Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: The future of reserve currencies 
Speech by Ms Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central  Bank,  at  the  Saint  Petersburg  International  Economic  Forum,  Saint  Petersburg, 
6 June 2009. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen: 
It  is  my  pleasure  to  participate  in  this  panel  of  distinguished  experts.  In  particular,  I  am 
pleased by the fact that the organisers have gathered around this table both officials from 
international  organisations,  central  banks  and  sovereign  wealth 
funds  as  well  as 
representatives  from  the  academia  and  the  private  sector.  We  are  here  to  discuss  a  topic 
which to some may appear as a technical issue for reserve managers but which is indeed 
broader as it may have repercussions on the global economy and the international monetary 
system. Let me focus in my remarks on the future of reserve currencies on three aspects of 
the  issue.  First,  I  will  describe  how  we  assess  at  the  ECB  the  use  of  the  euro  in  foreign 
reserve portfolios. Secondly, I will briefly recall the available evidence on the use of the euro 
in foreign exchange reserves with a focus on recent developments during the global financial 
crisis.  Finally,  I  would  like  to  share  with  you  some  general  reflections  on  the  key 
characteristics of international reserve currencies. 
In general, the international use of currencies is a market-driven process which is determined 
by  independent  decisions  of  private  agents  and  public  entities.  The  ECB  takes  a  neutral 
position on such matters, i.e. it neither promotes nor hinders the international use of the euro 
or other international currencies.  
In  the  context  of  reserve  currencies,  history  has  shown  that  the  currency  composition  of 
global foreign exchange reserves has often evolved very gradually and might be subject to 
considerable inertia stemming for example from anchor currency and liquidity considerations 
by central banks reserve managers. Can we underpin such considerations also with data for 
the ten years following the introduction of the euro? The only reliable source on the currency 
composition of foreign exchange reserves at the global level is IMF data which cover only 
around two thirds of total reserves and do not include assets managed by sovereign wealth 
funds. Let me therefore use this opportunity to encourage more central banks and sovereign 
wealth funds to disclose such information – on a confidential basis – to the IMF. The central 
bank of our host country, the Bank of Russia, even publishes the currency composition of its 
reserves  in  its  Annual  report  and  I  would  like  to  thank  the  colleagues  for  this  important 
Russian contribution to greater transparency in the area of international reserves. 
Keeping the incomplete coverage of the IMF data in mind, we can observe that the share of 
the euro has risen from 18% in 1999 to around 25% in 2003. Since then, if one adjusts the 
IMF figures – which are published in current exchange rates – for valuation effects, the share 
of  the  euro  in  global  foreign  exchange  reserves  has  remained  relatively  stable  hovering 
around  24-25%.  Interestingly,  this  relatively  stability  of  currency  shares  in  global  foreign 
exchange reserves persisted during the onset and intensification of the global financial crisis. 
In the fourth quarter of 2008, the share of the euro rose by around one percentage point – 
again,  after  adjusting  for  valuation  effects  (CHART  1).  It  is  conceivable  that  these  latest 
developments  have  been  mainly  driven  by  emerging  market  central  banks  which  have 
intervened to defend their currencies during the second half of 2008 and have mainly done 
so  by  selling  US  dollar-denominated  assets.  Whether  one  should  attribute  this  latest 
moderate increase in the share of the euro to a genuine change of currency preferences is 
therefore not obvious. 
Ladies and gentleman, please also allow me to reflect a bit more generally about the nature 
of international reserve currencies. What are the requirements for a currency to achieve such 
BIS Review 69/2009 
 1
a  status?  Price  stability  and  the  depth  and  liquidity  of  the  respective  capital  market  are 
important elements, and the euro appears to qualify in this regard. For example, in terms of 
liquidity, the euro appears to have become in the perception of reserve managers the second 
most attractive currency in the world (CHART 2). But what are the other factors that finally 
create a major international currency or even a “currency of exorbitant privilege” such as the 
US  dollar?  Recent  research  has  shown  that  we  can  also  use  standard  portfolio  theory  in 
order to get some useful insight into this question. For example, it appears that over the past 
30 years it made sense for a global bond investor – like a central bank – to be long dollar 
since the dollar has been a good hedge for such a portfolio.1  
One can also use standard portfolio theory in order to explain more specifically the currency 
choice in central bank portfolios over the past ten years. In fact, ECB research has shown 
that for many emerging markets with pegged or managed exchange rates it made a lot of 
sense to hold a sizable fraction of official reserves in their “anchor currency” which is often 
the  dollar.2  The  underlying  reason  is  not  that  these  central  banks  necessarily  have  to 
intervene  in  their  anchor  currency.  It  is  again  portfolio  theory  applied  to  international  bond 
portfolios that suggests that a country with a pegged or tightly managed exchange rate would 
overweight assets denominated in the anchor currency because they have a low variance in 
local currency terms and thus carry little risk. In addition, a high dollar share countries might 
be motivated by the fact that the dollar appears to be a good hedge against sudden stops in 
capital inflows – in particular at the global level. This empirical finding has been documented 
again  during  the  intensification  of  the  global  financial  crisis  during  which  capital  flows  to 
emerging markets dried up while the US dollar appreciated. 
Do these considerations mean that no changes to the current international monetary system 
are ever possible? As we know, history tells us that changes to the reserve currency status 
of currencies did occur. And we have at the country level recent examples of countries which 
hold today  more diversified reserve portfolios than in the past. In Russia, the share of the 
euro has grown in 2008 for the first time above that of the US dollar and currently stands at 
47.5%. What is important to note here is that the gradual diversification of Russia’s foreign 
exchange reserves had been preceded by a rising share of the euro in the Bank of Russia 
operational currency basket which is used as a point of reference in its exchange rate policy. 
This process has been gradual and started already in 2005. More generally, since decisions 
on a country’s anchor currency are typically determined by structural factors which change 
only  slowly  over  time  –  for  example  the  direction  of  trade  flows  or  invoicing  practices  – 
changes to the currency composition of reserves are also more likely to occur in a gradual 
way. In fact, the recent financial and economic turbulences which were also accompanied by 
some exchange rate volatility have resulted in only in very limited changes to the currency 
composition of global foreign exchange reserves. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
                                                 
1   See  Campbell,  J.  Y.,  Serfaty-de  Medeiros,  K.,  and  Viceira,  L.  M.,  2007.  “Global  Currency  Hedging”,  NBER 
Working paper, 13088 May 2007. 
2   See Beck, R. and Rahbari, E. (2008). “Optimal reserve composition in the presence of sudden stops: The euro 
and the dollar as safe haven currencies”, European Central Bank, Working Paper No. 916. 
2 
 BIS Review 69/2009
  3
BIS Review 69/2009 
 