Mary C Nkosi: Risk based supervision in Malawi 
Speech by Mrs Mary C Nkosi, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Malawi, at the official 
launch of risk based supervision, Blantyre, 9 January 2009. 
 The General Manager, Reserve Bank of Malawi; 
The Chairman of Bankers Association of Malawi; 
Board Members of various banks; 
Chief Executives of banks and members of management; 
External Auditors; 
Representative of the Institute of Internal Auditors; 
Representative of Society of Accountants; 
The Executive Directors - Supervision of Financial Institutions; Corporate Services and 
Support Services, RBM 
Heads of Department from Reserve Bank of Malawi; 
Officers of Bank Supervision and Supervision of Non Bank Financial Institutions;  
Members of the Press; 
Ladies and Gentlemen.  
Accept  my  warm  welcome  to  this  epic  occasion  and  moment  in  the  history  of  both  the 
Reserve Bank of Malawi and the act of supervision and regulation of the banking industry in 
Malawi. The Reserve Bank of Malawi changes its mode of supervision from the traditional 
CAMEL based approach to Risk Based Supervision (RBS). 
Such changes the world over, have always been clearly marked and remembered as major 
occasions.  Authorities  such  as  the  Federal  Reserve  System  of  the  USA  and  Financial 
Services Authority of the United Kingdom where much literature and practice on the subject 
may  be  drawn  had  to  change  at  one  point  in  order  to  improve  the  way  supervision  is 
conducted.  The  Reserve  Bank  of  Malawi  views  this  course  in  the  same  vein:  Change  to 
make  improvements  in  risk  management  in  banks  and  supervision  of  the  same  by  the 
regulators. 
Risk  based  supervision  entails  change  of  culture  in  one  way  or  the  other  because  certain 
things, like risk management can only be done that way now. I will emphasise a few changes 
that  are  expected  of  banks  in  order  to  yield  and  realize  full  benefits  of  the  Risk  Based 
Supervision initiative.  
Firstly, the role of the board has been clarified and expectations heightened to an extent that 
the board can not be a peripheral figure of banks any more. Through the Risk Management 
Guidelines,  the  RBM  calls  for  active  board  oversight  in  policy  and  strategy  formulation, 
review and ensuring that management executes its responsibility or is held accountable. 
Secondly,  the  governance  structure  should  not  impede  proper  risk  management  and 
reporting. Where this is the case, it should be addressed as a matter of urgency and priority.  
Thirdly,  all  risks  affecting  the  bank  should  be  addressed  by  policy,  (not  just  major  and 
traditional financial risks) so that no single risk is over looked. Some of you will recall that one 
of the major findings of the RBS survey which the Reserve Bank conducted back in 2007 
was apparent neglect of non financial risks. In the modern world of hi-tech and globalisation, 
transferability of risk across jurisdictions and the interrelationship between risks is very high. 
Worse still, across the boarder qualitative information about reputation, compliance or impact 
of  quantitative  financial  risk  matters  more  than  the  actual  financial  risk  itself  which  may 
actually  be  addressed.  Therefore,  it  is  imperative  that  due  attention  should  be  given  to  at 
least  nine  risks  identified  in  the  Risk  Management  Guidelines  namely,  Strategic,  Credit, 
Liquidity,  Interest  Rate,  Foreign  Exchange  Rate,  Price,  Operational,  Compliance  and 
Reputation risks. 
BIS Review 31/2009 
 1
Fourthly,  banks  have  to  take  stock  of  their  resources  to  meet  the  requirement  to  identify, 
measure,  monitor  and  control  risk.  Where  there  are  bottlenecks,  board  members  and 
management  present  here  are  requested  to  make  investments  in  training  and  some 
Management Information Systems possibly. I may not be very wrong to submit that the size 
of  the  bottom  line  is  not  the  only  performance  target  in  the  long  run.  I  am  also  reliably 
advised that the overall cost implications of such sacrifices are affordable across our banks. 
Ladies and gentlemen, the Reserve Bank of Malawi is not spared of the need to re-look at its 
culture  either.  One  such  eminent  change  is  that  Bank  Supervision  Department  will  be 
restructured along portfolio lines such that all faces you know or just hear of on the phone or 
through e-mail will visit banks in an on site inspection. This was not the case before, when 
we had distinct on-site and off-site divisions. 
So  many  good  things  have  been  sung  about  RBS  already  by  the  previous  speakers. 
However, let me add two more. These are: 
Firstly, RBS challenges and allows banks to demonstrate that they can assume more risk as 
long as it is managed to the satisfaction of the bank itself as determined by the Board and its 
policies.  Of  course,  other  eyes  like  risk  management,  internal  audit  and  regulators  as 
interested  groups  will  have  an  independent  opinion  on  the  activities  and  quality  of  risk 
management. 
Secondly, in RBS both banks and supervisors sit on the same side of the fence as far as risk 
is concerned, except that supervisors retain their assurance mandate. This gives supervisors 
better insight into what management is doing about inherent risk.  
Ladies and gentlemen, my call to you therefore is let us do our job! As you are aware Enron, 
Adelphia,  WorldCom,  Société  Générale  and  Barings  Bank,  to  name  but  a  few  represent 
massive corporate failure resulting in untold damage to employees, investors, creditors and 
economies; but who is to blame? For sure, no one can claim to be doing their job and be 
ignorant  of  fraud  or  more  precisely  risk  in  the  same  line.  Therefore,  Directors,  CEOs, 
Auditors, Risk Managers and Supervisors, let us do our job. 
Consequences,  of  laxity  in  risk  management  can  not  be  explained  more  than  the  recent 
financial crisis resulting in collapse of Bear Stearns, Indy Mac Bank and Lehman Brothers in 
the  USA.  While  state  intervention  for  Northern  Rock,  Fannie  Mae,  Freddie  Mac  and  Citi 
Group  just  emphasise  the  cost  of  ineffective  regulation  and  lack  of  capacity  to  fully 
understand risk being undertaken by the bank itself. We must have learnt lessons from these 
developments and we should not be scared to handle our challenges. 
On  its  part,  the  Reserve  Bank  remains  committed  to  its  legal  mandate  which  includes 
ensuring  a  safe  and  sound  financial  system  knowing  fully  well  how  critical  the  banking 
system is in the development agenda of the country. 
Lastly,  on  behalf  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Malawi,  allow  me  to  register  our  profound 
appreciation  and  recognize  the  contribution  of  the  IMF  East  Africa  Regional  Technical 
Assistance Centre (IMF East AFRITAC). The centre sponsored the technical assistance of 
Carmencita  Santos,  the  lead  consultant  on  RBS  to  Malawi  as  well  as  Mackay  Aomu  and 
Peter Phelan who also worked with us at some stage of the project. 
The Reserve Bank also appreciates the support and cooperation of banks in honouring and 
anchoring critical stages of the project. In addition, but not least though, there was a team of 
Reserve Bank officers who tirelessly worked on the project to its conclusion. It has been a 
job well done. 
With  these  few  remarks  ladies  and  gentlemen,  it  is  my  singular  honour  and  pleasure  to 
officially launch Risk Based Supervision in Malawi! 
Thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 31/2009
