Masaaki Shirakawa: Financial system and monetary policy 
implementation – long and winding evolution in the way of thinking 
Opening  speech  by  Mr  Masaaki  Shirakawa,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  2009 
International Conference hosted by the Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies, Tokyo, 
27 May 2009. 
 Introduction 
Good morning. I am very pleased to address the Bank of Japan international conference. On 
behalf  of  my  colleagues  at  the  Bank  of  Japan,  I  welcome  all  the  participants  from  central 
banks, international organizations, and academia. 
Interaction between financial system and monetary policy 
This  year’s  conference  focuses  on  the  theme  of  “Financial  System  and  Monetary  Policy 
Implementation.”  The  two  things  in  the  theme  are  closely  interacted.  That  interaction  has 
been  consistently  posing  important  policy  challenges  to  the  Bank  of  Japan  since  the  late 
1980s when bubble emerged. That seems to be increasingly the case for central banks in 
other  countries  as  well.  In  fact,  the  interaction  has  gradually  but  steadily  attracted  both 
policymakers and academics, and has become a popular theme for research conferences. 
We  have  certainly  benefited  from  such  developments.  For  this  conference,  leading 
economists have contributed six stimulating papers. Distinguished policymakers are getting 
together to discuss the current policy challenges at the policy panel session. 
I look back, with somewhat mixed feelings, on the past discussions on the policy responses 
to  the  bubble  and  its  burst.  Several  points  come  to  mind  immediately:  Twenty  years  ago 
when Japan’s bubble was at its peak. Ten years ago when Japan’s financial crisis was at its 
peak. Several years ago when the global economy was in the era of “great moderation.” Two 
years ago when the global credit bubble came to the surface as the U.S. subprime mortgage 
problem. And even more recently just at this time last year. I see long and winding evolution 
taking place in the way of thinking over time.  
Up until the mid 2000s, Japanese participants in international conferences, including myself, 
often  felt  frustrated  both  at  home  and  abroad:  on  the  one  hand,  the  delay  in  necessary 
actions at home such as injection of public capital, and, on the other hand, the difficulty in 
sharing  the  economic  reality  in  Japan  under  the  malfunctioning  financial  system  after  the 
burst of the bubble.1 The delay in policy actions was in part due to the political difficulty of 
persuasion. One factor behind seems to be the fact that financial institutions were unpopular, 
as  always.  But,  most  fundamentally,  we  were  not  equipped  with  economic  theory  to  fully 
address the core of the problem.  
In  those  days,  we  made  the  most  of  academic  wisdom,  but  we  often  encountered  the 
situations that were not well captured by the existing economic theory. For example, financial 
imbalances were built up under benign economic conditions, through sharp credit expansion, 
outsized  leverage,  and  soaring  asset  prices.2  After  the  burst  of  the  bubble,  market 
participants suddenly lost their confidence and reduced their risk-taking capacity. As a result, 
                                                 
1   Japan’s 1990s is often referred to as the “lost decade.” For the appropriateness of such characterization and 
policy responses, see Shirakawa (2009a). 
2   Among the papers contributed to the conference, Hattori, Shin, and Takahashi (2009) revisit Japan’s bubble in 
the 1980s by shedding light on the changes in money flow behind the expansion of the bubble.  
BIS Review 65/2009 
 1
the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  was  severely  constrained.  Further  monetary  policy 
responses  with  unorthodox  measures  were  adopted.  The  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy 
measures crucially depends on the central bank’s credibility, which is partly affected by the 
soundness  of  central  bank  balance-sheet  and  central  bank’s  neutrality  perceived  by  the 
public  at  large.  All  in  all,  those  experiences  seem  to  show  that  textbooks  on  macro  and 
monetary  economics  need  some  new  chapters  on  the  interaction  between  the  financial 
system and monetary policy. 
The  way  of  thinking  about  monetary  policy  management  has  certainly  changed  since  the 
outbreak  of  global  financial  market  turmoil  in  the  summer  of  2007.  In  particular,  since  the 
collapse of Lehman Brothers in September last year, the policy discussions have changed 
further with the first-hand experiences of the downward spiral in both the financial and real 
sectors of the economy. It has turned out that Japan’s experience is no longer unique. 
Adoption of unprecedented policy measures: Japan’s experiences 
I will provide a basis for discussion by reviewing the Bank of Japan’s policy implementation 
during  the  financial  crisis  after  the burst  of  the  bubble,  especially  since  the  late  1990s.  Of 
course, various measures were taken in the fields of central banking. Here my focus is on 
monetary policy. 
The Bank of Japan’s policy responses can be summarized into five points. First, the Bank 
lowered overnight interest rates in the interbank market down to virtually zero, eventually just 
one-tenth basis points (0.001 percent). Second, the Bank provided ample excess reserves 
by using various tools for monetary operations, including an increase in the outright purchase 
of long-term government bonds. For the smooth provision of ample liquidity, the maturity of 
monetary  operations  lengthened,  running  for  ten  months  in  bill-purchase  operations  at  the 
final  stage of  the  quantitative  easing  policy.  “Quantitative  easing”  is  often  used  in  a  rather 
vague  manner,  but  the  policy  action  we  adopted  can  be  regarded  as  a  pure  form  of 
“quantitative easing.” Third, the Bank adopted “credit easing” in the current terminology. The 
assets  purchased  included  asset-backed  securities  (ABSs)  and  asset-backed  commercial 
papers (ABCPs). Fourth, the Bank made a commitment to continuing with the zero interest 
rate policy and the quantitative easing policy. The conditions for commitment were expressed 
as “until deflationary concerns are dispelled” at the time of the zero interest rate policy and 
“until core CPI inflation becomes stably zero or above” at the time of the quantitative easing 
policy. Fifth, the Bank took unprecedented measures to secure the stability of the financial 
system, including purchases of stocks held by financial institutions.  
You  may  find  the  striking  similarities  between  the  policy  measures  formerly  taken  by  the 
Bank  of  Japan  and  those  currently  taken  by  central  banks  in  major  countries.  I  never 
imagined  that  a  host  of  unconventional  measures  taken  by  the  Bank  of  Japan  would  be 
adopted  by  other  central  banks  just  a  few  years  later.  I  also  guess  that  my  colleagues  at 
central banks in other countries never imagined employing such policy measures. Of course, 
such  measures  are  not  perfectly  identical,  reflecting  the  differences  in  the  structure  of 
financial intermediation and severity of stress in financial markets, as well as the differences 
in 
for  central  banks. 
Notwithstanding such differences, the aforementioned striking similarities stand out. It is quite 
natural that a central bank facing a financial crisis takes similar measures, because a central 
bank, after all, pursues the same objectives with the same capacity, that is, the capacity to 
adjust the amount of liquidity in the economy.3  
legal  and  social  restrictions  on  policy  measures  available 
                                                 
3   Among the papers contributed to the conference, Goodfriend (2009) argues central banking under financial 
turmoil by classifying central bank initiatives into monetary policy, credit policy, and interest rate policy. 
2 
 BIS Review 65/2009
Importance of liquidity 
This  leads  me  to  discussing  liquidity,  which,  I  think,  is  the  most  important  concept  in 
understanding  the  current  financial  crisis,  though  it  is  hardly  possible  to  sort  out  a  single 
factor.  During  the  expansion  period  of  the  credit  bubble,  it  was  complacency  based  on 
unfounded expectations about the unlimited availability of liquidity behind the aggressive risk-
taking attitude. By contrast, during the period of bubble bursting, it was fear of the exhaustion 
of liquidity that caused an extraordinary contraction of economic activity. In addition, liquidity 
conditions  significantly  changed  the  valuation  of  financial  assets,  thereby  influencing  the 
capital positions of financial institutions. 
Here,  I  use  the  term  of  “liquidity”  as  the  concept  incorporating  both  funding  liquidity  and 
market liquidity. But I have to admit that “liquidity” is hardly defined precisely and measured 
exactly  in  a  quantitative  manner,  and  thus  it  remains  somewhat  elusive.  Nevertheless, 
anybody can surely assess “liquidity” to a certain extent. After all, liquidity is the core concept 
in  understanding  interdependence  between  the  real  and  financial  sectors  of  the  economy 
from the beginning of central banking. The principal function of central banks has been and 
will be the guardian of liquidity. 
From the standpoint just I mentioned, it is crucially important for a central bank to adequately 
control  the  aggregate  amount  of  liquidity  in  the  economy.  Please  note,  however,  that  the 
concept of liquidity here does not necessarily correspond just to the terms of broad monetary 
aggregates  or  reserves.  In  fact,  the  reversed  correlations  between  money  stock  and 
economic activity are almost consistently observed in recent years in Japan: money stocks 
increase  when  economic  activity  weakens,  while  they  decrease  when  economic  activity 
expands. The money multiplier is also quite unstable. 
Challenges for central banks 
If  this  is  the  case,  what  does  it  mean  practically  to  say  liquidity  is  important?  I  will  touch 
briefly  upon  some  issues  and  challenges  for  central  banks,  based  upon  the  recent 
experiences.  
First of all, I want to draw your attention to a fine line between liquidity provision and capital 
provision.  Currently,  central  banks  are  faced  with  an  imminent  challenge  of  implementing 
unorthodox policy measures. The traditional role of a central bank is in providing liquidity. In 
times  of  crisis,  a  central  bank  attempts  to  provide  liquidity  aggressively  sometimes  with 
taking  some  credit  risk.  The  relaxation  of  collateral  eligibility  is  a  case  in  point.  In  a 
dysfunctional market where prices are not “discovered,” it is not so certain that a central bank 
is  protected  from  credit  risk,  even  if  central  bank  lending  is  “collateralized.”  That  makes  it 
difficult  to  distinguish  liquidity  provision  from  capital  provision.  Outright  purchases  of  credit 
instruments imply that a central bank shoulders credit risk in a more straightforward manner. 
In  that  regard,  monetary  policy  approaches  the  region  of  fiscal  policy.  Under  such 
circumstances,  a  central  bank  should  be  cautious  about  the  risks  of  undermining  its 
credibility  which  is  prerequisite  for  any  policy  implementation.  The  issues  such  as 
deterioration  in  financial  soundness  and  massive  intervention  to  resource  allocation  at  an 
individual  level  are  now  recognized.  Central  banks  in  major  countries  manage  to  strike  a 
balance between the ultimate responsibility of maintaining price and financial stability on the 
one hand and the accountability in a democratic society on the other hand. Although there is 
no  clear-cut  answer  holding  true  universally,  the  public  needs  to  understand  the  role  of 
central banks correctly.  
Second, central banks are supposed to work hard as a “plumber” in facilitating the smooth 
and efficient flow of funds.4 An important area is the payment and settlement system and our 
                                                 
4   See Tucker (2009). 
BIS Review 65/2009 
 3
own  procedure  of  monetary  operation.  Taking  an  example  of  the  cross-border  collateral 
arrangement, the Bank of Japan decided last week to expand its eligible collateral to foreign 
government  bonds  denominated  in  foreign  currencies  as  a  temporary  measure.  That 
arrangement  enables  financial  institutions  to  use  foreign  currency  denominated  foreign 
bonds as collateral for yen-fund provision operations by the Bank.  
Third, redesigning financial regulation and supervision, jointly with other relevant authorities, 
is called for.5 In view of the current crisis, not only credit risk but also market and funding 
liquidity  risk  need  to  be  addressed.  Specifically,  the  problem  of  pro-cyclicality  should  be 
addressed  by  establishing  proper  incentive  structures  for  rules  and  market  practices  to 
control the incentives at both micro- and macro-levels.  
Last  but  not  least,  I  will  draw  your  attention  to how  monetary  policy  should  be  conducted, 
once we fully recognize the importance of liquidity. Here, research activity at central banks is 
crucial.  For  example,  the  current  financial  crisis  sheds  light  on  the  risk-taking  channel  of 
monetary policy, stemming from the changes in liquidity conditions. The risk-taking channel 
works  in  the  nexus  between  monetary  policy  and  behavior  of  financial  institutions.6  The 
prolonged low interest rates under benign financial and economic conditions tend to create 
over-confidence and thus boost asset prices and collateral values as well as incomes and 
profits, thereby leading to affecting risk perception as well as enhancing risk tolerance. As a 
result, aggressive risk-taking behavior in the financial system surges, while a resultant build-
up of financial imbalances is likely to be left unchecked. Such financial imbalances come to 
the surface only once the economic environment starts deteriorating.  
Considering  the  complicated  transmission  channel  and  the  behavioral  aspect  of  various 
economic  agents,  how  to  frame  monetary  policy  is  quite  a  challenge.  For  instance,  in  its 
explanation, the time horizon for monetary policy needs to be extended, compared with the 
standard  time  horizon  generally  assumed  in  the  formal  inflation  targeting.  In  this  case, 
another  important  policy  challenge  is  posed  as  to  how  to  ensure  the  transparency  of 
monetary policy.  
Closing remarks 
Let me conclude now. In response to the current financial crisis, the policy discussions are 
continuing  about  wide-ranging  issues  on  not  only  monetary  policy  management  but  also 
financial regulation and supervision. Dialogue between academics and policy makers plays a 
crucial role in discussing and formulating necessary actions in both short- and medium- to 
long-term  perspectives.  In  that  regard,  I  am  convinced  that  this  year’s  conference  will 
produce further insights into more effective central bank policy making.  
Thank you. 
References 
Borio,  Claudio  and  Haibin  Zhu,  “Capital  Regulation,  Risk-taking  and  Monetary  Policy:  a 
Missing Link in the Transmission Mechanism?,” BIS Working Paper No. 268, 2008. 
Goodfriend,  Marvin,  “Central  Banking  in  the  Credit  Turmoil:  An  Assessment  of  Federal 
Reserve Practice,” mimeo, 2009. 
Hattori,  Masazumi,  Hyun  Song  Shin,  and  Wataru  Takahashi,  “A  Financial  System 
Perspective on Japan’s Experience in the Late 1980s,” mimeo, 2009. 
                                                 
5   See also Shirakawa (2009b). 
6   See Borio and Zhu (2008). 
4 
 BIS Review 65/2009
Shirakawa,  Masaaki,  “Way  Out  of  Economic  and  Financial  Crisis:  Lessons  and  Policy 
Actions,” Speech at Japan Society in New York, April 23, 2009a. 
________,  “Preventing  the  Next  Crisis:  The  Nexus  between  Financial  Markets,  Financial 
Institutions and Central Banks,” Speech at the London Stock Exchange, May 13, 2009b. 
Tucker, Paul, “Remarks at the Turner Review Conference,” March 27, 2009. 
BIS Review 65/2009 
 5
