Rundheersing Bheenick: Islamic finance and its developments in 
Mauritius  
Address by Mr Rundheersing Bheenick, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at the Opening 
Ceremony of the Seminar on Islamic Capital Markets, Port Louis, 19 May 2009. 
 A very good morning to you all. 
It is my great pleasure to welcome you all this morning and to offer a prelude to our important 
international seminar on Islamic Capital Markets. 
The word “Seminar”, Seminarium, derives from the Greek work for seed – semen – and thus 
our task is the spreading of seeds. At our meeting, God willing, these seeds are for a fresh 
garden for the world freed from the perils past, and very present, in which the now-globalised 
economies  of  the  world  have  been  put  at  such  grave  risk  by  mistaken  systems  of 
management of global financial and capital assets. A past in which, some declare, western 
bankers,  finance  professionals,  accountants,  market  players,  and  those  regulating  and 
supervising them have fatally wounded the golden goose of the market economy and even 
called into question some of the fundamental tenets of capitalism itself. 
It is as well we hit on the word seminar for our task, rather than the other commonly-used 
Greek  term  for  such  encounters  –  Symposium.  For  “Symposium”  derives  from  the  ancient 
term  for  a  drinking  party,  beloved  of  Plato,  Aristotle  and  their  friends  and  scholars,  which 
might  include  not  only  the  common  supping  of  fermented  grape  juice,  but  also  a  goodly 
supply of lightly-clad dancing ladies. 
I  am  not  sure  our  friends  and  brothers,  from  the  distinguished  Islamic  Financial  Services 
Board, would have entirely supported such a venture. So an international seminar we have – 
that is, a meeting for discussion or training; and through that, the planting of seeds for the 
future. 
We are honoured by the presence of Dr The Honorable Rama Krishna Sithanen, Vice Prime 
Minister and Minister of Finance, who has taken time off to be with us, only days before he 
presents his next budget at the end of the week. 
We are proud to be co-hosting an event for the first time with the Islamic Financial Services 
Board; and we are delighted to have the full collaboration of our sister regulator, the Financial 
Services Commission, in this exercise. It is no coincidence that this seminar takes place at a 
time  when  we  at  the  Bank  have  just  launched  our  first  Islamic  finance  operation,  HSBC 
Amanah  Mauritius.  We  have  been  working  towards  this  for  the  last  two  years,  and  it  is 
heartening  to  see  our  efforts  have  started  to  bear  fruit.  The  Dodo  is  finally  meeting  the 
Camel! 
But you might ask why this image of the Dodo and the Camel that appear on our posters for 
this event? For our overseas visitors who may not know it, the Dodo is that legendary but 
extinct  species  of  bird  that  died  out  in  Mauritius  not  long  after  man  first  set  foot  on  our 
previously  uninhabited  island.  The  Dodo  failed  to  adapt  and  paid  the  terrible  price  of  this 
failure. Its memory lingers in the logo of our central bank. It serves as a symbolic warning 
and  a  reminder  of  the  fate  that  awaits  those  who  do  not  adapt  to  change.  The  Camel,  of 
which I believe none exists in Mauritius, comes to us today, as a symbol of that species that 
is well adapted to that harshest of environments, the deserts of Arabia; it is that seasoned 
traveler who, when water is scarce, carries it on its back in its God-given hump. 
This meeting of the Dodo and the Camel is not an image from Samuel Huntington’s “Clash of 
Civilizations”, in which those of sharply differing cultures are doomed to eternal conflict. No, 
indeed, our meeting here is just the opposite. It is a meeting of minds intent to seek fresh 
BIS Review 62/2009 
 1
thoughts on sustainable banking and this, not merely to avert the fate of more species like 
the Dodo, threatened by global warming and the carbon imprint of man, but to also avert the 
very  recurrence  of  the  financial  and  economic  crisis  that  engulfs  the  world  today,  capital 
markets and banking in particular. 
About the IFSB 
For those who might not be in the know, the IFSB, a Kuala-Lumpur-based organisation, was 
set up in 2002 to promote soundness and stability in the Islamic financial services industry. 
Since its inception, the IFSB has been actively engaged in the development of international 
standards and guidelines for the Islamic financial services industry. The prudential standards 
adopted by the IFSB are globally accepted and are contributing to the smooth integration of 
Islamic  finance  with  the  conventional  financial  system.  The  IFSB  also  provides  a  platform 
which brings together all the stakeholders of the industry: regulatory agencies, private sector 
operators,  rating  agencies,  professional  associations,  as  well  as  regional  and  international 
financial institutions.  
Islamic banking is a multi-billion dollar industry in global and national finance. It also happens 
to be growing at a very rapid pace. In the midst of financial and economic crisis, the IFSB 
brings to us the principles and practices of Islamic banking and the management of capital 
markets. This will contribute to our search for a new focus for resilience in investment and 
banking  to  withstand  the  shocks  that  have  undermined  the  credibility  of  much  current 
international banking practice and nearly forced the collapse of capital markets. 
I wish to commend the IFSB for their remarkable work and for the catalytic role they have 
played in turning Islamic finance into a truly global phenomenon. From humble beginnings in 
1975, when the first formal Islamic Financial Institution was established, Islamic Finance has 
spread well beyond the confines of the Middle East. It now spans the globe from New York to 
Hong  Kong,  via  London  and  Singapore.  To-date,  there  are  over  300  Islamic  Financial 
Institutions  in  more  than  75  countries.  Mauritius,  an  observer-member  of  the  IFSB  since 
2007, is one of the newest additions to the Islamic Finance map. Now that we have proved 
our credentials in Islamic finance, we look forward to be admitted to full membership status in 
the near future. 
This morning, I would not wish to engage in a lengthy discussion on Islamic finance. I leave 
this to the experts and I am glad that so many of them have joined us for this event. Instead, 
I  will  focus  my  intervention  on  those  aspects  of  Islamic  finance  that  are,  according  to  me, 
relevant to the successful implementation of Islamic finance in Mauritius, namely its ethical 
dimension and the ability of Islamic finance to meet the transaction needs of the market. 
Ethics in Islamic finance: sowing the seeds for success 
In Islamic finance, the moral dimension is its raison d’être. Islamic finance is firmly anchored 
in  the  Sharia,  which  derives  from  the  Qur’an  and  the  sayings  and  deeds  of  the  Prophet 
Mohammed in the Sahih hadith. At the very core of Islamic finance is the concept of Riba 
which is where a buyer demands more of one item in exchange for just one item of equal 
value; this does not mean zero profit but zero interest.  
As many countries now have the lowest levels of interest on capital in living memory – and in 
Mauritius we have for some time now had negative real interest rates – it is time to ponder 
anew  on  the  role  of  central  banks  in  capital  markets  and  the  utility  of  interest  rates  as  a 
guiding  system.  Our  friend  Aristotle,  the  eager  symposiast  who  I  referred  to  earlier,  was 
deeply opposed to positive interest rates. If negative rates are bad for saving, positive rates 
are  not  an  unqualified  blessing  either.  Too  positive,  and  they  become  “usury”  which  the 
Oxford Dictionary defines as lending at an exorbitant rate of interest above the level allowed 
2 
 BIS Review 62/2009
in  law.  In  Islamic  banking,  the  legal  level  is  zero  and  any  rate  above  that  is  usury  and 
therefore prohibited. 
But  we  would  risk  gross  reductionism  if  we  were  to  introduce  Islamic  finance,  to  the 
uninitiated, merely  as  faith-based  finance.  Islamic  finance  does  propose  a  morally-inspired 
economic  behaviour.  It  envisages  a  partnership  between  capital,  business  acumen,  and 
entrepreneurial ability. Any activity that promotes the common good finds its place within the 
spectrum of Islamic financial instruments. Islamic banking tries to maximize both investment 
in the real economy and consumption so that development is promoted fast. Any incremental 
value, which generates from this productive enterprise, is shared; and if there is a loss, the 
entrepreneur  goes  without  reward.  The  distributive  justice,  which  follows  from  risk-sharing, 
and the promotion of public good are ideals that most of us share. This integration of ethics 
and values into finance is viewed positively by many.  
Such ethical safeguards are however not exclusive to Islam. To take another example from a 
different faith, St Thomas Aquinas opposed usury; but then you might say that was history, 
before  modern  banking;  indeed  it  was  well  before  the  excesses  of  modern  banking  and 
financial engineering, and the mismanagement of capital markets got us into the state we are 
in today. 
Let  us  not  forget  that  we  also  live  in  the  age  of  ethical  consumerism.  There  is  a  growing 
number of people who are constantly on the lookout for products that are “organic” or “green” 
–  in  short,  for  anything  that  espouses  the  principle  succinctly  summarized  in  the  following 
four words: “First, Do No Harm”!  
What  sets  Islamic  finance  apart,  though,  is  the  degree  to  which  its  prohibition  on  Riba 
requires that its adherents rethink the way they make their money. The sacred principle is 
that money should not produce money, and bankers from Islamic financial institutions make 
no compromise here. This commitment is translated in the fact that to every credit extended 
there  should  be  an  underlying  asset.  Money  should  be  used  only  to  finance  the  real 
economy. Adherence to this principle affects the relationship that each nurtures with money, 
whether we are an individual or an enterprise. An entity cannot borrow more than the total 
value of its listed shares while a person cannot de facto suffer from over-indebtedness. Most 
certainly, such principles cannot be harmful to borrowers!  
Another principle in Islamic finance that sets it apart from conventional finance – and which 
assumes a particular relevance in the global financial crisis – is that uncertainty in contractual 
terms and conditions is not permissible. All the terms and conditions of a financial transaction 
need to be clearly understood. This principle has insulated Islamic financial institutions from 
exposure to toxic assets. Fools rush in where angels fear to tread, they say. Then the herd 
instinct takes over … and before you know where you are, you find yourself in the kind of 
crisis  that  has  engulfed  conventional  finance,  in  particular,  the  world  of  shadow  banking. 
Islamic finance operators do not have this option. They can only enter ground that has been 
declared compliant by Sharia scholars. 
Global financial crisis 
The current global financial crisis has brought into sharper focus some worrisome aspects of 
contemporary financial markets. At the heart of our current global crisis has been the fateful 
distance  of  much  of  modern  finance  from  the  real  economy.  Per  contra,  at  the  heart  of 
Islamic banking and Islamic capital markets is the salutary insistence on bringing these two 
elements  closer  together.  We  cannot  turn  the  clock  of  globalisation  and  of  global  finance 
back. But we do need to look for a better way of managing our affairs insofar as money and 
finance  is  concerned.  To  quote  Raghuram  Rajan,  former  Chief  Economist  of  the  IMF,  the 
time has come for “regulatory soul-searching”. 
The economic model which follows from Islamic finance is very different from the “originate 
and distribute” model which has failed conventional finance so spectacularly. The founding 
BIS Review 62/2009 
 3
principles of Islamic finance, the prohibition of interest and the close linkage between the real 
economy and finance, offer a viable alternative to the conventional financial system. 
At a time when global conventional finance markets are in such a state of turmoil, Islamic 
finance does represent an appealing alternative. The short-term fixation on private benefits 
by  hook  or  by  crook,  which  has  turned  yesterday’s  financial  wizards  into  today’s  leading 
exponents of white collar and financial crime, must give way to a clearer focus on the longer 
term and the public good aspects of our financial interaction with our fellow-man. 
Now, in today’s world, Keynes and his precepts are experiencing a revival. It has taken open 
clamouring for government interventionism and the introduction of fiscal stimulus measures 
on  a  mind-boggling  scale  to  remind  us  that  “we  are  all  Keynesians  now.”  As  Greenspan 
reminds us in his autobiography, Time Magazine declared this way back in 1965, that is well 
before those words became indelibly associated with US President Richard Nixon. 
Along  with  stimulus  measures  and  public  spending,  we  are  re-discovering  the  Keynesian 
concern with zeroing down interest rates. “What enormous social changes would result from 
the gradual disappearance of a rate of return on accumulated wealth…” he declared in his 
General  Theory.  His  principal  preoccupation  at  that  time  was  relief  of  unemployment  and 
poverty in Europe. 
Keynes  saw  unemployment  and  its  social  and  economic  consequences  as  the  essential 
target for action. He said it would be better to employ people to bury money in bottles and 
then  employ  others  to  dig  it  up,  rather  than  put  up  with  rampant  unemployment.  We  find 
much  common  ground  between  Keynesian  theory  and  the  Islamic  concept  of  Capital 
markets.  This  is  particularly  evident  in  their  shared  focus  on  closing  the  gap  between  the 
function of money as a repository of value and the function of the economy to promote trade 
and employment. 
Islamic finance is just finance 
I mentioned earlier that Islamic finance has transcended borders and regions. What appeals 
in Islamic finance is its ability to transform products and services from mainstream finance 
into  Sharia-compliant  equivalents.  In  many  ways,  the  development  of  Islamic  finance  has 
rivaled the innovations in mainstream finance in recent years. The growth of Sukuks (Islamic 
bonds) has been dramatic; the London Stock Exchange has already listed over 20 Sukuks. 
Some governments have been considering the idea of sovereign Sukuk issue. This is indeed 
a remarkable achievement for an institutional arrangement which was formalised less than a 
generation ago.  
Here,  in  Mauritius,  Ijarah  (leasing)  and  Takaful  (insurance)  services  are  already  available. 
The range of Islamic financial products is set to expand further with HSBC Amanah starting 
operations here early this month and the expected launch of two other full-fledged Islamic 
banks soon.  
The  development  of  Islamic  finance  in  Mauritius  forms  part  of  our  strategy  to  become  a 
world-class financial centre, offering a whole range of financial services at a competitive price 
to an international clientele. Experts on Islamic finance concur that it is now emerging as a 
competitor to conventional finance on efficiency grounds. The development of Islamic finance 
in Mauritius can encourage new levels of dynamism in the sector and attract more foreign 
direct investment and portfolio flows especially at a time when our economy is showing signs 
of slowdown. It can smooth out the disparities between levels of financial development and 
capability, as well as foster deeper regional ties in Africa.  
This first event in Islamic finance, which we are starting this morning, has generated a lot of 
interest  among  all  stakeholders.  The  response  has  been  simply  overwhelming  and  bears 
testimony to the eagerness of each and everyone here to learn more about Islamic finance. 
We  are  acutely  aware  of  the  need  to  build  up  rapidly  a  local  pool  of  experts  in  Islamic 
4 
 BIS Review 62/2009
finance. Seminars such as these provide the appropriate platform for sharing and developing 
expertise. A bridge has been created between the IFSB and Mauritius and we hope to be 
able  to  organize  other  seminars  and  workshops  in  future.  We  are  confident  that  this  will 
create the necessary synergies to enable Islamic finance to gather momentum in our part of 
the world.  
Regulatory challenges for Islamic finance 
The  ethical  dimension  of  Islamic  finance  is  an  essential  ingredient  for  its  success.  What 
matters even more to us in Mauritius is its smooth integration with the rest of the financial 
system.  This  hinges  on  a  sound  regulatory  framework  embedding  best  international 
practices. There is no denying that there are regulatory challenges facing the Islamic finance 
industry  in  Mauritius.  As  is  the  case  in  any  burgeoning  enterprise,  some  of  the  real 
challenges  are  still  in  the  domain  of  the  unknown.  The  experience  of  other  jurisdictions 
provides us with precious insights and helps us to avoid certain pitfalls. Indeed, this is not the 
case only with Islamic Finance, but applies to the entire financial sector. In this sense, the 
global  financial  crisis  can  have  a  salutary  effect.  It  serves  as  a  wake-up  call  for  modern 
finance to review the regulatory apparatus, in terms of our operating framework, processes 
and procedures. 
Standardisation  with  regard  to  Islamic  finance  laws  and  regulatory  practices  and  the 
interpretation  of  the  Sharia,  is  an  essential  ingredient  in  increasing  the  marketability  and 
acceptance  of  Islamic  products.  There  is  a  need  to  foster  greater  transparency  and 
credibility.  The  work  of  international  institutions  such  as  the  IFSB  and  the  Accounting  and 
Auditing Organisation for Islamic Financial Institutions on the harmonisation of standards is 
absolutely crucial.  
There is one key aspect in which there is absolutely no difference in our regulatory approach 
to  Islamic  finance  as  against  our  approach  to  conventional  finance.  And  this  is  our 
uncompromising and steadfast adherence to global prudential standards and the adoption of 
international best practice for risk management and corporate governance. Additionally, we 
want to achieve a smooth integration with the conventional financial system.  
While doing all this, we must bear in mind that Islamic finance is just finance – it provides an 
alternative mode of financing that may appeal to all depositors and investors, irrespective of 
their religious beliefs.  
Conclusion 
Today, as we find ourselves at the centre of a turning and troubled world, we at the Central 
Bank  are  privileged  to  bring  together  the  flower  of  our  entrepreneurs,  bankers,  financiers, 
and economic thinkers under the threat of the fate of the Dodo to meet with our distinguished 
and experienced brothers from afar to, if I may use the phrase, distill what we can from the 
meeting of minds on this great issue of our times, the better management of capital markets. 
Can the Camel supplant the Dodo in our quest for a better future? 
I  thank  all  stakeholders  who  have  contributed  to  this  event  –  the  IFSB  for  sharing  their 
experience and wisdom in the preparation of this event, the FSC for joining hands with us, 
the speakers, discussants, participants and the organising committee. Events such as these 
provide  excellent  networking  opportunities  and  I  fervently  hope  that  participants  will  take 
advantage of the interaction to emerge wiser and richer. 
Thus  I  have  the  honour  and  great  pleasure  to  welcome  you  warmly  and  to  declare  the 
Seminar open for those who wish to sow the seeds and reap the harvest generating fresh 
species that can survive the rigours of our troubled times.  
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 62/2009 
 5
