Mugur Isărescu: Nine lessons from the current financial crisis  
Speech by Dr Mugur Isărescu, Governor of the National Bank of Romania and Member of 
the  Romanian  Academy,  during  the  session  titled  “What  lessons  can  be  learned  from  the 
current  economic  crisis?”,  organised  by  the  Economics,  Legal  and  Sociology  Department 
within the Romanian Academy, in co-operation with "Costin C. Kiritescu" National Institute of 
Economic  Research  and  the  ”ESEN  Reflection  Group”  Romanian  National  Committee, 
Romanian Academy, Bucharest, 14 April 2009. 
 Your Excellency, Mr. President of the Romanian Academy,  
Dear colleagues,  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
I have recently talked about the causes of the current financial crisis and the manner in which 
it affects the Romanian economy at Babeş Bolyai University in Cluj-Napoca and Transilvania 
University  in  Braşov.  Let  me  just  recall  here  that  the  current  crisis  on  the  US  subprime 
mortgage market was only the trigger of the global financial crisis. Its root causes were both 
macroeconomic  and  microeconomic  in  nature.  Plentiful  liquidity  was  the  catalyst  for  the 
merging of multiple microeconomic causes such as securitisation, financial deleveraging, rifts 
in  the  business  model  of  rating  agencies  and  excessive  deregulation,  which  resulted  in 
today's financial crisis.  
World economies are hit by this crisis to various extents, depending on the vulnerabilities of 
each and their exposure to toxic assets. The response to the crisis is contingent upon the 
fundamental  principles  we  believe  in,  the  available  resources,  the  institutions  and  the 
instruments we can make use of.  
A short list of the lessons should reflect all these aspects: what we have learned or think we 
have learned about the causes of the crisis; about the efficiency of the institutional texture 
and  the  array  of  instruments  at  hand;  and,  last  but  not  least,  about  the  most  appropriate 
positioning in the event of a crisis. With these criteria in mind, I will refer to nine lessons, of 
which  seven  are  universally  valid  and  two  hold  particularly  true  for  emerging  economies, 
such as Romania.  
In order to root out any possible confusion, I would like to point out from the very beginning 
what  these  lessons  do  NOT  deal  with.  First,  they  do  not  address  the  issue  of  shorter  or 
longer  economic  cycles  and  do  not  suggest  that  a  crisis  means  the  end  of  an  economic 
cycle. Second, the lessons do not provide an answer to the question whether we could ever 
avoid a financial crisis.  
1.  
Low inflation is not a sufficient condition for ensuring financial stability in the 
long run.  
Past experience appeared to have confirmed the opinion that inflation is the major source of 
financial  instability.  High  inflation  episodes  were  usually  accompanied  by  pronounced 
financial  instability  and  banking  sector  crises  or  were  followed  by  recession  after  the 
authorities took inadequate measures to curb inflation.  
The current global financial crisis became manifest after nearly two decades of relatively low, 
stable inflation. A number of factors caused low inflation to coexist with ample liquidity. The 
latter, along with the overly high level of savings, helped keep interest rates and volatility at 
bay. All this translated into a new financial texture, in which the bank intermediation model 
shifted  away  from  "originate  and  hold"  to  "originate  and  distribute".  The  new  products  and 
institutions that changed the fabric the financial system was made of until three decades ago 
led  to  the  outbreak  of  the  current  financial  crisis.  The  financial  crisis  was  triggered  by  the 
BIS Review 56/2009 
 1
developments in the US subprime mortgage market, as I have mentioned earlier. In turn, it 
broke  out  due  to  the  fact  that  the  Federal  Reserve  System,  given  the  above-mentioned 
conditions, had no other option but to increase interest rates with a view to maintaining low 
inflation. With the new financial texture however, rate hikes brought about the emergence of 
the financial crisis.  
In view of the above, my opinion is that ample liquidity changed the financial system to the 
point  where  monetary  policy  found  itself  trapped.  Inaction  would  have  resulted  in  higher 
inflation.  The  actions  taken  brought  about  financial  instability.  If  regulation  and  supervision 
had prevented the excessive build-up of risks by investors, interest rate hikes could not have 
prompted financial instability. Such developments point to the need of efficient cooperation 
between monetary policy, on the one hand, and regulation and supervision, on the other, a 
fact that failed to materialise over the past years in some of the world's leading economies. 
Monetary  policy  was  sometimes  overly  loose,  also  in  regard  to  the  regulatory  and 
supervisory framework in place.  
Regulation and supervision trail behind the markets at intervals. 
2.  
Markets always find a way to innovate because of the ongoing competition among economic 
agents to meet real needs. Innovations enhance the efficiency whereby such needs are met 
and  that  is  why  the  innovation  process  will  never  cease.  Even  if  confronted  with 
administrative barriers, markets will still identify solutions to meet demand.  
A clear example in this respect was the NBR's attempt at slowing down the frantic pace of 
forex-denominated  loans.  We  resorted  to  administrative  barriers,  yet  their  efficiency  was 
subdued  and  we  realised  that  side  effects  outweighed  benefits.  Hence  we  removed  those 
barriers relatively quickly.  
The  innovation  process  can  be  so  dynamic  and  sophisticated  that  market  regulators  or 
supervisors may lag behind. A statement in the G20 London Summit Communiqué of 2 April 
is  particularly  relevant  in  this  respect:  "Regulators  and  supervisors  must  (...)  support 
competition and dynamism, and keep pace with innovation in the marketplace". One of my 
advisors  said  this  is  a  recognition  of  the  fact  that  the  current  financial  crisis  is  not  due  to 
market failure, but rather to regulatory and supervisory institutions' inability to adapt to market 
realities. I would like to add that it is, at the same time, a guideline on how to keep the pace 
with  market  innovations.  It  is  important  to  strike  a  balance  between  the  two  by  enhancing 
regulatory and supervisory structures, as this process should by no means result in stymieing 
competition or economic agents' creative energies.  
The EU lacks certain institutions.  
3.  
This  is  clearly  pointed  out  in  the  De  Larosière  Report.  The  chapter  focusing  on  EU 
supervisory repair proposes a structural reform targeting two areas, namely micro-prudential 
and  macro-prudential  supervision.  The  Report  recommends  the  establishment  of  the 
European  Systemic  Risk  Council  (ESRC),  which  should  pool  and  analyse  information 
pertaining to macro-prudential risks and vulnerabilities across all EU financial sectors. The 
ESRC shall issue risk warnings and shall adopt economic policy recommendations.  
Another institution proposed in the Report is the European System of Financial Supervision 
(ESFS),  within  which  the  level  3  committees  (CEBS,  CEIOPS,  CESR)  will  be  transformed 
into  three  new  European  Authorities:  the  European  Banking  Authority,  the  European 
Securities  Authority  and  the  European  Insurance  Authority.  These  three  entities  will  have 
wider powers in the licensing and supervision of some specific EU-wide institutions, but it is 
the strong coordinating role of the ESFS that I want to stress.  
The fact that the European Systemic Risk Council would be set up under the auspices of the 
ECB  and  of  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks  would  allow  it  to  benefit  from  the 
2 
 BIS Review 56/2009
analytical capabilities and technical infrastructures developed by central banks in their own 
monetary and financial stability analyses. This also implies a strong cooperation between the 
ESFS  and  the  ESRC.  Thus,  both  the  ECB  and  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks 
should have access to relevant information from supervisors.  
We trust that this new structure, which is in charge of macro- and micro-supervision, will be 
able to help achieve the timely identification of behaviours likely to generate financial crises. 
But,  as  the ECB  President  Jean-Claude  Trichet  also  pointed  out,  for  the  proposed  macro-
prudential framework to function as intended, it is crucial that the risk warnings and economic 
policy recommendations issued by the ESRC be translated into policy action as effectively as 
possible. That is why I believe that these warnings and recommendations should be reported 
to the ECOFIN Council, while also providing an appropriate institutional basis that might vest 
the ECB and the other central banks, as advocated by President Trichet, with the necessary 
authority, accountability and legal capabilities in relation to the new macro-prudential tasks.  
4.  
Wage incentives in private companies are not adequately correlated with risk 
management.  
The  link  between  incentives  for  managers  and risk  management  is  not  always  obvious.  In 
recent years, financial innovations and products, as well as institutions subject to inadequate 
regulation  and  supervision  has  allowed  for  building  up  huge  profits  in  the  near  run  at  the 
price  of  taking  very  high  risks.  There  were  no  incentives  to  link  wages  and  bonuses  to 
medium- and long-term profits. Thus, managers were encouraged to take risks which they 
either  failed  to  understand  or  ignored  in  order  to  increase  the  profitability  bonuses  were 
linked to.  
Now it is better understood that compensation and internal risk management policies can be 
decorrelated. The De Larosière Report holds that compensation incentives should be better 
aligned  with  shareholders'  interests  and  long-term,  firm-wide  profitability.  In  particular,  the 
assessment  of  bonuses  should  be  set  within  a  multi-year  framework,  allowing  their  actual 
payment to be spread out through the cycle. The De Larosière Report contains the proposal 
that supervisors should oversee the adequacy of financial institutions' compensation policy 
and  enforce  changes  or  additional  capital  requirements  within  pillar  2  of  the  Basel  2 
framework unless corrective measures are implemented. My belief is that such a measure is 
in line with the principle of spurring competition and progress and is thus welcomed.  
5. 
In good times, people forget about the crises and ignore designing crisis 
management mechanisms.  
Significant financial strains and all the more so financial crises are seldom occurring events. 
We  are  therefore  lucky,  but  rare  occurrence  comes  at  a  cost.  The  crisis  management 
mechanisms in place at the time such events emerged may be inadequate. There may be 
legal provisions hampering quick actions, or the set of instruments and procedures may differ 
across countries thereby hindering cooperation, etc. The lesson to be learned is that crisis 
management mechanisms should be updated on a regular basis.  
Establishing  a  clear  and  transparent  single  crisis  management  framework  based  on  the 
recommendations of the De Larosière Report would benefit the UE in particular. Moreover, 
this framework should be flexible enough to allow countries to give a response according to 
the  features  of  the  crisis  specific  to  the  respective  country.  Anyway,  clear  principles  for 
preventing legal bottlenecks and the cross-country spillover of negative effects should be put 
in  place,  and  countries  should  share  the  fiscal  burden  of  a  cross-border  crisis  in  line  with 
those principles.  
BIS Review 56/2009 
 3
6.  
The IMF strengthened its role after being criticised for not having foreseen the 
Asian crisis. 
A few years ago, many economists expected a sharp decline in the IMF's role in the current 
economic  context.  Against  the  background  of  the  current  crisis,  the  world  seems  to 
rediscover the role of the IMF. The institution's funds have recently been increased in order 
to  meet  the  requests  of  different  countries  for  financial  and  technical  assistance.  The 
statements of the G20 leaders are indicative of the fact that the IMF will assess regularly the 
measures  taken  and  the  global  actions  necessary  to  be  initiated.  Furthermore,  a  close 
cooperation between the IMF and the Financial Stability Board (FSB), which will include all 
G20  countries,  members  of  the  Financial  Stability  Forum,  Spain  and  the  European 
Commission  is  envisaged.  Together,  the  IMF  and  the  FSB  will  convey  early  warnings  on 
macroeconomic and financial risks and will indicate the necessary actions to address such 
risks.  
My opinion is that the current financial crisis highlights the fact that in such difficult times, an 
institution having an image of each economy in the global context is required. The IMF has 
an  experience  of  at  least  5  decades  in  analysing  the  economies  of  its  members,  185 
countries at present, and such a capacity is rather difficult to build.  
7.  
Expansionary measures should be accompanied by exit strategies from the 
very beginning.  
History has shown that expansionary measures taken in order to exit an economic crisis do 
have  side  effects  in  terms  of  inflation.  The  lesson  learned  from  the  '70s  is  that  protracted 
expansionary  policies  resulted  in  high  levels  of  inflation  and  public  debt,  the  reduction  of 
which  called  for  tight  monetary  policies,  which  resulted  in  relatively  low  average  economic 
growth.  This  lesson,  along  with  that  learned  from  other  episodes  which  were  addressed 
similarly, shows that the measures to weather the crisis should be based on the objective of 
ensuring  medium-  and  long-term  fiscal  sustainability  and  price  stability.  In  practice,  this 
means that anti-crisis measures should be accompanied by credible exit strategies from the 
measures  that  are  now  necessary  to  support  the  financial  sector  and  provide  renewed 
impetus to global demand.  
From  this  perspective,  the  recent  meeting  of  the  G20  leaders  is  encouraging.  On  the  one 
hand, there were discussions regarding expansionary fiscal and monetary policies, including 
the use of unconventional monetary instruments, and, on the other hand, the objectives of 
ensuring  medium-  and  long-term  fiscal  sustainability  and  price  stability,  with  a  special 
emphasis on drawing up credible exit strategies from the measures that are now necessary 
to underpin the financial sector and give a new impetus to global demand.  
8.  
It is important that macroeconomic imbalances should be avoided and that a 
critical mass of structural reforms should support a sustainable growth path. 
This lesson holds particularly true for the emerging economies. Over the past several years, I 
have  repeatedly  pointed  out  in  my  speeches  that  convergence  with  the  EU  along  with 
maintaining macroeconomic stability is the major challenge facing Romania. In recent years, 
fast-track economic growth drew on external saving. Banks became dependent on external 
financing and the current account deficit exceeded the sustainability limits, which caused the 
Romanian economy to grow vulnerable.  
The  global  crisis  fostered  this  vulnerability  which  translated  into  a  marked  economic 
slowdown.  Today  it  has  become  clear  that  the  natural  bias  towards  speeding  up  real 
convergence  needs  to  be  balanced  by  the  need  to  ensure  a  sustainable  convergence 
process. The NBR has repeatedly warned against the pro-cyclical nature of the fiscal policy, 
which  added  to  excess  demand.  We  should  learn  the  lesson  that  allowing  wide  budget 
4 
 BIS Review 56/2009
deficits  while  the  economy  is  expanding  ends  in  failure.  It  would  have  been  much  easier 
today for us to find the means to weather the crisis if our budget had been on a surplus over 
a two-year period prior to the unleashing of the crisis.  
9.  
The adoption of the euro cannot be a substitute for the need of domestic 
policy adjustment. 
This lesson became clearer at the moment emerging economies were hit by the economic 
crisis. While the leu was strengthening, up until the summer of 2007, the issue of adopting 
the euro was not on the agenda of economic agents. The crisis highlighted the fact that the 
leu  was  overappreciated  and  the  market  made  the  necessary  correction.  Over  a  relatively 
short period – from July 2007 to date – the leu weakened by around 35 percent. Over the 
same  period,  the  prospects  of  economic  growth  changed  dramatically:  from  an  almost  9.4 
percent growth rate in 2008 Q3 to a most likely significant decline in 2009 Q1. The monetary 
and fiscal policies will be resorted to with a view to adjusting to the new environment.  
In face of the crisis, the relatively large stock of private foreign debt and the increased market 
volatility  made  some  economic  agents  believe  that  the  early  adoption  of  the  euro  could 
supersede  the  need  for  economic  policy  adjustments.  Yet  this  is  not  a  viable  option,  as 
adopting  the  euro  prior  to  having  achieved  the  main  stages  of  convergence  with  the  EU 
might  pose  serious  threats  in  the  future.  The  adoption  of  the  euro  today  would  mean  to 
relinquish monetary policy before having ensured convergence sustainability, namely before 
removing all the imbalances we are facing today. The outcome would consist in monetary 
policy being designed by the European Central Bank (ECB). But the ECB policy might prove 
inadequate from the standpoint of the specific problems facing the Romanian economy. The 
risk might occur that, in face of relatively high volatility of output and inflation, we run out of 
instruments to tackle the issue. I consider this as a strong enough reason not to adopt the 
euro  prior  to  eliminating  all  major  imbalances  in  the  economy  and  before  having  made 
enough progress on the path to achieving convergence.  
We  stand  committed  to  implement  the  pre-announced  calendar  of  the  euro  adoption.  We 
intend to join ERM II on 1 January 2012. After the minimum two-year stay in this mechanism, 
the  joint  decision  on  entering  the  euro  area  will  be  made  in  2014  and  (likely  to)  become 
effective as of 1 January 2015. Mention should be made that this is the calendar considered 
by  most  rating  agencies  and  foreign  investors,  hence  any  large  deviation  (postponement) 
from this calendar would be negatively perceived and penalised accordingly.  
 I believe there will also be other lessons for countries to learn from the current financial crisis. 
They will learn the manner in which a banking system can be restructured so as to cope with 
a global financial crisis, particularly what is the impact of a so-called "bad bank" on real life. I 
trust  countries  will  learn  that  central  banks'  resort  to  unconventional  instruments  bears 
certain  costs.  Yet,  regardless  of  the  number  of  lessons  learned,  the  experience  of 
financial crises indicates that the social memory of crises is of short duration and that 
the possibility of repeating the same mistakes should never be ruled out.  
Let  me  conclude  my  speech  with  the  words  of  Ivy  Baker  Priest,  former  Treasurer  of  the 
United States between January 1953 and January 1961.  
"The world is round and the place which may seem like the end may also be only the 
beginning",  Ms.  Priest  said.  The  idea  of  this  quotation  may  appear  as  a  truism  but  it  is 
relevant for today's state of the financial system.  
It may prove to be the key lesson to learn from "today's" crisis unless it may have been the 
lesson that mankind thought it had already learned every time a crisis occurred.  
BIS Review 56/2009 
 5
References: 
1. 
The High-Level Group on Financial Supervision in the EU report, chaired by Jacques 
de Larosière, Brussels, 25 February 2009.  
London Summit – Leaders' Statement, 2 April 2009.  
Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the ECB, Introductory remarks, Brussels, 30 March 
2009 (Hearing before the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee of the European 
Parliament).  
Mugur Isărescu, Criza financiară internaţională şi provocări pentru politica monetară 
din România, Cluj-Napoca, 26 February 2009.  
Mugur Isărescu, Criza financiar-bancară şi economică: strategii, programe şi măsuri 
anticriză. Implicaţiile şi perspectivele unei agende naţionale, Braşov, 6 March 2009. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6 
 BIS Review 56/2009
