Marion Williams: Launch of the National Financial Education Programme 
in Barbados 
Welcome remarks by Dr Marion Williams, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, at the 
Launch of the National Financial Education Programme, Bridgetown, 31 August 2009. 
 The  Honourable  David  Thompson,  Prime  Minister,  Minister  of  Finance  and  Investment, 
Labour, Civil Service and Energy; Permanent Secretaries, members of the Board of Directors 
of  the  Central  Bank  of  Barbados,  Management  and  staff  of  the  Bank,  representatives  of 
financial institutions and the education sector, members of the National Financial Education 
Programme  Planning  Committee;  specially  invited  guests,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  good 
morning and welcome to the launch of the National Financial Education Programme (NFEP). 
A few years ago at a meeting of the Central Bank Governors of the Commonwealth, it was 
recommended  that  central  banks  should  take  steps  to  enhance  financial  literacy  in  their 
jurisdictions.  At  the  time,  of  the  central  banks  in  the  Caribbean  only  the  Central  Bank  of 
Trinidad and Tobago had an active literacy programme. The Central Bank of Barbados took 
steps to make this a reality in Barbados. 
This National Financial Education Programme initiative is intended to educate individuals and 
households  about  how  to  better  manage  their  personal  finances  and  how  to  make  sound 
financial decisions that will enhance the quality of their lives which can lead to improvements 
at the national level. It is therefore a very important occasion for us at the Bank and I hope 
that every Barbadian will find the programme useful and timely. 
Throughout our 37-year history, the Bank has considered financial and economic education 
as a critical aspect of our corporate social responsibility and as a Public Affairs goal. Indeed, 
education in the areas of economics and finance is part of our raison d’être because we have 
always believed that the more informed our publics are, the more successful our policies are 
likely to be. So that over the years, we have hosted seminars and conferences on an array of 
economic and financial topics, targeting various interest groups. We have also had a vibrant 
schools education programme geared to educating school children about how the economy 
works. The National Financial Education Programme, as we have designed it, is consistent 
with these educational programmes and objectives. 
Today  we  are  launching  the  programme  under  the  slogan  “All  about  managing  your 
money”. We hope to impact every citizen with this initiative, but especially the man-in-the 
street by making this Programme practical. I will give insights first about the programme for 
the adults. 
We  have  designed  a  programme 
for  employees,  Non-Governmental  Organisations, 
community groups and service organizations, using a series of media. We have identified at 
least six topics that we will be addressing on a phased basis through face-to-face interaction 
with these groups. We will commence with presentations on Budgeting and Saving. Over 
the next three (3) to six (6) months, the programme will promote Budgeting and Saving as 
key elements of proper financial management. We will then review the programme, with a 
view to tweaking and improving it where necessary before we roll out the other topics. Other 
topics  we  hope  to  address  in  this  phase  are:  Borrowing  and  Purchasing  a  Home, 
Credit/Debit Cards, Insurance, Retirement Planning and Estate Planning, and Investing 
and  the  Stock  Market.  We  believe  that  this  direct  intervention  will  be  key  to  influencing 
changes  in  personal  financial  management  and  we  therefore  hope  to  utilise  this  medium 
extensively.  We  have  identified  several  groups  that  can  possibly  benefit  from  these 
presentations. However, if you have a group or know of one that might be interested, please 
contact the Bank. We will seek to accommodate you where ever possible. 
BIS Review 104/2009 
 1
In  addition  to  dialoging  with  you  in  open  fora  we  intend  to  use  the  mass  media  and  the 
Internet to spread our messages and to inform and educate you. 
We are also hoping to work with the Ministry of Education to create a programme specially 
for school children as we believe that financial literacy is better started with the young. We 
recognize  that  education  about  managing  personal  finances  should  begin  at  an  early  age. 
Hence,  we  hope  to  place  considerable  emphasis  on  the  programme  for  children of  school 
age. 
Let me reiterate that the National Financial Education Programme is not intended to create 
financial  experts,  but  to  help  you  improve  your  financial  circumstances  and  assist  you  in 
realizing your financial goals: be they purchasing a home, planning for your kids’ education, 
planning for retirement or insuring your home. It is designed to assist you in improving the 
financial decisions that affect your everyday lives. 
Before  crafting  our  programme,  we  conducted  a  survey  so  as  to  measure  whether 
Barbadians  would  embrace  it.  We  canvassed  about  25  workplaces  and  we  received 
responses from 250 persons, including the Bank’s staff. The results of the survey show that 
Barbadians are receptive to the National Financial Education Programme. The respondents 
felt that education on such areas as Budgeting and Investing, Coping with the Cost of 
Living, Retirement Planning; Purchasing a Home, Financing a Child’s Education and 
Credit  and  Debit  Card  Management  was  key.  Their  responses  were  consistent  with  the 
subject  areas  on  which  the  Bank  will  be  focusing  in  the  coming  months.  On  behalf  of  the 
organizing Committee, I thank persons who so kindly participated in the survey. Let me add, 
however, that while there is no one particular topic dealing with the cost-of-living, we hope 
that the overall programme will equip you to better manage this area. 
The Bank hopes to partner with persons in the financial services and the education sectors to 
help  with  the  delivery  of  the  National  Financial  Education  Programme.  We  are  therefore 
inviting commercial banks, the Barbados Stock Exchange, credit unions and other financial 
entities to come on board to provide technical and other assistance. We have organized a 
comprehensive  sponsorship  package.  If  you  are  interested  in  partnering  with  us  and  you 
wish to obtain more details about the partnerships, please contact Ms. Sadie Dixon at the 
Bank. Additionally, the Committee with responsibility for developing these partnerships may 
be contacting you. I must add, that while we welcome the participation and involvement of 
partners  we  will  not  be  promoting  any  company’s  products  and  services.  The  National 
Financial Education Programme is not about marketing products and services. 
Educating the populace on matters related to finance and economics is a critical aspect of 
our  mandate,  it’s  a  mandate  that  we  have  fulfilled  for  years,  and  this  programme  is  yet 
another initiative in our education campaign. However, as the nomenclature suggests, this 
programme  will  be  on  the  national  scale  and  we  hope  to  make  all  Barbadians  financially 
literate. 
Those of you who read the newspapers yesterday about the number of bounced cheques will 
agree that there is need for skills in budgeting. The result of such financial management and 
decisions can lead to a considerable improvement in financial decision-making. The length of 
the Programme will depend on its success. The more successful it is, the shorter its duration 
can  be.  We  trust  that  the  general  public  will  benefit  from  the  Programme.  I  thank  you  for 
listening. 
2 
 BIS Review 104/2009
