Masaaki Shirakawa: Way out of economic and financial crisis – lessons 
and policy actions 
Speech by Mr Masaaki Shirakawa, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at Japan Society, New 
York, 23 April 2009. 
 Introduction 
Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. First of all, I would like to thank both Japan Society 
and the Institute of International Bankers for giving me the opportunity to appear before such 
distinguished guests. I also appreciate the warm introduction by Mr. Rhodes. 
The global economy is suffering through the crisis of an exceptional scale. Many countries 
are struggling with the consequences of the global credit excess accumulated in the period of 
what we used to call “Great Moderation”. How to extricate our economies out of this plight is 
a top priority for governments and central banks all over the world. 
In  these  unusual  circumstances,  Japan’s  crisis  episode  almost  a  decade  ago  is  drawing 
renewed  attention.  Japan  went  through  a  boom-and-bust  cycle  from  the  late  1980s  to  the 
beginning  of  this  century.  Throughout  the  1990s,  Japan’s  economy  was  caught  in  a 
prolonged stagnation. Japan also experienced a systemic financial crisis. Because of these, 
Japan’s 1990s is often referred to as the “lost decade”. 
A  “lost  decade”  is  a  memorable  and  captivating  phrase,  although  not  to  my  liking  for  the 
reasons I will discuss later. In fact, the background of Japan’s economic slump during the 
1990s  was  intensely  debated  in  and  outside  Japan.  In  those  discussions,  Japan’s  “lost 
decade” was often considered as uniquely Japanese. But when it comes to falling economic 
activity  and  a  weakening  financial  system,  there  are  amazing  similarities  between  Japan’s 
experience in the 1990s and what the US has been through since the summer of 2007. And 
this  leads  some  to  argue  that  the  US  might  be  entering  its  own  version  of  the  “lost…not 
necessarily decade but something else”. 
With these in mind, I would like to structure my discussion into three parts. In the first part, I 
will talk about the similarities between Japan’s previous crisis and the present US difficulties. 
However, it is not my intention to lecture you on what the US should do at this juncture. This 
is  because  no  two  crises  are  identical  and  because  Japan  itself  is  also  mired  in  a  severe 
economic downturn now. In the second part, I would like to revisit Japan’s crisis experience 
from a broader perspective so that we can draw lessons in a multi-dimensional manner. In 
the final part, l will focus on the actions policymakers need to take in order to resolve the 
current crisis. To the extent relevant, I will touch on some aspects of crisis prevention as well.  
Learning the past crisis lessons 
To  begin  with,  allow  me  to  strike  a  personal  note  for  a  second.  Back  in  May  of  1990,  the 
Bank of Japan created a new department responsible for financial stability and I was chosen 
as a division chief. Then Governor Mieno gave my boss and myself a mandate to spell out 
policy  prescriptions  so  that  the  Bank  of  Japan  can  prepare  itself  for  possible  failures  of 
financial institutions. At that time, Japan’s economy was still in the booming mood. Although 
the stock market had peaked out already, property valuations still continued to rise. Looking 
back,  I  cannot  help  but  think  that  the  Governor  was  very  prescient  because  it  was  a  few 
years later that the initial signs of financial instability came to the surface.  
To fulfill the fresh mandate given by the Governor, my boss and I went on a two-week tour to 
the US and Europe to learn how foreign central banks and supervisory authorities handled 
the past financial crises in their jurisdictions. Here in the US, we met a lot of experts at the 
BIS Review 50/2009 
 1
Federal  Reserve  Board,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  Federal  Deposit  Insurance 
Corporation  (FDIC)  and  Resolution  Trust  Corporation  (RTC),  all  of  whom  were  generous 
enough  to  share  their  experiences  and  insights  with  us.  We  discussed  the  failure  of 
Continental  Illinois  National  Bank,  the  savings  and  loan  crisis,  and  the  demise  of  Drexel 
Burnham Lambert among others. On that basis, the Bank of Japan was able to develop in 
the early 1990s its own policy framework for possible financial contingencies in Japan. This 
framework evolved gradually to contain four pillars by the mid-1990s. 
First, when banks are found to be capital-deficient, the authorities should encourage them to 
carry out restructuring and raise additional capital from private investors.  
Second, when dealing with an insolvent bank, the authorities should explore a full range of 
measures,  including  assumptions  by  a  stronger  bank  with  financial  assistance  through  the 
deposit insurance scheme, establishment of an asset management company to separate bad 
assets, and creation of a bridge institution to preserve the function of the failed bank.  
Third,  a  central  bank  should  act  as  a  lender  of  last  resort  when  banks  are  facing  liquidity 
pressures with systemic implications.  
Fourth,  when  banks  find  it  difficult  to  raise  capital  in  the  market,  the  authorities  should 
consider the possibility of injecting public funds. Such recapitalization with the state budget 
should  come  with  a  commitment  by  the  management  of  the  recipient  bank  to  take  due 
responsibilities and its existing shareholders to incur possible losses. 
I  believe  these  generic  principles  still  hold  true  in  today’s  environment.  But  in  hindsight,  I 
have to admit that they are only part of more comprehensive strategies for dealing with a full-
blown financial crisis like the one we are witnessing. We need to ask ourselves why such 
comprehensive policies were not implemented in a timely manner. 
Financial crises: similarities between Japan and the US 
With  these  things  in  mind,  I  would  next  like  to  point  out  remarkable  similarities  between 
Japan’s  crisis  experience  from  the  1990s  to  early  this  century  and  what  the  US  has 
undergone in the past several years. These commonalities fall into five categories.  
First,  financial  crises  in  both  countries  were  preceded  by  high  economic  growth  and  low 
inflation  for  an  extended  period  of  time.  Japan’s  economic  ascent  in  the  1980s  looked 
unstoppable. The continued strength in the US economy in the last decade was emblematic 
of the so-called Great Moderation.  
In  Japan’s  case,  people  strengthened  confidence  in  the  late  1980s  after  riding  out  the  Oil 
Crises. Japan became the world largest creditor country by then with an increasing presence 
in the global economy. A sharp and sustained rise in land prices in those days was seen as a 
vindication of Japan’s stronger economic fundamentals. At the end of 1989, Japan’s stock 
market  capitalization  accounted  for  nearly  half  the  world’s  total  and  the  land  values  of  the 
Tokyo metropolitan area alone were said to equal those of the entire US. What an irrational 
frenzy it was. 
Second, both Japan and the US took time to recognize the collapse of the economic bubbles 
and  to  appreciate  its  substantive  implications  for  the  broader  economy.  In  fact,  Japan’s 
equity prices peaked at the end of 1989 and the nation-wide land price index in September 
1991. It was in July 1991 that the Bank of Japan started the easing cycle in its interest rate 
policy. Even at that time, though, many people cautioned that lower interest rates could lead 
to a resurgence of asset bubbles. In the US, residential investment growth turned negative in 
the first quarter of 2006 and the house prices peaked in May 2006. But it was in September 
2007 that the Federal Reserve began to slash policy rates. Some attributed the irrational rise 
in international commodity prices then to the rate cuts by the Federal Reserve. 
2 
 BIS Review 50/2009
In the early stage of the bubble bursting, it took us quite a while to understand how serious 
its negative impact on the economy would be.  We optimistically thought Japan’s economy 
would  pick  up  once  cyclical  corrections  in  business  investment  had  run  their  course.  This 
initial  optimism  was  proved  wrong  by  the  subsequent  deterioration  in  the  downward  spiral 
between the financial system and the real economy. The US is no exception in this regard. 
Policymakers often say “bubbles cannot be detected until they burst”. But more accurately, 
we should say “bubbles cannot be readily identified even after they burst”. The difficulty of 
identifying  economic  bubbles,  both  ex  ante  and  ex  post,  has  important  implications  for 
monetary policy. So I will come back to this topic later. 
Third,  liquidity  strains  have  been  a  prime  catalyst  for  many  of  the  past  financial  crises.  In 
Japan’s case, the failure of a mid-sized securities house to honor its inter-bank obligations 
triggered severe dislocations in the money market, which spread instantaneously to the wider 
segment  of  Japan’s  financial  markets.  Similarly,  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers  in 
September  2008 caused acute liquidity seizure, thereby shattering the confidence chain in 
the global financial markets and clogging credit flows between lenders and borrowers. 
Fourth,  even  when  financial  stability  was  in  jeopardy,  decisive  measures  such  as  public 
capital injections did not come until the market disruptions reached a critical point in our two 
countries. Several reasons explain this. Even in countries like Japan where banks’ executive 
compensations  are  relatively  modest,  financial  institutions  are  not  necessarily  popular. 
Moreover,  ordinary  citizens  do  not  appreciate  the  importance  of  credit  intermediation  until 
they lose it. For these reasons, we tend to be slow in taking decisive steps. Even if we agree 
on the need to use taxpayers’ money to stabilize the financial system, policy actions tend to 
be piecemeal in the face of public outrage over the mismanaged financial firms. 
In Japan’s case, the authorities decided in the mid-1990s to provide a financial support to 
small  credit  cooperatives  and  specialized  mortgage  lenders.  But  the  reckless  lending  by 
some of these entities sparked public anger and the financial support with taxpayers’ money 
was hotly contested in the Diet. This is part of the reason why recapitalization of systemically 
important  banks  was  delayed  to  the  late  1990s  in  Japan.  Such  policy  procrastination 
continued in spite of the voluntary curbs on banks’ executive pay and therefore worsened the 
spiral  between  the  economic  contraction  and  the  banking  sector  problems,  making  the 
disposals of bad assets even more difficult. As late as in 1999, the Japanese government 
finally  infused  sizable  amount  of  capital  into  major  banks.  But  even  this  turned  out  to  be 
insufficient to revitalize Japan’s banking industry. 
Fifth,  there  are  similarities  on  monetary  policy  front.  During  the  crisis,  the  Bank  of  Japan 
provided ample liquidity and brought the policy rate down to zero. In so doing, the Bank of 
Japan extended the maturities of liquidity-providing operations while expanding the range of 
acceptable collateral and counterparties. We also introduced a special lending facility to ease 
funding  stress  in  the  markets.  Furthermore,  we  purchased  private-label  securities  such  as 
asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP) and asset-backed securities (ABS). In this crisis, the 
US authorities have implemented a variety of measures similar to those innovative steps the 
Bank of Japan took in the past. I will take up this point later.  
What was Japan’s “lost decade”? 
As  I  mentioned  at  the  outset,  Japan’s  1990s  is  described  as  a  “lost  decade”.  This  catchy 
phrase  has  a  straightforward  implication  that  Japan’s  economy  was  plagued  by  a  long 
stagnation. But I do not like this characterization because it is too simplistic, misguiding us in 
terms  of  the  way  we  address  the  problems  and  thereby  formulate  appropriate  policy 
responses. So I would like to do some reality check again for a more balanced assessment 
of Japan’s experience in the 1990s. 
First,  it  is  true  that  Japan’s  economy  was  lackluster  throughout  the  1990s.  In  that  period, 
Japan’s  average  yearly  growth  rate  was  only  1.3%  in  real  terms,  much  less  than  the 
BIS Review 50/2009 
 3
preceding  decade’s  average  of  4.0%.  However,  even  in  1998,  the  worst  year  in  the  post-
bubble period, Japan’s growth rate was minus 1.5%, apparently less dismal than the sharp 
slowdown we are facing now. Also, even during the financial crisis, Japan’s real GDP did not 
fall below the level registered at the peak of the bubble days (1989). I think this owed much 
to the authorities’ efforts to avert financial meltdown by using all means available, including 
the extension of blanket guarantees for all forms of bank liabilities. 
Second,  even  in  the  low-growth  1990s,  there  were  some  tentative  recoveries  in  Japan’s 
economy, which led people to hastily believe that the economy has finally regained traction. 
They turned out to be false dawns, but it is human nature to become optimistic when things 
improve a little. 
Third, Japan’s crisis episode tends to be discussed in the context of deflation. To be more 
precise, however, what worried us most in those days was asset deflation, rather than price 
deflation as we usually presume by the terminology “deflation”. In fact, the peak-to-bottom 
declines in real estate valuations of large cities in Japan were in the order of minus 70-80%, 
while the cumulative fall in CPI between 1997 and 2004 was minus 3%. The real difficulties 
Japan confronted were the dangerous interactions between asset deflation and the banking 
sector fragility.  
Fourth, we should also note that, following the crash of the bubbles, Japan’s trend growth 
stagnated for a sustained period of time and there are structural dimensions to that. From the 
late 1980s through 1990s, Japan did not adapt successfully to the profound changes in the 
global economy; namely, a wave of deregulation, globalization and revolution of information 
and communication technology. These tidal waves prompted a deeper integration of global 
markets,  supported  by  the  division  of  production  processes  on  a  global  scale.  In  this  new 
landscape,  foreign  companies  optimally  deployed  their  production  sites  and  distribution 
channels to create value added, making greater use of outsourcing for cost efficiency.  
But  this  posed  a  challenge  to  Japanese  firms  whose  comparative  advantage  was  in  a 
centrally-controlled and team-oriented production chain. This Japanese industrial model was 
supported  by  high-skilled  domestic  workers  who  were  under  the  umbrella  of  life-time 
employment.  Preoccupied  with  the  past  success  of  their  business  models,  however, 
Japanese  companies  were  slow  in  responding  to  the  changing  realities  in  the  global 
economy. Japan’s economic bubbles added to the sense of complacency, too.  
Coupled  with  the  weakening  credit  intermediation  owing  to  the  non-performing  asset 
problem,  such  inability  to  change  undermined  an  efficient  allocation  of  resources  and 
reduced Japan’s growth potential. Lower trend growth, in turn, protracted Japan’s economic 
ailment after the bubbles burst. Together with the excesses left by the bubbles which I will 
explain  later,  this  is  one  of  the  fundamental  reasons  why  Japan’s  economy  remained 
sluggish in the 1990s.  
Lessons from Japan’s “lost decade” 
Next,  let  me  talk  about  what  kind  of  lessons  we  should  take  from  Japan’s  so-called  lost 
decade.  
The term “lost decade” has a connotation that rapid and bold actions by the authorities could 
have  resolved  the  crisis  much  sooner.  I  do  not  deny  the  importance  of  aggressive  policy 
responses in exigent circumstances. However, as a central banker who muddled through the 
tough times following the asset bubble crash, I suspect the simplification of this sort fails to 
capture the totality and subtlety of the problems Japan encountered in the 1990s, or for that 
matter, any economic crises of a comparable magnitude. In order to understand why Japan 
took  a  decade  to  put  the  economy  back  on  a  sustainable  growth  trajectory,  we  need  to 
review Japan’s experience from a broader policy perspective. I would like to emphasize three 
points in particular.  
4 
 BIS Review 50/2009
tend 
for  securing 
financial  stability 
First, it is not always the case that “bold actions” are judged to be bold afterwards. As I said, 
the  Japanese  government  embarked  on  large  capital  injections  in  1999  but  this  was  not 
enough to limit the vicious spiral between the economic deterioration and the financial crisis. 
After all, this is what the adverse feedback loop is all about. 
Second, as I already mentioned in regard to the banking crisis in Japan, bold and rapid policy 
actions 
to  be  politically  unpopular.  Therefore, 
policymakers should convince the public that crisis management operations by governments 
and central banks are not intended to rescue the failing banks but to save the entire financial 
system.  
Third, macroeconomic policies are no panacea although they play a key role in combating a 
sharp slowdown in the economy. We cannot regain strong economic growth unless we clean 
up the excesses created in the bubble period. Likewise, macroeconomic policies cannot deal 
with  the  productivity  losses  arising  from  the  inability  of  companies  to  adjust  their  business 
models. As these points are essential, allow me to spend a few more words. 
Japan’s  economic  imbalances  accumulated  in  the  exuberant  times  were  enormous.  In  the 
booming  1980s,  Japanese  businesses 
their 
investment surged at a double-digit pace in the three years to 1990. Once the bubble began 
to  collapse  in  the  early  1990s,  resource  utilization  declined  sharply  and  non-performing 
assets started to rise. In short, Japan piled up excesses in debt, capacity and labor. As you 
can see, imbalances of this size take a long time to unwind. 
Japan’s  economy  recovered  on  the  back  of  the  stabilization  of  the  financial  system.  But 
equally  crucial  for  Japan’s  economic  revival  was  the  elimination  of  those  excesses.  After 
shedding  excesses,  Japanese  companies  began  to  integrate  themselves  into  the  global 
value chain. This transformation was particularly visible for manufacturing industries such as 
electronics,  automobiles  and  general  machineries.  In  other  words,  following  the  structural 
shake-out in the late 1990s, Japanese companies re-invented themselves to be able to reap 
the  benefits  of  global  economic  dynamism  that  involved  both  advanced  and  emerging 
economies.  
increased  borrowings  substantially  and 
Policy actions for crisis resolution 
So far I was speaking in a past tense, talking mainly about Japan’s crisis experience in the 
1990s  and  early  this  century.  In  the  remaining  time,  I  would  like  to  discuss  policy  actions 
needed in the current environment.  
I  already  mentioned  the  striking  similarities  between  Japan’s  economic  difficulties  in  the 
1990s and the current US economic crisis. But we should not forget about the differences, 
either. For example, unlike Japan where banks play a larger role in credit allocation, the US 
relies more heavily on capital markets for financial intermediation. In addition, while Japan’s 
non-performing  assets  were  mostly  concentrated  in  commercial  real  estate  loans,  the  US 
problem originated in the securitization market. In theory, losses on securitized assets are 
easier to crystallize than those on commercial real estate loans because securitized assets 
are  constantly  re-priced  in  the  market.  However,  fair  values  of  securitized  assets  become 
much harder to determine when their market liquidity is impaired. Dispersion of securitized 
assets throughout the investor universe creates additional complexity, too.  
Since the onset of the current crisis, policymakers around the world have been treading very 
carefully between the two requirements: facilitating financial de-leveraging on the one hand, 
while  preventing  a  sharp  contraction  in  economic  activity  on  the  other.  This  is  a  fine 
balancing act because de-leveraging and economic downturns can be trapped in an adverse 
feedback loop. Policies I would suggest to combat the crisis of this sort are based on four 
pillars. They have already been adopted in our two countries, but let me repeat them. 
BIS Review 50/2009 
 5
First, we need to make sure that the liquidity needs in financial markets are smoothly met. 
This is indispensable for financial stability. As I said before, most of the past financial crises 
started  from  a  sharp  pullback  in  funding  liquidity.  Liquidity  concerns  are  highly  contagious 
and capable of eroding the foundations on which our financial system is built. In the present 
crisis,  therefore,  a  number  of  central  banks  have  substantially  expanded  their  liquidity 
operations in domestic currencies. To alleviate dollar funding pressures, major central banks 
have also activated temporary swap lines with the US Federal Reserve to provide dollars to 
financial institutions in their national markets.  
Second, when credit markets are under severe stress, a central bank is sometimes expected 
to  step  in  to  support  market  functioning.  The  modality  for  central  bank  intervention  differs 
across  individual  circumstances.  For  instance,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  pursued  credit 
easing  policy  to  unfreeze  the  US  financial  market  by  purchasing  plain  as  well  as  asset-
backed  commercial  paper,  agency-related  securities  and  so  forth.  In  spite  of  its  bank-
centered system, Japan has also been affected by the turmoil in global capital markets. In 
fact,  Japan’s  commercial  paper  and  corporate  bond  markets  tightened  sharply  in  the  last 
several months, which caused an acute squeeze in Japan’s corporate finance. To counter 
this,  the  Bank  of  Japan  has  started  buying  commercial  paper  and  shorter-term  corporate 
bonds, assuming credit risk of private sector debtors.  
Overall, Japanese banks are in stable conditions and we do not see a systemic problem in 
them. However, Japanese banks have sizable holdings of corporate shares and part of the 
unrealized gains on those share-holdings constitutes banks’ Tier II capital. Therefore, falling 
equity prices reduce their capital buffers and constrain the financial intermediation process. 
To  alleviate  this,  the  Bank  of  Japan  has  restarted  the  purchase  of  bank-held  corporate 
shares.  In  a  similar  vein,  the  Bank  of  Japan  has  also  announced  a  plan  to  supply 
subordinated loans to the Japanese banks subject to international capital standards. This is 
aimed at bolstering their Tier II capital. I would like to emphasize that these measures are 
quite exceptional by central banks’ standards.  
In a nutshell, the US and Japan are working in their own ways to relieve the tensions in the 
credit markets. 
Third, when the vicious circle between the economic downturn and financial instability is in 
motion, macroeconomic policies should play an active part in boosting aggregate demand. 
Interest  rate  reductions  are  most  traditional  in  the  policy  tool-kit  and  both  the  Federal 
Reserve and the Bank of Japan have cut their policy rates to effectively zero. Fiscal stimulus 
should  be  considered  as  well,  without  putting  the  long-term  fiscal  discipline  at  risk.  As 
highlighted in the recent G20 summit communiqué, major countries are already undertaking 
a fiscal expansion that will amount to $5 trillion by the end of next year. 
Fourth,  a  holistic  approach  is  needed  to  restore  financial  stability.  By  “holistic”,  I  mean 
implementing  a  range  of  policy  measures  in  tandem,  including  capital  augmentation  for 
banks and the removal of problem assets from their balance sheets. Financial system is built 
on the trust between lenders and borrowers. Once this foundation is shaken, it takes time to 
resume a normal functioning of the financial system. Currently, the global financial system is 
still  afflicted  by  a  loss  of  confidence.  In  order  to  allay  widespread  fears  over  financial 
instability,  the  authorities  around  the  world  have  taken  numerous  steps  such  as  capital 
injections, public guarantees for banks’ debts, separation of toxic exposures and the like.  
Separating impaired assets from banks while reinforcing their capital bases is a critical but 
the most difficult part of the financial rehabilitation strategy. In the first place, it is far from 
easy to grasp the extent of banks’ capital shortfalls. Securitized assets have a complex risk 
profile  due  to  their  multi-tranche  structure.  Worse  still,  market  liquidity  for  these  complex 
assets  has  evaporated  for  the  past  year  or  so,  further  complicating  their  fair  value 
measurement.  The  negative  interactions  between  the  economic  downturn  and  financial 
instability  are  generating  fresh  losses,  thereby  aggravating  concerns  over  banks’  capital 
shortages.  Any  attempt  at  breaking  into  this  sinister  feedback  loop  is  as  tricky  as  chasing 
6 
 BIS Review 50/2009
after  a  moving  target.  On  top  of  that,  it  is  politically  hard  to  reach  a  consensus  on  the 
sufficiency of government capital infusions.  
This is why public capital injections tend to be insufficient and behind the curve. But there is 
no quick fix. While making the best efforts to capture the extent of banks’ asset degradation, 
policymakers should communicate the importance of financial stability to taxpayers so that 
they become more receptive to the needed policy steps, however unpopular they might be.  
To  sum  up,  I  spoke  about  four  key  elements  of  financial  crisis  management:  1)  ample 
liquidity provisions, 2) support for credit market functioning, 3) macroeconomic stimulus, and 
4) injections of public capital and elimination of balance sheet uncertainties. Without effective 
policy measures on these fronts, the economy will deteriorate much faster and deeper. 
But we need to be aware that policymakers are not omnipotent. The policy actions we have 
taken in the past twenty months are no substitute for the necessary unwinding of economic 
imbalances accumulated in the preceding booms. As I mentioned earlier, Japan’s economy 
did  not  resume  sustainable  recovery  until  it  eliminated  excess  debt,  excess  capacity  and 
excess labor. The same goes for the current crisis. I think the US economy needs to work out 
excesses, which include unsustainable financial leverage, household over-indebtedness, and 
perhaps the over-extension of the financial industry. This will be painful but inescapable. In 
view of Japan’s decade-long experience, there are no palatable alternatives.  
One more note of caution. Because of the pain associated with the unwinding of excesses, 
we might be leaning toward protectionist measures in trade and finance. But we must resist a 
descent  into  protectionism  by  any  means.  Like  protectionism,  regulatory  overreaction  will 
also undermine the economic efficiency, thereby putting downward pressure on productivity 
growth. Without question, this is the last thing we intend to achieve.  
Challenges ahead: crisis prevention 
What I have so far said concerns crisis resolution. But crisis prevention is equally important 
from the longer-term viewpoint. Let me sketch this out. 
First  of  all,  the  current  crisis  presents  a  challenge  for  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  It 
requires  a  change  not  only  in  policymakers’  way  of  thinking  but  also  in  the  theoretical 
underpinnings  on  which  actual  policies  have  been  formulated.  In  the  last  two  decades, 
macroeconomics as a professional discipline has evolved with impressive sophistication. If I 
may  put  it  simply,  its  implications  for  policy  practitioners  might  be  condensed  into  three 
points. First, economic growth potential is maximized under the sustained stability in prices. 
Second, central banks’ monetary policy should be aimed primarily at achieving price stability. 
Third,  as  a  corollary  of  the  first  and  the  second,  the  onus  for  macroeconomic  stabilization 
should be mainly on monetary policy. Of course, there is nothing wrong with each of these 
propositions. But over time, they seem to have created a sense of complacency among us 
with regard to the potency of monetary policy. 
For instance, some macroeconomic theorists have claimed that a depression is no longer a 
real  concern.  However,  the  current  crisis,  including  its  run-up,  demonstrates  that  a 
macroeconomic  theory  does  not  take  proper  account  of  the  dynamics  in  financial  systems 
and  the  irrational  behavior  of  human  being  such  as  herding  and  indulgence  in  excessive 
optimism.  Therefore,  from  a  preventive  vantage  point,  we  need  to  develop  a  broader 
approach. 
Under  benign  economic  conditions,  imbalances  could  accumulate  through  a  number  of 
channels. As we saw in Japan in the 1980s and in the US in the early 2000s, expectations of 
sustained low interest rates often contribute to the build-up of economic excesses through 
higher  leverage.  In  good  times,  financial  institutions  also  tend  to  extrapolate  low  historical 
volatilities  into  their  measurement  of  potential  risk  exposures.  Intense  competition  puts 
additional pressure on those institutions to take on risks beyond their capacity. Such strong 
BIS Review 50/2009 
 7
inclinations for risk-taking at the level of individual financial institutions can lead to excessive 
risk-taking at the aggregate level, thereby sustaining asset price hikes and making the entire 
financial  system  more  vulnerable  to  sharp  reversals  of  risk  positions  and  the  resulting 
squeeze in market liquidity.  
Given  these  all,  I  think  it  is  becoming  increasingly  important  for  policymakers  to  sharpen 
macro-prudential  perspectives,  by  which  I  mean  two  things  in  particular.  One  is  to  keep 
monitoring risk distributions throughout the whole financial system. The other is to analyze 
how the financial system evolves within itself as well as through the complex interaction with 
the  real  economy.  These  perspectives  are  vital  not  only  for  regulatory  and  supervisory 
purposes alone but also for the conduct of monetary policy. In fact, there are a number of 
specific issues we need to examine in a macro-prudential framework. Because of the time 
constraints,  however,  I  will  just  touch  upon  the  most  important  aspect  for  central  bankers. 
Namely, how macro-prudential perspectives relate to monetary policy. 
How to deal with economic bubbles has been a controversial topic. One school of thought 
has argued that a central bank should pursue aggressive monetary easing after the bubble 
bursts. This line of thinking is based on a belief that bubbles are difficult to spot beforehand 
and central banks can merely mop up the debris of the collapsed bubbles. But I beg to differ. 
Quite often, bubbles are too elusive to identify even when they are crashing. On top of that, 
when accumulated excesses are being unwound in the aftermath of the bubble bursting, the 
efficacy of central bank’s easing policy is materially reduced as we are witnessing now.  
So what should we do?  
First and foremost, central banks should be attentive to both the prevention of bubbles and 
the  mitigation  of  their  consequences.  I  believe  this  symmetrical  approach  is  important. 
Central banks should remain vigilant as to whether excesses are lurking in the economy. As 
economic  imbalances  pile  up  insidiously,  a  narrow  focus  on  price  stability  makes  it  more 
likely for policymakers to overlook dangerous signs emerging in the wider economy. This is 
exactly  where  macro-prudential  perspectives  come  in.  Financial  imbalances  typically 
manifest themselves in sharp credit expansion, outsized leverage, soaring asset prices, or 
combination of those. These are the parameters central banks should watch carefully.  
But  excesses  can  appear  in  other  forms,  too.  The  challenge  for  central  banks  is  that 
economic imbalances have a long “formative period” so to speak, spanning much longer than 
the normal time horizon of monetary policy implementation. Therefore, if we focus narrowly 
on  short-term  movements  in  consumer  price  inflation,  this  could  have  an  unintended 
consequence  of  fostering  the  creation  of  bubbles.  In  response  to  the  bursting  of  the 
information technology bubble early this century and the deflation scare associated with that, 
monetary  policy  was  eased  on  a  global  scale  and  for  an  extended  period  of  time. 
Unfortunately this has proved to be one of the contributing factors to the global credit bubbles 
and the resulting mess in the global financial system.  
Central  banks  should  not  be  hesitant  in  pursuing  aggressive  monetary  easing  when 
economic conditions warrant. In a severe economic crisis, policymakers have to be careful 
not  to  mistake  a  temporary  rebound  in  the  economy,  or  a  false  dawn  I  would  say,  for  a 
genuine recovery. But there is no economic crisis that never ends. So central banks should 
also be mindful of a timely exit from those aggressive easing measures. A late exit can be an 
entry into something worse.  
Finally, let me add that monetary policy alone cannot prevent the recurrence of boom-and-
bust oscillations. For example, a host of issues remain to be addressed in the regulatory and 
supervisory arena as well. 
8 
 BIS Review 50/2009
Closing remark 
Since I am  almost 40  minutes into my speech, I would like to finish with a final  message. 
What we are confronting is not a garden-variety recession. This is the crisis of a truly global 
nature.  In  the  early  2000s,  Japan  was  able  to  benefit  from  the  recovery  in  the  global 
economy. This time, we cannot count on others in getting out of the woods. But over the past 
year or so, we have together achieved a lot in our fight against the crisis. In that spirit, we will 
continue  to  work  out  both  individual  and  shared  solutions.  Let  us  move  ahead  together  to 
rebuild sustainable and efficient financial systems for us and for our future generations.  
Thank you very much for your listening. 
BIS Review 50/2009 
 9
