Daniel K Tarullo: Large banks and small banks in an era of systemic risk 
regulation 
Speech  by  Mr  Daniel  K  Tarullo,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve System, at the North Carolina Bankers Association Annual Convention, Chapel Hill, 
North Carolina, 15 June 2009. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website.  
 The  financial  crisis  and  its  aftermath  have  revealed  fundamental  problems  in  both  risk 
management  by  financial  institutions  and  supervision  by  government  regulators.  These 
shortcomings arose in no small part from a failure by both the private and public sectors to 
adjust to far-reaching changes in financial markets over recent decades. There is a growing, 
though certainly not unanimous, view that supervision and regulation must be substantially 
more  oriented  toward  containing  systemic  risk  and  addressing  the  associated  problems 
posed by institutions considered too-big-to-fail. The public policy agenda will thus rightly be 
dominated for some time by proposals for legislative and administrative measures directed at 
systemic risk. In a moment I will offer some of my own views on the subject. 
Even  as  we  move  into  this  era  of  systemic  risk  regulation,  however,  it  is  important  to 
recognize  that  changes  in  the  financial  services  industry  have  affected  every  bank  in 
America, large and small. While smaller banks will not likely see the extensive supervisory 
changes that have been proposed for the largest financial institutions, they too must adapt 
their risk-management practices to new competitive and economic conditions. Only by doing 
so will they continue to play their distinctive role in providing credit to individuals and small 
businesses.  
The changes in the financial services industry that preceded the crisis, the crisis itself, and 
the regulatory changes that will follow together carry important consequences for all banks. It 
seemed to me particularly appropriate to address the implications of these changes here in 
North Carolina, home to institutions that range from the very large to the very small.1
Large banks 
If we have learned anything from the present crisis, it is that systemic risk was very much 
built  into  our  financial  system.  This  situation  was  the  outcome  of  a  decades-long  trend, 
during  which  traditional  bank  lending,  trading,  and  other  capital  markets  activities  were 
increasingly  integrated.  The  most  visible  manifestations  of  this  trend  were  the  explosive 
growth  of  securitization  and  the  increasing  involvement  of  banks  and  their  affiliates  in  all 
parts of the securitization process. And, as we learned during the course of the crisis, the 
universe  of 
failure  was  regarded  as  having  systemic 
consequences  extended  well  beyond  banks,  or  even  bank  holding  companies,  to  include 
financial firms not subject to mandatory prudential regulation.  
More generally, the emergence of the so-called shadow banking system changed important 
features of the traditional banking model, particularly at the largest institutions. These banks 
became  increasingly  dependent  on  the  wholesale  funding  provided  by  securitization, 
commercial paper issuance, and other sources – funding that was often poorly matched to 
the maturity of the firm's assets.  
institutions  whose  potential 
                                                 
1   The views presented here are my own and not necessarily those of other members of the Board of Governors 
or the Federal Open Market Committee. 
BIS Review 74/2009 
 1
imposed  more  detailed  capital  requirements  and 
The result was the rising vulnerability of these institutions to non-traditional sources of risk. 
The  new  market-based  liquidity  problems  arose  from  sudden,  sharp  movements  in  asset 
prices  that  led  to  enormous  market  uncertainty  concerning  the  values  of  those  assets.  As 
now  liquidity-strained  institutions  made  increasingly  distressed  asset  sales,  they  placed 
further downward pressure on asset prices, leading to margin calls for leveraged actors and 
mark-to-market  losses  for  all  holders  of  the  assets.  Since  multiple  firms  were  relying  on 
similar marketable assets as a ready source of liquidity, extreme price declines could ensue, 
engendering  a  negative  feedback  loop  that,  if  unchecked,  would  threaten  the  solvency  of 
firms operating on the assumption of liquidity through asset sales or borrowings secured by 
such assets. 
These and other changes in the competitive environment both prompted and advanced the 
relaxation  over  the  past  few  decades  of  many  of  the  restrictions  on  bank  activities  and 
affiliations that had been established in the 1930s. As a result of these changes, which had 
taken  place  both  through  administrative  action  and  by  statute,  banks  could  operate 
nationally, had few practical restrictions on their ability to pay competitive deposit rates, could 
conduct  a  much  broader  range  of  activities  within  their  own  operations,  and  could  affiliate 
with virtually any kind of financial firm. In response to now-permissible bank involvement in 
more  activities  and  affiliation  with  broker-dealers  and  other  financial  firms,  regulatory 
agencies 
insisted  on  better  risk 
management. But there was no overhaul of financial regulation to take account of the impact 
of trading and capital market activities on both traditional banking and systemic risk. 
The financial crisis has focused the attention of policymakers on the need for just this kind of 
regulatory reorientation. I have recently set forth a fairly extensive explanation of the changes 
I  believe  should  accompany  this  reorientation.2  I  will  not  repeat  this  whole  agenda  today. 
Instead, let me simply highlight a few of these items to illustrate concretely what an era of 
systemic risk regulation would look like. 
First, within the Federal Reserve, we are adjusting our consolidated supervision practices to 
take  greater  account  of  the  risks  faced,  and  created,  by  affiliates  principally  involved  in 
trading  and  other  capital  market  activities.  Recent  supervisory  practices  had  not  moved 
quickly enough away from the traditional focus on bank holding company regulation as a way 
to protect the insured depository institution subsidiaries, and toward more attention to such 
factors as the common exposures of different affiliates within the consolidated entity. 
Second,  we  must  strengthen  existing  regulations  and  supervisory  guidance,  particularly  in 
areas in which bank involvement in trading and markets is most significant. The centrality of 
liquidity  problems  to  the  crisis  requires  considerable  attention  to  adequate  liquidity  risk-
management practices, particularly at firms substantially reliant on wholesale funding. While 
the most serious liquidity problems occurred outside traditional commercial bank lending and 
borrowing activities, the crisis revealed significant fragilities in financial institutions' extensive 
use  of  short-term  repurchase  agreements  and  reverse  repurchase  agreements  to  finance 
large  portions  of  dealer  inventory  and  trading  positions.  On  the  other  side  of  the  balance 
sheet, capital requirements for assets in the trading book were revealed by the crisis to be 
seriously  deficient,  based  as  they  were  on  only  a  10-day  trading  horizon.  Along  with  our 
colleagues in the other regulatory agencies and, indeed, with our international colleagues in 
the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, we are working on proposals to address these 
problems. 
Third, we are augmenting our supervisory approach for bank holding companies to include a 
more  explicitly  systemic  perspective.  "Horizontal  reviews"  of  risks,  risk  management,  and 
other practices that are conducted across multiple financial firms and grounded in a uniform 
                                                 
2   Daniel K. Tarullo (2009), “Financial Regulation in the Wake of the Crisis,” speech delivered at the Peterson 
Institute for International Economics, Washington, D.C., June 8. 
2 
 BIS Review 74/2009
set of supervisory stress parameters can help identify both common trends and firm-specific 
weaknesses.  We  will  incorporate  into  more  routine  supervisory  practice  some  lessons 
learned  from  our  recently  completed  Supervisory  Capital  Assessment  Program  of  the 
nation's 19 largest bank holding companies.  
Fourth, it is important to solve through legislation the so-called boundary problem in financial 
regulation. Last year there was a series of runs on nondepository financial institutions that 
raised systemic concerns. Institutions that may be considered too-big-to-fail, or at least too-
interconnected-to-fail,  must  be  subject 
to  regulatory  requirements  and  consolidated 
supervision. 
Of  course,  these  are  not  the  only  steps  I  would  recommend,  either  within  the  Federal 
Reserve or for the financial regulatory structure more generally. They should, however, give 
you an idea of the kinds of changes that will be necessary as we shift to a focus on systemic 
risk regulation. 
Small banks 
Let me turn now to the situation of smaller banks – here in North Carolina and around the 
nation. The financial crisis did not originate in smaller banks, but they have hardly escaped 
the  fallout  from  the  crisis  itself,  and  from  the  serious  recession  that  has  followed.  On 
average, commercial banks with less than $1 billion in assets reported a modest net profit 
during the first quarter of 2009, recovering from an average loss position in the fourth quarter 
of  2008.  But  this  average  figure  hides  the  fact  that  nearly  one  in  five  of  these  banks  lost 
money in the first quarter. As of March 31, nonperforming assets were twice the level of one 
year  ago,  and  when  measured  against  total  loans  and  the  category  of  Other  Real  Estate 
Owned, stood at an historic peak. Furthermore, capital ratios, although still strong for these 
banks as a group, have fallen since early 2008.  
At the same time, the importance of traditional financial intermediation services, and hence of 
the  smaller  banks  that  typically  specialize  in  providing  those  services,  tends  to  increase 
during  times  of  financial  stress.  Indeed,  the  crisis  has  highlighted  the  important  continuing 
role  of  community  banks.  This  seems  an  opportune  moment  both  to  review  the  virtues  of 
community  banking  and  to  identify  some  of  the  difficulties  faced  by  community  bankers 
during this recession and beyond.  
The  dramatic  changes  in  the  U.S.  financial  services  industry  that  I  described  earlier  have 
also  produced  a  new  competitive  environment  for  community  banks.  Consolidation  has 
reduced  the  number  of  banking  institutions  (that  is,  commercial  banks  and  thrifts)  in  the 
United  States  by  nearly  50  percent  since  1989.  The  number  of  community  banks  has 
declined  by  a  similar  percentage,  leaving  the  share  of  all  banking  institutions  that  are 
community banks virtually unchanged.3  
Even as the number of banking institutions has been declining, the number of banking offices 
(branches plus headquarters) has been growing. Not surprisingly, big banks have been the 
drivers of the increase in banking offices. Since 1989, the number of community bank offices 
has declined by about 14 percent. The number of offices per community bank did increase 
from 2.4 to 3.9, but even this 60% growth must be understood in the context of the changes 
in  larger  banks.  In  this  same  20-year  period,  the  number  of  big  bank  offices  increased  by 
about 42 percent, and the number of offices per big bank more than tripled, from just under 
17 to nearly 55. The net effect was a decline of more than 25 percent in the share of banking 
                                                 
3   Statistics in this paragraph and the next are based on a definition of the term "community bank" that includes 
independent  commercial  banks  and  thrifts  with  assets  less  than  $1  billion  and  banks  and  thrifts  that  are 
subsidiaries of holding companies with total banking assets less than $1 billion, all in 2008 dollars. The term 
"big bank" is defined to include all other commercial banks and thrifts. 
BIS Review 74/2009 
 3
offices  operated  by  community  banks.  The  shares  of  deposits,  banking  assets,  and  small 
business loans held by community banks have declined substantially as well.  
These  declines  can  be  explained  by  a  number  of  factors,  including  legal  developments, 
technological  advances,  and  changes  in  the  business  strategies  of  larger  banks  and  non-
bank  financial  service  providers.  For  example,  deregulation  has  allowed  banks  to  expand 
their  geographic  reach,  facilitating  the  formation  of  a  number  of  large,  geographically 
diversified  banking  organizations.  These  large  banking  organizations  can  now  be  found  in 
many  local  markets,  competing  for  business  with  the  community  banks  that  call  those 
markets home. Here in North Carolina, the number of large banks with a branch presence in 
the state has more than doubled over the past twenty years, from 18 to 39.  
At  the  same  time,  technological  advances  have  made  information  about  households  and 
small  businesses  more  readily  available,  allowing  some  (typically  large)  institutions  to 
substitute  credit  scoring  for  more  costly  traditional  techniques  in  the  underwriting  of  some 
types of consumer and small business loans. This development has allowed larger banks to 
compete more effectively with community banks in providing these types of loans.  
Another  salient  change  in  the  competitive  environment  is  that  non-bank  financial  service 
providers  have  become  increasingly  important  participants  in  the  financial  services  sector, 
capturing a large and growing share of the retail financial services business. For example, 
while  the  number  of  credit  unions  has  declined  by  42  percent  since  1989,  credit  union 
deposits  have  more  than  quadrupled,  and  credit  unions  have  increased  their  share  of 
national  deposits  from  4.7  percent  to  8.5  percent.  In  addition,  some  credit  unions  have 
shifted  from  the  traditional  membership  based  on  a  common  interest  to  membership  that 
encompasses anyone who lives or works within one or more local banking markets. In the 
last  few  years,  some  credit  unions  have  also  moved  beyond  their  traditional  focus  on 
consumer services to provide services to small businesses, increasing the extent to which 
they compete with community banks. 
These  changes  have  posed  significant  challenges  for  community  banks.  Even  so,  many 
community  banks  have  thrived,  in  large  part  because  their  local  presence  and  personal 
interactions  give  them  an  advantage  in  meeting  the  financial  needs  of  many  households, 
small  businesses,  and  agricultural  firms.  Their  business  model  is  based  on  an  important 
economic explanation of the role of financial intermediaries – to develop and apply expertise 
that  allows  a  lender  to  make  better  judgments  about  the  creditworthiness  of  potential 
borrowers  than  could  be  made  by  a  potential  lender  with  less  information  about  the 
borrowers.  
A small, but growing, body of research suggests that the financial services provided by large 
banks are less-than-perfect substitutes for those provided by community banks.4 Consistent 
with  this  view,  one  study  finds  that  the  increase  in  competition  from  large,  geographically 
diversified  banking  organizations  has  not  affected  the  profitability  of  community  banks  in 
urban areas. There is some evidence of a profitability effect in rural areas, but it is actually 
more likely to be positive than negative.5 Thus, for most community bankers, the increased 
presence  in  their  local  markets  of  large,  geographically  diversified  banking  organizations 
appears not to adversely affect profitability. This circumstance may be due to the fact that a 
                                                 
4   See,  for  example,  Robert  Adams,  Kenneth  Brevoort,  and  Elizabeth  K.  Kiser,  (2007).  "Who  Competes  with 
Whom? The Case of Depository Institutions," Journal of Industrial Economics 55, pp. 141-67; Andrew Cohen 
and  Michael  J.  Mazzeo,  (2007).  "Market  Structure  and  Competition  among  Retail  Depository  Institutions," 
Review  of  Economics  and  Statistics  89,  pp.  60-74;  and  Timothy  Hannan  and  Robin  Prager,  (2004).  "The 
Competitive Implications of Multimarket Bank Branching," Journal of Banking and Finance 28, pp. 1889-1911. 
5   See Timothy Hannan and Robin A. Prager, (2009). "The Profitability of Small Single-Market Banks in an Era of 
Multi-Market Banking," Journal of Banking and Finance 33, pp. 263-71. 
4 
 BIS Review 74/2009
branch  manager  at  a  large  depository  institution  typically  does  not  have  the  same  local 
connections and relationships as a community bank president.  
Furthermore,  although  survey  data  indicate  that  small  businesses  have  increased  their 
reliance on large banks and non-bank financial service providers in recent years, the data 
show that these same firms have not reduced the average number of financial services they 
obtain  from  community  banks.  Rather,  small  businesses  are,  on  average,  using  more 
financial services and types of services than they have in the past, and are obtaining these 
services  from  a  greater  number  and  wider  variety  of  financial  institutions,  often  including 
community banks.6  
To remain successful, any business must adapt to a changing competitive environment. The 
adaptation of community banks over the past two decades is evidenced by the substantial 
changes in their balance sheets, on both the asset and liability sides. On the asset side, both 
the average ratio of total loans to total assets and the average share of lending comprised by 
commercial  real  estate  loans  have  increased  markedly.  On  the  liability  side,  reliance  on 
deposits  of  individuals,  partnerships,  and  corporations  has  declined  somewhat,  and  there 
has been a dramatic increase in the share of community banks that hold brokered deposits. 
In addition, community banks have become more reliant on non-interest sources of revenue.  
These changes in business strategy, which undoubtedly helped to maintain community bank 
profitability  over  much  of  the  past  two  decades,  may  in  the  current  financial  environment 
exacerbate  the  risks  faced  by  community  banks.  In  this  difficult  operating  environment, 
Federal  Reserve  examiners  are  encouraging  community  banks  to  focus  on  maintaining 
sound loan quality and  strong credit administration practices. In addition, they are  working 
with  community  banks  to  ensure  that  they  maintain  appropriate  capital  planning,  credit 
administration, and liquidity management policies.  
For example, earlier this year, the Federal Reserve issued supervisory guidance (SR letter 
09-4) that reemphasized the importance of capital planning and prudent dividend policies for 
bank  holding  companies  (BHCs)  and  their  bank  subsidiaries.  This  guidance  –  which  was 
directed  at  all  BHCs,  both  large  and  small  –  reminded  them  to  ensure  that  they  remain 
sources  of  strength  to  their  bank  subsidiaries  and  to  curtail  dividends  when  their  financial 
condition is under stress. 
A  key  part  of  any  effective  capital  planning  process  is  an  evaluation  of  the  risk  posed  by 
concentrations in specific portfolios of loans or other assets, and of the buffers necessary to 
offset potential losses on these holdings. In late 2006, the banking agencies issued guidance 
addressing  concentrations  in  commercial  real  estate  lending.  This  guidance  set  forth 
supervisory  expectations  for  the  management  of  risks  stemming  from  these  and  other 
concentrations,  including  consideration  of  the  effects  of  stressed  market  conditions  on  a 
bank's assets and capital. In the time since this guidance was issued, examiners report that 
many community banks have conducted rigorous and effective stress tests. But examiners 
have  also  visited  many  institutions  that  have  only  recently  begun  the  essential  step  of 
ensuring  that  their  management  information  systems  are  sufficiently  detailed  to  support  a 
robust analysis of bank concentration, and identifying where more work on stress testing is 
needed.  
Funds management has also been an area that has received a renewed supervisory focus at 
banks of all sizes. As depositors and other funds providers have become more sensitive to 
bank  risk,  many  banks  have  reinforced  their  contingency  funding  plans  and  developed 
sophisticated systems to more closely track their sources and uses of funds. These steps are 
particularly important for banks facing weaker asset quality.  
                                                 
6   See Robin Prager and John D. Wolken, (2008). "The Evolving Relationship between Community Banks and 
Small Businesses: Evidence from the Surveys of Small Business Finances," Federal Reserve Board Finance 
and Economics Discussion Series 2008-60. 
BIS Review 74/2009 
 5
Conclusion 
The  differences  in  the  business  models  of  systemically  important  financial  firms  and 
community banks are obvious. Yet the financial crisis and ensuing recession have revealed 
deficiencies  in  risk  management  in  institutions  of  both  types.  Changes  in  competitive 
environments  require  banks  to  respond  with  changes  in  their  business  strategies.  But  the 
financial  crisis  has  also  revealed  the  importance  of  banks  adopting  risk-management 
strategies appropriate to these strategic changes, and of bank regulatory agencies adapting 
their supervisory models to both these kinds of changes in financial institutions.  
The characteristics of the financial services industry have changed enormously in the last 30 
years.  Along  with  the  nature  of  the  regulatory  regime  that  will  be  effective,  the  key  aim  of 
prudential regulation remains what it has always been – to encourage the efficient allocation 
of capital to productive uses while protecting the system from the defects and excesses that 
are inherent in financial markets. As we recover from the  crisis and the recession, we will 
likely  be  entering  a  new  era  in  which  systemic  risk  regulation  assumes  much  greater 
importance for supervisors. But the role of bank management, and of risk management at 
banks,  will  also  remain  what  it  has  always  been  –  to  allow  these  institutions  to  play  an 
effective intermediating role in a safe and sound fashion.  
6 
 BIS Review 74/2009
