Mark Carney: Rebalancing the global economy 
Remarks  by  Mr  Mark  Carney,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  International 
Economic Forum of the Americas Conference of Montreal, Montreal, 11 June 2009.  
 The theme of this conference – "Adapting to a New World Order" – suggests that it is clear 
how  global  commerce  and  finance  will  be  reorganized  in  the  wake  of  the  current  crisis. 
However, the outcome is far from preordained. How we manage the rebalancing of the global 
economy  could  profoundly  influence  how  open,  equitable,  and  prosperous  the  New  World 
Order will be.  
Globalized product, capital, and labour markets1 lie at the heart of the New World Order to 
which  we  should  aspire.  However,  the  next  wave  of  globalization  needs  to  be  more  firmly 
grounded  and  its  participants  more  responsible.  In  recent  years,  a  belief  in  the  power  of 
markets  has  not  always  been  accompanied  by  a  commitment  to  build  resilient  markets. 
Moreover,  at  times,  policy-makers  and  the  private  sector  did  not  live  up  to  their 
responsibilities.  
In my talk today, I will outline an agenda to redress these failings in order to build a more 
responsible, more resilient globalization. But first I want to highlight the current challenges 
that stem from several key imbalances. Across economies, demand must rotate from deficit 
to surplus countries. Within our economies, major stock adjustments in inventories, labour, 
and capital will be required. Excessive levels of private debt must also be reduced. To offset 
the  resulting  shortfall  in  private  demand,  public  demand  must  increase.  The  role  of  public 
demand  is  to  bridge  a  gap.  To  do  so  successfully,  it  must  be  temporary,  credible,  and 
accompanied by measures to relaunch an open, resilient, and responsible global economy. 
The (newly) old world order 
It was not that long ago that we basked in the seemingly effortless prosperity of globalization. 
During  the  past  quarter  century,  steady  advances  in  transportation,  communication,  and 
information  technologies,  underpinned  by  the  widespread  adoption  of  liberal  economic 
policies,  shrank  the  globe  and  expanded  its  economy.  Never  in  history  has  economic 
integration involved so many people, such a variety of goods, and so much capital.2  
The  pace  and  breadth  of  globalization  were  made  possible  in  part  by  the  onset  of  global 
supply-chain  management.3  In  effect,  technology  and  globalization  facilitated  a  more 
widespread application of two of the most powerful forces in economics: division of labour 
and comparative advantage. National economies became tightly linked, with demand in one 
country  driving  production  and  inventory  cycles  across  several  countries.  From  a  price 
                                                 
1   The  globalization  of  labour  markets  is  due  mainly  to  information  technology,  which  facilitates  the  global 
outsourcing of services, including medical and financial services. 
2   The effective global labour supply quadrupled between 1980 and 2005. Merchandise exports grew to 20 per 
cent of global GDP, more than twice the level reached at the height of the last great wave of globalization a 
century ago. 
3   Advances  in  information  technologies,  specialized  production  processes,  and  reduced  communication  and 
transportation costs all led to a whole new range of goods and services becoming tradable. For example, over 
the past 30 years, the share of imports as a percentage of manufacturing production has tripled. 
BIS Review 73/2009 
 1
perspective,  the  net  result  was  steady  downward  pressure  on  the  prices  of  manufactured 
goods and steady upward pressure on commodity prices.4,5  
The global capital market was similarly transformed during this period. Cross-border capital 
flows  reached  15  per  cent  of  global  GDP,  five  times  the  rate  at  the  beginning  of  the  20th 
century.  By  and  large,  these  flows  facilitated  the  diversification  of  risk,  the  transfer  of 
technology, and the acceleration of global growth. At the same time, global markets became 
more  interdependent.  The  actions  of  others  mattered  more,  particularly  during  times  of 
stress.  
Globalization lifted hundreds of millions of people out of poverty and created the potential for 
hundreds of millions more to share their destiny. For Canada, it contributed to the second-
longest  expansion  in  our  nation's  history  –  a  period  characterized  by  rising  real  incomes, 
surging employment, and low, stable, and predictable inflation.  
In  recent  years,  however,  the  global  economy  has  become  increasingly  unbalanced.  The 
process  of  rebalancing  will  profoundly  affect  the  medium-term  outlook  for  the  global 
economy. 
Rotation of domestic demand from deficit to surplus countries  
We  are  now  experiencing  the  inevitable  correction  of  global  imbalances.  These  were 
characterized  by  misaligned  relative  prices,  underdeveloped  financial  sectors,  and  excess 
savings  in  emerging  markets.  These  were  matched  by  rapid  credit  expansion,  asset-price 
booms, and negative savings in many Western economies. These trends were encouraged 
by  policies  such  as  inflexible  exchange  rates  and  an  overreliance  on  export-led  growth  in 
Asia  and,  in  the  United  States,  the  promotion  of  unsustainable  household  spending  in 
response to the bursting of the tech bubble. These measures collectively contributed to a low 
and  stable  interest  rate  environment,  which  fed  enormous  risk  taking  and  leverage  across 
markets and currencies.  
These  imbalances  were  most  evident  in  current  accounts.  In  a  reversal  of  usual  trends, 
emerging  markets  ran  surpluses,  and  developed  countries  ran  deficits.  Poor  countries  in 
effect lent to rich ones. In 2006, the American deficit reached almost 7 per cent of GDP and 
the  Chinese  surplus  more  than  10  per  cent.  The  net  foreign  liabilities  of  the  world's  most 
developed economy and the net foreign assets of its largest emerging market were both on 
explosive paths. 
That  which  could  not  go  on  forever  eventually  and  brutally  stopped.  When  the  cavalier 
"search  for  yield"  was  replaced  by  a  desperate  "rush  for  shelter,"  leverage  was  viciously 
unwound  across  markets,  sharply  increasing  risk  premia  around  the  world.  In  the  real 
economy, the Bank expects that the U.S. current account deficit this year will fall by almost 
two-thirds from its peak. China's surplus will also narrow, although less dramatically (partly 
reflecting the offset from a sharp fall in commodity prices). 
The unwinding of global imbalances has highlighted the fundamental interconnectedness of 
the global economy. Virtually every financial asset on the planet was significantly re-priced 
as  the  crisis  intensified.  The  reverberations  of  contracting  U.S.  consumer  demand  spread 
rapidly  via  global  supply  chains,  and  a  global  inventory  glut  developed  virtually  overnight. 
A 3  per cent decline in U.S. consumption of goods over the past six months fed a 20 per 
                                                 
4   For  Canada,  the  combination  of  lower  prices  for  imports  of  manufactured  goods  and  higher  prices  for  our 
commodity exports drove an improvement in our terms of trade, which bolstered real disposable income per 
capita by about 8.5 per cent in the five years leading to 2008. 
5   The  rise  in  commodity  prices  was  due  to  the  rapid  increase  of  manufacturing  in  emerging  markets,  where 
production is relatively more commodity intensive. 
2 
 BIS Review 73/2009
cent  fall  in  Asian  industrial  production.  A  relationship  that  had  been  symbiotic  became 
virulent. 
The  recent  narrowing  of  global  current  account  imbalances  reflects  a  collapse  in  demand, 
which  is  hardly  desirable.  A  sustainable  rebalancing  of  domestic  demand  from  deficit 
countries, such as the United States and the United Kingdom, toward surplus countries, such 
as China and Germany, will take some time – and this will likely dampen the pace of global 
growth.  
Reduction of debt, and the reallocation of labour and capital 
The second important correction in this period of transition to the "New World Order" will be 
characterized  by  significant  stock  adjustments  in  the  financial  and  real  sectors  of  major 
industrialized economies. 
A key lesson of Japan's lost decade is that an economy will not grow until the excesses that 
built up during the bubble have been removed.6 In Japan, these included commercial real 
estate, physical capital, and a highly leveraged corporate sector. Financial imbalances and 
losses  from  a  deteriorating  economy  quickly  overwhelmed  the  capital  buffers  of  the 
Japanese  banking  sector.  The  resulting  negative  feedback  loop  between  the  real  and 
financial economies took nearly a decade to break. 
There  are  some  striking  parallels  in  the  United  States.  Earlier  this  decade,  there  was 
substantial  misallocation  of  investment  (much  of  which  was  financed  from  abroad)  into 
private  real  estate.  In  addition,  key  industries  such  as  autos  invested  in  capital  stock  that 
became  increasingly  misaligned  with  prospective  demand.  There  are  also  important 
differences. Unlike Japan, excess debt in the United States is concentrated in the household 
and financial sectors, and the deleveraging of the financial sector was a trigger rather than 
the result of the recession.  
With U.S. banks now raising significant capital to cushion their losses, the negative feedback 
loop between the financial and real economies has been slowed, though not yet reversed. 
More  capital  will  be  required  globally;  the  toxic  assets  in  core  banks  still  need  to  be 
addressed; and a host of vital financial markets, such as private-label securitization, must be 
relaunched. As a result, stabilization of the global financial system remains a precondition for 
a sustainable recovery, both globally and in Canada. 
This process of financial stock adjustment is mirrored by an adjustment process on the real 
supply  side  of  the  economy.  In  the  last  quarter  of  2008,  it  became  clear  that  levels  of 
inventories,  employment,  and  capital  were  not  commensurate  with  the  level  of  global 
demand.  Each,  in  turn,  fell  roughly  in  the  sequence  one  would  expect,  given  relative 
adjustment costs: first, inventories; next, employment, which is quasi-fixed; and last, capital, 
as investment fell below the rate of replacement.  
Although global demand and trade levels appear to be approaching bottom, and inventory 
and  labour  adjustments  have  already  been  substantial,  there  is  still  more  to  come. 
Unemployment will likely rise further across the G-7, with the sharpest increases still to come 
in those economies with the least-flexible labour markets. Uncertainty over the employment 
outlook will weigh on consumption in most major economies for some time. The capital stock 
adjustment process will take longer, and global investment growth is likely to remain negative 
well into 2010. This will serve as a significant drag on global growth and can be expected to 
reduce potential growth in most major economies.  
                                                 
6   See "Way Out of Economic and Financial Crisis: Lessons and Policy Actions," Masaaki Shirakawa, Governor 
of the Bank of Japan, Speech at Japan Society, New York. 23 April 2009. 
BIS Review 73/2009 
 3
Declining  investment  and  stagnant  consumption  will  mean  that  private  demand,  excluding 
that  generated  by  tax  stimulus,  will  remain  weak  until  the  middle  of  2010.  In  the  United 
States, China, and Japan, growth will likely be positive in the third quarter of 2009, but largely 
owing to massive fiscal expenditures and tax cuts. Self-sustaining private demand in most 
major economic areas is not yet imminent. 
The G-20 strategy is to enact extraordinary fiscal stimulus to offset financial headwinds and 
to bridge the gap until the end of the stock adjustment process and the restoration of private 
demand. Its success depends on three interrelated factors: the scale of the private savings 
response;  the  magnitude,  duration,  and  credibility  of  the  fiscal  response  itself;  and  the 
eventual rebalancing of risk between the public and private sectors. Let me address each of 
these factors in turn.  
The evolution of private and public savings 
One of the biggest imponderables is the outlook for household savings rates. In the run-up to 
the  crisis,  households  increasingly  "saved"  through  capital  appreciation  rather  than  from 
current  income.  A  decline  of  roughly  30  per  cent  in  U.S.  wealth  has  caused  household 
savings rates to rise sharply from nearly zero between 2005 and 2008 to 4 per cent in the 
first  quarter  of  2009.  The  new  equilibrium  of  household  savings  will  depend  on  multiple 
factors,  including  wealth  effects,  risk  aversion,  the  evolution  of  the  financial  system,  and 
crucially, the credibility of fiscal policy itself.  
The surge in private savings is being offset by a rise in public dissaving. The world is well on 
its  way  to  spending  an  average  of  2  per  cent  of  GDP  in  discretionary  fiscal  measures. 
Simultaneous fiscal action means that spillovers across countries offset each other to some 
degree,  thereby  limiting  net  leakage  and  maximizing  the  overall  impact.  In  addition,  the 
current global concentration on infrastructure spending provides some support for commodity 
prices. 
But  there  are  limits  to  everything,  including  fiscal  policy.  Across  the  G-7  this  year,  the 
average deficit will be 12 per cent of GDP. Global public borrowing requirements will be two 
times  greater  than  last  year.  Compounding  effects  and  the  need  to  avoid  an  abrupt 
withdrawal  of  fiscal  stimulus  will  mean  that  average  public  debt  levels  in  many  major 
economies  could  increase  to  110  per  cent  of  GDP  before  stabilizing.  The  composition  of 
global savings will need to change radically. 
These  dynamics  could  become  self-defeating  if  the  credibility  of  fiscal  paths  is  called  into 
question. A combination of substantial upward pressure on interest rates on investment or 
Ricardian effects7 on consumption would retard the recovery. It is therefore paramount that 
fiscal policy frameworks retain credibility. This requires both effective current initiatives and 
realistic  exit  strategies.  In  this  regard,  Canada's  experience  of  the  1990s  with  the  steady 
overachievement of near-term targets on the road to fiscal balance is relevant.  
Ultimately,  a  return  to  sustained  growth  in  private  sector  demand  that  can  accommodate 
desired private savings is essential. An open, global economy centred on private risk taking 
is the best prospect for this. But before that can be assured, much needs to be done, starting 
with an orderly retreat of the public sector.  
                                                 
7   Ricardian  equivalence  refers  to  the  theory  that  increases  in  government  spending  are  largely  offset  by 
reductions in private consumption, reflecting future anticipated tax increases. 
4 
 BIS Review 73/2009
Redistribution of risk between public and private sectors 
The financial panic required a bold response from the public sector. The loss of faith in the 
solvency of core banking institutions at times threatened the very functioning of the global 
financial  system.  While  absolutely  necessary,  the  response  to  the  crisis  has  profoundly 
shifted  risk  from  the  private  sector  to  the  public  sector.  Since  October,  the  G-7  has 
committed that no systemically important financial institutions will be allowed to fail. Across 
the world, bank financings have been guaranteed. With securitization markets still moribund, 
assets have been purchased and tail risks assumed by the public sector. Governments have 
even  guaranteed  warranties  on  certain  car  models.  With  these  precedents,  there  will  be 
further pressure for a host of new risk-sharing arrangements.8  
We need to think carefully about where risks are best held as we emerge from this crisis. 
There are two considerations. First, risks that can be priced are best borne by the private 
sector,  whereas  uncertainties  that  have  a  wide  and  significant  potential  impact  are  best 
borne  by  the  public  sector.  Second,  risks  are  endogenous:  Public  policy  and  private 
decisions influence aggregate risk in the system. For example, the widespread private use of 
collateral to mitigate counterparty risk reduced credit risk but sharply increased liquidity risk. 
Similarly,  the  public  sector's  recent  assumption  of  some  risks  creates  moral  hazard.  If  left 
unchecked,  this  will  eventually  promote  private  behaviours  that  will  add  overall  risk  to  the 
system.  
The expedient should not become permanent. Governments have assumed extraordinary tail 
risks and quite ordinary financial risks. They should decide whether to keep the former or to 
effectively  shut  down  the  activities  associated  with  them  (for  example,  some  aspects  of 
securitization). They should return the latter to the private sector.  
A central bank agenda for renewed globalization  
But how to do so, when animal spirits are so clearly moribund? Perceptions have changed. 
There is a better appreciation of the amorphous and endogenous nature of risk. There is also 
a welcome acknowledgement of uncertainty. Knowing that a black swan might be out there 
disciplines  activity.  Humility  seldom  goes  before  a  fall.  Unfortunately,  a  newly  humbled 
private  sector  may  only  re-engage  if  it  believes  that  the  system  is  more  resilient.  To 
accomplish  this,  central  banks,  along  with  other  public  agencies,  must  promote  both  the 
necessary market infrastructure and responsible policy.  
There are four priorities for renewed globalization.  
First,  transparency  should  be  increased  so  that  risk  can  be  identified  more  effectively  and 
priced  more  efficiently.  The  crisis  laid  bare  important  deficiencies  such  as  the  woefully 
inadequate disclosure on securitized products. The Bank of Canada used its collateral policy 
to  improve  the  disclosure  of  asset-backed  commercial  paper  (ABCP),  creating  a  standard 
that  should  become  commonplace.  The  current  global  initiative  to  transfer  many  over-the-
counter  derivatives  onto  clearing  houses  is  motivated  partially  by  the  desire  to  promote 
standardization.  
Second,  core  funding  markets  should  be  made  more  efficient  and  less  susceptible  to 
extreme  price  movements.  The  crisis  was  clearly  exacerbated  by  the  seizure  of  interbank 
and  repo  markets:  Good  collateral  became  unfinanceable  overnight,  firms  failed,  risk 
aversion skyrocketed, and the global economy plummeted. Promising avenues to break such 
(il)liquidity spirals include introducing clearing houses, standardizing products, implementing 
through-the-cycle margining, and ensuring more effective netting. As the ultimate provider of 
                                                 
8   See "(Nearly) nothing to fear but fear itself," Olivier Blanchard, Chief Economist, International Monetary Fund. 
Published in The Economist, 29 January 2009. 
BIS Review 73/2009 
 5
liquidity to the system, the Bank is thinking through whether to adapt its facilities to support 
continuous private liquidity creation. 
Third,  macroprudential  regulations  must  be  enacted  to  help  smooth  the  credit  cycle.  A 
prominent example could be a new bank capital regime. It should be dynamic (with buffers 
and provisions moving through the cycle), simple (including Canadian-style leverage caps), 
and coherent (consistent with broader initiatives such as moving over-the-counter derivatives 
onto exchanges). Given where we are in the current crisis, it should also be Augustinian, that 
is,  new  requirements  should  be  phased  in  over  time  to  avoid  deepening  the  recession 
because of procyclical deleveraging.  
Fourth,  all  countries  must  accept  their  responsibilities  for  promoting  an  open,  flexible,  and 
resilient international monetary system. Responsibility means recognizing spillovers between 
economies and financial systems and working to mitigate those that could amplify adverse 
dynamics.  It  means  submitting  to  peer  review  within  the  Financial  Stability  Board  and 
external  review  by  the  International  Monetary  Fund.  Fundamentally,  it  means  adopting 
coherent  macro  policies  and  allowing  real  exchange  rates  to  adjust  to  achieve  external 
balance over time. This crisis was caused in part by failures to meet the same challenges 
that bedevilled the architects of the original Bretton Woods system. Given the current, deeply 
synchronous global recession, the costs of free riding should be obvious to all. 
Conclusion  
I would like to conclude with a few words on the impact of this rebalancing for Canada. It 
appears  likely  that  the  global  economy  is  entering  a  period  of  lower  potential  growth.  The 
substantial capital misallocation and financial excesses of the boom years will take years to 
work off. Rebuilding globalization will also take time. Recognizing the scale of the industrial 
restructuring and the lower investment over that period, the Bank has lowered its estimate for 
Canadian productivity and potential growth. 
The shifting composition of global growth will also have important implications for Canada. 
The  current  pattern  of  U.S.  activity,  with  its  weakness  in  the  housing  and  auto  sectors,  is 
proving  particularly  challenging  for  our  businesses.  We  expect  the  U.S.  recovery  to  be 
relatively  subdued  compared  with  historical  experience,  given  the  domestic  rebalancing 
requirements in that economy.  
More positively, the greater proportion of emerging-market growth in the overall growth of the 
global  economy  should  create  new  opportunities,  particularly  by  supporting  commodity 
prices. Our research indicates that, even in the throes of the crisis, those emerging markets 
whose demand is most relevant to our exports are also generally the most resilient. These 
countries  can  be  expected  to  make  up  an  increasing  proportion  of  global  demand  going 
forward.  
Unfortunately, a smooth rotation of demand across economies is not assured. Overall, the 
orderly resolution of global imbalances remains an important risk to the outlook for growth 
and  inflation  in  Canada.  As  we  noted  in  our  policy  decision  last  week,  the  recent  sharp 
increase in the value of the Canadian dollar, if it proves persistent, could fully offset recent 
positive developments in financial conditions, commodity prices, and confidence.  
In the wake of a major shock to external demand and the financial crisis, the Bank has acted 
proactively and aggressively. We eased our policy rate to the lowest possible level – 1/4 per 
cent – to support private demand and to achieve our 2 per cent inflation target. Conditional 
on the outlook for inflation, the Bank expects the policy rate to remain at its current level until 
the  end  of  the  second  quarter  of  2010  in  order  to  achieve  the  inflation  target.  The  Bank 
retains considerable additional flexibility, including unconventional measures, as outlined in 
the principles-based framework in our April Monetary Policy Report.  
6 
 BIS Review 73/2009
With  our  domestic  and  international  partners,  the  Bank  is  working  actively  to  build  more 
resilient  markets  and  to  create  an  open,  global  financial  system.  Success  is  not  assured. 
Setbacks in managing through the recession could undermine support for open economies. 
More  broadly,  without  credible  policy  frameworks  and  robust  market  infrastructure,  private 
risk taking may not return to the extent required. However, there is every reason that Canada 
should  be  among  the  first  to  implement  the  agenda  that  I  have  described  today.  Through 
such leadership, we can do our part to create a more responsible, resilient globalization.  
BIS Review 73/2009 
 7
