Christian Noyer: The G20 and the role of emerging markets in the new 
financial architecture 
Opening speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France, of the Session “The 
G20 and the role of emerging markets in the new financial architecture”, at the Money and 
banking conference 2009, Central Bank of Argentina, Buenos Aires, 31 August-1 September 
2009. 
 I am delighted to introduce this final session devoted to the lessons learned from the crisis 
regarding the international financial architecture and the role of emerging markets in this new 
configuration. 
The strong and rapid transmission of the crisis from the United States to other industrialised 
countries,  and  subsequently  to  emerging  countries,  has  clearly  highlighted  the  contrast 
between: 
- 
on the one hand, the heightened exposure of the international economic and financial 
system to the risk of systemic crisis, due to the increased interdependence between 
players of developed and emerging economies and financial systems. 
and,  on  the  other  hand,  our  crisis  prevention  and  management  instruments,  which 
have proved to be largely inappropriate or insufficient. 
 Therefore, in order to prevent a similar crisis from occurring in the future, these instruments 
must  be  strengthened.  This  entails  a  reform  of  the  international  financial  architecture.  The 
mechanisms  and  content  of  international  cooperation  must  be  reviewed  with  the  aim  of 
devising  crisis  prevention  and  management  tools  that  better  take  account  of  the  greater 
interdependencies between the economic and financial systems of advanced and emerging 
countries. 
Against  this  backdrop,  the  strong  political  impetus  given  by  the  Heads  of  State  and 
Government of the G20, at its summit in London on 2 April, is most welcome. Indeed, it is fair 
that the road map for reforming the international financial architecture was set out by a group 
that ensures equal representation between industrialised and emerging countries. Work on 
implementing this road map is now underway and I would like to comment on the progress 
being made in three areas that I believe essential for achieving the defined goal: 
- 
- 
- 
strengthening financial regulation in a multilateral framework, 
developing multilateral surveillance, 
and enhancing the legitimacy and resources of the institutions that are at the heart of 
the international financial architecture. 
Strengthening financial regulation in a multilateral framework 
1.  
Before discussing the work being carried out in the area of regulation, I would like to highlight 
some  recent  welcome  developments  in  terms  of  the  governance  of  international  standard 
setters. 
Indeed, following the decision taken at the London summit to broaden the membership of the 
Financial Stability Forum (FSF) – re-established as the Financial Stability Board (FSB) – to 
include all G20 members, Spain and the European Commission, and to enhance its mandate 
to  promote  financial  stability  notably  by  developing  its  collaboration  with  international 
standard  setters,  membership  of  the  latter  was  also  recently  expanded  to  increase  the 
representation of emerging countries. 
BIS Review 101/2009 
 1
The  Technical  Committee  of  the  International  Organisation  of  Securities  Commissions 
(IOSCO),  charged  with  regulating  the  securities  markets,  broadened  its  membership  to 
include  Brazil,  China  and  India,  while  the  BIS  Committee  on  Payment  and  Settlement 
Systems  and  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (BCBS)  extended  their 
memberships to encompass 9 and 14 new countries respectively, the majority of which are 
emerging economies. 
Nevertheless,  there  is  a  need  now  to  ensure  that  a  good  balance  is  struck  between  the 
legitimate enlargement of these bodies to reflect our economic reality and the effective and 
efficient  mechanisms  those  organisations  have  shown  so  far.  For  example,  the  Basel 
Committee  must  now  find  ways  of  adapting  in  order  to  function  as  a  27-member  body, 
compared with a 13-member body beforehand. 
I  would  now  like  to  turn  to  the  work  in  progress  in  the  areas  of  prudential  regulation, 
accounting standards and the scope of regulation. 
As far as prudential regulation is concerned, the primary imperative is to improve the quality 
of  capital  and  to  harmonise  its  definition.  And  this  move  should  go  hand  in  hand  with  the 
quick  and  full  geographical  extension  of  Basel  II  because  this  framework  is  designed 
precisely to ensure that requirements are proportionate to risks and indeed it would certainly 
have helped if it had been implemented as initially planned before 2008. Beyond that, should 
we add a simple measure to our arsenal that enables us to assess leverage with a view to 
helping  anticipate  the  formation  of  asset  price  bubbles?  I  am  rather  doubtful  myself,  for 
several reasons. First, in the absence of single accounting standards, a comparison between 
banks belonging to different accounting universes will mean absolutely nothing. Second, that 
sort  of  ratio  did  exist  in  the  United  States  and  proved  of  no  help,  precisely  in  the  country 
where  the  crisis  emerged.  Finally,  in  the  present  circumstances,  it  could  add  to  the 
reluctance of banks to be active lenders in the interbank money market, therefore reducing 
market  liquidity  and  still  increasing  the  over-reliance  of  the  banking  sector  on  the  central 
bank counterparty. 
That said, it is essential to enhance the counter-cyclical nature of capital requirements. For 
instance,  implementing  a  forward-looking  provisioning  system  and  an  additional  capital 
requirement  at  the  cycle  peak  would  be  effective  measures  to  make  capital  requirements 
more contra-cyclical. In this regard and especially in the light of the profits announced by the 
major banking groups and the large payouts to traders, CEOs or shareholders in the form of 
dividends, I would like to stress that these profits should primarily be used to bolster capital 
ratios and allow banks to focus on their core task of financing the economy. 
All  in  all,  I  praise  international  standards  in  the  field  of  prudential  rules.  The  ones  already 
developed over many years and which the crisis is now leading us to adapt, or the new ones 
under  scrutiny,  are  only  meaningful  and  will  only  produce  their  desired  effects  if  they  are 
applied by all countries and, needless to say, first of all by those that negotiated them. From 
that viewpoint, the adoption of the Basel II framework by the United States looks to be one of 
the most important and urgent issues. 
It is also very important to improve and harmonise accounting standards. The views of G20 
countries sometimes differ as to the role of accounting. For instance, one contentious issue 
is  marking-to-market  and  the  extent  to  which  fair  value  accounting  should  be  applied.  It  is 
vital that the accounting choices of standard setters better take on board the financial stability 
dimension, since they have an impact on the latter. 
Lastly, the crisis has also highlighted the limitations of self-regulation; it is also essential that 
the regulation of all systemically important institutions and markets be proportional to their 
potential  impact  on  financial  stability.  However,  in  order  to  implement  such  an  approach, 
agreement would have to be reached at the international level on a standard definition of the 
systemic nature of an entity, which clearly does not depend on its size alone. Moreover, the 
consistency  and  the  appropriate  balance  of  such  potential  specific  rules  with  the  general 
rules must also be ensured. For instance, for banks, it is important to allow for the fact that 
2 
 BIS Review 101/2009
the size of an institution is already taken into account in the prudential ratios, since capital 
requirements  are  proportionate  to  exposures.  It  is  also  important  to  bear  in  mind  that  the 
diversification of business lines, which goes hand in hand with a certain size of institution, 
may  be  a  factor  of  resilience  that  should  not  be  discouraged.  This  is  an  important  and 
delicate task that has been entrusted to the FSB. 
Developing multilateral surveillance 
2.  
I will now turn to collective surveillance. Let me start with the following simple observation: 
the crisis did not emerge from where we were expecting. Our warning systems, both at the 
national and regional levels, let us down. Above all, we did not have an overall, across-the-
board view of the vulnerabilities. We omitted to take into account the interactions between 
global  economic  imbalances,  international  financial  stability  and  national  regulation  and 
supervision. 
The crisis took us by surprise because it broke out at the heart of the system, i.e. in the US 
financial sector. Unlike other recent financial crises and in particular the Asian crisis at the 
end of the 1990s, contagion spread from the industrialised countries to the rest of the world. 
Surveillance  instruments,  in  particular  those  of  the  IMF,  were  chiefly  designed  to  detect  a 
balance of payments crisis, whereas this crisis first affected the financial systems. We were 
prepared  for  a  foreign  exchange  crisis,  i.e.  a  sovereign  solvency  or  liquidity  crisis,  but  we 
were hit by a liquidity and solvency crisis in advanced countries’ financial institutions. 
Therefore, one lesson from the crisis is that surveillance must be strengthened across the 
board, including macroeconomic, financial and regulatory areas. It must be both macro- and 
microeconomic, incorporating systemic risk in particular. 
In  Europe,  this  issue  is  going  to  be  addressed  by  a  dedicated  committee  now  named  the 
European  Systemic  Risk  Committee  that  will  operate  in  close  collaboration  with  the 
European System of Central Banks. 
At the global level, the IMF and the FSB have been invited to step up their cooperation to 
develop  early  warning  exercises.  However,  the  surveillance  tools  that  international 
institutions  have  at  their  disposal  or  could  develop  cannot  claim  to  provide  exhaustive 
analysis.  Drawing  from  their  own  specific  expertise,  it  is  therefore  important  for  these 
institutions to compare their analyses with each other and with other multilateral institutions 
and  national  authorities  in  order  to  correctly  identify  all  the  sources  of  vulnerability  and 
significant risks of contagion. 
This  work  on  multilateral  surveillance  should  also  act  as  a  safeguard  against  temptations, 
which  would  be  extremely  detrimental:  just  when  supervision  needs  to  become  more 
international  to  deal  with  interdependent  risks,  we  must  avoid  national  myopia  through 
domestic  regulation.  This  is  clearly  the  case  in  the  area  of  liquidity.  What  could  also  be 
helpful  in  this  respect  is  the  enhancement  of  the  surveillance  of  financial  systems  of  all 
countries in the framework of the Financial System Assessment Program (FSAP), as well as 
the publication of their conclusions. 
3.  
The last area of reform that strikes me as particularly important is enhancing 
the legitimacy and resources of the financial institutions at the heart of the 
international financial architecture 
For  international  cooperation  to  function,  institutions  must  be  efficient  and  accepted  by  all 
economic players. This means that they must have clear mandates, appropriate resources 
and governance that correctly reflects today’s multipolar and interdependent economic and 
financial world. 
BIS Review 101/2009 
 3
In  this  area,  the  G20  also  agreed  on  robust  measures  aiming  in  particular  to  adapt  the 
resources  and  functioning  of  the  Bretton  Woods  institutions.  For  instance,  while  we  have 
observed  an  increasing  number  of  bilateral  initiatives,  such  as  swaps  offered  by  major 
currency issuers, such as the Fed and Eurosystem, as well as, in a very different context, by 
China, these mechanisms cannot alone constitute a coherent insurance system. This is why 
the  G20  decided  to  triple  IMF  resources  to  USD  750  billion,  which  is  unprecedented.  The 
intervention tools were also reformed. A multilateral instrument for the prevention and early 
management of crises was also created, the Flexible Credit Line (FCL); Mexico, Poland and 
Argentina have already signed up and this has without doubt reduced the risk of contagion. 
In  addition,  the  Poverty  Reduction  and  Growth  Fund  was  established  for  the  poorest 
countries.  This  clearly  reflects  the  IMF’s  commitment  to  reforming  its  assistance  and 
solidarity  framework  to  help  the  most  vulnerable  countries.  Similarly,  the  adequacy  of  the 
resources of multilateral development banks was reviewed and, for example, the capital of 
the Asian Development Bank was tripled. 
In order to enhance the legitimacy and efficiency of key players in the international financial 
architecture,  the  bolstering  of  resources  must  go  hand  in  hand  with  a  reform  of  their 
governance.  As  a  European,  I  am  perhaps  not  the  best  person  to  give  my  views  on  the 
governance  of  financial  institutions,  and  of  the  IMF  in  particular  because,  for  emerging 
countries to be given a fair representation, it is most often the representation of European 
countries  that  is  called  into  question.  You  may  therefore  be  tempted  to  interpret  my 
suggestions negatively. I would, however, first like to say that the representation of European 
countries should not be contested: Europe is a diverse continent that encompasses small, 
new,  and  even  emerging  countries  alongside  large  and  established  developed  nations. 
Overall, it is somewhat under-represented in a community that is still made up of sovereign 
states. And, above all, it seems to me that this is the wrong question or solution given our 
current  challenges:  while  the  issue  at  stake  here  is  improving  dialogue  with  a  view  to 
achieving  concerted  and  operationally-applicable  solutions,  I  do  not  believe  that  anyone 
really  asserts  that  the  optimal  way  to  enhance  the  future  of  our  financial  cooperation  is  to 
alter the composition of the 24- or 25-strong IMF Executive Board by 3 or 4 members. 
Nevertheless,  I  consider  that  a  number  of  principles  should  guide  this  desired  reform: 
governance  today  should  be  adapted  to  a  multipolar  financial  world.  While  all  members 
should be represented in proportion to their involvement and responsibilities, more than the 
complex  calculations  of  quotas  and  voting  rules,  we  should  fundamentally  focus  on  the 
functioning  and  mandate  of  the  IMF.  In  this  respect,  senior  officials  should  be  appointed 
strictly on the basis of their expertise and the IMF’s mandate should be expanded. Focusing 
on exchange rate developments alone is no longer sufficient, and if the IMF is to be able to 
contribute to ensuring international financial stability, it must pay greater attention to capital 
account  developments.  Furthermore,  this  contribution  cannot  simply  be  a  matter  of 
complying with a rigid and uniform body of rules. It must take account, in a balanced manner, 
not only of each country’s level of development but also the systemic risk that it constitutes 
within the global financial system. 
By the same token, for member countries, this requires effective participation in multilateral 
bodies aiming to foster the development of the international financial system, either through 
capital  account  liberalisation  or  provision  of  liquidity  where  necessary,  as  the  crisis  has 
clearly  shown.  Neither  can  we  escape  from  the  fact  that  the  international  status  of  certain 
countries’ currencies affords them a specific role or may affect them adversely. 
In all of these matters, beyond the stereotypical vision of the different interests of developed 
and emerging countries, I wish to recall that in fact we have converging interests: since we 
are closely linked in terms of finance and trade, it is in our collective interest to participate in 
the surveillance of financial systems within an enhanced multilateral framework. 
To conclude, I would like to reiterate that the new financial architecture that we are in the 
process  of  defining  should  not  be  hidebound  but  gradually  adapted  to  address  the  major 
4 
 BIS Review 101/2009
developments  in  the  international  economic  and  monetary  system.  In  this  regard,  the 
possible emergence of a “multicurrency” international monetary system deserves particular 
attention. Naturally, the US dollar remains the world's foremost reserve currency. Similarly, 
the  euro  plays  a  major  role.  However,  the  increasing  prominence  of  other  currencies, 
provided  of  course  that  they  become  fully  convertible  and  tradable  without  any  restriction, 
suggests that a new situation may materialise in which a growing number of currencies could 
enjoy international currency status. The possibility of using widely a supranational currency, 
such  as  the  SDR,  has  also  been  proposed  and  is  firmly  supported  by  several  emerging 
countries (although the SDR lacks in fact most of the properties of a true currency). If such a 
“multi-currency” world did emerge, bearing in mind that international currency status cannot 
be dictated but is the result of market forces, we would then have to adapt the international 
financial architecture accordingly. 
BIS Review 101/2009 
 5
