Ben S Bernanke: American International Group 
Testimony by Mr Ben S Bernanke, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve  System,  before 
the  Committee  on  Financial  Services,  US  House  of 
Representatives, Washington DC, 24 March 2009. 
 Chairman  Frank,  Ranking  Member  Bachus,  and  other  members  of  the  Committee,  I 
appreciate  having  this  opportunity  to  discuss  the  Federal  Reserve's  involvement  with 
American International Group, Inc. (AIG). In my testimony, I will describe why supporting AIG 
was a difficult but necessary step to protect our economy and stabilize our financial system. I 
will  also  discuss  issues  related  to  compensation  and  note  two  matters  raised  by  this 
experience that merit congressional attention.  
Reasons for our original lending decision 
We at the Federal Reserve, working closely with the Treasury, made our decision to lend to 
AIG  on  September  16  of  last  year.  It  was  an  extraordinary  time.  Global  financial  markets 
were experiencing unprecedented strains and a worldwide loss of confidence. Fannie Mae 
and Freddie Mac had been placed into conservatorship only two weeks earlier, and Lehman 
Brothers had filed for bankruptcy the day before. We were very concerned about a number of 
other major firms that were under intense stress. 
AIG's  financial  condition  had  been  deteriorating  for  some  time,  caused  by  actual  and 
expected losses on subprime mortgage-backed securities and on credit default swaps that 
AIG's  Financial  Products  unit,  AIG-FP,  had  written  on  mortgage-related  securities.  As 
confidence in the firm declined, and with efforts to find a private-sector solution unsuccessful, 
AIG faced severe liquidity pressures that threatened to force it imminently into bankruptcy. 
The Federal Reserve and the Treasury agreed that AIG's failure under the conditions then 
prevailing would have posed unacceptable risks for the global financial system and for our 
economy. Some of AIG's insurance subsidiaries, which are among the largest in the United 
States  and  the  world,  would  have  likely  been  put  into  rehabilitation  by  their  regulators, 
leaving policyholders facing considerable uncertainty about the status of their claims. State 
and local government entities that had lent more than $10 billion to AIG would have suffered 
losses.  Workers  whose  401(k)  plans  had  purchased  $40  billion  of  insurance  from  AIG 
against  the  risk  that  their  stable  value  funds  would  decline  in  value  would  have  seen  that 
insurance  disappear.  Global  banks  and  investment  banks  would  have  suffered  losses  on 
loans  and  lines  of  credit  to  AIG,  and  on  derivatives  with  AIG-FP.  The  banks'  combined 
exposures  exceeded  $50  billion.1  Money  market  mutual  funds  and  others  that  held  AIG's 
roughly  $20  billion  of  commercial  paper  would  also  have  taken  losses.  In  addition,  AIG's 
insurance  subsidiaries  had  substantial  derivatives  exposures  to  AIG-FP  that  could  have 
weakened them in the event of the parent company's failure. 
Moreover,  as  the  Lehman  case  clearly  demonstrates,  focusing  on  the  direct  effects  of  a 
default  on  AIG's  counterparties  understates  the  risks  to  the  financial  system  as  a  whole. 
Once begun, a financial crisis can spread unpredictably. For example, Lehman's default on 
its commercial paper caused a prominent money market mutual fund to "break the buck" and 
                                                 
1  
In  addition,  many  of  these  same  banks  had  borrowed  securities  from  AIG's  securities  lending  program  for 
which  they  had  given  AIG  cash  as  collateral.  Upon  an  AIG  bankruptcy,  the  banks  would  have  taken 
possession of the securities instead of receiving back their cash, exposing them to possible losses on those 
securities. 
BIS Review 35/2009 
 1
suspend  withdrawals,  which  in  turn  ignited  a  general  run  on  prime  money  market  mutual 
funds, with resulting severe stresses in the commercial paper market. As I mentioned, AIG 
had about $20 billion in commercial paper outstanding, so its failure would have exacerbated 
the  problems  of  the  money  market  mutual  funds.  Another  worrisome  possibility  was  that 
uncertainties about the safety of insurance products could have led to a run on the broader 
insurance industry by policyholders and creditors. Moreover, it was well known in the market 
that many major financial institutions had large exposures to AIG. Its failure would likely have 
led  financial  market  participants  to  pull  back  even  more  from  commercial  and  investment 
banks,  and  those  institutions  perceived  as  weaker  would  have  faced  escalating  pressure. 
Recall  that  these  events  took  place  before  the  passage  of  the  Emergency  Economic 
Stabilization Act, which provided funds that the Treasury used to help stem a global banking 
panic in October. Consequently, it is unlikely that the failure of additional major firms could 
have been prevented in the wake of the failure of AIG. At best, the consequences of AIG's 
failure would have been a significant intensification of an already severe financial crisis and a 
further worsening of global economic conditions. Conceivably, its failure could have resulted 
in a 1930s-style global financial and economic meltdown, with catastrophic implications for 
production, income, and jobs. 
The  decision  by  the  Federal  Reserve  on  September  16,  2008,  with  the  full  support  of  the 
Treasury, to lend up to $85 billion to AIG should be viewed with this background in mind. At 
that time, no federal entity could provide capital to stabilize AIG and no federal or state entity 
outside of a bankruptcy court could wind down AIG. Unfortunately, federal bankruptcy laws 
do  not  sufficiently  protect  the  public's  strong  interest  in  ensuring  the  orderly  resolution  of 
nondepository  financial  institutions  when  a  failure  would  pose  substantial  systemic  risks, 
which  is  why  I  have  called  on  the  Congress  to  develop  new  emergency  resolution 
procedures. However, the Federal Reserve did have the authority to lend on a fully secured 
basis,  consistent  with  our  emergency  lending  authority  provided  by  the  Congress  and  our 
responsibility as central bank to maintain financial stability. We took as collateral for our loan 
AIG's  pledge  of  a  substantial  portion  of  its  assets,  including  its  ownership  interests  in  its 
domestic  and  foreign  insurance  subsidiaries.  This  decision  bought  time  for  subsequent 
actions by the Congress, the Treasury, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the 
Federal Reserve that have avoided further failures of systemically important institutions and 
have supported improvements in key credit markets. 
The Federal Reserve's ongoing involvement with AIG 
Having lent AIG money to avert the risk of a global financial meltdown, we found ourselves in 
the  uncomfortable  situation  of  overseeing  both  the  preservation  of  its  value  and  its 
dismantling,  a  role  quite  different  from  our  usual  activities.  We  have  devoted  considerable 
resources to this effort and have engaged outside advisers. Using our rights as creditor, we 
have  worked  with  AIG's  new  management  team  to  begin  the  difficult  process  of  winding 
down AIG-FP and to oversee the company's restructuring and divestiture strategy. Progress 
is  being  made  on  both  fronts.  However,  financial  turmoil  and  a  worsening  economy  since 
September have contributed to large losses at the company, and the Federal Reserve has 
found  it  necessary  to  restructure  and  extend  our  support.  In  addition,  under  its  Troubled 
Asset Relief Program (TARP), the Treasury injected capital into AIG in both November and 
March. Throughout this difficult period, our goals have remained unchanged: to protect our 
economy and preserve financial stability, and to position AIG to repay the Federal Reserve 
and return the Treasury's investment as quickly as possible. 
In  our  role  as  creditor,  we  have  made  clear  to  AIG's  management,  beginning  last  fall,  our 
deep  concern  surrounding  compensation  issues  at  AIG.  We  believe  it  is  in  the  taxpayers' 
interest for AIG to retain qualified staff to maintain the value of the businesses that must be 
sold  to  repay  the  government's  assistance.  But,  at  the  same  time,  the  company  must 
scrupulously avoid any excessive and unwarranted compensation. We have pressed AIG to 
ensure  that  all  compensation  decisions  are  covered  by  robust  corporate  governance, 
2 
 BIS Review 35/2009
including internal review, review by the Compensation Committee of the Board of Directors, 
and consultations with outside experts. Operating under this framework, AIG has voluntarily 
limited the salary, bonuses, and other types of compensation for 2008 and 2009 of the CEO 
and other senior managers. Moreover, executive compensation must comply with the most 
stringent set of rules promulgated by the Treasury for TARP fund recipients. The New York 
Attorney General has also imposed restrictions on compensation at AIG. 
Many of you have raised specific issues with regard to the payout of retention bonuses to 
employees  at  AIG-FP.  My  reaction  upon  becoming  aware  of  these  specific  payments  was 
that, notwithstanding the business purposes that might be served by this action, it was highly 
inappropriate  to  pay  substantial  bonuses  to  employees  of  the  division  that  had  been  the 
primary  source  of  AIG's  collapse.  I  asked  that  the  AIG-FP  payments  be  stopped  but  was 
informed  that  they  were  mandated  by  contracts  agreed  to  before  the  government's 
intervention. I then asked that suit be filed to prevent the payments. Legal staff counseled 
against  this  action,  on  the  grounds  that  Connecticut  law  provides  for  substantial  punitive 
damages if the suit would fail; legal action could thus have the perverse effect of doubling or 
tripling the financial benefits to the AIG-FP employees. I was also informed that the company 
had  been  instructed  to  pursue  all  available  alternatives  and  that  the  Reserve  Bank  had 
conveyed  the  strong  displeasure  of  the  Federal  Reserve  with  the  retention  payment 
arrangement. I strongly supported President Dudley's conveying that concern and directing 
the  company  to  redouble  its  efforts  to  renegotiate  all  plans  that  could  result  in  excessive 
bonus payments. I have also directed staff to work with the Treasury and the Administration 
in their review of whether the FP bonus and retention payments can be reclaimed. Moreover, 
the  Federal  Reserve  and  the  Treasury  will  work  closely  together  to  monitor  and  address 
similar situations in the future. 
Lessons learned from AIG 
To conclude, I would note that AIG offers two clear lessons for the upcoming discussion in 
the Congress and elsewhere on regulatory reform. First, AIG highlights the urgent need for 
new  resolution  procedures  for  systemically  important  nonbank  financial  firms.  If  a  federal 
agency  had  had  such  tools  on  September  16,  they  could  have  been  used  to  put  AIG  into 
conservatorship or receivership, unwind it slowly, protect policyholders, and impose haircuts 
on creditors and counterparties as appropriate. That outcome would have been far preferable 
to the situation we find ourselves in now. Second, the AIG situation highlights the need for 
strong,  effective  consolidated  supervision  of  all  systemically  important  financial  firms.  AIG 
built up its concentrated exposure to the subprime mortgage market largely out of the sight of 
its  functional  regulators.  More-effective  supervision  might  have  identified  and  blocked  the 
extraordinarily reckless risk-taking at AIG-FP. These two changes could measurably reduce 
the likelihood of future episodes of systemic risk like the one we faced at AIG. 
BIS Review 35/2009 
 3
