Jean-Claude Trichet: Remarks on the future of European financial 
regulation and supervision 
Keynote address by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the 
Committee of European Securities Regulators (CESR), Paris, 23 February 2009. 
 Good morning ladies and gentlemen, 
I would like to thank Eddy Wymeersch for inviting me to deliver a keynote address at this 
conference  on  the  future  of  European  financial  regulation  and  supervision,  with  a  special 
focus on securities markets.  
Let  me  begin  by  describing  current  conditions  in  the  financial  sector,  and  the  “lines  of 
defence”  that  central  banks  and  governments  have  established  in  an  effort  to  combat 
systemic risks and to restore market confidence. In this context, I would like to highlight the 
crucial role that market participants need to play. Next, I will examine ways of reinforcing the 
resilience of the financial system. This is an issue that I hope you will be exploring in depth 
today. Finally, I will comment on the current debate about the EU’s supervisory framework. A 
change  in  this  framework  has  in  my  view  the  potential  to  bring  about  a  substantial 
improvement in our handling of the banking sector in Europe.  
The current situation and the policy response 
I. 
First  of  all,  let  me  say  a  few  words  about  the  situation  we  are  facing  now  and  the  policy 
responses.  
The financial system of the euro area, like those of the other industrialised economies around 
the  globe, is  under  severe  strain. This  is  not news  to  anyone  here.  But  what  has  become 
increasingly clear since the intensification of the crisis in mid-September last year is that the 
strains in the financial sector are spilling over into the real economy. This has set in motion a 
process  of  negative  feedback  between  the  financial  sector  and  the  real  economy.  The 
financial  system  is  hampering  economic  recovery  and,  at  the  same  time,  the  recession  is 
putting  greater  pressure  on  the  financial  system.  This  situation  is  more  difficult  to  combat 
than if the problems had remained largely confined to the financial sector. 
Net credit flows in the euro area remained positive during most of the financial turbulence, 
which has already lasted more than a year and a half. But in recent weeks we have seen the 
first  signs  of  falling  credit  flows.  Certainly,  an  important  part  of  this  fall  is  demand  driven: 
firms have been postponing investment, reflecting the weakening economic outlook, and also 
households have cut back on borrowing for the same reason. However, there are indications 
that  falling  credit  flows  reflect  also  supply-side  factors  and  tight  financing  conditions 
associated  with  a  phenomenon  of  deleveraging.  It  is  here  that  we  have  to  closely  watch 
developments.  If  such  behaviour  became  widespread  across  the  banking  system,  it  would 
undermine the raison d’être of the system as a whole.  
But there are more positive some elements as far as the financing of the corporate sector is 
concerned. One of them is given by the corporate bond market, where issue volumes have 
remained  significant.  In  January,  euro  non-financial  corporate  issuance  even  reached  a 
record high. Hence, this channel is open, and it is functioning. Of course, not all firms are 
benefiting equally from it, the pricing has become tougher and high volumes are likely to be 
partially  compensating  for  more  difficult  bank  financing.  But  in  an  environment  where  we 
BIS Review 22/2009 
 1
need  to  search  for  factors  of  reassurance,  the  considerable  issuance  volumes  in  the 
corporate bond market are noteworthy.  
Overall, however, there is no doubt that the situation in the financial sector and real economy 
remains very difficult. How are central banks, governments and other authorities responding 
to these challenges? And what more should they consider doing? 
The acute market conditions of last September prompted central banks to take a number of 
exceptional measures. These measures have been instrumental in organising a first line of 
defence against “systemic liquidity risk”. They include increasing the size and frequency of 
liquidity  operations,  extending  the  list  of  eligible  collateral,  significantly  expanding  our 
balance  sheets  and  implementing  unprecedented  interest  rate  cuts.  Compared  with  the 
period  before  the  start  of  the  turbulence,  the  Eurosystem’s  balance  sheet  has  grown  by 
about €600 billion, an increase of 68%, representing just above 6% of the euro area GDP. 
This shows that our “intermediation role” has grown very significantly. We are now providing 
–  and  this  is  quite  exceptional  –  unlimited  refinancing  to  the  banks  of  the  euro  area  for 
maturities ranging from one week to six months in exchange for eligible collateral. This is a 
very important contribution to liquidity in the financial sector of the euro area.  
Governments  for  their  part  have  organised  a  second  line  of  defence  against  what  I  have 
called  “systemic  solvency  risk”.  Key  measures  have  included  recapitalisations,  guarantees 
and  asset  support  schemes.  The  Eurosystem  has  issued  recommendations  on  the 
appropriate framework for both government guarantees and recapitalisation measures. The 
aim is to support the banking sector in a way that avoids creating distortions in the Single 
Market. Moreover, measures should be consistent with our liquidity management operations 
and  they  should  not  impair  the  implementation  of  the  single  monetary  policy.  The 
government measures are broadly in line with these recommendations.  
More recently, discussions have focused on asset support schemes. The aim is to remove 
the  uncertainty  surrounding  the  valuation  of  certain  securitised  assets  on  banks’  balance 
sheets. In this respect, the European Commission, in cooperation with the ECB, is defining 
broad guidelines for asset relief measures. 
Overall, the decisions governments took in October have helped to avert a major breakdown 
in  confidence  in  the  banking sector.  Some  of  the  measures  are still  being  implemented  or 
under  consideration.  The  success  of  these  measures  ultimately  depends  on  the  financial 
institutions  themselves.  Financial  institutions  have  an  important  responsibility  to  use  the 
measures  made  available  to  them  by  the  authorities,  take  them  fully  into  account  in  their 
decision-making and continue lending to the economy. 
Strengthening the financial system  
II. 
Let me now come to my second set of issues and explore ways to strengthen the financial 
system. Beyond the short-term need to maintain the effective intermediation function of the 
financial system, the crisis has highlighted substantial structural weaknesses in many areas 
of  this  system.  This  is  where  we  need  to  rebuild  and  strengthen  our  defences.  This  effort 
should  be  focused  on  three  goals:  it  should  foster  sustainability,  it  should  strengthen 
resilience and it should be holistic in its reach.  
1.  The first goal is a financial system that is sustainable in the long term. This means 
correcting some of the incentives that have led to excessive short-termism. It is now 
clear  that  the  promise  of  significant  returns  in  the  short  term  was  often  linked  to  a 
misjudgement of underlying risk. At the level of individual institutions, compensation 
schemes must be adjusted to avoid encouraging excessive risk-taking on the basis of 
relatively small amounts of capital. Instead, the incentive structure should encourage 
profitability over the medium to longer term. At the level of the financial system, we 
need  to  be  more  resolute  in  preventing  the  build-up  of  risks.  We  must  strengthen 
financial  stability  assessments  and  develop  mechanisms  for  translating  them  into 
2 
 BIS Review 22/2009
concrete measures. The ECB welcomes the proposals to reinforce macro-prudential 
oversight internationally. The envisaged closer cooperation between the International 
Monetary Fund and the Financial Stability Forum will be particularly useful.  
2.  The second goal is to improve our resilience to shocks. In the years leading up to the 
crisis, holding capital reserves or larger amounts of liquid assets, which typically earn 
lower  returns,  came  to  be  seen  as  an  inefficient  use  of  shareholders’  money.  The 
underlying perspective can be compared to that in the corporate sector many years 
ago, when technological innovation led to the widespread introduction of the “just-in-
time”  model  of  doing  business.  This  meant  that  firms  held  minimal  inventory  levels 
throughout the production chain. The result was a system that looked very efficient 
but  that  was  very  vulnerable  to  shocks.  Something  similar  has  happened  to  the 
financial  system  in  recent  years:  the  pressure  to  increase  immediate  shareholder 
value and short-term returns drove a number of institutions to limit their reserves and 
buffers to the minimum possible levels. And just as in manufacturing, the result has 
been a system that produced very high returns in the short term, but which proved 
vulnerable to shocks. Comparing the ex post returns with the considerable costs of 
the current turmoil, we have to realise that our financial system as a whole, including 
its  non-regulated  and  non-listed  entities,  was  neither  strong  nor  efficient.  It  did  not 
allocate  capital  properly,  and  it  did  not  manage  risks  well.  I  have  sometimes 
compared financial buffers with air bags in a car: what we have done in recent years 
is let part of the financial sector remove all the air bags. And now there has been an 
accident, we can see the scale of the injuries. We have to put reserves and buffers 
back into the system; they are the protection against serious damage in a downturn, 
and they are an integral part of sound finance. Such a large-scale reassessment is a 
matter  for  the  medium  term.  In  the  present  circumstances  I  wish  to  underline  that 
banks should not be requested to hold more capital than is required by the existing 
capital  framework.  We  should  not  today  introduce  “pro-cyclical”  changes  in  the 
regulatory  framework  at  a  time  when  we  are  already  observing  a  market-driven 
deleveraging of the first magnitude.  
3.  The third goal is reforms that are holistic in scope. In this respect, an important issue, 
which  I’m  sure  will  be  addressed  by  today’s  conference,  relates  to  the  scope  of 
financial regulation and prudential oversight. The current crisis is a loud and clear call 
to extend regulation and oversight to all systemically important institutions – notably 
hedge funds and credit rating agencies – as well as all systemically important markets 
– in particular the OTC derivatives market. What is currently under discussion is the 
precise way in which these elements should be integrated into an overall regulatory 
framework. Currently, we are in the process of identifying the regulatory gaps. This is 
taking place within an international discussion, which the ECB strongly supports. The 
ultimate aim must be to extend the regulatory net to cover all instruments, institutions 
and  markets  that  are  either  systemically  important  or  which  play  a  key  role  for  the 
functioning of markets. Hedge funds and credit rating agencies are at the centre of 
the debate. In Europe, the discussions on proposed regulatory initiatives to establish 
a  harmonised  framework  for  credit  rating  agencies  and  on  assessing  possible 
initiatives for hedge funds are important. The proposed regulatory framework for the 
registration  and  oversight  of  rating  agencies  –  with  an  important  role  for  the 
Committee  of  European  Securities  Supervisors  and  the  Committee  of  European 
Banking Supervisors – goes in the right direction. I also welcome the Commission’s 
initiative to launch a public consultation on hedge funds, to which the Eurosystem will 
contribute.  Let  me  stress  that  both  initiatives,  on  rating  agencies  and  hedge  funds, 
warrant strong international coordination. The G20, of which the ECB is a member, is 
setting the key milestones in this context. The outcome of this debate should be an 
international  agreement  about  the  key  features  of  the  new  regulatory  paradigm.  I 
mentioned  the  OTC  derivatives  market;  this  is  a  prime  example  of  a  systemically 
important  market  that  requires  more  transparency  and  a  better  infrastructure.  The 
BIS Review 22/2009 
 3
ECB’s Governing Council has already called for a strengthening of the infrastructure 
for  this  market  in  view  of  its  systemic  importance.  We  also  support  the  position  of 
ECOFIN, which in December 2008 endorsed the idea of introducing a European CCP 
for OTC credit default swap markets. And we see considerable merit in having this 
infrastructure located within the euro area.  
The EU’s supervisory framework  
III. 
Let me now come to the third and last element of my reflections this morning: the supervisory 
framework in Europe.  
Many issues are currently under consideration. I would like to focus on a dimension that is 
very relevant from a central banking perspective, namely macro-prudential supervision.  
Macro-prudential  supervision  of  the  financial  system  by  central  banks  needs  to  be 
strengthened. There is an international consensus emerging on this need, in the context of 
the lessons from the financial crisis.  
The  ECB  and  the  Eurosystem  have  the  technical  capacity  to  assume  a  stronger  role  in 
macro-prudential supervision. Indeed, it would be a natural extension of the mandate already 
assigned to us by the Treaty, namely to contribute to financial stability.  
The  tasks  of  macro-prudential  supervision  include  the  monitoring  and  analysis  of  financial 
stability,  which  the  ECB  is  already  undertaking.  But  this  goes  beyond  monitoring  and 
analysis:  macro-prudential  supervision  includes  developing  early  warning  systems  for  the 
risks in the financial system; it includes conducting macro stress-testing exercises; and it also 
includes  an  advisory  role  on  financial  regulation  and  supervision  from  a  financial  stability 
perspective.  
Importantly,  effective  macro-prudential  supervision  depends  on  access  to  data  and  its 
translation into concrete measures. Access to relevant data is essential for the assessment 
of risks and vulnerabilities in the financial system. This is why such access must be part and 
parcel of a well-functioning arrangement for macro-prudential supervision. Two issues need 
to be considered here.  
First, there is a need for a higher degree of transparency as regards the activities of financial 
institutions and markets that are relevant from a financial stability perspective. Supervisors 
and financial institutions have a role to play in enhancing transparency in their domains. To 
mention a specific example, we very much welcome the current dialogue between the ECB 
and  CESR  on  the  possibility  of  creating  a  standard  for  reference  data  on  securities  and 
issuers,  with  the  aim  of  making  such  data  available  to  policy-makers,  regulators  and  the 
financial industry through an international public infrastructure. Such an infrastructure would 
enable all interested parties to produce more timely analysis of increasingly complex financial 
markets, especially in times of turbulence. 
Second, central banks need to have access to the supervisory information that is essential 
for their financial stability assessments. Central banks and supervisors will also have to work 
together  to  establish  an  operational  agreement  for  the  information  flow  in  both  directions. 
This is not always straightforward in Europe given the multitude of actors involved, but here, 
too,  current  developments  give  us  a  clear  mandate,  even  an  obligation,  to  improve  the 
information flow.  
The ECB/Eurosystem stands ready to perform additional macro-prudential supervisory tasks. 
With our financial stability analysis, which has been well established over a number of years, 
we have already laid important foundations for such a role. 
4 
 BIS Review 22/2009
Conclusion  
Let  me  conclude.  I  have  mentioned  the  lines of  defence established by  central  banks  and 
governments, to safeguard, respectively, liquidity and solvency in the financial system. The 
reform of the regulatory and supervisory framework at the EU and international levels must 
substantially enhance the stability of the global financial system. The system must strengthen 
itself and build up its own defences. I propose a strengthening of the financial system that 
focuses  on  three  goals:  long-term  sustainability,  improved  resilience  and  a  holistic 
perspective.  
The EU has the opportunity for an important institutional change. It can adapt the supervisory 
framework to the new financial landscape, reflecting the considerable increase in European 
financial  integration  that  we  have  observed  in  recent  years.  This  must  be  one  of  the  key 
lessons for us to draw from the financial crisis. The ECB/Eurosystem stands ready to accept 
any  additional  responsibilities  that  the  Member  States  may  wish  to  assign  to  us,  in 
accordance with the Treaty. 
I am sure that today’s conference will provide valuable insights on all these matters. 
Thank you for your attention.  
BIS Review 22/2009 
 5
