Thomas Jordan: Monetary policy under the spell of the financial crisis 
Summary of a speech by Mr Thomas Jordan, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss 
National Bank, at the State Street Global Advisors (SSgA) Prima Talk, Zurich, 6 May 2009. 
The complete speech can be found in German on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch). 
 The  crisis  in  global  financial  markets  has  led  to  a  sharp  downturn  in  the  world  economy. 
Unavoidably, the Swiss economy has been pulled down too. The Swiss National Bank (SNB) 
has  reacted  by  considerably  relaxing  its  monetary  policy,  moving  –  in  effect  –  to  a  zero 
interest rate policy.  
The SNB is maintaining its ability to act at times of zero interest rates by making use of three 
unconventional measures: increasing the number of long-term repo transactions, purchasing 
Swiss  franc  bonds  issued  by  private  sector  borrowers  and  buying  foreign  currency  on  the 
open market. The initial impact of these measures has been positive. Risk premiums in the 
money  and  capital  markets  have  fallen  slightly.  The  tendency  of  the  Swiss  franc  to 
appreciate against the euro has been checked and volatility is declining. Curbing the upward 
pressure on the Swiss franc helps to protect against deflation risks in Switzerland.  
The Swiss economy is currently experiencing the most severe economic crisis since the mid-
seventies.  If  the  economies  of  our  most  important  trading  partners  recover,  and  if  the 
financial markets begin to stabilise, it is likely that the Swiss economy will also pass through 
the  cyclical  trough  during  the  course  of  the  year  2010.  Faint  signs  that  the  economy  is 
gaining a little ground have recently become evident abroad. The SNB’s measures are aimed 
at reducing the danger of deflation in Switzerland.  
To  maintain  price  stability  in  the  future,  pinpointing  the  optimal  date  for  exiting  from  the 
current  zero  interest  rate  policy  will  be  critical.  Although  the  reduction  in  liquidity  can  be 
carried  out  swiftly  and  easily  in  technical  terms,  the  practical  details  are  extremely 
challenging.  Correct  assessments  by  decision-makers  are  very  important  in  view  of  the 
particularly high level of model uncertainty at present. In addition, firmness will be required in 
the face of political pressure so that necessary, but unpopular corrective measures can be 
taken in good time. 
BIS Review 54/2009 
 1
