Mark Carney: From green shoots to the harvest – comments on financial 
stability 
Remarks  by  Mr  Mark  Carney,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Regina  &  District 
Chamber of Commerce, Regina, Saskatchewan, 18 June 2009.  
 It is a pleasure to be back in Saskatchewan. This great province has been one of the fastest-
growing  parts  of  the  country  in  recent  years,  benefiting  from  increasing  diversification  into 
biotechnology, alternative energy sources, and carbon-management solutions, among other 
industries. 
Today, I will refer to the traditional backbone of this economy: agriculture. I do so because 
lately there has been much talk of "green shoots" in the global economy. From the initially 
careful references to data that suggested a slowing of the rate of decline in global activity, 
the use of the term "green shoots" has quickly evolved. Some now refer to green shoots as if 
the  global  recovery  is a  foregone conclusion or  even  as  if  sustainable  growth  had  already 
begun. 
Would that it were so easy. Saskatchewanians know that it is a long, anxious time between 
the appearance of seedlings and the harvest. Much hard work remains, and external forces 
can profoundly influence the outcome: too little or too much rain, hail, pests, and disease can 
all frustrate even the most promising beginnings. And, in the end, global forces of supply and 
demand  determine  the  prices  received.  Old  adages  usually  contain  great  wisdom:  Just  as 
you  don't  count  your  chickens  before  they  are  hatched,  we  shouldn't  presume  that  green 
shoots today guarantee a bumper crop tomorrow. 
Financial stability and the Bank of Canada 
I  want  to  extend  this  analogy  to  provide  some  perspective  on  recent  developments  in 
Canadian  financial  stability.  Financial  stability  is  the  resilience  of  the  financial  system  to 
unanticipated  adverse  shocks.  This  resilience  determines  the  extent  to  which  Canadian 
households and businesses have access to the credit they need at appropriate terms and 
conditions. 
While our financial system is one of the soundest in the world, the ferocity of the once-in-a-
lifetime  global  financial  tempest  has  affected  all  Canadians,  regardless  of  their  location  or 
occupation. So, does our financial system still leave us well positioned for our green shoots 
to mature into a viable crop of summer wheat?1  
The  Bank  of  Canada  is  well  placed  to  make  this  judgment.  As  part  of  our  commitment  to 
promote  the  economic  and  financial  welfare  of  Canada,  the  Bank  actively  fosters  a  stable 
and  efficient  financial  system.  The  Bank  constantly  assesses  the  major  risks  to  the 
soundness  of  our  system,  and  helps  to  develop  policies  to  mitigate  them.  In  essence,  we 
worry not only about prospects of external shocks (the equivalent of weather or crop prices), 
but also about the buffers that our banks, businesses, and households have (the equivalent 
of the financial reserves farmers need to carry in case the harvest disappoints). 
Twice  a  year,  the  Bank  publishes  its  Financial  System  Review,  or  FSR  –  the  most  recent 
edition appeared earlier this week. My talk today will draw on that analysis and assessment. I 
will  concentrate  on  three  risks,  in  particular:  1)  the  liquidity  and  funding  positions  of  our 
                                                 
1   Our financial system is only one of the factors that influence the outlook for growth and inflation in Canada. 
BIS Review 77/2009 
 1
banks, 2) the adequacy of their capital, and 3) the financial health of Canadian households. I 
will conclude with a few observations on the economic outlook.  
Assessment of overall financial stability  
Since the autumn, the global economy has been in a deep and synchronized recession that 
was  triggered  by  the  worst  financial  crisis  since  the  Great  Depression.  In  recent  months, 
financial market conditions have improved noticeably and further, gradual progress is likely 
as  numerous  international  policy  initiatives  gain  traction.  Equity  markets  have  seen  strong 
gains in recent months (see Appendix, Chart 1), and credit markets have also rallied (Chart 
2). While there is still a long way to go before economic and financial conditions return to 
normal,  markets  seem  to  be  turning  their  backs  on  worst-case  scenarios.  The  panic  that 
engulfed global financial markets last fall is over. 
Developments in Canadian financial stability over the past six months reflect the competing 
influences of improved financial market conditions on the one hand and a deterioration in the 
economic outlook on the other. Overall, the level of risk to the Canadian financial system is 
judged to be broadly unchanged since last December.  
I would sound a note of caution familiar to those who work the land. We are well prepared 
but will still be tested. While the strong position of our banks has improved further in recent 
months and the balance sheets of Canadian households remain relatively sound, the global 
recession will mean that these reserves will be drawn upon in the months ahead.  
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  three  risks  that  I  cited  a  moment  ago,  starting  with  liquidity  and 
funding for banks. 
Liquidity and funding  
At the heart of the financial crisis was the collapse of wholesale funding markets for banks. 
Since August 2007, the very short-term interbank and repo markets have been under great 
strain. During the most intense periods of the crisis around the collapse of Bear Stearns in 
March 2008 and Lehman Brothers and others in the fall of last year, these markets seized up 
entirely:  Good  collateral  became  unfinanceable  overnight,  firms  failed,  and  risk  aversion 
across all financial markets skyrocketed.  
This crisis of confidence was less acute in Canada, but still produced severe strains in our 
wholesale funding markets. Heightened uncertainty made counterparties reluctant to extend 
financing beyond the shortest maturities, resulting in intense funding pressures for Canadian 
financial  institutions.  Banks  cut  back  their  market-making  activities  in  order  to  conserve 
balance  sheet  capacity,  which  further  aggravated  market  volatility.  These  dynamics  raised 
the risk of an adverse feedback loop between the financial system and the real economy.  
The Bank of Canada responded to these pressures by dramatically expanding our liquidity 
facilities,  and  the  Government  of  Canada  implemented  a  program  to  purchase  insured 
mortgages  with  the  help  of  the  Canada  Mortgage  and  Housing  Corporation,  thereby 
increasing the access of Canadian institutions to longer-term financing. Reflecting both the 
strength  of  our  banks  and  the  scale  of  our  actions,  conditions  in  Canada  have  been 
consistently  better  than  elsewhere  (Chart  3).  Since  December,  these  policies  have  gained 
considerable traction, helping to reinforce the improvement in domestic funding conditions as 
the global financial crisis subsided (Chart 4).  
This improvement has been reflected in a decline in the spreads on bank financing in money 
markets, a moderate extension of maturities, and a substantial reduction in the cost of term 
funding  for  Canadian  banks.  In  addition,  policy  initiatives  have  allowed  banks  to  increase 
substantially  their  holdings  of  government  securities,  which  has  helped  boost  their  liquidity 
situation  in  a  capital-efficient  way.  These  improvements  have  been  further  supported  by 
2 
 BIS Review 77/2009
strong growth in retail deposits and slowing credit growth (Chart 5). Market-making activity in 
Canadian  financial  markets  has  also  been  recovering,  although  it  remains  less  than 
satisfactory. 
Policy response 
There  are  important  lessons  to  be  drawn  from  this  experience.  The  performance  of  core 
funding  markets  during  the  crisis  intensified  the  financial  panic  and  helped  trigger  the 
recession. This is totally unacceptable. As a consequence, one of the Bank of Canada's top 
priorities  is  to  promote  institutional  changes  to  create  more  robust  core  funding  markets. 
Promising  avenues  to  break  such  (il)liquidity  spirals  include  introducing  clearing  houses, 
standardizing  products,  implementing  through-the-cycle  margining,  and  ensuring  more 
effective  netting.  As  the  ultimate  provider  of  liquidity  to  the  system,  the  Bank  is  thinking 
through whether to adapt its facilities to support continuous private liquidity creation. 
Bank capitalization  
Since the crisis began, the capital adequacy of banks around the world has been the subject 
of intense scrutiny. Concerns moved quickly from bank exposures to U.S. subprime debt on 
to structured products of all types as the crisis spread and, finally, to more traditional credits 
to businesses and households as the recession took hold. Concerns about capital adequacy 
for  banks  outside  Canada  were  made  worse  by  uncertainties  caused  by  accounting 
standards, valuation methodologies, and a loss of credibility of the Basel II regulatory capital 
standard. It was not lost on investors that every single financial institution that failed had a 
capital ratio well above its Basel II regulatory minimum the day before it went down. As a 
consequence, investors have demanded ever-higher capital ratios from all banks, creating a 
dynamic that has exacerbated the recession. 
In  this  context,  Canadian  institutions  have  benefited  from  several  factors:  high  initial 
capitalization (minimums set by the Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions are 
well above the Basel threshold), high-quality capital (with one of the highest proportions of 
common equity), the clarity provided by a simple leverage cap, low exposure to structured 
products, and clear valuation and disclosure standards (including rapid implementation of the 
Financial Stability Forum's enhanced disclosure guidance of April 2008) (Chart 6). 
Writedowns  by  Canadian  banks  have  been  relatively  moderate  to  date,  reflecting  their 
conservative lending practices and low exposure to highly impaired asset-backed products. 
But Canadian banks, as the principal source of finance in our economy, are still exposed to 
the risk of a marked deterioration in economic conditions, which would depress earnings and 
generate losses in their household and corporate loan portfolios. In general, this risk is why 
banks carry high capital buffers. 
The  macroprudential  risk  is  that  these  capital  buffers  may  not  be  allowed  to  play  their 
intended role in absorbing these losses because of market pressures to maintain inordinately 
high capital ratios. This could force banks to curb balance sheet growth, causing a tightening 
of credit conditions that would reinforce the negative impact of the economic downturn on the 
financial  system.  Reflecting  the  generalized  nature  of  the  financial  panic,  as  the  crisis 
unfolded, Canadian banks came under pressure from markets to increase their capital ratios. 
In  response,  Canadian  banks  raised  significant  additional,  high-quality  capital  from  private 
sources. 
The recent improvement in market sentiment has been reinforced by the release in May of 
the stress-test results for the 19 largest U.S. banks. These tests showed that the amounts of 
additional  capital  that  need  to  be  raised  are  manageable  –  indeed,  more  than  half  of  the 
estimated  shortfall  has  already  been  filled.  The  results  have  contributed  to  a  general 
improvement of confidence in the global banking sector. To the extent that global levels of 
uncertainty and risk aversion have been lowered, this should also relieve some of the market 
BIS Review 77/2009 
 3
pressure on Canadian banks to maintain inordinately high capital ratios. It would be welcome 
if buffers could serve their intended purpose, particularly in light of the extraordinary liquidity 
and funding support that public authorities have provided to our financial institutions. 
Policy response 
The crisis has undermined the credibility and demonstrated the procyclicality of the current 
bank  capital  regulatory  regime.  This,  too,  is  unacceptable.  An  improved  regime  should  be 
dynamic (with buffers and provisions moving through the cycle), simple (including Canadian-
style leverage caps), and coherent (consistent with broader initiatives such as moving over-
the-counter  derivatives  onto  exchanges).2  The  Bank  is  working  with  its  domestic  partners 
and is using its positions on the Basel Committee of Banking Supervision, at the Financial 
Stability Board, and in the G-20 to advance this goal.  
In April, G-20 leaders made it a priority to find ways to reduce procyclicality in the financial 
system (procyclicality in the financial sector resembles the hog cycle, except that the boom-
bust  nature  is  further  encouraged  by  regulations,  accounting  standards,  and  market 
practices).3  To  that  end,  our  latest  FSR  provides  detailed  analysis  of  key  issues,  ranging 
from reducing the procyclicality of bank capital regimes, compensation packages, and value-
at-risk-based  risk-management  practices.4  The  Bank  will  continue  to  devote  considerable 
analytic resources to ensure Canada leads the G-20 effort to reduce procyclicality.  
Household and corporate balance sheets  
The  resilience  of  our  financial  institutions  is  obviously  directly  affected  by  the  financial 
resilience of Canadian households and corporations. Canadian firms entered this recession 
in very strong shape. Corporate leverage is close to an historic low and is substantially below 
that in other major countries (Chart 7).  
The picture for Canadian households is more mixed. The starting point is relatively strong: 
The debt-service ratio has been stable over the past year and remains just below its long-
term average. In addition, equity in Canadian homes is significantly higher than in the United 
States (Chart 8).  
However,  a  deeper-than-expected  recession  has  meant  that  stresses  are  rising.  Income 
growth has slowed, and personal wealth levels have been eroded by lower house prices in 
some regions; credit growth has continued to outpace income growth, contributing to higher 
debt  levels  (Chart  9).  At  the  same  time,  sharp  increases  in  unemployment  are  raising  the 
incidence of financial stress among households (Chart 10). Non-performing household loans 
and associated provisioning at Canadian financial institutions are thus increasing, although 
the deterioration in credit quality is being mitigated to some extent by the decline in effective 
borrowing rates (Chart 11).  
The Bank has conducted a partial simulation exercise to estimate the impact on household 
balance sheets of a more severe economic downturn than currently envisaged, which would 
                                                 
2   Given where we are in the current crisis, it should also be Augustinian; that is, new requirements should be 
phased in over time to avoid deepening the recession because of procyclical deleveraging. 
3   When hog prices are high, more producers opt in to the market. As the product reaches maturity, there is an 
excess  of  supply,  and  prices  fall.  Given  low  prices,  producers  then  cut  back  their  production,  leading  to  a 
shortage and a price increase once again. 
4   This  issue  of  the  FSR  includes  the  following  reports:  "Procyclicality  and  Bank  Capital,"  by  N.  Arjani; 
"Procyclicality  and  Provisioning:  Conceptual  Issues,  Approaches,  and  Empirical  Evidence,"  by  M.  Misina; 
"Regulatory  Constraints  on  Leverage:  The  Canadian  Experience,"  by  A.  Crawford,  C.  Graham,  and  É. 
Bordeleau; "Procyclicality and Value at Risk," by P. Youngman; "Procyclicality and Margin Requirements," by 
N. Kamhi; and "Procyclicality and Compensation," by É. Bordeleau and W. Engert. 
4 
 BIS Review 77/2009
increase the unemployment rate to 10 per cent of the workforce. The results indicate that the 
associated rise in financial stress among households would lead to a significant increase in 
losses (which would reduce the Tier 1 capital ratios by about 1 percentage point) for financial 
institutions, which is well within their capacity to absorb (Table 1).  
The economic outlook  
The global economy is in the midst of a major synchronized recession. The Bank expects 
that growth will resume later this year but that the recovery internationally and in Canada will 
be more muted than normal. In part, this reflects the need to correct a series of imbalances 
across and within major economies. The recovery will initially owe much to monetary policy, 
which has been very aggressive, and to fiscal policy, which is beginning to have an impact. 
The effects of monetary and fiscal policy will reach full force in 2010. Self-sustaining demand 
in most economic areas is not yet imminent. 
It appears likely that the global economy is entering a period of lower potential growth. The 
substantial capital misallocation and financial excesses of the boom years will take years to 
work off. Recognizing the scale of the industrial restructuring and the decline in investment 
over that period, the Bank has sharply lowered its estimate for Canadian productivity growth 
and potential growth.  
The shifting composition of global growth will have important implications for Canada. The 
current pattern of U.S. activity, with its weakness in the housing and auto sectors, is proving 
particularly  challenging  for  our  businesses.  We  expect  the  U.S.  recovery  to  be  relatively 
subdued compared with historical experience, given its need to reduce excesses, particularly 
of private debt.  
More  positively,  the  greater  proportion  of  emerging-market  growth  in  overall  global  growth 
should create new opportunities. Our research indicates that, even in the throes of the crisis, 
those emerging markets whose demand is most relevant to our exports are also generally 
the most resilient. These countries can be expected to make up an increasing proportion of 
global  demand.  This  should  provide  an  important  support  for  commodity  prices  over  the 
medium term. 
The  Bank  has  acted  proactively  and  aggressively  to  counter  the  major  shocks  to  the 
Canadian economy. We eased our policy rate to the lowest possible level – 1/4 per cent – to 
support  private  demand  and  to  achieve  our  2  per  cent  inflation  target.  Conditional  on  the 
outlook for inflation, the Bank expects the policy rate to remain at its current level until the 
end  of  June  2010  in  order  to  achieve  the  inflation  target.  The  Bank  retains  considerable 
additional flexibility, including unconventional measures, as outlined in the principles-based 
framework in our April Monetary Policy Report. 
Conclusion 
Despite the global crisis, the Canadian financial system remains resilient. Prior to the crisis, 
Canadian households, businesses, and financial institutions had not built up the high levels 
of  debt  that  have  made  other  countries  vulnerable.  Canadian  banks  have  bolstered  their 
already  strong  capital  ratios  with  new  private  funds.  Wholesale  funding  conditions  have 
improved significantly and are among the most competitive in the world. The liquidity of bank 
balance sheets has improved. In short, our system is well positioned to face the strains of 
both the current recession and a more muted recovery. 
In farming, you are not in full control of your destiny, and your work is never done. Shocks 
frequently come from above. You may hope for the best, but you must plan for the worst. 
Even on the eve of summer, you know that it will soon be a long, cold winter, followed by 
another  spring.  The  cycle  begins  anew,  and  the  process  is  renewed  as  you  constantly 
BIS Review 77/2009 
 5
innovate by investing in new equipment and crop varieties. Ultimately, you are keepers of the 
land to pass on to the next generation. 
And so it is with financial stability. In a highly integrated global economy, shocks frequently 
come from abroad. We plan for the worst by trying to build a system that can absorb blows 
rather than amplify them. Canada has a strong system, but this crisis has proven that even 
the best is not good enough. Just like farmers, policy-makers need to innovate to make our 
financial system more resilient and efficient. This means more robust core funding markets, a 
better bank capital regime, and, more broadly, a series of measures to reduce procyclicality. 
The Bank will continue to work with our domestic and international partners to build such a 
financial system, so that the economic harvest in Saskatchewan and across Canada can be 
more consistently bountiful. 
 
 
 
  6 
 BIS Review 77/2009
   BIS Review 77/2009 
 7
    8 
 BIS Review 77/2009
   BIS Review 77/2009 
 9
    10 
 BIS Review 77/2009
  BIS Review 77/2009 
 11
 12 
 BIS Review 77/2009
