Savenaca Narube: A voice of reason - the writings of Savenaca Siwatibau 
Address by Mr Savenaca Narube, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, at the launch of “A 
Voice of Reason: the writings of Savenaca Siwatibau”, Suva, 23 February 2009. 
 Introduction 
Mrs. Suliana Siwatibau 
The Vice Chancellor of the University of the South Pacific (USP) Professor Rajesh Chandra 
Distinguished Guests 
It has been over five years since Mr. Siwatibau left us. But looking around this theater today, 
Siwa as he is commonly called, is still fondly remembered by colleagues and friends in Fiji 
and the Pacific. 
We  remember  Siwa  for  many  reasons  -  his  professionalism,  his  technical  proficiency,  his 
character and his personality. I think that a common thread running through his legacy was 
that he fiercely believed in the power of logic and reason. When Siwa was on to something 
that he knew was logical, it was extremely impossible to persuade him to an alternative view. 
Such was his passion for reason. 
“A Voice of Reason: the writings of Savenaca Siwatibau” is therefore a fitting tribute to Siwa. 
I am personally honored to be here today to launch this excellent piece of work. 
Firstly, I must acknowledge the excellent initiative of Professor Wadan Narsey in putting this 
book  together  in  his  own  time.  I  know  this  was  not  an  easy  task.  Some  of  Siwa’s  best 
speeches were off the cuff or from notes scribbled at the back of an envelope. It would take 
something like Wadan’s persistence, patience and plain hard work to put all these together. 
Secondly, as I read the tributes in the book, it struck me that I have the honour of sharing a 
few things with Siwa. For a start, we have the same first name. We were educated at Queen 
Victoria  School  where  we  came  away  with  the  Dux  prize  of  the  school.  We  both  went  to 
Auckland University. We held the position of the Permanent Secretary of Finance. We both 
served in the International Monetary Fund. And finally I have the privilege to share the office 
that he first occupied in the Reserve Bank of Fiji. 
But there I am afraid was where our commonalities ended. In my view, Siwa does not have 
many equals. As Wadan so eloquently puts it, Siwa was an icon not only in Fiji but also in the 
region and beyond. 
Reserve Bank of Fiji 
Today I thought of sharing some of my personal experiences with Siwa. 
I first met Siwa at the Central Monetary Authority in Dominion House in late 1980 when he 
took over from Mr. Tomkins as General Manager after his return from the IMF. He was the 
first local at the position. So naturally there was a lot of interest on how a local was going to 
perform  in  one  of  the  last  key  national  positions  to  be  localized  in  Fiji.  Very  quickly,  Siwa 
dispelled any concerns on his ability to lead  the Central Monetary Authority. Siwa became 
the first Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji when the transition occurred in 1984. 
We honor Siwa for his humility, caring and down to earth qualities. But in my assessment, 
underneath all that was a firm and strong leader. For us that worked under him, we came 
BIS Review 22/2009 
 1
face to face with his strong leadership qualities in our work. While he mixed easily amongst 
us,  he  applied  the  rules  very  strictly.  I  remember  the  strike  that  I  led  when  I  was  a  Trade 
Union representative at the Bank in 1983. At the end of the two week strike, while the Union 
did not get all that we wanted, everyone acknowledged that the resolution was a fair one and 
was  made  possible  by  Siwa’s  compassion  and  goodwill  to  the  workers.  During  this  rather 
difficult  negotiation  and  tension,  Siwa  was  very  calm  as  he  always  was  in  any  kind  of 
situation. I could clearly witness the clarity of his thinking and his strong belief in fairness and 
consistency. 
Siwa was our boss and also our father. I recall one day when he called me into his office. I 
had applied for a loan for my first car, a small Honda Civic. You know, Siwa adopted a slow 
drawl when he told people off. When you heard that drawl you knew you were in trouble. In 
that telling off voice he said “Savenaca, why are you buying a car when you don’t have a 
house.  You  should  buy  a  house  first  when  you  are  still  young.”  This  signified  the  caring 
personality that Siwa had for everyone. He was strict but ever concerned about our welfare! 
By the way I got the loan but with the condition that I buy a house within five years which I 
did. 
Siwa rose in the public limelight as the Governor of the Reserve Bank, a position that he held 
for 7 years. At that time, the Reserve Bank was a new organisation and many people did not 
understand what we did. The Bank was in this impressive new 16 storey building - still the 
tallest in Fiji. Siwa made a lot of efforts to explain the role of the Bank. I listened to many of 
his  speeches.  I  recall  when  he  explained  why  the  country  needed  foreign  reserves  to  a 
meeting of YMCA members. He explained the process of how the commercial banks use Fiji 
dollars  to  buy  foreign  reserves  from  the  Reserve  Bank  and  how  the  foreign  currency 
eventually  ended  up  with  the  importer’s  bank  account  abroad.  I  was  deeply  impressed  by 
how  he  could  simplify  a  complicated  and  complex  process  for  the  ordinary  person  to 
understand. At the end of his talk a young man asked, “Is keeping enough foreign reserves a 
difficult thing to do?” Siwa replied, “Well, you see my hair, they were all black last year, now 
they are rapidly turning grey.” If you can see me now Siwa, my hair is not only grey they have 
turned all white in the last six months. 
Siwa was a firm believer in getting the views of everyone. He established forums that are still 
active  today.  He  established  the  Macroeconomic  Policy  Committee  to  help  government 
formulate policies and make forecasts. This Committee is extremely busy right now revising 
the prediction for the economy in light of the floods and the global economic meltdown. Given 
what is happening around us, we will do extremely well to achieve the 2.4 percent growth 
that was released in November last year. I hope that the Reserve Bank will not be blamed for 
this economic scenario. 
We  live  in  challenging  times.  The  world  economy  is  buckling  from  the  fall  outs  from  the 
financial crisis. Fiji will not be immune from this global recession. Our economy was already 
under some stress. While Siwa may not have faced the same situation as the Governor of 
the Reserve Bank, I have often wondered what Siwa would advise us to get us through these 
unprecedented difficult times. For one thing, Siwa was clear with his thoughts and eloquent 
in outlining them particularly to non-economists like politicians. Siwa was also a stickler for 
economic stability. I am sure that he would emphasise to us today that while we have a host 
of economic problems we must deal with the stability first before we can solve the others. 
This would be a wise counsel. We will do well to heed it. Without stability you do not have a 
foundation for growth. 
Siwa  always  liked  a  lively  intellectual  debate.  He  established  the  Economic  Association 
which  is  still  functioning  today.  I  remember  in  the  first  meeting  of  the  Association,  he  was 
actually  the  speaker  and  speaking  -  yes,  you  can  guess  it--on  economic  stability  and  the 
importance  of  maintaining  our  foreign  reserves.  At  the  end  of  his  talk,  an  USP  economic 
student asked him why Fiji could not convert these foreign reserves to Fiji dollars and use the 
money  for  development  as  one  of  his  lecturers  had  suggested.  Obviously  a  bit  perplexed 
2 
 BIS Review 22/2009
about the question, Siwa replied, “You should ask that lecturer to go back to school. You see, 
for  Fiji  to  hold  this  foreign  exchange,  the  Fiji  dollar  equivalent  would  have  been  credited 
already  to  the  entity  or  person  who  earned  that  foreign  exchange”.  Obviously,  the  student 
and perhaps his lecturer may not have fully comprehended how foreign reserves end up with 
the  RBF.  I  do  not  think  that  the  exchange  is  a  reflection  of  the  quality  of  the  economic 
teachings at USP today. 
Siwa  left  the  Reserve  Bank  after  the  1987  coup.  He  took  his  skills,  knowledge  and 
experience to the region. Fiji’s loss was the region’s gain. Of course, Siwa went on to be the 
Vice Chancellor of the USP for a few years. 
Tribute to Mr. Savenaca Siwatibau 
Siwa  to  me  was  the  embodiment  of  a  wholesome  leader.  Professionally,  I  have  always 
admired  his  immovable  logic,  his  soft  touch  and  firm  hand,  his  technical  sharpness  and 
breath  of  knowledge.  Personally,  his  humility,  inclusiveness  and  compassion  were  very 
touching. He had taught me many things that I have tried to emulate in my professional and 
personal life.  
This book is an excellent reflection of Siwa – simple and modest. I am sure that this is how 
Siwa wanted to be remembered. 
Acknowledgement 
Finally, I wish to acknowledge a few people.  
Firstly, I acknowledge the presence of Mrs Suliana Siwatibau and Siwa’s relatives that are 
here today. Thank you for coming.  
Secondly,  I  extend  my  appreciation  to  our  host  Vice  Chancellor  Chandra  for  the 
arrangements. 
Thirdly,  I  big  vinaka  vakalevu  to  Wadan  for  his  initiative,  perseverance  and  hard  work  in 
putting together this excellent book.  
Finally, I thank you all for accepting our invitation to attend this launch. 
I trust that we will all enjoy the book and more importantly emulate the qualities of Siwa in our 
lives and in our leadership. 
BIS Review 22/2009 
 3
