Radovan Jelašić: National Bank of Serbia – European integration 
challenges 
Speech by Mr Radovan Jelašić, Governor of the National Bank of Serbia, at the promotion of 
the 4th issue of the regional magazine for EU integration and transition processes “European 
Integration Challenges”, Belgrade, 13 May 2009.  
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Allow  me  to  welcome  you  on  behalf  of  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia,  and  to  extend  my 
appreciation for the magazine “European Integration Challenges” whose very title points to 
the key challenges we shall be facing in the near future. 
Today I would like to touch on three key issues: first, what does integration to the EU mean 
for the National Bank from the point of view of concrete steps we have been taking so far; 
second, what is an “expensive” credit in Serbia versus Europe, and finally, what measures 
has  the  NBS  taken  so  far  to  lessen  the  effects  of  the  crisis  by  drawing  on  the  ample 
experience of EU countries. 
In  drafting  the  Law  on  the  NBS,  Law  on  Banks  and  many  other  legal  regulations  special 
attention  is  paid  to  their  harmonization  with  EU  regulations  so  as  to  create  necessary 
preconditions for the integration of our country into the family of 27 EU member countries. To 
illustrate,  we  in  Serbia  did  not  engage  in  long  debates  on  why  “maintaining  price  stability” 
should be the primary objective of the NBS instead of, for example, stability of the exchange 
rate which is so high on our everyday agenda and which, by the way, means „fixed rate” for 
many  in  Serbia,  or  the  maintenance  of  the  stability  in  wages,  GDP  growth  or  some  such 
other thing. The answer to this question is obvious enough. There is no alternative as that 
objective is stipulated by the Acquis Communautaire. The same applies to numerous other 
points  of  law  relating  to  NBS  operations  which  incorporate  experiences  gained  in  more 
advanced  phases  of  development  and  which  guarantees  that  our  legislation  will  precede 
practice and enable us to learn from the experiences of others because many countries have 
been through these phases long before us. Whether we shall actually join the EU does not 
depend  on  us,  because  adoption  of  the  so  called  “European  legislation”  represents  a 
necessary  condition  but  in  itself  is  not  sufficient  to  guarantee  our  integration  into  the  EU. 
Allow  me  to  illustrate  this  point  by  the  following  example:  Constitution  of  the  Republic  of 
Serbia  and  the  Law  on  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia  do  specify  that  the  NBS  is  an 
independent institution. But here comes the main difference between theory and practice and 
the  question  arises  whether  we  are  going  to  apply  our  own  measure  to  define 
“independence”, the term we adopted as the European norm and which is applied by their 
institutions, or we shall go on to make up our own definition of “independence” and use it. It 
is only if we decide to use their definition of “autonomy” and “independence” of the central 
bank, which is the only right way to take and which reflects the meaning of the term, that we 
can say that we have adopted the law not for the sake of “adopting a law” but for the sake of 
getting closer to the European values and the best European practices. 
And  “independence”  of  central  banks  has  often  and  in  many  ways  been  already  tested  in 
almost all EU countries. By definition, there are five types of independence: legal, personal, 
functional,  financial  and  organizational.  All  these  facets  of  independence  should  preclude 
exertion of influence on the performance of NBS tasks and the achievement of its primary 
objective  under  the  Law  on  the  NBS.  To  impinge  on  the  effectiveness  of  any  of  these 
postulates means to impinge on the principles of autonomy and independence of the central 
bank. Just as the English would put it “you cannot be a little pregnant, either you are or you 
are not”. I would also like to use this opportunity to thank the GTZ who has for years been 
trying to make sure that nobody goes about “inventing hot water” especially now that a good 
BIS Review 61/2009 
 1
part of legal regulations in Serbia have been adjusted, not only in spirit but also in practice, to 
the EU norms. 
Despite global economic crisis which shall obviously have much more severe consequences 
on the countries in transition than on the developed economies, our banking system is not 
only solvent (capital adequacy ratio of 21%) but is also liquid as around RSD 120 billion is 
still invested in short-term securities of the NBS and RS. This means that money is plentiful 
but is more expensive now than it was a year ago. 
But what does “expensive money” means today? Allow me to give some examples and then 
judge for yourselves whether money in Serbia is “expensive” or not. The most recent issue of 
securities by the Republic of Greece, an EU member state, with euro as its legal tender, has 
the maturity of five years and pays interest of 5.5% p.a., and Greece has an A- credit rating. 
Poland,  which  also  has  an  A-  credit  rating,  pays  5.87% interest  on its securities.  Siemens 
has AA- credit rating and has issued securities with coupons at 5.13% interest, while Turkey, 
a  G-20  member  state  with  BB-  credit  rating,  has  issued  securities  at  7.6%  interest  per 
annum.  The  fact  that  Serbia’s  credit  rating  is  just  BB-  and  our  country  is  neither  an  EU 
member  nor  a  candidate  for  EU  membership  or  a  G-20  member  state,  must  reflect  in  the 
conditions on the local market. Plus, it would not be bad at all if only the loans in Serbia were 
more  expensive  today  than  they  were  a  year  ago.  The  worst  part  is  that  the  Serbian 
economy has to go through a painful period of adjustment which was obvious enough even 
before the global economic crisis broke out! 
As part of its measures to alleviate the effects of the global economic crisis, and based on 
the best European practices, the NBS is in the process of introducing important innovations 
into almost all aspects of its operations: 
1. 
Discounting of a) securities, b) government receivables c) mortgage loans to secure 
additional liquidity  to  the  banking sector.  If  banks  pledge a  part  of  their  assets  as 
collateral, the NBS could extend around RSD 70 billion in short-term loans to banks 
at an interest of at least 15.5% (key policy rate plus 1.5%) at a time when the rate of 
RPI inflation is around 10% April-to-April.  
2. 
The NBS could provide up to EUR 1 billion in swap transactions. 
3. 
Relaxation of policy with regard to capital requirements, loan loss provisioning, etc.  
All of the above measures will help maintain stability of the banking sector, but the greatest 
challenge  facing  Serbia  and  the  region  as  a  whole  over  the  next  several  months  will  be 
finding  ways  to  persuade  banks  to  extend  more  credit.  Europe  is  also  facing  the  same 
problem because the ECB can lend money to banks, but it is only the banks that can extend 
them further to their end beneficiaries. 
Challenges  we  shall  be  facing  on  our  way  to  Europe  will  be  as  many  as  we  create  them! 
But one thing is for sure, the NBS will be facing the fewest as can be proved by the following 
facts: 
- 
Today  we  are  holding  a  meeting  with  the  representatives  of  the  ECB  and  17  EU 
member states that have been working in the NBS for more than nine months in six 
different areas of NBS operations in order to eliminate any “challenges”.  
Besides, Serbia is the first country in the region in which the “Vienna Initiative” has 
been successfully implemented.  
We  have  received  today  a  communication  from  the  IMF  informing  us  that  the  so 
called “safeguard assessment” of our country has been successfully completed.  
The NBS has initiated a number of regional initiatives relating to the financial sector: 
last week we received the President of the German BAFIN, an institution in charge 
of supervision of the German financial sector, while Bank of England and Banque de 
France have been holding a number of regional seminars, etc. 
   2 
 BIS Review 61/2009
And  finally,  allow  me  to  remind  you  once  again  that  Europe  will  certainly  give  Serbia  a 
chance. I have never doubted that, but when it comes to the European integration processes, 
nobody will nor anybody should do our job for us. How many challenges on that road will be 
created by us depends only on us and nobody else! 
BIS Review 61/2009 
 3
