Boediono: Living in a global economic crisis 
Speech  by  Prof  Dr  Boediono,  Governor  of  Bank  Indonesia,  at  the  Bankers’  Dinner  2009, 
Jakarta, 30 January 2009. 
 Ministers of Indonesia’s United Cabinet, 
Members of the People’s Representative Council, 
Prominent Bankers, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Assalamu‘alaikum wr.wb, 
Good evening and may God bless us all, 
Introduction 
To open my speech here this evening, I would like to invite us all to jointly extend our prayers 
and  gratitude  to  God  Almighty  for  this  fantastic  opportunity  to  gather  together  in  such 
salubrious  settings  at  the  Annual  Bankers’  Dinner  2009.  To  the  banking  community,  this 
event represents a tradition as a moment of reflection and information exchange between us 
all. 
I  would  quickly  like  to  take  this  great  opportunity,  if  not  slightly  belated,  on  behalf  of  all 
members of the Board of Governors of Bank Indonesia, to wish everyone a Happy New Year 
2009. The upcoming year of 2009 will be beset with challenges, however, we continue to be 
blessed with strength and guidance from God Almighty in all our endeavors. 
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, 
It is already extremely clear that numerous challenges and tests of our proverbial character 
will bedevil 2009. We are currently riding upon the crest of a great wave that represents the 
deepest  global  economic  crisis  since  the  Great  Depression  befell  the  world  in  1929. 
Dominating the thoughts of economic policymakers and players worldwide is how to weat her 
this “perfect” maelstrom successfully. We have all entered “survival mode”. 
To  the  majority  of  us  here  in  Indonesia,  the  salvo  that  heralded  the  onset  of  a  global 
economic crisis was heard during the first months of the second semester 2007. At which 
time it was disclosed that a number of banks and financial institutions in the U.S and U.K 
were  suffering  financial  hardship.  The  reason  was  attributed  to  sub-standard  quality 
mortgages, or subprime mortgages, that began to perform poorly. 
In  hindsight,  the  subprime  mortgage  debacle  was  merely  the  tip  of  the  iceberg  and  was 
immediately  followed  by  rapid  escalation.  The  impact  of  the  crisis  spread  like  wildfire  and 
deepened  further.  What  began  its  life  as  a  mortgage  crisis  quickly  became  a  global  credit 
crisis within a matter of months. The risk perceived by economic players increased almost 
exponentially. Credit flow for normal activities was severely disrupted as investors switched 
their  savings  to  cash  or  gold  instead  of  extending  loans.  Banks  and  financial  institutions 
stretching  across  all  corners  of  the  globe  faced  their  toughest  time  and  some  of  them, 
including those with a global reach, filed for bankruptcy. 
The governments of several countries were forced to provide bailout and rescue packages to 
inject  liquidity  into  the  economy  in  previously  unheard  of  amounts.  To  this  day  banks  and 
financial  institutions  remain  in  a  state  of  financial  distress  and  credit  flows  are  far  from 
normal. ”The financial sector is broken”, remarked Paul Volcker. 
What has deeply concerned economic players worldwide, and is to be avoided almost at all 
costs, is the vicious downward spiral between the financial sector and real sector. In other 
BIS Review 26/2009 
 1
words,  the  financial  sector  fails  to  function  effectively,  thus  exacerbating  the  real  sector, 
which  subsequently  undermines  financial  sector  performance  and  so  on,  hence  the 
downward spiral. 
The governments and central banks of many countries have taken any measures necessary, 
including unconventional steps to save the situation. In order to stop the downward spiral that 
I  mentioned,  the  monetary  authorities,  particularly  of  the  major  economies,  poured  in  vast 
amounts  of  liquidity.  In  addition,  almost  all  governments  have  rolled  out  fiscal  stimulus 
packages. 
To  save  their  respective  financial  sectors,  the  governments  of  several  countries  have 
intervened, including through the implementation of blanket guarantee schemes for savings 
held  at  banks,  insuring  or  taking  over  disputed  assets,  injecting  capital  into  financial 
institutions and even buying out such institutions. 
If  I  portray  a  gloomy  picture  of  the  global  economy,  I  certainly  do  not  wish  for  us  to  be 
pessimistic,  particularly  regarding  our  own  domestic  economy.  Objectively  speaking,  the 
current  situation,  and  indeed  the  outlook,  of  the  global  economy  is  dreary  at  best.  It  is 
important that we view our problems objectively and as such we can take appropriate actions 
to really deal concisely with the problems. Actually, I would like to encourage you all to be 
more  positive.  I  believe  that  with  mutual  determination  and  measurable  steps  we  can 
traverse this challenging path safely and soundly, and God Willing, we will emerge stronger 
on the other side. 
At a global level, I foresee a bright spot. At the epicenter of this crisis, the United States, new 
hope is dawning in the form of a new government with their new economic team, who have 
pledged to take prompt and forceful actions in order to deal with the crisis. The willingness of 
major countries to coordinate their policies has also strengthened. I have also observed that 
some components of previously taken actions have demonstrated favorable results, despite 
remaining relatively minor as the scale of the crisis has mushroomed. 
Meanwhile,  amidst  such  inauspicious  surroundings,  Indonesia  is  certainly  not  in  the  worst 
position  compared  to  other  countries.  In  general,  our  macro  posture,  including  economic 
growth, is not bad. Our banking industry also remains robust. 
Indonesia  can  be  considered  lucky  as  its  banks’  and  financial  institutions’  exposure  to 
subprime mortgages is minimal. However, we are certainly not immune to the impacts of the 
crisis.  As  global  credit  crunch  reached  its  pinnacle  following  the  bankruptcy  of  Lehman 
Brothers, which dealt a psychological blow to the domestic market, in November 2008 the 
Government  took  over  Bank  Century  in  order  to  maintain  national  banking  stability. 
Moreover, Indonesian banks are not immune from the problem of derivative products, and 
the  scale  being  relatively  smaller  compared  to  several  other  developing  countries,  and 
significantly less than in developed countries. 
Meanwhile, some have expressed that our delay in integrating our financial sector with the 
global financial network is really a blessing in disguise, as it has saved us from more serious 
crisis fallout. I tend to agree with this view. In my opinion, it serves as a lesson for us not to 
be over enthusiastic to advance or be considered advanced before we truly understand the 
inherent risks and before we are ready with the required tools to manage such risks. Later I 
will return to this subject on the lessons learned from the ongoing crisis. 
A current issue we face today is the waning access of corporations and banks to sources of 
foreign financing. The exodus of funds from developing countries, including Indonesia, has 
been stemmed. Furthermore, the signs of capital inflows to Indonesia are yet to materialize, 
except on a small scale. The return to a normal flow of funds has not yet transpired but, as I 
have mentioned, there is reason to be optimistic. 
We have all witnessed how developed countries have gone all out when taking measures to 
normalize  the  supply  and  flow  of  credit  to  their  own  countries  in  order  to  stem  the  tide  of 
deteriorating  economic  activities.  Once  credit  flows  in  such  countries  have  returned  to 
2 
 BIS Review 26/2009
normal, fund flows to developing countries will gradually return to normal too. Indonesia must 
position itself among other developing countries so that we can be among the first to benefit 
from the global financial awakening. In my view, the key lies in positioning Indonesia to be 
considered as a safe and convenient place to conduct business and investment. We have to 
assure investors that our macro economy is properly managed and sustainable, and that our 
financial sector, particularly the banking sector, is robust. This is our joint responsibility. 
Another  issue  of  concern  is  the  domestic  interbank  money  market  that  has  not  operated 
normally  in  terms  of  daily  transaction  volume,  in  particular  from  the  aspect  of  access  by 
medium and small banks to this fund source. For your information, this issue regarding the 
interbank money market has been experienced by numerous countries and each country has 
responded  differently.  In  general,  the  response  is  one  or  a  combination  of  three  steps: 
guarantee provision by the government; an insurance program with government support; and 
an  expansion  of  the  liquidity  facility  provided  by  the  central  bank  to  banks.  Hitherto, 
Indonesia has relied primarily on the third option, namely by expanding the liquidity facility to 
banks. 
Over the past several months, Bank Indonesia has taken several steps towards this common 
end.  It  is  important  to  admit  that  these  steps  have  not  resolved  all  of  the  outstanding 
problems,  particularly  in  terms  of  access  by  medium  and  small  banks  that  do  not  have 
adequate secondary reserves. Expansion of the central bank’s facility, such as through the 
short-term funding facility (FPJP), is not a perfect substitute for an optimal interbank market. 
Bank Indonesia expects national banks to jointly take initiatives and play a more active role in 
jumpstarting the domestic interbank market. We at Bank Indonesia always welcome further 
discussion with banks on this issue. 
Meanwhile, during the past two quarters, as has been evident in all countries, Indonesia is no 
exception; the global financial turmoil has crushed economic activities in general. This is a 
dangerous stage  that  requires  forceful  and effective  steps  to  bring  it  to  an  end.  Countries’ 
experiences have shown that a structural financial crisis such as is occurring now will have 
lasting impacts on the real sector. Sluggish economic growth will continue for several periods 
despite liquidity returning to normal. Consequently, I would like to reiterate the importance of 
strategies with clear targets. I will mention three targets that we must strive towards together: 
(a)  to  pass  safely  through  this  period  of  global  credit  crunch;  (b)  to  ensure  that  national 
economic  activity  does  not  deteriorate  in  the  short  term;  and  (c)  to  promote  conducive 
conditions so that the subsequent domestic economy is on a track to sustainable economic 
growth. 
Fiscal stimuli are a key step in preventing the further deterioration of economic activities in 
the short term. Furthermore, the expeditious implementation of the 2009 National Budget is 
required  and  it  also  has  to  succeed.  However,  as  Ben  Bernanke  often  reminds  us;  to 
emancipate  ourselves  from  the  shackles  of  this  crisis,  fiscal  stimuli  have  to  be  introduced 
concomitantly with financial sector strengthening. Fiscal stimuli are basically a way to prime 
the  pumps.  They  will  not  catalyze  sustainable  economic  growth  if  not  buttressed  by  a 
reawakening  of  private  and  business  sector  activities.  Furthermore,  the  private  sector  will 
only be roused if supported by a fully functioning financial sector. 
As such, measures to repair and reinforce our financial sector must be taken along with the 
introduction of fiscal stimuli. In our great nation, banks remain a reliable source of financing 
for  the  business  sector,  and  thus,  tidying  up  and  strengthening  our  banking  sector  must 
remain  a  priority  for  continuous  implementation.  Within  its  authority  but  constrained  by 
capacity limits, Bank Indonesia will take any and all measures required to attain this target. 
For  a  developing  country  such  as  Indonesia,  I  would  like  to  add  one  more  ingredient  to 
Bernanke’s recipe; that is we also have to perform structural reforms to remove the obstacles 
to business activity. 
BIS Review 26/2009 
 3
Lessons learned 
Distinguished guests, 
Experience is the best teacher in life. The ongoing global crisis provides valuable lessons for 
our future endeavors. Allow me to highlight a few. 
A simple lesson learned from this crisis is the importance of going back to basics. Let us view 
the reason. The current crisis can be seen as a consequence of financial sector development 
that is detached from its roots, which is real economic activity. Expansive development of the 
financial  sector  in  many  countries  for  over  a  decade  has  stemmed  from  financial  product 
innovation as well as the great strides made in financial institutions. Such innovative growth 
has  been  made  possible  by  the  revolution  in  information  technology  and  global  financial 
liberalization. 
The financial sector in many countries has attracted many people, including the best and the 
brightest, as it is often a fast track to wealth and riches. Those who are skillful, innovative 
and  dare  to  take  risk  can  receive  a  befitting reward.  Financial  products  that  have  become 
more varied, more sophisticated and more complex have a fatal side effect, namely that the 
inherent  risks  are  more  difficult  to  assess.  Financial  instruments  are  becoming  separated 
from underlying transactions that should form their base and have developed into bubbles. 
Due to their internal dynamics, the bubbles are swelling and many have finally burst, which 
precipitated this crisis. In short, the ongoing crisis is basically a consequence of failed risk 
management, both at the micro and macro levels. 
Back to basics applies to all financial institutions, particularly banks. The main role of banks 
is to facilitate and finance activities associated with the supply of goods and services to the 
people;  more  specifically  “real”  activities.  Banks  perform  their  function  through  financial 
intermediation;  that  is  to  collect  funds  from  their  owners  and  distribute  it  to  borrowers. 
However,  banks  can  act  as  more  than  just  intermediaries.  Banks  can  create  additional 
liquidity through demand deposits. Such bank activities inherently contain risks, either to the 
bank  itself,  to  savers,  to  the  banking  system  or  to  the  economy.  These  risks  have  to  be 
properly  mitigated  by  the  banks,  which  is  their  primary  responsibility  and  requires  the  full 
attention from bank management, above and beyond a full-time job. 
Banks play a role in financing activities with clear underlying transactions, which have to be 
based on clear risk assessment. Dabbling with speculative instruments is not the domain of 
bankers.  Banks  should  avoid  activities  that  contain  bubbles.  If  such  activities  cannot  be 
avoided, effective risk management must be applied. Bank Indonesia, as a regulator, has an 
interest in encouraging banks to apply prudential principles. In the future, we will strengthen 
the protocols required to accomplish this objective. 
The current crisis has also provided concrete proof that the concept of universal banking is 
not a crisis-durable model. We should reconsider this concept thoroughly and with caution. 
Policies  taken  to  further  develop  the  industry  towards  more  advanced  concepts  must  be 
followed  by  various  strengthening  measures  and 
the  preparation  of  resolute  risk 
management.  Meanwhile,  we  can  conclude  that  the  narrow-bank  concept  is  more  befitting 
the banking domain and has been proven to endure during a crisis. The selection of a bank 
business model determines the resilience of the banking sector. During the current crisis and 
the catastrophic crisis of 11 (eleven) years ago, we can clearly observe that banking sector 
resilience is the main line of national defense against financial turbulence. 
Allow me briefly to draw one more important lesson from the ongoing crisis. The lesson is 
that  the  basic  principles  of  conventional  macro  management  have  been  proven  to  be 
relevant in conditioning an economy against turbulence. Countries that observe and protect 
their basic indicators, such as the national budget deficit, current account deficit, ratio of debt 
to  repayment  capacity,  foreign  reserves,  inflation  rate,  liquidity  growth  and  exchange  rate 
under  a  framework  of  sustainable  economic  growth,  in  general,  are  in  a  better  position  to 
confront a crisis. Conventional wisdom prevails even (or especially) during a storm. 
4 
 BIS Review 26/2009
With  reference  to  macro  equilibrium  management,  I  believe  that  this  crisis  has  brought  a 
more  structural  lesson.  Using  experience  gleaned  from  the  current  crisis,  we  need  to 
consider  some  more  basic  questions;  questions  that  will  help  guide  us  when  positioning 
Indonesia during this era of globalization. For instance, what is the best equilibrium for our 
economy: between the domestic market and export market, between the financial sector and 
real sector, between the outward orientation and inward orientation of our financial sector, 
particularly  our  banks,  between  relying  on  domestic  financing  or  foreign  financing.  Such 
questions require a fair, thorough and in-depth thought process. It is imperative to answer 
these questions if we want to develop a more resilient national economy to future turbulence. 
Prospects and challenges in 2009 
Distinguished guests, 
Allow me to further explain the horizon we face in 2009. One issue that can be considered 
undeniable is that all countries around the world face an economic downturn. Indonesia is no 
exception. For us, the effects of the crisis began to be felt during the last quarter of 2008. 
The economic slowdown will be more obvious in 2009, particularly during the first semester. 
Estimations we ran at end of 2008 projected that our domestic economy in 2009 will grow in 
the  range  of  4%-5%.  Certainly  not  too  bad  when  compared  with  the  projections  of  many 
other countries. However, observing the current global trend, the downside risk will increase. 
In  line  with  efforts  to  protect  economic  growth,  the  key  here  is  how  to  maximize  domestic 
market potential to bolster domestic economic activities. The foremost element of this policy 
is to expedite the implementation of a fiscal incentive package and the 2009 national budget. 
Well-controlled inflation as well as government, political party and public expenditure for the 
upcoming  General  Election,  will  also  help  underpin  public  purchasing  power.  In  addition, 
certain  policies  that  must  be  intensified  include  measures  to  improve  the  business  climate 
and reduced domestic business costs. The implementation of such policy should not require 
any additional funding, however, more focused and determined actions to detangle the knots 
are necessary. We hope that during this year of the general election, such policies can be 
continued and even intensified. 
Meanwhile, along with tumbling commodity and fuel prices as well as solid rice production, 
the  interest  rate  in  2009  is  expected  to  decline,  in  the  range  of  5.0-7.0%.  If  current 
developments persist, however, the lower limit of this range is expected. 
Questions  often  arise  on  the  prospect  of  our  Balance  of  Payments  this  upcoming  year. 
Based  on  detailed  calculations  performed  at  the  end  of  last  year,  we  estimate  that  the 
Current  Account  will  run  a  deficit  of  around  0.11%  of  GDP  in  2009.  Global  fund  flows  are 
estimated to return to normal in 2009. However, there is one particular note for Indonesia. If 
the  experience  of  the  2004  General  Election  reoccurs  this  year,  namely  a  safe  General 
Election that results in the formation of credible cabinet, then during the fourth quarter there 
will  be  relatively  large  inflows  of  funds.  The  majority  of  such  funds  belong  to  our  nation’s 
citizens,  temporarily  placed  abroad  while  awaiting  confirmation  of  the  domestic  political 
situation. Based on our calculations, foreign reserves by the end of 2009 are estimated at 
USD51  billion;  adequate  to  finance  4.7  months  of  imports  and  government  foreign  debt 
repayments. 
In  the  banking  sector,  stress  tests  indicate  that  the  resilience  of  our  domestic  banking 
industry  is  sufficient.  In  2009,  the  capital  adequacy  ratio  (CAR)  is  estimated  to  decrease 
slightly from 16% in 2008 to 14%. From regulatory capital point of view, this ratio is still well 
above its minimum limit. However, from the economic capital view, this development should 
be anticipated in a timely fashion. A declining capital adequacy ratio indicates the reduced 
ability  of  banks  to  absorb  various  risks  and  expand  credit.  Therefore,  I  would  like  to  see 
efforts to reinforce bank capital remain as our primary focus in the future. Bank Indonesia will 
continue to closely monitor the development of capital at each bank. We are all aware that 
BIS Review 26/2009 
 5
without safe and adequate capital, the bank intermediary function will not run optimally, and 
industry resilience to inauspicious conditions, such as now for example, will be undermined. 
Based on current capital strength and contradictory to credit growth in developed countries 
such  as  in  the  European  Union  and  United  States,  where  a  downturn  was  experienced  in 
2008 and perhaps negative growth will prevail in 2009, credit growth in Indonesia in 2009 is 
estimated  to  remain  in  the  range  of  18%-20%. Yet  the  downside  risks are  relatively  large. 
Meanwhile, slow economic growth will precipitate a rise in NPL to around 5% in 2009, which 
is still considered within safe boundaries. 
It is important to be aware that liquidity in our banking system is currently adequate. This is 
evidenced by large placements in Bank Indonesia Certificates by Indonesian residents; now 
totaling Rp200 trillion, and undisbursed loans of Rp253 trillion (November 2008). This large 
liquidity  pool  indicates  that  our  economy  is  not  suffering  from  a  liquidity  shortfall.  Our 
challenge is how to utilize this liquidity to finance economic development and business sector 
activities. 
liquidity 
financial  system 
integrity.  Monetary  and 
Direction of monetary and banking policy in 2009 
Distinguished guests, 
Under  the  all-encompassing  blanket  of  the  current  global  crisis,  we  are  fully  aware  of  the 
importance  of  monetary  policy  that  supports  the  real  sector.  However,  policy  must  be 
consistently  implemented  in  the  context  of  sustainable  economic  growth,  supported  by 
economic  stability  in  the  mid-long  term.  Monetary  policy  must  strike  a  balance  amongst 
stimulating the real sector, maintaining price stability, maintaining financial market harmony 
and  ensuring 
loosening  will  be 
complemented with thorough surveillance and assessment by Bank Indonesia on indicators 
associated with these targets. 
Distinguished guests, 
We are aware that the various obstacles emanating from the global financial crisis in 2009 
require concrete steps by the relevant authorities to maintain the performance of business 
players in productive sectors. 
To this end, policy should be directed to ensure that the bank intermediary function can be 
performed optimally. Meanwhile, we also expect that the extension of Rural Business Loans 
and MSME loans will experience relatively strong growth. Such credit is vital to rural people 
and those in remote areas in order to enable them not only to survive but also expand their 
businesses during difficult periods such as we expect in 2009. 
Several policy measures have already been taken and will continue to be taken in the future 
to facilitate credit flow. This evening, I do not wish or have the time to convey in any detail 
the  regulations  that  will  be  promulgated.  I  opine  that  during  this  difficult  period  filled  with 
uncertainty,  the  policies  of  Bank  Indonesia  will  continue  unabated,  following  economic 
dynamics that require appropriate responses as well as anticipatory measures. 
However,  generally  speaking,  I  would  like  to  disclose  that  Bank  Indonesia  recently  issued 
regulations aimed at providing freedom of action for banks to extend credit. The regulations 
cover  several  issues  that  constitute  areas  of  concern  for  most  of  you  present  here  this 
evening, such as: extending the transition period for Basel II implementation with reference 
to  the  capital  cost  of  operational  risk  calculations;  procedure  simplification  for  opening  a 
branch office, including sharia banks; adjustment of risk-weighted assets for Small Enterprise 
Loans with a guarantee scheme; adjustment of the credit assessment method for specified 
amounts;  providing  USD  repurchase  agreement  (repo)  facility  between  banks  and  Bank 
Indonesia;  as  well  as  reducing  liabilities  regarding  the  provisions  for  losses  of  nonearning 
asset (abandoned assets). In the very near future, in-depth regulatory steps to improve bank 
transparency,  as  well  as  strengthen  the  effectiveness  of  liquidity  risk  management  and 
6 
 BIS Review 26/2009
derivative  products  will  complement  these  regulations  farther.  Under  such  a  policy,  all 
players  in  the  banking  industry,  including  shariah,  is  expected  to  have  sufficient  space  to 
maintain  its  intermediary  function,  as  well  as  continue  the  implementation  of  prudential 
principles and risk management as a priority. 
Distinguished guests, 
As I mentioned earlier, the cornerstone of our defense against a crisis is the banking sector. 
The economy is crisis resistant if its banking sector is crisis resistant. The banking sector I 
allude to is based on two pillars, namely good governance and good supervision. 
Regarding  good  governance,  I  would  like  to  stress  one  pivotal  aspect.  With  the 
circumstances  found  pervading  our  financial  and  banking  sectors  lately,  I  am  even  more 
assured that human integrity and character, above all else, are determining factors. We can 
adopt a sophisticated risk management system and put in place a good supervision system, 
however, in the end the result is subject to the integrity and character of the administrators. 
No matter how good a system is it will not work if the administrators seek loopholes to abuse 
and exploit. 
In the future, Bank Indonesia will strengthen its screening process based on the character 
and integrity of our bankers, and certainly, our supervisors. Bank Indonesia will also impose 
strict sanctions for those who abuse their authority. PSP and bank management must take 
full responsibility, bound by prevailing laws and regulations, for incidents that occur at their 
respective banks. 
Improvements to bank resilience closely correspond to the quality of bank supervision. With 
this  in  mind,  I  am  happy  to  report  that  Bank  Indonesia  is  currently  undertaking  steps  to 
augment  bank  supervision.  The  repositioning  and  revitalization  of  personnel  is  currently 
underway. Supervisory procedures and methods are constantly reviewed to focus on issues 
that determine the wellbeing of a bank. 
In 2009, we plan to boost the effectiveness of bank supervision through two key measures. 
The  first  is  to  complete  the  risk-based  supervision  framework  by  improving  the  risk 
assessment process, oversight, auditing and system surveillance. Ameliorating the quality of 
risk management, particularly liquidity management and control over new products and bank 
activity, represents the mainstay of ongoing endeavors. This is considered sufficiently urgent 
to  be  handled  during  the  current  financial  turmoil.  Second  is  to  improve  the  function  and 
organization of supervision both at head office and all branch offices of Bank Indonesia. 
We will continue to strengthen the correlation between findings and actions; between audit 
results  and  management  steps.  We  will  form  a  panel  team  to  improve  audit  quality  and 
managerial steps. This year, we will also increase our budget for training. These measures 
are expected to secure our pathway through this crisis period as well as also build more solid 
foundations for better bank supervision in the mid term. 
Closing 
Distinguished guests, 
This  brings  me  to  the  end  of  my  speech  here  this  evening.  The  ship  that  represents  our 
national  economy  is  currently  navigating  a  tempestuous  ocean.  The  ship  itself  is  relatively 
robust,  certainly  stronger  than  the  ship  we  sailed  eleven  years  ago.  However,  the  current 
weather  front  dwarfs  that  of  eleven  years  ago.  Notwithstanding,  I  am  convinced  we  can 
weather the storm. The key is that the ship’s crew and passengers are unified and open to 
help  one  another  based  on  trust.  I  am  confident  that  this  is  our  joint  resolution,  as  the 
alternative is too expensive for our country, as transpired eleven years ago. 
BIS Review 26/2009 
 7
I sincerely wish you all a productive year ahead and once again, Happy New Year for 2009. 
Hopefully during this New Year, God Almighty will bless us and light our way towards a better 
and more prosperous future. 
Thank you. 
Wassalamu’alaikum wr. wb. 
8 
 BIS Review 26/2009
