Seongtae Lee: Bank of Korea faces the challenges ahead   
Speech by Mr Seongtae Lee, Governor and Chairman of the Bank of Korea, at the Bank of 
Korea’s 59th Anniversary, Bank of Korea, Seoul, 12 June 2009. 
 Fellow members of the Bank of Korea, 
Today is the 59th anniversary of the founding of the Bank of Korea as Korea's central bank. 
First, I would like to thank all those who have contributed so much to making the Bank what it 
is today. I would also give thanks to all of our members for their hard work in tackling the 
difficulties arising from the global financial crisis. 
In the wake of Lehman Brothers' filing for bankruptcy protection in September last year, the 
financial  markets  and  real  economic  conditions  worsened  significantly.  Recently,  however, 
the economy has been showing signs of improvement. The economic downturn appears to 
have  flattened  out,  with  some  economic  and  confidence  indicators  showing  favorable 
movements. In the financial markets, stock prices have rebounded and the flow of funds to 
the  corporate  sector  is  on  a  steady  rise.  The  Korean  won  has  appreciated  and  foreign 
currency liquidity conditions have improved substantially as the current account has shifted 
to a sizable surplus. 
This is thanks partly to the improved external conditions, with the moderation of the global 
financial  market  unrest,  but  chiefly  to  the  wide-ranging  policy  measures  taken  by  the 
government  and  the  Bank  of  Korea.  The  Bank  has  actively  implemented  monetary  easing 
policy, lowering its Base Rate to a record low of 2.0 percent and making use of open market 
operations and lending facilities to mitigate the credit crunch. Together with this, in order to 
stabilize  the  foreign  exchange  market,  the  Bank  has  supplied  foreign  currency  liquidity  to 
financial institutions and established currency swap arrangements with central banks such as 
the US Federal Reserve. 
The Korean economy seems set to continue its recent improving trend, but it will be no easy 
matter for it to shift to a full-fledged recovery track given the several destabilizing factors that 
still exist both at home and abroad. First, it will take considerable time for the global financial 
markets to return to normal, due to the prolonged global economic recession and the delay in 
cleaning up and adjusting the balance sheets of major countries' financial institutions. There 
is also the likelihood that the upward trend in prices of oil and other commodities may slow 
down  the  economic  recovery  and  hamper  price  stability.  In  addition,  there  are  geopolitical 
risks present concerning the North Korean nuclear issue. 
My dear colleagues, 
There are many policy tasks to be pursued for our economy to overcome the shocks caused 
by the global financial crisis, and what is more, to maintain steady growth. 
First  of  all,  efforts  to  build  up  a  foundation  for  more  robust  domestic  demand  should  be 
continued.  The  global  economic  outlook  makes  it  difficult  to  expect  a  rapid  recovery  of 
Korean exports for the time being. A worsening employment situation, moreover, may hinder 
the recovery of private consumption and, along with sluggish facilities investment, lower the 
growth potential. In this regard, it is important to promote a virtuous circle of employment and 
growth  and  to  strengthen  economic  resilience  against  external  shocks  through  making 
continued policy efforts to boost domestic demand and create jobs. 
As it seems that the economic crisis has passed its peak, corporate restructuring has to be 
speeded up. If the resolution of ailing companies is delayed, it will be difficult for the financial 
markets  to  return  to  normal  at  an  early  stage  with  concerns  over  credit  risk  left  unsolved, 
while there is also the possibility that the external competitiveness of the Korean economy 
may be reduced. 
BIS Review 86/2009 
 1
The  financial  and  foreign  exchange  markets  presently  seem  fairly  stable,  but  more  efforts 
need to be devoted to keep them on a firm track. As part of such efforts, it is necessary to 
develop  measures  which  reduce  the  possibilities  of  market  unrest  from  the  large-scale  in- 
and  outflows  of  foreign  capital,  while  lessening  dependence  on  short-term  external  debt. 
Even when the financial markets and real economic conditions recover from this crisis, there 
is  a  need  to  devise  means  of  preventing  financial  institutions  from  becoming  locked  into 
excessive competition for asset growth. 
There should also be a keen awareness that the accommodative monetary and fiscal policies 
implemented to tackle this crisis could impose a burden on the economy in the medium- and 
long-term horizon. 
My dear colleagues, 
I would now like to talk about what the Bank of Korea should promote as its top priority in the 
second half of this year and beyond. 
The  Bank  should  conduct  interest  rate  policy  with  a  main  emphasis  on  supporting  the 
continuation of the recent improvement in the real economy and the financial markets. The 
Bank will also pay close attention to the possibilities that a rise in international commodity 
prices  may  disrupt  the  low  and  stable  trend  of  prices  and  that  rapidly  swelling  short-term 
liquidity may cause instability in asset prices such as those of real estate. 
The  Bank  also  has  to  make  constant  efforts  to  strengthen  the  foundation  for  financial 
stability. There is a need to examine the desirable scope of the Bank's financial stability role 
drawing  on  our  experience  of  this  financial  crisis,  and  discussions  concerning  framework 
reform  proposals  and  actual  instances  in  major  countries.  In  addition,  the  Bank  should 
endeavor to ensure that the general stance of emerging market countries, including Korea, is 
fully reflected in the course of reaching a global consensus on financial stability. To this end, 
we have to participate actively in discussions at G-20 meetings as well as in the Financial 
Stability  Board  (FSB)  and  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (BCBS),  both  of 
which our nation joined in March. 
We have to do our best to set the inflation target, to be adopted for the period from next year 
onward,  at  an  appropriate  level.  Although  inflation  targeting  per  se  is  assessed  to  have 
contributed  considerably  to  price  stability,  both  domestically  and  internationally,  the  Bank 
must also review any shortcomings in the system based on its past experiences. The Bank 
should make improvements in its operation, if necessary. 
Among the key projects we are now pursuing, I would like to mention two in particular. The 
running  of  the  new  BOK-Wire+,  which  went  into  operation  this  May,  should  be  stable  and 
seamless. And every effort must be made to ensure the trouble-free supply and circulation of 
the 50,000-won banknotes, to be introduced from June 23. 
The various other businesses we handle should also be carried out without the slightest slip-
up.  Settlement  risk  needs  to  be  managed  still  more  thoroughgoingly  to  cope  with  the 
expanded  participation  of  non-bank  financial  institutions  in  the  payment  and  settlement 
system. We must take great pains to ensure that the systems introduced for improving the 
efficiency of liquidity management, such as fungible issuance and prior fixed rate tenders for 
Monetary  Stabilization  Bonds,  achieve  their  desired  results.  In  the  management  of  the 
foreign reserves, we should do our utmost to upgrade risk management further and come up 
with ways to achieve stable returns in this period of low interest rates worldwide. 
My dear colleagues, 
The direction of financial and economic change at home and abroad remains very uncertain. 
As a result, the central bank's accurate assessment of the situation and selecting of timely 
and effective policy options are more important than ever for the national economy. Carrying 
out this mission, the Bank should arrange its organizational and personnel management in 
such a way as to maximize its potential. Full consideration also needs to be given to a new 
2 
 BIS Review 86/2009
organization  in  charge  of  activities  related  to  the  international  financial  institutions  that  the 
country has recently joined to ensure that it plays its role to the full. 
The Bank should also endeavor to improve internal management. Given that the efficiency of 
the  public  sector  is  now  subject  to  stricter  external  evaluation  and  that  many  people  are 
suffering hardship due to the difficult economic situation, the Bank has to redouble its efforts 
to get rid of any organizational shortcomings and save costs. 
Fellow members of the Bank of Korea,  
The Bank of Korea has undertaken active policy initiatives in response to this global financial 
crisis. These actions have contributed greatly to moderating the economic difficulties. 
Yet still the crisis is far from over and new policy tasks are expected to arise even after the 
crisis  passes.  Therefore,  we  should  stay  vigilant  and  remember  once  again  that  it  is  our 
mission to maximize the potential of each and every member of staff in order to achieve the 
stability of the national economy and its development. Through our unstinted efforts toward 
this, the economy will return to normal earlier and the public credibility of the Bank of Korea 
will be anchored still more firmly. 
On  this  special  day  on  which  we  celebrate  the  59th  anniversary  of  our  foundation,  I  once 
again appreciate your devoted commitment. I wish you and those you hold dear the best of 
health and the greatest of happiness. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 86/2009 
 3
