Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Policy and regulation of financial inclusion 
Welcoming remarks by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 
UNAG Asia Regional Forum on Policy and Regulation of Financial Inclusion, Kuala Lumpur, 
6 May 2009. 
 Introduction  
It is my pleasure to welcome you to the United Nations Advisers Group Asia Regional Forum 
on Policy and Regulation of Financial Inclusion. This conference takes place at a time when 
the  world  is  confronted  with  addressing  many  issues  that  have  emerged  from  the  current 
global  financial  and  economic  crisis.  Whilst  significant  attention  and  efforts  are  being 
channelled  to  resolving  the  financial  crisis  and  creating  an  enabling  environment  for  the 
resumption  of  growth  and  job  creation,  we  must  not  lose  sight  of  the  financial  inclusion 
agenda.  Financial  inclusion  is  vital  for  creating  balanced  sustainable  economic  growth.  It 
provides  the  opportunity  for  all  members  of  society  to  benefit  from  economic  progress.  It 
allows  for  a  shared  prosperity,  an  aspiration  that  is  encapsulated  in  the  United  Nations 
Millennium Development Goals.  
The Central Bank of Malaysia is most honoured to be given the opportunity to host this forum 
which is being held in Asia for the first time. We are most honoured to have Governor Nout 
Wellink, President, of the Central Bank of Netherlands. We are also pleased to have present 
Mr.  Jacques  Toureille,  UNAG  Advisor,  who  will  be  delivering  the  keynote  address  by  Her 
Royal Highness Princess Maxima on her behalf.  
This  forum  brings  together  some  of  the  best  minds  from  different  parts  of  the  world  with 
diverse experiences in the field of financial inclusion. I am certain that this forum will enhance 
our  understanding  of  the  vital  issues  confronting  the  financial  inclusion  agenda,  and  will 
contribute  towards  the  formulation  of  new  ideas  in  addressing  the  important  issue  of 
regulation and policy that will ensure the sustainability of an inclusive financial system.  
The financial crisis and its implications on the poor  
The year 2009 will likely to be a difficult year for most countries. As we enter the third year of 
this financial crisis, there is already a synchronised recession in the advanced economies. 
For most of the emerging economies however, the full effects of the crisis on their domestic 
economies  will  be  felt  this  year.  It  is  important  to  note  that  the  financial  systems  in  most 
emerging  economies  continue  to  remain  sound  and  more  importantly  continue  to  function, 
providing credit and supporting the economy. The collapse of external demand has however, 
adversely  affected  the  more  open  emerging  economies.  The  issue  of  equal  concern 
however,  is  the  more  disproportionate  impact  these  developments  will  have  on  the  poorer 
economies.  Similarly,  the  disproportionate  effect  these  developments  are  having  on  the 
poorer segments within a particular economy.  
This  crisis  thus  brings  to  the  forefront  a  number  of  issues  concerning  financial  inclusion. 
Firstly, while the crisis demands action with great urgency, the policy response to restore the 
functioning of the financial system and to get growth in the economy again, there also needs 
to be a continued commitment to the financial inclusion objective. This becomes all the more 
vital given the more adverse implications of the crisis on the poor segments in the economy.  
Secondly, while the policies and regulation of financial inclusion are essential to ensure the 
soundness  and  sustainability  of  an  inclusive  financial  system,  of  equal  importance  are  the 
policies,  instruments  and  framework  to  deal  with  distress  in  an  inclusive  financial  system. 
This is to ensure that the strategies for resolution will provide a total solution that addresses 
the  entire  spectrum  of  the  financial  system,  from  that  which  is  large  and  highly  connected 
BIS Review 54/2009 
 1
with  systemic  implications  to  that  which  is  small  and  highly  vulnerable.  This  includes 
measures  relating  to  relief  and  support  and  the  mechanisms  for  resolution  to  ensure  the 
sustainability  of  an  inclusive  financial  system  even  during  unstable  financial  and economic 
conditions.  
In  recognising  the  importance  of  financial  inclusion,  the  United  Nations  established  the 
United Nations Advisory Group on Financial Inclusion in 2006. The group advises the United 
Nations and member states on issues relating to the advancement of the financial inclusion 
agenda  on  a  global  scale.  Since  its  establishment,  many  successes  have  been  achieved. 
These  include  increasing  the  public  awareness  on  the  importance  of  financial  inclusion, 
assisting  governments  in  the  design  of  regulatory  systems  that  facilitate  the  creation  of 
financial  services  for  the  poor,  encouraging  the  of  use  of  holistic  measures  to  gauge  the 
progress of financial inclusion, collecting and disseminating best practices, collaborating with 
the  private  sector  to  leverage  on  the  talent  and  technology  to  further  advance  financial 
inclusion and to promote research that will galvanise new initiatives.  
In  Malaysia,  financial  inclusion  is  a  high  priority  in  our  national  agenda.  Since  the 
establishment of the Central Bank, there has been a conscious policy to have an extensive 
commercial banking branch network across the country, to ensure the outreach, in particular, 
to cover the non-urban areas. Malaysia now has 10.2 branches for every 100,000 individuals 
as opposed to the global median of 8.4 branches for every 100,000 individuals. In Malaysia, 
more  than  80%  of  the  population  also  have  some  form  of  savings  account.  This  has  also 
contributed  to  the  financialisation  of  savings  in  the  country.  Deposits  as  a  percentage  of 
gross domestic product is 180%. This means that savings is mobilised including from small 
savers  into  the  formal  financial  system.  This  allows  the  savings  to  be  channelled  to 
productive economic activity.  
To  further  drive  the  provision  of  basic  financial  services  to  the  underserved,  the  National 
Savings Bank in Malaysia has been mandated to enhance the outreach of deposit services 
and micro-financing. Their efforts, together with those of commercial banking institutions and 
government mandated micro-financing agencies, have resulted in a significant expansion of 
micro-financing. Micro-financing has increased from RM151 million in 2000 to RM1.7 billion 
in 2008, representing an annual average growth rate of 35%.  
Early this year, Bank Negara Malaysia celebrated its 50th anniversary. The Bank has taken 
the opportunity to review our existing legislation; the Central Bank Act to take into account 
the  dramatically  changed  domestic  and  international  economic  and  financial  environment. 
The work on this proposed new legislation has spanned two years. In articulating with greater 
clarity the mandate of the Bank, the objective of financial inclusion, not explicitly mentioned in 
our existing Act, but undertaken in practice is now explicitly articulated in the proposed Act. 
This is to ensure that going forward, the future generation of central bankers at Bank Negara 
Malaysia  will  continue  with  the  unwavering  commitment  to  the  building  of  an  inclusive 
financial system.  
Conclusion  
Let  me  conclude  my  remarks.  In  this  current  environment  of  great  uncertainty,  financial 
intermediation has a vital role in supporting an economic recovery. As regulators, the focus is 
placed on ensuring the soundness and stability of the financial system, and thereby provides 
the platform on which the role of the banking sector in the economy can be enhanced. It is 
the continued functioning of the financial system that will be a vital element in the economic 
growth and development process.  
For emerging market economies in particular, the efforts have to be extended beyond this to 
building  the  financial  infrastructure,  raising  the  level  of  financial  literacy  and  providing  the 
enabling environment for a more inclusive financial system.  
2 
 BIS Review 54/2009
This forum will provide us an opportunity to deliberate on the many issues that are before us, 
particularly in the context of the unstable times and the manner in which we can strengthen 
our  capacity  to  enhance  the  financial  inclusion  agenda.  On  that  note,  I  wish  you  a  very 
productive and successful meeting. Thank you. 
BIS Review 54/2009 
 3
