Rundheersing Bheenick: Putting Mauritius on the world’s Islamic finance 
map 
Address  by  Mr  Rundheersing  Bheenick,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  at  the  official 
launching of HSBC Amanah Islamic Banking Mauritius, Les Guibies, Pailles, 5 May 2009. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen 
A very good morning to you all. 
It is always a pleasure to do business with our friends from the Hong Kong and Shanghai 
Banking Corporation. They know so well the business of business. 
HSBC – a reliable partner over the years 
The presence of HSBC in our local banking history traces its roots back to 1859 when the 
Chartered  Mercantile  Bank  of  India,  London  and  China  established  a  branch  in  Mauritius. 
The  bank  boasts  therefore  over  150  years  of  significant  contribution  to  the  economic 
development of the country. 
Today HSBC, subsidiary and branch combined, ranks first in terms of assets, deposits and 
advances.  
HSBC has always adapted and evolved to meet new challenges in our financial sector. Now 
it is helping us write a new chapter in the history of banking and finance in Mauritius. We are 
pleased that HSBC Amanah has included Mauritius in its global strategy.  
HSBC,  with  its  distinct  Hexagon  logo,  needs  no  introduction  in  our  part  of  the  world.  It  is 
indeed “The World’s Local Bank” as their slogan has it.  
As Confucius said, “A man who reviews the old so as to find out the new is qualified to teach 
others”. 
As we search for solutions for the current global economic and financial crisis, it is well that 
we go back way beyond the days when our present, so-called, “whizz-kids” were born. That 
is the very ones that have now led so many bankers and the world into so much trouble. So 
we look now to our friends from Hong Kong who fuse together a sublime sense of history 
with a zest for the future to take us forward. 
In Mauritius, we have tended to look to Singapore for our benchmarks of performance. But 
Lee  Kwan  Yew,  celebrated  doyen  of  development  theory  and  practice,  in  fact  saw  Hong 
Kong as the standard-bearer of development for small states and for Singapore itself. In his 
perceptive  autobiography,  “From  Third  World  to  First”,  he  wrote  “I  saw  Hong  Kong  as  a 
source  of  inspiration  and  of  ideas  ….  before  visiting  Hong  Kong  I  did  not  understand  the 
importance of talent …. the yeast that transforms a society and makes it grow.” 
We  are  proud  that  as  we  take  our  first  tentative  steps  in  Islamic  finance  we  have  a 
prestigious  global  name  such  as  HSBC  Amanah  to  support  us  in  our  ambition  to  position 
Mauritius as a jurisdiction of choice for world-class Islamic financial services. 
It  is  an  irony  that  we  have  driven  conventional  banking,  Western  style,  so  far  beyond  its 
carrying  capacity  that  we  now  have  to  delve  back,  for  new  solutions  to  the  question  of 
sustainability, into that quite different tradition of banking derived from the principles of the 
Shariah. 
BIS Review 552009 
 1
Our approach to Islamic banking/our challenges 
Central  Banks,  such  as  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  and  the  Bank  of  England  amongst  others, 
have been important sources of inspiration for us. One has emerged as the Islamic finance 
powerhouse of the world and the other is by far the most renowned conventional financial 
centre. 
The UK had a visionary leader in Eddie George, Central Bank Governor between 1993-2003. 
Sadly, Lord George left us recently. I had the pleasure of meeting him last October on a day 
trip  to  Robben  Island  laid  on  by  South  African Governor  Tito  Mboweni  and  he  spoke  very 
fondly  of  his  visit  to  Mauritius.  He  was  an  easy  conversationalist.  It  was  precisely  a 
conversation with his neighbours, a well-established professional couple, deploring the fact 
that they were unable to access mortgages in the United Kingdom on the ground that they 
were based on riba, and thus not in accordance with the principles of their faith, that moved 
him to envisage Islamic finance in the UK.  
This casual chit-chat between good neighbours has today resulted in a financial centre that 
harbours six authorised Islamic financial institutions and another two dozen or so institutions 
offering Islamic financial products as well as over twenty sukuks listed on the London Stock 
Exchange. 
Meanwhile,  driven  by  petrodollars  and  rising  prosperity  in  the  Gulf  and  Southeast  Asia, 
Islamic  finance  has  literally  exploded.  Increasing  demand  for  Shariah-compliance  augurs 
even better days ahead for the Islamic finance industry as we prepare to enter the field. 
In these circumstances, how could we resist stealing a page from Eddie George’s book?  
Just like the British FSA did over 10 years back, we steered our thinking towards having a 
regulatory framework that accommodates both conventional and Islamic financial institutions.  
We have also drawn guidance from the experience of other countries which have embarked 
on Islamic finance but we have had to map out our own route. For instance, we have opted 
not to impose a single Shariah on our financial institutions Board. We have left it to individual 
institutions to set up their own Shariah Committee and nominate their own Shariah experts. 
The Bank will recognize Shariah experts from reputable jurisdictions.  
It is good to be clear about what Islamic finance is not? As we view it, Islamic finance is 
not  just  for  people  of  Muslim  faith.  The  sound  ethical  principles  underlying  Islamic  finance 
represent  an  attractive  alternative  to  conventional  financial  products.  Islamic  finance  offers 
advantages 
traditional  bank/customer, 
borrower/lender relationship changes considerably into a partnership in Islamic finance.  
We  have  already  amended  legislation  and  issued  the  necessary  guidelines,  but  the 
challenge goes well beyond the legal changes and setting up a regulatory framework. The 
challenge begins when marketing Mauritius as a destination of choice for Islamic finance. It is 
a very competitive field that we are entering. 
Other  challenges  for  this  secular  country  include  the  integration,  the  merging  of  this  novel 
way  of  doing  business  within  our  present  conventional  financial  landscape  as  a  seamless 
addition so that it is perceived as just another financial product. There is also the challenge of 
attaining full regulatory and Shariah compliance simultaneously.  
There  is  also  the  wider  or  meta-challenge  for  all  Islamic  financial  industry  stakeholders  to 
mainstream  the  industry  with  conventional  finance  systems.  The  present  global  financial 
delinquency constitutes an opportunity for the more ethical, risk-sharing, approach of Islamic 
finance. But it is early days yet for us in Mauritius to join that debate! Let us get our feet firmly 
on the first rung of the ladder as we are doing now! 
As  I  speak  to  you  today  I  am  aware  that  I  am  not  an  expert  in  Islamic  finance  and  I  am 
certainly not very likely to issue a  fatwah anytime soon! And I guess many of you present 
here today are fellow-novitiates! 
to  Muslims  and  non-Muslims  alike.  The 
2 
 BIS Review 55/2009
Our  bankers  and  their  legal  advisers  would  need  to  develop  a  thorough  understanding  of 
Islamic  law  to  ensure  that  the  financial  products  which  they  offer  meet  full  regulatory  and 
Shariah compliance. 
Shariah advisors should be able to combine their in-depth knowledge of Islamic law with a 
familiarity with conventional financial and economic concepts. 
We therefore need to develop the know-how as we would require a pool of experts in the 
field.  
Issuers of Islamic financial products on their part have a role to play in creating awareness, 
and in educating the public on the merits of Islamic finance. As for us, the regulator, we also 
have a steep learning curve ahead of us. 
Two years down the line 
When I joined office as Governor two years ago, I recognised that the potential of Islamic 
finance to bring diversity to our financial markets, boost business opportunities, and exert a 
positive impact on the economy.  
I jumped on a moving train. The work had already started. In October 2005, Government had 
set up a steering committee to explore the possibility of implementing the establishment of 
Islamic financial services in Mauritius. 
There was however some confusion about the “aiguillonage” and the destination.  
The first meeting was held under the chairmanship of the Minister of Arts and Culture. After 
some time, he quite reasonably asked the Ministry of Finance to take over the chair. It began 
to look suspiciously like a game of musical chairs when, in June 2006, the chairmanship was 
passed on to the Bank of Mauritius. But the train seemed finally to be on the right track and 
heading in the right direction.  
 A report was rapidly finalized in June 2007. This is when the challenge started for our small 
island. We had to chalk out a Way Forward to position our country in the first Division of the 
Islamic  Banking  League.  I  am  happy  to  say  that  in  only  two  short,  but  eventful,  years  we 
have: 
(i) 
Joined the IFSB as member – which crystallized after my very first meeting with the 
Secretary-General,  Professor  Rifaat,  when  I  attended  the  BIS  meeting  in  Basel  in 
2007; 
Brought  the  necessary  amendments  to  domestic  banking  laws  to  accommodate 
Islamic banking; 
Issued  the  Guideline  for  Institutions  Conducting  Islamic  Banking  Business  in  June 
2008; 
Approved in August 2008 the application for an Islamic bank from two promoters, one 
from  a  group  operating  in  the  Gulf  and  the  other  from  a  leading  financial 
conglomerate in Mauritius; 
Approved the application from HSBC to operate an Islamic window; and 
Embarked on a project to develop Shariah-compliant money market products for the 
emergence of an active Inter-bank Money Market for Islamic financial institutions. 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
Shariah-compliant Treasury and Central Bank paper 
Let me say a word about this. We have in mind to introduce Treasury and central bank paper 
which would be the equivalent of Treasury Bills/Notes/Bonds and Bank of Mauritius Bills, but 
without  the  interest  rate  element  attached,  to  make  them  Shariah-compliant.  Such 
BIS Review 552009 
 3
instruments  will  help  banks  offering  Islamic  financial  services  to  manage  their  liquidity.  I 
understand that we may be among the first central banks to introduce such instruments for 
banks to park their excess funds or manage their liquidity. As Governor of the Central Bank, I 
take  a  personal  commitment  to  do  whatever  is  required  to  help  our  licensees  implement 
Islamic banking successfully and make it work.  
Islamic finance and the global crisis 
The  launching  of  Islamic  banking  in  Mauritius  comes  at  an  opportune  time.  Economic 
thinkers,  who  are  trying  to  figure  out  how  the  world  sleepwalked  into  the  financial  mess, 
which we are now mired in, are now beginning to appreciate the need to redesign tomorrow’s 
financial architecture based on sound ethical principles.  
In this sense, Islamic finance is gaining added credibility as a viable alternative. Dr Zeti, the 
much-admired Governor of the Bank Negara Malaysia, has in numerous addresses recently 
underscored the relative resilience of Islamic finance to withstand global stress. Indeed, if we 
take the UK example, many banks have collapsed, or have been effectively nationalised, but 
there has been no failure of any Islamic financial institution. 
I  am  glad  –  as  I  am  sure  are  the  shareholders,  customers,  and  other  stakeholders  of  this 
global financial giant – that HSBC is not among the victims! 
Let  me  make  a  commercial  break  here  and  tell  you  about  the  forthcoming  Seminar  on 
Islamic Capital Markets. 
In two weeks’ time, we will be hosting a Seminar on Islamic capital markets. This is the first 
event that the Bank is officially launching in collaboration with IFSB. I am pleased that our 
sister-regulator has agreed to join forces with us in this exercise. This is as it should be. The 
border between banks and non bank financial institutions – which can be drawn not without 
difficulty  in  conventional  finance  systems  –  become  very  blurred  in  Islamic  finance.  We 
therefore  lean  on  the  Memorandum  of  Understanding  which  the  Bank  signed  with  the 
Financial Services Commission to ensure that there is no regulatory overkill.  
The  Seminar  aims  at  creating  awareness  on  the  Islamic  capital  market  and  its  role  in  the 
Islamic financial services industry. 
We have invited Expressions of Interest from the public wishing to attend the Seminar. I am 
pleased to say that we have been overwhelmed by the response.  
Given  the  huge  interest  to  participate  in  this  event,  we  at  the  Central  Bank  are  now 
contemplating to extend the planned event and organise sessions to accommodate all those 
who have expressed an interest to participate. This would thus be an additional contribution 
of the Bank in disseminating knowledge of Islamic Finance among the general public. Watch 
this space for a further announcement on this as soon as we finalise the logistics. 
Let  me,  therefore,  once  again  congratulate  HSBC  on  its  strategic  decision  to  start  Islamic 
finance operations here in Mauritius, and welcome HSBC Amanah to our shores. Today, my 
colleagues and I who have worked on this subject for two years now feel a legitimate sense 
of fulfillment. 
 And I can tell our friends from HSBC: You add depth to our financial sector. And give a new 
dimension  to  your  long-established presence  here.  You  also  comfort  us  in  our  ambition  to 
grow and develop our country as a major international financial centre. 
In these very difficult times that we are going through, when we inspect every passing cloud 
for  any  trace  of  silver  lining,  can  we  perhaps  expect  Amanah  to  be  the  spark  that  we  are 
looking for to re-energise our faltering economy?  
4 
 BIS Review 55/2009
All our very best wishes to you and your team, and a very good day to all of you, Ladies and 
Gentlemen, who are here with us this morning for the launching ceremony of the very first 
Islamic finance operation in Mauritius. 
BIS Review 552009 
 5
