Jean-Claude Trichet: Supporting the financial system and the economy – 
key ECB policy actions in the crisis 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  a 
Conference organised by the Nueva Economía Fórum and The Wall Street Journal Europe, 
Madrid, 22 June 2009. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I  would  like  to  thank  the  organisers  for  inviting  me  today  to  talk  about  the  ECB’s  policy 
actions in these times of truly unprecedented challenges – for our financial system, for the 
businesses large and small that drive our economy and for the citizens of Spain, the euro 
area and beyond. 
As some of you might remember, I was here in Madrid five years ago to give a speech on 
“The challenges for the European economy in 2004”. At that time one important issue was 
whether the economic recovery that had become apparent in the second half of 2003 would 
gather momentum. Another important issue was the need for economic policies that would 
make the euro area economy  more resilient to sudden and sometimes unexpected events 
and to foster its potential for sustainable long term growth.  
Needless  to  say,  the  challenges  the  euro  area  currently  faces  are  of  a  different  order  of 
magnitude than in 2004. Yet, at a fundamental level, the key issues are similar, namely how 
to pave the way for a robust recovery and how to increase the long term growth potential in a 
sustainable manner. In my view these two questions – the cyclical and the structural – are 
closely  entwined.  To  restore  confidence  in  the  near-term  and  the  long-term  future, 
policymakers in the euro area and elsewhere must maintain an appropriate balance between 
bold short-term action and the return to a path that is sustainable in the medium term. 
As I will explain, the ECB’s policy actions since the onset of the financial crisis have been at 
the  same  time  very  bold  and  strongly  anchored  in  the  medium-term  framework  of  our 
monetary  policy  strategy.  We  were  the  first  to  act  when  signs  of  financial  stress  emerged 
back  in  August  2007.  We  stepped  forcefully  into  the  breach  when  the  collapse  of  a  major 
financial player abroad threatened global financial stability last autumn, embarking in a full 
allotment  mode  with  fixed  rates  for  the  supply  of  liquidity.  And  in  recent  months,  we  have 
further deepened the set of measures that we call our policy of “enhanced credit support”.  
All  the  measures  we  are  using  share  two  crucial  features:  first,  they  are  designed  to  be 
effective in preserving the functioning of the money market, the appropriate financing of the 
economy  and  taking  into  account  the  very  significant  rebalancing  of  inflationary  risks; 
second, they can be easily unwound once the financial crisis attenuates and when we see 
any risks of a future rise in inflation. These two features ensure that all measures taken are 
fully  consistent  with  the  ECB’s  primary  objective,  which  is to  preserve price  stability  in  the 
euro area over the medium term.  
Beyond monetary policy, I see two policy priorities going forward. First, governments need to 
spell out how they envisage unwinding the crisis-related fiscal stimulus measures to return to 
sustainable fiscal positions in the medium term. This is particularly important as substantial 
support  for  the  financial  sector  might  still  be  needed.  While  this  support  often  does  not 
directly affect fiscal balances, it creates contingent liabilities that may have to be catered for. 
Second,  the  urgent  need  for  reform  of  the  global  financial  architecture  should  not  distract 
from  the  need  for  further  progress  with  labor  and  product  market  reform  in  the  euro  area. 
Rigorous  implementation  of  the  Lisbon  reform  agenda  remains  as  pressing  as  ever,  as 
increased  productivity  and  efficiency  will  not  only  foster  the  development  of  the  private 
sector, but also facilitate the return to sustainable fiscal positions. 
BIS Review 78/2009 
 1
In my remarks today, I would like first to recall the origins of the crisis. I will then explain in 
detail  the  various  actions  the  ECB  has  taken  to  support  the  euro  area  economy  and  the 
financial system. Before concluding, I will also say a few words on the specific challenges 
currently facing the Spanish economy. 
The roots of the financial crisis and its propagation 
Over the past ten years, we have witnessed a dramatic shift of focus in large parts of the 
financial  sector  –  away  from  facilitating  trade  and  real  investment  towards  unfettered 
speculation and financial gambling. To be clear, I do not deny that financial liberalisation and 
financial  innovation  over  the  past  two  decades  have  made  important  contributions  to  the 
overall  productivity  of  our  economies.  For  example,  the  securitisation  of  assets  –  the 
transformation of bilateral loans into tradable credit instruments – had tremendous potential 
for the diversification and efficient management of economic risk.  
But the way securitisation was implemented also meant that banks and non-banks were able 
not only to sell loans, but also often to place them fully off-balance sheet immediately after 
they had been extended. This weakened their incentives to conduct prudent screening and 
constant monitoring of loans. This is true only for the most recent product innovations in the 
field of securitisation. It is not true for a financial innovation that is more than two hundred 
years old: covered bonds. I will return to this asset class and give you a detailed assessment 
when I describe the ECB’s recent policy actions. 
The  credit  boom  was  exacerbated  by  three  multipliers.  First,  incentives:  ill-designed 
compensation schemes for loan managers and traders reinforced the shortening of their time 
horizons.  Second,  complexity:  increasingly  complicated  and  opaque  financial  instruments 
made it difficult for holders of securities to assess the quality of the underlying investments. 
And  third,  global  macroeconomic  imbalances:  a  chronic  shortage  of  savings  in  some 
industrialised economies was made possible by an excess of savings in other parts of the 
world.  This  acted  as  a  multiplier  that  was  exacerbated  during  the  years  immediately 
preceding the crisis by the sharply rising prices of oil and other commodities.  
In  mid-2007,  suddenly  though  not  unexpectedly,  the  interactions  of  perverse  incentives, 
excessive complexity and global imbalances threw the credit boom into reverse. The asset 
cycle turned, and many of the missing links in the financial chain were exposed. The collapse 
in  mid-September  last  year  of  a  major  financial  player,  turned  a  large-scale  crisis  of 
confidence  into  a  global  financial  panic.  As  the  intensity  of  the  crisis  became  evident, 
financial  intermediaries  restored  liquidity  buffers,  scaled  down  their  balance  sheets  and 
tightened lending conditions. Financial institutions dramatically reduced their exposure to the 
risks  that  they  had  imprudently  accumulated  during  the  phase  of  financial  euphoria. 
Collectively, they engaged in a large-scale process of “deleveraging”. Banks’ intermediation 
was reduced in the aggregate, and loans to companies were curtailed. The credit squeeze 
and the toll on the real economy set in.  
ECB policy actions in the financial crisis  
As I have said, the ECB has taken swift and forceful action to mitigate the effects of the crisis 
as events have unfolded. We were the first to act back in August 2007, temporarily providing 
on day 1 of the turmoil unlimited liquidity to preserve as normal as possible the functioning of 
the money market. 
Allow  me  to  stress  that  our  measures  together  with  the  support  measures  of  euro  area 
governments have yielded one very important result that sometimes seems to be overlooked: 
there has not been a single failure of a systematically relevant financial institution in the euro 
area. This is an achievement whose importance cannot be overstated.  
2 
 BIS Review 78/2009
The ECB’s policy actions have at all times been carefully calibrated to the structure of the 
euro  area  economy.  This  relates  in  particular  to  its  financial  structure,  which  differs 
profoundly from that of the United States, for example. 
The euro area has a largely bank-centred financial system, whereas that of the United States 
is primarily market-based. A few numbers illustrate these differences. At the end of 2007, the 
stock of outstanding bank loans to the private sector amounted to around 145% of GDP in 
the euro area. The corresponding proportion of bank loans to GDP in the United States was 
only 63%. This means that the banking sector is more than twice as important in the euro 
area as it is in the United States. It also means that to be effective, ECB policy must focus 
first and foremost on the banking sector.  
The  euro  area  financial  structure  I  have  just  described  provides  the  background  for  our 
policies. These policies are guided by our monetary policy strategy, a key element of which is 
the quantitative definition of price stability. We aim at an inflation rate of below, but close to, 
2% over the medium term. The precise quantification of our policy objective has proved an 
invaluable asset, a fail-safe mechanism against excessive swings in inflation expectations, 
downwards as much as upwards. Long-term inflation expectations in the euro area, whether 
based on surveys or extracted from financial indicators, have been exceptionally resistant to 
sudden  short-term  price  changes.  We  will  ensure  that  inflation  expectations  remain 
impervious to short-term changes in inflation, even in the face of sharply falling inflation. 
The  ECB’s  responses  to  the  financial  crisis  are  in  line  both  with  the  euro  area  financial 
structure and with our medium-term objective. Since the intensification of the financial crisis 
in  September  of  last  year  –  and  against  the  background  of  rapidly  receding  inflationary 
pressures  –,  we  have  taken  monetary  policy  measures  that  are  unprecedented  in  nature, 
scope and magnitude. These measures fall in two categories: first, conventional measures in 
the  form  of  interest  rate  changes;  second,  what  have  become  known  as  “non-standard” 
measures.  The  latter measures  taken  together  constitute  what  we  call  the  ECB’s  policy  of 
enhanced  credit  support.  These  are  specific  actions  we  have  taken  to  sustain  the  flow  of 
credit above and beyond what could be achieved through interest rate reductions alone.  
Interest rate action 
Before explaining in detail the core elements of our policy of enhanced credit support, I would 
like to talk briefly about interest rates – the conventional indicators of monetary policy. Since 
October of last year we have cut our key policy rate by a total of 325 basis points. It now 
stands at 1%, a historical low not only for the ECB but also for the national central banks that 
were its predecessors.  
Money market yields at longer than overnight maturity have fallen even more strongly than 
the policy rate. This is important because it means that a crucial element of the monetary 
policy transmission mechanism is intact. Borrowers in the euro area directly benefit from the 
low level of six-month and twelve-month money market rates because these are widely used 
by banks to set floating rate loans to households and companies. This is particularly true for 
Spain where floating rate loans are widespread, for example with respect to mortgage loans.  
Enhanced credit support  
Let me now turn to the exceptional policy actions that we have taken in response to the crisis 
–  the  so-called  “non-standard”  measures.  As  already  mentioned,  when  the  very  significant 
stress  in  interbank  markets  first  manifested  itself  in  August  2007,  the  ECB  immediately 
stepped into the breach and accommodated the temporarily elevated liquidity demand from 
the banks through a fixed rate operation with full allotment, providing €95 billion to the market 
within a few hours. Overnight lending of the same kind continued to be provided albeit with 
BIS Review 78/2009 
 3
lower  volumes  during  the  following  three  days.  So  we  can  say  that  the  ECB  was  the  first 
central bank in the crisis to engage in non-standard measures. 
Liquidity management measures 
When  in  mid-September  2008  interbank  trading  came  to  a  virtual  halt,  the  ECB  had  to 
engage in a new mode of liquidity provision. We started to provide refinancing well above the 
levels that banks had absorbed to fulfil their reserve requirements in normal times.  
Let me explain to you how and why we did this. There are three main building blocks to our 
new liquidity management approach. 
1)  Our  primary  concern  was  to  maintain  the  availability  of  credit  for  households  and 
companies at accessible rates. We significantly adapted our regular operations in the crisis. 
Since then, we have followed a new “fixed rate full allotment” tender procedure and we have 
significantly  expanded  the  maturity  of  our  operations.  Banks  have  been  granted  access  to 
essentially unlimited liquidity at our policy interest rate at maturities of up to six months. On 7 
May we decided to lengthen further the maturity of our refinancing operations, introducing a 
new one-year operation, the first of which will take place the day after tomorrow.  
To  appreciate  fully  what  these  changes  mean,  let  us  step  back  for  a  moment  and  look  at 
what  we  do  in  normal  times.  In  normal  times,  we  auction  a  given  amount  of  central  bank 
credit, mainly in refinancing operations with a one-week maturity, and let competition among 
bidders determine the interest rate at which that credit will become available to the banking 
system as a whole. This means that the liquidity injection is restrained by a policy decision. 
Last autumn, we changed that. As the demand for liquidity by individual institutions expanded 
abnormally  and  markets  dramatically  ceased  to  allocate  liquidity,  we  have  turned  that 
practice around. We have been determining the lending rate – at a very low level – and we 
stand ready to fill any shortage of liquidity that might occur at that interest rate for maturities 
of up to six months. This means that we currently act as a surrogate for the market in terms 
of both liquidity allocation and price-setting.  
2) The second building block of our new liquidity management approach is the list of assets 
that  we  take  as  collateral.  This  list  was  already  very  large  before  the  crisis,  but  we  have 
enlarged  it  even  further  and  now  accept  an  even  wider  range  of  securities  as  collateral. 
Government  securities account  for  only  44%  of  the  nominal  value  of  securities  on  the  list. 
The  rest  are  private  securities.  In  contrast  to  many  other  central  banks,  the  ECB  already 
intermediated private paper before the crisis and we have even strengthened this aspect in 
the crisis by accepting an even wider range of private paper.  
The  total  value  of  these  eligible  securities  is  currently  €12.2  trillion,  equivalent  to  130%  of 
GDP in the euro area. This very ample eligibility of collateral has dramatically eased banks’ 
liquidity constraints during the crisis and, ultimately, it has encouraged them to extend new 
credit or continue rolling over maturing loans. 
3)  The  first  two  building  blocks  offer  unlimited  refinancing  against  a  very  wide  range  of 
collateral.  But  they  can  only  reach  the  financial  system  if  they  are  coupled  with  the  third 
building block, namely the very large number of counterparties that have always been able to 
take part in our refinancing operations. Even before the crisis, 1,700 counterparties fulfilled 
all  relevant  criteria.  This  number  was  higher  at  the  time  than  for  the  other  major  central 
banks.  Following  the  changes  to  our  operational  framework  in  October  2008,  this  number 
rose even further. 
Our  measures  to  safeguard  the  banking  system’s  access  to  liquidity  have  resulted  in  a 
considerable expansion of the Eurosystem’s balance sheet, which reached a peak of 19% of 
GDP at the height of the crisis around the turn of the year. Since then, we have seen liquidity 
flows moving back from our balance sheet to the money market. This is a sign of improving 
4 
 BIS Review 78/2009
confidence  and  more  favourable  conditions.  We  therefore  see  some  indication  that  the 
functioning of the money market is improving. 
Covered bond purchases 
Another  unconventional  element  was  added  in  May:  outright  purchases  of  covered  bonds. 
This  measure  complements  the  liquidity  management  measures  I  have  just  described. 
Covered bonds are debt securities issued by banks, which give them access to funding of a 
longer-term nature than the ECB’s refinancing operations. Covered bonds thus allow banks 
to manage the maturity mismatch between their assets and liabilities. 
Why did we decide to engage in purchases in this particular asset class? Several reasons 
guided our decision. 
First, as I have already stressed, in the euro area measures to support the flow of credit to 
the  non-financial  sector  need  to  operate  first  and  foremost  through  banks.  Covered  bonds 
were  a  major  source  of  funds  for  banks  in  the  euro  area  before  the  intensification  of  the 
financial  crisis  last  autumn,  when  the  covered  bonds  market  virtually  shut  down.  The 
Governing  Council  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  Eurosystem  could  help  in  reviving  this 
market,  in  terms  of  liquidity,  issuance  and  spreads,  by  engaging  in  outright  purchases  of 
covered  bonds.  Already  after  the  announcement  of  7  May,  and  before  we  carried  out  any 
purchase,  there  has  been  a  wave  of  new  issuances  of  covered  bonds  and  a  degree  of 
compression of spreads. This is true in particular for Spanish banks, which traditionally have 
been significant issuers, but also for banks from countries where covered bonds were much 
less widespread. The effects on liquidity are expected to take place when the actual program 
will be conducted. Let me stress that our purchases – like all our other policies – target the 
euro  area  as  a  whole  and  not  any  particular  country.  Our  purchases  will  benefit  not  only 
banks  that  issue  covered  bonds  but  also  banks  that  are  holding  these  assets.  More 
importantly, beyond banks, our purchases will benefit the real economy, which obtains funds 
through the banks. 
Second,  covered  bonds  are  different  in  nature  from  the  variety  of  asset-backed  securities 
that had become so popular before turning sour with the financial crisis. Importantly, covered 
bonds do not involve a transfer of the credit risk of the underlying assets from the issuer to 
the investor. The credit risk stays with the originator, preserving the incentives for prudent 
credit  risk  evaluation  and  monitoring.  We  could  thus  say  that  covered  bonds  are  incentive 
compatible while many asset-backed securities were not, at least in the way the concept was 
implemented before the crisis. In the years preceding the crisis, banks tended to favour the 
issuance of asset-backed securities over the issuance of covered bonds, because this form 
of finance appeared cheaper in an environment characterised by heavy underpricing of credit 
risk.  Given  that  the  financial  crisis  clearly  exposed  the  dire  consequences  of  this 
underpricing,  the  usefulness  of  more  conservative  asset  classes  such  as  covered  bonds, 
which have proved to be safe assets over time is obvious. I believe that covered bonds and 
asset-backed securities will both contribute to a thriving capital market, each catering for a 
different set of investors and issuers. 
Last  but  not  least,  the  ECB’s  measures  for  enhanced  credit  support  were  designed  in  full 
respect of the euro area macroeconomic framework, which is founded on a clear division of 
tasks  and  policy  responsibilities  between  the  ECB  and  the  national  authorities.  Financial 
support  measures  potentially  involving  a  significant  transfer  of  credit  risk  from  financial 
institutions  to  the  taxpayer  clearly  fall  into  the  realm  of  fiscal  policy.  The  decided  outright 
purchases of covered bonds are fully consistent with this fundamental principle. While they 
are  expected  to  be  effective  in  supporting  credit,  these  purchases  do  not  burden  the 
Eurosystem with excessive credit risk and therefore do not limit our flexibility in the conduct 
of monetary policy. 
BIS Review 78/2009 
 5
Before  concluding,  allow  me  a  few  words  on  the  challenges  facing  the  Spanish  economy. 
Over the last decade the Spanish economy has shown a very strong performance in terms of 
output and in particular employment growth. Spain disposes of some world-class companies 
in important sectors including energy, communications and banking. Spain has been hard hit 
by  the  reassessment  of  risks  in  the  financial  sector  and  the  overall  change  in  economic 
sentiment  since  the  intensification  of  the  global  crisis  last  autumn.  The  Spanish  economy 
also  faces  some  specific  challenges,  stemming  in  part  from  macroeconomic  imbalances 
which have developed over many years and the related sharp reversal of the housing and 
construction boom. For many years strong growth in domestic demand led to relatively high 
inflation. The persistent inflation and labour cost differential with the average of the euro area 
during  the  expansion  has  hampered  competitiveness  which  will  have  to  be  regained.  The 
present  situation  suggests  a  need  for  labour  market  reform  and  wage  moderation  in 
particular  by  discontinuing  wage  indexation.  Appropriate  structural  reforms  will  support  a 
sustainable  economic  upswing  and  also  the  consolidation of  public  finances,  which  will  be 
crucial not only in Spain but in the entire euro area, for confidence to be restored. 
Conclusions  
As  I  noted  at  the  beginning  of  this  speech,  the  current  environment  is  clearly  much  more 
challenging  than  it  was  five  years  ago.  At  that  time  the  question  was  whether  economic 
recovery in the euro area was sufficiently robust. Currently, we are still in the downturn phase 
– a downturn that globally is proving to be the deepest since the Second World War. While 
there are first signs that the pace of economic weakening is decelerating, we must remain 
alert.  We  are  in  uncharted  waters,  and  there  are  still  risks  of  a  sudden  emergence  of 
unexpected financial turbulence. 
This being said, the overarching aim must be to restore confidence, to take measures that 
will solidly anchor the expectations of households and companies, and to lay the groundwork 
for a return to sustainable prosperity.  
This calls for a bold yet solidly grounded response. We must maintain the balance between 
the need to take immediate action commensurate with the gravity of today’s situation, and 
the equally undeniable obligation to return to a path that is sustainable in the medium term.  
The ECB for its part will do all that is necessary to continue to be a very solid and reliable 
anchor of stability and confidence in these challenging times. 
I thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS Review 78/2009
