Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Developing a new generation of savers with the 
program "Banking on Your Future" 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas), at the 16th Anniversary of the Central Bank of the Philippines, 
Manila, 3 July 2009. 
 Former  BSP  Governor  Gabriel  Singson,  Monetary  Board  Members,  our  partners  from  the 
banking community, our guests from the Aurora A. Quezon Elementary School, fellow central 
bankers, members of the media, special guests, good afternoon. 
On behalf of the Monetary Board, I thank all of you for joining us today as we celebrate the 
16th anniversary of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas. With the signing of our agreements this 
afternoon, we are on track to institutionalize our economic and financial education program 
for Filipino children.  
This program is important to us. We at the Bangko Sentral believe that persons literate in 
basic  economic  and  financial  concepts  stand  to  benefit  more  from  opportunities  that 
development brings. And we believe that our elementary education system is the best place 
to start.  
With our Memorandum of Agreement with the Department of Education, lessons on saving 
and  money  management  have  been  incorporated  into  the  curriculum  of  12  million  public 
elementary students where 90% of our elementary pupils study, beginning schoolyear 2008-
2009. Last week, the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas signed a Memorandum of Agreement with 
the Coordinating Council of Public Educators Association also for the inclusion of economic 
and financial concepts in private elementary school curriculum.  
Today, the launching of this savings promotion program "Banking on Your Future" brings the 
banking sector fully on board our financial education program for millions of Filipino children. 
Actually, we are looking at generating synergies from this program. We believe that saving 
as a habit can best be developed among schoolchildren who wield a strong influence in their 
homes  and  communities.  Through  the  children,  therefore,  we  hope  to  reach  out  to  their 
parents, including the unbanked. 
Equally important, we believe that informed Filipinos make for better partners in ensuring that 
we  have  a  sound  banking  system  and  a  more  efficient  transmission  mechanism  for  our 
monetary  policy  actions.  They  also  wise  up  to  financial  scams.  In  the  process,  they  help 
sustain balanced economic growth. This is the philosophy that underpins our economic and 
financial education program. We all know how resilient we Filipinos are. Given the right tools, 
there is much more we can do. 
The program “Banking on your Future” is therefore an important component of our economic 
and  financial  education  program.  The  support  of  the  Banking  Sector  for  this  program  is 
essential as you are the practitioners and therefore the ideal mentors to work with the youth 
regarding financial education. The key is knowledge sharing. 
We do look forward to banks and its branches to get involved in their neighbor elementary 
schools to mount parallel financial education activities and to reward best performing schools 
and students with prizes including savings account. The idea is to make it hip and cool for 
our students to have savings account that they can nurture and grow. This way, they develop 
the habit of saving on a regular basis.  
Aasahan  po  nang  ating  mga  kabataan  ang  programang  ito,  kasama  na  ang  ating  mga 
bisitang mag-aaral mula sa Aurora A. Quezon Elementary School. There are about 38,000 
BIS Review 84/2009 
 1
elementary schools there are about 7,000 bank offices and branches. I hope we can cover 
most, if not all of these schools.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen.  The  16th  anniversary  of  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  also 
coincides with the celebration of National Savings Consciousness Week. For this year, our 
theme is particularly appropriate: “Kinabukasan Siguruhin, Pag-iimpok Ugaliin.”  
It is only fitting therefore that together we launch the program “Banking on Your Future” on 
this auspicious day. 
Mabuhay ang Philippine Banking Sector! Mabuhay ating mga kabataan!  
Maraming salamat po sa inyong lahat. 
2 
 BIS Review 84/2009
