Jan F Qvigstad: The global economic crisis and its impact on Sovereign 
Wealth Funds – the example of Norway 
Speech by Mr Jan F Qvigstad, Deputy Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), 
at a meeting for financial sector representatives in Geneva hosted by the Royal Norwegian 
Embassy, Geneva, 11 May 2009. 
The text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. 
 Introduction 
Ambassador, Ladies and Gentlemen 
First, let me thank you for inviting me to this seminar for a discussion on the impact of the 
global economic crisis on sovereign wealth funds. 
Since I am the deputy governor of a central bank that manages one of the large sovereign 
wealth funds, I will use the Norwegian Government Pension Fund – Global as an example in 
my presentation.  
The financial and economic crisis 
What we are experiencing at this time is the deepest downturn in the world economy in the 
postwar period. The global economy will contract in 2009 for the first time in over 60 years. 
What is happening now is more than a normal fluctuation in the business cycle. The world is 
facing  a  crisis  of  confidence,  with  faltering  faith  in  the  future  and  a  loss  of  confidence  in 
banks, counterparties and contractual partners.  
The first signs of an emerging crisis in financial markets came into evidence already in early 
2007, when several financial institutions in the US came under stress. It intensified in August 
the same year, with the bankruptcies of the British bank, Northern Rock, and troubled banks 
in Denmark and Germany. On 15 September 2008, the crisis took a new and dramatic turn 
when  Lehman  Brothers  filed  for  bankruptcy.  The  next  day,  money  markets  seized  up. 
Confidence  between  banks  had  been  compromised.  Liquidity  dried  up,  interest  rates  rose 
sharply and equity prices fell. Exchange rate volatility – the daily fluctuations in the exchange 
rate – showed a marked rise. Bond markets in turn shut down. In the days and weeks that 
followed, banks tightened credit standards on new loans to households and enterprises.  
At  that  time,  global  economic  growth  was  already  slowing,  but  the  situation  deteriorated 
significantly  throughout  the  last  few  months  of  2008.  The  turnaround  hit  hard,  with 
synchronised effects on virtually all financial and goods and services markets, not only in the 
US but also in Europe, Asia, Latin America and Oceania. For a long period there were hopes 
that growth in China and other emerging market economies would hold up. But they are also 
severely affected by the crisis.  
During  the  year,  we  saw  a  bank,  credit  and  liquidity  crisis  in  the  financial  system  which 
gradually came to encompass a crisis in the real economy.  
The  contraction  in  the  world  economy  has  resulted  in  a  substantial  decline  in  traditional 
exports, and global trade has fallen markedly since autumn last year.  
The global downturn also led to a marked fall in prices for oil and other commodities through 
autumn 2008. For Norway and other countries that are dependent on exports of oil, gas and 
other commodities, government revenues and current account surpluses are reduced. This 
will most likely curb the growth of sovereign wealth funds in the near-term future. 
BIS Review 58/2009 
 1
The financial crisis dealt a heavy blow to investors all over the world, as global equity prices 
plummeted. International stock exchanges lost more of their value in 2008 than in any other 
single year in recent history. Absolute results, especially with regard to equities, were highly 
abnormal.  
An investor such as the Government Pension Fund – Global will possibly earn more in the 
long term because of wide fluctuations in equity values. Many investors have suffered losses 
on equities. As a result of this experience, required returns will be higher in the future. 
For investments in fixed income markets, the picture is more varied. The crisis resulted in 
large  and  unexpected  fluctuations  in  various  parts  of  the  fixed  income  market.  While 
government  bonds  in  some  countries  were  regarded  as  “safe  havens”,  with  a  subsequent 
surge in prices, segments of the fixed income market were hit by higher credit premiums and 
dwindling liquidity. 
The crisis presented major challenges for risk management. Historical relationships between 
risk  factors  collapsed,  and  liquidity  was  greatly  reduced  in  most  markets.  Market  volatility 
was very high in both equity and fixed income markets, and market movements were on par 
with the most volatile periods of the past century. 
Clearly, these adverse developments have affected many sovereign wealth funds (SWFs) in 
the same way as they have affected other investors. It is, however, difficult to determine how 
strong the impact has been as available information about individual SWFs and their inflows, 
outflows, return and market values vary. 
Let me therefore use the Norwegian Government Pension Fund – Global as an example. As 
you  can  see  from  this  chart,  the  Norwegian  fund  is  among  the  largest  sovereign  wealth 
funds, with total assets of some USD 350 billion at end-2008.  
The Norwegian Government Pension Fund – Global 
Before  I  talk  about  the  Fund’s  performance  last  year,  please  allow  me  to  explain  the 
principles and strategies underlying the Fund. 
The Norwegian oil era started some 40 years ago, when oil was first discovered in the North 
Sea.  Since  then,  the  petroleum  sector  has  grown  to  become  an  important  part  of  our 
economy.  Today,  petroleum  accounts  for  approximately  25  per  cent  of  Norway’s  gross 
domestic product (GDP) and nearly 50 per cent of total exports. 
Norway’s total petroleum production will remain high for many years to come, even though 
production of oil is now declining after peaking around the turn of the millennium. 
The economic challenges posed by petroleum extraction were widely recognised early on. 
As early as in 1974, the Norwegian parliament discussed these challenges in depth, and in 
the  early  1980s,  the  idea  of  a  fund  that  would  stabilise  petroleum  revenue  spending  was 
launched. Due to domestic economic turmoil and financial crisis in the late 1980s and early 
1990s, it took time before the idea of a fund was turned into actual savings.  
The first allocation – some USD 400 million – was not made until 1996. Since then, the Fund 
has grown rapidly in size. As you have already seen, the Fund’s assets are currently valued 
at around USD 350 billion. The Fund is expected to grow further in coming years, and may 
double in 5-10 years. 
The Fund was established as a tool to support prudent management of Norway’s petroleum 
wealth. One purpose is to shield the non-oil economy from price fluctuations.  
The  Fund  is  also  a  long-term  savings  instrument.  It  will  help  to  cope  with  future  financial 
commitments linked to an ageing population. Accumulation of capital in the Fund reflects the 
depletion of a non-renewable resource, which is exchanged for financial assets through the 
Fund’s  investments.  By  setting  up  the  Fund,  it  became  possible  to  establish  a  path  for 
2 
 BIS Review 58/2009
production of oil and gas that is independent of the profile for petroleum revenue spending. 
The  alternative  to  a  fund  would  have  been  to  directly  regulate  production  by  putting  a 
conservative upper limit on annual extraction. 
Furthermore, to effectively shield the non-oil economy, and to make sure that private sector 
investment decisions could be made independently of the public sector’s saving of petroleum 
wealth,  the  Fund  is  only  invested  abroad.  This  also  enhances  the  expected  return  on 
government wealth and contributes to diversification of risk. 
The Fund is by law fully integrated with the government budget, and the same priorities are 
imposed on spending from the Fund as on any other government spending. This means that 
the  entire  petroleum  revenues  are  transferred  to  the  Fund.  Then,  as  part  of  the  budget 
resolution, the Norwegian parliament decides on an annual transfer from the Fund to cover 
the government budget deficit. This procedure effectively prohibits use of the capital in the 
Fund for purposes not considered sufficiently important to be prioritised in the regular budget 
process. 
In 2001, the Norwegian parliament approved new fiscal policy guidelines stipulating that the 
annual transfer from the Fund to the fiscal budget – that is annual spending of oil money – 
should  correspond  to  the  expected  real  return  on  the  Fund.  The  expected  real  return  is 
estimated  at  4  per  cent.  The  point  of  reference  for  the  spending  rule  is  a  normal  cyclical 
situation. In the event of particularly high capacity utilisation, spending should be lower than 
4 per cent, whereas in a cyclical downturn, somewhat higher spending may be appropriate. 
The governance structure is based on a clear division of responsibilities between the political 
authorities and the operational management.  
• 
The Ministry of Finance is the owner of the Fund. The Ministry defines the mandate 
and monitors and evaluates performance. Key changes to investment guidelines are 
presented to the Norwegian parliament before implementation.  
The  management  of  the  Fund  is  delegated  to  Norges  Bank.  The  Bank’s  task  is  to 
implement the investment strategy and exercise ownership rights. Norges Bank also 
provides professional advice to the Ministry on investment strategies. 
 Norges Bank has built an organisation with emphasis on investment returns and based on 
three fundamental principles: Accountability, transparency and professional standards. 
Norges  Bank  manages  parts  of  the  funds  internally,  while  parts  are  managed  by  external 
managers appointed by the Bank on a commercial basis.  
Transparency  and  disclosure  of  information  are  key  features  of  the  Fund.  All  investment 
principles and guidelines as well as strategic advice and second opinion reports are made 
public.  We  publish  quarterly  reports  on  Fund  performance,  which  are  presented  at  press 
conferences. The Fund’s annual report discloses a list of every single investment held at the 
end  of  the  year,  and  also  provides  an  overview  of  corporate  governance  work,  including 
voting at general meetings.  
Initially,  transparency  was  aimed  at  building  confidence  among  Norwegians,  but  we  have 
also seen that our policy of transparency is highly appreciated internationally. 
The Fund’s investment strategy is to maximise financial return with moderate risk. The long-
term  strategic  allocation  is  defined  in  terms  of  a  benchmark  portfolio,  which  consists  of 
equities  and  fixed  income  instruments.  Equities  account  for  60  per  cent  of  the  Fund's 
strategic benchmark portfolio, while fixed income instruments account for 40 per cent.  
Last year, the Ministry decided that the Fund should prepare the ground for investing in real 
estate at 5 per cent of the strategic benchmark portfolio. In time, this may reduce the fixed 
income share to 35 per cent. 
Under the Fund’s investment strategy, more equities are purchased when equity prices fall 
and  fewer  when  prices  rise.  Thus,  the  Fund  purchased  a  large  volume  of  equities  in  the 
BIS Review 58/2009 
 3
period 2001-2003 and is buying a considerable volume now. Of the equities now held, 40 per 
cent were acquired in 2008 when prices were falling. The Fund currently owns a little more 
than  1¼  per  cent  of  listed  European  equities, and  the  Fund’s  average  ownership  share  in 
international  equity  markets  was  ¾  per  cent  at  the  turn  of  the  year,  with  allocations  to 
equities accounting for close to 50 per cent at that time. 
The Government Pension Fund – Global is invested in almost 7900 equities and bonds from 
2200 different issuers. Although the Fund is well diversified, its size means that it will have 
large individual positions in capital markets.  
The largest equity holdings include multinational companies like Royal Dutch Shell, Nestlé, 
BP, Exxon Mobil Corporation and Novartis, to name a few.  
Since summer 2008, the Ministry of Finance has allowed the Fund to hold up to 10 per cent 
of a company’s shares. At end-2008, the largest ownership interests were in British Mondi 
(8.7 per cent), Australian Babcock & Brown Infrastructure Group (7.8 per cent) and Finnish 
UPM-Kymmene (5.8 per cent).  
In bond markets, the largest issuers are sovereign states. The Fund will therefore normally 
have large holdings of government debt. The Fund’s average share of market capitalisation 
in fixed income markets at the end of 2008 was around ½ per cent. 
The Fund has a longer investment horizon than the vast majority of other market participants. 
The important question is therefore how sound today’s investments prove to be in the long 
term. 
The government now owns a fair share of the global business sector. This represents real 
value that will provide a return reflecting both global economic growth and the risk related to 
fluctuations in equity prices. 
Active ownership 
Active  ownership  has  also  become  an  important  part  of  Norges  Bank’s  investment 
operations.  The  purpose  is  to  help  safeguard  financial  wealth  for  future  generations  by 
promoting  good  corporate  governance  and  encouraging  high  ethical,  social  and 
environmental standards at investee companies. 
As a shareholder in almost 7 900 companies, Norges Bank has both rights and obligations in 
relation to these companies. Our long time horizon exposes us to developments in markets 
traditionally of less concern to more short-term investors.  
We  use  our  position  as  a  shareholder  to  address  topics  relating  to  traditional  shareholder 
rights,  such  as  the  right  to  equal  treatment  and  influence.  We  also  focus  on  topics  that 
influence  the  development  and  regulation  of  companies’  input  factors  –  both  regarding 
human resources such as labour, in particular children’s rights, and natural resources such 
as access to clean water and clean air. 
Norges  Bank’s  Executive  Board  has  established  a  set  of  principles  and  a  strategy  for  the 
exercise  of  ownership  rights.  Openness  and  transparency  are  key  principles  in  the 
management  of  the  Government  Pension  Fund  –  Global,  and  we  aim  to  be  as  open  as 
possible about our active ownership work. 
Our  active  ownership  is  practised  in  a  number  of  different  ways:  through  the  exercise  of 
voting  rights,  through  dialogue  and  engagement  with  individual  companies,  through 
collaboration  with  other  investors,  through  submissions  to  the  regulatory  authorities,  and 
through research and public communication. We aim to vote at all general meetings of the 
companies  in  which  the  Fund  has  shares.  We  voted  on  68  724  items  at  7  871  general 
meetings in 2008. 
4 
 BIS Review 58/2009
The impact of the crisis on the Norwegian Fund 
The Norwegian Fund has been hard hit by the crisis. In 2008, the total return on the Fund 
was a negative 23 per cent, the weakest in the Fund’s history. There was a negative return of 
41 per cent on the equity portfolio, while the return on the fixed income portfolio was close to 
zero. The real rate of return after costs has been 1 per cent since 1998. This is well below 
the assumed long-term return of 4 per cent. 
The negative return reduced the value of the Fund by nearly USD 100 billion. At the same 
time, new capital of close to USD 60 billion was transferred to the Fund during the year, the 
largest  annual  inflow  in  the  Fund’s  history.  Furthermore,  a  weaker  krone  in  relation  to  the 
currencies in which the Fund is invested increased the Fund’s value by some USD 80 billion.  
Consequently, in spite of the negative return, the Fund’s market value increased by nearly 
USD 40 billion during the year. 
The market value of the Pension Fund was around USD 350 billion (NOK 2 275 billion) at the 
end of 2008. 
The  financial  crisis  is  having  a  broad  impact,  and  most  forms  of  investment  are  falling  in 
value. Other government assets, such as shareholdings in domestic industries and subsea 
resources  in  the  North  Sea  have  also  fallen  sharply  in  value,  at  market  prices.  For  large 
investors,  there  have  been  few  places  to  hide  from  the  panic  that  has  gripped  financial 
markets.  Prices  for  government  bonds, particularly German and US bonds, rose last year, 
but yields are now very low and will provide little protection when inflation eventually picks up 
again. For households, housing wealth has also declined since summer of 2007 to the end of 
2008. The same probably applies to the value of infrastructure investments.  
After a little more than 10 years of experience, the Norwegian Fund has not reaped a risk 
premium in equity market as we had expected.  
The return generated by Norges Bank’s investment management in 2008 was 3.4 per cent 
lower  than  the  benchmark  portfolio  used  as  performance  measure.  This  is  considerably 
weaker than might have been expected in light of our investment strategy, which relies on a 
large number of small, independent positions. 
In the period since 1998, the Fund has recorded a cumulative annual excess return of 0.04 
percentage point lower than the return on the benchmark portfolio defined by the Ministry of 
Finance.  Norges  Bank’s  aim  is  to  generate  added  value  through  our  investment  choices. 
After many years of high performance, the Fund is now right back where it started.  
The Fund’s underperformance and the fall in overall return can largely be attributed to the 
financial crisis. Assessment of the results of our active choices should, in our opinion, also 
take  into  account  the  long-term  perspective  on  which  the  Fund’s  investment  strategy  is 
based. 
Norges Bank’s investment results since 1998 are different for the two asset classes equities 
and fixed income instruments. 
Although  active  equity  management  generated  negative  results  in  2008,  these  were  well 
within the limits predicted by our risk models for any one year. However, since the beginning 
the  annual  excess  return  on  equities  has  been  close  to  ½  percentage  point.  We  have 
established  an  equity  management  strategy  that  seems  to  be  fairly  robust  to  market 
fluctuations  and  that  has,  as  we  have  seen,  generated  solid  returns  viewed  over  a  longer 
period. 
Developments in the Fund’s fixed income portfolio have followed a different path. The annual 
return on the actual portfolio was ½ percentage point lower than the return on the benchmark 
portfolio.  
The results were not due to investment in high-risk fixed income instruments. At the end of 
2008, as much as 64 per cent of the bonds in the Fund’s fixed income portfolio had the best 
BIS Review 58/2009 
 5
credit rating, AAA, 20 per cent had the second best, AA, while ten per cent were rated A. 
Five per cent of bonds were rated BBB. Only one per cent of the fixed income portfolio has a 
lower credit rating. Realised losses as a result of bankruptcies have been low. 
How then can an excess return become negative from one year to the next? 
The  Fund’s  fixed  income  portfolio  is  well  diversified  across  different  types  of  bonds  and 
different regions and the active strategies had low correlation in normal markets. However, 
the  financial  crisis  revealed  that  these  strategies  were  exposed  to  more  underlying, 
systematic  risk.  Correlation  was  not  expected  to  be  high  between  investments  in,  for 
example,  Japanese  inflation-indexed  government  bonds,  bonds  issued  by  international 
organisations  such  as  the  European  Investment  Bank,  European  covered  bonds  and  US 
mortgage-backed bonds. 
These  experiences  and  the  abrupt  turnaround  in  market  liquidity  suggest  that  active 
management of the fixed income portfolio should be limited and measured on the basis of a 
number of criteria, as laid down by Norges Bank’s Executive Board. 
The  Fund  currently  has  extensive  holdings  of  bonds  that  are  difficult  to  trade  in  today’s 
market. Realised losses related to these investments have, as mentioned above, have been 
limited. The flipside of large book losses is that this portfolio has a high return, reflecting not 
only the increase in credit risk but also high liquidity premiums and fears and uncertainty in 
the market. The return, measured as the difference in the effective interest rate between the 
actual portfolio and the benchmark portfolio, is now close to two percentage points. 
History  has  seen  a  number  of  deep  financial  crises,  and  market  conditions  will  return  to 
normal in time.  
The final results of the management of the Fund’s fixed income portfolio since the beginning 
of the financial crisis cannot be deduced from the quarterly results while the crisis is at its 
peak. Values are not lost as long as borrowers fulfil their obligations. The Fund is prepared to 
retain  ownership  of  a  large  volume  of  bond  holdings  until  they  mature  in  a  few  years. 
Moreover, unless the economic outlook goes from bad to considerably worse, the Fund will 
record a substantial excess return in the years ahead. 
Conclusion 
The Norwegian Pension Fund has been hard hit by the crisis. Norges Bank’s management 
results  in  2008  were  weak  in  both  absolute  and  relative  terms.  Relative  returns  were 
significantly worse than might have been expected based on the investment strategy chosen. 
In the management of the fixed income portfolio, the crisis in the financial system revealed 
that risk exposure in the various mandates was not sufficiently independent. We also learnt 
that we must ensure clear responsibilities and limits to delegation. 
The fund is a long-term savings plan and capable of riding out large market swings. This is 
the very foundation of the investment strategy with its high allocation to equities. Our ability 
to adhere to this strategy in a critical phase – even if this should last some time – is crucial if 
the  Fund  is  to  deliver  the  returns  we  expect  in  the  longer  term.  Norges  Bank’s  Executive 
Board  has  reinforced  its  oversight  of  the  Bank’s  investment  management.  It  has  issued  a 
new  mandate 
introduces 
additional limits in the risk profile for investment management.  
As with the Fund’s long-term investment strategy based on active management and active 
ownership, the results of our operational management of the Fund need to be measured over 
time. To that extent, we need to maintain an incentive structure in order to retain and build 
long-term competence. We also need to ensure the quality of the investment management. 
In  our  view,  the  search  for  excess  return  has  had  a  strong  disciplinary  effect  on  the 
organisation. 
investment  management  responsibility  and 
that  delegates 
6 
 BIS Review 58/2009
I am confident that the operation we have built up will deliver good results in the long term. 
Thank you for your attention! 
 
    BIS Review 58/2009 
 7
    8 
 BIS Review 58/2009
    BIS Review 58/2009 
 9
    10 
 BIS Review 58/2009
    BIS Review 58/2009 
 11
    12 
 BIS Review 58/2009
    BIS Review 58/2009 
 13
    14 
 BIS Review 58/2009
    BIS Review 58/2009 
 15
    16 
 BIS Review 58/2009
    BIS Review 58/2009 
 17
 18 
 BIS Review 58/2009
