European Central Bank: Press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank 
and Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 
7 May 2009. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I are very pleased to welcome you to today’s 
press conference. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing 
Council, which was also attended by Commissioner Almunia.  
On the basis of its regular economic and monetary analyses, the Governing Council decided 
to reduce the interest rate on the main refinancing operations of the Eurosystem by a further 
25 basis points and the rate on the marginal lending facility by 50 basis points, to 1.00% and 
1.75% respectively. The interest rate on the deposit facility will remain unchanged at 0.25%. 
This decision brings the total reduction in the interest rate on the main refinancing operations 
of the Eurosystem since 8 October 2008 to 325 basis points.  
Current key ECB interest rates are appropriate taking into account all available information 
and analysis. In addition to the reductions in interest rates, the Governing Council decided 
today  to  proceed  with  its  enhanced  credit  support  approach.  In  continuity  and  consistency 
with the operations we have undertaken since October 2008, and in recognition of the central 
role  played  by  the  banking  system  in  financing  the  euro  area  economy,  we  will  conduct 
liquidity-providing  longer-term  refinancing  operations  with  a  maturity  of  12  months.  The 
operations will be conducted as fixed rate tender procedures with full allotment. The rate for 
the first of these operations, to be announced on 23 June 2009, will be the rate on the main 
refinancing operations at that time. Subsequently, the fixed rate may include a premium to 
the rate on the main refinancing operations, depending on the circumstances at the time.  
The  Governing  Council  has  decided  in  principle  that  the  Eurosystem  will  purchase  euro-
denominated  covered  bonds  issued  in  the  euro  area.  The  detailed  modalities  will  be 
announced after the Governing Council meeting of 4 June 2009.  
Furthermore,  the  Governing  Council  has  decided  that  the  European  Investment  Bank  will 
become an eligible counterparty in the Eurosystem’s monetary policy operations with effect 
from 8 July 2009 and under the same conditions as any other counterparty. 
These  decisions  have  been  taken  to  promote  the  ongoing  decline  in  money  market  term 
rates, to encourage banks to maintain and expand their lending to clients, to help to improve 
market  liquidity  in  important  segments  of  the  private  debt  security  market,  and  to  ease 
funding conditions for banks and enterprises. 
Today’s decisions take into account the expectation that price developments will continue to 
be dampened by the substantial past fall in commodity prices and the marked weakening of 
economic  activity  in  the  euro  area  and  globally.  The  latest  economic  data  and  survey 
information suggest tentative signs of a stabilisation at very low levels, after a first quarter 
which was significantly weaker than expected. The world economy, including the euro area, 
is  still  undergoing  a  severe  downturn,  with  the  prospect  of  both  external  and  domestic 
demand remaining very weak over 2009 before gradually recovering in the course of 2010. 
This  assessment  incorporates  a  number  of  adverse  developments  which  are  likely  to 
materialise over the coming months, such as a further deterioration in labour markets. At the 
same  time,  available  indicators  of  inflation  expectations  over  the  medium  to  longer  term 
remain firmly anchored in line with the Governing Council’s aim of keeping inflation rates at 
levels below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. The outcome of the monetary analysis 
confirms that inflationary pressure has been diminishing, as money and credit growth have 
further decelerated in recent months. Against the background of these developments, after 
BIS Review 56/2009 
 1
today’s decisions we expect price stability to be maintained over the medium term, thereby 
supporting the purchasing power of euro area households. 
Let  me  now  explain  our  assessment  in  some  more  detail,  starting  with  the  economic 
analysis. Reflecting the impact of the financial market turmoil, economic activity continued to 
weaken in the euro area in the course of the first quarter of 2009, in parallel with the ongoing 
downturn  in  the  world  economy.  This  weakening  in  the  first  quarter  appears  to  have  been 
significantly more pronounced than projected in March. More recently, there have been some 
tentative signs in survey data of a stabilisation, albeit at very low levels. Overall, economic 
activity is likely to be very weak for the remainder of this year, before gradually recovering in 
the course of 2010. In particular, the substantial fall in commodity prices since the summer of 
2008  is  supporting  real  disposable  income  and  thus  consumption.  In  addition,  external  as 
well  as  domestic  demand  should  increasingly  benefit  from  the  effects  of  the  significant 
macroeconomic stimulus under way as well as from the measures taken so far to restore the 
functioning of the financial system both inside and outside the euro area.  
Taking  all  these  measures  and  their  effects  into  account,  as  well  as  the  pronouncedly 
negative growth in the first quarter of this year and the most recently published forecasts by 
public institutions, the risks to this outlook remain broadly balanced. On the downside, there 
are concerns that the turmoil in financial markets could have a stronger impact on the real 
economy,  as  well  as  that  protectionist  pressures  could  intensify  and  that  there  could  be 
adverse developments in the world economy stemming from a disorderly correction of global 
imbalances. At the same time, there may be stronger than anticipated positive effects due to 
the decrease in commodity prices and to the policy measures taken.  
Annual HICP inflation was, according to Eurostat’s flash estimate, 0.6% in April, unchanged 
from  March.  As  explained  on  earlier  occasions,  the  decline  in  inflation  since  last  summer 
primarily reflects the sharp fall in global commodity prices over this period. Moreover, signs 
of a more broad-based reduction in inflationary pressure are increasingly emerging. Looking 
ahead, base effects stemming from past energy price movements will play a significant role 
in  the  shorter-term  dynamics  of  the  HICP.  Accordingly,  we  expect  to  see  headline  annual 
inflation rates declining further and temporarily remaining at negative levels for some months 
around  mid-year.  Thereafter,  annual  inflation  rates  are  expected  to  increase  again.  Such 
short-term dynamics are, however, not relevant from a monetary policy perspective. Looking 
further  ahead,  HICP  inflation  is  likely  to  remain  positive  and  below  2%  in  2010,  with  price 
developments  being  dampened  by  ongoing  sluggish  demand  in  the  euro  area  and 
elsewhere.  Available  indicators  of  inflation  expectations  over  the  medium  to  longer  term 
remain firmly anchored in line with the Governing Council’s aim of keeping inflation rates at 
levels below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. 
The risks surrounding this outlook are broadly balanced. They relate in particular to the risks 
to the outlook for economic activity as well as to risks to commodity prices. 
Turning to the monetary analysis, the latest data confirm the continued deceleration in the 
pace  of  underlying  monetary  expansion.  This  is  signalled,  for  instance,  by  the  concurrent 
further declines in the annual growth rates of M3 to 5.1% and of loans to the private sector to 
3.2%. The deceleration supports the assessment of diminishing inflationary pressures in the 
medium term.  
Month-on-month developments in M3 and its components have remained volatile, with data 
for  March  showing  a  contraction  in  most  of  the  respective  outstanding  amounts.  This  may 
partly reflect market participants’ investment responses to the past reduction in the key ECB 
interest  rates,  which  has  reduced  the  remuneration  of  short-term  deposits  and  marketable 
instruments and fostered corresponding shifts in the allocation of funds not only within M3 
but also to instruments outside M3.  
The  outstanding  amount  of  MFI  loans  to  the  private  sector  contracted  further  in  March, 
reflecting  mainly  a  negative  flow  of  lending  to  non-financial  corporations.  The  reduced 
amount of financing is again related mainly to loans with shorter maturities, while the net flow 
2 
 BIS Review 56/2009
of loans with longer maturities remained positive. The decline in short-term lending is likely to 
reflect  to  a  large  extent  lower  demand  in  the  wake  of  a  sharp  deterioration  in  economic 
activity  and  business  prospects  at  the  start  of  the  year.  Interest  rates  on  short-term  and 
floating  rate  bank  loans  to  households  and  non-financial  corporations  have  declined 
significantly over recent months, indicating that the transmission of monetary policy impulses 
to the economy continues. Overall, the latest money and credit data support the assessment 
that both banks and money-holding sectors are reducing their highly leveraged positions built 
up in past years. 
To sum up, the Governing Council’s decisions today take into account the expectation that 
price developments will continue to be dampened by the substantial past fall in commodity 
prices  and  the  marked  weakening  of  economic  activity  in  the  euro  area  and  globally.  The 
latest economic data and survey information suggest tentative signs of a stabilisation at very 
low  levels,  after  a  first  quarter  which  was  significantly  weaker  than  expected.  The  world 
economy, including the euro area, is still undergoing a severe downturn, with the prospect of 
both  external  and  domestic  demand  remaining  very  weak  over  2009  before  gradually 
recovering  in  the  course  of  2010.  This  assessment  incorporates  a  number  of  adverse 
developments  which  are  likely  to  materialise  over  the  coming  months,  such  as  a  further 
deterioration  in  labour  markets.  At  the  same  time,  available  indicators  of  inflation 
expectations  over  the  medium  to  longer  term  remain  firmly  anchored  in  line  with  the 
Governing Council’s aim of keeping inflation rates at levels below, but close to, 2% over the 
medium  term.  A  cross-check  with  the  outcome  of  the  monetary  analysis  confirms  that 
inflationary  pressure  has  been  diminishing,  as  money  and  credit  growth  have  further 
decelerated in recent months. Against the background of these developments, after today’s 
decisions  we  expect  price  stability  to  be  maintained  over  the  medium  term,  thereby 
supporting the purchasing power of euro area households. 
All in all, since the intensification of the financial crisis in September 2008, the Eurosystem 
has taken a series of measures that are unprecedented in nature, scope and timing. As a 
consequence, we have observed a clear decline in key money market interest rates that euro 
area banks typically use as benchmarks to reset floating rate loans and price new short-term 
loans. This in turn has led to sharp declines in rates for such loans to households and non-
financial  corporations.  As  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  works  with  lags,  our  policy 
action will progressively feed through to the economy in full. Hence, with all the measures 
taken, monetary policy has provided ongoing support for households and corporations.  
The Governing Council will ensure that, once the macroeconomic environment improves, the 
measures  taken  can  be  quickly  unwound  and  the  liquidity  provided  absorbed  so  that  any 
threat  to  price  stability  over  the  medium  to  longer  term  can  be  effectively  countered  in  a 
timely  fashion.  Indeed,  as  has  been  stressed  many  times,  the  Governing  Council  will 
continue to ensure a firm anchoring of medium-term inflation expectations. Such anchoring is 
indispensable to supporting sustainable growth and employment and contributes to financial 
stability.  Accordingly,  we  will  continue  to  monitor  very  closely  all  developments  over  the 
period ahead.  
Regarding fiscal policies, the latest projections for euro area countries point to continued 
revisions  to  budget  balance  estimates  and  forecasts.  Higher  budget  deficits  and  the  fiscal 
impact of financial sector support measures will lead to significantly higher government debt-
to-GDP ratios. In addition, updated projections by the Economic Policy Committee of the EU 
show that most countries face a challenging task in dealing with the budgetary costs of an 
ageing  population.  Therefore,  it  is  paramount  that  countries  make  a  strong  and  credible 
commitment to a path of consolidation in order to return to sound fiscal positions, respecting 
fully the provisions of the Stability and Growth Pact. This will preserve the public’s trust in the 
sustainability of public finances and will support both the recovery and long-term economic 
growth.  The  credibility  of  fiscal  consolidation  commitments  will  be  strengthened  if  they  are 
part of national policy frameworks oriented to the medium term.  
BIS Review 56/2009 
 3
Turning  to  structural  policies,  it  is  crucial  that  the  focus  is  now  on  strengthening  the 
adjustment capacity and flexibility of the euro area economy in line with the principle of an 
open market economy. This calls for an accelerated implementation of labour market reforms 
to facilitate appropriate wage-setting and labour mobility across sectors and regions as well 
as product market reforms to foster competition and speed up restructuring. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
4 
 BIS Review 56/2009
