Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj: Current financial situation in Bahrain 
Address by His Excellency Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj, Governor of the Central Bank of 
Bahrain, at the American Chamber of Commerce luncheon, Manama, 11 February 2009. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen: 
Thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  join  you  for  lunch  today,  and  for  your  excellent  hospitality.  I 
would  particularly  like  to  thank  Mr.  Al  Zayani  and  the  other  Members  of  the  Board  of 
Directors for their kind invitation to speak to you today. 
I have been asked specifically to talk to you about the current financial situation in Bahrain, 
particularly in comparison to international developments in the GCC region. 
There is general agreement that the turning point in the current crisis was the collapse of the 
American  investment  bank  Lehman  Brothers  on  September  15,  2008.  This  event  forced 
economists and policy-makers to revise their assumptions about the course of the financial 
crisis. After mid-September the financial crisis became an event of global proportions and for 
the first time in living memory, the global financial system was shaken to its foundations. For 
several weeks after mid-September, it seemed that no financial company was so strong that 
its failure was unimaginable, and no financial market was remote enough or secure enough 
to be unaffected by the events. 
It was at this point that ripples from the failure of Lehman Brothers began to affect us here in 
Bahrain. The effect was as much psychological as it was financial. 
The psychological impact was felt by both households and businesses. Ordinary people read 
their  newspapers,  watched  television  or  surfed  the  internet  and  saw  stories  about  the 
exceptional measures governments around the world were being forced to take to support 
their banking systems. Understandably people became nervous. There was a great deal of 
anxiety  about  the  possibility  of  bank  failures,  and  in  this  environment  rumours  were 
commonplace and often widely exaggerated. 
Some people also began to ask whether Bahrain should announce a general guarantee of 
deposits as so many other countries did in the weeks after the collapse of Lehman Brothers. 
Our view in the Central Bank was that a general guarantee of deposits was not needed. We 
were  confident  in  the  soundness  and  stability  of  Bahrain’s  banking  system.  We  were  also 
confident  in  the  strength  of  our  prudential  regime.  CBB  rules  and  regulations  and  our 
directions  to  banks  have  constrained  excessive  risk-taking  and  we  have,  for  example, 
ensured that banks are not over-exposed to any particular economic sector. Our rules and 
regulations were not always popular when we introduced them, but we knew that controlling 
banks’ risk-taking would be in the long-run interests of the Kingdom. 
The fear and anxiety of the last weeks of September and early October began to subside as 
people  came  to  recognise  that  the  banking  system  was  continuing  to  function  normally. 
People who had taken money out the banks began to return, and for the last several months 
banks’ deposits have been very stable. We have also seen banks continuing to report solid 
profitability, despite the impact of the crisis in the final quarter of 2008. 
The second impact of the Lehman collapse was on the liquidity of global markets. There was 
a  massive  rise  in  risk  aversion,  reflected  in  a  variety  of  indicators,  including  a  rise  in  risk 
premiums,  the  rising  cost  of  credit  default  swaps,  and  steep  falls  in  global  stock  markets. 
Activity in interbank markets virtually ceased. 
The shortage of global liquidity had an impact even here in the Gulf. As recently as July 2008 
the liquidity position of the GCC had never been stronger. In part, this was due to the high 
BIS Review 16/2009 
 1
price of oil, but it also reflected large speculative inflows of capital betting on a possible of 
revaluation of GCC currencies. 
As  the  financial  crisis  worsened  in  September,  we  began  to  see  rapid  acceleration  in  the 
outflow  of  capital.  Speculative  positions  were  quickly  reversed  as  the  banks  which  had 
placed those bets now discovered that they needed the liquidity closer to home. The result 
was a liquidity squeeze on banks throughout the GCC, from which those in Bahrain were not 
immune. 
Recognising  the  liquidity  pressures  on  Bahrain’s  banking  system,  the  Central  Bank  took 
action to alleviate the problem. We extended the range of collateral that we would accept in 
our lending operations with the banking system, so that this now includes long- and short-
term Ijara Sukuk issued by the  Kingdom of Bahrain. We are also looking at extending the 
scope of acceptable collateral still further. 
Our main policy initiative, however, was to establish a foreign exchange swap facility. This 
allows  banks  that  have US  dollars  to  bring  them  to  the  Central  Bank  to  swap  for Bahraini 
dinar  at  no  cost.  As  the  Federal  Reserve  and  other  leading  central  banks  had  taken 
measures to provide US dollars to financial markets in almost unlimited quantities, banks in 
Bahrain could obtain dollars and swap them for dinar whenever needed. The result has been 
to offset to a large degree the liquidity impact of capital outflows. We have done so in a way 
that  is  consistent  with  maintaining  our  currency’s  peg  to  the  US  dollar,  which  is  key  to 
maintaining confidence in the economy more broadly. 
The  issues  that  I  have  been  discussing  so  far  have  mainly  affected  the  financial  system. 
However, as liquidity has dried up and international bank lending has been sharply reduced, 
this  has  affected  the  financial  system’s  ability  to  provide  credit  to  the  real  economy,  the 
producers of goods and services. One result has been that the economic forecasts for the 
global  economy  have  been  sharply  downgraded  in  recent  months.  For  example,  the  IMF 
predicts  that  the  advanced  economies  will  shrink  by  two  percent  this  year,  while  the 
emerging  economies  will  enjoy  their  slowest  growth  in  the  last  10  years.  Overall,  the  IMF 
expects the global economy to grow by only half a percent, effectively at a standstill. 
Although the Bahraini economy will continue to grow, the rate of growth will slow down, in 
line with the rest of the GCC. It seems reasonable to assume that the impact will be similar to 
those  of  previous  economic  slowdowns.  In  particular,  we  anticipate  declines  in  bank 
profitability  as  business  opportunity  shrinks.  The  supply  of  credit  is  also  likely  to  remain 
constrained at least until advanced country banking systems are able to resume their role as 
suppliers of credit to the rest of the world. 
I would like to end by stressing that the Government and Central Bank remain committed to 
doing  all  in  our  power  to  maintain  economic  and  financial  stability  in  Bahrain.  It  may 
sometimes appear to an outsider that little is actually happening. Let me assure that this is 
far from the case. The Central Bank has monitored and will continue to monitor the financial 
situation in Bahrain very closely. We have already taken a number of measures to protect the 
stability of the financial system. 
Our  initiatives  may  not  have  received  a  great  deal  of  publicity,  but  they  have  nonetheless 
been effective. 
Thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 16/2009
