Barbro Wickman-Parak: Inflation targeting and the financial crisis 
Speech  by  Ms  Barbro  Wickman-Parak,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  LO 
(the Swedish Trade Union Confederation), Stockholm, 9 January 2009. 
 It is usual at the beginning of a new year to look back over the past year. If we look back at 
economic developments during 2008, it would be an understatement to say that it was an 
eventful year. First we had soaring oil and other commodity prices, combined with rising cost 
pressures and ever declining economic activity abroad. At this point concern was expressed 
in the international debate that the economies could suffer stagflation, that is, a combination 
of  rising  inflation  and  an  economic  downturn.  The  anxiety  about  stagflation  soon  faded. 
When  the  crisis  in  the  financial  markets  suddenly  intensified  in  the  wake  of  the  Lehman 
Brothers  bankruptcy  and  economic  activity  deteriorated  substantially  in  most  parts  of  the 
world, a new theme for the debate arose; deflation.  
It  is  no  surprise  that  situations  like  the  present  one  cause  people  to  wonder  whether  the 
monetary  policy  system  is  really  strong  enough  to  withstand  these  conditions,  too.  Let  me 
first  say  that  it  is  important  to  discuss  this;  new  experiences  and  knowledge  change  the 
conditions  for  monetary  policy.  These  things  are  not  carved  in  stone!  I  also  think that  it  is 
important  to  point  out  that  the  Riksbank  is  constantly  working  to  improve  its  strategy  and 
system  and  in  this  I  include  everything  from  forecasts  and  reports  on  which  decisions  are 
based to how we communicate our decisions and our strategy. This is a constantly ongoing 
process. Our present system has served us well during the crisis. It remains to be seen what 
lessons will be learned once the crisis is over and has been analysed. 
At  the  same  time,  it  is  important  that  any  discussion  on  potential  changes  is  based  on  a 
correct description of the system and of how monetary policy is in fact conducted. If anything 
should need to be changed, the decision must be based on the right grounds. I also believe 
that one should be cautious with regard to remaking the foundations of our monetary policy 
regime, that is, the inflation target and how it is formulated – and this applies especially in a 
sensitive  situation  like  the  present  one.  But  this  of  course  raises  questions  regarding  the 
present system and monetary policy strategy and why they are designed in this way.  
Quantified inflation target as nominal anchor  
In Sweden we had for a long time a fixed exchange rate as the norm for monetary policy and 
as the nominal anchor for the economy, that is, a means of anchoring inflation expectations 
so that they do not drift away. The idea was that a fixed exchange rate for the krona would 
mean that inflation in Sweden was adapted in the long term to inflation in the countries with 
currencies  to  which  the  krona  was  pegged.  Confidence  in  the  fixed  exchange  rate  would 
mean  that  the  expectations  of  inflation  in  Sweden  would  largely  be  the  same  as  the 
expectations in the countries to which we were thus linked. But in Sweden, as in many other 
countries, it proved impossible to prevent inflation soaring with a fixed exchange rate regime. 
Other countries which tried to control inflation by means of targets for the money supply also 
faced problems.  
The  Riksbank  announced  its  inflation  target  in  January  1993,  after  the  krona  had  been 
allowed to float earlier in the autumn with a great hullabaloo. The Bank then announced that 
the  target  for  monetary  policy  would  be  to  hold  the  annual  change  in  the  consumer  price 
index  at  2  per  cent.  The  target  would  formally  apply  with  effect  from  1995.  In  this  way 
Sweden became one of the first countries to choose to formulate its monetary policy in terms 
of an explicit inflation target.  
BIS Review 2/2008 
 1
Despite being aware that it would be difficult to attain the target exactly, the Riksbank chose 
to formulate the target with a specific figure for inflation. One of the most important reasons 
for this was to try to create an anchor around which inflation expectations could be stabilised. 
Clarity and openness were guiding principles for the inflation-targeting regime right from the 
start,  and  I  believe  that  this  has  played  an  important  part  in  building  up  confidence  in  the 
inflation target. This culture has therefore continued to permeate the Riksbank’s activities. It 
is  also  important  so  that  the  Riksdag,  which  is  our  principal,  can  evaluate  the  Bank  and 
require  accountability  from  us.  This  motive  became  particularly  important  when  the  new 
wording  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank  Act  gave  the  Riksbank  an  Executive  Board  with  an 
independent position in 1999.  
Why 2 per cent? 
The new wording of the Sveriges Riksbank Act applying from 1999 changed the objective for 
the  Riksbank’s  activities  to  maintaining  price  stability.  The  previous  Act  contained  a  more 
general  formulation  that  the  Riksbank  was  responsible  for  “foreign  exchange  and  credit 
policies”. When the new wording was produced, it was pointed out in the preliminary work 
that in principle the Act could be very detailed with regard to the target for inflation and so on. 
But  the  legislators  judged  that  this  type  of  precision  would  not  be  sufficiently  flexible  and 
allow the Riksbank enough scope to adjust the target to different circumstances.  
This raises the question of what price stability actually is and of whether 2 per cent inflation is 
the best target for the Riksbank. If one turns to academic literature on this subject, one will 
not find any clear answers. Everyone agrees that high inflation is detrimental to the economy. 
But  it  is  possible  to  find  both  arguments  in  favour  of  stabilising  inflation  a  couple  of 
percentage points above 2 and arguments in favour of a target that is lower, perhaps even 0 
per cent.  
One argument for having an inflation target above zero is that it reduces the likelihood that 
the economy will suffer periods of deflation. If the target were to stabilise inflation around 0 
per cent, inflation would probably fall below 0 during certain periods. That is, prices would 
periodically  fall  instead  of  increasing.  There  would  then  be  a  greater  risk  that  inflation 
expectations  –  which  should  be  around  0  per  cent  –  would  slide  downwards  so  that 
households and companies would begin to expect a more lasting fall in prices. This could, for 
instance, lead to households and companies delaying their consumption and investment until 
later, when prices have fallen even further, thus leading to a decline in demand. This could in 
turn  reinforce  expectations  that  prices  will  fall  and  it  could  create  a  negative  spiral  that  is 
difficult  to  reverse.  Having  an  inflation  target  that  is  slightly  above  zero  thus  gives  some 
protection against this. 
So, the inflation target should perhaps be greater than zero, but not too high. A few years 
ago, professors Francesco Giavazzi and Frederic Mishkin made an evaluation of monetary 
policy in Sweden during the ten years we have had an inflation target. One of the questions 
they  discussed  was  the  size  of  the  inflation  target.  As  I  have  already  implied,  it  was  not 
possible to draw any more precise conclusions on an exact figure, but their conclusion was 
that an inflation target of between 1 and 3 per cent is a good choice. If it is lower than 1 per 
cent, it can have a negative effect on economic growth. However, if it is above 3 per cent, it 
is too high for most people to perceive prices as being stable. This is why countries with an 
inflation target have often chosen a measure of inflation of around 2 per cent, which was of 
course also the case in Sweden. 
Must the inflation target be defined in terms of the CPI? 
One question that often arises in the debate on monetary policy is whether it might not be 
better to replace the target for the CPI with a target for some other measure of inflation. One 
suggestion that came up during the autumn, for instance, when energy and food prices rose 
2 
 BIS Review 2/2008
substantially,  was  that  the  inflation  target  should  only  apply  to  domestic  inflation  –  that  is 
increases  in  prices  of  goods  and  services  produced  in  Sweden.  Energy  prices  and  many 
food prices are determined on the world market in any case and are outside the reach of the 
Riksbank. This is true, but the price of, say, rice in our shops is not the same as the world 
market price of rice. The prices of goods we import are also affected at the consumer stage 
by conditions in Sweden, for instance, via transport costs, price mark-ups by wholesalers and 
retailers and also by the value of the krona.  
When the Riksbank raises the repo rate, total demand in the economy is dampened. This 
reduces the scope for price increases in all areas. And it is important that monetary policy 
focuses  on  keeping  down  the  general  price  increases  and  that  the  inflation  target  is  not 
redefined  merely  because  some  prices  are  rising  more  than  others.  Swedish  households’ 
total purchasing power declines even when prices of imported products rise. So the risk of 
such  price  increases  spreading  to  other  prices  and  to  wages  will  scarcely  decline  just 
because the inflation target is defined in terms of domestic prices.  
It is also important to distinguish between the measure of inflation to which our target applies 
and measures that are useful from time to time to analyse the driving forces behind inflation. 
The Riksbank often highlights the development of other measures to describe developments 
in  inflation  and  explain  the  monetary  policy  strategy  in  a  better  way.  For  example,  last 
autumn one measure that was useful was CPIX excluding energy. This could illustrate that 
we were assuming that energy prices would push up inflation temporarily but that the inflation 
trend would not be affected.  
But then is the CPI really the best measure for our inflation target? Different countries have 
chosen different solutions – although most countries define their inflation target in terms of 
the CPI or a modified version of the CPI. We Executive Board members have said that of 
course  the Riksbank  should  not  exclude  the  possibility  of changing  to  another  measure  of 
inflation than  the  CPI  if  there  are  good  reasons  for  doing so.  But  when  discussing  such  a 
change I believe that it is important to remember the most important reason for introducing 
the inflation target, namely the need for a nominal anchor. This implied at that time, and in 
my opinion it still indicates, that the inflation target should be defined in terms of a price index 
that reflects normal purchases and which Swedish households are familiar with. In any case, 
one important criterion for an alternative measures must be that it can really function as an 
anchor for inflation expectations.  
Are we Executive Board members "inflation nutters”? 
Many  proposals  for  changes  in  the  inflation-targeting  policy  that  have  been  put  forward 
recently relate to the balance between stabilising inflation and stabilising the real economy. 
Sometimes they seem to assume that the Riksbank is not allowed to, is unable to, or quite 
simply  does  not  want  to  give  consideration  to  production  and  employment  when  making 
decisions on the repo rate. Let me say this as clearly as I can: they are wrong. When we 
make decisions on changing the repo rate and make forecasts for it we always consider how 
production and employment will develop.  
To begin with, it is important to remember that there is generally no contradiction between 
low  and  stable  inflation  and  good  growth  and  employment.  The  whole  point  of  having  an 
inflation target is that it provides the economy with a stability that creates the right conditions 
for sustainable economic growth. 
So it is correct that price stability is the overall objective of the Riksbank’s activities. Nor do 
we have any specific target for production or employment in the same way that we have a 
specific target for inflation. Does this mean then that we are by definition, and indeed should 
BIS Review 2/2008 
 3
be, “inflation nutters” who only care about the inflation target when deciding on the interest 
rate?1  
When they drew up the new wording for the 1999 Sveriges Riksbank Act the possibility of the 
Riksbank having a target for the real side of the economy was also discussed. For various 
reasons  the  legislators decided  that  it  would  not  be  appropriate.  For example,  both  earlier 
experiences  and  economic  theory  show  that  an  expansionary  monetary  policy  that  fuels 
inflation will not increase employment or lead to higher growth in the long term. Such a policy 
has  on  the  contrary  had  negative  consequences  for  households  and  companies.  So,  as 
monetary policy cannot be used to achieve a lasting higher level of employment or growth in 
the  economy,  it  would  not  be  appropriate  to  have  specific  targets  for  the  real  side  of  the 
economy. In the long term, monetary policy cannot affect the real economy and the overall 
objective of monetary policy should therefore be price stability.  
However, monetary policy does have an effect on the real side of the economy in the short 
term, and in this way there is scope for monetary policy to help stabilise fluctuations in, for 
instance, production and employment. The legislator therefore considered that the Riksbank 
should have an obligation to support the general economic policy objectives laid down by the 
Riksdag,  but  to  the  extent  that  these  did  not  conflict  with  the  price  stability  target.  They 
considered that this was a natural consequence of the Riksbank being an authority under the 
Riksdag, so this obligation did not need to be written into the act. There is thus no reference 
to  this  in  the  Sveriges  Riksbank  Act,  although  it  is  mentioned  in  the  bill  adopted  by  the 
Riksdag.  
So how do we Executive Board members ensure that inflation will be on target at the same 
time  as  giving  consideration  to  the  real  economy?  Well,  quite  simply  by  not  behaving  as 
"inflation  nutters”  who  concentrate  blindly  on  how  far  inflation  is  deviating  from  the  target. 
Normally, if inflation has deviated from the target we do not necessarily aim to bring inflation 
back on target as quickly as possible. In this way, we create the scope to conduct monetary 
policy so that fluctuations in the real economy are dampened. Monetary policy is flexible in 
this way.  
At  the  same  time,  we  of  course  cannot  allow  inflation  to  drift  too  far  from  the  2  per  cent 
target, or to wait too long before bringing inflation back on target, as there would then be a 
risk that the inflation target would lose credibility. So, from the Riksbank’s point of view we 
have said that monetary policy is normally aimed at attaining the inflation target a couple of 
years ahead. This is our aim when forecasting the repo rate path. So an appropriate repo 
rate  forecast  is  normally  that  inflation  is  close  to  the  target  a  couple  of  years  ahead, 
according to our forecast, without any major fluctuations in the real economy. 
Monetary policy depends on the type of shock 
This means that it is not possible to describe our strategy by any mechanical policy rule. To 
determine whether, and if so, how the repo rate needs to be changed now and in the coming 
period, it is necessary to analyse the causes behind the deviation of inflation from the target 
and also how the interest rate, inflation and the real economy interact. What is the driving 
force in the economy? What type of shock has led to inflation deviating from the target? How 
has it affected production, employment and so on? And how are they likely to develop in the 
future?  As  there  is  a  time  lag  before  the  effects  of  monetary  policy  become  apparent,  the 
forecasts are of central importance. 
One  does  not  need  to  go  further  back  in  time  than  last  year  to  find  two  entirely  different 
examples of situations. The first example is the substantial increase in oil, electricity and food 
                                                 
1   Mervyn King, Governor of the Bank of England, coined the term "inflation nutter" as a description of a central 
bank that only concerned itself with the development of inflation. 
4 
 BIS Review 2/2008
prices during the first half of the year, which pushed up inflation way above the target. This 
took place in a situation where cost pressures in the economy were rising. At the same time, 
the  price  increases  meant  that  households’  purchasing  power  declined  and  there  were 
clearer signs that economic activity was beginning to weaken in Sweden and abroad. In the 
background there was also the financial market turbulence. It was in this way an example of 
a  situation  where  monetary  policy  must  balance  the  development  of  inflation  against  the 
development  of  the  real  economy.  For  one  thing,  we  must  ensure  that  we  retain  the 
credibility of the inflation target and bring inflation back on target within a reasonable period 
of  time.  But  at  the  same  time,  we  must  also  ensure  that  the  slowdown  in  production  and 
employment is not too severe.  
Given this balance, a majority of the Executive Board decided at the meetings in July and 
September that the repo rate needed to be raised. At the same time, what was presented 
then was by no means an extremely tight monetary policy – despite the fact that inflation was 
at its highest in over a decade and inflation expectations were clearly above the target level. 
As  usual  we  looked  both  at  how  inflation  and  the  real  economy  would  develop.  And  the 
forecast  for  the  repo  rate  presented  was  such  that  inflation  was  expected  to  be  back  on 
target  within  two  years  and  GDP  growth  was  expected  to  fall  initially  but  to  then  rise  to  a 
good long-term level.  
We know what happened next; the Lehman Brothers investment bank went bankrupt in mid-
September,  the  financial  markets  ground  to  a  halt  and  this  changed  the  game  rules.  The 
circumstances  for  monetary  policy  changed  and  we  were  given  an  example  of  a  different 
decision-making situation where both developments in inflation and developments in the real 
economy  called  for  the  same  decision.  During  the  autumn  we  cut  the  repo  rate  in  three 
stages by a total of 2.75 percentage points. This meant a departure from the monetary policy 
we  have  normally  conducted  and  which  is  characterised  by  more  gradual  changes  in  the 
interest  rate.  Before  I  talk  about  our  most  recent  interest  rate  decision  I  shall  discuss  in 
slightly  more  detail  how  the  financial  crisis  has  affected  monetary  policy  and  how  other 
measures by the Riksbank have been activated. 
Monetary policy and the financial crisis 
In principle, one can say that monetary policy is working as normal within the framework that 
has been in place since 1995. And unlike earlier crises, not least that at the beginning of the 
1990s, we have in the storm now raging a credible nominal anchor for the economy in the 
form of an inflation target. I think this is worth pointing out. It is actually thanks to the credible 
inflation target that the Riksbank has the flexibility to forcefully counteract the negative effects 
of the financial crisis on production and employment.  
Of course, the financial crisis means that the circumstances for conducting monetary policy 
are  abnormal.  For  example,  there  have  not  been  many  occasions  when  the  economy  has 
ground to a halt in the way that has happened in recent months. This creates challenges for 
monetary policy. 
One  such  challenge  is  that  historical  relationships  in  the  economy  have  to  some  extent 
changed as a result of the crisis. One contributory factor to the repo rate needing to be cut so 
much  during  the  autumn  was  that  rising  risk  premiums  in  the  wake  of  the  financial  crisis 
meant  that  the  normal  link  between  the  short-term  market  rates  and  the  repo  rate  was 
broken. This was indicated by the reactions to our reduction of the repo rate by a total of 1 
percentage  point  in  October.  The  market  rates  fell  to  a  much  lesser  extent.  On  the  other 
hand, the market rates followed the repo rate downwards in December. 
Moreover,  the  opportunities  for  households  and  companies  to  borrow  money  have  been 
restricted because access to credit has declined. The difficulties for banks and other lending 
institutions to find funding became acute when the financial crisis also hit Sweden with full 
force.  They  were  forced  to  accept  funding  at  shorter  and  shorter  terms  as  these were  the 
BIS Review 2/2008 
 5
only  markets  that  continued  to  function.  In  this  situation  the  Riksbank  intervened  by,  for 
instance, offering the banks loans at 3 to 6 months, that is, at much longer maturities than 
the  daily  and  overnight  loans  normally  offered.  We  took  these  measures  to  improve  the 
functioning of the markets and to make it easier for the banks to continue to provide loans to 
households and companies. We will continue to offer this form of liquidity support as long as 
is necessary. 
The extraordinary measures taken by the Riksbank thus aim to ease the supply of credit and 
improve 
the  measures  primarily  concern 
safeguarding  financial  stability,  they  will  also  improve  the  ability  of  monetary  policy  to 
stabilise inflation and the real economy. 
the  market.  Although 
functioning  of 
the 
Substantial interest rate cut in December 
On 3 December we made the individually largest change in the repo rate since the inflation 
target  officially  began  to  apply  in  1995.  The  assessment  of  the  Executive  Board  members 
was that cutting the repo rate from 3.75 to 2 per cent was necessary both to dampen the fall 
in production and employment and to attain the inflation target of 2 per cent.  
The  situation  in  the  financial  markets  both  in  Sweden  and  abroad  had  not  improved 
appreciably, despite central banks and governments around the world implementing forceful 
measures.  The  markets  for  medium  and  long-term  borrowing  were  functioning  poorly,  and 
sometimes not at all, and liquidity premiums were still high.  
The financial crisis had severely hampered access to credit and we could see clearly how 
this was reinforcing the downturn in the development of the economy. GDP had begun to fall 
in important parts of the world around us, economic indicators were at historically low levels 
and share prices had fallen drastically in recent months. Energy and food prices had fallen 
substantially  since  the  peak  in  the  middle  of  the  year  and  this  brought  some  relief  for 
households.  The  downturn  also  contributed  to  a  fall  in  inflation  and  in  this  way  there  was 
greater  scope  to  counteract  the  negative  developments  by  cutting  policy  rates,  both  in 
Sweden and abroad.  
Our  earlier  forecast  was  that  the  Swedish  economy  would  be  tangibly  affected  by  the 
financial crisis and that there would be a sharp downturn in international economic activity. In 
October we had revised down our growth forecasts for Sweden and abroad considerably and 
in December we revised the forecasts down by as much again; the economic slowdown had 
hit with even greater force than we had earlier expected. The weaker krona together with the 
fall in energy and food prices appeared to some extent to be able to counteract the severe 
slowdown in the economy. According to our forecast in December, Swedish GDP will decline 
by 0.5 per cent in 2009, but recover during 2010, when growth increases to approximately 2 
per cent.  
We also revised down the inflation forecast substantially, primarily because of falling energy 
prices and declining interest expenditure for households. According to our assessment, CPI 
inflation  will  on  average  be  just  over  1  per  cent  in  2009.  However,  inflation  will  then  rise 
towards the target level at the end of 2010, as economic activity improves and the effects of 
falling energy prices and interest expenditure no longer affect the inflation figures. 
The assessment in December was that resource utilisation would be lower than normal over 
the  coming  years,  while  inflation  would  undershoot  the  target  for  a  while.  Given  this,  we 
Executive  Board  members  were  agreed  that  a  substantial  and  long-lasting  cut  in  the  repo 
rate was needed to avoid an unnecessarily long period of inflation undershooting the target 
and  of  weak  real  economic  development.  Nor  were  there  any  advantages  to  adjusting  the 
repo rate in gradual stages. On the contrary, a large cut in the repo rate would in the opinion 
of  the  Executive  Board  have  a  faster  effect  than  a  smaller  cut  together  with  a  downward 
adjustment in the forecast for the interest rate.  
6 
 BIS Review 2/2008
Uncertainty over what is around the corner 
Another difficulty that monetary policy faces is that there is particularly great uncertainty over 
future developments right now. Our decision in December that the repo rate needed to be cut 
substantially was, as I see it, relatively simple. But at the same time it was very difficult to 
assess economic developments over the coming years and thereby the future development 
of the repo rate path.  
Some  of  the  difficulty  lies  in  assessing  the  scope  and  effects  of  different  fiscal  policy 
stimulation packages abroad. However, the greatest difficulty lies in assessing how long the 
financial crisis will persist and what demands it will make on monetary policy. My assessment 
at the most recent meeting was that a cut of 1.75 percentage points and a repo rate around 2 
per cent over the coming year was the closest we could come to a well-balanced monetary 
policy. But I considered the assessment to be very uncertain, particularly from 2010 onwards. 
Will  the  expected  recovery  in  the  economy  manifest  itself  or  will  the  downturn  be  more 
prolonged? We will probably all have to continue to wrestle with this question. 
The plan is that the next decision on the repo rate will be made next month. We will then, as 
usual,  take  a  stance  on  how  the  new  statistics  that  have  become  available  affect  the 
prospects for inflation and economic activity and the repo rate forecast. At the same time, we 
will  of  course  closely  follow  developments  and  be  prepared  to  take  action  if  and  when 
necessary. 
Some concluding reflections 
The events of last autumn clearly illustrate that with a credible monetary policy framework it 
is  possible  to  conduct  a  flexible  monetary  policy  that  can  quickly  be  adapted  to  sudden 
changes in circumstances. The fact that the actual rate of inflation has been far above the 
target  has  not  been  an  obstacle  to  significant  and  rapid  cuts  in  the  interest  rate.  The 
forecasts  for  both  growth  and  inflation  have  been  adjusted  downwards  considerably  and 
have indicated scope to reduce the interest rate in order to bring inflation back to the target a 
couple of years ahead. Monetary policy is and must continue to be forward looking. 
As  I  suggested  earlier,  the  theme  of  deflation  has  begun  to  appear  in  the  international 
debate.  I  commented  on  this  at  our  latest  monetary  policy  meeting.  My  view  was  that  the 
threat of deflation should not be exaggerated and that there are major differences compared 
to the 1930s, the period that people often refer to in this context. One important difference is 
that central banks and governments around the world are taking strong measures to support 
the financial system and stimulation packages have been launched to counter the economic 
downturn.  
We forecast that the rate of inflation will decline rapidly in 2009 and this will probably mean 
that people will continue to talk about deflation. If so, it is important to remember why inflation 
is falling. A large part of the explanation comprises falling energy prices and falling interest 
expenditure;  that  is  factors  that  are  favourable  to  growth.  And  it  is  also  important  to 
remember  that  a  temporary  fall  in  the  rate  of  inflation  towards  zero,  or  even  below  zero, 
should  not  be  confused  with  a  prolonged  process  with  falling  prices  that  affects  long-term 
inflation expectations. In the latter case, consumption and demand may come to a halt, which 
could  further  reduce  inflation  expectations  and  thus  affect  demand  in  an  ongoing  negative 
spiral.  Our  forecasts,  and  those  of  most  other  experts,  indicate  that  growth  will  recover  in 
2010 and that inflation will then increase. Expectations of generally falling prices over a long 
period of time should not thrive in such an environment.  
We expect the financial crisis to peter out during the course of the year that has just begun. 
However,  the  analysis  of  what  has  happened  and  of  what  needs  to  be  done  in  terms  of 
regulation  will  continue.  The  discussion  of  the  consequences  for  monetary  policy  and  the 
monetary policy framework will also continue. One question that will probably arise again is 
whether, and if so how, central banks should take the development of credit and asset values 
BIS Review 2/2008 
 7
such as property prices into account. This has been a controversial issue in the international 
debate  in  recent  years.  In  the  light  of  the  events  of  the  autumn,  this  issue  will  probably 
become topical again.  
8 
 BIS Review 2/2008
