Bandid Nijathaworn: Risk management and Pillar II implementation 
Opening address by Dr Bandid Nijathaworn, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the 
FSI-SEANZA Regional Seminar on the Implementation of the Supervisory Review Process 
(Pillar II) of Basel II, Bangkok, 21-24 April 2009. 
 issue, 
Distinguished  Speakers;  and  colleagues  from  SEANZA  central  banks  and  regulatory 
authorities, 
Let  me  begin  by  extending  a  warm  welcome  to  all  of  you  to  Bangkok,  and  on  behalf  of 
SEANZA members, I would like to express our appreciation to all the speakers, as well as 
the  FSI,  for  their  contributions  to  make  this  FSI-SEANZA  Regional  Seminar  on  the 
Implementation of the Supervisory Review Process possible. This is all the more so as this 
seminar  had  to  be  rescheduled  from  last  year,  and  in  this  regard,  let  me  express  our 
commitment  that  the  Bank  of  Thailand  stands  ready  to  facilitate  you  and  ensure  that  your 
experience here will be a fruitful and enjoyable one. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
The current global financial crisis underscores the need to strengthen risk management and 
risk-based supervision, so that we can deal more effectively with the increased complexity 
arising  from  both  financial  product  innovation  and  increased  interconnectedness  between 
financial institutions. 
As  for  the  current  crisis,  while  many  causes  have  been  identified,  what  has  become  very 
clear is that financial institutions, capitals were not adequate given their risks, and this had 
allowed  over-leveraging  by  financial  institutions  as  well  as  by  their  customers,  leading  to 
over-indebtedness  and  asset  price  bubbles.  The 
the 
inadequate  risk  management,  covering  the  entire  process:  from  the  lack  of  proper  risk 
measurement,  especially  with  regard  to  complex  product,  as  well  as  liquidity  risk,  to 
inadequate risk management and control, and to micro-prudential risk-based supervision. In 
addition,  there  is  now  greater  attention  being  paid  to  the  importance  of  macroprudential 
approach, in recognition of the risk from procyclicality and interconnectedness of institutions, 
especially  the  large  and  highly  complex  financial  institutions.  Also,  greater  recognition  is 
given to the problem of the unregulated shadow banking sector, like the hedge funds, which 
are  also  key  in  systemic  risk  process.  All  these  issues  pose  a  major  policy  challenge,  as 
indeed  the  various  working  groups  and  committees  of  the  BIS  are  now  working  on  the 
guidelines,  and  on  the  key  issues  such  as  accounting,  valuations,  procyclicality,  and 
adequacy of capital and provisions. 
In view of the depth of the current problem, and the fact that it may be quite sometime before 
the global standards on these issues can be settled, regulators, in my view, must be ready to 
take  the  needed  action  to  ensure  that  we  address  these  risks  in  our  financial  systems 
systematically. This is why Pillar II is all the more important, because the essence of Pillar II 
is to ensure that financial institutions have adequate risk management process and capital, 
commensurate with their risk profiles. And this is why we are seeing increased vigilance by 
regulators and the financial institutions themselves, in terms of the rigour in the use of stress-
tests, which is essential in the environment of heightened volatility that superseded historical 
norm. 
The implementation of Pillar II is, however, a challenge, not only in terms of the technical and 
quantitative  expertise  for  reviewing  Internal  Capital  Adequacy  Assessment  Process,  or 
ICAAP, but also on qualitative aspects such as how to foster an on-going two-way dialogue 
with  the  supervised  institutions  that  would  enhance  the  ICAAP  process.  To  meet  this 
challenge, regulators need to establish a strong credibility so as to strengthen the impact of 
their  recommendations  and  requirement  on  ICAAP,  and  in  some  cases,  increase  capital 
therefore,  underscores 
BIS Review 56/2009 
 1
requirement  to  ensure  capital  appropriate  to  the  material  risks,  not  yet  covered  in  Pillar  I. 
Also, there are challenges on the legal and institutional capacity aspects on how to handle 
the more principle-based, and therefore, more institution-specific regulatory requirement. 
As  for  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  our  progress  on  Pillar  II  implementation  is  continuing.  By 
working closely with all stakeholders especially Thai Bankers, Association, we have issued 
three prudential guidelines for Basel II since 2006. Pillar II formally took effect the end of last 
year, while Pillar III will be implemented in June this year. As far as Pillar II is concerned, we 
expect  Thai  banks  to  put  in  place  the  ICAAP  within  this  year  and  establish  the 
comprehensive  process  by  the  end  of  next  year.  Overall,  we  are  on  track  with  the 
implementation of Basel II, thereby reaffirming our commitment to international best practice. 
With  this  brief  initial  remark,  it  is  my  hope  that  this  seminar  would  provide  the  needed 
knowledge  and  skills  to  supervisors  from  SEANZA  countries  for  the  challenges  posed  by 
Pillar II. 
2 
 BIS Review 56/2009
