Perks Ligoya: Co-ordinated regulations for the SADC region 
Address by Dr Perks Ligoya, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Malawi, at the Conference for 
the  Committee  of  Insurance,  Securities  and  Non-Bank  Financial  Authorities,  Lilongwe, 
17 September 2009. 
 The Chairperson, Committee of Insurance, Securities, and Non bank financial Authorities,  
Mr Patrick Mhango  
The Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of Malawi, Mrs Mary Nkosi 
The General Manager, Reserve Bank of Malawi, Dr Wilson Banda 
Distinguished delegates 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It  gives  me  pleasure  and  honour  to  grace  this  important  occasion.  The  Reserve  Bank  of 
Malawi is honoured to host this year’s conference for the Committee of Insurance, Securities, 
and  Non  bank  financial  Authorities  (CISNA)  and  in  this  regard  I  would  like  to  welcome  all 
delegates particularly those who have travelled from regional member countries to participate 
in this event. 
Chairperson, Ladies and Gentlemen,  
I  wish  to  commend  all  CISNA  members  for  your  continued  interest  and  dedication  to  the 
SADC mission. Your attendance in such large numbers is clear testimony of your desire to 
achieve  economic  integration  in  the  SADC  region.  We  in  Malawi  acknowledge  benefits  of 
regional integration which, I am glad to say, include systematic growth and development of 
the  financial  sector  in  general,  and  of  insurance,  securities,  pension  and  microfinance 
subsectors, in particular.  
Chairperson, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The financial sector is a catalyst of economic growth and all effort to develop and deepen this 
sector remains a key public policy challenge. In this regard, I find the role of CISNA to be 
consistent  with  aspirations  of  our  Governments.  CISNA  supports  initiatives  toward  the 
creation  of  a  strong  base  of  domestic  non-bank  financial  institutions,  particularly  those 
specialising in the mobilisation of long-term savings, for example life insurance, pensions and 
collective investment schemes. In addition, CISNA supports measures to increase access to 
quality  insurance  and  other  risk  management  products  by  households  and  entities  in  the 
region.  CISNA  also  addresses  issues  pertaining  to  market  infrastructure  and  liquidity  of 
capital markets in the region. This is a critical function because assurance of liquidity acts as 
a catalyst for greater participation of investors, both local and foreign. These noble goals are 
supported  by  SADC  governments  through  protocols  which  aim  at  promoting  financial 
markets. 
Chairperson, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
CISNA plays a very important role in the improvement and harmonization of regulations for 
the SADC region. Sound and well co-ordinated regulations promote and maintain confidence 
in  regional  financial  systems.  Allow  me,  therefore,  to  commend  CISNA’s  efforts  in 
harmonising  standards  in  regional  markets,  particularly  in  insurance,  pensions,  and  capital 
markets.  
Chairperson, Ladies and Gentlemen,  
You  may  wish  to  know  what  Malawi  is  doing  with  respect  to  improving  the  regulatory 
environment for our financial sector and non-banks, in particular. The process of formulating 
financial  sector  bills  is  in  its  final  stages.  These  include  the  Financial  Services,  the 
Retirement  Funds,  the  Microfinance,  the  Financial  Cooperatives,  and  the  Securities  Bills. 
BIS Review 114/2009 
 1
There are also Payment Systems and Credit Reference Bureau Bills being processed which 
will  also  facilitate  and  support  further  development  of  the  financial  sector.  In  addition,  the 
Insurance  Act  and  the  Banking  Act  have  undergone  rigorous  scrutiny  and  review.  Once 
these bills are passed into laws, they will provide us with a stronger mandate and enabling 
regulatory  frameworks  for  the  regulation  and  supervision  of  the  entire  financial  sector.  I 
therefore wish to take this opportunity to express my appreciation to the Ministry of Finance 
and the Ministry of Justice for their useful contribution in the formulation of these bills. The 
Reserve  Bank  has,  however,  been  the  lead  institution  the  formulation  of  these  bills  and  I 
thank the team involved. I wish to encourage them not to relax but to continue working hard 
until these bills are enacted into laws.  
Upon enactment of the bills, the Reserve Bank is expected to take on board the regulation 
and supervision of microfinance and pension plans, in addition to insurance, capital markets 
and banks. I must say, we are aware of the challenges lying ahead. However, it is my hope 
that conferences of this nature do provide solutions to such challenges. I therefore call upon 
all the distinguished delegates to consider this conference as a rare opportunity for sharing 
experiences on regulation and supervision of non-bank financial institutions.  
Chairperson, Ladies and Gentlemen,  
You  may  ask  yourselves  why  SADC,  and  indeed  Malawi,  should  bother  about  enabling 
regulatory  frameworks?  Recall  an  African  saying  which  goes  “Umanena  Chatsitsa  Dzaye 
Kuti Njobvu Ithyoke Mnyanga.” If we consider the recent financial crisis, then the question 
would be “where did countries slip”? Many countries in the developed world are now calling 
for a review of the regulatory infrastructure because the general feeling is that it caused the 
financial  crisis.  Recent  developments  in  global  financial  markets  strongly  suggest  the 
importance  of  effective  regulatory  regimes  for  financial  markets.  Misguided  regulation  can 
have adverse repercussions on the financial sector, and indeed the entire economy. It is for 
this reason that SADC must maintain high standards of regulation for our financial markets. 
The Chairperson, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I note from the conference program that you will also reflect on the impact of the financial 
crisis on the SADC region. This is commendable as it is a subject of interest to everyone.  
With  these  remarks,  it  is  now  my  pleasure  and  privilege  to  declare  the  conference  for  the 
Committee of Insurance, Securities and Non bank financial Authorities officially open. 
Distinguished Delegates, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 114/2009
