Jürgen Stark: Short address at the opening ceremony for the “Language 
of Money” exhibition 
Speech by Mr Jürgen Stark, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the Museum für Kommunikation, Berlin, 24 September 2009. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  distinguished  ambassadors  and  members  of  parliament,  I  am 
delighted to be here with you in these wonderful premises of the Museum für Kommunikation 
in  Berlin,  the  oldest  former  postal  museum  in  the  world,  and  to  be  able  to  open  the 
“Language of Money” exhibition. 
It is with great pleasure that President Trichet acts on behalf of the European Central Bank 
as a patron of the “Language of Money” exhibition and he deeply regrets not being able to 
attend today’s opening ceremony in person.  
The  European  Central  Bank  appreciates  and  supports  activities  aimed  at  educating  the 
public  in  financial  and  economic  matters  and  the  exhibition  which  we  will  see  tonight 
contributes to this goal. It explains the different forms that money took in past societies and 
the role of money nowadays. 
The language of money added a new word to its vocabulary in December 1995 and this new 
word was the euro. You might recall the debate that was had at the time – the name “ECU” 
did  not  sound  particularly  good  in  German  while,  for  the  French,  it  was  the  name  of  an 
ancient  coin.  It  was  decided  that  choosing  the  word  euro  ought  to  favour  no  language  in 
particular.  This  created  a  solid  foundation  for  the  new  currency.  However,  not  only  the 
"professional  euro-sceptics",  but  many  others  too  would  not  have  predicted  that  the  euro 
would be such a success.  
The euro came into being on 1 January 1999 and it is now the currency in 16 Member States 
of the European Union. With the creation of the euro, it became clear that a currency could 
represent a decisive step on the long path towards an ever closer union among the peoples 
of Europe.  
Since the euro’s introduction, Europeans have benefited from price stability. This is a great 
success story. The maintenance of price stability, which constitutes the primary goal of the 
ECB, benefits all citizens of the euro area directly. It protects income and savings, and helps 
reduce  borrowing  costs,  thus  promoting  investment  and  economic  growth,  which  are 
prerequisites for job creation and prosperity. In recent months, we have seen another of the 
euro’s  benefits  during  the  financial  crisis.  The  euro  protected  the  euro  area  from  internal 
exchange rate tensions as well as from political ones, as it had done on previous occasions.  
As the euro banknotes and coins were introduced on 1 January 2002, they became one of 
the most tangible symbols of Europe. The euro has quickly become an integral part of the 
everyday  lives  of  citizens  within  the  euro  area  and  it  is  now  used  by  almost  330  million 
Europeans on a daily basis. Some 12.5 billion euro banknotes are currently in circulation in 
Europe and beyond, with a total face value of more than €750 billion. Today, the euro is an 
internationally  accepted  currency.  People  have  confidence  in  the  euro  –  confidence  that 
others accept the currency, that this money is “valid” and that its stability will be sustained 
over the long term. This confidence is crucial for a currency to thrive. 
These  days,  with  the  euro  as  our  currency,  we  hardly  give  a  thought  to  how  much  it  has 
changed our everyday lives; we can travel without paying a commission to exchange money 
within the euro area or transfer money within this area and pay the same fee as for a national 
transfer. In all euro area countries, we can simply hand over some cash or give the cashier a 
payment card or have the amount due transferred from our bank account to another account 
with one click of a mouse. However, we should not forget that it has not always been this 
BIS Review 114/2009 
 1
easy. In this respect, the exhibition is a worthwhile attempt to make people more familiar with 
the language of money, as money is an integral part of our society.  
The importance of money in the modern economy is such that it is crucial to be proactive in 
educating all citizens about how to deal with their own financial affairs in a responsible and 
cautious manner. This exhibition explains the various forms that money can take. 
I  should  also  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  highlight  the  fruitful  cooperation  between  the 
European Central Bank and the Museum für Kommunikation which has given the ECB the 
opportunity  to  display  its  “Euro  Exhibition”  in  the  museum’s  premises  from  20  November 
2009 until 17 January 2010. I do not want to reveal too many details at this stage, but, as you 
may have a chance to discover for yourselves later this year, the “Euro Exhibition” features a 
common theme that will naturally complement the exhibition on the “Language of Money”. It 
will tell you all about the euro banknotes and how to detect counterfeits in an interactive and 
entertaining  manner.  You  will  be  able  to  learn  how  the  euro  aids  communication  and 
connection between the people in Europe and the rest of the world. I should therefore like to 
warmly invite you to this exhibition, which opens on 20 November here at the Museum für 
Kommunikation in Berlin, before it continues its journey around Europe, having already been 
shown in Italy, Slovakia and Spain.  
I should like to take this opportunity to wish you a very enjoyable and informative experience 
during your visit to the “Language of Money” exhibition and to once again congratulate the 
Museum für Kommunikation in Berlin on this valuable initiative. 
2 
 BIS Review 114/2009
