Ben  S  Bernanke:  Community  development  financial  institutions  –  challenges 
and opportunities 
Speech  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve System, at the Global Financial Literacy Summit, Washington DC, 17 June 2009. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website. 
 I am pleased to be back at the Town Hall Education, Arts, and Recreation Campus for the 
Global  Financial  Literacy  Summit.  I  commend  the  organizers  and  participants  for  their 
commitment  to  financial  literacy.  As  Americans  struggle  with  very  difficult  economic  and 
financial circumstances, the importance of financial literacy and financial education has never 
been  more  evident.  Organizations  such  as  our  host  today,  Operation  HOPE,  with  its  local 
Hope Centers, provide a vital service by helping adults and young people gain the financial 
knowledge they need to achieve their economic goals.  
Community-based  organizations  such  as  Operation  HOPE  offer  training  and  counseling  to 
people in traditionally underserved markets, helping them to manage credit, buy homes, and 
start small businesses. As we reaffirm our commitment to increasing financial literacy as a 
means  of  improving  economic  opportunity,  we  should  recognize  that  the  contributions  of 
community development organizations go well beyond providing information and guidance to 
individuals  and 
facilitate  economic  growth  and 
development  by  offering  a  broad  range  of  services  and  financing  in  low-  and  moderate-
income communities. In this regard, a uniquely important role has been played by a group of 
specialized lenders known as Community Development Financial Institutions, or CDFIs. This 
morning I would like to offer a few thoughts about this important set of institutions and the 
challenges they face in the current economic and financial environment. 
We don't have to look too far to see the contributions of CDFIs. In this portion of Washington, 
D.C.,  east  of  the  Anacostia  River,  CDFIs  and  other  community-based  organizations  are 
working  with  private  partners  and  with  government  in  multifaceted  efforts  to  spur 
development,  add  quality  affordable  housing,  increase  commercial  activity,  and  better 
connect 
the  broader  regional  economy.  Community-based 
organizations such as CDFIs can play critical roles in these important undertakings because 
of their detailed knowledge of neighborhoods' economic needs and strengths and because of 
their commitment to their mission of community development. 
families.  These  organizations  also 
these  neighborhoods 
to 
CDFIs and their role in community development 
CDFIs come in various forms. They may be banks, credit unions, nondepository loan funds, 
or  venture  funds.  Generally,  CDFIs  strive  to  provide  affordable  and  appropriate  financial 
services  to  people  and  communities  who  traditionally  lack  access  to  such  services. 
Depending on the institution and local needs, they may offer financing for homeownership, 
rental  housing,  commercial  real  estate,  health  care,  small  businesses,  microenterprises, 
charter schools, and child care facilities, among other purposes.1 CDFIs often also work with 
traditional lenders to attract private capital for community development. A nearby example of 
such  cooperation  is  the  redevelopment  of  the  long-vacant  former  Camp  Simms  National 
Guard site in Southeast D.C. That project, which included a local CDFI in partnership with 
                                                 
1   Paul  Weech  (2009),  "Observations  on  the  Effects  of  the  Financial  Crisis  and  Economic  Downturn  on  the 
Community  Development  Finance  Sector,"  Working  Paper  Series  2009-5  (San  Francisco:  Federal  Reserve 
Bank of San Francisco, May). 
BIS Review 76/2009 
 1
the D.C. government, a private developer, and a local community development corporation 
(CDC), led to the creation of a shopping area that included a much-needed grocery store and 
other commercial services.  
In  many  ways,  the  formation  of  CDFIs  represented  an  important  milestone  in  the  ongoing 
evolution of policy strategies for community development and revitalization. During much of 
the past century, federal community development efforts were large-scale, top-down affairs. 
As we have seen in the sphere of international development assistance, centralized, large-
scale development efforts – though not without their successes – often imposed a one-size-
fits-all  approach  that  failed  to  take  sufficient  account  of  the  particular  needs  and 
characteristics of local communities. In many cases, the results were disappointing or worse; 
for  example,  the  so-called  urban  renewal  programs  of  the  1950s  and  1960s  had  what 
ultimately proved to be devastating effects on some areas. In response, the policy focus has 
shifted over time toward using tools that allow more-customized approaches to local needs, 
such as block grants and housing vouchers. The growth of local CDCs and the passage of 
the Community Reinvestment Act in 1977, which required most deposit-taking institutions to 
lend and invest throughout their business areas, exemplified the trend toward a more bottom-
up approach to development.  
By  the  late  1980s,  new  alliances  formed  among  the  public,  private,  and  nonprofit  sectors, 
creating  a  network  of  institutions  that  understood  and  were  committed  to  serving  local 
communities.2  In  1994,  the  Congress  created  the  CDFI  Fund,  housed  within  the  Treasury 
Department.3  The  Treasury  recently  estimated  that  the  fund  attracts  $15  in  nonfederal 
investments for every dollar it invests in a CDFI.4
In addition, the government provided new market-based incentives to attract private capital to 
community  development.  For  example,  the  Low-Income  Housing  Tax  Credit  program, 
created  in  1986,  offers  credits  to  investors  in  affordable  rental  housing.  The  affordable 
housing  developments,  in  turn,  often  rely  on  community-based  organizations  to  help  with 
development, financing, and property management. More than 2 million units of affordable 
rental  housing  have  been  built  as  a  result  of  investors  using  the  incentives  offered  by  the 
program since its inception.5  
Today, nationwide, there are more than 1,000 certified CDFIs with a collective $25 billion in 
assets.6 These organizations have loaned and invested billions of dollars in our nation's most 
distressed  communities  and  have  attracted  many  conventional  investors  into  underserved 
areas.  For  small  businesses  in  particular,  CDFIs  provide  critical  funding  because  many 
traditional creditors view such loans as too risky or, sometimes, too small to be profitable. As 
a complement to lending, CDFIs offer training and technical assistance to their customers, 
directly or through partnerships, thus increasing borrower capacity and mitigating loan risk. 
Successful  CDFI  borrowers  often  graduate  to  conventional  financing  as  their  needs  grow, 
                                                 
2   David  Erickson  (2006),  "Community  Capitalism:  How  Housing  Advocates,  the  Private  Sector  and  the 
Government Forged New Low-Income Housing Policy, 1968-1996," Journal of Policy History, vol. 18 (2), pp. 
167-204. 
3   The CDFI Fund was established by the Riegle Community Development and Regulatory Improvement Act of 
1994, Pub. L. No. 103-325, 107 Stat. 2369. 
4   U.S. Department of the Treasury, Office of Performance Budgeting and Strategic Planning (2009), FY 2010 
Budget in Brief (Washington: Department of the Treasury). 
5   National  Council  of  State  Housing  Agencies  (2007),  State  HFA  Factbook:  2006  NCSHA  Annual  Survey 
Results (Washington: NCSHA). 
6   CDFI  Data  Project  (forthcoming),  "Providing  Capital,  Building  Communities,  Creating  Impact  –  Fiscal  Year 
2007". Previous reports can be found at http://cdfi.org/index.php?page=dataproject-c. 
2 
 BIS Review 76/2009
thereby attracting the participation of mainstream lenders while freeing up CDFI resources to 
plant new seeds in the community.7
Current challenges and opportunities for CDFIs 
CDFIs have certainly not been spared from the financial disruptions of the past two years. 
While  many  CDFI  portfolios  have  continued  to  hold  up  relatively  well  despite  the  financial 
crisis, rates of delinquencies and defaults on CDFI loans have risen as economic conditions 
have  worsened.8  In  light  of  the  mission  of  CDFIs,  it  is  not  surprising  that  their  financial 
concerns  often  reflect  economic  distress  in  the  broader  community:  the  once-thriving  local 
business that is shutting its doors, the affordable rental housing complex that is struggling to 
make payments as tenants lose jobs and fall behind, and the after-school youth center that 
cannot repay its loan because its donor base has shrunk. Even as the capacity of CDFIs has 
become more constrained, economic conditions and pullbacks by mainstream lenders have 
increased the demands being placed on these organizations to provide credit and services.9
Traditionally,  CDFIs  have  been  able  to  fund  a  majority  of  their  operating  activities  through 
earnings.10 However, those earnings have come under pressure as loan losses have risen, 
deal  volumes  have  declined,  and  sources  of  capital  for  new  activities  have  become  more 
expensive or unavailable altogether. Moreover, CDFIs' main sources of outside capital and 
operating  support  are  facing  significant  pressures  of  their  own.  Funding  from  philanthropic 
sources has been reduced as endowments have suffered capital losses and rates of giving 
have declined.11 Indeed, two-thirds of foundations surveyed recently reported that they plan 
to reduce the number and size of their grants in 2009, and cuts are expected to continue in 
2010  and  beyond.12  Funding  from  state  and  local  governments  that  sometimes  support 
CDFIs  is  also  dwindling,  reflecting  increased  fiscal  pressures.  And  mainstream  financial 
institutions have reduced their support of CDFIs, both by providing less direct funding and by 
extending less credit in support of projects done in partnership with them. 
Just as banks are adapting to the changing financial landscape, the community development 
industry  can  adopt  changes  to  help  it  emerge  stronger  from  this  crisis.  CDFIs  are  taking 
steps  to  minimize  losses,  strengthen  their  portfolios  and  liquidity  positions,  and  assess 
existing activities and planned investments in light of the worsened financial and economic 
environment.  
As CDFIs move past the immediate hurdles, however, careful consideration will need to be 
given  to  more  systemic  changes  to  correct  weaknesses  that  have  emerged  in  the  current 
CDFI model. Notably, the reduction of funding by key participants highlights the importance 
of broadening and diversifying the industry's funding base. For example, in the case of the 
                                                 
7   See "Observations on the Effects of the Financial Crisis," note 1. 
8   The net charge-off rate in fiscal year 2007 was 0.55 percent (see "Providing Capital, Building Communities," 
note  6).  From  a  survey  of  CDFIs  in  fiscal  year  2008,  a  charge-off  rate  of  1.7  percent  was  reported.  See 
Opportunity Finance Network (2009), CDFI Market Conditions Report: Fourth Quarter 2008, OFN, April. 
In the fourth quarter of 2008, 63 percent of reporting CDFIs reported an increase in credit applications, while 
over the prior quarter, 52 percent saw an increase in delinquencies. See CDFI Market Conditions Report, note 
8. 
9  
10   Earned  revenues  represent  53  percent  of  CDFI  total  operating  revenues.  See  U.S.  Department  of  the 
Treasury,  Community  Development  Financial  Institutions  Fund  (2007),  Three  Year  Trend  Analysis  of 
Community  Investment  Impact  System  Institutional  Level  Report  Data  FY  2003-2005  (Washington: 
Department of the Treasury, CDFI Fund). 
11   At  last  report,  philanthropic  sources  made  up  12  percent  of  capital  and  25  percent  of  operating  funds  for 
CDFIs. See Three Year Trend Analysis, note 10. 
12   Steven  Lawrence  (2009),  "Foundations  Address  the  Impact  of  the  Economic  Crisis,"  Foundation  Center, 
Research Advisory, April. 
BIS Review 76/2009 
 3
identifying  previously  unrecognized  market  opportunities,  assessing 
Low-Income Housing Tax Credit markets, major investors, including several large banks and 
government-sponsored enterprises, sharply curtailed their investments in affordable housing 
as the value of the tax credits declined along with their profits.13 Continuing and expanding 
the  current  efforts  to  attract  new  investors  to  the  Low-Income  Housing  Tax  Credit  market 
could  mitigate  the  overreliance  on  a  few  market  investors.  The  same  could  be  said  for 
investors in projects supported by the New Markets Tax Credit, a program of the CDFI Fund 
meant to attract investment to low- and moderate-income areas.  
Other ongoing efforts to access institutional funding and the capital markets should continue 
so that CDFIs can tap more-reliable sources of funding at wholesale prices. For instance, the 
Federal  Housing  Finance  Agency  recently  introduced  its  rules  for  public  comment  on  how 
certified CDFIs can become members of the Federal Home Loan Bank System and access 
its lower-cost funds, as permitted under recent legislation. Such funding, with known pricing 
and  terms,  would  be  reliable  and  would  help  CDFIs  manage  their  balance  sheets  more 
efficiently and inexpensively.  
Prior  to  the  financial  crisis,  some  CDFIs  had  been  making  progress  in  gaining  access  to 
secondary  financing  markets.  Although  these  markets  remain  disrupted,  such  efforts  hold 
promise,  especially  to  the  extent  that  CDFIs  are  able  to  produce  high-quality  data  and 
analysis of proposed investments. Good data, together with qualitative knowledge, is critical 
for 
investment 
performance, and helping guide investors to make better decisions.  
Finally, cultivation of nontraditional funding sources might prove fruitful. Increased interest by 
socially  motivated  individual  investors  has  expanded  the  pool  of  investment  capital  for 
community  development.  One  CDFI  has  created  a  product  similar  to  a  mutual  fund  where 
individuals  purchase  "community  development  notes"  that  are  invested  in  community 
development  organizations.  The  fund  has  raised  capital  from  about  4,700  individuals  and 
invested about $160 million; further, it has performed well, with an average 3 percent rate of 
return to investors and very low loss rates.14 Even during the recession, new investors have 
been  drawn  by  the  appeal  of  supporting  low-  and  moderate-income  communities  while 
earning relatively good rates of return. Other developments, such as emerging peer-to-peer 
lending platforms, also hold promise.  
While  community  development  finance  is  a  small  part  of  our  overall  capital  and  credit 
markets, the Federal Reserve recognizes that these financial flows are critically important for 
many  low-  and  moderate-income  communities.  In  fact,  the  Board  of  Governors  has  been 
working  with  several  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Banks  to  promote  research  on  how  best  to 
promote CDFIs' effectiveness and financial stability.15
The current crisis points to the importance of a strong network of healthy community-based 
organizations  and  lenders.  As  many  communities  struggle  with  rising  unemployment,  high 
rates  of  foreclosures,  and  vacant  homes  and  stores,  these  organizations  lead  efforts  to 
stabilize their neighborhoods. Rather than pulling back, CDFIs are introducing new products 
and programs to help communities respond to the crisis. For instance, a number of groups 
                                                 
13   Angelyque  Campbell  and  Jennie  Blizzard  (2008),  "Community  Development  Finance:  Innovative  Paths  to 
Capital during the Credit Squeeze," Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, MarketWise, Fall/Winter. 
14   Data from audited financial statements on the Calvert Foundation Community Investment Notes, as of year-
end 2008. Since the fund's inception in 1995, the portfolio reports an overall 0.20 percent loss rate, none of 
which  has  been  realized  by  investors.  See  Calvert  Social  Investment  Foundation  (2009),  "Community 
Investment Note: Due Diligence Brief," Calvert Foundation, April. Also see the Calvert Foundation's website at 
www.calvertfoundation.org. 
15   For instance, in May 2009 the Board hosted a Community Development Finance Summit to discuss promising 
strategies for CDFIs facing challenges in the current crisis. The Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco has 
conducted  research  on  these  topics  through  its  Center  for  Community  Development  Investments,  and  the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston has worked with key partners to identify and promote best practices. 
4 
 BIS Review 76/2009
are  purchasing  homes,  which  might  otherwise  sit  vacant,  from  loan  servicers  who  take 
possession of foreclosed properties. These homes are repaired and then sold or rented to 
families. Because foreclosures and resulting vacancies impose costs on neighborhoods and 
local governments, facilitating occupancy can help maintain neighborhood stability.16 These 
efforts are difficult, time consuming, and challenging to finance – exactly the kind of thing in 
which  CDFIs  specialize.  CDFIs  and  other  groups  across  the  country  are  working  hard  to 
stabilize  neighborhoods  because  they  do  not  want  to  lose  the  progress  attained  by  years, 
and sometimes decades, of investment in low- and moderate-income communities. 
Indeed,  this  community  stabilization  work  is  important  for  the  overall  economic  recovery. 
Healthy  and  vibrant  neighborhoods  are  a  source  of  economic  growth  and  social  stability. 
CDFIs and other community groups are already responding to the evident needs, but they 
will require many willing partners to ensure success in the long run, including governments, 
mortgage  servicers,  and  mainstream 
lenders.  Strong  community  organizations  can 
accomplish  a  great  deal,  but  their  capacity  will  be  severely  limited  without  the  willing 
partnership of many other institutions.  
Conclusion 
As the effects of the financial crisis and the resulting economic downturn have spread, there 
has  been  increased  focus  on  preserving  the  gains  made  in  low-  and  moderate-income 
communities  over  recent  decades.  Accomplishing  that  objective  requires  preserving  the 
institutions 
these  communities.  Without  strong  CDFIs,  attracting 
investments and capital to rebuild and revitalize communities would be even more difficult. 
Economic  recovery,  like  economic  development,  is  a  bottom-up  as  well  as  a  top-down 
process. Through their work at the community level, CDFIs, together with other community 
development organizations, can help build a sustainable recovery for all of us.  
that  helped  build 
                                                 
16   In particular, recent research points to the adverse spillover effects of foreclosures on local property values. 
See,  for  example,  Zhenguo  Lin,  Eric  Rosenblatt,  and  Vincent  W.  Yao  (2009),  "Spillover  Effects  of 
Foreclosures on Neighborhood Property Values," Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics, vol. 38 (4), 
pp. 387-407. 
BIS Review 76/2009 
 5
