Ewart S Williams: Status of the financial services sector in Trinidad and 
Tobago and implications for national development 
Address by Mr Ewart S Williams, Governor of the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago, to 
the South Trinidad Chamber Energy Luncheon, Port-of-Spain, 6 April 2009.  
 Thank you very much for inviting me to discuss a theme that is very topical (very much in the 
news) in the light of the international financial crisis which has engulfed the world since the 
fourth quarter of last year and especially since the emergence of the financial meltdown of 
CL Financial, the largest conglomerate in the Caribbean. 
For me, the chance to discuss the state of the financial sector is particularly opportune, in the 
light of a survey quoted in a local newspaper which carried a headline “T&T Citizens have no 
trust in the financial sector”. In a poll conducted between March 5 and 6, 72 percent of the 
502 persons interviewed had no confidence in the financial sector. 
In view of the recent developments – the crisis facing financial systems all over the world, our 
CL  Financial/CLICO  crisis,  the  international  recession  and  the  slowdown  in  the  domestic 
economy, people are justified in asking the questions: is our financial system safe, as a 
repository for my savings; is the financial system operating in my interest; does the financial 
sector  have  a  role  in  reversing  this  economic  slowdown,  or  simply,  should  we  have 
confidence in the financial sector? 
Answering the last first, and while confessing to partiality, I categorically affirm that you 
could  and  should  have  absolute  confidence  in  our  financial  system.  While  there  are 
deficiencies, while there are things that need to be fixed, as financial systems go, ours is 
strong,  robust,  resilient,  and  with  some  tweaking  could  and  should  make  an  even 
greater contribution to our national development. 
Although my topic refers to the financial system, my remarks will be heavily focused on the 
banks,  non-banks  and  the  insurance  industry  –  those  institutions  that  come  under  the 
regulatory control of the Central Bank. I will not comment on our capital markets which would 
need a lecture by itself. 
To understand the current status of our financial system, one needs to have some context. 
Our  financial  system  was  liberalized  in  the  early  1990s,  as  part  of  a  process  of  structural 
reform which included many other aspects such as: trade and tariff reform, privatization, tax 
reform, capital account, liberalization etc. 
Financial liberalization, along with rapid economic growth, induced by the steady increase in 
oil and gas prices, set in motion the evolution of a more sophisticated, more diversified 
and more complex financial sector which brought with it many benefits. Not unexpectedly, 
it also brought a whole host of challenges, some of which are still to be resolved. Let me cite 
some of the more notable changes that have occurred in our financial system over the past 
twenty years: 
• 
There has been significant consolidation among the banks, with the three largest 
banks now accounting for 70 per cent of total bank assets; similarly the three largest 
insurance companies accounting for three-quarters of the insurance industry. (The 
largest  insurance  company,  CLICO  accounts  for  close  to  55  per  cent  of  total 
insurance assets). 
Most banks have greatly expanded their product offerings, functioning as “universal 
banks”,  offering  in  addition  to  basic  banking  services,  pension  and  mutual  fund 
management,  individual  annuity  plans,  trust  services,  leasing,  brokerage  and 
merchant banking services. In an effort to compete, insurance companies have 
 BIS Review 45/2009 
 1
   been issuing deposit-like products and mutual funds. (CLICO has led the cross-over 
to bank-like products). 
To  reduce  costs  and  to  compete  effectively,  some  of  the  institutions  adopted 
conglomerate  structures.  Here  again,  CL  Financial  led  the  way  in  terms  of  the 
breadth and complexity of its structure. 
A  fourth  significant  change  in  the  last  few  years  is  the  extent  of  regional 
penetration by our banks and insurance companies, both through off-shore lending 
and insurance coverage as well as through shareholding and ownership. Of course, 
the  extra-ordinary  level  of  regional  penetration  brought  increased  risk  and  has 
created special problems in the CLICO case. 
And one last change I would like to mention: you would re-call that in the 1970s and 
1980s,  we  embarked  on  the  “localization”  of  the  banking  sector.  Currently, 
reflecting  the  impact  of  what  we  could  broadly  call  “globalization”,  of  the  eight 
commercial banks operating in Trinidad and Tobago, six are foreign-owned – a 
reversal of the localization trend. 
Unfortunately,  neither  the  legal  nor  the  prudential  framework  kept  pace  with  the  rapid 
evolution of the financial sector. 
For example, the first upgrade of the Financial Institutions Act since the early 1990s came 
in  September  2006.  This  was  followed  by  a  comprehensive  reform  of  the  FIA,  which  was 
approved by Parliament in December 2008. The current Insurance Act dates back to 1966, 
with an important amendment from 1980. The next upgrade came a few weeks ago, in the 
context of the CLICO crisis.  
The other elements of our legislative framework are similar, if not more antiquated. Our 
Credit Union legislation dates back to the Co-operative Societies Act of 1971, when credit 
unions were small, truly cooperative, societies handling paltry sums; legislation on pensions 
was embedded in the 1980 Insurance Act; and even now, there is no legislation governing 
mutual funds, just guidelines for institutions licensed under the FIA). 
the  Government  adopted  a  White  Paper  on  financial  sector  reform, 
In  2004, 
implementation of which is currently in progress. As noted, Parliament recently approved a 
new FIA, which is the centerpiece of our financial legislation. A new Securities Industry Act 
(SIA) is close to being presented to Parliament. 
We are fairly advanced in the preparation of a new Insurance Act and new credit union 
legislation  is  not  too  far  around  the  corner.  After  these  we  plan  to  concentrate  on  new 
pensions  legislation  next  year.  We  will  also  need  to  turn  our  attention  to  legislation  to 
address some unregulated intermediaries such as, the business of bureaux de change and 
money  transfer  companies,  which  are  institutions  of  more  recent  vintage.  We  are  also 
working on designing a regulatory regime for two “statutory corporations”, the HMB and the 
UTC. 
The  Central  Bank  has  been  given  an  expanded  regulatory  mandate  to  include  the 
insurance companies and pension funds and the credit unions. The Bank has been taking 
steps to adapt its regulatory methodologies to the requirements of these new institutions and 
has been upgrading its personnel to cope with the rapidly evolving financial environment – an 
environment that requires a new regulatory approach to deal with conglomerate structures, 
consolidated supervision, cross-border holdings and ownership, a whole new emphasis 
on governance and an assessment of institutions own risk management frameworks. 
It will take time for any Regulator to get on top of all these new challenges; and it is taking 
time for us in the Central Bank to do so. But we are doing so fast. 
Notwithstanding the legislative and regulatory challenges, I could state emphatically that, by 
all international indicators, we have a robust banking system. 
2 
 BIS Review 45/2009
   In aggregate, the banks’ capital ratios are very high (18 per cent compared with a 
statutory minimum of 8 per cent) 
In  aggregate,  the  level  of  non-performing  loans  is  low;  about  2  per  cent,  which 
would be the envy of banking systems in most developing countries and not too far 
from the level you find in most developed countries. Some would argue that the low 
level of nonperforming loans reflects, in part, the banks’ ultra conservative lending 
policies, focusing on short-term consumer loans and avoiding more risky lending for 
business activity and more so for small business. Be that as it may …… 
Our  profitability  indicators  are  also  impressive.  In  2008,  the  profits  after  tax 
amounted to $2.2 billion representing a return on equity of 20 percent. 
For many, the high level of profitability enjoyed by the banks, speaks to the proliferation of 
charges  and  commissions  levied  on  most  bank  transactions,  together  with  the  spread 
between  the  rates  on  loans  and  advances  and  that  paid  to  depositors.  In  Trinidad  and 
Tobago  this  spread  stands  at  about  8.2  percentage  points,  compared  with  7  percentage 
points  for  the  region  as  a  whole.  In  advanced  countries  the  figure  is  around  3  percentage 
points. 
I should note that from time to time the Central Bank has engaged the commercial banks in 
discussions about these issues and while we understand some of their arguments, I am not 
sure that we have a perfect meeting of minds. 
The  banks  note,  for  instance,  that  bank  charges  in  Trinidad  and  Tobago  are  lower  than 
those that obtain in the rest of the region and in developed countries. 
They also point to the several factors that explain the sizable spread between deposit and 
lending rates. One factor is, without doubt, the level of reserve requirements. Currently, at 17 
per cent, this level is determined by the Central Bank as part of its anti-inflation policy. The 
fact that these reserves are un-remunerated certainly acts as a tax on the banks which they 
try to re-coup by increasing the level of the spread. 
However, even abstracting from the reserve requirement, the spread between deposit and 
lending rates can still be considered high. In theory, high spreads can represent the level of 
oligopolistic power (or the lack of competition) in the banking system as well as an indicator 
of the level of efficiency of banking operations. It is somewhat surprising that the increased 
use of technology has not yet resulted in greater efficiency which could be passed on to 
the consumer. 
As an aside, complaints about high bank spreads are also an important issue in Jamaica, so 
much so that three years ago, the Jamaica Manufacturers Association filed a complaint with 
the country’s Fair Trading Commission alleging collusion in rate setting. The FTC cleared the 
institutions saying that it found no evidence to substantiate the charge. Let me state that, in 
my view competition is alive and well in our banking system and I see absolutely no evidence 
of interest rate collusion. 
Let me  make one other comment about our banking system, having to do with its lending 
patterns. 
The  data  show  that  credit  to  business  firms  accounts  for  just  under  one-half  of  bank 
credit,  followed  by  consumer  credit,  about  one-third,  and  real  estate  mortgage  loans, 
about  20  per  cent  of  the  total.  The  level  of  consumer  credit  is  fairly  high  by  developing 
country standards. In Latin America, for instance consumer credit stands at under 20 percent 
of total bank credit. 
For most of 2007 and 2008 consumer credit was growing at a significantly faster rate than 
business credit, the impact of which can be seen by the number of cars on the roads. 
For the last few months, reflecting the steady rise in interest rates and some concerns about 
the economic slowdown, the rate of expansion of consumer credit has slowed drastically. 
BIS Review 45/2009 
 3
The  data  on  bank  credit  to  businesses  need  to  be  interpreted  with  caution.  In 
developed countries large firms raise much of their funding from capital markets. In Trinidad 
and  Tobago,  like  in  most  developing  countries,  the  largest  firms  finance  their  investment 
through  bank  borrowing.  It  is  the  small  and  medium-sized  firms  that  find  difficulty  in 
obtaining bank financing. The reasons for this are well-known and have to do with their lack 
of acceptable collateral, the perceived riskiness and the high cost of servicing such loans. 
So,  granted  that  the  banking  system  is  currently  robust,  what’s  the  risk  it  faces  if  the 
economic slowdown in Trinidad and Tobago and in the region is prolonged? 
If the slowdown is prolonged and is accompanied by a significant increase in unemployment, 
one would expect that non-performing loans will rise. However, the current level of about 
2  per  cent  provides  significant  room,  before  non-performing  loans  reach  critical  levels. 
Moreover,  the  level  of  regulatory  capital  of  18  per  cent  provides  an  adequate  buffer  to 
meet any difficulties. 
In  the  US,  the  decline  in  real  estate  prices  contributed  greatly  to  the  difficulties  in  the 
banking system. In Trinidad and Tobago, our banking system has maintained high mortgage 
approval standards, in part by restricting loan to value ratio between 75-80 percent (no sub-
prime mortgages here) and has contained its exposure to falling real estate prices by limiting 
the share of these loans in its portfolio to 20 percent. 
What about our insurance companies…. What is the health of our insurance sector? The 
honest  answer  is  uneven.  Excluding  CLICO  for  the  time  being,  for  reasons  I  will  discuss 
later,  many  insurance  companies  need  to  strengthen  their  risk  management  and 
governance policies. Let me explain a bit: 
• 
The  existing  legislation  requires  insurance  companies  carrying  on  long  term 
insurance business to have share capital of a mere $3 million, which if strictly 
observed, robs them of the needed buffer to meet adverse circumstances. For 
general  companies,  share  capital  of  only  $1  million  is  required.  This  has  not 
changed since 1980. 
The statutory fund, which is meant to protect policy-holders, is only effective if it 
was funded on an on-going basis. Prior to last month, strictly speaking, the law 
only required companies to meet its statutory fund requirements for one-month, after 
the end of their fiscal year. 
In the case of non-life companies there are far too many complaints regarding the 
timeliness and adequacy of claims settlement. 
The truth of the matter is that the insurance industry has not been subject to formal 
regulation for a long time and as such, has not internalized a regulatory culture. 
Consequently  there  are  challenges  in  getting  some  companies  to  meet  normal 
regulatory requirements such as: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Filing statutory returns within the stipulated time frame. 
Complying with recommendations resulting from on-site examinations. 
Topping up their statutory fund within the required time frame. 
Complying with their own internal audit recommendations. 
   Fortunately things are improving and the introduction of new legislation would contribute to 
enhancing regulatory compliance. 
Before I end, let me briefly address the CIB/CLICO issue. 
If the financial sector was in such good shape how does one explain the CLICO affair? 
My simple answer is that CLICO/CIB was an aberration. 
4 
 BIS Review 45/2009
 As you know CLICO and CIB were subsidiaries of the conglomerate CL Financial Group, 
which  covered  some  60  subsidiaries  in  the  financial  sector,  in  energy,  real  estate 
manufacturing  and  distribution.  The  financial  institutions  in  the  Group,  if  you  include  the 
commercial  bank,  has  assets  of  equivalent  to  about  37  per  cent  of  GDP.  On  paper,  CL 
Financial has assets of over $100 billion. 
In  a  financial  system  which,  could  be  described  as  well-capitalised  and  generally 
conservative, Clico/CIB were isolated cases of an overly aggressive and risky business 
model. This model was characterized by: 
• 
excessive related-party transactions which carry significant contagion risks. This 
high  level  of  concentration  is  not  specifically  prohibited  by  the  present 
legislation; 
an  aggressive  high  interest  rate  resource  mobilization  strategy  to  finance 
equally high risk investments, much of which were in illiquid assets (including real 
estate both in Trinidad and Tobago and abroad); and 
a very high leveraging of the Group’s assets. 
• 
In  this  model,  the  flow  of  deposits  and  policyholders’  funds,  through  rollovers  and  new 
business, masked the limited profitability of many of CL Financial’s investments. Then 
came the recent international crisis, methanol prices (a major source of dividends) declined; 
real estate values plummeted and in a climate of uncertainty, the rate of roll-overs and new 
deposits  slowed  markedly.  This  led  to  liquidity  and  perhaps  solvency  problems,  the  real 
impact of which is now being assessed. 
I would want to suggest that the CLICO/CIB crisis represents a case of “systemic failure” 
from which we all can take invaluable lessons. 
Clearly we need to upgrade our legislation as a matter of urgency. It is hoped that the 
recent international financial crisis as well as the recent stresses in both the credit union and 
the insurance industry would convince industry participants of the need for modern legislation 
to cope with a modern financial sector. 
Two, directors and management need to take seriously their fiduciary obligation to protect 
depositors’/policyholders’  funds.  Independent directors  have  a  special  obligation  to  provide 
checks and balances and play a “whistle-blowing role”, if necessary. 
Three,  external  auditors  must  also  recognize  their  fiduciary  responsibilities  and  must  be 
held  accountable.  The  self-regulatory  bodies  must  set  and  enforce  the  highest  auditing 
standards. That’s the legacy of Enron and World com. 
Four, as Regulator we need to continue to upgrade our skills and quickly achieve the 
level of competence in the insurance and credit union regulations as we have achieved in 
bank regulation. Of course, we have been in bank regulation for close to fifty years whilst we 
have only recently been doing insurance. 
The CLICO/CIB crisis is a major setback for the financial sector in the region. We have been 
able  to  contain  the  contagion  but  the  challenge  of  strengthening  market  confidence  and 
ensuring that the cost to taxpayers remains minimal in the medium term is ongoing. 
The CLICO/CIB collapse should be a lesson that serves to strengthen our financial system 
for the next several years. 
BIS Review 45/2009 
 5
