Caleb M Fundanga: Foreign private investment in Zambia 
Opening remarks by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the Closing 
and Dissemination Workshop on Foreign Private Investment and Investor Perception Survey, 
Lusaka, 4 June 2009. 
 The Chairman; 
Distinguished Invited Guests and Participants; 
Members of the Press ; 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Mr. Chairman, 
It  is  my  honour  and  privilege  to  officiate  at  this  very  important  Closing  and  Dissemination 
workshop of Phase II of the survey on Foreign Private Investment and Investor Perception. 
As I welcome you all, I wish to convey my appreciation for your contribution to the success of 
the  project.  May  I,  in  this  regard,  express  our  special  appreciation  to  the  private  sector 
colleagues for their cooperation as respondents. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Let  me  take  this  opportunity  to  extend  my  sincere  gratitude  to  the  Private  Sector 
Development  (PSD)  Programme,  for  providing  financial  support  for  this  very  important 
project. Further, our thanks go to the COMESA Secretariat, United Nations Conference for 
Trade  and  Development  (UNCTAD),  Macroeconomic  and  Financial  Management  Institute 
(MEFMI),  Development  Finance  International  (DFI)  and  international  consultants  for 
providing  financial  and  technical  support  to  this  survey.  With  their  financial  and  technical 
support,  the  Government,  through  the  Balance  of  Payments  Committee,  comprising 
representatives from the Ministry of Commerce, Trade and Industry, Ministry of Tourism and 
Natural  Resources,  Zambia  Development  Agency,  Central  Statistical  Office  and  Bank  of 
Zambia,  was  able  to  undertake  this  very  important  survey.  Without  their  support,  it  would 
have been very difficult to complete this phase of the Survey. 
Distinguished Guests, 
As you are aware, the Zambian economy has recorded significant positive developments in 
the  recent  past,  owing  to  the  wide-ranging  economic  reforms  the  Government  has  been 
implementing  since  1992.  The  reforms,  which  are  aimed  at  stabilising  the  economy  and 
supporting economic recovery for the purpose of reducing poverty among our people, have 
facilitated  increased  investment  in  various  sectors  of  the  economy,  such  as,  agriculture, 
tourism, construction and manufacturing. As you may also be aware, the mining sector has 
attracted unprecedented amounts of investment in the recent past. Government’s economic 
reforms  since  the  early  1990s  have  contributed  immensely  to  the  boosting  both  local  and 
foreign investors’ confidence in the Zambian economy, which is an important pre-requisite for 
attracting capital flows. 
The  survey  findings  that  we  are  disseminating  today  indicate  that  Foreign  Private  Capital 
flows to Zambia in 2007 rose to US $1,932.8 million from the US $176.3 million recorded in 
2001. The 2007 inflows were largely in form of foreign direct investment, borrowing from non-
affiliates (Loans and Trade Credits) and portfolio investment. We believe that the introduction 
of economic reforms led to a substantial increase in private capital flows, which regrettably, 
we have not been able to capture on a regular basis due to budgetary constraints. 
Mr. Chairman, 
History has taught us that high volatility in private capital flows, if not properly monitored and 
managed,  can  induce  financial  and  macro-economic  instability  in  the  domestic  economy. 
BIS Review 71/2009 
 1
Evidence from South East Asia indicates that capital flows engendered a financial crisis in 
that  region  in  1997  and  1998.  In  light  of  this  evidence,  the  results  of  the  Foreign  Private 
Investment  and  Investor  Perception  Survey  are  intended  to  assist  the  Government  to 
effectively  monitor  private  capital  flows.  Accurate  and  reliable  data  on  private  capital 
investment will be helpful in understanding recent developments in the Zambian economy. 
Better information on investor perceptions will assist Government in designing policies that 
will attract more investment into our economy. Further, the results of the survey should prove 
useful to the private sector and other stakeholders. 
On the whole, the importance of timely and reliable information on capital flows in the design 
of appropriate policy responses by Government and thus enhancing macroeconomic stability 
can  hardly  be  overemphasised.  Adequate  and  consistent  information  on  capital  flows  will 
also  greatly  improve  Balance  of  Payments  Statistics  for  Zambia  and  serve  as  an  early 
warning system for Government on potential international financial crises and other external 
shocks. 
Mr. Chairman, 
Zambia,  like  many  other  developing  countries,  has  inadequate  capacity  to  collect,  analyse 
and disseminate data and information on foreign private capital investment. Compared with 
other countries in the African sub-continent, Zambia has serious gaps with respect to data on 
foreign private capital investment. For instance, while we are now at the second phase of the 
Survey, Uganda, Tanzania and Malawi are in the sixth, fourth and third phases, respectively. 
This only reveals to us the critical need to conduct this enterprise survey more regularly. To 
this  end,  I  wish  to  direct  that,  as  a  way  forward,  the  Balance  of  Payments  Statistics 
Committee  conducts  this  survey  annually.  The  Bank  of  Zambia,  in  collaboration  with 
Government and other Balance of Payments Statistical Committee member institutions will 
do  everything  possible  to  ensure  that  the  collection  of  this  vital  information  is  done  on  an 
annual basis. Accordingly, it is my hope that participants at this workshop will appreciate the 
importance of this survey and find the results useful. 
Distinguished Guests, 
I am particularly happy to learn that the Zambian team compared to other countries in the 
region, has conducted this enterprise survey in record time. It shows true commitment and 
dedication of the team to this project. Please keep up the good work. Be reminded, however, 
that  you  have  established  a  benchmark,  which  we  want  to  be  associated  with,  and  which 
others  will  want  to  emulate.  I  have  no  doubt  that  we  will  beat  the  record  we  have  set  for 
ourselves when we conduct the next survey. I am confident that this workshop will achieve its 
intended  objective  of  disseminating  the  findings  of  the  survey  and  stimulate  active 
participation and comments from the various stakeholders. 
Mr. Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is now my pleasure and honour to declare this Closing and Dissemination Workshop on 
Foreign  Private  Investment  and  Investor  Perception  Survey  officially  opened  and wish  you 
fruitful deliberations. 
I thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 71/2009
