T T Mboweni: Renewed challenges for model builders and forecasters in 
times of extreme uncertainty 
Keynote address by Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
SAKE24 Economist of the Year Award’s Dinner, Johannesburg, 20 May 2009.  
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen  
 Introduction 
1.  
Thank  you  for  the  invitation  to  address  you  on  this  important  occasion.  Since  this  is  a 
function to recognise the efforts of economic analysts to predict the future, it is fitting to share 
a few thoughts on the challenges and serious issues that confront both model-builders and 
forecasters in these most difficult and turbulent times.  
The current financial crisis has forced us all to make a major re-assessment of the way in 
which we have generally perceived the economy to work. Previous fundamental relationships 
and  economic  correlations  we  took  for  granted  have  come  under  question  and  this  has 
caused intense debate in almost all areas of economic discourse.  
The South Africa Reserve Bank and almost all of us here at this venue make use of various 
tools  in  the  form  of  structural  models  that  help  us  analyse  and  forecast  the  future  of  the 
economy. The fact that forecasts keep changing in such a dramatic way does not necessarily 
mean that we are bad modellers or forecasters. But we must be aware of the limitations of 
models,  and  the  major  challenges  that  face  forecasters  in  this  ever-changing  economic 
environment.  
representation  of 
The use and challenge for models  
2.  
At the heart of any economic model is a perception of how the economy works. This leads to 
the representation of the structural economic relationships in the economy. This can either 
be  a  “guesstimate”  or  gut  feel,  based  on  the  modeller’s  knowledge  of  how  the  economy 
functions  or,  alternatively,  a  well-articulated  mathematical 
the 
interrelationships in the economy in the form of an econometric model.  
There are significant differences between models, depending on the different views on how 
the economy is seen to function, and also the use to which the model is being put. Although 
the various types of models are structured to capture and replicate the economy by providing 
for the key channels of the transmission mechanism, the emphasis tends to shift between 
models. For example, the National Treasury will be interested in a model that is geared to 
accurately assess the overall economic and financial market impact of the spending patterns 
of  government,  while  the  central  bank  would  be  more  concerned  with  having  a  model 
specifically  aimed  at  achieving  its  mandated  inflation  target  and  monitoring  the  economic 
consequences of its monetary policy actions.  
There is no unique model or best approach to the forecasting processes and procedures in 
central banks. This is one reason why the South African Reserve Bank has adopted the so-
called suite of models approach. Central banks try to pursue full-information strategies. So, 
instead  of  relying  on  just  one  model  to  produce  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  (MPC) 
forecast,  we  employ  a  large  variety  of  different  models.  Also,  since  the  structures  of  the 
various  models  are  diverse,  each  one  is  capable  of  telling  a  different  story.  The  suite-of-
models approach has the added advantage of taking some degree of model uncertainty into 
account by taking all relevant and potentially-important information into consideration.  
BIS Review 67/2009 
 1
There are essentially two different types of models. The first is the structural macroeconomic 
type of model which includes the traditional multi-equation model, and the second is a short-
term  time  series  forecast  model.  Each  has  its own  set  of  benefits  and  disadvantages.  For 
example, we have the higher frequency autoregressive integrated moving average (ARIMA) 
models  which  are  useful  for  short-term  forecasts  but  are  incapable  of  predicting  a  turning 
point  since  they  are  essentially  based  on  their  own  historic  trends.  The  structural  multi-
equation models such as the South African Reserve Bank’s core econometric model is more 
suited  for  policy  analysis  and  forecasting  since  it  incorporates  behavioural  relationships 
between the key variables of the model.  
Other structural models such as the dynamic stochastic general equilibrium models (DSGE) 
and quarterly projection models (QPM) are more reliable over the medium to longer term but 
are extremely sensitive to the initial conditions or data starting points of the forecast. This is 
also a reason why many central banks that have adopted the DSGE approach spend a lot of 
time and resources on determining exactly where the economy finds itself currently and how 
far it is from the steady state.  
Because of the lags in the response of inflation to changes in the monetary policy stance, 
any  forward-looking  monetary  policy  framework  requires  a  forecast  of  inflation.  However, 
forecasts should be used with the required degree of caution. Forecasts are, by definition, 
surrounded  by  uncertainty,  and  knowledge  about  the  degree  of  forecast  uncertainty  is 
essential for decision-makers. Basically, we can identify five sources of forecast uncertainty: 
uncertainty  about  future  shocks  to  endogenous  variables  (e.g  shocks  to  consumption  and 
productivity);  uncertainty  about  assumptions  concerning  exogenous  variables 
(e.g 
assumptions about oil prices); uncertainty about model parameters (e.g marginal propensity 
to consume); uncertainty about data (e.g revisions of GDP); and uncertainty about the model 
structure and specification.  
Because of these uncertainties, it becomes extremely difficult to assess the balance of the 
various influences on the central forecast. Mervyn King, Governor of the Bank of England, 
has  therefore  argued  that  we  should  not  focus  too  much  on  the  central  forecast:  “The 
Monetary Policy Committee has always stressed that a projection is a probability distribution 
for possible outcomes and not a single path for either growth or inflation”.(Mervn King, Bank 
of England, 2009)  
Since  their  impact  depends  on  the  variable  in  question  and  the  forecast  horizon  under 
scrutiny,  to  actually  prioritise  or  rank  the  source  of  forecast  uncertainty  is  a  difficult  task,. 
However,  in  any  given  model,  the  degree  of  uncertainty  related  to  future  shocks  and  the 
assumed trend in the exogenous variables generally pose the greatest threat to aggregated 
forecast  uncertainty,  rather  than  the  uncertainty  related  to  the  estimated  parameters  and 
data. But challenges also relate to the structural specification of the models used by central 
banks as it is difficult to incorporate everything that really matters in a simplified econometric 
framework of the real world.  
For  example,  the  traditional  models  were  not  able  to  capture  the  current  crisis.  David 
Blanchflower of the Bank of England recently commented on the use of misspecified models 
or models that fail to take crucial financial issues into consideration: “The economic models 
that  provided  the  rationale  for  the  inflation  targeting  approach  do  not  describe  well  the 
features  of  the  global  economy  that  led  to  the  current  crisis;  the  build  up  of  global 
imbalances,  perceptions  of  risk  in  the  economy  and  stresses  within  the  financial  sector.” 
(David  Blanchflower,  Bank  of  England,  2009)  As  these  factors  are  extremely  difficult  to 
incorporate into our models, building models that capture these issues will be a challenge to 
model builders.  
Apart from specification problems, there is the issue of exogenous assumptions that get fed 
in to the model. A forecast generated by even the most perfect model will only be as good as 
the  assumptions  that  are  used.  Very  often  these  exogenous  assumptions  are  notoriously 
difficult  to  predict.  For  example,  in  2007  and  2008  when  the  international  oil  prices  were 
2 
 BIS Review 67/2009
increasing,  we  were  continuously  surprised  on  the  upside  by  oil  price  developments.  We 
were also caught by surprise by the degree to which oil prices declined in the second half of 
2008.  In  the  forecasting  process  our  modelling  team  spends  a  lot  of  time  analysing  the 
relevant data and forecasts of other institutions to come up with well-informed assumptions. 
But  there  is  no  guarantee  that  these  assumptions  will  be  correct  or  that  they  will  remain 
unchanged by the time of the next meeting.  
By way of illustration, at the April MPC meeting, the assumptions incorporated into the model 
included an average contractual oil price of US$50 per barrel in 2009 and US$55 in 2010. 
(The contractual prices are lower than the spot prices). However in August 2008, the oil price 
assumptions  for  the  same  two  years  were  US$115  per  barrel  and  US$107  per  barrel 
respectively.  Other  assumptions  in  the  previous  meeting  included:  International  commodity 
prices are expected to decline on average by 15 per cent this year and to remain unchanged 
next  year;  international  wholesale prices  are  expected  to decline by  3¼  per  cent  this  year 
before  increasing  by  2  per  cent  in 2010;  while  growth  in  South  Africa’s  trading partners  is 
expected to contract by 2 per cent in 2009 and expand by 1½ per cent next year. The real 
effective  exchange  is  expected  to  depreciate  by  4¼  per  cent  in  2009  and  to  remain 
unchanged  in  2010.  Domestic  assumptions  include  a  4  per  cent  increase  in  final 
consumption  expenditure  by  general  government  in  the  next  2  years;  administered  price 
inflation of 2 per cent in 2009 and 9¾ per cent in 2010; and an increase in import crude oil 
volumes of 5 per cent in 2009 and unchanged in 2010.  
The monetary policy transmission mechanism  
3.  
All central bank models strive to replicate the most important channels of the monetary policy 
transmission  mechanism.  In  particular  this  includes  the  interest  rate  channel  and  the 
exchange  rate  channel  in  particular.  The  exchange  rate  is  possibly  one  the  most  difficult 
variables  to  estimate  in  the  model  and  usually  includes  some  sort  of  interest  rate  parity 
measure  which  allows  for  the  domestic  exchange  rate  to  appreciate  if  the  interest  rate 
differential moves in its favour. However, does this relationship necessarily hold at times of 
global  financial  market  uncertainty?  We  have  seen  in  these  circumstances  investors  and 
international  banks  feel  the  need  to  limit  their  risk  exposure  by  repatriating  their  funds  to 
“safe-haven” instruments such as USA bonds in particular. Our models are unable to predict 
reliably  the  exchange  rate  during  such  periods  where  we  have  extremely  volatile  and 
unpredictable capital movements.  
The other critical transmission channel is the interest rate channel. Most models generally 
assume  that  there  is  no  obstruction  to  the  interest  rate  pass-through  to  the  rest  of  the 
economy. However, at the peak of the financial market crisis towards the latter part of last 
year,  commercial  banks  started  to  raise  their  credit  lending  standards  and  criteria.  The 
quarterly Senior Loan Officer survey of the Federal Reserve Board bears testimony to the 
fact that elevated loan spreads and increased deposit requirements have been self-imposed 
by the banks to reduce their asset risk in an effort to protect their balance sheets. Although 
this is probably perfectly rational behaviour by prudent banks struggling to value the extent of 
their loan exposure, it has the unfortunate effect of reducing the effectiveness of monetary 
policy initiatives taken by central banks to stimulate the economy. In fact, in most advanced 
economies, central bank interest rate levels are currently at their lowest levels in decades, 
but this does not necessarily imply that this intended benefit is passed on directly through to 
the investor and consumer.  
The behaviour of commercial banks is quite understandable, given the nature and origins of 
the  current  economic  situation.  However,  it  also  underlines  the  procyclical  nature  of  their 
actions: banks are more keen to offer credit when times are good, but become somewhat 
reluctant to advance credit facilities during times of uncertainty and economic slowdown. This 
behaviour of commercial banks is not unique to the USA. The BER/ Ernst & Young Financial 
Services Index has also found evidence that domestic banks also have raised their lending 
BIS Review 67/2009 
 3
standards  and  criteria.  It  also  appears  that  domestic  banks  are  charging  higher  spreads 
relative to prime than was previously the case.  
The  above  illustrates  that  we  should  not  rely  too  heavily  on  the  results  of  a  model  to 
guarantee our policy success, particularly during times of heightened uncertainty. No model 
can  be  expected  to  replicate  all  these  factors  in  a  consistent  time-invariant  framework, 
especially  since  the  behavioural  patterns  of  economic  agents  tend  to  change  so  radically 
from time to time.  
Conclusion  
4.  
Despite all the problems with the use of models and the challenges related to forecasting in 
an uncertain environment, models, irrespective of how they are structured, remain integral to 
the policy decision taken and we will therefore continue to use them. The models themselves 
have  become  increasingly  sophisticated.  But  this  does  not  guarantee  the  success  of 
monetary  policy  formulation  and  implementation  especially,  in  an  uncertain  future.  The 
challenges  we  are  faced  with  have  certainly  escalated  in  recent  times.  However,  with  the 
new  challenges  we  also  have  new  opportunities  to  get  a  greater  understanding  of  the 
dynamic and ever-changing economy we need to deal with.  
Thank you very much.  
References 
Blanchflower, D. 2009. “Macroeconomic policy responses in the UK?”, open lecture by David 
Blanchflower an external member of the Bank of England Monetary Policy Committee at the 
University  of  Nottingham,  published  by  the  globalisation  and  economic  policy  centre, 
University of Nottingham, Thursday 29th January, 2009. www.dartmouth.edu/~blnchflr.  
Ernst  &  Young,  2009.  “The  Financial  Services  Index  :  1st  Quarter  2009”,  the  financial 
services report for the first quarter of 2009, compiled by George Kershoff (BER) and Graham 
Thompson (E&Y), the survey  was conducted between 11 February and 17 March and the 
results processed on 18 March 2009. The number of responses processed was: retail banks 
(21), investment banks (17), investment managers (63) and life insurers (17), April 2009.  
Federal  Reserve  Board,  2008.  “Senior  Loan  Officer  Opinion  Survey  on  Bank  Lending 
Practices”, survey on the state of the USA banking sector provided by the Federal Reserve 
Board, published January 2009.  
http://www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/snloansurvey/200902/  
King, M. 2009. Opening Remarks by the Governor, Inflation Report Press Conference, Bank 
of England, Wednesday 13 May 2009.  
4 
 BIS Review 67/2009
