Ben S Bernanke: The crisis and the policy response 
Text of the Stamp Lecture by Mr Ben S Bernanke, Chairman of the Board of Governors of 
the US Federal Reserve System, at the London School of Economics, London, 13 January 
2009. 
The  original  speech,  which  contains  various  links  to  the  documents  mentioned,  can  be  found  on  the  US  Federal  Reserve 
System’s website.  
 For almost a year and a half the global financial system has been under extraordinary stress 
–  stress  that  has  now  decisively  spilled  over  to  the  global  economy  more  broadly.  The 
proximate cause of the crisis was the turn of the housing cycle in the United States and the 
associated rise in delinquencies on subprime mortgages, which imposed substantial losses 
on  many  financial  institutions  and  shook  investor  confidence  in  credit  markets.  However, 
although the subprime debacle triggered the crisis, the developments in the U.S. mortgage 
market were only one aspect of a much larger and more encompassing credit boom whose 
impact transcended the mortgage market to affect many other forms of credit. Aspects of this 
broader credit boom included widespread declines in underwriting standards, breakdowns in 
lending  oversight  by  investors  and  rating  agencies,  increased  reliance  on  complex  and 
opaque credit instruments that proved fragile under stress, and unusually low compensation 
for risk-taking. 
The abrupt end of the credit boom has had widespread financial and economic ramifications. 
Financial  institutions  have  seen  their  capital  depleted  by  losses  and  writedowns  and  their 
balance  sheets  clogged  by  complex  credit  products  and  other  illiquid  assets  of  uncertain 
value.  Rising  credit  risks  and  intense  risk  aversion  have  pushed  credit  spreads  to 
unprecedented  levels,  and  markets  for  securitized  assets,  except  for  mortgage  securities 
with  government  guarantees,  have  shut  down.  Heightened  systemic  risks,  falling  asset 
values,  and  tightening  credit  have  in  turn  taken  a  heavy  toll  on  business  and  consumer 
confidence  and  precipitated  a  sharp  slowing  in  global  economic  activity.  The  damage,  in 
terms of lost output, lost jobs, and lost wealth, is already substantial. 
The  global  economy  will  recover,  but  the  timing  and  strength  of  the  recovery  are  highly 
uncertain. Government policy responses around the world will be critical determinants of the 
speed and vigor of the recovery. Today I will offer some thoughts on current and prospective 
policy responses to the crisis in the United States, with a particular emphasis on actions by 
the Federal Reserve. In doing so, I will outline the framework that has guided the Federal 
Reserve's responses to date. I will also explain why I believe that the Fed still has powerful 
tools at its disposal to fight the financial crisis and the economic downturn, even though the 
overnight federal funds rate cannot be reduced meaningfully further. 
The Federal Reserve's response to the crisis  
The  Federal  Reserve  has  responded  aggressively  to  the  crisis  since  its  emergence  in  the 
summer of 2007. Following a cut in the discount rate (the rate at which the Federal Reserve 
lends to depository institutions) in August of that year, the Federal Open Market Committee 
began to ease monetary policy in September 2007, reducing the target for the federal funds 
rate by 50 basis points.1 As indications of economic weakness proliferated, the Committee 
continued to respond, bringing down its target for the federal funds rate by a cumulative 325 
basis points by the spring of 2008. In historical comparison, this policy response stands out 
                                                 
1   A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point. 
BIS Review 3/2009 
 1
as exceptionally rapid and proactive. In taking these actions, we aimed both to cushion the 
direct effects of the financial turbulence on the economy and to reduce the virulence of the 
so-called adverse feedback loop, in which economic weakness and financial stress become 
mutually reinforcing.  
These policy actions helped to support employment and incomes during the first year of the 
crisis.  Unfortunately,  the  intensification  of  the  financial  turbulence  last  fall  led  to  further 
deterioration in the economic outlook. The Committee responded by cutting the target for the 
federal  funds  rate  an  additional  100  basis  points  last  October,  with  half  of  that  reduction 
coming as part of an unprecedented coordinated interest rate cut by six major central banks 
on October 8. In December the Committee reduced its target further, setting a range of 0 to 
25 basis points for the target federal funds rate. 
The Committee's aggressive monetary easing was not without risks. During the early phase 
of rate reductions, some observers expressed concern that these policy actions would stoke 
inflation.  These  concerns  intensified  as  inflation  reached  high  levels  in  mid-2008,  mostly 
reflecting  a  surge  in  the  prices  of  oil  and  other  commodities.  The  Committee  takes  its 
responsibility  to  ensure  price  stability  extremely  seriously,  and  throughout  this  period  it 
remained  closely  attuned  to  developments  in  inflation  and  inflation  expectations. However, 
the  Committee  also  maintained  the  view  that  the  rapid  rise  in  commodity  prices  in  2008 
primarily  reflected  sharply  increased  demand  for  raw  materials  in  emerging  market 
economies,  in  combination  with  constraints  on  the  supply  of  these  materials,  rather  than 
general  inflationary  pressures.  Committee  members  expected  that,  at  some  point,  global 
economic  growth  would  moderate,  resulting  in  slower  increases  in  the  demand  for 
commodities and a leveling out in their prices – as reflected, for example, in the pattern of 
futures market prices. As you know, commodity prices peaked during the summer and, rather 
than  leveling  out,  have  actually  fallen  dramatically  with  the  weakening  in  global  economic 
activity. As a consequence, overall inflation has already declined significantly and appears 
likely to moderate further. 
The Fed's monetary easing has been reflected in significant declines in a number of lending 
rates, especially shorter-term rates, thus offsetting to some degree the effects of the financial 
turmoil on financial conditions. However, that offset has been incomplete, as widening credit 
spreads,  more  restrictive  lending  standards,  and  credit  market  dysfunction  have  worked 
against the monetary easing and led to tighter financial conditions overall. In particular, many 
traditional  funding  sources  for  financial  institutions  and  markets  have  dried  up,  and  banks 
and  other  lenders  have  found  their  ability  to  securitize  mortgages,  auto  loans,  credit  card 
receivables,  student  loans,  and  other  forms  of  credit  greatly  curtailed.  Thus,  in  addition  to 
easing monetary policy, the Federal Reserve has worked to support the functioning of credit 
markets and to reduce financial strains by providing liquidity to the private sector. In doing so, 
as I will discuss shortly, the Fed has deployed a number of additional policy tools, some of 
which were previously in our toolkit and some of which have been created as the need arose. 
Beyond the Federal funds rate: The Fed's policy toolkit 
Although the federal funds rate is now close to zero, the Federal Reserve retains a number 
of policy tools that can be deployed against the crisis. 
One important tool is policy communication. Even if the overnight rate is close to zero, the 
Committee  should  be  able  to  influence  longer-term  interest  rates  by  informing  the  public's 
expectations about the future course of monetary policy. To illustrate, in its statement after its 
December meeting, the Committee expressed the view that economic conditions are likely to 
2 
 BIS Review 3/2009
warrant  an  unusually  low  federal  funds  rate  for  some  time.2  To  the  extent  that  such 
statements cause the public to lengthen the horizon over which they expect short-term rates 
to  be  held  at  very  low  levels,  they  will  exert  downward  pressure  on  longer-term  rates, 
stimulating  aggregate  demand.  It  is  important,  however,  that  statements  of  this  sort  be 
expressed in conditional fashion – that is, that they link policy expectations to the evolving 
economic  outlook.  If  the  public  were  to  perceive  a  statement  about  future  policy  to  be 
unconditional,  then  long-term  rates  might  fail  to  respond  in  the  desired  fashion  should  the 
economic outlook change materially.  
Other than policies tied to current and expected future values of the overnight interest rate, 
the Federal Reserve has – and indeed, has been actively using – a range of policy tools to 
provide direct support to credit markets and thus to the broader economy. As I will elaborate, 
I find it useful to divide these tools into three groups. Although these sets of tools differ in 
important respects, they have one aspect in common: They all make use of the asset side of 
the Federal Reserve's balance sheet. That is, each involves the Fed's authorities to extend 
credit or purchase securities. 
The first set of tools, which are closely tied to the central bank's traditional role as the lender 
of last resort, involve the provision of short-term liquidity to sound financial institutions. Over 
the course of the crisis, the Fed has taken a number of extraordinary actions to ensure that 
financial  institutions  have  adequate  access  to  short-term  credit.  These  actions  include 
creating new facilities for auctioning credit and making primary securities dealers, as well as 
banks, eligible to borrow at the Fed's discount window.3 For example, since August 2007 we 
have lowered the spread between the discount rate and the federal funds rate target from 
100  basis  points  to  25  basis  points;  increased  the  term  of  discount  window  loans  from 
overnight to 90 days; created the Term Auction Facility, which auctions credit to depository 
institutions for terms up to three months; put into place the Term Securities Lending Facility, 
which allows primary dealers to borrow Treasury securities from the Fed against less-liquid 
collateral;  and  initiated  the  Primary  Dealer  Credit  Facility  as  a  source  of  liquidity  for  those 
firms, among other actions.  
Because  interbank  markets  are  global  in  scope,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  also  approved 
bilateral currency swap agreements with 14 foreign central banks. The swap facilities have 
allowed these central banks to acquire dollars from the Federal Reserve to lend to banks in 
their jurisdictions, which has served to ease conditions in dollar funding markets globally. In 
most cases, the provision of this dollar liquidity abroad was conducted in tight coordination 
with the Federal Reserve's own funding auctions.  
Importantly,  the  provision  of  credit  to  financial  institutions  exposes  the  Federal  Reserve  to 
only minimal credit risk; the loans that we make to banks and primary dealers through our 
various  facilities  are  generally  overcollateralized  and  made  with  recourse  to  the  borrowing 
firm. The Federal Reserve has never suffered any losses in the course of its normal lending 
to  banks  and,  now,  to  primary  dealers.  In  the  case  of  currency  swaps,  the  foreign  central 
banks are responsible for repayment, not the financial institutions that ultimately receive the 
funds; moreover, as further security, the Federal Reserve receives an equivalent amount of 
foreign currency in exchange for the dollars it provides to foreign central banks.  
Liquidity provision by the central bank reduces systemic risk by assuring market participants 
that, should short-term investors begin to lose confidence, financial institutions will be able to 
                                                 
2   Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve (2008), "FOMC Statement and Board Approval of Discount Rate 
Requests of the Federal Reserve Banks of New York, Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta, Minneapolis, and San 
Francisco," press release, December 16. 
3   Primary dealers are broker-dealers that trade in U.S. government securities with the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New  York.  The  New  York  Fed's  Open  Market  Desk  engages  in  trades  on  behalf  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
System to implement monetary policy. 
BIS Review 3/2009 
 3
meet the resulting demands for cash without resorting to potentially destabilizing fire sales of 
assets.  Moreover,  backstopping  the  liquidity  needs  of  financial  institutions  reduces  funding 
stresses and, all else equal, should increase the willingness of those institutions to lend and 
make markets.  
On  the  other  hand,  the  provision  of  ample  liquidity  to  banks  and  primary  dealers  is  no 
panacea. Today, concerns about capital, asset quality, and credit risk continue to limit the 
willingness of many intermediaries to extend credit, even when liquidity is ample. Moreover, 
providing  liquidity  to  financial  institutions  does  not  address  directly  instability  or  declining 
credit availability in critical nonbank markets, such as the commercial paper market or the 
market for asset-backed securities, both of which normally play major roles in the extension 
of credit in the United States. 
To address these issues, the Federal Reserve has developed a second set of policy tools, 
which  involve  the  provision  of  liquidity  directly  to  borrowers  and  investors  in  key  credit 
markets. Notably, we have introduced facilities to purchase highly rated commercial paper at 
a term of three months  and to provide backup liquidity for money market mutual funds. In 
addition, the Federal Reserve and the Treasury have jointly announced a facility that will lend 
against AAA-rated asset-backed securities collateralized by student loans, auto loans, credit 
card  loans,  and  loans  guaranteed  by  the  Small  Business  Administration.  The  Federal 
Reserve's credit risk exposure in the latter facility will be minimal, because the collateral will 
be subject to a "haircut" and the Treasury is providing $20 billion of capital as supplementary 
loss protection. We expect this facility to be operational next month. 
The  rationales  and  objectives  of  our  various  facilities  differ,  according  to  the  nature  of  the 
problem  being  addressed.  In  some  cases,  as  in  our  programs  to  backstop  money  market 
mutual  funds,  the  purpose  of  the  facility  is  to  serve,  once  again  in  classic  central  bank 
fashion,  as  liquidity  provider  of  last  resort.  Following  a  prominent  fund's  "breaking  of  the 
buck" – that is, a decline in its net asset value below par – in September, investors began to 
withdraw  funds  in  large  amounts  from  money  market  mutual  funds  that  invest  in  private 
instruments  such  as  commercial  paper  and  certificates  of  deposit.  Fund  managers 
responded by liquidating assets and investing at only the shortest of maturities. As the pace 
of withdrawals increased, both the stability of the money market mutual fund industry and the 
functioning  of  the  commercial  paper  market  were  threatened.  The  Federal  Reserve 
responded  with  several  programs,  including  a  facility  to  finance  bank  purchases  of  high-
quality  asset-backed  commercial  paper  from  money  market  mutual  funds.  This  facility 
effectively  channeled  liquidity  to  the  funds,  helping  them  to  meet  redemption  demands 
without  having  to  sell  assets  indiscriminately.  Together  with  a  Treasury  program  that 
provided partial insurance to investors in money market mutual funds, these efforts helped 
stanch the cash outflows from those funds and stabilize the industry. 
The  Federal  Reserve's  facility  to  buy  high-quality  (A1-P1)  commercial  paper  at  a  term  of 
three months was likewise designed to provide a liquidity backstop, in this case for investors 
and  borrowers  in  the  commercial  paper  market.  As  I  mentioned,  the  functioning  of  that 
market  deteriorated  significantly  in  September,  with  borrowers  finding  financing  difficult  to 
obtain, and then only at high rates and very short (usually overnight) maturities. By serving 
as a backup source of liquidity for borrowers, the Fed's commercial paper facility was aimed 
at  reducing  investor  and  borrower  concerns  about  "rollover  risk,"  the  risk  that  a  borrower 
could not raise new funds to repay maturing commercial paper. The reduction of rollover risk, 
in  turn,  should  increase  the  willingness  of  private  investors  to  lend,  particularly  for  terms 
longer than overnight. These various actions appear to have improved the functioning of the 
commercial  paper  market,  as  rates  and  risk  spreads  have  come  down  and  the  average 
maturities of issuance have increased. 
In contrast, our forthcoming asset-backed securities program, a joint effort with the Treasury, 
is not purely for liquidity provision. This facility will provide three-year term loans to investors 
against  AAA-rated  securities  backed  by  recently  originated  consumer  and  small-business 
4 
 BIS Review 3/2009
loans. Unlike our other lending programs, this facility combines Federal Reserve liquidity with 
capital provided by the Treasury, which allows it to accept some credit risk. By providing a 
combination  of  capital  and  liquidity,  this  facility  will  effectively  substitute  public  for  private 
balance sheet capacity, in a period of sharp deleveraging and risk aversion in which such 
capacity appears very short. If the program works as planned, it should lead to lower rates 
and  greater  availability  of  consumer  and  small  business  credit.  Over  time,  by  increasing 
market liquidity and stimulating market activity, this facility should also help to revive private 
lending.  Importantly,  if  the  facility  for  asset-backed  securities  proves  successful,  its  basic 
framework  can  be  expanded  to  accommodate  higher  volumes  or  additional  classes  of 
securities as circumstances warrant. 
The Federal Reserve's third set of policy tools for supporting the functioning of credit markets 
involves  the  purchase  of  longer-term  securities  for  the  Fed's  portfolio.  For  example,  we 
recently announced plans to purchase up to $100 billion in government-sponsored enterprise 
(GSE)  debt  and  up  to  $500  billion  in  GSE  mortgage-backed  securities  over  the  next  few 
quarters. Notably, mortgage rates dropped significantly on the announcement of this program 
and have fallen further since it went into operation. Lower mortgage rates should support the 
housing sector. The Committee is also evaluating the possibility of purchasing longer-term 
Treasury securities. In determining whether to proceed with such purchases, the Committee 
will focus on their potential to improve conditions in private credit markets, such as mortgage 
markets. 
These three sets of policy tools – lending to financial institutions, providing liquidity directly to 
key credit markets, and buying longer-term securities – have the common feature that each 
represents a use of the asset side of the Fed's balance sheet, that is, they all involve lending 
or the purchase of securities. The virtue of these policies in the current context is that they 
allow the Federal Reserve to continue to push down interest rates and ease credit conditions 
in a range of markets, despite the fact that the federal funds rate is close to its zero lower 
bound. 
Credit easing versus quantitative easing 
The  Federal  Reserve's  approach  to  supporting  credit  markets  is  conceptually  distinct  from 
quantitative easing (QE), the policy approach used by the Bank of Japan from 2001 to 2006. 
Our approach – which could be described as "credit easing" – resembles quantitative easing 
in one respect: It involves an expansion of the central bank's balance sheet. However, in a 
pure QE regime, the focus of policy is the quantity of bank reserves, which are liabilities of 
the  central  bank;  the  composition  of  loans  and  securities  on  the  asset  side  of  the  central 
bank's  balance  sheet  is  incidental.  Indeed,  although  the  Bank  of  Japan's  policy  approach 
during  the  QE  period  was  quite  multifaceted,  the  overall  stance  of  its  policy  was  gauged 
primarily  in  terms  of  its  target  for  bank  reserves.  In  contrast,  the  Federal  Reserve's  credit 
easing  approach  focuses  on  the  mix  of  loans  and  securities  that  it  holds  and  on  how  this 
composition  of  assets  affects  credit  conditions  for  households  and  businesses.  This 
difference  does  not  reflect  any  doctrinal  disagreement  with  the  Japanese  approach,  but 
rather  the  differences  in  financial  and  economic  conditions  between  the  two  episodes.  In 
particular, credit spreads are much wider and credit markets more dysfunctional in the United 
States today than was the case during the Japanese experiment with quantitative easing. To 
stimulate aggregate demand in the current environment, the Federal Reserve must focus its 
policies on reducing those spreads and improving the functioning of private credit markets 
more generally. 
The stimulative effect of the Federal Reserve's credit easing policies depends sensitively on 
the  particular  mix  of  lending  programs  and  securities  purchases  that  it  undertakes.  When 
markets are illiquid and private arbitrage is impaired by balance sheet constraints and other 
factors, as at present, one dollar of longer-term securities purchases is unlikely to have the 
same impact on financial markets and the economy as a dollar of lending to banks, which 
BIS Review 3/2009 
 5
has in turn a different effect than a dollar of lending to support the commercial paper market. 
Because various types of lending have heterogeneous effects, the stance of Fed policy in the 
current regime – in contrast to a QE regime – is not easily summarized by a single number, 
such as the quantity of excess reserves or the size of the monetary base. In addition, the 
usage of Federal Reserve credit is determined in large part by borrower needs and thus will 
tend  to  increase  when  market  conditions  worsen  and  decline  when  market  conditions 
improve.  Setting  a  target  for  the  size  of  the  Federal  Reserve's  balance  sheet,  as  in  a  QE 
regime,  could  thus  have  the  perverse  effect  of  forcing  the  Fed  to  tighten  the  terms  and 
availability of its lending at times when market conditions were worsening, and vice versa. 
The lack of a simple summary measure or policy target poses an important communications 
challenge. To minimize market uncertainty and achieve the maximum effect of its policies, 
the Federal Reserve is committed  to providing the public as much information as possible 
about the uses of its balance sheet, plans regarding future uses of its balance sheet, and the 
criteria on which the relevant decisions are based.4
Exit strategy 
Some  observers  have  expressed  the  concern  that,  by  expanding  its  balance  sheet,  the 
Federal  Reserve  is  effectively  printing  money,  an  action  that  will  ultimately  be  inflationary. 
The Fed's lending activities have indeed resulted in a large increase in the excess reserves 
held by banks. Bank reserves, together with currency, make up the narrowest definition of 
money,  the  monetary  base;  as  you  would  expect,  this  measure  of  money  has  risen 
significantly  as  the  Fed's  balance  sheet  has  expanded.  However,  banks  are  choosing  to 
leave  the  great  bulk  of  their  excess  reserves  idle,  in  most  cases  on  deposit  with  the  Fed. 
Consequently,  the  rates  of  growth  of  broader  monetary  aggregates,  such  as  M1  and  M2, 
have been much lower than that of the monetary base. At this point, with global economic 
activity  weak  and  commodity  prices  at  low  levels,  we  see  little  risk  of  inflation  in  the  near 
term; indeed, we expect inflation to continue to moderate. 
However, at some point, when credit markets and the economy have begun to recover, the 
Federal  Reserve  will  have  to  unwind  its  various  lending  programs.  To  some  extent,  this 
unwinding will happen automatically, as improvements in credit markets should reduce the 
need  to  use  Fed  facilities.  Indeed,  where  possible  we  have  tried  to  set  lending  rates  and 
margins  at  levels  that  are  likely  to  be  increasingly  unattractive  to  borrowers  as  financial 
conditions  normalize.  In  addition,  some  programs  –  those  authorized  under  the  Federal 
Reserve's  so-called  13(3)  authority,  which  requires  a  finding  that  conditions  in  financial 
markets  are  "unusual  and  exigent"  –  will  by  law  have  to  be  eliminated  once  credit  market 
conditions substantially normalize. However, as the unwinding of the Fed's various programs 
effectively constitutes a tightening of policy, the principal factor determining the timing and 
pace of that process will be the Committee's assessment of the condition of credit markets 
and the prospects for the economy. 
As lending programs are scaled back, the size of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet will 
decline,  implying  a  reduction  in  excess  reserves  and  the  monetary  base.  A  significant 
shrinking  of  the  balance  sheet  can  be  accomplished  relatively  quickly,  as  a  substantial 
portion of the assets that the Federal Reserve holds – including loans to financial institutions, 
currency  swaps,  and  purchases  of  commercial  paper  –  are  short-term  in  nature  and  can 
simply be allowed to run off as the various programs and facilities are scaled back or shut 
down. As the size of the balance sheet and the quantity of excess reserves in the system 
                                                 
4   Detailed  information  about  the  Federal  Reserve's  balance  sheet  is  published  weekly  as  part  of  the  H.4.1 
release.  For  a  summary  of  Fed  lending  programs,  see  Forms  of  Federal  Reserve  Lending  to  Financial 
Institutions. 
6 
 BIS Review 3/2009
decline,  the  Federal  Reserve  will  be  able  to  return  to  its  traditional  means  of  making 
monetary policy – namely, by setting a target for the federal funds rate. 
Although a large portion of Federal Reserve assets are short-term in nature, we do hold or 
expect  to  hold  significant  quantities  of  longer-term  assets,  such  as  the  mortgage-backed 
securities  that  we  will  buy  over  the  next  two  quarters.  Although  longer-term  securities  can 
also be sold, of course, we would not anticipate disposing of more than a small portion of 
these assets in the near term, which will slow the rate at which our balance sheet can shrink. 
We are monitoring the maturity composition of our balance sheet closely and do not expect a 
significant problem in reducing our balance sheet to the extent necessary at the appropriate 
time.  
Importantly,  the  management  of  the  Federal  Reserve's  balance  sheet  and  the  conduct  of 
monetary policy in the future will be made easier by the recent congressional action to give 
the Fed the authority to pay interest on bank reserves. In principle, the interest rate the Fed 
pays on bank reserves should set a floor on the overnight interest rate, as banks should be 
unwilling to lend reserves at a rate lower than they can receive from the Fed. In practice, the 
federal funds rate has fallen somewhat below the interest rate on reserves in recent months, 
reflecting the very high volume of excess reserves, the inexperience of banks with the new 
regime,  and  other  factors.  However,  as  excess  reserves  decline,  financial  conditions 
normalize, and banks adapt to the new regime, we expect the interest rate paid on reserves 
to become an effective instrument for controlling the federal funds rate.  
Moreover,  other  tools  are  available  or  can  be  developed  to  improve  control  of  the  federal 
funds rate during the exit stage. For example, the Treasury could resume its recent practice 
of issuing supplementary financing bills and placing the funds with the Federal Reserve; the 
issuance  of  these  bills  effectively  drains  reserves  from  the  banking  system,  improving 
monetary control. Longer-term assets can be financed through repurchase agreements and 
other methods, which also drain reserves from the system. In considering whether to create 
or expand its programs, the Federal Reserve will carefully weigh the implications for the exit 
strategy. And we will take all necessary actions to ensure that the unwinding of our programs 
is  accomplished  smoothly  and  in  a  timely  way,  consistent  with  meeting  our  obligation  to 
foster full employment and price stability. 
Stabilizing the financial system 
The  Federal  Reserve  will  do  its  part  to  promote  economic  recovery,  but  other  policy 
measures  will  be  needed  as  well.  The  incoming  Administration  and  the  Congress  are 
currently discussing a substantial fiscal package that, if enacted, could provide a significant 
boost  to  economic  activity.  In  my  view,  however,  fiscal  actions  are  unlikely  to  promote  a 
lasting  recovery  unless  they  are  accompanied  by  strong  measures  to  further  stabilize  and 
strengthen the financial system. History demonstrates conclusively that a modern economy 
cannot grow if its financial system is not operating effectively. 
In  the  United  States,  a  number  of  important  steps  have  already  been  taken  to  promote 
financial  stability,  including  the  Treasury's  injection  of  about  $250  billion  of  capital  into 
banking  organizations,  a  substantial  expansion  of  guarantees  for  bank  liabilities  by  the 
Federal  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation,  and  the  Fed's  various  liquidity  programs.  Those 
measures, together with analogous actions in many other countries, likely prevented a global 
financial meltdown in the fall that, had it occurred, would have left the global economy in far 
worse condition than it is in today.  
However, with the worsening of the economy's growth prospects, continued credit losses and 
asset  markdowns  may  maintain  for  a  time  the  pressure  on  the  capital  and  balance  sheet 
capacities of financial institutions. Consequently, more capital injections and guarantees may 
become necessary to ensure stability and the normalization of credit markets. A continuing 
barrier to private investment in financial institutions is the large quantity of troubled, hard-to-
BIS Review 3/2009 
 7
value  assets  that  remain  on  institutions'  balance  sheets.  The  presence  of  these  assets 
significantly increases uncertainty about the underlying value of these institutions and may 
inhibit  both  new  private  investment  and  new  lending.  Should  the  Treasury  decide  to 
supplement  injections  of  capital  by  removing  troubled  assets  from  institutions'  balance 
sheets, as was initially proposed for the U.S. financial rescue plan, several approaches might 
be considered. Public purchases of troubled assets are one possibility. Another is to provide 
asset  guarantees,  under  which  the  government  would  agree  to  absorb,  presumably  in 
exchange for warrants or some other form of compensation, part of the prospective losses on 
specified portfolios of troubled assets held by banks. Yet another approach would be to set 
up  and  capitalize  so-called  bad  banks,  which  would  purchase  assets  from  financial 
institutions in exchange for cash and equity in the bad bank. These methods are similar from 
an  economic  perspective,  though  they  would  have  somewhat  different  operational  and 
accounting implications. In addition, efforts to reduce preventable foreclosures, among other 
benefits,  could  strengthen  the  housing  market  and  reduce  mortgage  losses,  thereby 
increasing financial stability. 
The public in many countries is understandably concerned by the commitment of substantial 
government resources to aid the financial industry when other industries receive little or no 
assistance.  This  disparate  treatment,  unappealing  as  it  is,  appears  unavoidable.  Our 
economic system is critically dependent on the free flow of credit, and the consequences for 
the  broader  economy  of  financial  instability  are  thus  powerful  and  quickly  felt.  Indeed,  the 
destructive effects of financial instability on jobs and growth are already evident worldwide. 
Responsible  policymakers  must  therefore  do  what  they  can  to  communicate  to  their 
constituencies why financial stabilization is essential for economic recovery and is therefore 
in the broader public interest. 
Even as we strive to stabilize financial markets and institutions worldwide, however, we also 
owe  the  public  near-term,  concrete  actions  to  limit  the  probability  and  severity  of  future 
crises.  We  need  stronger  supervisory  and  regulatory  systems  under  which  gaps  and 
unnecessary  duplication  in  coverage  are  eliminated,  lines  of  supervisory  authority  and 
responsibility  are  clarified,  and  oversight  powers  are  adequate  to  curb  excessive  leverage 
and  risk-taking.  In  light  of  the  multinational  character  of  the  largest  financial  firms  and  the 
globalization of financial markets more generally, regulatory oversight should be coordinated 
internationally  to  the  greatest  extent  possible.  We  must  continue  our  ongoing  work  to 
strengthen the financial infrastructure – for example, by encouraging the migration of trading 
in credit default swaps and other derivatives to central counterparties and exchanges. The 
supervisory authorities should develop the capacity for increased surveillance of the financial 
system as a whole, rather than focusing excessively on the condition of individual firms in 
isolation; and we should revisit capital regulations, accounting rules, and other aspects of the 
regulatory regime to ensure that they do not induce excessive procyclicality in the financial 
system  and  the  economy.  As  we  proceed  with  regulatory  reform,  however,  we  must  take 
care not to take actions that forfeit the economic benefits of financial innovation and market 
discipline. 
Particularly  pressing  is  the  need  to  address  the  problem  of  financial  institutions  that  are 
deemed  "too  big  to  fail."  It  is  unacceptable  that  large  firms  that  the  government  is  now 
compelled  to  support  to  preserve  financial  stability  were  among  the  greatest  risk-takers 
during the boom period. The existence of too-big-to-fail firms also violates the presumption of 
a  level  playing  field  among  financial  institutions.  In  the  future,  financial  firms  of  any  type 
whose failure would pose a systemic risk must accept especially close regulatory scrutiny of 
their  risk-taking.  Also  urgently  needed  in  the  United  States  is  a  new  set  of  procedures  for 
resolving failing nonbank institutions deemed systemically critical, analogous to the rules and 
powers that currently exist for resolving banks under the so-called systemic risk exception. 
8 
 BIS Review 3/2009
Conclusion 
The  world  today  faces  both  short-term  and  long-term  challenges.  In  the  near  term,  the 
highest  priority  is  to  promote  a  global  economic  recovery.  The  Federal  Reserve  retains 
powerful  policy  tools  and  will  use  them  aggressively  to  help  achieve  this  objective.  Fiscal 
policy  can  stimulate  economic  activity,  but  a  sustained  recovery  will  also  require  a 
comprehensive plan to stabilize the financial system and restore normal flows of credit. 
Despite the understandable focus on the near term, we do not have the luxury of postponing 
work  on  longer-term  issues.  High  on  the  list,  in  light  of  recent  events,  are  strengthening 
regulatory oversight and improving the capacity of both the private sector and regulators to 
detect and manage risk.  
Finally, a clear lesson of the recent period is that the world is too interconnected for nations 
to go it alone in their economic, financial, and regulatory policies. International cooperation is 
thus essential if we are to address the crisis successfully and provide the basis for a healthy, 
sustained recovery.  
BIS Review 3/2009 
 9
