Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Macroeconomic prudence – a review of the 
Philippine economy in 2009  
Statement by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of the Central Bank of the Philippines 
(Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas),  at  the  Tuesday  Club  Breakfast  Meeting,  Manila,  6  January 
2009. 
 Let me begin by wishing everyone a “calmer”, hopefully “not too” challenging 2009 ahead of 
us. Last year, I was also your guest around this time. Then, I greeted you a “happy, though 
perhaps more challenging year!” If you recall, we were then coming out of 2007, which saw 
the country experience the “ideal convergence of high growth and low inflation”. But on the 
heels of 2007, we began to feel some of the impact of the US subprime mortgage problem. 
Subsequent market events have certainly proven me correct, haven’t they?  
In fact, the country faced two major challenges. First, volatile international prices of oil and 
non-oil commodities which caused inflation to accelerate globally, particularly in the first half 
of the year. Second, the broadening of the reach of the impact of the US subprime mortgage 
problem  –  from  the  US  subprime  market  alone  to  the  US  financial  market,  to  the  global 
financial markets and then to the US and major REAL economies, and now the global real 
economy.  
These challenges translated to lower-than-first-forecasted real GDP growth and higher-than-
targeted  inflation.  Nevertheless,  the  country  still  ended  2008  on  much  better  footing  than 
most of our Asian counterparts.  
Specifically,  Philippine  growth  for  the  first  3  quarters  of  2008  stood  at  4.6  percent, 
significantly lower than the NG’s initial target but still within the country’s long-term growth 
trend and quite respectable compared to our ASEAN neighbors. Inflation, on the other hand, 
peaked  at  12.4  pct  in  August  from a  level  of  4.9  pct at  the  start  of  the  year.  The average 
inflation for the first 11 months of 9.4 was significantly higher than the target range of 4 pct 
+/- 1 percentage point. This upswing in inflation was, however, not unique to the Philippines 
in 2008, given that this trend was largely due to elevated and highly volatile international oil 
and food prices. 
On the exchange rate, the peso lost much of the gains it tucked in 2007, due principally to 
heightened risk aversion towards emerging markets including the Philippines as the global 
financial turmoil spread. The peso depreciated 13.3 pct against the US dollar in 2008 against 
an 18.8 pct appreciation in 2007. This loss in value was, nonetheless, in line with movements 
of other currencies in the region, which also depreciated against the US dollar. In addition, in 
terms of the Real Effective Exchange Rate over the past eight years, the peso has largely 
maintained its competitiveness against a basket of currencies of our major trading partners 
and competitor countries.  
In the meantime, we have been able to keep the Gross International Reserves at comfortable 
levels. GIR stood at $36.8 B at end November 2008, an increase of about $3 B over the end 
2007 level. The build-up in GIR has allowed us to keep the BOP in surplus in 2008. At almost 
$37  B,  GIR  is  5.8  months’  of  imports  and  2.5  times  short-term  debt  based  on  residual 
maturity. These ratios are at least twice the international benchmark levels of 3 months of 
imports and 1 time the debt ratio.  
The banking system remains sound. The series of banking reforms put in place over the last 
five  years,  and  among  others,  the  inherent  conservatism  and  the  domestic  orientation  of 
banks,  as  well  as  the  BSP’s  phased-in  approach  to  embracing  financial  innovation,  have 
resulted  in  minimal  exposure  of  the  banking  system  to  the  troubled  international  financial 
institutions. In addition, banks continue to be capitalized above the BIS standard and BSP 
BIS Review 1/2009 
 1
regulatory  requirement;  bank  balance  sheets  are  at  their  strongest  since  the  1997  Asian 
financial crisis; and assets continue to grow.  
What do we foresee for 2009? 
2009 will be a critical year. It could define how we will perform when the markets turn around. 
If  you  read  most  analyses  of  the  US  and  major  economies’  downtrend,  the  expectation  is 
these  could  last  about  18  months.  Therefore,  depending  on  when  you  begin  your  count, 
recovery in the US and maybe globally could begin in 2010. No one, however, can say for 
certain how deep and how long the global downtrend would be, nor how far markets would 
retreat. Therefore it is incumbent upon us to continue to brace for further uncertainty in the 
global  financial  markets,  recessionary  trends  that  would  spread  to  regions  beyond  the 
developed world; and volatilities in commodity prices, particularly oil. 
How shall we respond to the unfolding environment? 
Monetary policy in 2009 will continue to be anchored on inflation targeting. The discipline of 
the inflation-targeting framework that we adopted in 2002 has helped the BSP focus more on 
its primary mandate of price stability. More specifically, as inflation risks moderate, BSP will 
carefully  consider  opportunities  for  monetary  policy  easing  amidst  tightening  financial 
conditions.  We  will  continue  to  ensure  appropriate  levels  of  market  liquidity  to  maintain 
confidence in and the efficient functioning of the financial markets. We will calibrate monetary 
policy to protect our people’s real income and purchasing power. We will endeavor to keep 
inflation  at  manageable  levels  as  this  creates  the  environment  for  sustainable  long-term 
growth.  
The BSP’s external sector policy will remain focused on ensuring our external vulnerabilities 
are  limited.  More  specifically,  we  will  beef  up  reserves  for  insurance;  maintain  a  market-
determined (thereby externally competitive) exchange rate and we will continue to review our 
FX regulatory environment.  
Banking sector policies will revolve around buttressing the banking system’s soundness. The 
reforms we have so far put in place have created the environment which has resulted in the 
system’s minimal exposure to the global financial market turbulence. We will continue on this 
track.  
Conclusion 
I began these brief remarks declaring we have ended 2008 on a much sounder footing than 
most of our Asian neighbors. So far, we have not been as affected by the global financial 
turmoil.  
I also said that 2009 would be critical in crafting policy that would allow us to be ready take to 
advantage of the upturns in the global slowdown when they do materialize.  
As we concluded 2008 and now look forward to 2009, we reflect upon how we have been 
able to remain fairly resilient in the face of the challenges we faced in 2008 – macroeconomic 
prudence. That is, consistently building buffers during the good times to provide us a shield 
during the bad times. As 2009 rolls in, we will press on with this strategy that has so far kept 
us in good stead. 
2 
 BIS Review 1/2009
