Mario Draghi: Overview of economic and financial developments in Italy  
Concluding remarks by Mr Mario Draghi, Governor of the Bank of Italy and Chairman of the 
Financial  Stability  Board,  at  the  Ordinary  Meeting  of  Shareholders  2008  –  115th  Financial 
Year, Bank of Italy, Rome 29 May 2009. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The  reorganization  of  the  Bank  is  going  ahead  as  scheduled.  Eighteen  branches  have 
already been closed and others will cease operations over the coming months. By the end of 
this year, 58 of the original 97 branches will still be operational, including 6 specializing in 
banking and financial supervision and 25 assigned, with a streamlined structure, to the State 
treasury service and to providing information services to the public. Banknote production will 
be  reorganized,  with  the  agreement  of  the  trade  unions,  in  order  to  expand  output  and 
increase efficiency. 
Following  the  absorption  of  the  Italian  Foreign  Exchange  Office,  for  more  than  a  year  the 
Bank  of  Italy  has  had  the  function  of  combating  money  laundering  through  a  Financial 
Intelligence  Unit  that  operates  within  the  Bank  but  with  special  autonomy.  It  has  been 
endowed  with  substantial  resources  and  expertise.  In  carrying  out  its  tasks,  the  FIU  has 
developed fruitful synergies with the banking and financial supervision area. This benefits the 
stability  and  the  reputation  of  the  banking  system.  The  Unit  cooperates  closely  with  the 
judiciary  and  with  the  Finance  Police,  to  which  a  constantly  growing  stream  of  complaints 
and reports are submitted. 
This January Antonio Finocchiaro left the Governing Board to assume the office of chairman 
of the Pension Fund Supervisory Authority. In the course of a long career, Mr Finocchiaro 
served  the  Bank  of  Italy  with  rigour  and  dedication,  making  important  contributions  in  a 
diversity  of  fields  ranging  from  the  original  development  of  the  Bank’s  IT  system  to  the 
management of human resources and trade union relations, to operational organization and 
management. Let me offer him my most affectionate and grateful salutation. His place on the 
Governing  Board  has  been  filled  by  Anna  Maria  Tarantola,  former  Managing  Director  for 
Banking and Financial Supervision. 
The  Bank’s  staff  last  year  faced  an  extraordinary  commitment,  commensurate  with  the 
difficulties  of  the  economic  and  financial  crisis  we  are  experiencing  and  the  exceptional 
response required at every level. The earthquake in Abruzzo has posed a painful additional 
challenge.  All  are  responding  with  self-sacrifice,  putting  the  great  professional  and  human 
qualities that distinguish our team to the best possible use. I thank all of them on behalf of 
the General Council and the Governing Board.  
The question of the Bank’s ownership structure remains to be dealt with. For over seventy 
years now the present arrangements have ensured the independence and decision-making 
autonomy of the central bank. However, the evolution of the structure of the banking system 
has  brought  to  light  a  formal  anomaly  that  it  is  advisable  to  remove.  We  are  prepared  to 
design, together with our shareholders and with the Government, a solution that will work to 
the benefit of the entire system. 
The global crisis 
Since  mid-March  tensions  in  the  financial  markets  have  eased  and  share  prices,  despite 
fluctuations, have recovered, returning to the levels recorded at the beginning of the year; the 
qualitative indicators of the real economy point to a subsidence of recessionary pressures.  
BIS Review 68/2009 
 1
These are encouraging signs. The likelihood of deflation, in the sense of a protracted decline 
in the general price level, now appears slight, also because longer-term inflation expectations 
remain close to 2 per cent. However, in view of their seriousness, the persistent risks to the 
unfolding economic scenario require that the economy continue to be supported decisively 
using  all  available  instruments.  There  is  awareness  of  the  need  to  prepare  in  advance 
strategies  to  reabsorb  the  large  budget  deficits  and  exceptional  liquidity  creation  that 
characterize the current situation. 
It is not yet possible to point with certainty to a definitive cyclical inversion: the forecast is for 
a return to growth in 2010. The general expectation is for falling levels of employment and 
revenue, accompanied by continuing volatility in the financial markets, with adverse effects 
on consumption and investment.  
The  task  of  economic  policies  is  to  attenuate  the  negative  spiral  of  unemployment  and 
consumption. The response has been prompt, vigorous and coordinated at the international 
level. Up to now there has been no sign of a significant resumption of protectionism. 
Official interest rates have been cut drastically in all the main economies. Between October 
2008  and  the  beginning  of  May,  the  Governing  Council  of  the  European  Central  Bank 
lowered the rate on main refinancing operations by 3.25 percentage points, to 1 per cent, the 
lowest level ever reached in the euro-area countries.  
The reduction was reflected in market rates: the three-month Euribor rate is currently 1.3 per 
cent,  over  4  percentage  points  lower  than  in  the  first  ten  days  of  October.  Twelve-month 
interest  rates  in  euro  are  aligned  with  those  in  dollars  and  slightly  lower  than  the  sterling 
rates.  
The  expansionary  measures  taken  by  all  the  central  banks  significantly  enlarged  their 
balance sheets in ways that reflect differing national financial structures. Bank credit in the 
euro area is relatively more important than in the United States (around 140 per cent of GDP 
compared with 60 per cent). Accordingly the Eurosystem has so far focused on banks. 
The introduction in October last year of a system of bank funding at a fixed rate, limited only 
by  the  availability  of  collateral,  was  a  highly  important  development;  this,  along  with  other 
measures, enabled banks to meet their liquidity requirements in a situation of money market 
paralysis.  It  also  provided  certainty  regarding  the  rate  they  would  have  to  pay  for  a  much 
longer  period  than  in  the  past:  the  maturities  of  longer-term  refinancing  operations  were 
extended up to six months and, from next June, to twelve months. Against these loans banks 
can now post as collateral a much broader range of securities than were previously eligible. 
A  global  systemic  collapse  was  averted,  but  neither  monetary  expansion  nor  the  effect  of 
built-in  stabilizers  in  government  budgets  could  fully  counter  the  fall  in  aggregate  demand 
and the social costs of the recession.  
Since last autumn international organizations have been emphasizing the need for decisive 
discretionary  budgetary  measures,  coordinated  internationally  and  involving  all  the  main 
countries. The Council of the European Union called for stimulus interventions totalling 1.5 
per cent of the euro-area GDP in 2009. 
In all the industrial countries and in many emerging economies, first and foremost China, the 
fiscal policy response has been markedly expansive. The size, duration and makeup of the 
interventions  have  varied,  reflecting  in  particular  the  uneven  impact  of  the  crisis, the  initial 
state  of  the  public  finances  and  the  scale  of  built-in  stabilizers.  The  simultaneity  of  the 
stimulus measures adopted enhances their effectiveness. 
According to recent estimates by the International Monetary Fund, in 2009 the fiscal deficits 
of advanced countries will reach almost 9 per cent of GDP, then fall by 1 percentage point in 
2010.  Between  2008  and  2010  government  gross  debt  is  forecast  to  increase  by  27 
percentage points of GDP in the United States, to almost 100 per cent, and by 16 percentage 
points in the euro area, to 85 per cent. 
2 
 BIS Review 68/2009
The need to place massive volumes of government securities on the market in the next two 
years  puts  upward  pressure  on  interest  rates;  these  will  intensify  with  the  easing  of  the 
recession and attendant rise in demand for private debt securities, checking the recovery of 
the economies. Once the crisis has passed, the public debt must be reduced sharply. 
However, history teaches us that without the restoration of the banks to health and without 
the resumption of credit flows, the recession will be more drawn out and the recovery slower, 
despite the exceptional expansion of budget deficits. 
After the failure of Lehman Brothers last September, government interventions to guarantee 
bank  deposits  and  liabilities  and  to  support  recapitalization  prevented  additional  collapses; 
they were insufficient to avert a contraction of credit. Financial markets are still struggling to 
become fully functional again. Risk aversion remains high. 
Worldwide, in the past two years banks have recorded losses of over $1,000 billion in their 
balance  sheets.  Just  under  half  of  the  funds  used  to  rebuild  their  capital  base  came  from 
government intervention. 
Looking  ahead,  banks’  capital  requirements  must  be  met  by  reactivating  the  market.  This 
depends on the total transparency of banking assets. The cloud of uncertainty that continues 
to hang over banks’ balance sheets limits the inflow of private capital, increases the level of 
capital  ratios  demanded  by  the  market  and  makes  the  incentives  to  reduce  assets  more 
stringent. 
Action  must  be  taken  to  re-establish  the  certainty  and  credibility  of  the  asset  side  of  bank 
balance sheets. The measures announced by a number of countries to insure or transfer to 
separate  entities  part  of  their  assets  can  prompt  the  emergence  of  the  most  problematic 
securities.  But  to  restore  confidence  in  the  major  international  financial  institutions,  there 
remains the need for a full, internationally coordinated, consistent, rigorous and transparent 
stress  testing  of  banks’  balance  sheets,  which  has  already  been  launched  in  the  United 
States and is being prepared in Europe. 
Promoting financial stability 
The  crisis  is  rooted  in  distortions  in  the  markets’  functioning,  regulatory  and  supervisory 
shortcomings and the conduct of intermediaries in the world’s leading financial centres. The 
exceptional liquidity that flowed into those centres as a result of the prolonged disequilibria in 
savings rates and payments balances contributed to keeping interest rates, volatility and the 
cost  of  protection  against  insolvency  at  abnormally  low  levels.  This  led  to  a  general 
underestimation of risk with a consequent overvaluation of financial assets and real estate. 
The  defects  in  regulation  and  the  management  of  risk  by  the  world’s  largest  banks  were 
concealed. An accommodating monetary policy contributed to the artificial dilation of financial 
volumes  and  permitted  the  continuation  of  a  situation  rendered  fundamentally  unstable  by 
the  distortions  and  shortcomings  mentioned  above.  The  market  rejected  economic  policy 
interventions  despite  their  timidity;  blinded,  it  lost  its  diagnostic  capacity,  its  self-correction 
mechanisms were paralysed. 
A financial system that combines innovation and solidity, profit and support for households 
and firms will have to have more rules, more capital and less debt. The global strategy that is 
emerging  is  based  on  three  pillars:  the  international  financial  institutions,  the  regulatory 
authorities and the central banks. 
The International Monetary Fund has taken on a crucial role; its resources have been more 
than  doubled  and  its  ability  to  intervene  has  been  enhanced.  Today  the  IMF  can  support 
countries  in  difficulty,  especially  the  emerging  economies  that  are  suffering  most  from  the 
adverse  economic  cycle;  the  Fund’s  assistance  in  managing  imbalances  is  preventing  the 
systemic propagation of the crisis. The IMF, together with the Financial Stability Board, has 
been  entrusted  with  analysing  and  signalling  threats  to  the  stability  of  the  global  financial 
BIS Review 68/2009 
 3
in 
responsible 
the  application  of 
for  monitoring  national  authorities 
system.  It  is  encouraging  that  the  leading  countries  have  at  last  accepted  periodic  IMF 
examination of the soundness of their financial systems. 
More  rigorous  multilateral  surveillance  than  in  the  past  will  contribute  to  the  global 
consistency  of  national  economic  policies.  But  the  orderly  correction  of  current  account 
imbalances will have to hinge on a world capital market that is fully functioning and free from 
defects in regulation and control.  
This belief underlies the establishment by the G20 Heads of State and Government of the 
Financial  Stability  Board.  The  new  body  has  a  broadened  membership  and  mandate  by 
comparison with the Financial Stability Forum; in April 2008 the latter had produced the first 
report on the steps to be taken to overcome the shortcomings of regulation. The Board is 
now 
those 
recommendations,  coordinating  the  many  committees  of  regulators  and  accountants  that 
determine  the  standards  for  banks,  and  proceeding  with  the  establishment  of  international 
colleges of supervisors for the largest financial institutions. More rigorous capital and liquidity 
requirements,  the  extension  of  the  scope  of  regulation  to  non-bank  institutions,  the 
completion  of  Basel  II  and  amendment  of  the  accounting  rules  in  order  to  reduce  their 
procyclicality,  and  more  demanding  supervision  and  regulation  for  institutions  whose  size 
makes  them  a  systemic  risk;  these  are  the  measures  describing  the  path  of  the  Financial 
Stability Board’s work in the coming months.  
The  Italian  presidency  of  the  G8  is  conducting  the  work  to  set  global  standards  for  the 
transparency, propriety and integrity of international economic and financial activity. 
The  crisis  has  considerably  broadened  the  consensus  on  the  need  for  central  banks  to 
expressly  include  financial  stability  among  their  objectives;  restricting  their  task  to  taking 
corrective action after a crisis is no longer deemed sufficient. The idea is gaining ground that 
the functions of monetary policy and supervision reinforce each other. The debate on these 
issues is complex and far from over.  
In  Europe  the  revision  of  large  parts  of  the  system  of  banking  and  financial  supervision  is 
already under way. The fundamental aspects of this process appear correct; in some points it 
needs to be strengthened. 
The assignment of supervisory tasks aimed at systemic stability to a European council is a 
good  idea  if  it  has  real  powers  of  intervention  and  operates  in  close  coordination  with  the 
national supervisory authorities.  
In  at  least  some  areas  the  common  supervisory  standards  should  be  binding  and  directly 
applicable at national level. It is necessary to harmonize deposit guarantee systems and the 
mechanisms for crisis management.  
The repercussions of the crisis in Italy 
According to the latest forecasts, the world crisis will cause GDP to fall in Italy by about 5 per 
cent this year, after decreasing by one per cent in 2008. 
The collapse of foreign demand has triggered a sharp contraction in industrial production and 
investment. The reaction of firms, especially those most exposed to the international cycle, 
was immediate: the temporary closure of entire factories and production lines; temporary and 
permanent  reductions  in  the  workforce;  postponement  of  purchases  of  intermediate  and 
capital goods; and unusually long delays in paying suppliers. In the six months from October 
2008 to March 2009 GDP fell by more than 7 per cent on an annual basis compared with the 
previous six months. 
The  recent  signs  of  an  easing  of  the  most  acute  phase  of  the  recession  come  from  the 
financial markets and opinion surveys, more than from the statistics available to date on the 
real economy. For a return to sustained growth there must be a stable recovery of the world 
4 
 BIS Review 68/2009
economy, the weakness of the labour market must not have an even more severe impact on 
domestic consumption, and the structure of our productive system must be strengthened. 
Employment and consumption 
Among  the  prudential  measures  that  firms  have  taken  to  cope  with  the  recession,  those 
involving labour have been of three types: a reorganization of shifts and working hours and a 
freeze on hiring; recourse to the Wage Supplementation Fund; and non-renewal of fixed-term 
contracts and layoffs of permanent employees. Nearly all firms have used measures of the 
first  type.  Ordinary  wage  supplementation  was  also  used  extensively,  quickly  reaching  the 
peak  levels  recorded  in  the  1992-93  recession;  the  cover  it  potentially  provides  is 
nonetheless  limited  −  one  third  of  payroll  workers  in  the  private  sector  −  and  it  provides 
workers with a maximum monthly benefit that is less than half the average gross earnings in 
industry.  It  is  estimated  that  two  fifths  of  the  industrial  and  service  firms  with  20  or  more 
workers  will  reduce  their  staff  this  year;  the  reduction  will  probably  be  most  pronounced 
among  the  smallest  firms.  More  than  2  million  fixed-term  workers  will  see  their  contracts 
expire this year; more than 40 per cent work in private services, nearly 20 per cent in the 
public sector; 38 per cent work in the South.  
Workers on wage supplementation and job seekers already amount to about 8.5 per cent of 
the labour force, a share that could rise above 10 per cent. Households’ disposable income 
and consumption are expected to go on falling, despite the substantial decrease in inflation. 
The governmental measures in favour of less well-off households and the incentives for the 
purchase of durable goods are providing temporary support.  
A  first  risk  of  the  current  cyclical  phase  is  a  sharp  reduction  in  domestic  consumption,  to 
which firms could react by further restricting their purchases of capital goods and inputs. 
Firms and the crisis  
Thanks  to  the  commitment  of  our  regional  branches,  we  have  conducted  a  particularly 
thorough  survey  of  the  state  of  the  Italian  economy,  the  difficulties  that  firms  are 
encountering and how they are reacting to the crisis.  
Expectations of a sharp fall in turnover (of more than 20 per cent according to many firms) 
and great uncertainty as to the duration of the crisis have caused investment plans for this 
year to be reduced by 12 per cent in industry and services overall and by more than 20 per 
cent in the manufacturing sector – exceptionally high figures by historical standards. 
Restructuring in large parts of the economy began in the first half of this decade. Prior to the 
crisis,  some  positive  results  were  already  visible  in  terms  of  productivity  and  competitive 
strength on foreign markets, but these difficult times jeopardize the process. 
According to our survey, about half of the 65,000 industrial and service firms with 20 or more 
employees are engaged in restructuring. They expect a much smaller than average drop in 
turnover in 2009. At one extreme, the more financially solid among them are now buffering 
the impact of the recession by consolidating their technological edge and diversifying their 
outlet markets. There are a fair number of such firms, we estimate more than five thousand, 
employing  nearly  a  million  people.  Some  appear  ready  to  take  advantage  of  the  crisis  by 
repositioning  themselves  in  the  market.  At  the  other  extreme  lie  the  firms  that,  having 
decided to grow in size and technological intensity, and to open up internationally, had taken 
on debt. Now, with the crisis, they are faced with the drying up of cash flows, more rigid bank 
credit,  and  considerable  problems  in  accessing  capital  markets.  At  least  six  thousand 
companies, once again with almost a million workers, are affected in this way.  
The  effects  of  the  crisis  are  being  felt  above  all  by  firms  with  fewer  than  20  workers.  In 
manufacturing alone there are nearly 500,000 such firms, employing just under two million 
BIS Review 68/2009 
 5
workers. The very survival of those subcontracting for larger firms that are cutting orders and 
deferring payments is sometimes at stake. 
The coming months will be decisive; excessive mortality due to financial strangulation of too 
many companies that have the potential to prosper after the crisis has passed is a second, 
serious, risk for the Italian economy. 
Financing the economy 
The deterioration of the economy tends to curb bank lending. In April the quarterly rate of 
growth of credit to non-financial firms was nil; it had been 12 per cent a year earlier. Lending 
to households has also continued to slow. 
A  part  of  the  deceleration  can  be explained  by  a  decline in  manufacturing  and  real  estate 
investment and in the consumption of durable goods. But the supply of bank lending has also 
been curtailed, mainly owing to difficulties in raising medium and long-term funds and to the 
increase in credit risk.  
Our survey found that the loan applications of 8 per cent of firms were rejected − the highest 
figure since the mid-1990s; it was less than 3 per cent a year ago. Over 10 per cent of firms 
state that since last October they have been asked for early repayment. This happens more 
frequently  in  the  South  of  Italy  but  affects  the  whole  country  and  even  some  larger 
companies. 
Banks cannot be asked to be less prudent in granting credit; a banking system that risked the 
integrity  of  its  balance  sheets  and  the  confidence  of  those  who  entrust  their  savings  to  it 
would not serve the interests of the economy. What can, and must, be asked of our banks is 
to 
the  present,  exceptional 
circumstances. Special attention must be paid to the longer-term prospects of the firms that 
apply  for  financial  assistance.  When  evaluating  and  making  decisions,  banks  must  take 
account of technology, organization and the dynamics of firms’ main markets.  
The Government’s recent initiatives to increase the Guarantee Fund for small and medium-
sized firms can strengthen banks’ support to smaller companies. 
Consideration  should  also  be  given  to  the  possibility  of  making  a  public  loan  guarantee 
scheme available to a broader range of firms, as in other countries, for a limited period of 
time and with safeguards to reduce distortions in resource allocation. 
However,  it  is  also  important  to  reactivate  the  Italian  securitization  market;  if  properly 
structured these instruments will remain a key channel for financing. The less risky tranches 
backed  by  portfolios  of  mainly  newly-granted  loans  could  be  covered  by  government 
guarantee. The State would not be required to make an immediate outlay of funds and its 
guarantee would be adequately remunerated. 
to  recognize  creditworthiness 
their  ability 
improve 
in 
Anti-crisis measures 
Economic policy currently presents more difficulties in Italy than in other countries. Action to 
bolster demand is restricted by government debt from the past. Measures taken to date to 
mitigate  the  social  costs  of  the  recession  have  relied  mainly  on  funds  allocated  to  other 
purposes.  
But firm and credible action to set the public finances right within an agreed time frame can 
provide scope for a more incisive economic policy. 
The  first  concern  is  the  danger  of  a  further  deterioration  of  labour  market  conditions.  The 
crisis  has  highlighted  long-standing  deficiencies  in  our  system  of  social  protection,  which 
continues to be fragmented. Otherwise identical workers are treated differently only because 
they  are  employed  in  a  craft  firm  rather  than  in  a  larger  company.  It  is  estimated  that  1.6 
million  employees  and  quasi-employees  have  no  right  to  any  assistance  if  they  are 
6 
 BIS Review 68/2009
dismissed.  More  than  800,000  full-time  workers  in  the  private  sector,  that  is  8  per  cent  of 
potential beneficiaries, are entitled to an allowance of less than €500 a month. 
A  good  system  of  social  buffers  for  the  unemployed  that  balances  out  financially  over  the 
economic  cycle  lifts  some  anxiety  from  workers,  supports  consumption,  improves  mobility 
between  firms  and  sectors,  and  helps  redirect  individual  skills  into  more  productive 
employment. Well-defined, nondiscretionary assistance, conditional upon engaging actively 
in  a  job  search  –  stronger  controls  being  essential  here  –  increases  people’s  sense  of 
security, gives their life-plans substance, and makes it less necessary to save for a rainy day; 
it narrows the disparities between workers with and without safeguards. 
In a welcome move, the Government has already included temporary income support among 
its anti-crisis measures, including in the case of shutdowns in companies not covered by the 
Wage  Supplementation  Fund.  It  has  also  made  provision  for  experimental  measures  in 
favour of some quasi-employees.  
The time is ripe for a rigorous, comprehensive reform that will rationalize the current system 
of  social  buffers  and  provide  more  universal  benefits.  There  is  no  need  to  overturn  the 
existing system. It can be re-designed around the two traditional instruments of the ordinary 
Wage Supplementation Fund and unemployment benefits, suitably adjusted and graduated. 
These  should  be  accompanied  by  income  support  for  the  cases  they  do  not  cover,  as 
happens  almost  everywhere  else  in  Europe  and  as  proposed  in  the  Government  White 
Paper.  A  form  of  tax  credit  could  be  considered  for  those  on  low  wages:  this  system  has 
been  successfully  adopted  in  many  countries  and  could  help  to  regularize  informal 
employment.  
Among the anti-crisis measures for the productive system, priority must go to action to ease 
firms’ financial problems, such as the plan of intervention being drawn up with the assistance 
of Cassa Depositi e Prestiti and SACE, the export credit insurance agency. Additional and 
more  direct  support  could  be  provided  by  cutting  payment  times  for  general  government 
trade payables, which amount to about 2.5 per cent of GDP. A further move would be made 
in  this  direction  by  temporarily  suspending  the  requirement  to  pay  into  the  National  Social 
Security Institute, INPS, the part of contributions to severance pay not allocated to a pension 
fund, amounting annually to 0.3 percentage points of GDP. While both actions would entail 
greater recourse to the financial markets, neither would worsen the central government’s net 
financial position. 
Measures  to  stimulate  private  investment  in  residential  property,  which  it  is  hoped  will  be 
introduced  in  suitable  form  very  shortly,  will  assist  the  recovery  of  capital  accumulation. 
Existing building work should be completed at the earliest opportunity and encouragement 
should  be  given  to  local  projects,  many  of  which  are  fairly  small  and  could  be  launched 
without delay. 
The adjustment of the public finances and structural policies 
The recession is slowly producing an effect on the tax yield: having decelerated for most of 
2008, it fell during the last two months. VAT receipts decreased by 1.5 per cent in the year as 
a whole, compared with an increase of 2.3 per cent in consumption, partly due to the shift 
towards  essential  goods  carrying  a  lower  rate.  In  the  first  four  months  of  this  year,  VAT 
receipts were down 10 per cent on the same period of 2008. Revenue from corporate income 
tax, which dropped by more than 9 per cent in 2008, could fall by a still larger amount this 
year. Only the revenue from personal income tax is holding up. 
The  action  of  built-in  stabilizers  is  likely  to  raise  the  public  deficit  by  around  2  percentage 
points this year, to more than 4.5 per cent of GDP. In 2010 the deficit could exceed 5 per 
cent.  
Even without additional measures to support the economy, by the end of the crisis the public 
debt will have increased considerably in terms of GDP, back to the levels of the early 1990s. 
BIS Review 68/2009 
 7
The ratio of primary current expenditure to GDP, which in 2008 reached the highest value 
recorded since the Second World War, will rise by 3 percentage points in 2009. Total public 
expenditure will be well over 50 per cent of GDP, and unless steps are taken it will tend to 
stay at that level in the years to come. There is a danger that the economy will have to bear 
the burden of extremely heavy taxation for many years. 
After the crisis has been overcome, Italy will find itself not only with more public debt but also 
with  an  endowment  of  private  capital  –  physical  and  human  –  impoverished  by  the  sharp 
drop in investment and the rise in unemployment. If we were to do no more than return to a 
low growth path like that of the past 15 years – starting, moreover, from decidedly worsened 
conditions  –  it  would  be  difficult  to  pay  down  the  debt,  while  the  necessity  for  restrictive 
policies to ensure its sustainability would become more stringent. We must aim, immediately, 
at achieving faster growth in the medium term. It is necessary to act on two fronts: to ensure 
the consolidation of the public finances and to implement the long-awaited reforms that will 
enable our economy to be an active partner in the world economic recovery.  
The measures reducing current expenditure must be introduced into legislation immediately, 
even  if  the  effects  are  deferred,  not  put  off  to  further  legislative  acts  or  administrative 
decisions.  In  many  cases  this  simply  means  proceeding  more  resolutely  on  the  courses 
already embarked upon.  
The  gradual  raising  of  the  average  age  at  retirement  will  guarantee  adequate  pensions.  A 
higher  employment  rate  among  those  between  the  ages  of  55  and  65  will  increase  both 
households’ disposable income and the economy’s potential output. 
In 2008 occupational pension funds recorded negative yields of 6 per cent and open funds 
lost  14  per  cent.  These  results  must  not  induce  us  to  modify  the  process  launched  in  the 
early 1990s to foster the development of a second, funded retirement pillar. In the long run a 
mixed  system  is  preferable  to  a  straight  pay-as-you-go  system.  Nevertheless,  some 
adjustments and additions may be advisable. It is necessary to encourage the introduction of 
products  that  automatically  diminish  the  riskiness  of  portfolios  as  retirement  nears  and  to 
offer securities allowing for better management of risks over the long term.  
The  implementation  of  fiscal  federalism  must  make  a  contribution  to  curbing  government 
expenditure. By strictly linking spending and taxation decisions, without forgoing the principle 
of  solidarity,  it  can  lead  to  more  efficient  use  of  public  resources.  A  crucial  feature  of  the 
reform enacted by Parliament is the replacement of historical expenditure by standard costs 
as the criterion for the assignment of resources to local authorities. Until now the reference to 
historical  expenditure  has  made  public  budgets  more  rigid,  institutionalizing  inertial 
mechanisms in expenditure trends. 
Much is expected from the planned reform of the public administration. The breadth of the 
plan,  the  emphasis  it  places  on  transparency  and  on  the  measurement  of  government 
performance and the recognition of merit are all important elements of change. The efficacy 
of the reform will depend on the design of evaluation systems and on the organizational rules 
adopted.  
Progress has been made in simplifying and reordering regulations and in reducing red tape, 
in  particular  for  business  start-ups.  Yet  new  regulatory  provisions  continue  to  be  both 
complex  and  opaque.  The  bureaucratic  costs  for  business  activity  remain  high,  with 
substantial differences from region to region. 
Regulatory simplification and effective public action are necessary conditions for reducing the 
incidence of the underground economy, which is estimated to account for more than 15 per 
cent of overall economic activity in Italy. The concealment of a considerable proportion of the 
tax base increases the burden on law-abiding taxpayers. It undermines the competitiveness 
of the majority of firms, creates inequities and disrupts the social fabric. Progress in fighting 
underground economic activity would make it possible to lower official tax rates, attenuating 
distortions and unfairness.  
8 
 BIS Review 68/2009
It is necessary to improve the quality and increase the quantity of human capital and physical 
infrastructure. Last year on this occasion I dwelt on the urgent need to elevate educational 
attainment in our schools and universities. The drive for reform in this area must proceed and 
intensify. Physical infrastructure is a crucial factor in competitiveness. In the last twenty years 
the gap between Italy’s infrastructural endowment and that of the other leading EU countries 
has more than tripled. As regards major public works, the failure to set long-term priorities 
has resulted in discontinuity and the dissipation of funds on a multitude of projects. The list of 
high-priority  strategic  infrastructures,  originally  21,  has  now  swollen  to  over  200.  The  time 
and the costs for high-speed rail lines and motorway network extensions, and even for short 
road  links  and  bypasses,  are  far  greater  than  in  other  European  countries.  A  kilometre  of 
motorway can cost over twice as much as in France or Spain. The causes are the uncertain 
attribution of powers and jurisdiction between national and regional government, poor initial 
cost estimation and shortcomings in reporting and continual project alterations. Regulatory 
defects limit recourse to project financing.  
The  process  of  liberalization  undertaken  in  years  past  must  not  halt  or  retreat.  In  the 
countries  where  services  are  less  liberalized,  the  growth  problems  of  technologically 
advanced  industries  are  more  severe.  Local  public  services  are  an  example  of  the  way  in 
which the absence of regulation entrusted to bodies that are competent and independent of 
the service providers can engender inefficiency and higher costs for consumers. 
The crisis and the banks 
In the recent past the Italian banking system underwent a major transformation, spurred by 
heightened  competition.  A  large  number  of  mergers  and  acquisitions,  by  increasing  the 
average size and efficiency of Italian banks, helped to improve their resilience in the face of 
the crisis.  
The  crisis  caught  the  Italian  banking  system  at  a  time  when  reorganizations  were  being 
completed, new forms of governance were being tested and the presence in foreign markets 
was  being  expanded.  The  system  remains  characterized  by  the  clear  prevalence  of  credit 
intermediation activity in favour of households and firms, strong local roots and a generally 
balanced structure of assets and liabilities. 
The impact of the crisis on the banks has been less traumatic in Italy than in other countries, 
thanks above all to a limited exposure to structured finance products and lesser reliance on 
wholesale funding. At the end of 2008 structured credit instruments represented just under 2 
per cent of the assets of the main banking groups. Wholesale funding made up 29 per cent 
of total funding for our system, against an average of 41 per cent in the euro area. 
A  fundamentally  sound  model  of  intermediation,  together  with  a  particularly  prudent 
regulatory  framework  and  supervisory  approach,  has  shielded  Italian  banks  from  the  most 
devastating  effects  of  the  market  turbulence.  Taxpayers  have  not  been  saddled  with  the 
costs of losses and bankruptcies seen in other countries.  
The banking system is not immune to the consequences of the crisis, however. Italian banks’ 
profits  contracted  sharply  in  2008.  The  return  on  equity  of  the  largest  groups  fell  by  5 
percentage points. 
Lending  rates  have  come  down  rapidly  since  October.  The  average  initial  rate  on  new 
variable-rate mortgage loans to households declined from 5.6 per cent to stand at 3.7 per 
cent in March. Interest rates for fixed-rate mortgages have also fallen swiftly; the differential 
that still existed at the beginning of last year between Italy and the euro-area average has 
narrowed considerably. For short-term loans to firms, the reduction in rates between October 
and  March  averaged  about  2  percentage  points.  But  it  is  also  true  that  the  risk  and  rate 
differentials between borrowers have widened: the difference between the cost of new loans 
of limited amount and that of high-value transactions has grown; the disparity in borrowing 
BIS Review 68/2009 
 9
costs  between  small  and  large  firms  has  increased.  Those  now  in  greatest  need  of  credit 
suffer from this. 
Bad  debts  and  loans  classified  as  “substandard”,  that  is  to  say  in  temporary  repayment 
difficulty, are growing rapidly. The lesson of experience is that the recession will continue to 
affect loan quality even two or three years after the cyclical upturn. 
In Italy, unlike other large countries, writedowns to loans are immediately tax deductible only 
up  to  0.3  per  cent  of  the  amount  of  total  lending;  the  portion  exceeding  that  amount  is 
deductible over 18 years. The rule becomes especially stringent in this recessionary phase, 
in which the pressure to curtail lending in order to satisfy capital requirements is mounting. 
Banks’ capital 
Despite  the  decline  in  profitability,  banks  have  maintained  capital  above  the  minimum 
standards.  The  average  ratio  of  capital  to  risk-weighted  assets  was  10.4  per  cent  for  the 
largest groups at the end of last year. The higher ratios found abroad often reflect massive 
injections  of  public  capital.  By  international  standards,  leverage,  measured  by  the  ratio  of 
total assets to core capital, is lower in Italy. 
The  Bank  of  Italy  assesses  capital  adequacy  with  stringent  criteria.  Instruments  of  lesser 
quality  make  up  13  per  cent  of  the  core  capital  of  the  five  largest  Italian  banking  groups, 
compared with 22 per cent for the 15 largest euro-area banking groups. 
Stress  tests,  which  evaluate  resilience  in  the  face  of  markedly  unfavourable  economic 
developments,  have  become  a  practice  in  supervisory  action  since  2005,  when  the 
International Monetary Fund conducted its Financial System Stability Assessment for Italy. 
We have just completed an aggregated exercise to estimate the impact on banks’ balance 
sheets of a deterioration in the quality of credit exposures to Italian households and firms in 
the two years 2009-10 under assumptions of more adverse macroeconomic conditions than 
those foreseen for Italy by the main international organizations. 
The results of the exercise indicate our banking system’s ability to hold up, even under more 
adverse scenarios. 
But I have already let it be known on several occasions that capital strengthening is a priority 
for  the  banking  system.  It  is  not  only  a  question  of  increasing  the  buffers  safeguarding 
stability.  Capital  strengthening 
leading 
intermediaries; it is also a necessary although not sufficient condition to maintain the flows of 
credit to the economy. 
This is why in the present phase it is also necessary to limit the distribution of profits. Many 
banks  have  done  so.  The  sacrifice  shareholders  are  being  asked  to  make  today  is 
compensated for by the greater solidity of their investment. 
The markets have reacted positively. Compared with mid-March, the premiums on the credit 
default swaps of the largest Italian banks have fallen by more than half, a significantly greater 
decline than the average reduction recorded in Europe. 
The effort must continue. The public instruments for capital strengthening envisaged by law 
are  now  available.  The  intervention  of  the  state  is  temporary;  the  private  shareholders  will 
have to replace the public funds as soon as market conditions permit. 
to  compete  with 
is  essential 
in  order 
the 
 These concluding remarks were written in the throes of a general crisis that has catapulted 
the world into perhaps its gravest difficulties since the middle of the last century. The wound 
that  has  been  inflicted  upon  the  public  confidence  –  confidence  in  the  markets  and  their 
protagonists, in the future of millions of people, in the social compact that binds us together – 
has to be healed. 
10 
 BIS Review 68/2009
Overcoming the crisis means rebuilding that confidence. Not by means of artifices but with 
the patient, laborious effort to understand what has happened and what future scenarios are 
possible; and with the consequent action. Much has been done. It is not the work of a day. 
Much  remains  to  be  done:  to  create  jobs  again,  to  restore  vitality  to  firms,  to  repair  the 
financial markets, to earn the citizens’ trust. 
The  Bank  of  Italy,  both  at  home  and  in  international  fora,  is  engaged  in  improving  the 
regulatory  framework  and  detecting  the  vulnerabilities  and  risks  of  banking  and  financial 
business.  We  shall  continue  to  improve  supervision.  We  must  progress  in  our  action  to 
safeguard a system that so far – thanks in part to that action – has withstood the crisis better 
than others. 
Every  country  faces  the  crisis  with  its  own  special  strengths  and  its  weaknesses,  its  own 
history.  There  is  a  national  aspect  to  the  response:  for  Italians,  the  repercussions  will  be 
more or less severe depending on our own choices. In the last twenty years our story has 
been  one  of  stagnant  productivity,  low  investment,  low  wages,  low  consumption  and  high 
taxes.  We  must  lift  our  gaze  from  the  present  woes  to  take  the  longer  view.  An  effective 
response to today’s emergency is possible only if it is accompanied by the sort of conduct 
and reforms that can raise our growth above the low path of recent decades.  
Italian banks’ balance sheets are not weighed down by a legacy of impaired assets. Let them 
exploit this advantage over their competitors to face a present and a future that will not be 
easy;  show  foresight  in  assessing  their  customers’  creditworthiness;  follow  the  example  of 
the  bankers  who  financed  the  reconstruction  and  the  economic  boom  of  the  1950s  and 
1960s.  Let  firms  strive  to  continue  the  rationalization  they  began  just  a  few  years  ago; 
safeguard the accumulated skills of their workers, which will be invaluable again in what we 
hope  is  a  not  too  distant  future.  The  completion  of  the  country’s  social  buffers,  the 
resumption of public investment and the actions to sustain demand and credit that have been 
outlined today will have the desired effects if they are coupled with structural reforms – not 
just in order to be able to tell the markets that the deficit is under control, but because these 
reforms are the foundation for future growth. 
Confidence cannot be rebuilt with false hopes. But neither can it be restored without hope. 
Surely we can emerge from this crisis stronger than before. 
BIS Review 68/2009 
 11
