Paul Tucker: Regimes for handling bank failures – redrawing the banking 
Social Contract  
Remarks  by  Mr  Paul  Tucker,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at  the  British 
Bankers’  Association  Annual  International  Banking  Conference  “Restoring  confidence  – 
moving forward”, London, 30 June 2009. 
 Thank you very much to the BBA for inviting me today. It is a real pleasure to be here when 
so much is being debated about the future of the financial system. I’d like to use the occasion 
to  develop  some  of  the  emerging  thoughts  of  the  international  official  sector  on  the 
environment – the “rules of the game” or Social Contract – within which banks will need to 
operate in future. 
Banks’ liquidity risks and the banking Social Contract 
The defining characteristic of banks lies in the liquidity services you provide to the economy, 
and  in  the  consequent  liquidity  risks  that  you  run.  History  shows  that  banks  are  inherently 
fragile. Banks are vulnerable to deposit runs. The current crisis has revealed, if it needed to 
be, that the same goes for money market funds. And it turned out that big securities dealers 
had effectively been turned into quasi banks by funding themselves partly from balances held 
by prime-brokerage hedge-fund clients; balances that could be withdrawn on demand, and in 
some  cases  were.  So  what  I  have  to  say  is  about  the  economic  substance  of  banking 
liquidity risk, not its legal form.  
While banks have also suffered capital shortfalls as this crisis progressed, at least in its early 
stages liquidity was at its core. As our capital markets and the trading activities of our banks 
expanded,  the  risk-management  paradigm  was  that  the  liquidity  of  markets  would  be 
resilient.  It  is  surprising  that  some  big  banks,  not  all,  ran  such  truly  massive  maturity 
mismatches. And it is similarly surprising that many medium-sized banks in this country had 
liquidity portfolios comprising largely floating rate notes issued by other banks. Yes, it does of 
course cost more to hold gilts and other highly liquid assets; but an illusory liquidity portfolio 
just transfers the risk to the central bank or the government.  
Some banks and building societies have not looked distress in the eye over the past year 
and in earlier years endeavoured to run their business safely, foregoing some of the profits of 
the boom. But I would urge even them to recognise that their relatively calm passage through 
the crisis to date owes a lot to government standing behind their peers.  
The banking Social Contract  
That support cannot go on forever, which underlines why the Social Contract for banks must 
be redrawn. 
It must be redrawn to reflect the lessons from the crisis. And also to mark a credible shift in 
regime so that, as an industry, you can re-establish trust and stand on your own feet.  
Traditionally, there have been three elements to the Social Contract for banking. In exchange 
for being allowed to profit from taking the risks inherent in providing liquidity, or monetary and 
credit,  services  to  the  economy,  banks  have  been  subject  to  prudential  regulation;  given 
access  to  liquidity  insurance  at  the  central  bank;  and  required  to  finance  industry-wide 
insurance  schemes  to  protect  depositors.  All  three  components  have  needed  to  be 
redesigned. 
I  offered  a  few  thoughts  on  the  first  –  the  regulation  of  banks  –  at  the  conference  on  the 
FSA’s Turner Report a few weeks ago. On microprudential supervision. I wanted to add four 
BIS Review 83/2009 
 1
points. First, that supervisors must be expert, unafraid to substitute their judgment for that of 
management and the board where necessary, but restrain themselves from doing so except 
when  needed.  Second,  that  concentrated  exposures,  on  either  side  of  the  balance  sheet, 
must be limited. Third, that complex structures rendering a bank unsupervisable must not be 
permitted, as the BCCI crisis taught us nearly twenty years ago. And fourth, that regulatory 
requirements for capital, liquidity and so on should take into account how much risk a bank 
brings  to  the  system  as  a  whole.  As  one  of  my  predecessors,  George  Blunden  said  over 
twenty  years  ago,  “Supervisory  standards  are  set  with  an  eye  to  protecting  [banks]  from 
problems which could be created by wider, systemic developments. A bank may consider a 
course of action it wishes to take to be acceptable – as it may well be in a limited context. But 
the  same  course  might,  if  widely  copied  by  other  banks,  have  unfortunate  effects  on  the 
banking system as a whole. It is part of the supervisors’ job to take that wider, systemic view 
and  sometimes  to  curb  practices  which  even  prudent  banks  might,  if  left  to  themselves, 
regard as safe.”1 All four points are old verities.  
On the second plank of the banking Social Contract, I set out the Bank’s current thinking on 
liquidity  insurance  in  Tokyo  a  few  weeks  ago.2  The  Bank  has  introduced  new  permanent 
liquidity facilities for banks, whereby we stand ready to lend to viable banks against a very 
wide  range  of  collateral,  on  terms  designed  to  avoid  encouraging  imprudent  liquidity 
management.  And  this  year  we  have  effectively  been  acting  as  a  Market  Maker  of  Last 
Resort  in  certain  corporate-credit  markets.  Given  the  significance  of  capital  markets  in 
today’s financial system, central banks need to think about whether or not such operations 
should be a permanent part of their armoury. 
Today, I want to outline our thinking on the third element of the Social Contract. Taking it to 
be about only deposit insurance turns out to be too narrow. It is really about what society 
should demand of banks to make their failures marginally more tolerable. 
It  is  not  often  a  central banker  can speak  openly  about  bank  failures.  Indeed,  most  of  the 
time,  central  bankers  avoid  public  remarks  on  issues  like  Too  Big  To  Fail;  Emergency 
Liquidity  Assistance;  flaws  in  insolvency  regimes;  burden  sharing  between  national 
authorities, and so on. But surrounded as we are by failed banks, it is not only possible to 
talk about bank failures without scaring the horses; it would be irresponsible not to do so. 
And  as  central  bankers  and  regulators  free  themselves  from  that  mental  strait-jacket,  new 
and perhaps far reaching ideas are emerging.  
They amount to redrawing the third element of the Social Contract between the authorities 
and the banks.  
To  recap,  the  third  element  has  been  that  the  banking  system  should  bear  the  cost  of 
insuring  retail  depositors  with  banks  against  loss.  The  lessons  go,  narrowly,  to  the 
construction  of  such  insurance;  but  also  to  a  broader  reformulation  in  which  deposit 
insurance is just one component of the overall package. 
Deposit insurance: risk-based premia and pre-funding 
For most of the past thirty years, deposit insurance in the UK applied to modest amounts, 
and  provided  less  than 100%  cover  of  the  insured  amount.  The  element  of  “co-insurance” 
was intended to leave retail depositors with an incentive to take care where they deposited 
                                                 
1   Blunden G, “Supervision and Central Banking”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, August 1987. Since the 
Turner Report was published, Adair Turner has himself added this point to the FSA’s list of conclusions. 
2   “The  Repertoire  of  Official  Sector  Inventions  in  the  Financial  System:  Last  Resort  Lending,  Market-Making, 
and Capital”, speech by Paul Tucker given at the Bank of Japan’s 2009 International Conference in Tokyo on 
28 May 2009. Also see, “The Development of the Bank of England’s Market Operations”, a consultative paper 
by the Bank of England, October 2008. 
2 
 BIS Review 83/2009
their  savings.  It  turned  out  to  be  naïve  on  two  fronts.  First,  it  proved  unrealistic  to  expect 
households generally to take such care. And second, it brought politics into bank rescues, 
because  of  the  hardship  that  could  still  be  suffered  by  regular  depositors  when  their  bank 
failed.  Nearly  a  decade  ago  I  became  convinced  of  the  need  for  100%  insurance  of  a 
meaningful  amount  in  order,  as  I  put  it  in  internal  exchanges,  “to  take  politics  out  of  crisis 
management”. 
In the wake of Northern Rock and Bradford and Bingley, the FSA moved to 100% insurance 
of  £50K.  That  means  that  nearly  all  regular  households  in  this  country  are  completely 
protected; and when today I refer, rather approximately, to “100% insurance”, that is what I 
mean.3  
The Bank’s view has been that in such a system, the banking system’s contribution to the 
insurance  scheme  should  be  risk-based  and  pre-funded.  The  industry  has  been  more 
doubtful about the idea of pre-funding and so I want to explain our thinking.  
A system of 100% insurance of a meaningful amount changes the landscape.  
First,  it  alters  the  purposes  of  bank  regulation.  It  is  no  longer  really  about  protecting 
depositors, as the vast majority are wholly protected by the insurance scheme. From a micro 
perspective, it is essentially about minimising risks to, and losses at, the deposit insurer, the 
UK Financial Services Compensation Scheme.  
Second,  it  also  potentially  alters  the  dynamics  of  the  market  place.  It  makes  it  easier  for 
banks to pay up for deposits; the signal that a bank will take greater risk than otherwise, as it 
would have to, does not matter to the depositors. They are covered, and so simply enjoy the 
higher  returns  on  their  deposits.  If  the  bank  succeeds,  the  rewards  are  reaped  by 
shareholders and management; if it fails, retail creditors get repaid in full. This doesn’t feel 
like  a  stable  regime.  And  it  is  worth  remembering  that  President  Roosevelt  seriously 
hesitated before introducing the equivalent FDIC scheme in the US in the 1930s for precisely 
that reason.  
One way of addressing these risks – and the approach eventually being tried in the US  – 
would be to make such risk-taking banks pay a higher levy into the insurance scheme. Risk-
based premia would help to offset the incentives otherwise created. And, of course, any such 
insurance scheme must be pre-funded; it is no good trying to collect levies from riskier banks 
after they have gone bust. That is why the Bank has advocated this course.  
Another route would be to seek to address banks’ perverse incentives via idiosyncratic, risk-
based capital requirements; ie active use of Pillar II of the Capital Accord, which is desirable 
in any case. 
One can argue that the two routes could be equivalent for the banking system as a whole. In 
a system of risk-based premia, the ex ante levies on “safe and sound” banks would obviously 
be lower than those on their riskier peers. In a system of variable capital requirements, the 
burden  on  the  FSCS  and  so  the  ex  post  levies  on  the  surviving  “safe  and  sound”  banks 
should  crystallise  less  frequently,  and  perhaps  also  be  smaller,  the  greater  the  amount  of 
capital a riskier, failed bank had to carry. But it is not so straightforward. Unlike the US, the 
UK  does  not  have  a  regime  of  “depositor  preference”,  which  means  that  the  FSCS  ranks 
alongside  (rather  than  ahead  of)  ordinary  wholesale  creditors  and  so  shares  losses  with 
them. The risk-reducing benefits of extra risk-based capital would, therefore, be spread over 
                                                 
3   The  FSA  Consultation  Paper,  “Financial  Services  Compensation  Scheme:  Review  of  limits”  (CP08/15), 
estimated  that  (based  on  BBA  data  for  two  large  banks)  the  share  of  accounts  covered  by  the  increase  in 
deposit insurance from £35,000 to £50,000 would rise from 96% to 98%, while the share of the overall value of 
deposits insured would rise from 52% to 60%. Using data from the building society sector, the coverage of 
individuals  was  similar  to  those  with  accounts  at  a  bank,  but  the  share  of  total  balances  insured  was 
somewhat greater, at around 77%. 
BIS Review 83/2009 
 3
creditors generally, not just insured depositors and the FSCS. Risk-based premia protect the 
FSCS, and so the wider banking system, in a more targeted way. The two approaches could 
probably be made equivalent by making Pillar II/risk-based capital add-ons sensitive to the 
total scale of a bank’s unsecured funding – wholesale as well as retail. For this purpose, the 
maturity of the unsecured wholesale funding is irrelevant, so this would not be the same thing 
as saying that capital requirements should take into account a bank’s wholesale liquidity risk, 
and might take us beyond anything being contemplated by regulators at present. 
Even  without  risk-based  premia,  pre-funding  ensures  that  failed  banks  do  make  a 
contribution. And it has other advantages. First, it avoids the potentially pro-cyclical effects of 
collecting contributions on a pay-as-you-go basis, ie just when the banking system is weak, 
Pre-funding may be a useful step in reducing the financial system’s pro-cyclical tendencies.  
Second, subject to appropriate constraints, the insurance fund could be available for use in 
resolutions that avoid liquidation and payout under the deposit-insurance scheme. That is the 
approach  in  the  US.  And  it  brings  me  to  the  broader  elaboration  of  the  banking  Social 
Contract.  
Resolving bank distress: information needs  
As  the  2007  Northern  Rock  disaster  demonstrated  and  as  the  Governor  explained  at  the 
Treasury  Select  Committee  in  September  of  that  year,  each  country  needs  a  Special 
Resolution  Regime  for  banks,  enabling  economically  essential  banking  functions  and  so 
confidence to be preserved in the event of distress. The UK now has such a regime. 
But  delivering  effective  resolutions  is  not  just  a  matter  of  the  official  sector  introducing 
legislation and equipping an authority, in the UK’s case the Bank, with resources to use it.  
It also, crucially, requires banks to structure themselves so as to permit orderly resolution. 
That, it can now been seen, is the better version of the third element of the banking Social 
Contract. 
What does it mean?  
In the first place, it entails banks maintaining up-to-date information on their retail deposits in 
a way that facilitates rapid payout under the FSCS. Rapid payout is necessary to maintain 
the  confidence  of  depositors  in  other  banks.  It’s  all  very  well  most  retail  depositors  being 
100% protected, but not so comforting if they had to wait ages to receive repayment from the 
deposit  insurer  after  their  bank  had  failed.  In  the  UK,  the  FSCS  will  be  working  hard  to 
address this issue.4 Until rapid payout is feasible, where a buyer for the whole bank for some 
other solution cannot be found it is more likely than otherwise that distressed banks will be 
resolved via the SRR, with deposit books transferred where possible to other banks.  
But I stress “where possible”, because this general approach depends on there being bidders 
for  deposit  books.  That  cannot  be  guaranteed.  So  banks  must  invest  in  the  information 
systems to be able to provide the FSCS pretty well instantly with what they need for rapid 
payout.  EU  directives  specify  a  target  for  payout  within  20  days.  Something  like  a  week 
would  probably  be  more  reassuring.  Speeding  up  the  process  will  require  banks  to  keep 
information on, for example, all the deposits a person has with a banking group which are 
                                                 
4   This has been the subject of two recent FSA consultation papers: “Financial Services Compensation Scheme 
reform: Fast payout for depositors and raising consumer awareness”, (CP 09/3), January 2009 and “Financial 
Services  Compensation  Scheme:  Verification  of  the  single  customer  view  and  changes  to  deposit 
compensation”, (CP 09/16), June 2009. The latter expands on the some of the proposals in the earlier CP, as 
well as providing feedback from that consultation. It notes that: “Final rules have not yet been made regarding 
fast payout generally and no decision has been made as to whether to proceed with the single customer view 
(SCV) proposals”. The CP remains open for comment. 
4 
 BIS Review 83/2009
eligible for deposit insurance; and the closing balance, including interest due, each day on 
eligible  deposits.  Banks  would  also  need  to  be  able  to  transmit  all  that  information,  on 
demand,  to  the  FSCS.  Getting  to  that  point  will  require  time.  There  is a  case  for debating 
whether it should be a regulatory requirement.  
The information I outlined is not needed just when a bank does actually go into liquidation 
and the FSCS makes a payout to depositors. It is also needed by the Bank of England to 
assess whether any of the Special Resolution Regime (SRR) tools could meet the statutory 
objectives of the 2009 Act more effectively than liquidation. Indeed, that is why the Bank has 
a clear interest in the information provided to the FSCS.  
In  fact,  even  more  information  is  needed  when  we  employ  the  SRR  instead  of  liquidation. 
Using  the  new  Act,  the  Bank,  working  the  FSA  and  HMT,  can  split  up  a  bank  or  building 
society  into  a  number  of  pieces:  deposits  going  to  one  buyer;  some  assets  possibly  to 
another;  parts  going  into  administration.  Effective  execution  of  an  operation  of  this  kind  is 
very  information  intensive.  For  example,  it  requires  banks  to  have  up-to-date,  coherent 
management accounts for all parts of the business. One might think that would be a good 
idea anyway. It should certainly be a requirement now.  
Execution  also  requires  detailed  information  on  how  the  business  is  run.  Just  a  few 
examples.  First,  on  the  services  that  different  parts  of  the  group  provide  to  each  other, 
because  if  split  up  they  may  have  to  agree  so-called  Transitional  Service  Agreements. 
Second, on which essential services have been outsourced. Third, on details of netting and 
derivative contracts, so that the Bank can apply  various statutory safeguards for creditors. 
That  is  a  formidable  task,  and  it  is  striking  that,  in  the  US,  the  FDIC  has  introduced  a 
requirement that troubled banks must be able to demonstrate that, if necessary, they could 
report each day the details of so-called Qualifying Financial Contracts, which are essentially 
derivatives. We may need to contemplate something along those lines in the UK.  
All of that is needed after buyers for the business have been found. Potential bidders for all 
or  part  of  an  ailing  bank  will  themselves  need  the  kinds  of  information  typically  offered  to 
bidders  in  a  “friendly”  M&A  transaction.  So  there  is  a  case  for  banks  routinely  maintaining 
such  a  Data  Room  as  part  of  their  crisis  contingency  plans.  In  delivering  its  resolution 
responsibilities under the 2009 Banking Act, the Bank is ready to work with banks and the 
FSA in helping to specify in more detail what is needed in practice. If the information can be 
ready almost routinely the execution of resolutions would be aided.  
In summary, as a consequence of its new statutory role, the Bank can have a need for a lot 
of information about banks getting into distress. That might usefully be seen alongside the 
information needed before a bank reaches the point of being unviable, when it might apply to 
draw  on  the  Bank’s  public  liquidity  insurance  facilities,  notably  the  Discount  Window.  And 
beyond that, a bank might seek Emergency Liquidity Assistance, where the Bank acts under 
the  Tripartite  MoU.5  In  either  circumstance,  the  Bank  will  need  information  on  the  bank’s 
liquidity position and planning, and a lot of detailed information on the collateral it would be 
offering. I therefore urge the BBA’s members to send the Bank (as well as, of course, the 
FSA) your Contingency Funding Plans; and, secondly, to pre-position collateral with us for 
the DWF.  
Overall, we need to engage together constructively on what information the authorities need 
in order to handle incipient or actual distress.  
                                                 
5   Paragraph  14  of  the  Memorandum  of  Understanding  between  HM  Treasury,  the  Bank  of  England  and  the 
Financial Services Authority says: "In exceptional circumstances, there may be a need for an operation which 
goes beyond the Bank's published framework for operations in the money market. Such a support operation is 
expected to happen very rarely and would normally only be undertaken in the case of a genuine threat to the 
stability of the financial system to avoid a serious disturbance in the UK economy." 
BIS Review 83/2009 
 5
in  almost  any 
Orderly wind down: writing “wills” 
There is a broader issue lurking in the background here, and in today’s environment we can 
and must address it openly. 
Last Friday, in the Bank’s latest Financial Stability Report, we emphasised the importance 
going forward of enhancing market discipline, notably through much better disclosures. But 
proposals for greater market discipline are not going to gain traction in the real world – the 
only world that matters – so long as wholesale creditors and others believe and act on the 
basis that some firms can be Too Big To Fail. And, of course, it is not just TBTF. It can be 
Too  Interconnected  To  Fail  too.  And  it  is  not  just  a  problem  with  so-called  LCFIs.  As 
demonstrated  by  the  UK’s  Secondary  Banking  Crisis  in  the  1970s,  contagious  distress 
amongst smaller banks can threaten stability more widely when they are afflicted by shared 
underlying problems: Too Similar To Fail, as one international colleague put it. And thinking 
of  the  place  of  some  banks  or  building  societies  in  their  local  communities,  we  can  also 
confront Too Popular To Fail.6 Putting aside that last notion, the solid point is that whether or 
not one firm’s distress has systemic consequences will, as a general matter, depend on the 
circumstances; but, very awkwardly, there are some firms, and some financial-infrastructure 
providers,  whose  distress  would  currently  be  systemic 
imaginable 
circumstances.  
We need to sort all that out one way or another. It is part of a wider debate about the future 
structure of the industry. The Bank is contributing to that debate, and a number of options 
were discussed in our Financial Stability Report last week, including as the Governor said at 
the Mansion House a fortnight ago, whether or not banks' activities should be regulated more 
heavily  or  even  in  the  extreme  restricted.  That  debate  is  obviously  difficult,  with  no  easy 
answers.  But  it  is  important,  and  cannot  be  ducked.  As  the  Governor  proposed  at  the 
Mansion House, it would help greatly if your banks could write a “will” for how they could be 
wound down in an orderly way in the face of distress. Indeed, that now has to be part of the 
banking Social Contract.  
It must surely entail a radical simplification of some group structures. Moving from, say, two 
thousand legal entities to one thousand would, somehow, miss the point. 
This will not be easy. We do understand that. But it is important to bring about the kind of 
regime shift necessary to restore confidence and trust in the industry without a government 
prop. 
The degree to which banking groups cannot deliver on this should be reflected over time in 
capital and liquidity requirements. As well as making distress itself less likely, that would also 
help to shift incentives in a healthy direction. 
I have talked throughout about banks. But the authorities will need to consider how far this 
approach  should  extend.  The  Treasury  already  has  power  to  put  bank  holding  companies 
into Temporary Public Ownership, but none of the regular SRR toolkit is available. And the 
Treasury  is  also  consulting  on  how  investment  banking  distress  should  be  handled  in  the 
light of the problems with the Lehmans insolvency and administration since last autumn.7
Cross-border resolutions 
There is also a vital cross-border element to all of this, which absolutely must be recognised 
and  tackled  if  we  are  to  establish  sounder  foundations  for  a  world  of  free,  global  capital 
markets. 
                                                 
6  
7  See, HM Treasury (2009), “Developing effective resolution arrangements for investment banks”, May 2009.  
I owe that expression to my colleague Paul Fisher. 
6 
 BIS Review 83/2009
Around thirty-five years ago the founding document of the rules of the game for international 
banking was issued: the Basel Concordat for the supervision of internationally active banks. 
Although  updated  in  the  early  1980s  to  embrace  consolidated  supervision  in  the  wake  of 
Banco  Ambrosiano’s  collapse,  its  essential  precepts  have  remained  unchanged.8  Home 
supervisors carry the responsibility for consolidated supervision. Broadly, hosts carry little or 
no responsibility for branches, other than for liquidity, although it is not easy to pin down what 
that  means;  but  hosts  carry  somewhat  greater  responsibility  for  the  soundness  of 
subsidiaries. (Within well-defined regional areas, variants can operate: eg passporting within 
the EU.) 
The point of rehearsing all that familiar stuff is that the division of labour for supervision of 
banks during peacetime absolutely must be consistent with the insolvency and other regimes 
that would operate in the event of failure or distress. Bluntly, it is no good assuming that an 
internationally  active  bank  can  be  regulated  as  a  single  unit  if,  when  distress  comes, 
differences  in  the  insolvency  or  resolution  regimes  of  the  various  countries  in  which  it 
operates effectively split the bank into a series of de facto distinct, local entities.  
The extra complications are legion, revolving around banking practice as well as resolution 
regimes.  
For example, if a group employs central liquidity management, as has been not uncommon, 
host  supervisors  and creditors  may  wake  up  the  morning  after  a  failure  to  find that  all  the 
group’s surplus liquidity is in another jurisdiction, available first to creditors there. This kind of 
thing  can  unhelpfully  alter  the  incentives  for  home  regulators  to  be  full  and  frank  in  their 
exchanges with host supervisors. We should not overlook that when extolling the merits of 
colleges  of  supervisors.  But  those  problems  should,  given  sufficient  will  and  common 
commitment, be trackable. 
Even more difficult are the entanglements and conflicts between home and host insolvency 
and  resolution  laws.  There  is,  for  example,  a  first-order  difference  between  single-entity 
insolvency  regimes  and  separate-entity  regimes.9  The  latter,  for  example  in  the  US  for 
foreign banks, have the effect of de facto ring-fencing local assets for local depositors. And 
even in countries that basically operate a single-entity regime, some (including the UK) would 
have  the  option  of  putting  a  branch  into  liquidation  pre-emptively  to  de  facto  ring  fence  it 
before the home authorities had established a whole-bank insolvency procedure.  
These  issues  are  not  new.  In  the  aftermath  of  the  BCCI  closure,  which  affected  many 
countries, the BCBS produced a paper in 1992 on the difficulties confronted.10 Arguably, the 
authorities pulled their punches slightly. But, in any case, so far as I can tell, nothing was 
done outside of Europe, where insolvency law for banks was adapted. In particular, the EU 
9  
                                                 
8   George Blunden chaired the Basel Committee when the original document was produced; and Peter Cooke 
did so in the 1980s. 
In  a  single-entity  insolvency  regime,  the  home  country  authorities  would  seek  to  apply  a  single  main 
insolvency proceeding to a bank incorporated in their jurisdiction and to all its branches in other countries. This 
is sometimes referred to as a universal approach to cross-border insolvency. This contrasts with a separate-
entity insolvency regime, in which separate insolvency proceedings may be applied to the parent bank (by the 
home country) and its branches in other countries (by host countries); this constitutes a territorial approach to 
cross-border insolvency. 
10   Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (1992). “The insolvency liquidation of a multinational bank”, Bank for 
International Settlements. Its key conclusions were: 1) when closing a multinational bank, supervisors should 
pay attention to the nature and timing of communications among themselves and of their communications with 
creditors, shareholders and management; 2) the nature of liquidation rules may be relevant to the manner in 
which multinational banks are supervised; 3) differences in liquidation rules across jurisdictions in a winding-
up can affect returns to depositors and other creditors and the operations of deposit protection schemes; and 
4) coordination and cooperation between liquidators can affect the returns to creditors in a liquidation and can 
be affected by the role of supervisors in a liquidation. 
BIS Review 83/2009 
 7
adopted the Credit Institutions Reorganisation and Winding-Up Directive, albeit after quite a 
delay  in  2001,  under  which  a  single-entity  regime  was  introduced for  the  resolution  of  any 
bank  incorporated  in  the  EEA,  applying  to  the  parent  bank  and  also  to  all  its  branches 
throughout the EEA. 
A  little  less  than  a  decade  after  the  BCBS’s  report  on  the  lessons  from  BCCI,  the 
FSF/G10/BCBS  produced  a  joint  report  on  the  orderly  wind  down  of  large  and  complex 
financial institutions. It was a good report. It called for a range of things, including Factbooks 
on key firms; contingency funding plans; wider crisis management plans; and so on. Perhaps 
most  important,  it  underlined  that,  at  that  time,  no  one  really  knew  how  to  wind  down  an 
LCFI. Quite a conclusion. A good one. It is a pity that the report wasn’t published. So far as I 
can see, nothing much was done, internationally.  
We now have another chance. A new round of work is now underway in the BCBS to identify 
impediments  or  complications  arising  from  national  insolvency  laws,  resolution  regimes,  or 
supervisory  practices.  I  would  be  amazed  if  that  group  does  not  identify  some  material 
issues,  for  the  reasons  I  have  discussed.  If  so,  they  should  not  be  dismissed  by  the  Top 
Brass,  left  to  worry  only  middle-ranking  technocrats,  as  seems  to  have  happened  nearly 
twenty years ago. 
Perhaps most important, in April, the Financial Stability Forum (now renamed the Financial 
Stability Board) issued Principles for Cross-Border Co-operation on Crisis Management. But 
what  really  matters  is  that  they  were  endorsed  by  the  G20  Heads  of  Government  at  their 
subsequent Summit. Which means that there is political endorsement for national authorities 
to  dilute  their  narrow  attachment  to  local  interests,  recognising  that  in  globalised  markets 
their  interests  will  often  best  be  served  through  co-operative  solutions.  Either  that,  or  the 
structure of international banking may have to change. 
Given the starting point, the Principles are demanding. For each of the most important global 
banks, the aim is that home and host authorities (regulators and central banks) should work 
together  to  identify  obstacles  to  effective  management  of  crises.  To  that  end,  home 
authorities  are  charged  with  ensuring  that  firms  are  capable  of  supplying  the  information 
needed to manage a crisis. And firms are strongly encouraged to maintain contingency plans 
to wind themselves down – as I have already said today, the Bank  would like there to be 
consideration of whether that could be a requirement for operating in the UK. And, as I also 
made clear earlier, we do realise that all of that will be formidable, best approached with an 
international consensus. 
Similarly  demanding  is  the  requirement  in  the  Principles  that  countries  “strive”  to  find 
internationally co-ordinated solutions, sharing information as freely as practicable. That is not 
something which one could say has always been apparent over the past two years, although 
it  worked  well  on  market  operations.  As  the  Principles  recognise,  the  drive  for  greater 
openness  between  authorities  should  not  be  permitted  to  jeopardise  effective  resolution 
through leaks or pre-emptive action to ring-fence local interests. 
I  am  reporting  this  because  the  FSB  Principles  have  not  got  as  much  coverage  as  they 
warrant.  Yet  it  is  very  important  that  the  banking  world  appreciates  that,  alongside  other 
issues  and  initiatives  I  have  outlined  this  morning,  they  have  the  potential  –  indeed,  are 
intended – to bring about material changes in the way you structure your businesses, in how 
you interact with the authorities, and in the wider environment in which you operate. 
I hope that the Financial Stability Board Working Group on the Crisis Management Principles 
will  not  hesitate  to  report  back  to  the  FSB,  and  through  it  to  alert  G20  Ministers,  if 
implementation is or looks to be stalling – whether because it is meeting with resistance from 
the authorities or the industry, or blockages in national laws and practices. 
8 
 BIS Review 83/2009
Concluding comment 
This  crisis  has  reminded  a  generation  of  some  old  truths.  Banks  can  fail.  But  they  matter 
enormously to our economies, and so the authorities cannot afford to stand back and allow 
disorderly  systemic  failure.  Going  forward,  we  cannot  have  a  regime  where  the  upside  for 
risk-taking  goes  to  shareholders  and  management,  but  the  downside  falls  to  the  general 
taxpayer. 
All three elements of the Social Contract for banking need to be reformed. Better regulation 
and  supervision,  including  a  macroprudential  element.  Better  arrangements  for  liquidity 
insurance, which the Bank has tried to introduce alongside our international peers. And, my 
main  topic  today,  a  new  regime  for  resolving  bank  distress.  In  particular,  banks  must 
structure and run themselves to permit orderly wind down. And they must invest to provide 
the authorities with the information they need to do so.  
This  will  not  be  easy.  And  it  will  not  be  cheap.  Together  with  higher  capital  and  liquidity 
requirements – lower leverage and reduced maturity transformations – over time it may well 
mean a lower headline return on equity for some banks. But, of course, it would also entail 
lower  risk  for  bank  equity  and  bond  investors,  and  surely  it  is  risk-adjusted  returns  that 
matter. And it would also deliver lower risk to society more generally, which matters hugely.  
To be clear, we want banks and the financial sector more generally to thrive. The institution I 
come from believes in a market economy, in capitalism. The financial sector has played an 
enormous role in the development of modern economies. But a regime in which banks can 
thrive standing on your own feet would be a better market – for all of us.  
BIS Review 83/2009 
 9
