Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Transforming potential into reality  
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas),  at  the  BAIPHIL's  Induction  of  Officers  and  General 
Membership Meeting, Manila, 15 July 2009. 
 Distinguished  officers  and  members  of  the  Bankers  Institute  of  the  Philippines  led  by 
Incoming  President  Susan  Uranza  and  Outgoing  President  Lydia  King,  SEC  Chairman  Fe 
Barin,  MBM  Ignacio  Bunye,  PM  Cesar  Virata,  fellow  bankers,  colleagues  from  the  BSP, 
special guests, good afternoon!  
On behalf of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, I congratulate BAIPHIL’s new set of officers led 
by President Susan Uranza. Ladies and gentlemen, let us wish them well and cheer them on 
with a long round of applause!  
To the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, the BAIPHIL is a long-standing partner in strengthening 
the  Philippine  banking  sector  by  enhancing  productivity  through  research,  information 
exchange  and  education.  Indeed,  through  its  continuous  development  and  conduct  of 
appropriate training programs, BAIPHIL has been upgrading the knowledge and expertise of 
banking  professionals.  In  other  words,  BAIPHIL  plays  a  major  role  in  keeping  Philippine 
bankers abreast of global bank standards and practices. This is a very important function.  
The banking sector is the pillar of our financial system as it remains the primary source of 
funds  for  our  business  sector,  drawing,  in  turn,  from  funds  entrusted  to  it  by  investors, 
creditors,  and  depositors.  It  is  essential  therefore  that  our  bankers  are  able  to  adapt  and 
respond appropriately to a constantly changing and ever challenging environment.  
This is particularly true today when the global financial landscape continues to be redefined 
by the ongoing financial crisis and the most severe global economic downturn in decades. 
New  challenges  have  emerged,  even  as  new  opportunities  surface. It  is  crucial,  therefore, 
that bankers should be ready to take on these new challenges and opportunities.  
For instance, it is important to note that while other countries struggle with tight credit, our 
banking sector remains liquid and able to sustain lending at double-digit growth rates.  
As  of  May  2009,  outstanding  loans  of  commercial  banks,  including  reverse  repurchase 
agreements, reached P2.1 trillion, over 10% higher than the year-ago level. This is a positive 
trend that indicates continuing support from the banking sector for productive activities that 
sustain economic growth.  
Having said this, banks must make sure that appropriate risk management systems are in 
place to guard against potential credit and liquidity risks, among others. There should be no 
room for complacency insofar as risk management is concerned. I believe BAIPHIL’s training 
programs on risk management will go a long way in addressing this need.  
Ensuring the quality of your training programs on good governance is also important, as this 
counts  as  compliance  to  the  BSP’s  mandatory  requirement  for  bank  directors  and  key 
officers. As you are aware, weak governance and lack of transparency have been cited as 
among the causes of the continuing global financial crisis and economic downturn.  
There  are  other  programs  that  I  know  BAIPHIL  can  take  on  quite  effectively,  which  are 
aligned with our special advocacies at the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas.  
One  of  these  is  economic  and  financial  education  for  Filipinos.  So  far,  we  have 
institutionalized  the  integration  into  the  public  elementary  school  curriculum  lessons  on 
saving  and  money  management  starting  schoolyear  2008-2009.  This  joint  program  of  the 
Bangko Sentral with the Department of Education targets 12 million students, from Grade I to 
Grade  VI,  or  nearly  90%  of  Filipino  children  in  the  elementary  schools.  This  number  will 
BIS Review 96/2009 
 1
increase further as last month, the Coordinating Council of Private Educators Association or 
COCOPEA  also  expressed  its  intent  to  teach  saving  and  money  management  lessons  to 
elementary students in private schools estimated at over 1.5 million.  
We  are  therefore  planting  the  seeds  for  nurturing  a  new  generation  of  Filipinos  who  save 
regularly  and  manage  their  finances  properly.  They  are  the  future  of  our  nation.  They 
deserve our support.  
The  Bangko  Sentral  has  also  started  financial  education  programs  on  saving,  money 
management,  and  investment  options  for  overseas  Filipinos  and  their  dependents.  With 
BAIPHIL’s support, we can cover more ground and extend our reach. This is one way we can 
express our appreciation to overseas Filipinos whose remittances have kept the Philippine 
economy  resilient  in  the  midst  of  the  global  recession.  Their  monthly  remittances  have 
remained above $1 billion since 2006 and reached an unprecedented annual level of $16.4 
billion in 2008. In 2000, remittances for the whole year were just over $6 billion. Latest data 
show that for May 2009, remittances coursed through the banking system reached a record 
high of $1.48 billion or a YOY growth of 3.7 percent. Total or cumulative remittances for the 
first 5 months of 2009 amounted to $6.98 billion, representing a YOY increase of 2.8 percent. 
Together, let us help Overseas Filipinos and their families put their money to optimal use, so 
that they can allocate their cash flows not only for consumer goods and leisure but also for 
smart spending and savings such as education, housing and investments. Banks should also 
explore new products and services for overseas Filipinos as well as guide them on the type 
of savings pattern and investments that are suitable for them.  
Finally,  BAIPHIL  can  help  develop  teaching  modules  on  saving,  investment,  and  money 
management for adults and out-of-school youths in cooperation with the Bangko Sentral and 
the Department of Education’s Bureau of Alternative Education.  
I  am  very  pleased  therefore  that  BAIPHIL  through  President  Susan  Uranza,  signed  a 
Memorandum of Agreement with the Bangko Sentral last week to support our economic and 
financial  education  program  including  our  savings  promotion  campaign  which  we  call 
“Banking on Your Future.” Other organizations that have signed up as our partners for this 
program are the Rural Bankers Association of the Philippines, the Chamber of Thrift Banks, 
the  Bank  Marketing  Association  of  the  Philippines  and  the  Bankers  Association  of  the 
Philippines.  
The BSP has also set up Economic and Financial Learning Centers in our regional offices 
and  branches  where  researchers  can  access  economic  and  financial  data  generated  and 
monitored by the Bangko Sentral.  
Indeed,  the  BSP  in  coordination  with  the  banking  sector  has  taken  a  proactive  stance  to 
institutionalize  an  inclusive  program  for  the  economic  and  financial  education  of  Filipinos 
anchored on the theme, “Financial Education: Building Blocks for a Stronger Economy”.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen.  The  BSP  recognizes  the  need  to  continuously  raise  the  bar  of 
competency  for  banking  professionals.  At  a  macro  level,  the  depth  of  skills  of  the  entire 
banking sector workforce will be a crucial factor in building a stronger banking system. In this 
regard,  I  recognize  that  BAIPHIL  has  been  and  will  continue  to  provide  support  in 
strengthening the human capital base of our banks.  
The  BSP,  for  its  part,  will  remain  committed  and  continue  to  craft  appropriate  monetary 
policies and banking reforms that will allow our economy to ride out the crisis. We will also 
move forward with reforms to protect consumers and investors. These initiatives, which we 
have vigorously pursued in recent years, are instrumental in instilling order and depth in the 
banking system, ahead of the onset of the global financial crisis. 
Nevertheless,  considering  all  that  is  happening  in  the  global  arena,  we  are  in  a  relatively 
good  place.  Among  others,  our  inflation  rate  in  June  is  at  its  lowest  in  22  years,  we  are 
2 
 BIS Review 96/2009
looking at a balance of payments surplus this year, and our gross international reserves are 
at its highest level ever.  
This is not to say that we will have smooth sailing moving forward. In this imperfect world, we 
are bound to meet unexpected bumps along the way. 
However,  if  BAIPHIL  continues  to  be  successful  in  fulfilling  its  mission  to  enhance 
productivity through research, information exchange and education, then the banking sector 
would be better equipped to hurdle the challenges that will come its way.  
And given its commitment to participate actively in expanding the reach of our economic and 
financial education programs, BAIPHIL should also make a big impact in promoting wealth 
creation  among  Filipinos.  Susan,  your  president  at  BAIPHIL,  describes  this  process  as 
teaching Filipinos proper lifestyle management. I agree with this practical approach.  
We  at  the  Bangko  Sentral  are  therefore  looking  forward  to  a  fruitful  collaboration  with 
BAIPHIL  that  will  result  in  a  continuously  growing  pool  of  trained  bankers  as  well  as 
financially literate Filipinos who will help build a better and stronger Philippines.  
Again,  my  congratulations  to  the  distinguished  ladies  and gentlemen  of  the  BAIPHIL,  your 
past set of officers led by Mrs. Lydia King and the freshly-inducted new officers under the 
leadership of President Susan Uranza.  
Mabuhay ang BAIPHIL! Mabuhay ang Pilipinas!  
Maraming salamat po sa inyong lahat. 
BIS Review 96/2009 
 3
