Masaaki Shirakawa: The role of central banks in the new financial 
environment 
Remarks  by  Mr  Masaaki  Shirakawa,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  International 
Monetary Conference, Kyoto, 9 June 2009. 
 Introduction 
Let  me  first  thank  the  hosts  for  inviting  me  to  the  International  Monetary  Conference.  The 
IMC  has  a  very  long  history  of  providing  not  only  its  private  sector  members,  but  also  the 
public  sector  with  an  excellent  opportunity  to  frankly  discuss  a  broad  range  of  issues 
regarding financial institutions, financial markets and the financial system. 
We are unfortunately still in the midst of an unprecedented financial crisis, although hopefully 
the worst is behind us. The topic the organizers have given to us central bankers, "The Role 
of Central Banks in the New Financial Environment", is clearly a very timely one, something 
which is on our minds everyday. The fundamental role of a central bank remains unchanged, 
but its functions have gradually changed with the passing of time. In the case of the Bank of 
Japan,  on-site  examinations  of  financial  institutions  were  introduced  in  1928  based  on  the 
experience of the financial crisis after World War I. The Bank of Japan Act was revised in 
1998  to  strengthen  the  independence  of  monetary  policy.  This  reflects,  among  others,  the 
lessons  learned  regarding  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  during  the  bubble  period  of  the 
latter  half  of  the  1980s.  At  that  time,  our  on-site  bank  examination  was  also  given  a  clear 
legal backing. 
How will the role of the central banks around the world change in light of the current global 
financial crisis? 
In considering this issue, I would like to first pose two questions to the top executives that are 
here with us today. First, in the years heading up to the crisis, especially the five year period 
between  2003  and  2007,  did  you  recognize  that  risks  were  building  up  in  your  institution 
and/or  in  the  financial  system?  Second  -  this  is  a  question  about  the  now  famous  quote 
regarding dancing with the music - if we were in the future to experience a similar benign 
economic  period  of  high  growth,  low  inflation,  low  interest  rates  and  low  market  volatility, 
would you choose a different business strategy? If you were to choose a different strategy, 
what would be your expectations on the path that senior executives of your rival institutions 
would choose? 
While you are responsible for making your bank both profitable and resilient to shocks, the 
role of the central banks is to assure that your endeavors lead to a sound financial system 
conducive  to  economic  prosperity.  What  we  central  banks  need  to  understand  is  that  the 
behavior  of  market  participants  will  be  influenced  by  human  nature  and  competitive 
pressures in the markets.  
Without trying to paint a complete picture, let me raise a number of issues with respect to the 
role of central banks which I believe are important in the new financial environment.  
Role of central banks 
Assessing risks on a system-wide basis 
First, central banks need to assess risks on a system-wide basis taking into consideration the 
linkages  between  the  real  economy  and  financial  markets  as  well  as  among  financial 
institutions. Such assessment will be the basis for policy actions regarding financial system 
stability.  Of  course,  this  is  a  typical  example  of  something  that  is  easier  said  than  done. 
BIS Review 71/2009 
 1
Before  the  current  crisis,  central  banks  issued  warnings  regarding  the  build-up  of  risks 
through financial system reports. However, issuing warnings are not so difficult. Senior bank 
executives and other market participants themselves, to some extent, recognize such risks. If 
we seriously wish to reduce such risks, remedial action is required. But in order to go beyond 
analysis and take remedial actions, a proper assessment, a strong will, together with a robust 
legal  framework  which  enables  effective  action,  are  all  necessary.  In  any  event,  without  a 
system-wide  assessment,  no  actions  are  possible.  I  believe  central  banks  are  in  a  natural 
position to take up such an assessment role. As the entity responsible for monetary policy, 
central banks focus on macro economic conditions, have close contacts with financial market 
participants, and our institutional culture emphasizes the importance of research. 
Reconsidering the conduct of monetary policy 
Second, we need to reconsider the conduct of monetary policy. When one looks at market 
participants and senior bank management collectively, their incentives are also influenced by 
macro economic and financial conditions. The most typical example would be the search for 
yield  witnessed  during  the  so-called  Great  Moderation.  This  incentive  issue  evolves  into  a 
difficult  challenge  for  monetary  policy  when  asset  bubbles  emerge.  The  problem  is  often 
debated simply as whether monetary policy should lean against the wind or excessive asset 
price  increases.  However,  I  believe  that  such  a  formulation  of  the  issue  confuses  the 
discussions on monetary policy. No central banker believes that bubbles can or should be 
prevented just through monetary policy. A more practical formulation of the issue for central 
banks would be, "how should monetary policy be conducted in an environment where asset 
prices  are  rising,  credit and  leverage  are  increasing  and  the  economy  is  growing, strongly 
signaling  a  need  for  policy  tightening,  while  only  general  prices  remain  stable?"  In  such  a 
bullish  atmosphere,  raising  policy  rates  somewhat  would  have  little  short-term  effect  in 
dampening  bubble-like economic  activity.  On  the  other  hand,  if  the  central  bank  maintains 
very  accommodative  monetary  policy,  this  would  amplify  the  expansion  of  credit  and 
leverage. When we debate the relationship between monetary policy and bubbles, we can 
neither be too optimistic nor too pessimistic. The build-up of excesses cannot be constrained 
by monetary policy alone. We need a combination of policy measures. At the same time, if 
monetary  policy  is  inappropriate,  the  bubble  will  grow  even  more,  eventually  bursting  and 
causing a sharp contraction of the economy. 
Revamping prudential regulation 
Third,  central  banks  need  to  contribute  to  the  on-going  debate  in  revamping  prudential 
regulation.  Central  banks  may  or  may  not  be  the  regulatory  body  depending  on  each 
country's  legal  framework.  Nonetheless,  regardless  of  the  legal  framework,  central  banks, 
which  are  responsible  for  the  stability  of  the  financial  system,  can  and  should  play  a 
constructive  role  in  designing  prudential  rules.  The  behavior  of  financial  institutions  is 
strongly influenced both by the macro economic environment and by prudential rules. As a 
specific example, prudential rules such as regulatory capital requirements and bank practices 
such  as  provisioning  need  to  be  reviewed  with  the  aim  of  reducing  pro-cyclicality.  A 
framework whereby banks build up buffers during good economic conditions so that they can 
use  such  buffers  to  maintain  their  financial  intermediation  function  during  difficult  macro 
conditions is essential. 
Strengthening the provision of banking services 
Fourth, the banking services central banks provide need to be strengthened. In recent years, 
central  banks  have  taken  multiple  steps  to  enhance  the  stability  and  efficiency  of  the 
payment and settlement system, such as steps to minimize settlement risks emerging from 
time  zone  differences  in  foreign  exchange  transactions  and  enhancing  payment  and 
settlement  system  oversight.  During  this  crisis,  in  the  area  of  money  market  operations, 
2 
 BIS Review 71/2009
central banks have expanded the range of collateral and counterparties, and major central 
banks have conducted coordinated operations to provide US dollar liquidity. These measures 
have helped bring back stability to financial markets. 
However, in ever-changing financial markets, challenges remain. It is often mentioned that 
financial markets are gradually becoming seamless in a figurative sense. But, it is far from 
seamless even if it were limited to financial transactions and their settlement. During the day, 
incoming  payment  instructions  and  outgoing  payment  instructions  are  not  completely 
synchronized, and thus the need for intraday credit emerges. This is most typical in foreign 
exchange transactions, although such risks have been reduced through the introduction of 
CLS.  Additionally,  market  volatility  can  suddenly  increase  short-term  funding  needs,  as 
financial institutions require additional collateral under margining arrangements. As a result, 
in the process of financial transactions, leakages of liquidity or temporary storage of liquidity 
become inevitable, and seams emerge. In times of crisis, the shortage of liquidity caused by 
such seams can aggravate the situation. Central banks will need to continuously review how 
our banking services can fill such gaps.  
Enhancing organizational culture and human capital 
In  concluding  I  would  like  to  emphasize  the  importance  of  the  organizational  culture  and 
human  capital  at  both  central  banks  and  the  private  sector.  Organizations  cannot  flourish 
without  a  rich  culture  emphasizing  fundamental  aims  and  without  a  deep  pool  of  human 
capital embodying such a culture. 
First, both central banks and financial institutions need to cultivate a culture emphasizing the 
importance of maintaining a long-term perspective. Otherwise, both cannot attain their goals 
on a sustained basis: long-term macro economic and financial stability for central banks and 
long-term profitability for the private sector, respectively.  
Second,  in  the  case  of  central  banks,  we  need  to  be  in  a  position  to  help  fill  the  gaps  of 
incomplete contracts and markets. Financial transactions are concluded using various forms 
of  contracts,  and  it  is  impossible  to  prepare  a  contract  which  can  cover  each  future  state. 
Using  economics  terminology,  "complete  contracts"  do  not  exist.  A  central  bank  can,  for 
example,  function  as  an  honest  broker  or  a  catalyst,  in  supporting  the  development  of  a 
market-based  solution  to  a  newly  emerging  issue.  In  order  to  be  in  a  position  to  fill  such 
gaps,  it  is  critical  that  central  banks  are  sensitive  to  changes  in  the  financial  markets  and 
financial industry. However, since central banks are not profit motivated organizations, there 
is the risk that we do not promptly recognize such changes. On the other hand, individual 
financial institutions and other market participants do not necessarily have the incentive to 
internalize the possible effects of their behavior on the overall financial system. Maintaining 
stability in the financial system  would not be  possible without cooperation between central 
banks and the private sector. Central banks need staff who have excellent people skills to 
cultivate  constructive  relationships  with  financial  institutions  and  market  participants, 
understand the details of business practices, and honed their macro perspectives. One of the 
important  roles  I  have  as  governor  of  a  central  bank  is  to cultivate  such  an  organizational 
culture.  In  a  similar  vein,  I  hope  you  can  foster  a  culture  within  your  institutions  that 
recognizes  the  importance  of  our  collaborative  efforts  and  would  support  our  work  by 
informing the public sector in a timely manner of possible buds emerging in the economy or 
financial markets which may harm the stability of the financial system. As I mentioned at the 
outset, the IMC provides an excellent opportunity for such dialogue. 
I will stop here. Thank you. 
BIS Review 71/2009 
 3
