Bandid Nijathaworn: Where is global finance heading? 
Speech  by  Dr  Bandid  Nijathaworn,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the 
Conference entitled, “Where is Global Finance Heading? The Stake of Emerging Economies 
in the International Financial System”, organised by Central Bank of Peru and Reinventing 
Bretton Woods Committee, Cusco, Peru, July 13-14, 2009. 
 Thank you Chair 
First, let me thank the Central Bank of Peru and Reinventing Bretton Woods Committee for 
the invitation. It is an honour to be speaking to you today. 
The topic of this first session is “Time of upheaval: Where global finance is heading?”. This is 
definitely an important question given the current crisis is now almost two years old and is 
still  evolving.  Judging  from  the  implications  that  the  crisis  has  had  so  far  on  the  world 
economy and financial markets, this is truly the first crisis of globalization. The crisis shows 
that financial upheaval can happen in any country, regardless of whether it is large or small, 
emerging or developed, and once happens, it can impart huge externalities on the rest of the 
world  given  the  globalized  nature  of  the  world’s  trade  and  payment  systems.  But  more 
importantly,  the  crisis  points  to  the  weakness  in  the  configuration  of  policies  and  financial 
regulation  in  the  period  leading  up  to  the  crisis  that  led  to  excessive  risk-taking  in  the 
intermediation of global savings and investment across economies. 
Compared  to  the  Asian  financial  crisis  twelve  years  ago,  the  dynamic  of  macroeconomic 
adjustment in this crisis also looks similar, although the trigger point this time is more bank-
led  than  currency-led.  The  real  surprise,  however,  was  in  the  timing,  the  scale,  and  the 
intensity of how the problem quickly deteriorated into a major global turbulence. According to 
the IMF, compared with the previous crises, the cost of the current crisis in terms of financial 
losses could be as high as 10 percent of US GDP. This implies a very substantial welfare 
loss. 
Is this the time of upheaval? My answer is both yes and no. The “No” part refers to the fact 
that,  despite  the  magnitude  of  the  current  crisis,  aggressive  policy  response  and  the 
willingness to do more by Governments have successfully contained the fallout to the extent 
that  collapse  of  the  global  financial  system  has  been  avoided.  Financial  markets,  to  an 
appreciable extent, are stabilizing, risk appetite is returning, and signs of improvement in the 
real economy are beginning to emerge on a world-wide basis. Although it is still early days, 
they do point to the beginning of stabilization which is an important first step for economic 
recovery to take hold. 
The “Yes” part of my answer comes from what I see as a major challenge in the ideas and 
policies on how best to manage the global economy going forward in this era of globalized 
finance. For instance, with this crisis, we witness a breakdown in the key assumptions that 
form the basis of our thinking about the efficiency and the self-correcting nature of markets 
which,  for  a  long  time,  underpin  the  rationale  for  globalization,  liberalization,  and 
deregulation. These assumptions are now being challenged. 
Next, in this crisis, the most damage comes from the most regulated sector of the economy, 
notably the financial sector. What we saw is that, even with regulation in place, the sector 
surprisingly  exhibited  important  failure  in  risk  management  discipline  across  a  variety  of 
institutions  and  players,  including  banks,  institutional  investors,  credit-rating  agencies,  and 
regulators.  On  this,  a  better  way  to  manage  risk  to  support  the  process  of  international 
financial  intermediation  still  needs  to  be  worked  out.  And  finally,  the  global  economy  has 
never before been put in a position that it might have to deal with the consequences of the 
BIS Review 92/2009 
 1
massive  policy  response  that  have  been  put  in  place  both  on  the  fiscal  and  the  monetary 
fronts.  These  4  consequences  are  the  known  unknowns,  and  the  approach  we  choose  to 
address  them  will  importantly  influence  the  direction  that  global  finance  will  take  going 
forward. 
Given the focus of this conference is on the stake of emerging economies in the international 
financial system, let me share with you briefly how emerging economies in Asia so far have 
managed in the current crisis, and how we see the direction of global finance evolving. 
This  time  emerging  markets  are  not  the  cause  of  the  crisis,  but  are  affected  by  its  global 
contagion. Emerging markets in Asia, this time, were able to weather the impact of the crisis 
with a relatively strong initial position. The strengths are found in the region’s banking sector, 
which  so  far  has  been  resilient  because  of  the  limited  exposure  to  subprime-related  and 
other toxic assets, the sector’s strong capital base, and its low reliance on external funding. 
This time external vulnerabilities of the region’s economies are low. They are supported by 
high  levels  of  international  reserves,  continued  current  account  surplus  and  low  external 
debt. More importantly, economic fundamentals of the region have improved markedly, and 
these have helped enhance the room for policy as well as the ability of the economy to adjust 
to shock. Suffice it to say that these improved qualities are no accident. They are the results 
of deliberate policies to reform the domestic economy, maintain discipline in macroeconomic 
management, build up a liquidity buffer for self-insurance, and strengthen supervision of the 
banking system. 
Notwithstanding  the  improved  qualities,  the  impact  of  the  crisis  on  the  Asian  emerging 
economies have been substantial, and largely transmitted through three channels. The first is 
the tightened access to international capital market as a result of the global credit crunch. 
The second is the reversal of capital flows linked to the process of global deleveraging. And 
the third is the impact on the real economy on account of the collapse in exports. For Asia, 
the impacts have been uneven across countries, depending on the size of the initial capital 
inflows  and  the  maturity  composition  of  external  debt.  Nonetheless,  because  of  the  higher 
levels of reserves, the absence of significant currency mismatches, and greater flexibility in 
the exchange rate regimes, emerging markets in Asia have been able to adjust better to the 
shock without undermining economic and financial stability. 
However, it may be noted that, so far, the impact from the trade channel has been the most 
severe. This is because of the large share of exports and manufacturing in the region’s GDP. 
For example, exports from the five ASEAN economies fell by about 12 percent in the fourth 
quarter of last year, and by 28 percent in the first quarter of this year, while GDP growth over 
the  same  two  quarters  fell  by  0.6  percent.  This  decline  is  large  and  shows  that  Asian 
emerging  markets  remain  closely  tied  to  the  global  business  cycle.  Therefore,  without 
improvements in the world economy, a sustained recovery in Asia will be difficult in the near-
term. 
Reflecting this, the focus of the policy response, at least in Thailand, has been to help the 
economy adjust to the impact of the crisis through a supportive stance of monetary and fiscal 
policies  while  maintaining  the  overall  policy  discipline.  As  for  banks,  the  supervisory 
approach  has  been  to  ensure  that  the  banking  system  remains  healthy,  and  continues  to 
operate fully to support the economy with good risk management and adequate capital. 
At  this  time,  consistent  with  developments  elsewhere,  more  positive  signs  in  the  real 
economy are also beginning to emerge in Asia, and this has led to a view that conditions for 
recovery  look  more  promising  in  Asia,  given  the  lesser  impact  on  the  region’s  economic 
fundamentals and the banking sector. I find this view quite plausible. This is because, in the 
case of Asian financial crisis, it was also the countries that did not have a serious financial 
sector problem or external vulnerabilities that were able to recover relatively more quickly. 
On this note, let me digress to the issue of decoupling. If we divide the dynamic of financial 
crisis into three phases, namely, first the shock of the news phase when everything is on a 
downturn,  to  the  second  phase  of  market  stabilization,  and  the  third  phase  of  economic 
2 
 BIS Review 92/2009
recovery, it is clear from what has happened so far that, on the downturn, it is a recoupling 
story both for the real economy and for finance. The downturn has been quite synchronized 
because of the globalized nature of the world’s production, trade, and financial investment. 
Nonetheless,  for  the  market  stabilization  and  the  economic  recovery  phases,  I  see 
decoupling in the timing and in the pace of recovery being a strong possibility. This is based 
on  significant  differences  that  exist,  between  the  core-crisis  countries  and  the  countries 
affected by contagion, in the relative strength of the economic fundamentals, the state of the 
banking sector, and the perception of risk by investors. However, beyond the initial recovery, 
sustained economic decoupling will be difficult without a major restructuring in the sources of 
growth which, in the case of Asia, calls for a reorientation of the growth driver from exports to 
domestic demand. 
Making  this  transition  safely  in  this  era  of  globalized  finance  will  be  the  next  important 
challenge for emerging markets in Asia. In the past ten years, the share of domestic demand 
in the region’s GDP fell by 6.3 percentage point, and the share is now 12.3 percentage point 
below  its  peak  in  1994.  Moving  the  ratio  back  will  require  major  restructuring  in  both  the 
demand and the supply sides of the economy, which needs to be supported by policies that 
redirect  economic  incentives  from  savings  to  domestic  consumption  and  investment.  Such 
task  is  gigantic.  Chief  amongst  the  polices  needed  to  support  this  transition  will  be  the 
development of the region’s financial system, to ensure an efficient intermediation of savings 
into  productive  investment.  This  is  really  the  key  issue  where  the  challenge  and  the 
constraint  to  economic  decoupling  lies.  One  of  the  prime  reasons  underlying  the  current 
global  imbalance  is  the  limited  capacity  of  the  financial  systems  in  emerging  markets  to 
generate investment from their local savings. As a result, the intermediation was taken up 
instead  by  financial  systems  in  the  advanced  economies  which,  as  we  know,  led  to  risk-
taking and a major asset price bubble. 
In closing, I want to end my remark by making a few observations on the direction of global 
finance going forward. 
As a matter of fact, the current crisis is also a crisis of globalized finance, considering the 
damage that has been done to the global banks and financial markets. Lessons learnt from 
this crisis will definitely bring about important changes in the global financial landscape, as 
well as in the regulatory approach to bank regulation and supervision. On this, key trends we 
can  expect  to  see  in  the  emerging  financial  landscape  will  include,  on  the  demand  side, 
consumers  becoming  more  risk  averse  and  having  preference  for  local  institutions  and  for 
simplicity  of  transactions  and  instruments,  while  demanding  greater  accountability  and 
transparency.  On  the  banking  side,  business  models  of  banks  will  become  more 
conservative,  relying  less  on  wholesale  funding  and  on  the  use  of  leverage,  while  giving 
greater  importance  to  risk  management  and  higher  liquidity  buffer.  And  on  the  regulatory 
front, more emphasis will definitely be on public surveillance and the use of macroprudential 
oversight,  with  focus  on  system-wide  stability,  closer  supervision  of  the  systemically 
important  financial  institutions  including  non-banks,  and  establishing  an  international 
procedure for an orderly unwinding of a troubled systemically important global player. These 
changes will help reduce the likelihood of crisis and contain the impact of a systemic failure 
to  the  level  that  can  be  managed  by  conventional  policies.  In  parallel  with  this,  on  the 
economic front, adjustment to the financial crisis will continue and, in the process, the global 
economy will likely move into a world of two halves. The first half is the corecrisis countries 
whose  immediate  policy  concern  will  be  to  rebuild  financial  fundamentals  and  resume 
growth. The second half is the less-affected economies, including emerging markets in Asia, 
whose policy focus will be to sustain growth and avoid financial instability. This latter point is 
important because, given abundant liquidity, the shift in the pattern of global growth towards 
the less-affected economies will spark a new financial cycle driven by a resumption of large 
capital flows to emerging markets. The challenge for emerging markets, therefore, is to grow 
safely  by  managing  all  the  attendant  risk  associated  with  the  strong  capital  flows.  In  this 
context,  it  is  important  that  the  experience  of  the  last  ten  years,  when  the  fall  in  Asian 
BIS Review 92/2009 
 3
demand after the Asian financial crisis was offset by a boom in US residential investment, 
must not be repeated. Otherwise, the crisis risk will remain high, and globalized finance will 
be seen only as a threat to long-term economic stability. 
Managing this risk and growing safely will be the stake of emerging market economies going 
forward. To achieve this, policymakers will need to acknowledge the risk and come up with 
the  appropriate  safeguards.  First  and  foremost  for  emerging  markets  is  the  continued 
strengthening of the domestic financial sector as I have noted, which is the key pre-requisite 
for raising the ability of the financial system and the economy to manage risk. Next, regional 
financial mechanism will also need to be strengthened to provide additional safeguards in the 
context  of  market  surveillance  and  coordination  of  crisis  prevention  and  resolution  efforts. 
One lesson we have learnt dearly from the current crisis, as well as from the Asian financial 
crisis,  is  that  globalized  finance  can  be  a  source  of  serious  risk  to  global  economic  and 
financial stability. Policymakers at the global level must accept this fact and be prepared to 
respond to it in a forward-looking way. 
I probably have used up the allocated time. Again, I want to thank the Central Bank of Peru 
and  Reinventing  Bretton  Woods  Committee  for  the  invitation.  It  has  been  a  pleasure,  and 
thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 92/2009
