T T Mboweni: Overview of the South African economy 
Address  by  Mr  T  T  Mboweni,  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  at  the  89th 
ordinary general meeting of shareholders, Pretoria, 17 September 2009. 
 Introduction 
The past year has witnessed the most severe global economic downturn since the 1930s. At 
the time of the previous annual general meeting, the impact of the financial market crisis was 
becoming evident in various economies. However, at that stage the extent and depth of the 
global  recession  were still  to  be  realised. In  response  to the  slowdown,  central  banks  and 
governments  around  the  world  have  taken  unprecedented  and  unconventional  steps  to 
protect  their  banking  systems  and  economies.  In  South  Africa  the  well-regulated  banking 
system  was  relatively  insulated  from  the  fallout.  However,  the  globalised  nature  of  the 
downturn  meant  that  the  domestic  economy  was  not  spared,  and  the  resulting  domestic 
recession required appropriate fiscal and monetary policy responses. 
These developments posed a new challenge to monetary policy and resulted in a renewed 
focus on matters of financial stability. Appropriate supervision and regulation of the domestic 
banking sector and payment system have ensured an orderly financial market environment. 
Although inflation was outside the target range, the stance of monetary policy was loosened 
significantly  in  the  face  of  an  expected  moderation  in  inflation  and  a  weakening  economy. 
Nevertheless, some upside risks to the inflation outlook remained and this constrained the 
monetary policy response somewhat. Apart from these concerns, the South African Reserve 
Bank (the Bank) also focused on maintaining and improving its internal operations. 
A comprehensive economic report, which is included as part of the Annual Report 2008/09, 
provides an analysis of developments in the domestic and international economy during the 
year  under  review.  Particular  emphasis  is  placed  on  those  developments  that  have  had 
implications for the operations of the Bank. As is usually the case, the focus of this address is 
on the main operational areas of the Bank. 
Monetary policy 
During the past year, monetary policy has been faced with new challenges. For the first time 
since the introduction of the inflation-targeting framework in 2000, monetary policy had to be 
implemented in the context of a domestic recession and against the backdrop of the severe 
and synchronised downturn in the world economy. At the same time, inflation remained well 
above  the  upper  end  of  the  inflation  target  range  and,  despite  the  downside  pressures, 
targeted inflation was only moderating at a very slow rate. 
At  the  time  of  the  previous  annual  general  meeting,  inflation  was  significantly  outside  the 
target  range.  The  consumer  price  index  excluding  mortgage  interest  cost  (CPIX)  inflation 
peaked at 13,6 per cent in August 2008 and declined to 10,3 per cent by December. With the 
publication  in  February  2009  of  the  reweighted  and  rebased  inflation  measure,  headline 
consumer  price  index  (CPI)  inflation  for  all  urban  areas  was  adopted  as  the  new  inflation 
target measure, with the target range remaining at 3 to 6 per cent. CPI measured 8,1 per 
cent in January, but increased to 8,6 per cent in February and has been declining gradually 
since then. By July, CPI inflation had declined to 6,7 per cent. However, the pace of decline 
has  been  constrained  by  substantial  increases  in  some  administered  prices,  particularly 
electricity prices, and persistently high food price inflation. 
As  a  result  of  the  global  turmoil,  the  outlook  for  inflation  was  subject  to  greater  risk  and 
uncertainty than usual, and this complicated monetary policy decision-making. Furthermore, 
BIS Review 110/2009 
 1
there  are  concerns  about 
the  assessment  of  risks  changed  significantly  in  the  course  of  the  year  in  line  with  the 
reversal in the trends of a number of factors impacting on inflation. 
The international oil price had been one of the main sources of upside risk to the inflation 
outlook during 2008. However, in response to the global downturn, the price of North Sea 
Brent crude oil declined from levels of around US$146 per barrel in August 2008 to around 
US$34 in December. Domestic petrol prices followed suit and declined from R10,70 per litre 
in  July  2008  to  R6,01  per  litre  in  January  2009.  However,  as  global  growth  prospects 
improved, the oil price has recently increased to around US$70 per barrel. Nevertheless, as 
a result of exchange rate developments, the domestic petrol price is still lower than the levels 
that prevailed in 2008 and has contributed to downward pressure on inflation during the year 
to date. 
The behaviour of the rand exchange rate during the past year has reflected the volatile global 
environment. In the early stage of the unfolding crisis, the rand came under pressure, along 
with  the  currencies  of  most  other  emerging-market  economies.  In  November  the  rand  had 
depreciated  to  around  R11,85  against  the  US  dollar,  and  at  the  December  meeting  of  the 
Monetary Policy Committee (MPC), the exchange rate was identified as the single biggest 
upside  risk  to  the  inflation  outlook.  However,  as  risk  aversion  abated,  the  rand  recovered 
somewhat over the subsequent months and the risk to the inflation outlook from this source 
was reduced significantly. The rand has recently been at levels close to those prevailing in 
the first half of 2008. 
Global developments also reduced the risk to the inflation outlook. The synchronised global 
recession and generally lower commodity prices meant that the threat to world inflation had 
dissipated  substantially.  While 
inflationary 
consequences  of  the  accommodating  monetary  policy  stance  in  a  number  of  advanced 
economies, global inflation is expected to remain contained at low levels. 
The widening domestic output gap during the past period also posed a downside risk to the 
inflation outlook. After a number of years of growth of around 5 per cent, the economy began 
to slow to rates below potential output growth. The economy grew at an annualised rate of 
0,2 per cent in the third quarter of 2008, but the full impact of the slowing world economy on 
the domestic economy became more evident in subsequent quarters. In the final quarter of 
2008  a  contraction  of  1,8  per  cent  was  recorded.  In  the  first  two  quarters  of  2009  the 
economy contracted at annualised rates of 6,4 per cent and 3,0 per cent respectively. 
Final consumption expenditure by households has been contracting since the third quarter of 
2008. The weaker domestic demand was a result of declining real disposable incomes and 
employment,  and  negative  wealth  effects  as  a  consequence  of  the  significant  decline  in 
equity and house prices. The negative trend in consumption expenditure was reinforced by a 
significant  deceleration  in  the  growth  of  credit  extension  to  the  private  sector.  This  was  in 
response to both lower demand for, and restricted supply of, credit as banks applied stricter 
lending criteria in view of the increasing number of impaired loans. 
Despite these factors that were generally conducive to a decline in the inflation rate, there 
were other pressures and risks to the upside. Administered prices continued to exert upward 
pressure on inflation. The biggest thrust came from the electricity price increase of 27,5 per 
cent granted to Eskom in 2008, followed by a further increase of 31,3 per cent announced in 
June 2009. Wage settlements in excess of inflation have also posed a threat to the inflation 
outlook. These settlements partly reflected the deterioration of inflation expectations over the 
period. 
Food price inflation was the main contributor to overall inflation over the past year. This was 
despite significant declines in the prices of agricultural commodities, which were reflected at 
the  producer  price  level  with  respect  to  both  agricultural  products  and  manufactured  food. 
Nevertheless, food price inflation at the consumer price level has remained stubbornly high. 
However,  there  have  been  recent  indications  that  the  pace  of  moderation  in  food  price 
inflation may be accelerating. 
the  possible 
2 
 BIS Review 110/2009
In  response  to  the  downward  trend  in  actual  and  forecast  inflation,  the  monetary  policy 
stance  has  been  eased  progressively  by  a  cumulative  500  basis  points  since  December 
2008. The repurchase rate was reduced by 50 basis points at the December 2008 meeting of 
the MPC and by a further 100 basis points at each of the four subsequent meetings. At the 
June  2009  meeting  the  monetary  policy  stance  remained  unchanged,  but  at  the  August 
meeting  the  repurchase  rate  was  reduced  by  a  further  50  basis  points  as  the  committee 
assessed that the risks to the inflation outcome had tilted further to the downside. 
The easing in monetary policy was applied despite the fact that inflation was still outside the 
inflation  target  range.  However,  in  a  forward-looking  monetary  policy  framework  the  MPC 
focuses on the expected path of inflation. Although subject to a high degree of variability and 
uncertainty,  the  inflation  forecast  during  this  past  period  has  consistently  indicated  that 
inflation  was  expected  to  return  to  within  the  inflation  target  range  over  a  reasonable  time 
horizon.  The  MPC  continued  to  apply  monetary  policy  within  a  flexible  inflation-targeting 
framework,  cognisant  of  the  economic  downturn.  Nevertheless,  price  stability  remains  the 
ultimate objective of monetary policy and the Bank remains committed to achieving the target 
over a reasonable time frame. 
Money-market operations 
In response to the consequences of the global financial market crisis, many central banks 
injected  large  amounts  of  liquidity  into  their  money  markets.  However,  domestic  markets 
remained characterised by excess liquidity conditions and, therefore, no additional liquidity 
had to be provided to domestic banking institutions. In order to drain the excess liquidity, the 
Bank  issued  South  African  Reserve  Bank  (SARB)  debentures  and  conducted  reverse 
repurchase  transactions.  Liquidity  was  also  drained  from  the  money  market  through 
increases in the balances of the accounts held at the Bank by banks and the public sector, 
and increases in notes and coin in circulation. In the year to the end of August 2009 these 
factors were jointly responsible for draining a total amount of approximately R6,9 billion from 
the  money  market.  The  excess  liquidity  is  partly  associated  with  the  increase  in  foreign-
exchange reserves over the past years. 
Foreign-exchange reserves 
The pace of accumulating foreign-exchange reserves by the Bank declined considerably as a 
result  of  the  turmoil  in  the  international  financial  markets.  At  the  end  of  August  2009  the 
official  gross  gold  and  foreign-exchange  reserves  amounted  to  US$38,0  billion  and  the 
international  liquidity  position  amounted  to  US$36,9  billion.  The  Bank  will  continue  with  its 
strategy of accumulating reserves when market conditions are favourable. 
However, further accumulation is expected to be constrained by the volatility in the foreign-
exchange markets, the level of global risk aversion and the cost of sterilisation. 
Managing the foreign-exchange reserves poses considerable challenges, particularly in the 
current uncertain global financial market conditions. As capital preservation represents one 
of the main pillars of the reserves management policy of the Bank, various steps have been 
taken to protect South Africa’s reserves from the instability and volatility experienced in these 
markets. Accordingly, counterparty risks, exposure to specific asset classes and the overall 
duration  of  the  reserves  portfolio  were  reduced,  and  the  Bank’s  conservative  investment 
guidelines  were  tightened  further.  However,  the  demise  of  Lehman  Brothers,  in  particular, 
gave  rise  to  a  series  of  downgrades  in  the  credit  ratings  of  financial  institutions  and 
investment instruments, which resulted in mark-to-market declines or unrealised losses in the 
value of some of the instruments on the balance sheet of the Bank. 
A  comprehensive  review  of  the  external  fund  management  programme  was  conducted 
during the year under review. The mandates of three of the existing fund managers will be 
BIS Review 110/2009 
 3
renewed and three new managers will be appointed in September 2009, bringing the total 
number of external fund managers to six. 
Currency distribution 
Currency counterfeiting generally remains a risk to the Bank and the economy. Continuous 
efforts  are  being  made  to  combat  counterfeiting  and  to  ensure  the  integrity  of  currency  in 
circulation. The Bank has initiated a process for the introduction of a new series of banknotes 
and  coin  with  new  themes  and  improved  security  features.  It  is  envisaged  that  the  new 
currency series will be launched by mid-2013. 
The national payment system 
The  Bank,  in  conjunction  with  the  settlement  banks,  has  been  concentrating  on  the 
development and implementation of a national payment system information database, and a 
review  of  the  real-time  gross  settlement  (RTGS)  network  infrastructure  and  associated 
applications.  A  review  of  the  current  RTGS  system  –  the  South  African  Multiple  Option 
Settlement  (SAMOS)  –  indicated  that  the  system  was  of  a  world-class  standard.  Potential 
enhancements  to  the  SAMOS  infrastructure  and  applications  are  due  to  be  made  in 
consultation with stakeholders during 2009. 
Although  volumes  and  values  of  payment  transactions  increased  substantially  during  the 
financial  market  volatility  in  September  and  October  2008,  the  operations  and  liquidity 
provision  of  the  settlement  system  and  associated  foreign-exchange  Continuous  Linked 
Settlement  (CLS)  system  performed  well  and  without  disruptions.  In  October  2008  the 
SAMOS system settled a record aggregate value of R8,5 trillion. 
The  Bank  continued  its  role  as  part  of  the  CLS  system  oversight  group  chaired  by  the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York. During the year the Bank and other participating central 
banks  signed  a  CLS  oversight  protocol  arrangement.  CLS  oversight  arrangements  and 
processes  were  thoroughly  and  successfully  tested  during  the  financial  market  crisis  in 
September and October 2008. 
Financial stability 
Financial  stability  is  of  vital  interest  to  central  banks  and,  with  the  evolution  of  the  global 
financial crisis, renewed attention has been paid to financial stability policy responses. Some 
central banks have responded by adopting more explicit and broader mandates for financial 
stability.  The  crisis  also  highlighted  the  need  for  macroprudential  analysis  of  the  financial 
system  as  a  whole  in  order  to  identify  and  mitigate  systemic  risks.  The  Bank  continually 
seeks  to identify  inherent  weaknesses  in the financial system  and  monitors  risks  that  may 
result in financial system disturbances. 
Financial institutions and markets in South Africa were spared the worst of the direct effects 
of the global financial crisis as they were largely shielded by their limited exposure to risky 
foreign  assets  and  liabilities.  Developments  in  the  domestic  financial  infrastructure  and 
regulatory  environment  that  are  likely  to  strengthen  the  resilience  of  the  financial  system 
include  new  legislative  developments  to  improve  competition,  consumer  protection  and 
corporate governance. 
Bank regulation and supervision 
As  part  of  its  bank  supervision  function,  the  Bank  maintained  its  focus  on  promoting  the 
soundness of the domestic banking system through the effective and efficient application of 
international  regulatory  and  supervisory  standards.  The  implementation  of  Basel  II  on 
4 
 BIS Review 110/2009
1 January 2008 and the application of the Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision 
issued  by  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  remain  the  cornerstones  of  the 
Bank’s regulatory and supervisory framework. 
The Bank continued to refine its Basel II-revised regulatory and supervisory approach during 
2008  and  2009  by  attending,  inter  alia,  to  the  Internal  Capital  Adequacy  Assessment 
Processes  implemented  by  banks;  thematic  reviews  of  credit,  market  and  operational  risk; 
and the processing of applications by banks to use the advanced approaches to calculate 
their  minimum  capital  requirements  in  respect  of  credit  and  operational  risk.  In  line  with 
international  developments,  the  Bank  held  discussions  with  the  banking  industry  on  the 
stress-testing frameworks it implemented. In addition, the Bank continued to develop its own 
internal stresstesting expertise and methodology to facilitate the effective monitoring of the 
stress-testing frameworks of banks. 
The  secondary  effects  of  the  international  financial  market  turmoil,  combined  with  cyclical 
economic developments in South Africa, worsened the operating environment of the banking 
sector during 2008 and the first half of 2009, with a significant decline in the rate of growth in 
loans and advances. Furthermore, increasing pressure on consumers continues to be clearly 
evident  in  the  marked  increase  in  impaired  advances  and  rising  credit  impairments,  which 
impact  negatively  on  the  earnings  of  banks.  However,  the  South  African  banking  system 
remains stable and banks are adequately capitalised. 
In  response  to  the  international  financial  market  turmoil,  the  Bank  commissioned  an 
independent review of all securitisation schemes in which domestic banks were participating 
in order to  determine whether such schemes were being managed prudently. Although no 
material issues were identified, the recommendations in the final report will be used as the 
basis  for  further  consultation  with  the  banking  industry  and  for  possible  legislative  and/or 
regulatory framework amendments in future. 
International co-operation 
The  Bank  addresses  itself  to  regional  and  continental  programmes  that  promote  future 
regional  integration.  The  Bank  hosts  the  Secretariat  of  the  Committee  of  Central  Bank 
Governors (CCBG) in the Southern African Development Community (SADC) and supports 
the  implementation  of  CCBG  projects.  The  SADC  Finance  and  Investment  Protocol  (FIP) 
was  ratified  by  the  South  African  Parliament  in  2008  and  work  has  begun  in  the  various 
committees.  Of  note  is  the  completion  of  the  drafting  of  the  proposed  SADC  central  bank 
model  law,  which  will  pave  the  way  for  the  harmonisation  of  the  legal  and  regulatory 
frameworks of SADC central banks. 
The Bank plays a leading role in the SADC payment system project. During the past year the 
focus  has  been  on  the  efficiency  of  electronic  settlement  systems  and  the  collection  of 
payment system statistics. Further work is being done on the interlinking of payment systems 
on a regional basis and the efficiency of remittance payment systems in the region. 
The  Bank  participated  in  several  initiatives  to  strengthen  financial  systems  in  SADC.  The 
Bank  hosted  or  organised  a  number  of  regional  workshops  and  conferences  for  SADC 
central banks in conjunction with international training institutions. These institutions included 
the  International  Monetary  Fund  Institute,  the Bank  for  International  Settlements  (BIS)  and 
the Toronto Centre. 
Participation in multilateral forums such as the Group of 20 (G-20) and the Financial Stability 
Board increased in the wake of the global financial and economic crisis. South Africa, as an 
active member of the G-20, contributed to the formulation of the co-ordinated G-20 response 
to the global financial crisis. The Bank also continues to foster relations with the BIS, and 
participates in a number of BIS committees and forums, including the Basel Committee on 
Banking Supervision. 
BIS Review 110/2009 
 5
Internal administration 
The Annual Report 2008/09 of the Bank was distributed to shareholders before this meeting. 
The total assets of the Bank show an increase from R300 billion at the end of March 2008 to 
R344 billion at the end of March 2009. The Bank was not unaffected by the turmoil in the 
world’s  financial  markets.  Low  yields  on  prime  investments  and  the  collapse  in  prices  of 
many traded financial instruments caused a decline in net income after tax from R2,5 billion 
in the previous financial year to R0,9 billion in the 2008/09 financial year. 
Operational expenditure is budgeted to increase by 22 per cent in the current financial year. 
This increase is due to an increase of 42 per cent in the production cost of currency; stock 
building  of  currency  for  the  2010  FIFA  World  Cup  tournament;  delivery  of  back  orders  of 
currency in respect of the previous financial year; and significant repairs and maintenance to 
Bank premises. 
The  four  subsidiary  companies  of  the  Bank,  namely  the  South  African  Mint  Company,  the 
South  African  Bank  Note  Company,  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  Captive  Insurance 
Company  and  the  Corporation  for  Public  Deposits,  achieved  their  objectives  during  the 
financial year. After a review of reports by their boards of directors, and internal and external 
auditors,  the  Bank  is  satisfied  that  the  subsidiaries  have  continued  to  be  managed  in 
accordance with their objectives and best corporate governance practice. The results of the 
subsidiaries  are  reported  on  a  consolidated  basis  with  those  of  the  Bank  in  the  financial 
statements in the Annual Report 2008/09. 
The  shares  of  the  Bank  continued  to  trade  through  the  over-the-counter  trading  facility. 
During  the  2008/09  financial  year,  40  transactions  were  concluded,  representing  57  980 
shares. 
The permanent staff complement of the Bank increased by 34 in the year and totalled 1 930 
at the end of the financial year. The overall staff turnover for the period was 6,2 per cent; 
slightly  lower  than  in  the  previous  year.  In  terms  of  overall  employment  equity,  the 
percentage  of  black  employees  has  increased  by  2  percentage  points  to  60  per  cent, 
compared  with  a  target  of  50  per  cent  for  2009.  At  management  level  an  increase  of  2 
percentage  points  was  also  achieved.  While  the  Bank  has  made  advances  with  regard  to 
gender representation generally, female representation at the more senior levels remains a 
priority area. 
The  Bank  consulted  widely  on  employment  equity,  resulting  in  the  implementation  of  a 
programme to educate and sensitise employees about disability issues. The Bank completed 
its disability verification process in which employees were given the opportunity to declare 
their disability status voluntarily. 
Performance  management  had  previously  been  identified  as  the  only  remaining  barrier  to 
employment  equity  in  the  Bank.  A  task  team  investigated  the  Bank’s  performance 
management system and made recommendations for improvement. The revised system is 
being implemented. 
As part of the Bank’s HIV/AIDS programme, almost 70 employees were trained to serve as 
peer counsellors. The programme is an ongoing initiative, and the next phase will address 
voluntary counselling and testing. 
The Bank continues to emphasise training and development. In the period under review the 
Bank received R2,4 million in the form of mandatory grants for complying with the reporting 
regulations of the Skills Development Act, 1998 (Act No. 97 of 1998). Seven students have 
completed learnerships and have all been appointed to permanent positions in the Bank. The 
Bank  has  also  approved  a  new  policy  for  external  bursaries  and  25  university  students  in 
their second year of study have been granted financial assistance. 
6 
 BIS Review 110/2009
Besides the general central banking programmes offered, the Bank organised and hosted a 
number of specialised courses and seminars. Topics included the flow of funds, advanced 
econometric and computational methods, financial stability, and currency management. 
The Bank strives to promote a research culture in the Bank and a number of joint research 
projects  have  been  completed  under  the  auspices  of  the  Visiting  Research  Fellows 
Programme. In October the Bank hosted its biennial conference with the theme “Challenges 
for  Monetary  Policy-makers  in  Emerging  Markets”.  The  conference  proceedings  were 
published in book form and on the website of the Bank. 
The Bank has initiated work on an integrated workforce plan to ensure that Bank employees 
have appropriate skills. The plan will address the continuity of skills and ensure the effective 
transfer of the intellectual knowledge essential for the successful operations of the Bank. 
A number of the Bank’s branch buildings have been assigned heritage status, which creates 
challenges for cash-handling requirements, energy efficiency, environmental friendliness, the 
provision of uninterrupted power supply, fire-detection systems and access for people with 
disabilities,  while  preserving  the  integrity  of  the  buildings.  Most  of  the  planned  upgrades, 
additions  or  alterations  to  the  branches  have  either  been  completed,  have  reached  the 
construction stage or are near this stage pending the successful completion of the planning 
and  tendering  processes.  The  new  Bloemfontein  branch  building  is  being  designed.  The 
existing  fire-detection  and  evacuation  communication  systems  at  Head  Office  and  in  the 
Durban branch are being replaced to comply fully with health and safety regulations. 
Finally,  the  Bank  has  made  considerable  progress  with  the  implementation  of  the  new 
enterprise resource planning (ERP) solution, which is expected to enhance the efficiency of 
internal  processes.  The  ERP  will  integrate  the  data  and  processes  from  various  business 
units, and should offer numerous benefits to the Bank, including the introduction of proven 
best practices and the decommissioning of more than 20 legacy systems that have become 
difficult to maintain. The ERP should be fully implemented before the end of 2009. 
Conclusion 
Although the worst of the global downturn appears to be behind us, the recovery is expected 
to be slow and protracted. The domestic economy also appears set to recover somewhat in 
the coming months, and domestic inflation is expected to continue its moderating trend as a 
result  of  downward  pressures  from  weak  domestic  demand  and  lower  commodity  prices. 
However, the rate of decline is being constrained by high and sustained administered price 
increases  and  wage  settlements  in  excess  of  inflation.  The  Bank  will  continue  to  strive  to 
achieve  price  stability  within  a  flexible  inflation-targeting  framework  in  the  interest  of 
sustainable economic growth. 
The recent global financial market turmoil has highlighted the need for the Bank to maintain a 
commitment  to  financial  stability.  This  includes  the  monitoring  and  supervision,  where 
applicable, of the national payment system, the financial markets and the banking system. 
The  domestic  financial  markets  have  come  through  the  global  banking  crisis  relatively 
unscathed. Nevertheless, credit impairments have been increasing, which poses a threat to 
the profitability of banks, and these trends will be monitored closely. 
Internally,  the  Bank  will  continue  to  concentrate  on  staff  development,  and  to  implement 
measures  to  retain  staff  and  boost  staff  morale  through  more  appropriate  performance 
management.  Emphasis  will  also  be  placed  on  enhancing  the  efficiency  of  the  internal 
processes  of  the  Bank  and  the  introduction  of  the  new  ERP  solution  during  the  year  is 
expected to contribute to this objective. 
BIS Review 110/2009 
 7
Acknowledgements 
I wish to thank the Presidency, the Government and Parliament for their continued support. 
The good working relationship with the National Treasury was maintained, facilitated by the 
system of bilateral committees. I wish to thank the previous and current Ministers and Deputy 
Ministers of Finance for their support and co-operation during the past year, as well as the 
Director-General and staff in the National Treasury. 
I  also  wish  to  thank  the  Board  of  the  Bank  for  the  work  they  have  done  in  ensuring 
appropriate  corporate  governance  in,  and  the  smooth  running  of,  the  Bank.  Mr  Daniel 
Mminele joined the Board of the Bank following his appointment as Deputy Governor. I wish 
to take this opportunity to congratulate him on his appointment. 
This  is  my  last  annual  address  to  shareholders.  I  wish  to  thank  the  Presidency  for  the 
opportunity to serve the country as Governor of the South African Reserve Bank. It has been 
an  honour  and  a  privilege.  I  can  look  back  on  the  past  ten  years  with  pride  at  the 
achievements of the Bank. In this respect, I wish to express my sincere appreciation to the 
deputy governors, the management and staff of the Bank for their professionalism, support 
and dedication in assisting to achieve the various objectives of the Bank during the past ten 
years. I also wish to congratulate Ms Gill Marcus on her appointment as my successor. Ms 
Marcus is no stranger to the Bank or to the financial sector, and I know that I will be leaving 
the Bank in extremely capable hands. I wish Ms Marcus, the deputy governors and the staff 
of the Bank all the best in facing future challenges. 
8 
 BIS Review 110/2009
