Caleb M Fundanga: Global financial and economic crisis and its effect on 
the Zambian economy  
Speech by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, to the SADC Group of 
High Commissioners and Ambassadors Meeting, Lusaka, 9 July 2009. 
 Chairperson 
Your Excellencies High Commissioners and Ambassadors from SADC Resident in Zambia 
Distinguished Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
It is a great honour and privilege to be invited this afternoon to share Zambia’s experiences 
given the unfolding global financial and economic crisis. In discussing this topic, I will begin 
by  highlighting,  albeit  briefly,  the  origins  of  the  current  global  economic  crisis.  I  will  then 
underscore  the  effect  of  the  crisis  on  the  Zambian  economy  before  I  look  at  the  policy 
responses, the challenges and then conclude. 
Origins of the crisis 
As Your Excellencies are already aware, the genesis of the current global economic crisis 
has  been  traced  to  the  collapse  of  the  sub-prime  mortgage  market  which  started  between 
2002  and  2006.  This  was  when  lending  to  the  household  sector  in  the  United  States  of 
America (USA) was growing at a rate far beyond that of the broader economy (i.e. growth in 
GDP). The rising delinquencies in the subprime mortgage market triggered turbulences in the 
subprime  mortgage  –  backed  securities  market  leading  to  a  financial  crisis  which  quickly 
spread to other advanced economies. 
Subsequently,  the  financial  crisis  created  a  recessionary  economic  environment  in  which 
global  trade,  stock  market  indices,  and  commodity  prices,  such  as  copper  and  cobalt, 
declined significantly. The global financial and economic crises thus negatively impacted on 
economies around the world by adversely affecting trade and investment flows and the price 
of key export commodities. 
To  respond  to  this  crisis,  several  actions  are  being  taken  at  global  level  by  the  major 
economies to address the root causes and the effects of the global financial and economic 
crises.  These  are  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  stimulus  measures  aimed  at  boosting  global 
consumption  and  investment  demand  in  an  effort  to  avoid  a  significantly  sharper  global 
contraction  than  that  which  has  already  occurred.  Measures  typically  entailed  reduction  of 
interest rates, tax cuts and increased Government spending in form of bail-outs of strategic 
institutions  and  in  some  cases  virtual  nationalisation.  Concrete  steps  are  also  now  being 
taken  to  reform  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  frameworks  governing  the  financial  sector. 
Further, increased resources have been provided to key multi-lateral institutions such as the 
IMF and the World Bank. These institutions have also been mandated to play a central role 
in  leading  the  global  response  to  the  crisis  and  evaluating  the  efficacy  of  the  various 
measures that are being implemented. 
Impact of the global economic crisis on Zambia 
The  Zambian  financial  sector  has  so  far  not  been  directly  adversely  affected  by  the  credit 
crunch  as  reflected  in  the  continued  stability  of  the  banking  sector  with  most  banks  being 
adequately capitalized and the inter-bank market operating as before. This is mainly due to 
the sector’s limited integration into the international financial markets. Further, our financial 
sector  had  no  exposure  to  toxic  assets,  which  led  to  the  credit  crunch  in  most  developed 
BIS Review 86/2009 
 1
markets. However, the  current global financial crisis, with the subsequent global economic 
recession,  has  adversely  affected  Zambia,  like  most  global  economies,  mainly  through: 
reduced revenue earnings from mineral resources; job losses, particularly in the extractive 
industry; lower foreign capital inflow (both foreign portfolio investment (FPI) and foreign direct 
investment (FDI)); rising domestic inflation driven by pass-through effects of the depreciation 
in  the  exchange  rate  of  the  Kwacha  against  major  currencies;  and  declining  number  of 
foreign tourists. 
Revenue earnings from mineral resources 
As you may know, Your Excellencies, Zambia, like many African countries, relies heavily on 
commodity exports. This has made the country more vulnerable to the global downturn. The 
global financial crisis and the plummeting commodity prices on the international market have 
negatively affected Government revenue. The global economic recession has resulted in a 
reduction in world demand for copper, which in turn, has led to the precipitous fall in copper 
prices. Copper prices at the London Metal Exchange (LME) fell from highs of US$8,980 per 
tonne  in  July  2008  to  as  low  as  US  $2,812  per  tonne  in  December,  2008.  The  dramatic 
decline in the price of copper has entailed reduced earnings from copper exports by mining 
companies  and  subsequently  reduced  earnings  for  the  Government  from  mineral  royalties 
and corporate taxes from this source as well as falling income taxes from employees in the 
mining and related sectors. 
The  reduced  earnings  for  the  mining  sector  may  translate  into  lower  investments  and 
production.  Further,  some  mining  companies,  which  were  carrying  out  exploration  works, 
have  suspended  these  activities.  Ultimately,  all  this  lead  to  job  losses  in  the  country’s 
extractive industry, leading to lower income tax revenue. In addition, the downturn will reduce 
Government’s capacity to develop the much needed infrastructure as it may have to scale-
down its capital expenditure in line with lower realized revenue. 
Loss of employment 
In the real sector of the economy, the impact of the crisis has been reflected in the scaling 
down of production or the closing down of some mining operations due to low copper prices. 
This has had the inevitable consequence of loss of jobs. However, following the reopening of 
some mines, the situation has slightly improved. 
External position 
The  declining  earnings  from  copper  exports  adversely  affected  Zambia’s  balance  of 
payments  position.  For  instance,  during  the  fourth  quarter  of  2008,  the  overall  balance  of 
payments deficit widened to US $177.6 million from US $120.6 million recorded the previous 
quarter. Merchandise export earnings declined to US $909.8 million from US $1,206.7 million 
realised  in  the  third  quarter  of  2008  following  a  sharp  reduction  in  metal  export  earnings. 
Metal export earnings declined by 23.1% to US $711.7 million in the fourth quarter of 2008 
from US $925.6 million the previous quarter. Metal export earnings at US $575.8 million in 
the  first  quarter  of  2009  were  49.8%  lower  than  the  US  $1,147.2  million  recorded  in  the 
similar  period  last  year.  A  slide  in  both  copper  and  cobalt  export  earnings  owing  to  lower 
prices accounted for this outturn. Nonetheless, it should be noted that commodity prices on 
the  international  markets  recently  have  been  edging  upwards.  If  this  trend  is  sustained, 
Zambia’s external position may improve accordingly. 
Foreign capital inflow 
Your Excellencies, the global financial crisis has led to the decline in the foreign portfolio 
investment inflows as investors reduced their exposure to emerging market instruments. The 
risk aversion towards emerging markets has led to a reduction in foreign portfolio inflows and 
2 
 BIS Review 86/2009
holdings  in  Zambia’s  Government  securities.  This  has  resulted  in  a  net  outflow  of  foreign 
portfolio investment since funds that mature are not being rolled over and funds coming in 
have  be  en  scaled  down.  For  example,  the  foreign  investor’s  total  holding  of  Government 
securities has reduced from K1,054.7 billion in the third quarter of 2008 to K446.2 billion by 
the second quarter of 2009. Similarly, the flow of foreign investments at the Lusaka Stock 
Exchange has switched from a net inflow of US$2.5 million during the period January to May 
2008 to a net outflow of US$8.5 million in the same period this year. 
Exchange rate volatility and domestic inflation 
The global financial meltdown has caused a contagion effect to our foreign exchange market 
and has led to volatility in the exchange rate of the Kwacha against major currencies. This 
unfavourable development is partly a consequence of reduced earnings from copper exports 
arising from the fall in copper prices as reflected in the lower supply of foreign exchange on 
the market by mining companies. For instance, the supply of foreign exchange to the market 
by mining companies has declined by 35.7% to a monthly average of US $62.4 million in the 
first half of this year from an average of US $97.0 million in the last half of 2008. 
Further, the weakness of the local currency is a consequence of increased risk aversion to 
emerging  and  developing  economy  financial  assets,  as  stated  earlier,  attributed  to  the 
deepening  global  financial  crisis.  In  this  regard,  the  supply  of  foreign  exchange  by  foreign 
portfolio  investors  for  the  purchases  of  Kwacha  financial  assets,  such  as  Government 
securities  and  domestic  company  equities,  has  significantly  declined,  with  most  non-
residents  preferring  to  liquidate  their  investments  and  externalising  the  foreign  exchange. 
The result of this is the volatility in the exchange rate of the Kwacha against major foreign 
currencies.  In  the  last  quarter  of  2008,  the  Kwacha  depreciated  by  26.9%  to  trade  at  an 
average  of  K4,394.76/US$  (BoZ  mid-rate)  from  an  average  of  K3,462.00/US$  in  the  third 
quarter. 
It should also be noted that the depreciation of the Kwacha against major currencies partly 
contributed  to  higher  inflation,  particularly  as  Zambia  remains  dependent  on  imports  for  a 
wide  variety  of  consumer  goods  as  well  as  inputs  for  domestic  production.  Further,  this 
unfavourable development has a strong role in shaping inflation expectations. 
Tourism 
Apart  from  mining  and  related  companies  that  are  affected  by  the  effects  of  the  global 
recession,  tourism  has  also  been  negatively  impacted.  The  number  of  foreign  tourists  is 
anticipated to decline owing to financial problems and credit crunch their countries of origin 
are facing. 
Availability of credit 
Perhaps the most challenging effect of the global financial crisis, especially for developing 
countries  like  Zambia,  is  its  impact  on  private  sector  investment.  Between  2006  and  2008 
credit to the private sector grew strongly (at an average of 45.6% per annum), largely driven 
by  the  expansion  of  consumer  credit  and  the  strong  growth  in  the  domestic  economy.  An 
immediate consequence of the financial and economic crisis has been a curtailment of credit 
lines and a slow-down in FDI flows. In 2009, domestic credit is expected to slow down as 
financial  institutions  adopt  more  conservative  lending  practices  and  tighten  their  lending 
standards. In addition, the deterioration in corporate and household balance sheets is now 
being translated into higher non-performing loans (NPLs) as a percentage of total assets in 
the banking sector (from 6% in mid-2008 to 10% in May, 2009 – an increase of 67%.). The 
deterioration in NPLs is now across all the past due loan categories. 
BIS Review 86/2009 
 3
Policy response 
In responding to the crisis, the Government is taking steps to maintain macroeconomic 
stability and continue encouraging investments that will lead to diversification of the economy 
and  safeguard  vital  social  services.  Further,  the  Government  is  actively  engaging  new 
investors to take over the running of the closed mining operations as well as negotiating with 
the owners of the bigger mines on modalities of continuing with operations at the mines to 
forestall further job losses. The 2009 Budget has prioritised infrastructure development with 
the  view  to  opening  investment  opportunities  for  diversification,  particularly  in  agriculture, 
tourism, and manufacturing sectors. Some specific measures include the following: 
Agricultural sector:  
Increased allocation of funds to the sector for livestock development and creation of at least 
one  disease-free  livestock  zone,  Farm  Block  infrastructural  development  and  irrigation 
projects.  Further,  the  value  added  tax  on  selected  agricultural  equipment  and  spares,  has 
been zero rated as incentive to increase agricultural production and productivity. 
Tourism sector: 
In order to diversify the economy and attain broad based economic growth, Government has 
increased  the  allocation  to  the  sector  to  improve  access  to  the  Northern  Tourism  Circuit 
(infrastructural development in Mbala and Kasaba Bay). Further, Government will embark on 
the  development  of  a  new  world  class  tourism  area  in  Livingstone,  and  step-up  the 
development of road infrastructure in key national parks namely, Luangwa and Kafue. 
Manufacturing: 
In order to expand the manufacturing base, Government is promoting the establishment of 
Multi-Facility Economic Zones (MFEZ) on the Copperbelt (Chambishi), and Lusaka (Lusaka 
south  and  east)  provinces  by  providing  for  fiscal  incentives  and  quality  infrastructure 
development  in  the  budget.  The  construction  of  the  Chambishi  MFEZ  has  already 
commenced.  Further,  the  budget  reclassified  and  re-categorised  certain  manufacturing 
materials with the aim of lowering customs duty rates. 
in 
Mining sector: 
In light of the adverse impact of the global economic crisis on the mining sector and with the 
view  of  easing  these  effects,  the  Zambian  Government  introduced  tax  concessions,  which 
included  removal  of  the  windfall  tax,  increasing  capital  allowance  to  100  percent  as  an 
investment incentive, and reduction of customs duty on Heavy Fuel Oils. 
As the Central Bank, we have continued to monitor and review developments in the foreign 
exchange  market  and  provide  prudent  support  when  necessary  in  order  to  dampen 
excessive  volatility 
recently  achieved 
macroeconomic stability. To this end, the Bank has been a net seller of foreign exchange to 
banks. However, the Bank’s interventions are limited given the global extent and magnitude 
of the crisis. 
In addition, the Bank has enhanced its vigilance and interaction with the domestic financial 
system to ensure adherence to its supervisory guidelines and to enhance information flows 
between  banks  and  itself.  Accordingly,  the  Bank  also  introduced  measures  to  ensure  that 
financial  market  players  under  its  supervision  provide  detailed  information  on  their  foreign 
exchange transactions. 
Further, the Bank has continued to reinforce the regulation and supervision of the financial 
sector.  Effective  surveillance  of  the  financial  market  entails  adopting  appropriate  risk 
rate  and  safeguard 
the  exchange 
the 
4 
 BIS Review 86/2009
management  policies  and  procedures  that  will  ensure  that  financial  institutions  do  not 
undertake  excessive  risks  that  may  increase  the  vulnerability  of  the  country  to  external 
shocks. 
Challenges 
Maintaining  macroeconomic  stability  is  critical  to  sustaining  economic  growth  in 
Zambia.  The  challenge  is  how  to  sustain  stability  and  mitigate  falling  domestic  demand 
within the constraints posed by increasingly scarcer external financial inflows. This has to be 
done  in  the  context  of  implementing  policies  consistent  with  medium-term  stability  and 
development goals. 
The second challenge relates to mitigation of the vulnerability of the Zambian economy 
to the adverse external shocks.  We  will  have  to  closely  monitor  capital  flows  and  adopt 
supervisory  policies  that  will  ensure  a  sound  and  stable  financial  system.  The  pursuit  of 
policies that promote macroeconomic stability is also important to ensure that the domestic 
economy remains attractive to both domestic and foreign investors for the long-term growth 
and development of the economy. 
One of the unfolding lessons of the current crisis is the need for greater transparency in the 
transactions  players  in  the  financial  markets  undertake,  particularly,  with  respect  to  off-
balance sheet transactions. We will therefore be acting to ensure that market players provide 
us  with  detailed  information  on  their  transactions.  In  addition,  we  will  continue  to  work 
towards  strengthening  and  developing  our  financial  markets  as  well  as  encouraging 
competition and efficiency. 
Prospects for 2009 and beyond 
Your  Excellencies,  going  forward,  it  remains  important  to  accelerate  diversification  of  the 
economy  as  a  way  to  mitigate  the  effects  of  a  prolonged  global  financial  crisis.  Currently, 
there are enormous business opportunities which still lie unexploited in Zambia in virtually all 
sectors of the economy. It is important that we continue reducing the cost of doing business, 
in conjunction with the private sector, in order to improve investments in various sectors of 
the  economy.  The  agriculture  sector,  for  instance,  remains  underdeveloped  despite  the 
country possessing large tracts of arable land, adequate water and relatively good weather. 
This  is  one  sector  where  the  country  can  easily  take  advantage  of  its  comparative 
advantage. 
The achievement and maintenance of a low and stable inflation rate, preferably single digit, 
therefore remains key to promoting investment, enhancing business planning and confidence 
in  the  economy,  maintaining  external  competitiveness  and  stabilising  people’s  incomes.  In 
the  medium-term,  Government  continues  to  pursue  market  and  structural  reforms  in 
partnership with the private sector with the view of consolidating the gains so far attained for 
sustained economic growth and development. 
Despite  the  adverse  effects  of  the  global  economic  meltdown,  there  are  still  prospects  for 
appreciable economic growth in 2009 and the years ahead. GDP growth is expected to be 
led  by  growth  in  agriculture;  construction;  financial  services;  manufacturing;  transport  and 
communication; and wholesale and retail trade. 
Conclusion 
In conclusion, we all agree that Zambia remains vulnerable to effects arising from the on-
going global financial crisis, particularly if it is prolonged. We hope that the actions that most 
affected countries, led by the US and the EU, have taken would help cool down the financial 
crisis and bring back the much needed confidence in the financial systems. 
BIS Review 86/2009 
 5
For  its  part,  the  Bank  of  Zambia  continues  to  closely  monitor  global  developments  and 
always  stands  ready  to  intervene  in  the  local  financial  market  with  a  view  to  prevent  any 
systemic risks that may have negative effects on macroeconomic gains achieved thus far. 
Once  again,  Your  Excellencies  let  me  thank  you  most  sincerely  for  this  opportunity  to 
discuss the challenges Zambia is facing in view of the current global economic crisis. 
I thank you. 
6 
 BIS Review 86/2009
