Ben S Bernanke: Current economic and financial conditions and the 
federal budget  
Testimony by Mr Ben S Bernanke, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve System, before the Committee on the Budget, US Senate, Washington DC, 3 March 
2009. 
 Chairman Conrad, Senator Gregg, and members of the Committee, I am pleased to be here 
today to offer my views on current economic and financial conditions, the federal budget, and 
related issues.  
Recent financial and economic developments and the policy responses 
Over  the  past  18  months,  the  global  economy  has  experienced  a  period  of  extraordinary 
turbulence. The collapse of a global credit boom, triggered by the end of housing booms in 
the United States and other countries and the associated problems in mortgage markets, has 
led to a deterioration of asset values and credit conditions and taken a heavy toll on business 
and consumer confidence.  
The financial crisis intensified considerably in the fall. In the United States, the government-
sponsored enterprises, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, were placed into conservatorship, and 
Lehman Brothers Holdings and several other large financial institutions either failed, nearly 
failed,  or  were  acquired  by  competitors  under  distressed  circumstances.  Losses  at  money 
market  mutual  funds  led  to  large  withdrawals  by  their  investors,  and  those  outflows 
undermined  both  the  stability  of  short-term  funding  markets,  particularly  the  commercial 
paper market, and confidence in wholesale bank funding markets.  
In  early  October,  the  loss  of  investor  confidence  in  financial  institutions  around  the  world 
raised  the  prospect  of  an  international  financial  collapse,  an  event  that  would  have  been 
devastating  for  global  economic  prospects.  Using  authorities  granted  by  the  Emergency 
Economic  Stabilization  Act,  on  October  14,  the  Treasury  announced  a  plan  to  inject  $250 
billion in capital into U.S. financial institutions. The Treasury's actions were complemented by 
the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation's expansion of bank liability guarantees and by 
the expansive provision of liquidity by the Federal Reserve. Together with similar measures 
in other countries, these steps averted a collapse and restored a degree of stability to the 
financial system. Nevertheless, the cumulative effect of the financial stress was to precipitate 
a sharp downturn in economic activity around the world. 
The Federal Reserve responded forcefully to the significant deterioration in financial market 
conditions  and  the  substantial  worsening  of  the  economic  outlook  by  continuing  to  ease 
monetary  policy  aggressively  late  last  year.  By  December,  the  Federal  Open  Market 
Committee (FOMC) had brought its target for the federal funds rate to a historically low range 
of 0 to 1/4 percent, where it remains today. The FOMC anticipates that economic conditions 
are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for some time. 
With  the  federal  funds  rate  close  to  zero,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  focused  on  alternative 
tools  to  ease  conditions  in  credit  markets.  We  have  established  new  lending  facilities  and 
expanded  existing  facilities  that  aim  to  enhance  the  flow  of  credit  to  businesses  and 
households: We increased the size of the Term Auction Facility to help ensure that banks 
could  obtain  the  funds  they  need  to  provide  credit  to  their  customers;  we  expanded  our 
network  of  swap  lines  with  foreign  central  banks  to  help  ease  conditions  in  global  dollar 
markets  that  were  spilling  over  into  our  own  funding  markets;  we  established  facilities  to 
promote the functioning of  money  market mutual funds and the commercial paper market; 
and  we  introduced  the  Term  Asset-Backed  Securities  Loan  Facility,  or  TALF,  which  is 
BIS Review 24/2009 
 1
designed to facilitate the renewed issuance of consumer and small business asset-backed 
securities.  In  addition,  to  improve  the  functioning  of  the  mortgage  market  and  to  support 
housing  markets  and  economic  activity  more  broadly,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  begun  to 
purchase large amounts of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities.  
The  measures  taken  since  September  by  the  Federal  Reserve,  other  U.S.  government 
entities, and foreign governments have helped improve conditions in some financial markets. 
In  particular,  strains  in  short-term  funding  markets  have  eased  notably  since  last  fall,  and 
London interbank offered rates, or Libor – which influence the interest rates faced by many 
U.S.  households  and  businesses  –  have  decreased  sharply.  Conditions  in  the  commercial 
paper market also have improved, even for lower-rated borrowers, and the sharp outflows 
from money market mutual funds in September have been replaced by modest inflows. In the 
market for conforming mortgages, interest rates have fallen nearly 1 percentage point since 
the announcement of our intention to purchase agency debt and agency mortgage-backed 
securities.  Corporate  risk  spreads  have  also  declined  somewhat  from  extraordinarily  high 
levels, although bond spreads remain elevated by historical standards. Likely spurred by the 
improvements  in  pricing  and  liquidity,  issuance  of  investment-grade  corporate  bonds  has 
been strong, and speculative-grade issuance, which was near zero in the fourth quarter, has 
picked  up  somewhat  more  recently.  Nevertheless,  significant  stresses  persist  in  many 
markets.  For  example,  most  securitization  markets  remain  closed,  and  some  financial 
institutions remain under pressure.  
As I noted, the ongoing stresses in the financial markets have been accompanied by a sharp 
contraction in economic activity. After edging down during the summer, real gross domestic 
product (GDP) is reported by the Commerce Department to have declined at an annual rate 
of 6.2 percent in the fourth quarter of last year, with nearly every major category of final sales 
contributing to the drop.  
The recent near-term indicators show little sign of improvement. Businesses shed 600,000 
jobs in January, about the same pace of job loss as in November and December, and the 
unemployment  rate 
for 
unemployment insurance has moved higher since mid-January, suggesting that labor market 
conditions may have worsened further in recent weeks. In reaction to the deteriorating job 
market,  the  sizable  losses  of  equity  and  housing  wealth,  and  the  tightening  of  credit 
conditions,  households  have  continued  to  rein  in  their  spending.  Home  sales  and  new 
construction have continued to decline despite lower mortgage rates, reflecting the uncertain 
economic environment and the expectation of many potential buyers that home prices have 
further to fall.  
The manufacturing sector has also deteriorated further so far this year. Manufacturing output 
fell sharply again in January, bringing the rate of capacity utilization to its lowest level in the 
post-World  War  II  period.  Orders  and  shipments  of  durable  goods,  which  dropped  in  the 
fourth quarter, fell markedly further in January, and most survey-based measures of business 
conditions  are  at  or  near  record  low  levels.  Given  the  weak  economic  environment,  many 
businesses  have  apparently  cut  back  their  plans  for  capital  expenditures  significantly. 
Moreover,  exports,  which  had  provided  a  welcome  offset  to  the  weakness  in  domestic 
demand  through  the  middle  of  2008,  fell  sharply  in  the  final  months  of  last  year,  and  the 
incoming news suggests a widespread contraction in activity abroad.  
Despite  the  considerable  decline  in  final  demand  in  the  United  States,  businesses  have 
managed to trim inventories in recent quarters. Still, with sales anticipated to remain poor for 
a  while  longer,  many  businesses  are  carrying  more  inventories  than  they  desire  and, 
consequently, are likely to cut production further in the months ahead. 
Meanwhile,  overall  consumer  price  inflation  has  slowed  considerably,  primarily  because  of 
the steep drop in energy prices in the second half of last year. The PCE price index was up 
just 0.7 percent in January from its year-earlier level, after having risen 3-1/2 percent over 
the preceding 12-month period. Core PCE price inflation, which excludes the direct effects of 
to  7.6  percent.  Moreover, 
the  number  of  claims 
jumped 
2 
 BIS Review 24/2009
food  and  energy  prices,  has  also  slowed,  decreasing  to  1-1/2  percent  for  the  12  months 
ending in January from 2-1/4 percent in the year-earlier period. Wide margins of economic 
slack and reduced cost pressures suggest that inflation is likely to remain quite low over the 
next couple of years. 
Although  the  near-term  outlook  for  the  economy  is  weak,  over  time,  a  number  of  factors 
should promote the return of solid gains in economic activity in the context of low and stable 
inflation. The effectiveness of the policy actions taken by the Federal Reserve, the Treasury, 
and other government entities in restoring a reasonable degree of financial stability will be 
critical  determinants  of  the  timing  and  strength  of  the  recovery.  If  financial  conditions 
improve,  the  economy  will  be  increasingly  supported  by  fiscal  and  monetary  stimulus,  the 
beneficial  effects  of  the  steep  decline  in  energy  prices  since  last  summer,  and  the  better 
alignment  of  business  inventories  and  final  sales,  as  well  as  the  increased  availability  of 
credit.  
Fiscal policy in the current economic and financial environment 
As you are well aware, the Congress recently passed a major fiscal package, which is aimed 
at  strengthening  near-term  economic  activity.  The  package  includes  personal  tax cuts  and 
increases  in  transfer  payments  intended  to  stimulate  household  spending,  incentives  for 
business investment, federal grants for state and local governments to reduce their need to 
cut services or cancel building projects, and increases in federal purchases. By supporting 
public  and  private  spending,  the  fiscal  package  should  provide  a  boost  to  demand  and 
production over the next two years as well as mitigate the overall loss of employment and 
income that would otherwise occur.  
That said, the timing and the magnitude of the macroeconomic effects of the fiscal program 
are subject to considerable uncertainty, reflecting both the state of economic knowledge and 
the unusual economic circumstances that we face. For example, households confronted with 
declining incomes and limited access to credit might be expected to spend most of their tax 
cuts; then again, heightened economic uncertainties and the desire to increase precautionary 
saving  or  pay  down  debt  might  reduce  households'  propensity  to  spend.  Likewise,  it  is 
difficult to judge how quickly funds dedicated to infrastructure needs and other longer-term 
projects will be spent and how large any follow-on effects will be. The Congressional Budget 
Office (CBO) has constructed a range of estimates of the effects of the stimulus package on 
real  GDP  and  employment  that  appropriately  reflects  these  uncertainties.  According  to  the 
CBO's estimates, the effect of the stimulus package on the level of real GDP at the end of 
2010 could range from about 1 percent to a little more than 3 percent, relative to a baseline 
forecast that does not include the stimulus. They estimate that these effects on output would 
leave the corresponding unemployment rate between 1/2 percentage point and 2 percentage 
points lower at the end of next year than in the baseline forecast. 
The goal of the fiscal package is not just to provide a one-time boost to the economy, but to 
lay  the  groundwork  for  a  self-sustaining,  broad-based  recovery.  Historical  experience 
strongly  suggests  that  without  a  reasonable  degree  of  financial  stability,  a  sustainable 
recovery will not occur. Although progress has been made on the financial front since last 
fall, more needs to be done. As you know, in response to ongoing concerns about the health 
of financial institutions, the Treasury recently announced plans for further steps to ensure the 
strength and soundness of the financial system and to promote a more smooth flow of credit 
to households and businesses. The plan would use the remaining resources appropriated to 
the Treasury under the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act – approximately $350 billion – 
and  also  involve  additional  spending  to  support  the  activities  of  Fannie  Mae  and  Freddie 
Mac. Whether further funds will be needed depends on the results of the current supervisory 
assessment of banks, the evolution of the economy, and other factors. The Administration 
has included a placeholder in its budget for more funding for financial stabilization, should it 
be necessary. 
BIS Review 24/2009 
 3
Unfortunately,  the  spending  for  financial  stabilization,  the  increases  in  spending  and 
reductions  in  taxes  associated  with  the  fiscal  package,  and  the  losses  in  revenues  and 
increases  in  income-support  payments  associated  with  the  weak  economy  will  widen  the 
federal  budget  deficit  substantially  this  year.  Taking  into  account  these  factors,  the 
Administration  recently  submitted  a  proposed  budget  that  projects  the  federal  deficit  to 
increase  to  about  $1.8  trillion  this  fiscal  year  and  to  remain  around  $1  trillion  in  2010  and 
2011. As a consequence of this elevated level of borrowing, the ratio of federal debt held by 
the public to nominal GDP is likely to move up from about 40 percent before the onset of the 
financial crisis to more than 60 percent over the next several years – its highest level since 
the early 1950s, in the years following the massive debt buildup during World War II.  
Of course, all else equal, this is a development that all of us would have preferred to avoid. 
But  our  economy  and  financial  markets  face  extraordinary  challenges,  and  a  failure  by 
policymakers to address these challenges in a timely way would likely be more costly in the 
end.  We  are  better  off  moving  aggressively  today  to  solve  our  economic  problems;  the 
alternative  could  be  a  prolonged  episode  of  economic  stagnation  that  would  not  only 
contribute  to  further  deterioration  in  the  fiscal  situation,  but  would  also  imply  lower  output, 
employment, and incomes for an extended period. 
With such large near-term deficits, it may seem too early to be contemplating the necessary 
return  to  fiscal  sustainability.  To  the  contrary,  maintaining  the  confidence  of  the  financial 
markets  requires  that  we  begin  planning  now  for  the  restoration  of  fiscal  balance.  As  the 
economy recovers and resources become more fully employed, we will need to withdraw the 
temporary  components  of  the  fiscal  stimulus.  Spending  on  financial  stabilization  also  must 
wind down; if all goes well, the disposition of assets acquired by the Treasury in the process 
of  stabilization  will  be  a  source  of  added  revenue  for  the  Treasury  in  the  out  years. 
Determining the pace of fiscal normalization will entail some difficult judgments. In particular, 
the Congress will need to weigh the costs of running large budget deficits for a time against 
the possibility of a premature removal of fiscal stimulus that could blunt the recovery. We at 
the Federal Reserve will face similar difficult judgment calls regarding monetary policy. 
As I mentioned earlier, the President has recently submitted a budget, and it proposes an 
ambitious agenda, including new initiatives for energy, health care, education, and tax policy. 
These  are  all  complex  policy  issues  in  which  the  specific  design  of  each  program  is  as 
important as the budgetary amount allocated to it. The Congress will have considerable work 
in evaluating how to proceed in each of these areas.  
As  part  of  that  evaluation,  it  will  be  critical  to  consider  the  formidable  challenges  and 
tradeoffs  needed  to  simultaneously  achieve  an  economic  and  financial  recovery,  fiscal 
responsibility,  and  program  reforms  that  accomplish  their  desired  goals  effectively  and 
efficiently. In particular, policymakers must remain prepared to take the actions necessary in 
the  near  term  to  restore  stability  to  the  financial  system  and  to  put  the  economy  on  a 
sustainable path to recovery. But the near-term imperative of achieving economic recovery 
and  the  longer-run  desire  to  achieve  programmatic  objectives  should  not  be  allowed  to 
hinder timely consideration of the steps needed to address fiscal imbalances. Without fiscal 
sustainability, in the longer term we will have neither financial stability nor healthy economic 
growth. 
4 
 BIS Review 24/2009
