Ardian Fullani: Challenges facing the Albanian economy and financial 
sector 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the Regional Summit of 
Governors and Bankers, Becici, Montenegro, 20 June 2009. 
 Distinguished Governors, 
Dear participants, 
I want to start by thanking the organizers of this meeting, for promoting this joint discussion 
regarding  the  status  of  our  financial  sectors  and  the  measures  which  are  necessary  to 
sustain its resistance to the negative effects of this unprecedented global crisis. Indeed, what 
started as financial crisis in the USA, has transformed itself into an economic crisis, that is 
having dire consequences in real sectors of the world economy. I will start by describing the 
main macroeconomic developments of our economy and the characteristics of our financial 
system, which is similar to other countries in our region. Then I will proceed with some of the 
measures taken by Bank of Albania, to alleviate the impact of the international financial crisis 
on our banking sector and the economy. I will finish by mentioning some thoughts on future 
policies, which I consider important to strengthen the economic environment and the financial 
stability in our region and in Albania. 
The Albanian economy has been growing steadily over the last decade  
Our economy has been in a solid path of growth for the last decade, with an average annual 
growth rate of around 6 percent. It has benefited from economic reforms that have provided 
development  opportunities  for  our  private  business  sector,  have  sustained  markets 
development, have promoted competition, have stimulated flexible labor markets and have 
increased  social  revenues.  Supported  by  an  IMF  assistance  program,  both  fiscal  and 
monetary policies have been cautious in providing the necessary stimulus to the economic 
growth, by being consistent and disciplined in the pursuit of their objectives to achieve fiscal 
consolidation  and  ensure  a 
low-inflation  environment.  This  steady  good  economic 
performance has been supported by a flexible exchange rate that has been instrumental in 
supporting  and  maintaining  a  balanced  growth,  by  maintaining  the  right  incentives  for 
interaction between domestic and foreign counterparties. 
As in other countries in our region, the banking sector dominates the financial system 
in Albania  
The  assets  of  the  banking  sector  make  around  95  percent  of  the  total  financial  assets  in 
Albania, or around 80 percent of GDP. Nowadays, the banking sector counts 16 banks with 
around 500 branches, all in private hands, where the foreign capital dominates. Over time, 
the  sector  has  increased  the  number  of  branches,  has  improved  its  products  to  the  public 
and  has  increased  its  intermediating  role.  At  the  same  time,  the  entrance  of  well-known 
European banking groups from Greece, Austria Italy and France, has been associated with 
episodes  of  consolidation  in  the  banking  industry.  Financial  performance  indicators  have 
been  very  good.  In  the  last  three  years  mainly,  the  banking  sector  has  also  introduced 
modern  payment  infrastructure  and  products,  to  allow  for  increasing  usage  of  electronic 
payment  cards  and  internet  banking.  Undoubtedly,  the  banking  sector  has  been  a  very 
important contributor in the economic growth, while preserving solid business development 
and financial soundness indicators. 
BIS Review 89/2009 
 1
Despite  the  solid  performance  in  the  last  years,  the  Bank  of  Albania,  in  its  role  of  the 
monetary authority and the exclusive supervisor of the banking sector, was vigilant to point 
out areas of the banking activity that required increasing attention from the industry. 
We have continuously expressed our concern regarding the rapid increase in lending, which 
at some time reached up to 8-9 percentage points in terms of annual growth to GDP. We 
were aware of the risk it would bring to the credit quality, even though this was not expected 
to  be  relevant.  The  composition  of  the  loan  portfolio,  which  is  dominated  by  the  euro-
denominated loans, has always been a point of concern. Despite the fact that this position is 
supported  by  a  strong  presence  of  retail  foreign  currency  denominated  liabilities  in  banks 
balance  sheets,  a  generally  supportive  environment  of  exchange  rates  and  interest  rates 
over time and very close economic links to Euro-area countries like Italy and Greece, Bank of 
Albania has been consistent in its approach to introduce gradually regulatory measures that 
would  discourage  rapid  increase  in  lending,  encourage  banks  to  lend  more  in  domestic 
currency and increase transparency toward clients on banks products and services. 
Impact of the crisis in our economy and in the financial sector, has been increasing 
and … 
In the last quarter of 2008, the financial sector in Albania started to feel the impact of the 
international  financial  crisis.  The  main  development  was  an  increasing  sensitivity  of  the 
public for their savings in the banking sector. 
People started to withdraw their deposits regardless of the currency of denomination. At the 
beginning,  there  was  no  pressure  on  the  exchange  rate  but  it  started  to  mount  at  the 
beginning of this year, when it was noticed a contraction in the inflow of foreign currency, due 
to a decline in exports and remittances. The quality of the loan portfolio started to deteriorate, 
and the nonperforming loans reached 8 percent of the entire outstanding loan portfolio at the 
end  of  April  2009.  We  expect  this  figure  to  edge  higher,  as  data  from  the  economy  and 
surveys of business expectations and a marked slowdown in the credit availability, suggest 
that the economic growth is going to be much lower than the previous year. Due to a decline 
in interest income margins and an increasing amount of provisions, some of the banks have 
started to accumulate negative financial results. 
On  a  brighter  note,  almost  all  the  banks  have  increasingly  supported  loans  in  domestic 
currency.  At  the  same  time,  the  banking  sector  remains  well  capitalized  and  liquid.  The 
capital adequacy ratio was 17.1 percent in March 2009, compared to the required minimum 
level of 12 percent. Liquid assets to total assets, is at around 42 percent. 
The  capital  adequacy  of  the  banking  sector  is  sufficient  to  cover  for  a  worst  scenario  that 
combines no economic growth, a higher level of depreciation for the exchange rate, and a 
higher level of non-performing loans. I want to mention also that banks shareholders have 
quickly and sufficiently responded to our calls for capital injection. Obviously, we remain in 
very close contacts with bank representatives, to identify further needs in this direction. 
… measures have been taken to cope with the changing environment  
Since  the  last  quarter  of  2008,  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  intensified  its  work  on  various 
directions to carefully monitor the developments and preempt them where possible. For this 
reason we have: 
- 
strengthened  bilateral  and  multilateral  contacts  with  bank  representatives,  asking 
them for increased vigilance due to current international market conditions; 
increased  contacts  with  other  domestic  institutions  that  regulate  and  monitor  the 
financial markets, in particular with the Authority of Financial Market Supervision that 
supervises the insurance sector; 
BIS Review 89/2009
 2 
          increased  the  number  of  publications,  including  the  Financial  Stability  Report  2007 
(Sept.) and the Statement on Financial Stability (Oct. 2008, April 2009), which try to 
analyze the elements of the crisis and its potential effects on Albanian Banking Sector 
and the economy; 
increased the presence in the Media, to explain the crisis, to clarify the position of our 
banking sector toward the potential crisis effects, and to maintain public confidence in 
the banking sector; 
changed and improved the reporting framework of banks, in terms of timeliness and 
quality of data, in particular regarding their exposure to international markets (and the 
mother-banks),  their  liabilities  (deposits  and  exposure  to  credit  lines)  from  mother-
banks,  and  their  loan  portfolio  developments.  These  data  are  being  closely 
monitored; 
intensified  the  on-site  supervision  of  banks,  to  closely  monitor  their  process  of  risk 
management and the way they have been reacting to the new developments; 
improved  our  stress-test  analysis,  in  terms  of  introducing  more  conservative 
assumptions, and technicalities that allow for a combination of adverse scenarios; 
started  to  execute  fixed-price  (unlimited  amount)  weekly  reverse  repo  transactions 
and longer term reverse-repo transactions, and extended the list of eligible collateral 
for these transactions, to better suit the liquidity needs of the banks; 
doubled  the  usage  rate  of  the  required  reserves  in  order  for  banks  to  use  more  of 
their  reserves  with  the  central  banks,  should  they  need  it  during  the  maintenance 
period; 
prepared and forwarded to Parliament changes in the deposit insurance legislation. 
The  approval  of  these  changes  has  provided  our  depositors  with  a  significant  and 
permanent increase in the maximum amount of their deposits that is fully insured; 
lowered in January 2009 our policy interest rate by 50 basis points, to 5.75 percent, 
on  the  back  of  declining  inflationary  pressures.  Since  then,  concern  about  the 
exchange  rate  developments  and  potential  impact  on  inflationary  expectations  and 
financial stability have been dominating the discussions; 
In addition, in an improved framework of the internal discussions and decision-making, we 
are  reviewing  our  “back-up”  plans,  to  assess  the  possibility  of  new  actions,  should  we 
encounter a worsening scenario. 
Now is the time to introduce policies that will strengthen the economic environment 
and the financial stability in our region...  
In a global level, it has now become clear that the recent crisis was a consequence of wrong 
incentives  that  supported  unbalanced  financial  activity  development  and  misconception  of 
risk assessment, pricing and management. The supervisory institutions, trapped sometimes 
in  situations  of  complicated  structures,  insufficiency  of  resources,  inability  to  follow  and 
understand  market  financial  innovations  and  risk  location,  were  not  able  to  correct  the 
situation  in  due  time.  The  need  to  restore  and  maintain  financial  stability  during  this 
unprecedented  crisis,  has  called  for  swift,  coordinated  and  extraordinary  measures  by  the 
public  authorities,  both  in  the  area  of  monetary  and  fiscal  policies.  Central  banks  have 
abandoned  almost  any  restriction  and  have  even  adopted  unconventional  measures  in 
providing  liquidity  to  the  financial  markets.  Governments  have  shown  a  very  strong 
commitment  to  reduce  systemic  risk  by  saving  important  financial  institutions,  provide 
guarantees for inter-bank lending, raise the level of deposit guarantees for the public etc. 
This crisis is providing the public authorities and markets wherever in the world, with the best 
opportunity  to  identify  deficiencies  and  correct  those  for  preventing  a  similar  crisis  in  the 
BIS Review 89/2009 
 3
future.  Such  task  requires  strong  and  visionary  measures,  which  in  the  medium  term  will 
enable  the  strengthening  of  the  supervisory  architecture  in  different  levels,  but  also  will 
create  conditions,  including  macroeconomic  and  fiscal  ones,  to  avoid  excesses  in  the 
financial activity, not only in the financial industry but also in the balance sheet of households 
and  businesses.  Such  measures  will  require  strong  coordination  and  responsibility  by  the 
public authorities in the national level, and a commitment to push ahead with the necessary 
steps  to  reform  and  improve  the  supervisory  superstructure  in  the  regional,  European  and 
global  level.  In  the  European  level,  such  measures  will  be  supported  by  the  findings  and 
recommendations of the “De Larosière Report”, but of course their implementation will not be 
easy. As it is expected to be a more centralized model for globally systemic banks and, to an 
extent, a more decentralized one for smaller financial institutions, we hope that supervisory 
authorities  in  small  countries  will  have  a  better  determined  position  that  would  allow  for 
clearer responsibilities and stronger voice in communication with the supervisors in the home 
countries. 
More  or  less,  all  the  countries  in  our  region  have  resisted  the  initial  direct  impact  of  the 
international crisis, by enjoying some natural protection from less developed and integrated 
financial  markets  and  a  much  lower  level  of  indebtedness  from  the  households  and 
businesses, compared to developed countries. However, it is now clear that at the time of 
continuing  financial  integration  and  economic  globalization,  this  may  not  be  enough  to 
compensate for potential risks coming from less diversified economic growth, overreliance in 
remittances,  insufficient  culture  of  risk  management  in  financial  institutions  and  other 
economic  agents  –  in  particular  for  the  exchange  rate  and  liquidity  risk,  and  very  limited 
space  from  the  public  authorities  to  introduce  financial  measures  similar  to  those  in  the 
developed countries. Hence, policy measures should address these and other deficiencies to 
find a proper solution in the medium-term. Such measures should reflect the preference for 
preventive approaches. 
… and in Albania  
The Bank of Albania has been vocal in its concern regarding the impact of the international 
financial crises, in particular regarding the performance of the Albanian economy. 
Risks  to  economic  growth  have  increased  and  they  are  related  in  particular  with  a  further 
decline in credit from the banking sector, an increasing trade deficit (due to a slowdown in 
exports),  a  sharp  contraction  of  remittances  (due  to  perception  of  lower  wealth  and 
increasing unemployment in the developed countries). We believe that at these times, there 
is a much stronger need for a careful monetary policy and responsible fiscal policy. 
Regarding the financial sector, we believe that there is also a need to establish certain rules, 
that would support a more balanced and safe development of the financial industry in general 
and  of  the  banking  sector  in  particular  in  the  future.  Firstly,  on  general  measures,  I  would 
support any such one that will contribute to: the establishment of a strong legal framework for 
property title and property rights in Albania, which in return will be instrumental in developing 
a non-financial asset market and increase price transparency and ultimately, strengthen the 
process  of  risk  assessment.  Secondly,  efforts  should  be  made  to  develop  the  non-bank 
financial market as well the capital market in general. 
This  will  help  to  better  support  the  economic  development  of  the  country  and  of  various 
economic agents, increase their opportunities to finance their needs in a more diversified and 
competitive way (thus improve their skills in managing risks) and release some pressure from 
the banking sector. Thirdly, the public authorities in the country (the supervisory authorities 
and  the  Government)  must  have  sound  contingency  plans  for  possible  financial  crisis 
management. Recent events in other countries, have shown the importance of having a well-
coordinated  plan  of  actions,  which  is  discussed,  agreed  and  tested  in  advance.  Fourthly, 
when it comes to the regulatory and supervisory framework of the banking sector, I am in 
favor of introducing the necessary changes to make it less pro-cyclical. In the case of Albania 
4 
 BIS Review 89/2009
– where the minimum required capital levels are already high, I would be more in favor of 
introducing the model of dynamic provisioning adapted to the business structure and to the 
level  of  technical  sophistication  of  the  banking  sector.  In  addition  and  in  a  more  general 
position,  I  would  support  a  revision  of  the  regulatory  framework  toward  clearance  and 
simplicity,  even  though  it  might  be  interpreted  like  I  am  supporting  more  a  rule-based 
approach in supervision. 
I think that a regulatory framework is really effective and successful when it combines both 
the  simplicity  and  transparency  of  a  rule-based  approach  with  the  flexibility  and  forward 
looking characteristics of a principle-based approach. In any case, I believe it is necessary to 
make banks responsible for convincing the supervisor on the risk and return characteristics 
of various new products, before they exceed a certain threshold in size and exposure. This is 
achievable if the supervisory framework is always built with the main focus on assessing and 
managing  the  risk  in  different  directions  of  the  banking  activity.  Fifthly,  when  it  comes  to 
choose between lending in domestic currency or foreign currency, one should have various 
considerations in mind related with the nature of currency flows in the country, the concerns 
of  the  transmission  mechanism  of  the  monetary  policy,  the  nature  of  the  exchange  rate 
regime,  the  currency  composition  of  the  asset-liabilities  of  the  banking  sector  etc..  In  this 
regard, we  shall support a stronger role of the  domestic currency in the lending activity of 
banks, and will make lending in foreign currency more costly for banks if it is not supported 
by retail savings in foreign currency. Thus, the over-reliance of banks in wholesale financial 
resources in foreign currency to support rapid lending should be addressed and managed in 
due time. 
I find this meeting as very useful to discuss these issues and others that you have identified. 
I  believe  that  the  ultimate  goal  should  be to establish a genuine and effective  cooperation 
and to support a coordinated approach where possible. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS Review 89/2009 
 5
