Spencer Dale: Tough times, unconventional measures 
Remarks  by  Mr  Spencer  Dale,  Executive  Director  and  Chief  Economist  of  the  Bank  of 
England,  at  the  Association  of  British  Insurers  Economics  and  Research  Conference, 
London, 27 March 2009. 
I would like to thank Rohan Churm, Alan Mankikar and Tim Taylor for their considerable help in preparing these 
remarks. The views expressed are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of other members of the Monetary 
Policy Committee. 
 The UK economy is in a deep recession. Output in the United Kingdom fell at its fastest rate 
in nearly thirty years in the final quarter of last year, and a similar fall in output in the first 
quarter of this year appears likely. We are in the throes of a synchronised global downturn, 
which has spread far and wide.  
But the darkest hour is just before the dawn. Although immediate prospects appear bleak, 
the substantial economic stimulus that is underway means that there are grounds for thinking 
that  economic  conditions  may  start  to  improve  later  this  year.  An  important  part  of  that 
stimulus  stems  from  the  extraordinary  measures  taken  by  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee 
over  the  past  six  months,  including  our  decision  to  start  using  unconventional  policy 
measures. 
Today, I will describe my view of the economic outlook and outline the factors that I believe 
will spur a gradual turnaround in our economy. And I will explain why, earlier this month, the 
Committee voted to use unconventional policy measures: how they will work and how we will 
monitor their effectiveness. 
I am delighted to have the opportunity to discuss these issues at the Association of British 
Insurers. The insurance industry is a key part of the UK economy and of the financial sector 
in  particular.  Indeed,  it  accounts  for  a  third  of  all  the  jobs  in  the  UK  financial  sector.  Your 
industry,  like  virtually  every  other  sector  of  the  UK  economy,  is  being  affected  by  the 
recession. And given your members’ significant holdings of gilts and corporate bonds, it will 
have a key role to play in the transmission of the unconventional policy measures recently 
begun by the Committee. 
The economic outlook 
1.  
The causes of the current recession can be traced back to at least the summer of 2007. The 
fallout  from  the  sub-prime  mortgage  crisis  and  the  resulting  pressure  on  banks’  balance 
sheets led to a sharp tightening in the price and availability of credit. And the first stages of 
what became a renewed and prolonged surge in oil and other commodity prices began to 
erode households’ spending power and eat into companies’ profit margins.  
As a result, the UK economy gradually slowed through the end of 2007 and into the first half 
of 2008. But the economic outlook took a dramatic turn for the worse in the autumn of last 
year.  That  deterioration  followed  the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers,  which  triggered  the  most 
severe banking crisis for almost a century. Confidence in the very essence of banking – as 
well as in individual financial institutions – was shaken to its core and measures of financial 
market risk and uncertainty ballooned. The resulting contraction in the supply of credit has 
had a significant impact on the ability of households and companies to borrow and spend. 
But the nature of the downturn over the past six months cannot be explained solely in terms 
of the direct effects of the collapse of Lehman Brothers on the supply of credit. The impact of 
changes in credit conditions on investment and consumption decisions tends to be gradual, 
as existing loans mature and new contracts are negotiated. This contrasts with the dramatic 
pace at which economic activity and sentiment turned during the final quarter of last year. 
BIS Review 46/2009 
 1
Output,  orders  and  investment  all  fell  precipitously  in  a  matter  of  months.  Moreover,  the 
downturn in economic activity was seemingly indiscriminate. Output in virtually every corner 
of the world fell sharply, irrespective of a country’s exposure to sub-prime loans, the state of 
its banking system, or its level of indebtedness. The effects of the shock were also felt far 
beyond its epicentre in the financial sector. Manufacturing output has been particularly hard 
hit, with UK manufacturing output estimated to have fallen by 4.9% in the fourth quarter of 
last year; the largest quarterly fall for over thirty years. Many other countries have suffered 
even  larger  falls:  Japanese  manufacturing  output  is  estimated  to  have  contracted  by  over 
12% in Q4 and German manufacturing output by over 7%. World trade is estimated to have 
fallen by over 6% in January alone. 
The pace, breadth and spread of the global downturn suggest that tighter credit conditions 
were not the only force at work. It seems clear that a pronounced and widespread collapse in 
confidence also played a major role. With the failure of Lehman Brothers it became all too 
apparent that the problems in the financial sector were more acute than had previously been 
thought. This was compounded by the realisation that even the largest financial institutions 
were not “too big to fail”. More fundamentally, the demise of Lehman Brothers may have led 
to a questioning of policymakers’ ability to deal effectively with such unprecedented financial 
turmoil.  The  view  that  the  impact  of  the  financial  crisis  would  be  largely  restricted  to  the 
exclusive  confines  of  the  Square  Mile  and  Wall  Street  was  dispelled  once  and  for  all. 
Households and businesses cut back on their spending as it became increasingly apparent 
that the effects of the financial crisis on the real economy were likely to be deeper and more 
widespread than previously envisaged.  
The impact of the tightening in the supply of bank credit and of the widespread collapse of 
confidence  was  compounded  by  developments  in  the  supply  of  trade  credit.  In  previous 
recessions,  many  large  businesses  in  the  UK  were  able  to  support  smaller  companies  by 
reducing payment times to companies further up the supply chain and by extending credit to 
those  further  down.  But  pressures  on  corporate  cash  flows  and  the  reduced  availability  of 
bank credit may have limited the scope for larger companies to behave in this way in this 
downturn. The Monetary Policy Committee, via its network of regional Agents, is monitoring 
closely developments in the demand for and availability of trade credit. 
The reduction in the availability of trade credit has been accompanied by a tightening in the 
supply of credit insurance. This is at a time when the demand for such insurance is at its 
highest.  Similarly,  heightened  uncertainty  about  the  global  environment  has  increased  the 
demand for letters of credit from UK exporters.  
These  developments  are  understandable  and  predictable:  the  economic  environment  has 
deteriorated markedly and as insurers you need to protect yourselves against future losses. 
There is a limit to how much insurance premiums can be raised before they exceed the profit 
margin associated with a particular transaction. Higher prices can have the same effect as 
the complete withdrawal of supply.   
I  know  that  members  of  the  ABI  are  working  hard  with  Government  and  with  business  to 
agree how best to meet these challenges. It is vital for the long-term success of both your 
industry and our economy as a whole that a workable solution is found. 
Where next for the UK economy? 
The Monetary Policy Committee set out its latest economic outlook in the February Inflation 
Report. That Report went to great pains to stress the considerable uncertainty surrounding 
the prospects for the economy. Nobody can predict with any certainty how the UK economy, 
or indeed the world economy, is likely to fare over the next year or so. So beware of anyone 
that suggests otherwise. 
With  that  warning  in  mind,  let  me  outline  my  central  economic  outlook,  which  is  broadly 
similar  to  that  described  in  the  February  Report.  Near-term  prospects  are  bleak. Output  is 
likely  to  contract  further  in  the  first  half  of  this  year,  as  a  weakening  labour  market  and 
2 
 BIS Review 46/2009
concerns about job prospects weigh on consumption, companies run down their stocks and 
scale  back  investment  spending,  and  the  synchronised  slowing  in  world  demand  restrains 
export growth. But as we go through 2009, I believe it is most likely that the pace at which 
output is contracting will ease and that we will see some signs of recovery by around the turn 
of this year.  
This  view  is  based  on  the  substantial  stimulus  that  is  already  starting  to  flow  through  the 
pipelines  of  our  economy.  There  has  been  a  marked  easing  in  global  monetary  and  fiscal 
policies; authorities around the world have also enacted substantial initiatives to revitalise the 
global banking system; the sharp falls in commodity prices will boost households’ purchasing 
power; and the marked depreciation in sterling should support demand, both at home and 
abroad, for domestically produced output. The scale of this stimulus is significantly greater 
than that seen at comparable stages of the recessions in the 1970s, 80s or 90s.  
But to repeat, there is huge uncertainty about the precise form and timing of the recovery and 
so  this  central  path  should  be  treated  with  a  healthy  degree  of  scepticism.  In  particular,  I 
think the risks around this central path are weighted to the downside, reflecting the possibility 
that the actions taken by the authorities around the world to improve the availability of credit 
and to restore business and consumer confidence are slow to take effect. So there may still 
be more to do.  
Learning from past recessions 
When considering the likely scale and duration of this recession, it is natural to examine the 
experience  from  past  recessions.  And  simple  comparisons  with  recent  recessions  are  not 
encouraging. For example, taking account of developments in Q1, output appears likely to 
have fallen by more in the first few quarters of this recession than in any of the preceding 
ones. But when making these comparisons, it is important to recognise that the parallels are 
far from perfect. The causes of this downturn are very different from those of most recent 
recessions  and,  as  I  have  just  described,  the  policy  response  on  this  occasion  has  been 
much quicker and more decisive. There is also a third factor that needs to be borne in mind 
when drawing lessons from history. 
This is the first recession in the UK for nearly 20 years. The structure of our economy has 
changed  significantly  since  the  early  1990s,  and  even  more  so  since  the  early  1980s  and 
1970s.  The  UK  economy  has  undergone  extensive  reforms  and  deregulation,  and 
businesses have been transformed by the implementation of new technology and the effects 
of globalisation. It is hard to quantify precisely the various ways in which the structure of the 
economy has changed. The appropriate data are not always available and it may be a long 
time  until  the  effects  are  discernible  in  aggregate  economic  statistics.  Importantly,  the 
significance of some of these structural reforms may not be fully apparent until the economy 
is subjected to a substantial shock.  
For example, one consequence of globalisation is that supply chains around the world are far 
more  integrated.  This  is  likely  to  have  played  an  important  role  in  the  speed  and 
synchronisation  of  the  world  downturn,  as  the  effects  of  falling  demand  in  a  few  countries 
were  translated  into  lower  orders  and  production  in  many  in  a  matter  of  weeks.  That 
increased integration is also likely to affect the speed and nature of the recovery.  
Similarly, the technology used to control and manage inventories has changed substantially 
over  the  past  twenty  or  thirty  years.  This  may  have  enabled  companies  to  run  down  their 
stocks earlier in this recession than in previous downturns. And indeed there is evidence that 
firms  have  already  cut  back  aggressively  on  their  stock  levels.  A  corollary  of  this  sharp 
correction is that the stock cycle may be shorter lived than in previous recessions.  
The  behaviour  of  the  labour  market  may  also  have  changed.  I  have  been  struck  by  the 
number of business people who tell me about the array of measures they have already taken 
since their orders starting falling sharply last autumn. Wages have been frozen or even cut, 
BIS Review 46/2009 
 3
hours have been reduced, working practices have been adjusted. To the extent that wages 
and  hours  are  now  more  flexible,  the  adjustment  in  employment  may  be  less.  But  if  it  is 
easier for companies to vary their labour force than in the past, much of this adjustment may 
come through more quickly than in previous downturns.   
It is hard to know at this stage how significant these structural changes will be in determining 
the depth of the recession and the speed of the recovery. But the possibility that there has 
been a material structural change in our economy highlights a further danger of viewing the 
current  recession  through  the  prism  of  previous  ones.  The  latest  economic  data  on  world 
trade, output and unemployment are unmistakeably grim, but we must continually challenge 
ourselves about how to interpret these and the economic data to come. They could be telling 
us something about the causes and size of the downturn, the impact of the policy measures 
taken so far, or how changes in economic structure are affecting the response of output and 
employment. 
Let me now say a little about the role the Monetary Policy Committee is playing in addressing 
the challenges posed by the global economic downturn.  
Unconventional policy measures  
2.  
The MPC responded to the marked deterioration in the economic outlook with an aggressive 
easing in monetary policy. We reduced Bank Rate from 5% to an historic low of just 0.5% in 
a  matter  of  months.  Moreover,  at  our  policy  meeting  earlier  this  month,  the  Committee 
agreed to finance £75 billion of asset purchases by the issuance of central bank reserves, in 
order to boost the supply of money and improve the functioning of corporate credit markets.  
The  purchase  (and  sale)  of  assets  by  central  banks  is  nothing  new;  central  banks  have 
always implemented monetary policy by changing the size and composition of their balance 
sheets.  Nor,  importantly,  has  the  objective  of  monetary  policy  changed,  which  is  to  hit  the 
Government’s 2% target for CPI inflation. What is different, however, is the range of assets 
being purchased by the Bank and the scale of those purchases. Given those changes, I want 
to explain the rationale for large scale asset purchases in the current economic climate. In 
doing so, I will address two key questions. First, how will asset purchases help us meet the 
inflation target? And second, how will we monitor the progress of the policy and assess its 
effectiveness? 
How will asset purchases help us to meet the inflation target? 
The objective of the asset purchase programme is to boost nominal spending in order to hit 
the inflation target. The tightening in the availability of credit and the collapse in confidence 
has led to a sharp slowing in the growth of nominal demand. The four-quarter growth rate of 
nominal GDP sank to a record low in the final quarter of last year. The weakness in nominal 
spending has been accompanied by a sharp slowdown in the growth of bank lending to firms 
and households and in the growth of money holdings of the non-financial sector. At our policy 
meeting  earlier  this  month,  the  Committee  judged  that  without  the  additional  stimulus 
provided  by  the  asset  purchase  programme,  the  growth  of  nominal  spending  would  be 
insufficient to meet the inflation objective.  
The MPC instructed the Bank to use the additional reserves to purchase two types of assets: 
gilts and high-quality corporate debt. This twin-track approach allows for asset purchases to 
stimulate nominal spending in a variety of different ways. Such a pragmatic strategy seems 
entirely sensible given that this in the first time these unconventional tools have been used in 
the UK. 
I find it helpful to summarise the different mechanisms through which asset purchases may 
boost nominal spending into three broad channels. 
4 
 BIS Review 46/2009
First,  the  purchases  of  gilts  will  act  to  increase  their  prices  and  reduce  their  yields.  This 
change in the relative attractiveness of holding gilts is likely to cause investors to reallocate 
their portfolios into other assets, such as corporate bonds, which in turn will tend to reduce 
the yields on those assets. In so doing, the borrowing costs faced by firms and households 
should fall. As of today, the Bank has purchased £13bn of gilts from investors. 
Second, purchasing assets with central bank reserves will significantly increase the amount 
of  liquidity  in  the  system.  This  expansion  in  the  supply  of  money  may  in  itself  encourage 
greater levels of lending and borrowing. Bank deposits are likely to increase, providing banks 
with  a  ready  source  of  funding  to  finance  additional  lending.  Similarly,  as  the  additional 
liquidity permeates through the economy, companies may feel less constrained by the need 
to hoard liquidity and more able to undertake investment projects. 
Third,  purchases  of  high-quality  corporate  debt  should  help  to  improve  the  functioning  of 
corporate  credit  markets.  Strains  on  financial  institutions’  balance  sheets,  combined  with 
heightened  levels  of  uncertainty  and  risk  aversion,  have  impaired  the  liquidity  of  key 
corporate credit markets. Firms’ access to some of these markets has been restricted and 
the cost of credit inflated. By purchasing assets in a targeted way, the Bank can aid liquidity 
in  these  markets  and  so  improve  the  availability  of  corporate  credit.  The  Bank  has  been 
purchasing commercial paper for over a month now. It made its first purchases of corporate 
bonds  this  week.  And  we  are  reviewing  the  case  for  intervention  in  other  corporate  credit 
markets. 
Importantly, the objective of the Bank’s operations within corporate credit markets is not to 
purchase  a  specific  quantity  of  assets;  rather  it  is  to  improve  the  functioning  of  those 
markets. The scale of purchases required to improve market liquidity may in fact be relatively 
small:  the  very  knowledge  that  the  Bank  stands  ready  to  purchase  assets  may  be  as 
beneficial  as  the  actual  asset  purchases  themselves.  Moreover,  the  required  scale  of 
purchases is likely to diminish over time as liquidity improves and private investors return to 
the market. It is important not to judge the potential significance of this channel by the scale 
of asset purchases. 
How can we monitor the effectiveness of the purchases?  
It  is  much  too  soon  to  come  to  a  firm  judgement  about  whether  this  programme  of  asset 
purchases is having its desired effect. In particular, the impact on the growth of broad money 
and credit will not begin to be discernible for several months yet. There are, however, some 
encouraging signs. Since the MPC’s announcement, yields on gilts have fallen by 40-60bp at 
the horizons at which the Bank is making purchases. This has been accompanied by falls in 
yields on non-financial corporate bonds of up to around 30bp. And since the Bank started to 
operate  in  the  commercial  paper  market,  spreads  have  tightened  and  issuance  has 
increased. These developments have been mirrored in the positive feedback the Bank has 
received from issuers of commercial paper. 
Over the coming weeks and months, the MPC will be monitoring a wide range of indicators 
as we form an initial assessment of the likely effectiveness of the asset purchase programme 
in  stimulating  nominal  spending.  A  critical  issue  will  be  the  extent  to  which  movements  in 
asset  prices  and  market  spreads  are  translated  into  lower  borrowing  rates  faced  by 
businesses  and  households.  Equally  important  will  be  the  extent  to  which  the  additional 
liquidity and lower borrowing rates act to spur the growth of broad money and credit.  
I  am  confident  that  increasing  the  supply  of  money  will  eventually  lead  to  an  increase  in 
nominal demand. But there is considerable uncertainty about the relative importance of the 
different  channels  through  which  it  may  work.  As  such,  I  welcome  the  eclectic,  twin-track 
approach  adopted  by  the  Committee.  There  is  also  considerable  uncertainty  about  the 
overall size and timing of the impact of the monetary expansion on nominal spending and on 
the  prospects  for  inflation.  That  is  why  in  the  minutes  of  its  March  meeting,  the  MPC 
BIS Review 46/2009 
 5
indicated that, just as with its decisions on Bank Rate, we would review the appropriate scale 
of the asset purchase programme each and every month.  
Conclusion 
the  objective  guiding 
these  dramatic  developments, 
3.  
The  extraordinary  developments  in  the  global  economy  since  the  autumn  have  been 
matched by the magnitude of the policy response. Monetary policy continues to play its part, 
with Bank Rate set at a historically low level and the launch of a large-scale asset purchase 
programme.  Throughout 
the 
Committee’s decisions has remained the same: the need to keep inflation on track to meet 
the Government’s 2% inflation target. It was that objective that underpinned the decisions to 
reduce Bank Rate to unprecedented levels. And it was that objective that drove the MPC to 
adopt unconventional policy measures.  
The inflation target will also dictate the rate at which the stance of monetary policy is returned 
to  normal  as  economic  prospects  recover.  The  outlook  for  inflation  relative  to  the  inflation 
target provides the natural guide to exiting from this period of exceptional monetary stimulus. 
Importantly, this exit strategy is clear, transparent and open to public scrutiny. Openness and 
transparency have been the cornerstones of UK monetary policy since the Monetary Policy 
Committee was established in 1997. That has never been more important than now.  
The inflation target is symmetric. That requires the MPC to set policy in a symmetric way. 
The Committee adjusted monetary policy boldly and decisively on the way down in order to 
meet  the  inflation  target.  And,  let  me  assure  you  that,  when  the  time  comes,  we  will  be 
prepared to respond with equal vigour on the way back up. 
6 
 BIS Review 46/2009
