Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Developing a strong and dynamic SME sector 
Keynote address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 
Launch of SME Credit Bureau, Kuala Lumpur, 16 April 2009. 
 Introduction  
It is my pleasure to be here this morning to speak at the launch of the SME Credit Bureau. 
The development of a strong and dynamic SME sector is a priority on our national agenda to 
promote  a  vibrant  and  active  SME  sector  that  will  contribute  towards  generating  a 
sustainable and balanced economic growth. Malaysia has therefore adopted an aggressive 
SME  development  programme  to  strengthen  the  viability  and  capacity  of  the  SMEs  to 
increase their contribution to high quality growth of the economy.  
Over the recent five years, the SMEs contribution to economic growth has increased. Indeed, 
the SME contribution to economic growth in the manufacturing sector has increased from 6% 
of real gross domestic product in 2001 to 8.4% in 2005. The overall SME contribution to the 
gross  domestic  product  has  increased  to  32%  while  19%  of  total  exports  are  by  SMEs. 
Experience has shown in several of the developed countries, that SMEs contribute to at least 
half of the gross domestic product. Benchmarked against this, there is clearly a significant 
potential for SMEs in Malaysia to increase their contribution to the economy.  
Economic outlook and policy response  
The year 2009 is likely to be a difficult year for businesses. The global economy is expected 
to  remain  weak  following  the  synchronized  recession  in  the  advanced  economies.  While 
there is significant uncertainty on the prospects for recovery, the stimulus measures being 
implemented  across  the  globe  and  the  measures  to  address  the  financial  crisis  in  the 
advanced economies are expected to contribute to improving conditions in the second half of 
this  year.  However,  should  there  be  further  delays  in  addressing  the  impairment  of  the 
financial  systems  in  the  crisis  affected  countries,  this  would  be  a  risk  to  the  economic 
recovery process. This would in turn continue to have significant spillover effects on the rest 
of the world.  
Whilst  Malaysia  has successfully  maintained  the  stability  of  its  financial  system  during  this 
period of uncertainty, the economy is not insulated from these global developments. Despite 
the  high  degree  of  openness  of  our  economy,  Malaysian  businesses  are  however,  less 
leveraged with significantly less foreign financial exposures and therefore better able to cope 
with the effects of the global economic downturn.  
During  this  recent  decade,  Malaysia  has  aggressively  implemented  measures  to  promote 
domestic demand as a driver for growth and thus achieve a more balanced growth. While the 
export sector is still important, the significance of domestic demand has gradually increased. 
In this current environment, the Malaysian Government has implemented a significant fiscal 
stimulus  to  sustain  domestic  demand.  Following  the  reduction  in  interest  rates,  retail 
borrowing costs have declined to new historical lows. Thus both the fiscal stimulus and the 
accommodative  monetary  environment  are  expected  to  improve  demand  conditions  in  the 
second half of the year.  
Malaysia  also  has  diverse  trading  partners  which  contributes  towards  mitigating  the  full 
impact of the global slowdown on our domestic economy. Businesses in Malaysia have over 
the  years  continued  to  build  trade  and  investment  linkages  with  other  emerging  countries 
especially  in  Asia  .  Adequate  access  to  financing  is  therefore  vital  not  only  for  supporting 
domestic demand but also to ensure that Malaysian businesses are able to take advantage 
of the opportunities in the regional and global economy.  
BIS Review 47/2009 
 1
The  strong domestic  banking  system,  with  its  ample  liquidity,  has  the potential  capacity  to 
provide  the  access  to  financing.  Some  SMEs  however  are  experiencing  stress  from  the 
current  more  difficult  environment.  Several  preemptive  measures  have  therefore  been 
introduced to enhance the prospect for access to financing. The SME Assistance Guarantee 
Scheme  that  was  launched  on  3  February  2009  to  provide  SMEs  with  an  80%  guarantee 
cover will enhance access to financing in addition to keeping the cost of financing low. As at 
5  April  2009,  more  than  880  applicants  have  successfully  obtained  financing  through  this 
scheme and more than 790 applicants are still being evaluated. Two additional schemes, the 
Working  Capital  Guarantee  Scheme  and  the  Industry  Restructuring  Financing  Guarantee 
Scheme, has been recently launched to enhance access to financing for working capital and 
to  support  long-term  investments  that  will  increase  productivity  and  that  will  generate  high 
value-added activities.  
The  measures  to  enhance  access  to  financing  are  also  reinforced  by  the  provision  of 
financial advisory services and by developing channels for redress by borrowers. The BNM 
LINK and TELELINK established by Bank Negara Malaysia and the ABM-Connect that has 
been set up by the Association of Banks in Malaysia serve as important conduits for greater 
interface between the banks and the borrowers. These measures are also complemented by 
the institutional framework to deal with problem loans in the retail and business segments. 
The  Small  Debt  Resolution  Scheme  (SDRS),  which  was  created  in  2003  to  facilitate  the 
restructuring  and  rescheduling  of  credit  facilities  for  small  businesses  has  now  been 
expanded to include all viable SMEs facing financial difficulties with financing from multiple 
financial institutions.  
Importance of Information Credit Bureaus  
Malaysia has been ranked number one in the world in terms of access to credit by the World 
Bank  in  2008.  Despite  its  favourable  assessment,  efforts  will  continue  to  be  intensified  to 
ensure  that  this  access  continues,  particularly  during  this  more  challenging  and  uncertain 
time.  The  establishment  of  the  SME  Credit  Bureau  is  one  of  these  measures.  The  SME 
Credit  Bureau  is  a  vital  element  in  the  information  credit  bureau  industry.  SMEs  are  thus 
encouraged to maintain and compile the required information so as to enhance their potential 
access to credit.  
SMEs are expected to benefit greatly from the services of the SME Credit Bureau. Firstly, the 
SME  Credit  Bureau  empowers  SMEs  to  build  their  credit  reputation  from  a  wide  range  of 
transaction  behaviors.  These  include  transactions  with  suppliers,  customers  and  utility 
providers.  The  record  of  transaction  behavior  is  expected  to  provide  comprehensive 
information on the SMEs, especially for SMEs that are accessing financing from the banking 
sector  for  the  first  time.  Secondly,  the  SME  Credit  Bureau  uses  a  credit  methodology  that 
discounts  aged  information  thus  providing  a  fairer  assessment  of  the  SMEs  current  credit 
worthiness.  
SMEs should also use the services provided by the SME Credit Bureau to better understand 
the  credit  evaluation  processes.  This  will  facilitate  the  efficient  processing  of  the  loan 
applications.  This  will  also  allow  SMEs  to  secure  more  favorable  financing  terms  from 
financial institutions. This approach is also expected to incentivise SMEs to inculcate a credit 
culture  that  enhances  their  eligibility  for  financing.  A  positive  assessment  from  the  SME 
Credit Bureau will be recognized by all financial institutions. The SMEs will therefore have 
increased options and will be able to compare and obtain the most favorable terms.  
Over the years, SMEs have become an increasingly important segment of the loan portfolio 
of  our  financial  institutions.  With  higher  exposures  to  this  sector,  the  comprehensive 
information compiled by the SME Credit Bureau will be a valuable information source that will 
facilitate better monitoring and management of the SME portfolio. The information from the 
SME Credit Bureau will also expedite the assessment of developments in new markets and 
2 
 BIS Review 47/2009
the  creation  of  a  liquid  secondary  market  which  would  in  turn  increase  the  availability  of 
funds to SMEs.  
Consistent  with  the  importance  of  the  SME  segment  in  the  total  loan  portfolio,  financial 
institutions should  also  regularly  interface  with  SME  associations  so  that  financial  services 
rendered to the sector can be more customised to the specific requirements of the sector. In 
this current challenging period of slower growth, financial institutions need to understand and 
address  early  the  problems  being  faced  by  the  SMEs.  This  may  involve  adopting  greater 
flexibility  in  structuring  SMEs'  financing  facilities  including  in  the  restructuring  programmes 
and to provide the supporting financial advisory services. In addition, early assessments and 
taking the appropriate remedial actions before the financial conditions deteriorate will avoid 
other more costly solutions.  
In  this  highly  challenging  environment,  SMEs  also  need  to  initiate  their  own  measures  to 
achieve  greater  cost  efficiency  and  to  enhance  productivity  improvements.  This  would 
involve looking at every facet of the business operations and to identify ways to streamline 
processes,  eliminate  waste,  consolidate  activities  and  adopt  new  technology  and  energy-
efficient  processes.  A  number  of 
these 
enhancements. Other initiatives could include the pooling of resource requirements such as 
the purchase of common raw materials to benefit from bulk discounts from suppliers and to 
share transportation costs. The Chambers of Commerce and Industry associations can have 
an important coordinating role in such undertakings. Experience-sharing sessions can also 
be  organized  in  which  successful  members  can  share  experiences  in  achieving  cost 
efficiency and productivity improvements.  
Equally important is increasing the value creation and seeking new areas of business growth. 
This may involve shifting resources to new areas of business or markets. In striving towards 
long-term competitiveness. Experience has shown that the aptitude for hard work, prudent 
practices,  the  agility  to  adapt  to  changing  conditions,  perseverance  and  the  ability  for 
reinvention are some of the qualities of the successful SMEs in our economy.  
The  creation  of  the  SME  Credit  Bureau  is  another  milestone  in  the  development  of  the 
enabling supporting infrastructure for strengthening the SME sector. The creation of such an 
information  credit  bureau  industry  is  a  further  step  forward  in  generating  a  financial 
intermediation  process  that  is  more  efficient  and  effective.  I  hope  that  financial  institutions 
and the SME Credit Bureau would work together towards making today's initiative achieve its 
objective. In enhancing greater access to credit to the SME sector, it would strengthen the 
potential for SME contribution to the economy.  
funds  have  been  established 
to  support 
BIS Review 47/2009 
 3
