Duvvuri Subbarao: Financial stability – issues and challenges 
Valedictory address by Dr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
FICCI-IBA  Annual  Conference  on  “Global  Banking:  Paradigm  Shift”,  organised  jointly  by 
FICCI and IBA, Mumbai, 10 September 2009. 
 Global banking – paradigm shift 
I.  
Thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  participate  in  this  FICCI-IBA  conference  on  “Global  Banking: 
Paradigm Shift”. I understand this is one of the important banking conferences in the annual 
calendar, and so I struggled through what I should say at this valedictory that is central to the 
theme of the conference.  
Quite  understandably,  public  discourse  over  the  last  one  year  has  been  dominated  by  the 
global financial crisis; and the future of global banking has clearly been one of the important 
facets of this discourse. How the regulatory architecture around the world is reinvented will 
be a critical determinant of the paradigm shift in global banking. In his 1962 book, “Structure 
of  Scientific  Revolutions”,  Thomas  Kuhn  argues  that  when  evidence  against  a  prevailing 
scientific  theory  piles  up,  that  theory  is  jettisoned  and  a  new  one  is  adopted  signalling  a 
paradigm shift. As we contemplate the lessons of the crisis, the questions that arise are what 
is the evidence against the old model of central banking and regulation, and what is the new 
model. What is the paradigm shift required? I will position my speech this afternoon on some 
of the issues in this paradigm shift.  
II.  
Financial stability – key lesson of the crisis 
Breakdown of trust 
There appears to be broad agreement around the world that the worst of the crisis is behind 
us. The risk of a descent into a second Great Depression – which seemed to be a threat as 
recently  as  March  –  has  greatly  diminished,  if  not  disappeared.  Nevertheless  there  is  a 
furious debate on the pace and shape of global recovery. Regardless of one’s position on 
this debate, everyone is agreed on one thing which is that restoration of trust in the financial 
system  is  central  to  the  pace  and  shape  of  recovery.  What  this  crisis  has  witnessed  is  a 
massive  break  down  of  trust  across  the  entire  financial  system  –  trust  in  banks  and  non-
banks,  trust  in  central  banks  and  other  regulators,  trust  in  credit  rating  agencies  and 
investment advisers, trust in brokers, dealers and traders, and trust in the financial markets, if 
not in the market system itself. 
Anatomy of financial instability 
It  was  the  abrupt  breakdown  of  trust  following  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers  in  mid-
September  2008  that  caused  financial  markets  in  advanced  economies  to  go  into  seizure. 
Suddenly, there was a great deal of uncertainty not only about the extent of losses and the 
ability of banks to withstand those losses, but about the extent of risk in the system, where it 
lay  and  how  it  might  explode.  This  uncertainty  triggered  unprecedented  panic  and  almost 
totally paralyzed the entire chain of financial intermediation. Banks hoarded liquidity. Credit, 
bond  and  equity  markets  nearly  froze.  Signalling  a  massive  flight  to  safety,  yields  on 
government  securities  plunged  while  spreads  over  risk  free  government  securities  shot  up 
across  market  segments.  Several  venerable  financial  institutions  came  to  the  brink  of 
collapse.  Massive  deleveraging  drove  down  asset  prices  setting  off  a  vicious  cycle.  Trust 
totally dried up.  
BIS Review 106/2009 
 1
The  epicentre  of  the  crisis  lay  in  the  advanced  economies,  but  it  soon  spread  in  two 
directions. First, in the advanced economies, it spread from the financial sector to the real 
sector  severely  hurting  consumption,  investment,  export  and  import.  Second,  it  spread 
geographically from the advanced economies to the emerging market economies and soon 
engulfed almost the entire world through trade, finance and confidence channels. In short, 
financial stability that we had grown to take for granted got impaired.  
Financial stability comes centre stage 
That indeed is one of the many lessons of the crisis – that financial stability cannot be taken 
for granted. We have learnt that financial stability can be jeopardized even if there is price 
stability  and  macroeconomic  stability.  We  have  learnt  that  a  threat  to  financial  stability 
anywhere in the world is potentially a threat to financial stability everywhere. We have learnt 
that  financial  stability  has  to  shift  from  being  an  implicit  variable  to  an  explicit  variable  of 
economic policy.  
Financial instability, as we have seen, can hurt even the most advanced economies, but the 
damage it can cause in poor and developing economies can be particularly severe. People 
with low levels of income have no headroom to bear downside risks, and their livelihoods can 
be disrupted by financial instability. It is therefore even more important that countries such as 
ours pay particular attention to preserving financial stability even as we deepen and broaden 
our financial sector at home and integrate with the rest of the world.  
All of us in the financial sector have a role in managing financial stability. Given the centrality 
of this topic to our mandate, I would like to focus my comments this afternoon on financial 
stability. I will start by examining how and why central banks let financial stability fall through 
the cracks, and then review the international initiatives under way to remedy the system. I will 
then  explain  the  Indian  approach  to  financial  stability,  in  particular  highlighting  the  stability 
enhancing features of our policy and regulatory framework. Finally, I will look ahead to some 
issues and challenges on the way forward. 
Central banks and financial stability 
III.  
Central bankers around the world are clearly in the forefront battling the crisis. While they are 
clearly part of the solution, questions are being asked about whether they were, in fact, part 
of  the  problem.  In  particular,  did  they  fail  to  see  the  crisis  coming?  Were  they  behind  the 
curve  in  preventing  excesses  from  building  up?  Did  they  neglect  financial  stability  in  their 
zealous  pursuit  of  price  stability?  More  importantly,  did  they  behave  like  this  because  the 
accountability  mechanisms  were  weak?  To  address  these  questions,  let  me  refer  to  three 
egregious failures attributed to central banks. 
First failure – exclusive focus on price stability 
The years before the crisis saw a powerful intellectual consensus building around inflation 
targeting. A growing number of central banks, starting with New Zealand in the late 1980s 
and  currently  numbering  over  20,  geared  monetary  policy  almost  exclusively  to  stabilizing 
inflation.  Even  where  central  banks  did  not  target  a  precise  inflation  rate,  their  policy 
objectives  were  informed,  if  not  dominated,  by  price  stability.  This  approach  seemed 
successful. There was an extended period of price stability accompanied by stable growth 
and low unemployment. The presumption that price stability would deliver financial stability 
too  seemed  to  have  been  validated.  Having  beaten  the  nasty  bouts  of  stagflation  of  the 
1970s and tamed business cycles, central banks declared victory. They had discovered the 
holy grail.  
The  crisis  has  blunted  that  sense  of  triumph.  It  has  called  into  question  the  wisdom  of 
exclusive inflation targeting and even challenged the notion of price stability being the only 
2 
 BIS Review 106/2009
objective of monetary policy. It has underscored the importance of acknowledging financial 
stability as an explicit variable in the policy matrix of central banks.  
Second failure – failure to prevent asset price bubbles 
A second and related feature of central banking that led to the crisis was the benign neglect 
of the build up of asset bubbles and financial imbalances. In particular, the monetary policy 
stance  of  studied  indifference  to  asset  price  inflation  stemmed  from  the  now  notoriously 
famous  Greenspan  orthodoxy  which  can  be  summarized  as  follows.  First,  asset  price 
bubbles are hard to identify on a real time basis, and the fundamental factors that drive asset 
prices  are  not  directly  observable.  Second,  monetary  policy  is  too  blunt  an  instrument  to 
counteract asset price booms. And third, a central bank cannot presume to know more than 
the market. After all financial markets are efficient, rational and self-correcting. Any central 
bank action to correct the market is not only uncalled for, but is bound to be sub-optimal. The 
surmise  therefore  was  that  the  cost-benefit  calculus  of  a  more  activist  monetary  stance  of 
“leaning  against  the  wind”  was  clearly  negative.  It  was  considered  more  cost  effective  for 
monetary policy to wait for the bubble to burst and clean up afterwards rather than prick the 
bubble in advance.  
Third failure – lightness of regulation 
A  third  lapse  attributed  to  central  banks,  and  to  financial  sector  regulators  where  they  are 
separate from central banks, was the lightness of regulation. A host of factors – innovation of 
complex products by slicing and dicing, the originate and distribute mode of lending, misuse 
of derivative products, securitization that encouraged aggressive off-balance sheet activity, 
loose supervision and regulation – all culminated in the build up of systemic risks, and this 
despite  the  growing  sophistication  of  risk  management  systems.  Regulation  typically 
focussed on individual institutions, not recognizing the fallacy of composition – that systemic 
stability  could  be  threatened  even  if  individual  institutions  within  the  system  are  stable.  A 
whole network of bank-like institutions – now called the “shadow banking system” – grew and 
flourished  outside  the  regulatory  regime  of  banks.  Regulatory  arbitrage  became  common 
practice as banks shifted risk to affiliated entities in the shadow system and evaded capital 
requirements. 
Warnings ignored 
It is not as if the risks to financial stability were brewing silently. Several international fora 
were  discussing  growing  threats  from  macro  economic  imbalances,  asset  price  build  up, 
credit expansion and depressed risk premia, and some had even issued alerts and warnings 
about the impending crisis. But central banks largely refrained from strong corrective action 
for a variety of reasons – the perceived inefficiency of monetary policy to redress asset price 
bubbles,  separation  of  monetary  and  regulatory  policies  and  misplaced  faith  in  the  self-
correcting forces of financial markets. At least some of the central banks actually believed 
that the Great Moderation permanently changed the macroeconomic dynamics and that the 
good times will roll on for ever. The net result of all this was financial stability failed to receive 
central bank attention it warranted.  
Global action towards financial stability 
IV.  
Expectedly,  the  crisis  has  triggered  a  vigorous  debate  on  how  financial  stability  should  be 
safeguarded. Even as the crisis is not fully behind us, several lessons are clear. First, the 
received  wisdom  is  that  prevention  is  better  than  cure  and  that  central  banks  should  take 
countercyclical  policy  actions  to  prevent  build  up  of  imbalances.  Second,  a  consensus  is 
emerging  around  the  view  that  central  bank  purview  should  explicitly  include  financial 
stability.  Third,  there  is  growing  acknowledgement  that  financial  stability  needs  to  be 
BIS Review 106/2009 
 3
understood and addressed both from the micro and macro perspectives. At the micro level, 
we  need  to  ensure  that  individual  institutions  are  healthy,  safe  and  sound;  we  need  in 
addition, to safeguard financial stability at the macro level.  
Some  of  the  significant  actions  already  taken  to  bolster  the  resilience  of  the  international 
financial system include the enhancement of the Basel II capital framework, particularly with 
regard to trading and off-balance sheet securitisation activities of banks, setting strong risk 
management standards for banks and financial institutions on governance, management and 
disclosure of liquidity risk and stress testing, integrating sound compensation principles in the 
Basel capital framework, introducing central counterparties for derivatives trading, developing 
new accounting standards to enhance the consolidation of special purpose vehicles, making 
transparent  banks'  relationships  with  such  entities  and  the  issue  of  internationally  agreed 
principles for the oversight of hedge funds.  
Beyond  actions  already  taken,  work  is  under  progress  on  several  initiatives  to  strengthen 
stability and I want to highlight some of the more important ones.  
• 
Strengthening the regulatory capital framework: Recognising that the banking sector 
entered the crisis with an insufficient level and quality of capital, the Basel Committee 
on  Banking  Supervision  is  developing  concrete  proposals  to  strengthen  the  quality, 
consistency and transparency of the capital base of banks. 
Developing  a  global  liquidity  standard:  Recognizing  that  illiquidity  of  banks  can 
threaten its solvency as much as inadequate capital and also adversely impact the 
stability  of  the  financial  system,  work  is  under  way  to  develop  an  international 
framework for liquidity risk regulation and supervision. 
Strengthening the supervision of cross-border entities: Given the growing number of 
cross-border financial conglomerates and their role in transmitting risk, arrangements 
are  being  put  in  place  for  cross-border  cooperation  among  regulators  and  for 
establishing supervisory colleges. 
Strengthening the macroprudential framework: Regulation has typically focussed on 
individual  institutions,  which  as  has  become  evident  now  is  necessary  but  not 
sufficient. It is equally important to monitor systemic stability. The Basel Committee is 
now  developing  macroprudential  regulations  to  address  procyclicality  and  systemic 
risk issues. 
Reviewing  international  accounting  standards:  There  is  a  view  that  some  of  the 
current  accounting  standards  have  contributed  to  market  volatility.  The  Financial 
Stability  Board  and  the  accounting  standard  bodies  are  consulting  on  revising 
standards, in particular those relating to financial instruments and their valuation. 
Extending  the  perimeter  of  regulation:  Work  is  under  way  to  develop  a  global 
framework  governing 
reporting 
requirements to be imposed on non-banks. The principle being put forward is that if 
an institution looks and behaves like a bank, then it should be regulated like a bank, 
regardless of its legal form. 
Strengthening the oversight of credit rating agencies: The crisis has questioned the 
integrity, conduct and business model of credit rating agencies. Corrective initiatives 
under way include stronger regulation of credit rating agencies, measures to address 
conflicts of interest, differentiation between ratings of structured and other products, 
and strengthening the integrity of the rating process. 
Rationalising  compensation  structures:  It  is  agreed  that  compensation  structures  in 
large financial institutions have given rise to perverse incentives for staff to maximize 
profits at the cost of long-term sustainability. A key objective of the proposed changes 
is  to  promote  compensation  schemes  that  reflect  the  underlying  risks  taken  that 
regulatory  disclosure  and 
registration, 
the 
       4 
 BIS Review 106/2009
include  back  loading  payoffs  and  claw  back  clauses  that  retrospectively  adjust 
bonuses on the basis of future position losses.  
As  a  member  of  G20,  the  expanded  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB)  and  the  Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (BCBS),  India  is  actively  engaged  in  several  of  these 
international initiatives. The task for us will be to draw the lessons of the crisis, understand 
international best practices and adapt them to our context.  
V.  
Financial stability – Indian approach 
Financial stability in India during the crisis 
Even in the midst of such a cataclysmic crisis, our financial sector remained safe and sound, 
and  our  financial  markets  continued  to  function  normally.  Sure,  we  have  been  hurt  by  the 
crisis,  but  much  less  than  most  others.  It  will  be  a  folly  though  to  let  that  lull  us  into 
complacency and to believe that there is something inevitable about India’s financial stability. 
As India further integrates with the rest of the world, as it inevitably will, we will increasingly 
be exposed to the forces of globalization. We cannot be globalizing, and at the same time 
expect to remain “decoupled”. Indeed, this crisis has shown that “decoupling” is a God that 
failed.  If  financial  stability  anywhere  in  the  world  is  jeopardized,  our  financial  stability  will 
become vulnerable too.  
India’s approach to financial stability 
In contrast to the minimalist formula of “single objective, single instrument”, the conduct of 
monetary policy by the Reserve Bank has been guided by multiple objectives and multiple 
instruments.  In  general,  our  three  main  objectives  have  been  price  stability,  growth  and 
financial  stability,  with  the  inter  se  priority  among  the  objectives  shifting  from  time  to  time 
depending on the macroeconomic circumstances.  
What  have  been  the  key  features  of  our  approach  to  safeguarding  financial  stability?  On 
financial  globalization,  our  stance  has  been  gradualist  –  of  making  haste  slowly.  We  view 
capital  account  liberalisation  as  a  process  and  not  an  event.  The  extent  of  opening  is 
contingent upon  progress  in  other sectors.  The  policy  framework  encourages  equity  flows, 
especially  direct  investment  flows  but  debt  flows  are  subject  to  restrictions  which  are 
reviewed  and  fine-tuned  periodically.  The  exchange  rate  is  largely  market-determined  and 
we intervene in the foreign exchange market in times of excessive volatility. 
Our approach to financial sector regulation has been informed by the fact that our system is 
dominated by commercial banks. Thus, as early as mid-1990s, the Reserve Bank instituted 
the  prudential  framework  governing  banks,  especially  commercial  banks,  as  a  part  of  the 
overall structural reforms. As of April 2009, all our commercial banks are Basel II compliant.  
We established a Board for Financial Supervision for focussed regulation and supervision of 
banks and other financial institutions under RBI’s jurisdiction. We widened and deepened the 
financial markets in terms of instruments, products and participant, while continuing with a 
cautious approach towards exotic products.  
India – important measures towards financial stability 
It  may  be  relevant  to  highlight  some  of  the  specific  features  of  our  system  that  have 
contributed to financial stability:  
• 
Banks  are  required  to  hold  a  minimum  percentage  of  their  liabilities  in  risk  free 
government securities under the statutory liquidity ratio (SLR) system. This stipulation 
ensures that banks are buffered by liquidity in times of stress.  
BIS Review 106/2009 
 5
       We managed the capital account actively. In the face of large capital inflows during 
2006-08,  we  sterilised  the  resultant  excess  liquidity  through  calibrated  hikes  in  the 
cash reserve ratio (CRR) and issue of market stabilisation scheme (MSS) securities. 
When the flows reversed during the last quarter of 2008, we reversed the measures 
too. We cut the CRR and bought back the MSS securities to inject liquidity into the 
banking system.  
Through  pre-emptive  countercyclical  provisioning  and  a  differentiated  risk  weight 
stipulation for “sensitive sectors”, we were able to contain the adverse impact of high 
credit growth in some sectors and asset price fluctuations on banks’ balance sheets.  
To  ensure  that  securitization  is  value  adding,  we  insist  on  “true  sale”,  and  credit 
enhancements and liquidity support are subject to capital regulations. We also require 
profit  from  sale  of  assets  to  SPVs  to  be  amortised  over  the  life  of  the  securities 
issued.  
Access to overnight unsecured call market is restricted to banks and primary dealers. 
Other entities can access the overnight market only through collateralised instruments 
which are cleared and settled on a guaranteed basis through a central counterparty.  
Regulation and oversight have been extended to systemically important non-deposit 
taking, non-banking finance companies, and this has limited leverage and space for 
regulatory arbitrage.  
Systemic  interconnectedness  has  been  addressed  by  bringing  banks’  exposures  to 
non-bank finance companies within the prudential framework.  
Central counterparty (CCP) clearing and guaranteed settlement is currently operative 
for government securities transactions and inter-bank rupee-USD forex transactions. 
CCP guaranteed arrangements for forex forwards and OTC rupee interest rate swaps 
are underway.  
Financial stability unit in RBI 
As  you  will  note  from  the  above  listing,  we  have  used  both  monetary  and  regulatory 
measures  to  maintain  financial  stability.  This  synergistic  approach  has  been  possible 
because the Reserve Bank is both the monetary authority and the regulator of banks, non-
banks  and  a  large  segment  of  the  financial  markets.  On  the  way  forward,  our  financial 
markets  will  deepen  and  broaden  further  and  we  will  also  be  increasingly  exposed  to  the 
forces of globalization. All this will have implications for our financial stability. The Reserve 
Bank is conscious of the need to pay increasing attention to financial stability and to improve 
our  skills  in  this  area.  As  a  beginning  in  this  direction,  we  have  set  up  a  multi-disciplinary 
Financial Stability Unit in the Reserve Bank and are planning to put out a regular Financial 
Stability Report. The first report is planned in the next few months. These reports will present 
an  overall  unified  assessment  of  the  health  of  the  financial  system  with  a  focus  on 
identification and analysis of potential risks to systemic stability.  
Financial stability: challenges on the way forward 
VI.  
Like  all  other  policy  measures,  maintenance  of  financial  stability  involves  trade-offs  and 
throws up a number of challenges. I want to highlight five important challenges that we will 
need to address on the way forward. In doing so, I will draw from global experience.  
First challenge: how to define and measure financial stability 
It  came  to  light  in  several  countries  during  the  crisis  that  the  responsibility  for  financial 
stability fell through the cracks as no agency or regulator was definitively mandated with it. 
6 
 BIS Review 106/2009
Now,  there  are  moves  to  explicitly  indicate  which  agency/agencies  will  be  responsible  for 
financial  stability  as  also  to  specify  a  protocol  for  addressing  threats  to  financial  stability, 
much like the ones we have developed for managing natural disasters. But this requires, in 
the first place, for financial stability to be precisely defined.  
Despite widespread usage, financial stability is difficult to define let alone measure. This is in 
contrast to price stability which can be defined and quantified. Some define financial stability 
as  the  absence  of  financial  instability  which,  of  course,  is  tautological.  From  a  macro-
prudential  perspective,  financial  stability  can  be  defined  as  a  situation  where  the  financial 
sector functions without any discontinuity. This definition is conceptually neat but is not useful 
for policy purposes unless it can be quantified for measurement purposes. Policy makers and 
analysts at international fora are actively engaged in fleshing out the definition so that it is 
precise,  measurable  and  comprehensive.  Some  critical  elements  of  any  financial  stability 
framework, aspects that need to inform the definition of financial stability, are the following: 
• 
Excessive  volatility  of  macro-variables  such  as  interest  rates  and  exchange  rates 
which have direct impact on the real economy;  
Build-up of significant leverage in financial, corporate and household sector balance 
sheets; 
The moral hazard risks posed by institutions that have become “too-big-to-fail” or too 
interconnected or complex to resolve;  
Internal  systemic  buffers  within  the  financial  sector,  both  at  the  institution  and 
systemic levels, to counter potential shocks to the economy;  
Strong  policy  and  institutional  mechanisms  to  lean  against  the  wind  even  as  “the 
music is playing”;  
Prevalence  of  unregulated  nodes  in  the  financial  sector  which,  through  their 
interconnectedness  with 
regulated  system,  can  breed  systemic 
vulnerabilities.  
formal 
the 
     Second challenge: financial stability – exclusive or shared responsibility? 
The crisis has triggered an active discussion on an appropriate regulatory structure that is 
best  suited  to  safeguard  financial  stability.  There  are  several  regulatory  models  around 
including those where the central bank is a pure monetary authority with bank regulation and 
supervision vested with another agency. Post-crisis, the emerging view is that the crisis was 
caused, at least in part, by the lack of coordination and communication between the separate 
bodies  and  that  it  is  optimal,  in  the  interest  of  financial  stability,  to  entrust  the  function  of 
regulation  of  banks  and  non-banks  also  to  central  banks.  The  argument  is  that  only  the 
monetary  authority,  as  the  lender  of  last  resort,  can  provide  emergency  liquidity  support. 
Also, being the regulator, the monetary authority gets a better sense of the market conditions 
and can therefore manage liquidity more efficiently.  
But  this  model  raises  fresh  questions.  In  particular,  can  the  central  bank  have  exclusive 
responsibility for financial stability? Conversely, can the government completely delegate this 
responsibility to the central bank under a principal-agent model? 
Consider,  for  example,  a  situation  where  the  banking  system  is  under  threat  of  instability. 
Decisions have to be made on which banks to bail out and how much support to extend. In 
all  this,  fiscal  support  may  need  to  be  extended.  Would  a  government,  especially  if  it  is 
democratically  elected  and  accountable  to  a  legislature,  not  want  to  have  a  say  in  this 
regard? This calls for the following question to be resolved. How should the responsibility for 
financial stability be shared between the government and the central bank? What should be 
the protocol for decision making? Who should prevail, and under what circumstances, in the 
event of a deadlock? 
BIS Review 106/2009 
 7
Third challenge: growth and financial stability – managing the trade-offs 
In  order  to  safeguard  financial  stability,  we  have  traditionally  used  a  variety  of  prudential 
measures such as specifying exposure norms and pre emptive tightening of risk weights and 
provisioning  requirements.  But  these  measures  are  not  always  costless.  For  instance, 
tightening  of  risk  weights  arguably  tempers  the  flow  of  credit  to  certain  sectors,  but 
excessive,  premature  or  unnecessary  tightening  could  blunt  growth.  Similarly,  exposure 
norms  offer  protection  against  concentration  risks;  however,  such  limits  could  restrict  the 
availability  of  credit  for  important  growth  sectors.  This  is  a  live  issue  in  our  country  in  the 
context  of  the  immense  needs  of  infrastructure  financing.  Thus,  as  in  the  case  of  price 
stability,  central  banks  face  the  challenge  of  managing  the  trade  off  between  financial 
stability and growth.  
It  needs  to  be  recognized  that  after  a  crisis,  with  the  benefit  of  hindsight,  all  conservative 
policies  appear  safe.  But  excessive  conservatism  in  order  to  be  prepared  to  ride  out  a 
potential crisis could thwart growth and financial innovation. The question is what price are 
we willing to pay, in other words, what potential benefits are we willing to give up, in order to 
prevent  a  black  swan  event?  Experience  shows  that  managing  this  challenge,  that  is  to 
determine how much to tighten and when, is more a question of good judgement rather than 
analytical  skill.  This  judgement  skill  is  the  one  that  central  banks,  especially  in  developing 
countries such as India, need to hone as they simultaneously pursue the objectives of growth 
and financial stability.  
Fourth challenge: reforming regulatory architecture 
As the lessons of the crisis emerge, central banks are vigorously reinventing themselves and 
almost all countries are reviewing their regulatory architectures. Two key lessons are driving 
this  change:  first  that  the  responsibility  for  financial  stability  cannot  be  fragmented  across 
several  regulators;  it  has  to  rest  unambiguously  with  a  single  regulator,  and  that  single 
regulator optimally is the central bank. And second, that there is need for coordination across 
regulators  on  a  regular  basis  and  for  developing  a  protocol  for  responding  to  a  crisis 
situation. I want to address three issues in the broad area of regulatory architecture.  
The first issue has to do with regulatory coordination. In India, we have a host of regulators in 
the  financial  sector  –  RBI,  SEBI,  IRDA  and  PFRDA.  In  order  to  facilitate  coordination 
between  them,  there  is  a  High  Level  Coordination  Committee  on  Financial  Markets 
(HLCC-FM) comprising all the regulators and the Finance Secretary. While the Governor of 
the Reserve Bank chairs the HLCC-FM, the Ministry of Finance provides the secretariat. The 
hallmark of the HLCC meetings, and one that adds most value to them, is that the meetings 
are informal and there is free exchange of positions, views and opinions. There is a view that 
the HLCC-FM should be given a formal structure. While a formal structure will have the merit 
of  enforcing  accountability,  the  flip  side  is  that  it  may  make  the  forum  excessively 
bureaucratic and detract from its other value adding features. This is an issue that we must 
debate  further.  One  area  where  the  HLCCFM  could  have  a  more  defined  role  relates  to 
oversight of large financial conglomerates.  
The second issue relating to regulatory architecture with relevance for financial stability has 
to  do  with  changes,  if  any,  warranted  in  the  regulation  of  financial  markets.  Two  recent 
reports, both influential, one by Percy Mistry on Mumbai as an International Financial Centre 
and  the  other  by  Raghuram  Rajan  on  Financial  Sector  Reforms,  have  recommended  that 
regulation  of  all  trading  of  financial  products  and  instruments  be  brought  under  SEBI.  We 
need to seriously debate the advisability of such a unification.  
Currently, the arrangement for regulation of financial markets is as follows. Apart from banks, 
NBFCs  and  other  financial  institutions,  RBI  regulates  the  money  market,  the  government 
securities  market,  the  credit  market  and  the  foreign  exchange  market  and  the  derivatives 
thereon.  In  respect  of  OTC  derivatives,  only  those  derivatives  where  one  party  to  the 
transaction is an RBI regulated entity have legal validity. In respect of products traded on the 
8 
 BIS Review 106/2009
implications 
exchanges,  procedures  for  trade  execution  fall  within  the  regulatory  purview  of  SEBI. 
Therefore,  unlike  many  countries,  India  has  had  established  procedures  for  regulation  of 
OTC derivatives.  
By far the most important reason why the present arrangement should continue has to do 
with preserving financial stability. Unlike equity prices, interest rates and exchange rate are 
key  macroeconomic  variables  with 
for  monetary  policy  and  overall 
macroeconomic  stability.  In  addition,  banks  dominate  the  interest  and  exchange  rate 
markets. By also being the regulator of these markets, the Reserve Bank is in a position to 
exercise  oversight  of  institutions,  markets  and  products,  to  monitor  market  developments, 
sense  impending  developments,  take  advance  action,  prevent  excessive  volatility  and 
maintain financial stability at the systemic level. This is an arrangement that has stood to the 
test of time, has protected our financial stability even in the face of some severe onslaughts. 
This  is  an  arrangement  that  we  should  not  jettison  lightly  in  quest  of  a  unified  market 
regulator.  
The third issue in the reform of regulatory architecture is about whether a central bank should 
also be a banking regulator. Pre-crisis, there was a dominant argument for separation of the 
monetary and regulatory functions premised on a possible conflict of interest. According to 
this view, if financial stability becomes the dominant concern of a central bank, it could result 
in a moral hazard for banks. Banks will likely take excessive risks in the full confidence that 
the central bank, being also the regulator, will ease policy and extend regulatory forbearance 
to bail them out in a crisis. Paradoxically, the aggressive pursuit of financial stability can itself 
threaten financial stability over the long horizon.  
The crisis has clearly weakened this argument. The concern over regulatory forbearance is 
exaggerated.  It  is  worth  noting  that  some  advanced  economies  where  regulation  and 
supervision  are  with  an  agency  other  than  the  central  bank  are  themselves  revisiting  their 
regulatory  structures  and  contemplating  some  unification.  The  crisis  has  also  shown  that 
there  are  clear  synergies  between  monetary  policy  management  and  financial  sector 
regulation. In particular, the central bank can perform its lender of last resort function more 
effectively if it has a clear view of the institution’s current and prospective balance sheet and 
its liquidity and solvency position.  
The jury of course is still out on which model is the best as the crisis has discredited almost 
all  models.  I  want  to  point  out  though  that  we  need  to  reflect  on  the  lessons  of  the  crisis 
seriously before reforming our regulatory structures. 
Fifth challenge: fiscal policy, financial stability and central bank independence 
The  emerging  regulatory  architecture  geared,  among  other  things,  to  preserving  financial 
stability will have implication for the prized independence of central banks. Before 1970, it 
was  typical  across  countries  for  monetary  policy  to  be  hostage  to  fiscal  compulsions.  But, 
following  the  stagflation  of  the  1970s  and  the ascendency  of  monetary  policy  thereafter,  a 
neat arrangement started to emerge. Governments started becoming fiscally responsible and 
monetary policy had started getting independent.  
This  arrangement  is  now  unravelling  as  a  result  of  the  crisis.  Unnerved  by  the  scale  and 
sweep  of  the  crisis,  governments  and  central  banks  around  the  world  responded  with  an 
unprecedented  show  of  policy  force.  Central  banks  cut  policy  interest  rates  and  have 
resorted  to  injecting  massive  liquidity  in  the  system  through  a  slew  of  measures  variously 
called quantitative and credit easing. Governments stepped in with fiscal stimulus packages 
raising  fiscal  deficits  to  levels  not  seen  before  in  peace  time.  Even  as  governments  and 
central  banks  cooperated,  the  familiar  tensions  between  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  have 
started playing up. It is widely hoped though that once the crisis is behind us, these tensions 
will  melt  away  and  monetary  policy  will  once  again  be  conducted  independent  of  fiscal 
compulsions.  On  the  other  hand,  there  are  apprehensions  that  this  may  not  happen  soon 
BIS Review 106/2009 
 9
because of the expected protracted recovery and also because of structural factors that may 
keep fiscal deficits at elevated levels into the medium term.  
These  tensions  between  fiscal  and  monetary  policies  could  potentially  militate  against 
financial  stability.  If  governments  continue  to  incur  large  fiscal  deficits,  it  will  be  that  much 
more difficult for central banks to maintain price stability. While the current crisis has shown 
that  price  stability  is  not  sufficient  to  ensure  financial  stability,  price  stability  is  decidedly  a 
necessary  condition  for  financial  stability.  Higher  inflation  could  also  push  the  yield  curve 
upwards. This could result in significant mark to market losses for fixed income instruments 
with potentially adverse implications for banks’ profitability. This again could impair financial 
stability. 
In  India  too,  we  are  confronting  the  dilemma  of  managing  the  tension  between  fiscal  and 
monetary policies. The government has asked the Finance Commission to indicate a road 
map for returning to a path of fiscal consolidation. It is imperative that both the centre and 
states in India return to a path of fiscal consolidation, for a number of reasons, including the 
need to preserve financial stability.  
Conclusion 
VIII.  
Let  me  now  conclude.  To  summarize,  I  have  alluded  to  how  financial  stability  has  been 
impaired during this crisis and the flaws in the central banking paradigm that may have been 
responsible for this. I have narrated some of the important international initiatives under way 
to preserve and strengthen financial stability. I have argued that in the face of India’s rapid 
integration with  the  world,  we  need  to  be  vigilant  about  protecting  our  financial stability  as 
developments  anywhere  in  the  world  can  affect  us.  I  have  explained  India’s  approach  to 
financial stability and indicated that the Reserve Bank is retooling itself to safeguard financial 
stability. Finally, I addressed five major challenges that the world, India included, will need to 
address on the way forward. 
The more we study and analyze financial stability, the clearer it becomes that preserving and 
strengthening  financial  stability  is  a  complex  challenge.  We  need  to  take  measured  and 
timely action, and make a balanced judgement – not to be too benign, but also not go over 
board with excessive or premature tightening.  
There  is  a  concern  in  some  quarters  that  the  crisis  may  have  dented  our  enthusiasm  for 
financial  sector  reforms.  I  believe  that  concern  is  misplaced.  We  will  not  slow  down  on 
reforms, but will surely rework the road map to reflect the lessons of the crisis. 
10 
 BIS Review 106/2009
