European Central Bank: Press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank 
and  Mr  Lucas  Papademos,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  Luxembourg, 
2 July 2009. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  our 
press  conference  here  in  Luxembourg.  I  would  like  to  thank  Governor  Mersch  for  his  kind 
hospitality and to express our special gratitude to his staff for the excellent organisation of 
the meeting of the Governing Council. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting 
of the Governing Council, which was also attended by the President of the Eurogroup, Prime 
Minister Juncker, and Commissioner Almunia. 
On the basis of its regular economic and monetary analyses, the Governing Council decided 
to leave the key ECB interest rates unchanged. The current rates remain appropriate taking 
into account all the information and analyses that have become available since our meeting 
on 4 June 2009. The fall of annual inflation rates into negative territory in June is in line with 
previous expectations and reflects mainly temporary effects. After a return to positive inflation 
rates, we expect price developments to remain dampened over the policy-relevant horizon. 
Recent  data  releases  and  survey  information  provide  further  indications  that  economic 
activity  over  the  remainder  of  this  year  is  likely  to  remain  weak  but  should  decline  less 
strongly than was the case in the first quarter of 2009. This assessment incorporates adverse 
lagged  effects,  such  as  a  further  deterioration  in  labour  markets,  which  are  likely  to 
materialise  over  the  coming  months.  Looking  ahead  into  next  year,  after  a  phase  of 
stabilisation, a gradual recovery with positive quarterly growth rates is expected by mid-2010. 
Available  indicators  of  inflation  expectations  over  the  medium  to  longer  term  remain  firmly 
anchored in line with the Governing Council’s aim of keeping inflation rates below, but close 
to,  2%  over  the  medium  term.  The  outcome  of  the  monetary  analysis  corroborates  the 
assessment of low inflationary pressure, as money and credit indicators continue to be weak. 
Against this background, we expect the current episode of extremely low or negative inflation 
rates  to  be  short-lived  and  price  stability  to  be  maintained  over  the  medium  term,  thereby 
continuing to support the purchasing power of euro area households. 
Let me now explain our assessment in further detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
The data and survey information that have become available since our last press conference 
in early June have broadly confirmed our previous expectations. Economic activity over the 
remainder of this year is expected to remain weak but should decline less strongly than was 
the  case  in  the  first  quarter  of  2009.  Looking  ahead  into  next  year,  after  a  phase  of 
stabilisation, a gradual recovery with positive quarterly growth rates is expected by mid-2010. 
The  significant  policy  stimuli  in  all  major  economic  areas  should  support  growth  globally, 
including in the euro area.  
In the view of the Governing Council, the risks to the economic outlook are balanced. On the 
positive  side,  there  may  be  stronger  than  anticipated  effects  stemming  from  the  extensive 
macroeconomic stimulus being provided and from other policy measures taken. Confidence 
may also improve more quickly than currently expected. On the other hand, concerns remain 
relating to a stronger or more protracted negative feedback loop between the real economy 
and the turmoil in financial markets, further increases in oil and other commodity prices, the 
intensification  of  protectionist  pressures,  increasingly  unfavourable  labour  markets  and, 
lastly, adverse developments in the world economy stemming from a disorderly correction of 
global imbalances.  
With regard to price developments, annual HICP inflation was, according to Eurostat’s flash 
estimate, -0.1% in June, compared with 0.0% in May. As explained on previous occasions, 
BIS Review 83/2009 
 1
the  further  decline  in  annual  rates  of  inflation  was  anticipated  and  reflects  primarily  base 
effects resulting from past sharp swings in global commodity prices.  
Looking ahead, owing to these base effects, annual inflation rates are projected to remain 
temporarily in negative territory over the coming months, before turning positive again. Such 
short-term movements are not relevant from a monetary policy perspective. Consistent with 
available forecasts and projections, looking further ahead, inflation is expected to remain in 
positive territory, while price and cost developments are expected to remain dampened in the 
wake of ongoing sluggish demand in the euro area and elsewhere. In this respect, indicators 
of inflation expectations over the medium to longer term remain firmly anchored in line with 
the  Governing  Council’s  aim  of  keeping  inflation  rates  below,  but  close  to,  2%  over  the 
medium term. 
Risks  to  the  outlook  for  inflation  are  broadly  balanced.  On  the  downside  they  relate,  in 
particular, to the outlook for economic activity, while on the upside they relate to higher than 
expected  commodity  prices.  Furthermore,  increases  in  indirect  taxation  and  administered 
prices may be stronger than currently expected owing to the need for fiscal consolidation in 
the coming years. 
Turning  to  the  monetary  analysis,  the  latest  data  confirm  a  continued  deceleration  in 
monetary dynamics. In May, the annual growth rate of M3 declined further to 3.7%, with that 
of loans to the private sector falling further to 1.8% – the lowest rates since the start of Stage 
Three  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union.  This  concurrent  deceleration  supports  the 
assessment  of  a  slower  underlying  pace  of  monetary  expansion  and  low  inflationary 
pressures over the medium term. 
In May, the outstanding amounts of most components of M3 showed a contraction, reflecting, 
to  a  large  extent,  the  recent  declines  in  interest  rates  paid  on  short-term  deposits  and 
marketable instruments and the increased allocation of funds to instruments outside M3 that 
these may have fostered. Following a substantial strengthening in April, the growth of M1, 
while having remained strong, also moderated in May. The short-term developments in M3 
have  been  volatile  over  the  past  few  months.  Looking  beyond  this  volatility,  the  pace  of 
monetary expansion has clearly slowed since the last quarter of 2008. 
The flow of bank loans to non-financial corporations and households has remained subdued, 
reflecting in part the weakening in economic activity and the continued low levels of business 
and  consumer  confidence.  A  moderate  monthly  contraction  in  the  outstanding  amount  of 
loans  to  non-financial  corporations  has  been  observed  over  recent  months.  These 
developments are mostly due to a decline in short-term lending, while the flow of loans with 
longer  maturities  has  remained  slightly  positive.  In  this  respect,  it  is  important  to  note  that 
past reductions in key ECB rates have continued to be passed on through lending rates to 
both  non-financial  corporations  and  households.  The  resulting  improvement  in  financing 
conditions  should  provide  ongoing  support  for  economic  activity  in  the  period  ahead. 
However, as we have stressed in the past given the challenges that lie ahead, banks should 
take appropriate measures to strengthen further their capital bases and, where necessary, 
take full advantage of government measures to support the financial sector, particularly as 
regards recapitalisation. 
To sum up, the current rates remain appropriate taking into account all the information and 
analyses that have become available since our meeting on 4 June 2009. The fall of annual 
inflation rates into negative territory in June is in line with previous expectations and reflects 
mainly  temporary  effects.  After  a  return  to  positive  inflation  rates,  we  expect  price 
developments  to  remain  dampened  over  the  policy-relevant  horizon.  Recent  data  releases 
and survey information provide further indications that economic activity over the remainder 
of this year is likely to remain weak but should decline less strongly than was the case in the 
first quarter of 2009. This assessment incorporates adverse lagged effects, such as a further 
deterioration  in  labour  markets,  which  are  likely  to  materialise  over  the  coming  months. 
Looking ahead into next year, after a phase of stabilisation, a gradual recovery with positive 
2 
 BIS Review 83/2009
quarterly growth rates is expected by mid-2010. Available indicators of inflation expectations 
over the medium to longer term remain firmly anchored in line with the Governing Council’s 
aim of keeping inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. A cross-check 
of the outcome of the economic analysis with that of the monetary analysis corroborates the 
assessment of low inflationary pressure, as money and credit indicators continue to be weak. 
Against this background, we expect the current episode of extremely low or negative inflation 
rates  to  be  short-lived  and  price  stability  to  be  maintained  over  the  medium  term,  thereby 
continuing to support the purchasing power of euro area households.  
As  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  works  with  lags,  our  policy  action  should 
progressively  feed  through  to  the  economy  in  full.  Hence,  with  all  the  measures  taken, 
monetary  policy  will  provide  ongoing  support  for  households  and  corporations.  The 
Governing Council would like to recall that the Eurosystem provided a significant amount of 
liquidity  to  euro  area  banks  at  its  recent  first  12-month  longer-term  refinancing  operation. 
This  operation  at  a  fixed  interest  rate  of  1%  is  expected  to  strengthen  further  the  liquidity 
position of banks and to support the normalisation of money markets and the extension of 
credit to the economy alongside the other measures of enhanced credit support. Once the 
macroeconomic environment improves, the Governing Council will ensure that the measures 
taken are quickly unwound and that the liquidity provided is absorbed. Hence, any threat to 
price  stability  over  the  medium  to  longer  term  can  be  effectively  countered  in  a  timely 
fashion. As has been emphasised many times, the Governing Council will continue to ensure 
a firm anchoring of medium-term inflation expectations. Such anchoring is indispensable to 
supporting  sustainable  growth  and  employment  and  contributes  to  financial  stability. 
Accordingly, we will continue to monitor very closely all developments over the period ahead.  
As regards fiscal policies, the Governing Council welcomes the spring 2009 orientations for 
euro area fiscal policies as agreed by the euro area finance ministers in June. A return to 
sound, sustainable public finances, thus strengthening overall macroeconomic stability, must 
be  ensured.  Against  this  background,  euro  area  governments  should  prepare  and 
communicate  ambitious  and  realistic  fiscal  exit  and  consolidation  strategies  within  the 
framework  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  In  the  view  of  the  Governing  Council,  the 
structural adjustment process should start in any case not later than the economic recovery. 
In 2011 the consolidation efforts should be stepped up. To correct the envisaged large fiscal 
imbalances  of  euro  area  countries,  structural  consolidation  efforts  will  need  to  exceed 
significantly the benchmark of 0.5% of GDP per annum set in the Stability and Growth Pact. 
In  countries  with  high  deficits  and/or  debt  ratios  the  annual  structural  adjustment  should 
reach at least 1% of GDP.  
Turning to structural policies, there is a need to intensify efforts to support potential growth 
in the euro area. Given the negative impact of the financial crisis on employment, investment 
and  the  capital  stock,  it  is  crucial  to  accelerate  the  implementation  of  necessary  structural 
reforms. In particular, product market reforms are required to foster competition and speed 
up  restructuring  and  productivity  growth.  Furthermore,  labour  market  reforms  need  to 
facilitate  appropriate  wage-setting  and  labour  mobility  across  sectors  and  regions.  At  the 
same time, many of the policy measures taken in recent months with a view to supporting 
specific segments of the economy should be phased out in a timely manner. It is crucial that 
the  focus  is  now  on  strengthening  the  adjustment  capacity  and  flexibility  of  the  euro  area 
economy in line with the principle of an open market economy and free competition. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS Review 83/2009 
 3
