Martín Redrado: Dynamism and soundness in the face of the crisis 
Article  by  Mr  Martín  Redrado,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Argentina,  published  in  El 
Chronista, 8 May 2009. 
 The  decades  of  macroeconomic  instability  and  recurrent  crises  that  we  have  faced  in 
Argentina were not harmless in terms of welfare. 
Although  Latin  American  countries  have  shown  lower  economic  growth  rates  and  higher 
macroeconomic volatility than other regions, the case of our country is on a different scale. If 
we consider the past 30 years, the average growth in Latin America was less than half of 
Asia’s, with volatility that nearly doubled Asian levels. 
In that period of time, Argentina’s growth was three times lower than in Emerging Asia, while 
volatility turned out to be eight times higher. 
This process triggered enormous economic and social losses, hindering on our chances to 
develop and leading to changes in our citizens’ behavior. Indeed, the consequences of this 
process  include  portfolio  dollarization;  fiscal,  financial  or  external  dominance;  obstacles  to 
develop a long-term credit market; and the marked negative correlation between changes in 
retail deposits and foreign exchange fluctuations. 
These factors, which undermined the power of some traditional monetary policy instruments, 
have played a key role in the design of our monetary-financial system. In these cases, it is 
essential to ensure systemic stability and build “buffers”, which give priority to avoiding "the 
next  crisis"  and  minimize  the  effects  of  disruptions.  In  particular,  our  risk  management 
strategy  based  on  four  pillars  (permanent  equilibrium  in  the  monetary  market,  managed 
floating exchange rate regime, maintenance of external liquidity buffers, appropriate financial 
regulation  and  supervision)  is  fully  compatible  with  these  aims  as  well  as  with  the  tools 
available. 
This scheme, which was carefully developed along recent years, now allows us to overcome 
each  volatility  episode  in  the  new  international  context,  minimizing  the  impact  on  the  real 
economy and avoiding inconsistencies that might make it unsustainable over time. This has 
not occurred by chance. It was the consequence of the Central Bank’s deliberate strategy, 
which has prepared us to deal with the new scenario in the best possible way. One of the 
main  structural  reforms  in  our  system  has  been,  for  example,  the  design  of  a  specific 
regulatory framework preventing currency mismatches, reducing the exposure to the public 
sector, and maintaining prudence when introducing financial innovations. 
In  addition,  we  accumulated  international  reserves  during  the  “good  times”  (when  the 
opportunity cost of doing so was low), so now we have a sizeable stock to weather financial 
turmoil. In turn, the implementation of a sterilization policy to keep money supply in check 
enables us to count with domestic liquidity management mechanisms that have been tested 
and are now very useful for injecting money into the system, if necessary. It is just the same 
scheme working under different circumstances. This is also reflected in the foreign exchange 
regime, which has always worked to mitigate excessive volatility, avoiding abrupt fluctuations 
that could jeopardize the economy's financial stability. 
After this crisis, financial stability will definitely start to play a role it has never played before 
in the priority list of central banks worldwide. Both developed and emerging countries have 
had  to  adjust  monetary  schemes  focused  on  the  interest  rate  as  the  single  instrument  to 
maintain stability. In fact, financial stability objectives were implicitly and explicitly added, and 
instruments were adjusted to new priorities. Within this framework, many central banks have 
had to revisit their usual regulation, operation and intervention mechanisms. 
BIS Review 58/2009 
 1
In this regard, the literature is lagging behind. If the relationship between economic theory 
and  policy  recommendations  is  reasonably  well  defined  during  “normal”  times,  in  times  of 
turmoil, this relationship becomes much weaker. We have reached a point in which economic 
theory  is  having  a  hard  time  keeping  up  with  praxis.  Literature  has  shown  results  that  are 
ambiguous or contrary to those produced by the usual “technology”, especially in relation to 
the approach that relies on the interest rate as the single instrument. The same applies to the 
managed floating exchange rate regimes. Recent empirical papers that refined the analysis 
started  by  several  academics  argue  against  sharp  fluctuations  in  the  domestic  currency, 
mitigating excessive volatility, especially in developing countries with rather shallow capital 
markets and limited access to hedging instruments. 
In our case, we have been fully consistent with our history, idiosyncrasy and, thus, with the 
instruments available. We can now claim that our strategy is so sound that it has enabled us 
to overcome four stress episodes in the past 20 months (July-October 2007, April-June 2008, 
September-November  2008  and  March  2009)  and  it  has  proved  to  be  adequate  to  go 
through these hard times with unusual stability. Despite the current scenario, and for the first 
time  in  decades,  we  are  able  to  ensure  monetary  and  financial  stability  for  the  Argentine 
people. 
2 
 BIS Review 58/2009
