Ben S Bernanke: Financial reform to address systemic risk 
Speech  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve System, at the Council on Foreign Relations, Washington DC, 10 March 2009. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website. 
 The  world  is  suffering  through  the  worst  financial  crisis  since  the  1930s,  a  crisis  that  has 
precipitated  a  sharp  downturn  in  the  global  economy.  Its  fundamental  causes  remain  in 
dispute. In my view, however, it is impossible to understand this crisis without reference to 
the global imbalances in trade and capital flows that began in the latter half of the 1990s. In 
the simplest terms, these imbalances reflected a chronic lack of saving relative to investment 
in  the  United  States  and  some  other  industrial  countries,  combined  with  an  extraordinary 
increase in saving relative to investment in many emerging market nations. The increase in 
excess  saving  in  the  emerging  world  resulted in  turn  from  factors  such  as  rapid economic 
growth  in  high-saving  East  Asian  economies  accompanied,  outside  of  China,  by  reduced 
investment  rates;  large  buildups  in  foreign  exchange  reserves  in  a  number  of  emerging 
markets;  and  substantial  increases  in  revenues  received  by  exporters  of  oil  and  other 
commodities.  Like  water  seeking  its  level,  saving  flowed  from  where  it  was  abundant  to 
where  it  was  deficient,  with  the  result  that  the  United  States  and  some  other  advanced 
countries experienced large capital inflows for more than a decade, even as real long-term 
interest rates remained low.  
The  global  imbalances  were  the  joint  responsibility  of  the  United  States  and  our  trading 
partners,  and  although  the  topic  was  a  perennial  one  at  international  conferences,  we 
collectively did not do enough to reduce those imbalances. However, the responsibility to use 
the resulting capital inflows effectively fell primarily on the receiving countries, particularly the 
United  States.  The  details  of  the  story  are  complex,  but,  broadly  speaking,  the  risk-
management systems of the private sector and government oversight of the financial sector 
in the United States and some other industrial countries failed to ensure that the inrush of 
capital  was  prudently  invested,  a  failure  that  has  led  to  a  powerful  reversal  in  investor 
sentiment  and  a  seizing  up  of  credit  markets.  In  certain  respects,  our  experience  parallels 
that of some emerging-market countries in the 1990s, whose financial sectors and regulatory 
regimes  likewise  proved  inadequate  for  efficiently  investing  large  inflows  of  saving  from 
abroad. When those failures became evident, investors lost confidence and crises ensued. A 
clear  and  highly  consequential  difference,  however,  is  that  the  crises  of  the  1990s  were 
regional, whereas the current crisis has become global.1  
In  the  near term,  governments  around  the  world  must  continue  to take  forceful  and,  when 
appropriate, coordinated actions to restore financial market functioning and the flow of credit. 
I  have  spoken  on  a  number  of  occasions  about  the  steps  that  the  U.S.  government,  and 
particularly the Federal Reserve, is taking along these lines.2 Until we stabilize the financial 
system, a sustainable economic recovery will remain out of reach. In particular, the continued 
viability of systemically important financial institutions is vital to this effort. In that regard, the 
Federal  Reserve,  other  federal  regulators,  and  the  Treasury  Department  have  stated  that 
they  will  take  any  necessary  and  appropriate  steps  to  ensure  that  our  banking  institutions 
                                                 
1   Another  important  difference  is  that,  unlike  in  the  Asian  crisis,  investors  have  not  fled  U.S.  markets.  They 
have, however, fled from many private credit markets. 
2   See, for example, Ben S. Bernanke (2009), "Federal Reserve Policies to Ease Credit and Their Implications 
for the Fed's Balance Sheet," speech delivered at the National Press Club Luncheon, National Press Club, 
Washington, D.C., February 18. 
BIS Review 28/2009 
 1
have the capital and liquidity necessary to function well in even a severe economic downturn. 
Moreover,  we  have  reiterated  the  U.S.  government's  determination  to  ensure  that 
systemically important financial institutions continue to be able to meet their commitments.  
At the same time that we are addressing such immediate challenges, it is not too soon for 
policymakers  to  begin  thinking  about  the  reforms  to  the  financial  architecture,  broadly 
conceived,  that  could  help  prevent  a  similar  crisis  from  developing  in  the  future.  We  must 
have a strategy that regulates the financial system as a whole, in a holistic way, not just its 
individual  components.  In  particular,  strong  and  effective  regulation  and  supervision  of 
banking  institutions,  although  necessary  for  reducing  systemic  risk,  are  not  sufficient  by 
themselves to achieve this aim.  
Today, I would like to talk about four key elements of such a strategy. First, we must address 
the problem of financial institutions that are deemed too big – or perhaps too interconnected 
–  to  fail.  Second,  we  must  strengthen  what  I  will  call  the  financial  infrastructure  –  the 
systems,  rules,  and  conventions  that  govern  trading,  payment,  clearing,  and  settlement  in 
financial markets – to ensure that it will perform well under stress. Third, we should review 
regulatory  policies  and  accounting  rules  to  ensure  that  they  do  not  induce  excessive 
procyclicality – that is, do not overly magnify the ups and downs in the financial system and 
the  economy.  Finally,  we  should  consider  whether  the  creation  of  an  authority  specifically 
charged with monitoring and addressing systemic risks would help protect the system from 
financial crises like the one we are currently experiencing. My discussion today will focus on 
the  principles  that  should  guide  regulatory  reform,  leaving  aside  important  questions 
concerning how the current regulatory structure might be reworked to reduce balkanization 
and  overlap  and  increase  effectiveness.  I  also  will  not  say  much  about  the  international 
dimensions  of  the  issue  but  will  take  as  self-evident  that,  in  light  of  the  global  nature  of 
financial institutions and markets, the reform of financial regulation and supervision should be 
coordinated internationally to the greatest extent possible. 
Too big to fail 
In  a  crisis,  the  authorities  have  strong  incentives  to  prevent  the  failure  of  a  large,  highly 
interconnected financial firm, because of the risks such a failure would pose to the financial 
system and the broader economy. However, the belief of market participants that a particular 
firm  is  considered  too  big  to  fail  has  many  undesirable  effects.  For  instance,  it  reduces 
market  discipline  and  encourages  excessive  risk-taking  by  the  firm.  It  also  provides  an 
artificial incentive for firms to grow, in order to be perceived as too big to fail. And it creates 
an  unlevel  playing  field  with  smaller  firms,  which  may  not  be  regarded  as  having  implicit 
government support. Moreover, government rescues of too-big-to-fail firms can be costly to 
taxpayers, as we have seen recently. Indeed, in the present crisis, the too-big-to-fail issue 
has emerged as an enormous problem.  
In  the  midst  of  this  crisis,  given  the  highly  fragile  state of  financial  markets  and  the  global 
economy, government assistance to avoid the failures of major financial institutions has been 
necessary  to  avoid  a  further  serious  destabilization  of  the  financial  system,  and  our 
commitment  to  avoiding  such  a  failure  remains  firm.  Looking  to  the  future,  however,  it  is 
imperative  that  policymakers  address  this  issue  by  better  supervising  systemically  critical 
firms  to  prevent  excessive  risk-taking  and  by  strengthening  the  resilience  of  the  financial 
system to minimize the consequences when a large firm must be unwound. 
Achieving  more  effective  supervision  of  large  and  complex  financial  firms  will  require  a 
number of actions. First, supervisors need to move vigorously – as we are already doing – to 
address  the  weaknesses  at  major  financial  institutions  in  capital  adequacy,  liquidity 
management,  and  risk  management  that  have  been  revealed  by  the  crisis.  In  particular, 
policymakers  must  insist  that  the  large  financial  firms  that  they  supervise  be  capable  of 
monitoring and managing their risks in a timely manner and on an enterprise-wide basis. In 
that regard, the Federal Reserve has been looking carefully at risk-management practices at 
2 
 BIS Review 28/2009
systemically important institutions to identify best practices, assess firms' performance, and 
require improvement where deficiencies are identified.3 Any firm whose failure would pose a 
systemic  risk  must  receive  especially  close  supervisory  oversight  of  its  risk-taking,  risk 
management, and financial condition, and be held to high capital and liquidity standards.4 In 
light of the global reach and diversified operations of many large financial firms, international 
supervisors  of  banks,  securities  firms,  and  other  financial  institutions  must  collaborate  and 
cooperate on these efforts. 
Second, we must ensure a robust framework – both in law and practice – for consolidated 
supervision of all systemically important financial firms organized as holding companies. The 
consolidated  supervisors  must  have  clear  authority  to  monitor  and  address  safety  and 
soundness  concerns  in  all  parts  of  the  organization,  not  just  the  holding  company.  Broad-
based application of the principle of consolidated supervision would also serve to eliminate 
gaps  in  oversight  that  would  otherwise  allow  risk-taking  to  migrate  from  more-regulated  to 
less-regulated sectors.  
Third, looking beyond the current crisis, the United States also needs improved tools to allow 
the  orderly  resolution  of  a  systemically  important  nonbank  financial  firm,  including  a 
mechanism  to  cover  the  costs  of  the  resolution.  In  most  cases,  federal  bankruptcy  laws 
provide  an  appropriate  framework  for  the  resolution  of  nonbank  financial  institutions. 
However, this framework does not sufficiently protect the public's strong interest in ensuring 
the  orderly  resolution  of  nondepository  financial  institutions  when  a  failure  would  pose 
substantial systemic risks. Improved resolution procedures for these firms would help reduce 
the too-big-to-fail problem by narrowing the range of circumstances that might be expected to 
prompt government intervention to keep the firm operating.  
Developing  appropriate  resolution  procedures  for  potentially  systemic  financial  firms, 
including  bank  holding  companies,  is  a  complex  and  challenging  task.  Models  do  exist, 
though,  including  the  process  currently  in  place  under  the  Federal  Deposit  Insurance  Act 
(FDIA) for dealing with failing insured depository institutions and the framework established 
for Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac under the Housing and Economic Recovery Act of 2008. 
Both models allow a government  agency to take control of a failing institution's operations 
and management, act as conservator or receiver for the institution, and establish a "bridge" 
institution  to  facilitate  an  orderly  sale  or  liquidation  of  the  firm.  The  authority  to  "bridge"  a 
failing  institution  through  a  receivership  to  a  new  entity  reduces  the  potential  for  market 
disruption  while  limiting  moral  hazard  and  mitigating  any  adverse  impact  of  government 
intervention on market discipline.  
The new resolution regime would need to be carefully crafted. For example, clear guidelines 
must  define  which  firms  could  be  subject  to  the  alternative  regime  and  the  process  for 
invoking  that  regime,  analogous  perhaps  to  the  procedures  for  invoking  the  so-called 
systemic  risk  exception  under  the  FDIA.  In  addition,  given  the  global  operations  of  many 
large  and  complex  financial  firms  and  the  complex  regulatory  structures  under  which  they 
operate, any new regime must be structured to work as seamlessly as possible with other 
domestic  or  foreign  insolvency  regimes  that  might  apply  to  one  or  more  parts  of  the 
consolidated organization.  
                                                 
3   The  Federal  Reserve  has  issued  enhanced  guidance  on  consolidated  supervision  of  bank  and  financial 
holding companies. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2008), "Federal Reserve Issues 
Guidance  for  Consolidated  Supervision  of  Bank  Holding  Companies  and  Combined  U.S.  Operations  of 
Foreign Banking Organizations," press release, October 16. 
4   Such an approach would also help offset the incentives for financial firms to become too big to fail. 
BIS Review 28/2009 
 3
Strengthening the financial infrastructure 
The  first  element  of  my  proposed  reform  agenda  covers  systemically  important  institutions 
considered  individually.  The  second  element  focuses  on  interactions  among  firms  as 
mediated by what I have called the financial infrastructure, or the financial plumbing if you 
will:  the  institutions  that  support  trading,  payments,  clearing,  and  settlement.  Here  the  aim 
should  be  not  only  to  help  make  the  financial  system  as  a  whole  better  able  to  withstand 
future shocks, but also to mitigate moral hazard and the problem of too big to fail by reducing 
the  range  of  circumstances  in  which  systemic  stability  concerns  might  prompt  government 
intervention. I'll give several examples. 
Since September 2005, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York has been leading a major 
joint  initiative  by  the  public  and  private  sectors  to  improve  arrangements  for  clearing  and 
settling credit default swaps (CDS) and other over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives. As a result, 
the  accuracy  and  timeliness  of  trade  information  has  improved  significantly.  However,  the 
infrastructure for managing these derivatives is still not as efficient or transparent as that for 
more mature instruments. The Federal Reserve Bank of New York, in conjunction with other 
domestic  and  foreign  supervisors,  will  continue  to  work  toward  establishing  increasingly 
stringent  targets  and  performance  standards  for  market  participants.  To  help  alleviate 
counterparty  credit  concerns,  regulators  are  also  encouraging  the  development  of  well-
regulated and prudently managed central clearing counterparties for OTC trades.5 Just last 
week, we approved the application for membership in the Federal Reserve System of ICE 
Trust, a trust company that proposes to operate as a central counterparty and clearinghouse 
for CDS transactions.  
The Federal Reserve and other authorities also are focusing on enhancing the resilience of 
the  triparty  repurchase  agreement  (repo)  market,  in  which  the  primary  dealers  and  other 
major banks and broker-dealers obtain very large amounts of secured financing from money 
market mutual funds and other short-term, risk-averse sources of funding.6 For some time, 
market participants have been working to develop a contingency plan for handling a loss of 
confidence in either of the two clearing banks that facilitate the settlement of triparty repos. 
Recent experience demonstrates the need for additional measures to enhance the resilience 
of these markets, particularly as large borrowers have experienced acute stress. The Federal 
Reserve's Primary Dealer Credit Facility, launched in the wake of the Bear Stearns collapse 
and expanded in the aftermath of the Lehman Brothers bankruptcy, has stabilized this critical 
market, and market confidence has been maintained. However, this program was adopted 
under  our  emergency  powers  to  address  unusual  and  exigent  circumstances.  Therefore, 
more-permanent  reforms  are  needed.  For  example,  it  may  be  worthwhile  considering  the 
costs  and  benefits  of  a  central  clearing  system  for  this  market,  given  the  magnitude  of 
exposures generated and the vital importance of the market to both dealers and investors.  
More broadly, both the operational performance of key payment and settlement systems and 
their  ability  to  manage  counterparty  and  market  risks  in  both  normal  and  stressed 
environments  are  critical  to  the  stability  of  the  broader  financial  system.  Currently,  the 
Federal  Reserve  relies  on  a  patchwork  of  authorities,  largely  derived  from  our  role  as  a 
                                                 
5  
International standards for central counterparties have been developed, and national authorities should work 
to  ensure  that  all  covered  entities  adhere  to  these  standards.  See  Committee  on  Payment  and  Settlement 
Systems  and  Technical  Committee  of  the  International  Organization  of  Securities  Commissions,  Bank  for 
International Settlements (2004), "Recommendations for Central Counterparties," November. The benefits and 
costs of a central counterparty are discussed in "Assessing the Potential for Instability in Financial Markets," a 
speech  delivered  by  Randall  S.  Kroszner  (2008)  at  the  Risk  Minds  Conference,  International  Center  for 
Business Information, Geneva, Switzerland, December 8. 
6   Primary dealers are broker-dealers that trade in U.S. government securities with the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New  York.  The  New  York  Fed's  Open  Market  Desk  engages  in  trades  on  behalf  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
System to implement monetary policy. 
4 
 BIS Review 28/2009
banking  supervisor,  as  well  as  on  moral  suasion  to  help  ensure  that  critical  payment  and 
settlement  systems  have  the  necessary  procedures  and  controls  in  place  to  manage  their 
risks.  By  contrast,  many  major  central  banks  around  the  world  have  an  explicit  statutory 
basis  for  their  oversight  of  these  systems.  Given  how  important  robust  payment  and 
settlement  systems  are  to  financial  stability,  a  good  case  can  be  made  for  granting  the 
Federal  Reserve  explicit  oversight  authority  for  systemically  important  payment  and 
settlement systems.  
Another  issue  that  warrants  attention  is  the  potential  fragility  of  the  money  market  mutual 
fund  sector.  Last  fall,  as  a  result  of  losses  on  Lehman  Brothers  commercial  paper,  a 
prominent money market mutual fund "broke the buck" – that is, was unable to maintain a net 
asset  value  of  $1  per  share.  Over  subsequent  days,  fearful  investors  withdrew  more  than 
$250  billion  from  prime  money  market  mutual  funds.  The  magnitude  of  these  withdrawals 
decreased only after the Treasury announced a guarantee program for money market mutual 
fund  investors  and  the  Federal  Reserve  established  a  new  lending  program  to  support 
liquidity in the asset-backed commercial paper market.  
In light of the importance of money market mutual funds – and, in particular, the crucial role 
they play in the commercial paper market, a key source of funding for many businesses – 
policymakers  should  consider  how  to  increase  the  resiliency  of  those  funds  that  are 
susceptible to runs. One approach would be to impose tighter restrictions on the instruments 
in which money market mutual funds can invest, potentially requiring shorter maturities and 
increased liquidity. A second approach would be to develop a limited system of insurance for 
money  market  mutual  funds  that  seek  to  maintain  a  stable  net  asset  value.  For  either  of 
these approaches or others, it would be important to consider the implications not only for the 
money market mutual fund industry itself, but also for the distribution of liquidity and risk in 
the financial system as a whole.  
Procyclicality in the regulatory system 
It  seems  obvious  that  regulatory  and  supervisory  policies  should  not  themselves  put 
unjustified pressure on financial institutions or inappropriately inhibit lending during economic 
downturns. However, there is some evidence that capital standards, accounting rules, and 
other regulations have made the financial sector excessively procyclical – that is, they lead 
financial  institutions  to  ease  credit  in  booms  and  tighten  credit  in  downturns  more  than  is 
justified  by  changes  in  the  creditworthiness  of  borrowers,  thereby  intensifying  cyclical 
changes.  
For  example,  capital  regulations  require  that  banks'  capital  ratios  meet  or  exceed  fixed 
minimum standards for the bank to be considered safe and sound by regulators.7 Because 
banks typically find raising capital to be difficult in economic downturns or periods of financial 
stress, their best means of boosting their regulatory capital ratios during difficult periods may 
be to reduce new lending, perhaps more so than is justified by the credit environment. We 
should review capital regulations to ensure that they are appropriately forward-looking, and 
that capital is allowed to serve its intended role as a buffer – one built up during good times 
and drawn down during bad times in a manner consistent with safety and soundness.8 In the 
area  of  prudential  supervision,  we  should  also  ensure  that  bank  examiners  appropriately 
balance the need for caution and the benefits of maintaining profitable lending relationships 
when evaluating bank loan policies. 
                                                 
7  
In  addition  to  ensuring  that  banking  organizations  comply  with  minimum  regulatory  capital  requirements, 
supervisors also must ensure that organizations have the ability to assess their overall capital needs and hold 
capital commensurate with their individual risk profiles. 
Internationally, the Financial Stability Forum and the Basel Committee have already begun such a review. 
8  
BIS Review 28/2009 
 5
The ongoing move by those who set accounting standards toward requirements for improved 
disclosure  and  greater  transparency  is  a  positive  development  that  deserves  full  support. 
However, determining appropriate valuation methods for illiquid or idiosyncratic assets can 
be  very  difficult,  to  put  it  mildly.  Similarly,  there  is  considerable  uncertainty  regarding  the 
appropriate  levels  of  loan  loss  reserves  over  the  cycle.  As  a  result,  further  review  of 
accounting standards governing valuation and loss provisioning would be useful, and might 
result  in  modifications  to  the  accounting  rules  that  reduce  their  procyclical  effects  without 
compromising the goals of disclosure and transparency. Indeed, work is underway on these 
issues through the Financial Stability Forum, and the results of that work may prove useful 
for U.S. policymakers.9  
Another  potential  source  of  procyclicality  is  the  system  for  funding  deposit  insurance.  In 
recognition of this fact – as well as the weak economic outlook and the current strains on 
banks  and  the  financial  system  –  the  Federal  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation  recently 
announced  plans  to  extend  from  five  years  to  seven  years  the  period  over  which  it  would 
restore the deposit insurance fund to its minimum required level. This plan, if implemented, 
should  help  reduce  the  costs  imposed  on  banks  at  a  time  when  capital  and  lending  are 
already  under  pressure.  Policymakers  should  consider  additional  steps  to  reduce  the 
possible procyclical effects of deposit insurance costs while still ensuring that riskier banks 
pay higher premiums than safer banks. One possibility would be to raise the level to which 
the  designated  reserve  ratio  may  grow  in  benign  economic  environments,  so  that  a  larger 
buffer is available to be drawn down when economic conditions worsen and insurance losses 
are high.  
Systemic risk authority 
The policy actions I've discussed would inhibit the buildup of risks within the financial system 
and  improve  the  resilience  of  the  financial  system  to  adverse  shocks.  Financial  stability, 
however,  could  be  further  enhanced  by  a  more  explicitly  macroprudential  approach  to 
financial regulation and supervision in the United States. Macroprudential policies focus on 
risks to the financial system as a whole. Such risks may be crosscutting, affecting a number 
of firms and markets, or they may be concentrated in a few key areas. A macroprudential 
approach would complement and build on the current regulatory and supervisory structure, in 
which the primary focus is the safety and soundness of individual institutions and markets.  
How could macroprudential policies be better integrated into the regulatory and supervisory 
system?  One  way  would  be  for  the  Congress  to  direct  and  empower  a  governmental 
authority  to  monitor,  assess,  and,  if  necessary,  address  potential  systemic  risks  within  the 
financial system. The elements of such an authority's mission could include, for example, (1) 
monitoring large or rapidly increasing exposures – such as to subprime mortgages – across 
firms and markets, rather than only at the level of individual firms or sectors; (2) assessing 
the potential for deficiencies in evolving risk-management practices, broad-based increases 
in financial leverage, or changes in financial markets or products to increase systemic risks; 
(3) analyzing possible spillovers between financial firms or between firms and markets, such 
as  the  mutual  exposures  of  highly  interconnected  firms;  and  (4)  identifying  possible 
regulatory gaps, including gaps in the protection of consumers and investors, that pose risks 
for the system as a whole. Two areas of natural focus for a systemic risk authority would be 
the stability of systemically critical financial institutions and the systemically relevant aspects 
of the financial infrastructure that I discussed earlier. 
Introducing a macroprudential approach to regulation would present a number of significant 
challenges.  Most  fundamentally,  implementing  a  comprehensive  systemic  risk  program 
                                                 
9   Financial  Stability  Forum  (2008),  "Report  of  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  on  Enhancing  Market  and 
Institutional Resilience: Follow-Up on Implementation", October 10. 
6 
 BIS Review 28/2009
would demand a great deal of the supervisory authority in terms of market and institutional 
knowledge,  analytical  sophistication,  capacity  to  process  large  amounts  of  disparate 
information, and supervisory expertise. 
Other challenges include defining the range of powers that a systemic risk authority would 
need to fulfill its mission and then integrating that authority into the currently decentralized 
system of financial regulation in the United States. On the one hand, it seems clear that any 
new  systemic  risk  authority  should  rely  on  the  information,  assessments,  and  supervisory 
and regulatory programs of existing financial supervisors and regulators whenever possible. 
This  approach  would  reduce  the  cost  to  both  the  private  sector  and  the  public  sector  and 
allow  the  systemic  risk  authority  to  leverage  the  expertise  and  knowledge  of  other 
supervisors. On the other hand, because the goal of any systemic risk authority would be to 
have a broader view of the financial system, simply relying on existing structures likely would 
be insufficient.  
For  example,  a  systemic  risk  authority  would  need  broad  authority  to  obtain  information  – 
through data collection and reports, or when necessary, examinations – from banks and key 
financial market participants, as well as from nonbank financial institutions that currently may 
not be subject to regular supervisory reporting requirements. A systemic risk authority likely 
would  also  need  an  appropriately  calibrated  ability  to  take  measures  to  address  identified 
systemic risks – in coordination with other supervisors, when possible, or independently, if 
necessary. The role of a systemic risk authority in setting standards for capital, liquidity, and 
risk-management practices for the financial sector also would need to be explored, given that 
these standards have both microprudential and macroprudential implications.  
In general, much discussion will be needed regarding what can reasonably be expected from 
a macroprudential regime and how expectations, accountability, and authorities can best be 
aligned. Important decisions must be made about how the systemic risk regulation function 
should be structured and located within the government. Several existing agencies have data 
and expertise relevant to this task, so there  are a variety  of organizational options. In any 
structure,  however,  to  ensure  accountability,  the  scope  of  authorities  and  responsibilities 
must be clearly specified 
Some commentators have proposed that the Federal Reserve take on the role of systemic 
risk  authority;  others  have  expressed  concern  that  adding  this  responsibility  would 
overburden  the  central  bank.  The  extent  to  which  this  new  responsibility  might  be  a  good 
match for the Federal Reserve depends a great deal on precisely how the Congress defines 
the role and responsibilities of the authority, as well as on how the necessary resources and 
expertise  complement  those  employed  by  the  Federal  Reserve  in  the  pursuit  of  its  long-
established core missions. 
It  seems  to  me  that  we  should  keep  our  minds  open  on  these  questions.  We  have  been 
discussing  them  a  good  deal  within  the  Federal  Reserve  System,  and  their  importance 
warrants careful consideration by legislators and other policymakers. As a practical matter, 
however,  effectively  identifying  and  addressing  systemic  risks  would  seem  to  require  the 
involvement  of  the  Federal  Reserve  in  some  capacity,  even  if  not  in  the  lead  role.  As  the 
central bank of the United States, the Federal Reserve has long figured prominently in the 
government's responses to financial crises. Indeed, the Federal Reserve was established by 
the  Congress  in  1913  largely  as  a  means  of  addressing the  problem  of  recurring  financial 
panics.  The  Federal  Reserve  plays  such  a  key  role  in  part  because  it  serves  as  liquidity 
provider of last resort, a power that has proved critical in financial crises throughout history. 
In addition, the Federal Reserve has broad expertise derived from its wide range of activities, 
including  its  role  as  umbrella  supervisor  for  bank  and  financial  holding  companies  and  its 
active monitoring of capital markets in support of its monetary policy and financial stability 
objectives.  
BIS Review 28/2009 
 7
Conclusion 
In the wake of the ongoing financial crisis, governments have moved quickly to establish a 
wide  range  of  programs  to  support  financial  market  functioning  and  foster  credit  flows  to 
businesses  and  households.  However, 
these  necessary  short-term  steps  must  be 
accompanied  by  new  policies  to  limit  the  incidence  and  impact  of  systemic  risk.  In  my 
remarks today, I have emphasized the need to address the problems posed by firms that are 
perceived  to  be  too  big  to  fail,  the  importance  of  efforts  to  strengthen  the  financial 
infrastructure,  the  desirability  of  reducing  the  procyclical  effects  of  capital  regulation  and 
accounting rules, and the potential benefits of taking a more macroprudential approach to the 
supervision  and  regulation  of  financial  firms.  Some  of  the  policies  I  propose  can  be 
developed and implemented under the existing authority of financial regulators. Indeed, we 
are in the process of doing just that. In other cases, congressional action will be necessary to 
create the requisite authority and responsibility. 
Financial crises will continue to occur, as they have around the world for literally hundreds of 
years. Even with the sorts of actions I have outlined here today, it is unrealistic to hope that 
financial  crises  can  be  entirely  eliminated,  especially  while  maintaining  a  dynamic  and 
innovative financial system. Nonetheless, these steps should help make crises less frequent 
and less virulent, and so contribute to a better functioning national and global economy. 
8 
 BIS Review 28/2009
