José Manuel González-Páramo: On the occasion of the inauguration of 
the Euro Exhibition in Barcelona 
Speech  by  Mr  José  Manuel  González-Páramo,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European  Central  Bank,  on  the  occasion  of  the  inauguration  of  the  Euro  Exhibition, 
Barcelona, 2 February 2009. 
 Dear José, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  a  pleasure  for  me  to  be  here  in  these  wonderful  premises  of  Banco  de  España  in 
Barcelona to celebrate with you the occasion of the 10th anniversary of Stage Three of the 
Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) and of the adoption of the euro. We are also here to 
inaugurate “The Euro Exhibition”, presenting the euro banknotes and coins through a range 
of innovative features, which we hope will be appreciated by the public in Barcelona. 
First 10 years of the euro 
1.  
On 1 January 1999 the Third Stage of EMU began with the irrevocable fixing of the exchange 
rates  of  the  currencies  of  the  11  Member  States  initially  forming  the  euro  area.  Monetary 
authority  for  the  new  currency  was  transferred  to  the  Governing  Council  of  the  European 
Central  Bank.  The  euro  became  the  currency  of  over  300  million  citizens  of  Europe.  The 
number of countries participating in the EMU grew over the years. Today, euro banknotes 
and coins are legal tender in 16 of the 27 Member States of the European Union, and used 
daily by almost 330 million citizens in the euro area. 
Slovakia has recently become the 16th member of the euro area. Following a two-week dual 
circulation period during which payments could be made using either euro or Slovak koruna, 
the euro became the sole legal tender in Slovakia on 17 January 2009 and the changeover 
was very smooth. Today, the single currency is used in an area that stretches from Cyprus to 
Ireland and from Portugal to Finland. 
As  you  know,  the  euro  cash  did  not  enter  into  circulation  until  1  January  2002,  when  it 
replaced the banknotes and coins of the national currencies like, in the case of Spain, the 
peseta. 
To  support  the  cash  changeover,  which  was  one  of  the  largest  logistical  operations 
undertaken  in  Europe,  extensive  information  campaigns  were  successfully  run  to  acquaint 
citizens with the visual appearance of the euro banknotes and coins. 
The euro is widely recognised as an international currency of major significance. Some 12 
billion  banknotes  circulate  in  Europe  and  beyond,  representing  a  face  value  of  more  than 
EUR 700 billion. The number of euro banknotes in circulation continued to grow since the 
initial  cash  changeover  in  2002  and  their  value  has  almost  tripled  since  the  end  of  the 
changeover period. 
With this success story in mind, we are confidently looking forward to the anniversaries to 
come, which will be marked by the full consolidation of the euro and its further adoption by 
new member states. 
The Euro Exhibition 
2.  
Today we inaugurate the Euro Exhibition here in Barcelona. The exhibition was previously on 
display to the public in Bratislava to mark the cash changeover in Slovakia. Other locations 
on its journey throughout Europe will follow. 
BIS Review 10/2009 
 1
The primary objective of the Euro Exhibition is to give the public at large the opportunity to 
gain a thorough overview of the euro banknotes and coins and to raise its awareness of their 
security features. It features, inter alia, modules on the history of money, the design elements 
of  euro  banknotes  and  coins  and  the  functioning  of  banknote  security  features.  It  also 
includes  a  range  of  interactive  elements  to  raise  the  visitors’  attention  via  touch  screen 
applications  such  as  games,  films  or  security  feature  showcases  displaying  counterfeit 
banknotes. 
You are cordially invited to make use of all the elements which will contribute to make your 
visit a learning, interesting and amusing experience at the same time. 
You will certainly notice that the Euro Exhibition features a common design: the “Ages and 
styles of Europe”. As you know, there are windows and doorways depicted on the front of 
each  euro  banknote  and  bridges  on  the  back.  These  architectural  elements  symbolise 
communication and connection between the people of Europe and between Europe and the 
rest of the world. Furthermore, bridges are regarded as a means to connect the past with the 
future, symbolising thus the way to a common European future. 
A children’s corner has been established to meet children’s special expectations. It refers to 
our  children’s  booklet,  specially  drafted  for  primary  students.  To  ensure  that  the  children 
understand and enjoy the story in their mother tongue, the Spanish translation of the story 
was tested in Colegio San José de Getafe, Madrid, which we appreciate very much. 
It is a pleasure for us to present this booklet to the public in the newly translated versions for 
the first time in Spanish and in all co-official languages. The booklet tells an exciting short 
story,  set  against  the  realistic  background  of  a  counterfeit  case  and  explains,  in  an 
appropriate  way  for  children,  how  to  verify  the  authenticity  of  a  euro  banknote.  As  an 
additional  educational  benefit,  its  multilingual  format  can  arouse  the  children’s  interest  in 
other languages. 
The name of this booklet is:  
(in Español, Català, Euskara, Galego, Valencià) 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
After  these  introductory  remarks  it  is  now  a  pleasure  for  me  to  declare  this  Euro 
Exhibition open. You are kindly invited to come closer to view the exhibition and the 
children’s booklet. 
Ana y Alex contra los falsificadores de billetes 
L’Anna i l’Àlex contra els falsificadors de bitllets 
Ana eta Alex, billete-faltsutzaileen aurka 
Ana e Alex contra os falsificadores de billetes 
Ana i Aleix contra els falsificadors de bitllets 
2 
 BIS Review 10/2009
