Mario Draghi: The financial crisis – impact and responses  
Statement by Mr Mario Draghi, Governor of the Bank of Italy and Chairman of the Financial 
Stability Board, on behalf of Albania, Greece, Italy, Malta, Portugal, San Marino and Timor 
Leste,  at  the  Seventy-Ninth  Meeting  of  the  Development  Committee  (Joint  Ministerial 
Committee of the Boards of Governors of the Bank and the Fund on the Transfer of Real 
Resources to Developing Countries), Washington DC, 26 April 2009. 
 A crisis of growing proportions 
1. 
Since  we  last  convened  in  Washington  for  the  Bank  and  the  Fund  Annual  Meetings,  six 
months ago, the crisis has taken a new turn. What was then a crisis affecting most advanced 
economies is now having severe impact on Developing and Transition Countries (DTC). 
Several  transmission  mechanisms  have  acted  adversely  over  the  last  semester:  financial 
intermediaries overly exposed to maturity/currency risks have curtailed lending; heightened 
risk aversion has massively reduced capital flows into emerging economies; export revenues 
have  fallen  as  a  result  of  declining  trade  volumes  and  commodity  prices;  remittances  – 
normally a countercyclical factor in poor countries – seem to show a reversal in their multi-
year upward trend. 
The Bank response to the crisis 
2. 
The World Bank Group (WBG) has promptly responded to the growing financial needs of its 
client countries by scaling-up its development assistance and leveraging its own resources 
with those from other public and private donors. President Zoellick has pledged to bring new 
IBRD loans from $13bn to $35bn in the current fiscal year and up to $100bn over the period 
spanning  fiscal  years  2009  to  2011.  Over  the  same  period,  IFC  plans  to  fully  leverage  its 
capital base by raising its loans to $12bn per year.  
The WBG response to the financial crisis has also led to the development of the Vulnerability 
Framework (VF), a well-conceived platform intended to provide donors with an ample choice 
of  multilateral  development  institutions  and  facilities  to  channel  development  funds.  The 
support  to  trade  finance,  as  envisaged  in  the  VF,  will  help  timely  counteract  the  sharp 
contraction  in  trade  volumes  that  emerged  in  recent  months.  The  VF  is  well  positioned  to 
play an important countercyclical role, backing countries currently cut off from capital markets 
with additional finance. 
At the same time it is important that all new resources falling under the VF umbrella meet 
standards of accountability, oversight and evaluation as rigorous as those governing the use 
of  WBG  funds.  More  broadly,  short-term  public  budget  relief  (through  fast-disbursing 
Development  Policy  Operations)  must  be  strictly  and  verifiably  targeted  to  restoring  fiscal 
space for essential social needs (Health, Education, Nutrition); a sharp focus on long-term 
development  goals,  above  all  the  need  to  support  food  security,  social  safety  nets  and 
infrastructure, especially in African countries, must be maintained.  
We  support  the  envisaged  surge  in  the  deployment  of  IBRD  and  IFC  resources.  Lending 
growth over time under persistent uncertainty on economic and financial conditions warrants 
continued  budgetary  discipline  and  a  thorough  review  of  both  institutions’  financial 
sustainability and overall risk exposure.  
The  front-loading  of  IDA  resources  and  fast  implementation  procedures  such  as  the 
Vulnerability Financing Facility, are appropriate measures at this time of crisis. We believe 
that IDA is well positioned to accelerate its support to low income countries, thanks to the 
BIS Review 552009 
 1
substantial increase of its commitment authority for the next three years under the IDA 15 
replenishment. 
Crisis and climate change: two intertwined challenges 
3. 
The  complexity  of  dealing  with  climate  change  reflects  the  intricacy  of  development 
challenges  in  an  increasingly  interdependent  world.  Climate  change  encompasses,  and 
amplifies, concerns related to natural resource scarcity, food supply and security. It entails 
substantial  financial  requirements  and  distributional  tradeoffs  that,  in  turn,  pose  daunting 
political economy challenges.  
However,  neither  these  challenges  nor  emergencies  related  to  crisis  management  should 
undermine  the  WBG’s  commitment  to  the  climate  change  agenda.  Scientists  have 
documented that the window of opportunity to tackle climate change is shrinking fast and that 
urgent and unprecedented levels of multilateral collaboration are needed. 
Moreover,  the  UN  Climate  Change  Conference  in  Copenhagen  in  December  will  shape  a 
new global financial regime providing the World Bank with a unique opportunity to liaise with 
lead negotiators emphasizing the WBG role in the international debate on climate change. In 
particular,  we  expect  the  WBG  to  help  develop  currently  existing  or  proposed  financial 
schemes  to  support  less  carbon  intensive  technologies  and  to  adapt  rural  and  urban 
environments to the adverse impacts of climate change. 
Voice 
4. 
We  welcome  the  progress  made  in  implementing  the  first  stage  of  the  reform  aimed  at 
enhancing the representation of DTC in the World Bank Group. As agreed at the last Annual 
Meetings, the shareholding review should consider the evolving weight of all members in the 
world economy and other Bank-specific criteria consistent with the development mandate of 
the institution. 
We invite Management, in close interaction with the Board, to prepare concrete criteria and 
options  for  shareholding  realignment  to  be  submitted  for  Governors’  future  consideration, 
with a view to reaching a broad consensus on realignment by the 2010 Spring Meetings. 
2 
 BIS Review 55/2009
