Mallam Sanusi Lamido Sanusi: Developments in the banking system in 
Nigeria 
Address  by  Mr  Mallam  Sanusi  Lamido  Sanusi,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Nigeria, 
Lagos, 14 August 2009. 
 Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen of the Press, 
As we are all aware, the world economy has  been hit by the repercussion of the financial 
meltdown that started with the sub-prime mortgage crisis in the United States of America and 
spread to Europe and other parts of the world. This crisis has led to the collapse of many 
banks and other financial institutions, and even rendered an entire nation bankrupt. 
In  Nigeria,  the  banking  system  appears  to  have  weathered  the  storm  due  to  a  number  of 
factors. Among these are the facts that our financial system is not strongly integrated into the 
international financial system, as well as the relatively simple nature of financial products and 
strong capitalization and liquidity of Nigerian banks. 
However, there are many who have been aware for a while now that whereas the system in 
general is likely to absorb and survive the effects of crisis, the effects vary from bank to bank. 
A few Nigerian banks, mainly due to huge concentrations in their exposure to certain sectors 
(capital market and oil and gas being the prominent ones), but due to a general weakness in 
risk management and corporate governance, have continued to display signs of failure. 
As far as October last year, some of the banks showed serious liquidity strain and had to be 
given financial support by the Central Bank in the form of an "Expanded Discount Window" 
(EDW) where the CBN extended credit facilities to these banks on the basis of collateral in 
the form of Commercial Paper and Bankers' acceptances, sometimes of doubtful value.  
As  at  June  4,  2009  when  I  assumed  office  as  Governor  of  the  CBN,  the  total  amount 
outstanding  at  the  Expanded  Discount  Window  was  N256.571  billion  most  of  which  was 
owed by the 5 banks. 
A review of the activity in the EDW showed that four banks had been almost permanently 
locked in as borrowers and were clearly unable to repay their obligations. A fifth bank had 
been a very frequent borrower when its profile ordinarily should have placed it among the net 
placers of funds in the market. Whereas the five banks were by no means the only ones to 
have benefited from the EDW, the persistence and frequency of their demand pointed to a 
deeper problem and the CBN identified them as probable source of financial instability, most 
likely suffering from deeper problems due to non-performing loans. 
The impact of the situation of these banks was being felt by the market in different negative 
ways. Because of this strain in their balance sheets, the banks pushed up the interest rate 
paid to private sector deposits and their competitors had to follow suit. They also contributed 
to the destabilization of the inter-bank market as many of their competitors were unwilling to 
take an unsecured risk on them. If was primarily because of these banks, or at least some of 
them,  that  the  CBN  took  the  step  of  guaranteeing  the  inter-bank  market  when  it  stopped 
granting  new  lines  under  the  EDW.  Without  that  guarantee,  almost  four  banks  would  not 
have been able to borrow in the inter-bank and would probably have collapsed. 
As  you  are  aware,  we  guaranteed  the  inter-bank  market  to  give  us  the  time  to  conduct  a 
thorough  diagnostic  of  the  banks  and  ensure  that  appropriate  remedial  action  is  taken.  At 
least four of the banks in question have since the guarantee came into force either remained 
heavy users of funds at the EDW or drawn heavily from other banks under cover of the CBN 
guarantee  to  wind-down  at  this  window.  In  all  events,  it  is  clear  that they  do  not  have  the 
ability to meet their obligations to depositors and creditors as they are in a grave situation. 
BIS Review 111/2009 
 1
Afribank Plc 
Finbank Plc 
Intercontinental Bank Plc 
Oceanic Bank Plc and  
Union Bank Plc. 
In view of the aforementioned circumstances, I instructed the Director of Banking Supervision 
of the CBN to carry out a Special Examination of the following five banks: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
The  examination  was  conducted  by  a  joint  team  of  CBN  and  NDIC  officials.  The  major 
findings on the 5 banks included: 
1. 
Excessively  high  level  of  non-performing  loans  in  the  five  banks  which  was 
attributable  to  poor  corporate  governance  practices,  lax  credit  administration 
processes and the absence or non-adherence to the bank's credit risk management 
practices.  Thus  the  percentage  of  non-performing  loans  to  total  loans  ranged  from 
19% to 48%. The 5 banks will therefore need to make additional provision of N539.09 
billion. 
The  total  loan  portfolio  of  these  five  banks  was  N2,801.92  billion.  Margin  loans 
amounted  to  N456.28  billion  and  exposure  to  oil  and  gas  was  N487.02  billion. 
Aggregate non-performing loans stood at N1,143 billion representing 40.81%. 
From 1 and 2 above, it is evident that the five banks accounted for a disproportionate 
component  of  the  total  exposure  to  capital  market  and  oil  and  gas,  thus  reflecting 
heavy concentration to high risk areas relative to other banks in the industry. 
The  huge  provisioning  requirements  have  led  to  significant  capital  impairment. 
Consequently, all the banks are undercapitalized for their current levels of operations 
and  are  required  to  increase  their  provisions  for  loan  losses,  which  impacted 
negatively  on  their  capital.  Indeed  one  is  technically  insolvent  with  a  Capital 
Adequacy Ratio of (1.01%). Thus, a minimum capital injection of N204,94 billion will 
be required in the 5 banks to meet the minimum capital adequacy ratio of 10%. 
The five banks were either perennial net-takers of funds in the inter-bank market or 
enjoyed liquidity support from the CBN for long periods of time, a clear evidence of 
illiquidity. In other words, these banks were unable to meet their maturing obligations 
as they fall due without resorting to the CBN or the inter-bank market. As a matter of 
fact,  the  outstanding  balance  on  the  EDW  of  the  five  banks  amounted  to  N127.85 
billion  by  end  July  2009,  representing  89.81%  of  the  total  industry  exposure  to  the 
CBN  on  its  discount  window  while  their  net  guaranteed  inter-bank  takings  stood  at 
N253.30 billion as at August 02, 2009. Their liquidity ratios ranged from 17.65% to 
24% as at May 31, 2009. (Regulatory minimum is 25%). 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
It is important to note that at least three of the banks are systemically important (accounting 
for more than 5% of assets and deposits in the banking system) and together the five banks 
account for 39.93% of loans, 29.99% of deposits, and 31.47% of total assets as at May 31, 
2009. 
Given the extent of the asset quality problem leading to liquidity stresses, and the variety of 
stress  points  on  the  banks'  balance  sheets,  failure  to  act  to  secure  the  financial  health  of 
these banks will clearly place the system at risk. The Central Bank has a responsibility to act 
to  protect  all  depositors  and  creditors  and  ensure  that  no  one  loses  money  due  to  bank 
failure. The Bank also needs to move decisively to remove this principal cause of financial 
instability and restore confidence in the banking system. 
Consequently,  having  reviewed  all  the  reports  of  the  examiners  and  the  comments  of  the 
Directors  and  Deputy  Governors,  I  am  satisfied  that  these  5  institutions  are  in  a  grave 
2 
 BIS Review 111/2009
Afribank Plc 
Intercontinental Bank Plc 
Union Bank of Nigeria Plc 
Oceanic international Bank Plc  
Finbank Plc 
Mr. John Aboh – MD/CEO Oceanic International Bank Plc 
Mr. Mahmud L. AlabI – MD/CEO Intercontinental Bank Plc 
Mr. Nebolisa Arah – MD/CEO Afribank Plc 
Mrs. Suzanne Iroche – MD/CEO Finbank Plc 
Mrs. Funke Osibodu – MD/CEO Union Ban Plc 
situation  and  that  their Management  have  acted  in  a  manner  detrimental  to the  interest  of 
their depositors and creditors, Therefore, in exercise of my powers as contained in Sections 
33  and  35  of  the  Banks  and  Other  Financial  Institutions  Act  1991,  as  amended,  and  after 
securing the consent of the Board of Directors of the CBN, I hereby remove the Managing 
Directors  and  the  Executive  Directors  of  the  following  banks  from  office  with  effect  from 
Friday, August 14, 2009. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
These persons forthwith cease to be directors and officers of their respective banks. 
The Board of the Central Bank of Nigeria has also appointed the following as the MD/CEOs 
of the affected banks: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
Each of the above will head a management team that will include Executive Directors and 
Chief Financial Officers to be appointed by the CBN. This team is tasked with continuing the 
businesses of the banks as a going concern. I therefore appeal to the Boards of the affected 
banks, in their own interest, to co-operate with the newly appointed Executive Management. 
We are conscious of the fact that changing management alone will not resolve this problem. 
Consequently, the CBN is injecting a total of about N400  billion into these five banks with 
immediate effect in form of Tier 2 Capital to be repaid from proceeds of capitalization in the 
near future. This injection is sufficient to resolve and stabilize all the institutions and enable 
them  continue  normal  business.  The  injection  of  fresh  capital  by  the  CBN  is  a  temporary 
measure  as  government  does  not  intend  to  hold  the  shares  for  long  and  shall  divest  its 
holdings as soon as new investors recapitalize these banks. 
Let me also advise all debtors of Nigerian banks, that the CBN and all government agencies 
are united in our commitment to support the recovery efforts of the banks. Debtors who do 
not pay shall have their names published in national newspapers in due course and we will 
solicit the support of law enforcement agencies in recovery. 
Let me reassure especially the customers of the affected banks and all the banks in general 
that there is no cause for alarm They should continue to transact their normal business in the 
banks where their accounts are domiciled as this exercise is meant to further strengthen the 
banking industry and recapitalize the affected banks. 
I should also state at this point that the scope of the Special Examination was widened to 
cover all 24 banks. So far, we have concluded the audit of 10 banks including these five, the 
others  being  Diamond  Bank,  First  Bank,  United  Bank  for  Africa,  Guaranty  Trust  Bank  and 
Sterling Bank. We have also commenced the next batch of 11 banks and hope to conclude 
them  by  end  of  August,  All  in  all,  we  expect  to  conclude the  audit  in  mid-September.  The 
Central Bank is requiring all banks to make appropriate provisioning for non-performing loans 
and disclose them. We hope that by the end of this quarter, all banks would have cleaned up 
their balance sheets. On the basis of the information available to us so far, we are confident 
BIS Review 111/2009 
 3
that  the  banking  system  is  safe  and  sound  and  we  have  dealt  with  the  major  sources  of 
systemic risk. 
I will conclude by restating that, going forward, the CBN will not waiver in its desire to ensure 
that  public  confidence  in  the  Nigerian  banking  system  is  maintained  through  appropriate 
disclosures  and  the  reinvigoration  of  its  policy  of  zero  tolerance  on  all  professional  and 
unethical conducts. 
We will not allow any bank to fail. However, we will also ensure that officers of banks and 
debtors who contribute to bank failures are brought to book to the full extent of the law and 
that all proceeds of infraction are confiscated where legally feasible. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 111/2009
