Ardian Fullani: Recent developments in the global and the Albanian 
economy 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  regional  meeting, 
Korça, 13 February 2009. 
 I  feel  very  privileged  to  be  among  you  again,  in  this  marvellous  audience  of  intellectual 
values and professionalism. It is the second time I visit Korca in the capacity of the Governor 
of  the  Bank  of  Albania  and  I  observe  with  pleasure  that  this  city  has  made  admirable 
progress. Allow me to emphasise once more that Korça, this charming and hospitable city, 
has given and will always give me pleasure. 
Usually  favourite  topics  for  a  Governor  are  monetary  policy,  financial  stability,  banks  and 
money,  structural  reforms  and  economic-financial  policies.  However,  the  current  situation 
makes inevitable the communication on recent developments the global economy in general 
and the Albanian economy in particular are being faced with. 
Global economy is confronted with numerous challenges. 2008 year-end and January 2009 
have definitely confirmed recession in the USA, Germany, Britain and Japan, let alone many 
other  European  emerging  economies,  such  as  Ukraine,  Hungary,  Byelorussia,  Serbia  and 
any other country. 
While risk of further financial stability shocks is overcome for the developed economies, the 
economic  situation  is  deteriorating  more  and  more,  where  unemployment  is  increasing 
rapidly,  along  with  output  reduction.  In  the  meantime,  the  emerging  economies  are 
experiencing  a  deterioration  of  financial  conditions,  tightening  of  lending,  pressure  on 
exchange  rate  and  at  the  same  time  significant  reduced  demand  for  some  very  important 
branches of the economy. 
I made this introduction to make you understand that global economy is experiencing a great 
contraction,  which  as  concerns  the  shocking  intensity  and  extension,  has  never  been 
experienced before in the modern history or after the second world war. Many taboos have 
fallen  and  continue  to  fall.  The  grave  financial  crisis  ignited  and  erupted  at  the  heart  of 
capitalism, in the USA and from there it spread up quickly all over the world.  
Though  it  may  sound  paradoxical,  our  economy  has  been  resistant  to  this  tsunami. 
According to available official data and judging upon a number of indirect indicators, we have 
concluded  that  the  economic  activity  over  2008  performed  in  line  with  the  early  2008 
projections. 
Generally the economic activity at home has been sustained by domestic financial resources, 
while  the  Albanian  banking  system  has  been  dynamic  and  effective  in  channelling  the 
savings towards the funding of corporate production or household consumption This process 
has been also facilitated by the macroeconomic stability, which has enabled the fall of risk 
perception in the economy. 
Dwelling briefly on the fulfilment of legal obligations of the Bank of Albania, I would like to 
highlight that inflation returned within the 2-4 percent target of the Bank of Albania over the 
second  half  of  the  year.  The  relaxation  of  supply-side  shocks  and  appropriate  monetary 
conditions have been key factors enabling the balancing of demand and supply-side factors. 
During  2008  the  key  interest  rate  was  held  unchanged,  at  6.25  percent,  aiming  at  and 
materializing the anchoring of economic agents’ inflation expectations close to the 3 percent 
target of the Bank of Albania. Money market activity was conditioned by the performance of 
monetary indicators and the real economy. In response to these developments, the Bank of 
Albania intervened in the money market by injecting liquidity of different maturity terms. Also, 
BIS Review 37/2009 
 1
in order to better satisfy the banks’ needs, the Bank of Albania changed in November the 
repo auction form to auctions with undetermined amounts. 
In the end of January 2009 the Bank of Albania’s Supervisory Council decided to reduce the 
key interest rate by 0.50 percentage point, recording a turning point in the monetary policy 
stance in terms of easing it. 
However, I should underline that developments during 2008 year-end and early 2009 enable 
an objective and real assessment of the overall economic-financial situation of the country for 
the present and the future. Let me mention two or three of them, bringing our insight to your 
attention. 
1. 
During  January  2009  the  logical  reluctance  of  individuals  towards  their  bank, 
reflected  mainly  in  the  form  of  deposit  withdrawal  over  the  period  of  October-
December 2008, came to an end. Naturally this is a good news indicating that the 
Albanian  banking  system  has  passed  a  difficult  exam,  which  many  of  its 
“colleagues”  in  the  region  and  beyond  could  not  pass.  The  liquidity  situation  has 
ameliorated. Symmetric distribution among banks has promoted increased volume 
of  interbank  market  transactions,  turning  it  back  to  normal  trading  levels.  In 
response  to  Bank  of  Albania’s  reaction,  this  has  been  associated  with  reduced 
interest rates for all instruments and maturities. 
Is it accidental? Is it merely destiny? 
No,  it  has  neither  to  do  with  destiny,  nor  with  turning  back  to  any  slogans  of  the 
centralised economy era. 
According to latest data, the banking system appears profitable. Return on equity is 
11.35 percent for 2008. In the meantime, banks have extended their investments but 
they have also increased their equity. Capital adequacy rate is 17.23 percent of total 
assets  and  risk-rated  off-balance  sheet  items,  while  loan  portfolio  quality  is  at 
satisfactory levels. 
Year  2008  coincides  with  increased  prudential  policies  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  in 
terms of adopting a more conservatory approach. The passing of the new banking 
law,  the  2007  developments  once  credit  bubble  exploded  in  the  USA  and  high 
lending  rates  over  3-4  last  years  were  assessed  with  prudence  by  the  Bank  of 
Albania. Therefore, in early 2008 the Bank of Albania organised the first open forum 
with the banking system, submitting through an open communication, a new packet 
of  prudential  regulations  for  being  discussed  there,  aiming  at  consolidating  the 
financial stability of the country. 
The Bank of Albania’s Supervisory Council gave way to the approval of the whole 
proposed  packet, 
thus  creating  an  effective  vaccine,  which  has  produced 
appropriate  antibodies  or  has  provided  the  immunity  I  mentioned  earlier  in  my 
speech. 
Which are these modifications that have increased our resistance so much? 
• 
In  compliance  with  the  new  law,  there  were  approved  new  criteria  for 
calculating,  supervising  and  reporting  large  exposures  of  banks  to  parent 
banks and connected subjects, aiming at managing the risk deriving from 
concentrated exposure to them. 
In  order  to  achieve  a  more  effective  management,  a  new  regulation  was 
drafted, strengthening the internal audit in banks and branches of foreign 
banks. It regards the internal audit as a part of the general governance of 
banks. It ensures the platform for creating an efficient internal audit system, 
as  the  main  factor  in  management  and  administration  of  banks  and 
branches of foreign banks. 
 2 
 BIS Review 37/2009
   A  special  importance  was  given  to  transparency  of  banking  and  financial 
products and services. This is another aspect where we intervened during 
2008.  The  new  requirements  standardise  the  way  and  form  of  supplying 
customers  with  information  about  banking  products  and  services.  Special 
emphasis  was  laid  on  obligatory  publication  of  effective  interest  rates  for 
deposits  and  loans.  Through  this  information  bank  customers  may  get 
acquainted with calculation of loan effective interest rate, elements of credit 
and  deposit  contract,  marketing  of  products  and  services,  maintaining  of 
customer  data  and  confidentiality,  dealing  with  customer  complaints  and 
establishment of specific structures relating to such complaints. 
Part  of  the  new  package  was  also  the  standardization  of  obligatory 
information the banks and branches of foreign banks should disclose about 
the main business of banks, their organisation and management, financial 
performance and position, risk management and accounting policies. 
Taking into consideration the international situation and aiming at a better 
diversification of risk deriving from the concentration of bank investments in 
international  financial  markets,  the  Bank  of  Albania’s  Supervisory  Council 
made  some  other  amendments  to  the  Regulation  on  Risk  Management, 
consisting mainly in putting more prudential benchmarks on large exposure 
indicators and on the techniques of collateral calculation and recognition. 
After presenting the work we have done during 2008, naturally we have the right to claim that 
we have acted appropriately, taking many preventing actions, which have helped absorbing 
the negative effects of recent developments. 
2. 
Initial  data  of  December  2008  indicate  a  contraction  of  credit  to  the  economy, 
particularly of credit in foreign currency. Allow me to explain once more that it has to 
do  with  one  of  the  gravest  symptoms  accompanying  the  latest  financial  crisis 
internationally. This is so real that in developed economies, credit to the economy 
and  the  interbank  channels  have  almost  stopped  functioning  or  are  operating  at 
minimum levels. 
Though peripherally, this development has been materialised even in our economy. 
However,  I  believe  that,  what  really  matters  is  the  future.  Of  specific  contacts  we 
have had with banks operating in Albania, we have drawn the conclusion that we 
share  the  same  concern  that  a  drastic  stoppage  of  credit  to  the  economy  would 
gravely  damage  the  economic  activity  of  the  country  and  the  financial  system’s 
position. Therefore, we are constantly communicating with banks, to guarantee that 
during 2009 the Albanian economy will receive the deserved financial support from 
the banking system. I am confident that the presence of senior representatives of 
the  banking  system  here  in  this  hall  testifies  the  awareness  and  understanding  of 
this concern. 
The  decision  made  some  days  ago  by  the  Bank  of  Albania,  as  also  stated  in  the 
press  release  on  the  Supervisory  Council’s  meeting,  creates  “more  breath  to  the 
economic activity of the country”. I feel well to observe that the banking system has 
already reacted. Treasury-bill and interbank market interest rate reduction has been 
evidenced. 
Interbank  money  market  development,  as  a  necessary  bridge  for  enhancing  the 
effectiveness of monetary policy transmission, has been and will always be in Bank 
of Albania’s focus. As such the interbank market development has been subject to 
discussion in many meetings conducted by the Bank of Albania. In these meetings 
banks have highlighted credit risk as one of the main obstacles for the development 
of  this  market.  To  minimise  this  risk,  the  Bank  of  Albania  drafted  the  Law  on 
Repurchase Agreements and sample contracts. 
3. 
BIS Review 37/2009 
 3
The  passing  of  this  Law  finalised  the  Bank  of  Albania’s  endeavours  to  set  up  an 
appropriate  legal  infrastructure  for  the  market  of  repurchase  agreements  among 
commercial  banks.  Following  its  passing,  the  Bank  of  Albania  held  a  number  of 
meetings, aiming to clarify its core elements. The main purpose of these meetings 
was  to  speed  up  the  concluding  of  relevant  contracts  among  banks,  in  order  to 
materialise the practical implementation of this Law. The period we have left behind 
is regarded as sufficient for finalizing the process of drafting and signing individual 
contracts on repurchase agreements. Therefore, I draw the attention of the banking 
system  to  proceed  quickly,  sparing  the  time  for  signing  respective  contracts.  The 
process finalization should be necessarily followed by daily quotations of banks in 
terms of interbank borrowing and lending. 
The latest decision of the Bank of Albania’s Supervisory Council serves the spirit of 
transparency increase and customer protection, making compulsory the quotation of 
mortgage loan rate on the basis of Bank of Albania’s key interest rate. 
Distinguished participants, 
Recently  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  constantly  stated  that  year  2009  carries  over  numerous 
challenges,  which  in  the  context  of  sharp  global  issues,  make  our  task  more  difficult. 
However,  I  would  highlight  that  assessing  objectively  the  current  situation  and  that  of  the 
near future is an expression of prudence. We at the Bank of Albania remain committed to 
monitor cautiously all the economic-financial developments, willing to take proper actions to 
further consolidate the macroeconomic and financial balances. 
In this way we accomplish our constitutional service for the country’s sustainable growth and 
development.  In  this  difficult  task,  I  avail  myself  of  the  opportunity  to  invite  all  the 
stakeholders  and  the  broad  public  to  become  part  of  the  dialogue  for  finding  ways  and 
optimal  solutions,  in  order  to  minimize  the  negative  effects  the  international  economy 
transmits to our country. 
4 
 BIS Review 37/2009
