Svante Öberg: The current economic situation 
Speech by Mr Svante Öberg, First Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at a meeting, 
Jönköping, 5 March 2009. 
The original speech, which contains graphs, can be found on the Sveriges Riksbank’s website.  
  The minutes of the monetary policy meeting published just over one week ago show how we 
Executive Board members reasoned when we decided to cut the repo rate to 1 per cent at 
our monetary policy meeting on 10 February. Today I intend to give my views on economic 
activity and monetary policy. My speech can be summed up in the following four points: 
• 
The  financial  turmoil  worsened  in  the  autumn  and  has  developed  into  a  global 
financial crisis  
International developments will be weak this year and there is a considerable risk 
that economic activity will also be weak next year. 
GDP growth in Sweden will be negative this year and inflation will fall. 
The Riksbank has cut the repo rate to 1 per cent and may need to cut it further 
• 
• 
I have structured my presentation in line with these four points. I shall begin with an account 
of  developments  in  the  financial  markets.  Then  I  shall  describe  international  economic 
developments  and  what  we  see  before  us  during  the  coming  years.  I  shall  then  go  on  to 
discuss the Swedish economy. I shall conclude with some views on current monetary policy. 
I shall now begin with developments in the financial markets. 
The financial turmoil worsened in the autumn and has developed into a global 
financial crisis 
The financial turmoil worsened in September 2008. It has now turned into a global financial 
crisis. Developments during the financial crisis can be illustrated in several different ways, for 
instance,  through  TED  spreads.  These  show  the  difference  between  the  interest  rate  the 
banks pay on loans between one another on the interbank market and the interest rate on 
risk-free government securities. It is thus a measure of how the banks price credit risk. At the 
beginning  of  2007  and  also  prior  to  this,  the  spread  was  often  between  10  and  20  basis 
points in Sweden, the United States and the euro area.  
In  August  2007  the  TED  spreads  increased  substantially.  The  large  French  bank  BNP 
Paribas stopped withdrawals from three of its investment funds, which were exposed to the 
US subprime market, that is, mortgage loans aimed at households with a poor ability to pay. 
The reason for this was that it was impossible to calculate what the assets in the funds were 
worth,  as  trade  in  them  had  largely  ceased.  At  the  same  time,  several  other  large  market 
participants  warned  of  losses  linked  to  the  US  mortgage  market.  The  banks  began  to  be 
unwilling  to  lend  money  to  one  another  and  interest  rates  in  the  interbank  market  rose 
substantially. The US central bank, the Federal Reserve (the Fed), and the European Central 
Bank  (ECB)  took  action  in  this  situation  by  lending  large  volumes  of  money  to  the  banks 
when they could not borrow from one another. 
The  degree  of  financial  unease  then  varied  during  the  course  of  a  whole  year.  The  TED 
spreads peaked when the banks wanted to secure their liquidity ahead of the turn of the year 
2007-2008.  A  further  peak  was  reached  in  March  2008  when  US  investment  bank  Bear 
Sterns suffered acute liquidity problems and suspended payments, but things calmed down 
again after the Fed mediated the takeover of the bank by JP Morgan. 
BIS Review 25/2009 
 1
In  mid-September  2008,  when  the  US  investment  bank  Lehman  Brothers  filed  for 
bankruptcy,  the  financial  turmoil  became  an  acute  financial  crisis.  The  TED  spreads  were 
driven  up  to  very  high  levels.  Many  banks,  institutions  and  funds  were  highly  exposed  to 
Lehman Brothers. Few had expected such an important financial agent to be allowed to fall. 
There was a great deal of concern that more players would end up in a similar situation. The 
remaining large investment banks as such quickly disappeared. 
The financial crisis also spread to other countries and developed into a global financial crisis. 
Access to credit declined on the financial markets around the world and some markets more 
or less ceased functioning. No one dared to lend money to anyone else because of fears that 
the other party could go bankrupt and the money that had been lent would disappear.  
What triggered the financial turmoil almost two years ago was problems in the US housing 
market. After several years of rising rapidly, house prices began to fall in autumn 2006. At 
the  same  time  economic  activity  in  the  United  States  began  to  slow  down.  An  increasing 
number  of  borrowers  experienced  difficulties  in  paying  their  interest  and  instalments.  This 
applied  in  particular  to  borrowers  with  subprime  loans.  Mortgage  institutions  had  often 
packaged  subprime  loans  together  with  other  loans  in  what  were  known  as  structured 
products, which had been sold mainly to investors in the United States and Europe. When 
credit losses increased it was difficult to determine who owned the high-risk assets and how 
large these risks were. 
But the underlying causes of the current crisis are more than just subprime loans and the 
new financial products. One important cause is the imbalances in the global financial system 
that have developed over a long period of time. Savings have been too small in the United 
States  and  too  large  in  China  and  the  oil-producing  countries.  The  United  States  has  had 
large  deficits  in  its  current  account  while  other  countries  have  had  large  surpluses.  At  the 
same  time,  monetary  policy  has  been  very  expansionary  in  the  United  States,  with  low 
interest  rates.  Other  countries  such  as  China  have  pegged  their  currencies  to  the  dollar, 
which meant that monetary policy in the world as a whole became very expansionary. This 
supported  strong  growth  in  the  world  during  the  years  2002-2006  and  gradually  led  to  an 
increase in oil and other commodity prices. 
There are also several causes that have interacted and led to the financial crisis. The credit 
rating agencies have given the new financial products too high ratings because of they have 
not taken sufficient account of the risk that it would not be possible to sell these products in 
the market. The supervision of the financial markets has not given sufficient consideration to 
the  problems  that  can  arise  from  a  house  price  bubble.  The  regulations  in  the  financial 
markets are procyclical, that is, they tend to reinforce fluctuations in economic activity. The 
remuneration  structure  in  the  private  sector  has  moreover  encouraged  short-term  thinking 
and substantial risk-taking.  
Massive measures have helped avoid a financial meltdown  
Massive  measures  by  governments,  central  banks  and  other  authorities  around  the  world 
have meant that a financial meltdown could be avoided. The central banks have contributed 
large liquidity injections, that is, lent money to the banks against collateral. Several central 
banks have also provided emergency liquidity assistance to individual institutions. The Fed, 
the ECB and other central banks have moreover lent money through  swap agreements to 
other central banks to alleviate the crisis in other countries. The central banks have also cut 
policy  rates  rapidly  and  forcefully,  sometimes  in  coordinated  actions,  to  alleviate  the 
repercussions  of  the  financial  crisis  on  production  and  employment.  Governments  have 
offered  guarantees  and  capital  injections  to  reduce  the  risk  of  further  bankruptcies  in  the 
banking  sector.  Several  countries  have  also  decided  on  large  fiscal  policy  stimulation 
packages. 
2 
 BIS Review 25/2009
The  measures  taken  by  central  banks  and  governments  around  the  world  so  far  have 
contributed to reducing the pressure on the interbank markets. Without these measures the 
financial markets would probably have ceased functioning entirely. One sign that the crisis is 
no  longer  as  acute  is  that  the  TED  spreads  have  fallen  in  Sweden,  as  well  as  the  United 
States  and  the  euro  area.  The  spreads  are  now  back  at  around  the  same  levels  that 
prevailed immediately prior to the worsening of the crisis in 2008. But the financial markets 
are still functioning much less efficiently than normal. It is also still difficult for companies to 
finance themselves in the capital market. 
The  Riksbank  has  also  implemented  a  large  number  of  unconventional  measures  to 
safeguard financial stability and mitigate the negative effects of the financial crisis. During the 
second half of 2008 the Riksbank increased its lending to the banks by more than SEK 450 
billion. Almost SEK 200 billion of this was comprised of loans in US dollars. We have largely 
financed  this  through  a  swap  agreement  with  the  Fed.  Our  own  foreign  exchange  reserve 
was not sufficiently large to manage such extensive lending in dollars. The increased lending 
has  meant  that  the  Riksbank’s  balance  sheet  grew  during  the  second  half  of  2008  from 
around SEK 200 billion to around SEK 700 billion.  
We have also changed our collateral requirements so that the banks can offer more types of 
security  as  collateral  and  thus  more  easily  sustain  their  functions  in  the  market.  We  have 
given special liquidity assistance to Kaupthing and Carnegie to safeguard financial stability 
and  ensure  the  functioning  of  the  financial  markets.  We  have  begun  offering  loans  with 
commercial paper as collateral to facilitate companies’ financing. We have also signed swap 
agreements with Iceland and Latvia to support crisis management in these countries. And we 
have cut the interest rate. 
Since 
these 
unconventional  measures.  We  have  decided  on  loans  with  longer  maturities,  with  variable 
interest  rates  and  with  smaller  supplements  and  we  have  signed  a  swap  agreement  with 
Estonia.  
The  Swedish  National  Debt  Office  and  Finansinspektionen  (the  Swedish 
financial 
supervisory authority) have also taken action to alleviate the financial crisis. The Government 
has  raised  the  state  deposit  guarantee  and  extended  it  to  cover  all  types  of  deposits  in 
accounts,  it  has  introduced  a  guarantee  programme,  established  a  guarantee  fund  and 
decided on means of capital injections to the banks. At the same time, the Government is 
conducting a more expansionary fiscal policy than before. 
I now intend to move on to describe international developments. 
the  monetary  policy  meeting 
in  February  we  have 
further  extended 
International developments will be weak this year 
The world economy was in a slowdown phase even before September 2008. Since then the 
deterioration in the world economy has been rapid. All of the large, developed economies are 
now in recession. During the fourth quarter of last year GDP growth in the United States and 
the euro area fell by around 6 per cent calculated on an annual rate. In Japan the fall was 
even greater, more than 12 per cent calculated on an annual rate.  
In  the  wake  of  the  weak  development  households  and  companies  have  become  more 
pessimistic about the future. Confidence indicators have been in free fall and are now at all-
time lows in many countries. For example, the purchasing managers index has never before 
been  so  low.  Share  prices  have  largely  halved  since  the  top  levels  in  2007.  The  great 
uncertainty is also reflected in the large fluctuations in stock market rates. 
For the world as a whole we are now expecting more or less zero growth this year. Growth 
and  developing  economies  appeared  for  a  long  time  to  be  coping  relatively  well.  But  they 
have now also been affected by the crisis. In China, growth slowed down significantly during 
the final quarter of last year. The oil-producing countries in the Middle East and Russia have 
BIS Review 25/2009 
 3
also experienced a sharp slowdown in economic activity. A few years ago GDP growth in the 
growth and developing economies was on average around 7 per cent a year. Now the IMF is 
assuming that it will only amount to just over 3 per cent.1  
The speed of the global economic downturn is unparalleled in modern times and has come 
as a surprise to the Riksbank and many other forecasters. At the beginning of September we 
were expecting world growth to amount to almost 4 per cent in 2009. In the Monetary Policy 
Report  we  published  in  February  we  are  instead  forecasting  almost  zero  growth  this  year. 
Developments  in  the  world  economy  are  thus  expected  to  be  the  weakest  since  the 
beginning of the 1980s. 
Inflation has fallen significantly in recent months. It rose rapidly in 2007 and up to summer 
2008, primarily as a result of rising energy and commodity prices. Since then the price of oil 
has more than halved. This has led to a rapid changeover from high to low inflation. In July 
inflation in the OECD countries was close to 5 per cent. In January it had fallen to zero per 
cent  in  the  United  States  and  to  around  1  per  cent  in  the  euro  area.  Over  the  coming  six 
months we will probably see very low or negative inflation in some industrial nations.  
Inflation  excluding  energy  and  food  prices  has  been  more  stable  in  recent  years.  In  the 
United States, core inflation has fallen slightly, but only from 2.5 per cent during the first half 
of 2008 to 1.7 per cent in January 2009. In the euro area, core inflation is just below 2 per 
cent.  
We forecast that growth will pick up again in 2010  
The forecast published in our February Report assumes that growth in the United States and 
Europe  as  well  as  the  world  economy  will  slowly  pick  up  in  2010.  There  are  three  main 
factors pointing to an upturn:  
• 
The first is the force with which central banks and governments have acted during 
the crisis to stabilise the financial markets. This has meant that one can see some 
signs that the financial markets are gradually beginning to function again.  
The  second  is  the  expansionary  monetary  and  fiscal  policy.  The  policy  rates  are 
very  low  in  all  of  the  large  countries  and  fiscal  policy  has  become  more 
expansionary, particularly in the United States, but also in Europe and many other 
countries.  
The third factor is that inflation will be very low, which strengthens real incomes.  
  But there is a considerable risk that 2010 will also be a year of weak growth 
But  there  is  a  considerable  risk  that  2010  will  also  be  a  year  of  weak  growth  in  the  world 
economy. The main factor in favour of more negative developments is that the financial crisis 
is so potent and on a global scale. Our forecasting methods do not stretch as far in such a 
widespread  financial  crisis  as  the  current  one.  Our  extensive  econometric  models  do  not 
have  any  inbuilt  sophisticated  financial  sector  and  are  therefore  unable  to  capture  the 
mechanisms  in  a  financial  crisis.  Our  more  partial  models  and  assessments  have  some 
forecasting ability up to one year, but the uncertainty is considerable, even one year ahead. 
This is indicated in particular by the revisions to the forecasts for this year. 
It  is  thus  necessary  to  take  into  account  experiences  of  earlier  financial  crises.  Harvard 
professor  Kenneth  Rogoff,  who  is  also  one  of  the  advisers  to  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
                                                 
1   The 
recent 
IMF’s  most 
see http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2009/update/01. 
forecast 
update 
from 
the 
end 
of 
January 
2009, 
4 
 BIS Review 25/2009
Riksbank, has together with his colleague professor Carmen Reinhart studied the effects of 
various financial crises. They consider the Swedish bank crisis of the 1990s to be one of the 
five most serious financial crises, “the big five”.2 One of their studies shows that the financial 
crises that have occurred in industrial nations in recent decades have been followed by long 
periods  of  weak  growth.3 Seen  as  an  average  of  the  18  crises  reported,  this  concerns  a 
period  of  three  years  of  low  growth  and  for  the  "big  five"  an  average  of  three  years  of 
negative growth. 
In  their  most  recent  study  of  financial  crises,  which  was  presented  in  January,  professors 
Reinhart  and  Rogoff  have  also  chosen  to  include  growth  economies.4 They  find  three 
common elements with regard to the consequences of the financial crises:  
• 
Firstly, house and share prices fall substantially and over a long period of time. For 
house prices the average fall in real terms is 35 per cent over a six-period and for 
shares it is 55 per cent over three and a half years.  
Secondly,  financial  crises  are  associated  with  large  declines  in  production  and 
employment.  On  average,  GDP  per  capita  falls  by  9  per  cent  over  two  years  and 
unemployment rises by an average of 7 percentage points over four years. 
Thirdly,  national  debt  almost  doubles,  but  not  primarily  as  a  result  of  the  costs  of 
recapitalising the financial system. Instead, the main causes are reduced tax income 
and costs for fiscal policy stimulation. 
  Experiences  from  earlier  financial  crises  thus  show  that  they  are  usually  followed  by  a 
prolonged period of low growth and falling employment, falling asset prices and a substantial 
deterioration in public finances. This time the crisis is a global one, while most of the earlier 
crises have been of a national or regional nature. In my opinion, this indicated at the most 
recent monetary policy meeting that there is a risk that the economic downturn will be more 
prolonged than in the main scenario and that 2010 will also be a year of weak growth in the 
world economy. 
An  important  condition  for  growth  in  the  world  to  pick  up  again  is  that  the  situation  in  the 
world’s largest economy, the United States, stabilises and in particular that the US housing 
market  shows  an  upturn.  Real  house  prices  in  the  United  States  have  remained  largely 
stable from the 1950s until the mid-1990s. They then rose by approximately 80 per cent and 
are  now  falling  rapidly.  As  long  as  they  continue  to  fall,  household  wealth  will  fall  and  the 
banks’ losses will rise. 
I shall now move on to part three of my speech, which concerns the Swedish economy. 
GDP growth in Sweden will be negative this year 
Sweden is a small, open economy. We are therefore affected when growth abroad declines. 
It has a rapid impact on Swedish exports. The decline in the export of goods during the fourth 
quarter of 2008 is the largest measured in an individual quarter. Orders in the export market 
have also fallen substantially and point to a continued fall in exports in coming months.  
Manufacturing companies are very gloomy with regard to future prospects. Both the National 
Institute of Economic Research’s confidence indicator for the manufacturing sector and the 
purchasing managers index are at all-time lows.  
                                                 
2   The other four are Spain 1977, Norway 1987, Finland 1991 and Japan 1992. 
3   Carmen M. Reinhart, and Kenneth S. Rogoff, “Is the 2007 U.S. Subprime Crisis So Different? An International 
Historical Comparison”. American Economic Review Vol. 98 No. 2: 339-344. (2008). 
4   Carmen  M.  Reinhart,  and  Kenneth  S.  Rogoff.  “The  Aftermath  of  Financial  Crises.”  Essay  prepared  for 
presentation at the American Economic Association in San Francisco, 3 January 2009. 
BIS Review 25/2009 
 5
Several  companies  state  in  the  Riksbank’s  company  survey,  which  was  carried  out  in 
December  and  January,  that  they  have  not  experienced  such  a  sudden  slowdown  in  the 
economy as during the final months of 2008. The companies also say that they have found it 
increasingly difficult to finance their operations. But no clear credit crunch is yet visible in the 
official financial market statistics. Lending to companies increased by 0.3 per cent in January 
compared with the previous month and by 10.6 per cent compared with the same month last 
year.  
Our most recent forecast is that GDP will fall by 1.4 per cent this year. Towards the end of 
the year GDP is expected to begin to rise again. But as with international economic activity, 
there is a substantial risk that Swedish developments will also be poorer than in our main 
scenario.  
The  GDP  forecast  for  this  year  has  been  revised  down  substantially  since  last  autumn.  In 
September 2008 the Riksbank forecast growth this year of 0.9 per cent. It is very rare that 
forecasts are changed so much in such a short time. The revision is way outside the 95 per 
cent  confidence  interval  that  usually  applies  to  our  forecasts.  It  is  also  the  reason  why 
monetary policy has changed so radically since last autumn.  
The weakened economic activity is now also having an increasingly clear effect on the labour 
market.  Employment  has  begun  to  fall  and  unemployment  has  begun  to  increase.  Labour 
market indicators such as redundancy notices and the number of job vacancies are pointing 
to a continued rapid decline in the labour market. In the February Report our forecast is for 
employment to decline by almost 200,000 persons at the end of 2010, from the top level in 
2008, and for unemployment to rise to around 9 per cent in 2010. 
However,  our  most  recent  forecast  is  that  the  current  economic  downturn  will  not  be  as 
severe as that during the crisis in the 1990s. On the other hand, we are assuming that it will 
be  more  severe  than  the  most  recent  economic  downturn  in  connection  with  the  dotcom 
crash in 2000. This is indicated by the various measures of resource utilisation we regularly 
produce. 
Since the monetary policy meeting in February Statistics Sweden has published the National 
Accounts for the fourth quarter of 2008. GDP fell by just over 9 per cent calculated as an 
annual rate during the fourth quarter of 2008. This is the weakest rate of change measured 
during  the  period  for  which  statistical  comparisons  are  available,  that  is,  since  1980.  Our 
forecast in the February Monetary Policy Report assumed that GDP would fall by almost 4 
per cent calculated as an annual rate during the fourth quarter. 
Inflation will fall rapidly 
In  2008  CPI  inflation  rose  up  to  September.  It  then  peaked  at  4.4  per  cent.  Since  then 
inflation has fallen rapidly. In January 2009 it amounted to 1.3 per cent. This was around a 
tenth more than we estimated at the most recent monetary policy meeting. A large part of the 
decline is due to the fall in mortgage rates and energy prices. Underlying inflation measured 
as  the  CPIF,  which  excludes  changes  in  mortgage  rates,  amounted  to  2.1  per  cent  in 
January. This underlying inflation has also fallen in recent months, but not as much as CPI 
inflation. If one also excludes energy prices, underlying inflation amounted to 2.4 per cent in 
January.  Food  prices  increased  by  around  5  per  cent  in  January  and  are  still  holding  up 
inflation. 
We see ahead of us that CPI inflation will continue to fall over the coming six months and 
that it will become negative for a large part of the year. But the heavy fall is mainly due to our 
cutting the repo rate, which means that mortgage rates fall. In addition, energy prices will be 
lower than one year ago, which will also push down inflation. At the beginning of 2010 the 
rate of increase of the CPI will quickly rise again and be over 3 per cent at the end of 2011. I 
shall return to this a little later. 
6 
 BIS Review 25/2009
Underlying inflation measured as the CPIF excluding energy is calculated to be close to 2 per 
cent during the forecast period. It is kept up at the beginning of the period by the fact that unit 
labour  costs,  that  is,  the  labour  cost  per  unit  produced,  has  increased  relatively  quickly  in 
recent years as a result of weak development in productivity. The National Accounts for 2008 
point to weaker productivity and a larger increase in unit labour costs than we were expecting 
at our monetary policy meeting.  
Moreover, the krona has weakened substantially since the autumn, which is expected to lead 
to higher imported inflation. You now have to pay more than 9 kronor for a US dollar and 
more than 11 kronor for a euro. Compared with a basket of currencies belonging to our most 
important trade partners, what is usually known as the TCW index, the krona has fallen by 
more  than  20  per  cent  since  September.  The  krona  has  continued  to  weaken  since  the 
monetary policy meeting.  
What the weaker GDP growth in the fourth quarter of 2008, the increased unit labour costs, 
the  weaker  krona  and  other  new  information  means  altogether  for  our  assessment  of  the 
Swedish economy is something we Executive Board members will have to consider at our 
next monetary policy meeting on 20 April. 
I  shall  now  move  on  to  the  fourth  part  of  my  speech,  about  current  monetary  policy  in 
Sweden. 
The Riksbank has cut the repo rate to 1 per cent and may need to cut it further 
At the most recent monetary policy meeting on 10 February the Riksbank cut the repo rate to 
1 per cent. We Executive Board members were unanimous on this decision. Inflation does 
not at present entail any restriction on cutting the repo rate. At the same time, developments 
in the real economy are so weak that they motivate an even more expansionary monetary 
policy. In total, the repo rate has been cut by 3.75 percentage points since the autumn.  
At the same time, the repo rate forecasts were lowered. Personally, I consider it reasonable 
to have a repo rate path that indicates we will continue to have a low repo rate over a long 
period  of  time.  The  repo  rate  may  need  to  be  cut  further  if  economic  developments  are 
weaker than we were expecting at the monetary policy meeting. However, it is also important 
to be aware that interest rates will not remain this low in the long term. 
In this context I would like to comment on some aspects of monetary policy: the monetary 
policy target, inflation expectations and the weak krona. 
The monetary policy target 
The target of monetary policy is expressed as being that CPI inflation should be 2 per cent. 
But with the repo rate decision and the repo rate path we now have as a condition for our 
forecasts, CPI inflation will not be close to 2 per cent towards the end of the forecast period; 
it will instead be a good 3 per cent. This could be considered a breach of the monetary policy 
strategy we have formulated. In this we write that monetary policy should normally be aimed 
at attaining the inflation target within two years. But the current situation is not normal.  
In the present situation it is more reasonable to aim for CPIF inflation being close to 2 per 
cent towards the end of the forecast period. And it will be, according to our forecasts. CPI 
inflation varies substantially over time, partly as a result of our own repo rate decisions. The 
substantial  fall  in  inflation  this  year  is  primarily  due  to  our  own  repo  rate  cuts  and  falling 
energy prices. Inflation measured in terms of the CPIF, on the other hand, is more stable and 
provides  a  better  picture  of  the  underlying  inflation  trend.  During  the  period  1995-2008,  in 
which we have hade an inflation target, inflation measured as the CPIF has on average been 
close to 2 per cent and rarely outside of the tolerance interval of 1-3 per cent. The target for 
monetary  policy  is  still  that  CPI  inflation  should  be  2  per  cent,  but  we  must  accept  that  it 
fluctuates around 2 per cent as a result of repo rate changes.  
BIS Review 25/2009 
 7
At the most recent monetary policy meeting my colleague Lars E.O. Svensson took up the 
question  of  temporarily  replacing  the  inflation  target  with  a  price  level  target.  Lars  has  put 
forward  this  idea  earlier  in  his  research  into  monetary  policy  with  a  zero  interest  rate  and 
experiences  from  Japan's  deflation  problems  in  the  1990s.  If  the  central  bank  has  cut  the 
nominal policy rate to zero, one may find oneself in a situation where the real interest rate is 
too high to be able to stimulate the economy. The central bank must then bring up inflation 
expectations and thereby bring down the real interest rate. According to Lars, one means of 
creating  expectations  of  higher  inflation  and  escaping  from  this  liquidity  trap  could  be  to 
introduce a temporary price level target, for instance in the form of an average inflation target 
where  inflation  must  remain  around  the  target  over  a  five-year  period.  The  central  bank 
would  then  have  the  possibility  to  compensate  for  low  inflation  or  deflation  through  a 
correspondingly higher inflation rate further ahead. The idea is that if the target is credible, 
inflation expectations will rise and the real interest rate will fall.  
My opinion is that we should not change the inflation target. We have invested so much in 
the credibility of the current inflation target and it has functioned very well. Inflation has on 
average been close to 2 per cent during the 14 years we have had an inflation target, and in 
the longer term inflation expectations are firmly anchored close to 2 per cent. Nor does Lars 
suggest  that  we  should  change  the  inflation  target.  He  discusses  a  hypothetical  situation 
where the policy rate is zero and inflation expectations are no longer firmly anchored around 
the inflation target, but are much lower. However, even if we were to find ourselves in such a 
situation we should not change the inflation target. It takes a long time to build up confidence 
in an inflation target, and to temporarily replace the inflation target with a price level target 
would damage credibility. 
Inflation expectations 
The question of the importance of inflation expectations has risen once again in that there 
has been greater discussion of deflation, particularly in the United States, where the policy 
rate is close to zero. In February, the Fed for the first time published its long-term forecasts 
for growth, unemployment and inflation. The forecasts show that the Fed is aiming to keep 
inflation between 1.7 and 2.0 per cent a year in the long term. According to the Chairman of 
the  Federal  Reserve,  Ben  Bernanke,  this  inflation  forecast  in  actual  fact  represents  an 
inflation target. The increased clarity over the Fed’s aims is intended to help stabilise inflation 
expectations. 
It is important for monetary policy that inflation expectations in the longer term are anchored 
firmly around the inflation target. Previously, when inflation was higher than 2 per cent it was 
important that expectations did not rise too far above two per cent. Now that inflation is lower 
than 2 per cent and the forecasts point towards CPI inflation being negative later this year, it 
is important that they do not fall too far below 2 per cent and in particular that there are no 
expectations of deflation. 
One should not attach too much importance to surveys of inflation expectations. They have 
their  limitations.  But  they  are  nevertheless  interesting  as  a  part  of  the  base  for  monetary 
policy.  I  believe  that  the  following  conclusions  can  be  drawn  from  Prospera’s  most  recent 
survey, published in January:  
• 
Firstly,  inflation  expectations  five  years  ahead  have  fallen  from  2.6  per  cent  in 
October  to  2.3  per  cent  in  January.  This  is  good  as  they  were  a  little  too  high  in 
October.  
Secondly, inflation expectations in the longer term have not been pushed up by our 
rapid and large repo rate cuts. As I said, they have instead declined.  
Thirdly,  there  are  no  widespread  expectations  of  deflation  in  the  longer  term. 
Inflation  expectations  five  years  ahead  are  close  to  2  per  cent.  The  normal 
correlation between actual inflation and inflation expectations five years ahead also 
BIS Review 25/2009
  8 
  indicates that inflation expectations will remain close to 2 per cent even if the CPI 
falls in 2009 in line with our forecast.  
Fourthly,  inflation  expectations  two  years  ahead  have  fallen  from  2.8  per  cent  in 
October to 1.5 per cent in January. This is slightly more worrying. It is a larger fall 
than  the  normal  correlation  between  actual inflation  and inflation  expectations  two 
years  ahead  would  indicate.  The  fact  that  they  are  far  below  2  per  cent  also 
indicates that the interest rate should remain low for a longer period of time.  
On  the  other  hand,  inflation  expectations  one  year  ahead  are  not  as  interesting  in  this 
perspective. They do not say very much about the credibility of monetary policy, as inflation 
in the short term can deviate quite substantially from 2 per cent, even if monetary policy is 
well-balanced. 
The weak krona 
The  financial  crisis  has  also  given  rise  to  large  fluctuations  in  the  international  foreign 
exchange markets. Investors have turned to large currencies, which are perceived as more 
liquid and secure. In this situation the krona has experienced the largest weakening since it 
was  allowed  to  float  in  November  1992.  The  Riksbank  does  not  have  any  target  for  the 
krona, but our assessment is that the weakening is temporary and primarily a result of the 
financial crisis. We are expecting the krona to strengthen again as the crisis wanes, partly 
because Sweden has for a long period of time had a stable surplus in its foreign trade. 
But  there  is  a  risk  that  the  weakening  will  be  more  prolonged.  This  would  lead  to  exports 
strengthening  and  imports  slowing  down,  but  at  the  same  time  provide  an  inflationary 
impulse. In the current situation this may be an advantage in the short term, as economic 
activity  is  now  weak  and  inflation  is  low.  But  in  the  longer  term  a  currency  that  fluctuates 
substantially can be a problem. It increases uncertainty.  
At  the  monetary  policy  meeting  Lars  E.O.  Svensson  also  took  up  the  possibility,  as  a  last 
resort  and  in  a  hypothetical  situation  with  a  zero  interest  rate  and  very  low  inflation 
expectations,  of  introducing  a  temporary  exchange  rate  target  to  bring  up  inflation 
expectations.  This  method  would  involve  first  introducing  a  price  level  target  and  then 
depreciating  the  currency  to  attain  this  price  level  target.  It  would  in  theory  make  inflation 
expectations  rise  and  inflation  accelerate.  The  real  interest  rate  would  therefore  be  lower, 
which would stimulate production and employment.  
My own opinion is that the Riksbank should not even temporarily hold the krona exchange 
rate at an artificially low level. When the repo rate is cut, this normally means that the krona 
weakens. But the current weakening of the krona began back in August last year before the 
repo  rate  cuts  were  made  and  ought  mainly  to  be  due  to  the  financial  crisis.  There  are 
primarily three reasons against temporary interventions to keep the krona at a low level. The 
first is that there is no reason to do this, as underlying inflation and inflation expectations are 
close  to  2  per  cent.  The  second  reason  is  that  the  current  problem  is  that  this  is  a  global 
crisis  and  all  countries  cannot  depreciate  their  currencies  at  the  same  time  to  stimulate 
production and push up inflation. The third is that our experiences of trying to solve problems 
by depreciating the currency are not positive.  
However,  there  may  be  reason  to  further  develop  the  type  of  unconventional  measures  I 
talked about earlier and to do this at the rate motivated by the problems. 
Concluding remarks 
Let me now summarise my view of the current economic situation. 
The  financial  turmoil  worsened  in  the  autumn  and  has  since  then  developed  into  a  global 
financial  crisis.  As  a  result  of  the  developments  in  the  financial  markets,  international 
BIS Review 25/2009 
 9
developments will be weak this year. There is also a considerable risk that economic activity 
will  also  remain  weak  next  year.  GDP  growth  in  Sweden  will  be  negative  this  year  and 
inflation will fall. The Riksbank has therefore cut the repo rate to 1 per cent and may need to 
cut it further. 
At the Riksbank we have now begun work on producing new forecasts for the coming years. 
On 20 April, my colleagues and I will take a new monetary policy decision. We will then once 
more take a stance on economic developments and on how the interest rate should be set to 
attain our inflation rate of 2 per cent in the long term. 
Thank you! 
10 
 BIS Review 25/2009
