Marion Williams: The global financial crisis – can we withstand the shock  
Address by Dr Marion Williams, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, at the Luncheon 
Meeting of the Barbados Chamber of Commerce, Needhams Point, St Michael, 25 February 
2009. 
 Mr.  Magnus  Whitehead  CEO  of  the  Barbados  Chamber  of  Commerce  and  Master  of 
Ceremonies,  Mr.  Andy  Armstrong  Senior  Vice  President,  Mr.  Roger  Blackman  Council 
Member,  Mr.  Oliver  Jordan  President  of  the  Barbados  Bankers  Association,  ladies  and 
gentlemen. 
This  address  comes  at  a  most  important  time.  Often  in  times  like  these  in  the  interest  of 
financial stability one tries to avoid  controversy. However, regulators have an obligation to 
inform.  It  is  important  that  we  strike  the  right  balance.  I  trust  that  at  the  end  of  this 
presentation I would have informed, would have inspired confidence in our financial system 
and would also have avoided controversy. 
As  you  are  aware,  the  genesis  of  the  current  crisis  was  shaped  in  the  US  by  complex 
financing structures – structures which are generally not found in emerging countries such as 
ours so our region would largely have avoided a direct impact. It is true that it started as a 
crisis in the financial sector, particularly in the US, and then Europe, but it is no longer just a 
financial  crisis.  Indeed,  though  the  financial  sector  in  the  developed  world  is  in  crisis  the 
world  is  in  a  global  economic  recession.  Indeed  in  some  cases  the  financial  sector  in 
emerging  markets  has  not  been  as  seriously  affected  but  almost  all  developing  countries’ 
economies are at best suffering a downturn. 
Emerging countries have been hit on a number of fronts as a result of the global economic 
downturn.  Firstly,  through  trade  reduction,  secondly,  through  liquidity  tightness  in  some 
domestic  financial  markets  and  lower  capital  inflows,  and  thirdly,  through  a  reduction  or  a 
slowdown in remittances from overseas. For these reasons, it will be a difficult 2009 for most 
developing countries. Having been until recently impacted by the twin food and fuel shocks, 
most emerging markets now have to face this additional financial and fiscal shock which may 
carry  severe  consequences,  especially  for  those  economies  with  weaker  macroeconomic 
fundamentals. 
Fortunately  for  Barbados  it  entered  this  period  with  relatively  strong  macroeconomic 
fundamentals. It had had 7 years of positive growth, its fiscal deficit was manageable and 
though  its  debt  ratio  was  relatively  high,  its  external  debt  ratio  was  quite  low.  It  had  also 
recorded annual surpluses on its balance of payments and its financial system was sound. 
The  continued  global  financial  uncertainty  can  however  deprive  or  slow  the  access  of 
developing  countries  to  funding  for  high  priority  development  objectives  including  heath, 
education  and  infrastructure  –  in  our  case  primarily  tourism-related  activities  and  can 
aggravate a likely economic downturn. 
Central banks and governments across the globe have been forced to take unprecedented 
measures to preserve stability, in an attempt to cushion the impact of the financial crisis on 
their economies. They have been forced to broaden the pool of eligible collateral in order to 
provide  liquidity.  The  speed  and  magnitude  of  monetary  policy  easing  during  the  past  six 
months  or  so, 
recapitalisations  and  government  guarantees  has  been 
unprecedented. 
The  ripple  effects  have  adversely 
the  new 
industrialising export economies – as we have seen in China and the Far East – as global 
demand shrinks. How badly the less aggressive exporters will be affected – like those in the 
Caribbean  –  is  not  yet  clear,  but as  prices  fall  those  countries  whose  exports  were  barely 
the  economic  condition  of 
influenced 
including 
BIS Review 27/2009 
 1
competitive  will  have  difficulty  in  retaining  their  market  share.  Those  with  special  market 
niches will likely stand a better chance of maintaining volumes. 
The brightest spot is likely to be a very low inflation rate, although there is concern in North 
America of possible deflation. 
While the efforts of policy makers in the major economies will no doubt in time “heal” their 
economies,  in  the  short  to  medium  term,  their  responses  are  likely  to  impact  on  us  in 
Barbados and the developing world generally. The severity of the impact is largely uncertain. 
One can hypothesise about the impact on the regional offshore or financial services sector of 
the blanket guarantees to bank depositors and creditors by some of the governments in the 
developed  world.  These  guarantees  tend  not  to  extend  beyond  national  borders  and  may 
have consequences for the eagerness of investors to go offshore. In addition, much wealth 
has  been  lost  in  the  financial  meltdown  and  the  international  financial  sector  will  need  to 
market itself very aggressively in order to maintain the growth it has experienced over the 
past five years in the area of wealth management. Indeed recent events in Antigua should 
prompt us to more aggressively try to distinguish ourselves from the pack and try to avoid 
being linked by geography. Though the US economy has been weakening, the repatriation of 
funds  to  the  US  has  been  evident  in  the  strengthening  of  the  US  dollar  in  the  past  three 
months  versus  most  of  the  major  currencies,  with  the  exception  of  the  Japanese  yen.  Of 
note,  this  is  also  likely  to  negatively  impact  capital  markets  in  emerging  economies,  as 
foreign investors from Europe and North America, retreat. 
Much has been said about the impact of the global recession on the Barbadian economy, 
especially  on  sectors  such  as  tourism  and  construction.  At  the  Central  Bank,  we  have 
recognised the need to keep the real economy going and accordingly have reduced interest 
rates rapidly over the past six months, so that the reduction being passed through translates 
to lower bank lending rates. This should serve to ease the financing conditions for companies 
and households. 
I have spoken elsewhere about labour market flexibility as a key method for mitigating the 
effects of the downturn. Today however, I will speak primarily about how our financial system 
is positioned to withstand these global pressures. 
Today, policy makers all over the globe are assessing whether – and to what extent – certain 
features  of  the  financial  system  encouraged  market  excesses  and  the  build  up  of  large 
financial  imbalances.  Many  are  also  considering  what  changes  should  be  made  to  the 
financial system and to the regulatory and supervisory framework. 
First I will start with capital adequacy and tell you where Barbados stands. Adequate capital 
provides the institution with a buffer to support it in bad times. It allows the bank to make 
losses  without  going  insolvent  and  to  effect  writedowns  and  to  suffer  reductions  in  asset 
values without facing the prospect of its assets falling below its liabilities. 
Capital adequacy 
The  capital  adequacy  framework  based  on  Basel  II  emphasises  greater  sensitivity  to  risk, 
because it links required capital to the perceived riskiness of assets. 
In the US, information available suggests that tier 1 capital of most large US banks is 7.5% of 
assets, and for European banks 3.3%. In Barbados a comparable ratio is about 11.5% well 
above the statutory threshold – somewhat higher than even the Canadian banks which are at 
9%. 
In normal times adequacy of capital can sustain an institution in a bad patch. However, we 
have  observed  such  dramatic  declines  in  the  market  value  of  assets  that  8%  –  the  Basel 
guideline  for  combined  tier  1  and  tier  2  –  is  no  longer  adequate,  since  market  values  can 
move swiftly and by large percentages, as has happened in recent times. 
2 
 BIS Review 27/2009
Reserve requirements 
While  many  central  banks  in  developed  economies  have  virtually  abandoned  reserve 
requirements, commercial banks in Barbados are still required by the Central Bank to hold 
reserve requirements. This can act as a source of support should banks experience liquidity 
problems.  The  Central  Bank  discourages  banks  from  falling  below  their  required  liquidity 
levels but if they are in difficulties and are willing to meet the costs, it is accessible. A second 
tier, called securities requirements, is also in place in Barbados. Central banks across the 
developed world do not require this tier of reserves – not even in Canada – though some 
central banks in the developing world still retain it. However, for years developing countries 
including Barbados, were pressured by the IMF to remove it. In these circumstances if banks 
in the US and UK and Europe had such reserves, they would have had a fall-back position – 
ability to sell off these securities or have the central bank lower the requirement so providing 
them with liquidity. Commercial banks in Barbados therefore have three tiers of support; cash 
reserve requirements, securities requirements and capital requirements. 
Corporate governance 
Part  of  the  process  of  vigilance  also  includes  the  need  to  continuously  look  at  the 
strengthening of corporate governance standards. Corporate governance over the past few 
years has been in the forefront of public opinion. In some markets, policymakers are rapidly 
taking steps to ensure that governing boards understand the nature and complexity of the 
risk a corporation is assuming. 
Review of accounting rules 
There  have  been  stringent  calls  to  review  the  accounting  rules  applied  to  financial 
transactions, in particular the mark to market rules. Indeed, the current accounting rules have 
been  highlighted  as  having  contributed  to  financial  market volatility  in  the  US  and  Europe. 
When  markets  are  erratic  as  they  are  in  the  US,  marking-to-market  does  not  provide 
accurate  or  useful  information,  especially  from  a  medium  or  longer-term  perspective. 
International regulators are currently reviewing those rules. 
Moreover,  the  current  impairment  rules  have  not  allowed  banks  to  have  forward-looking 
provisions so that they could build up provisions in good times, and draw them down when 
the cycle turns, and defaults surface. We should therefore reflect on how we can dampen or 
correct  the  pro-cyclical  impact  of  fair-value  accounting  and  provisioning  regimes,  without 
compromising  the  delivery  of  accurate  and  useful  information  or  a  “true  and  fair  value”  to 
investors. 
The mortgage market 
Barbadians are not a high risk-taking people and our banks have tended to be risk averse. 
For this reason, even 100% mortgages have been slow in coming to Barbados. Indeed some 
banks  do  not  agree  with  it  even  now,  because  they  believe  that  the  borrower  must  have 
some stake in the borrowing or else if things get difficult early in the life of the loan or market 
values tumble, he can walk away with impunity. In addition, while banks in Barbados offer 
variable rate mortgages they have not got involved in step-up mortgages. Indeed our variable 
rate mortgages are always related to future market rates, not to a pre-determined schedule 
of step-ups in interest rates. The notion of having an enticement rate to lure borrowers in, 
which steps up sharply two to three years later irrespective of where market rates are at the 
time, has not been a part of our financial landscape. In our situation higher default rates tend 
to occur mostly if the job market gets difficult and borrowers cannot service their loans, or, as 
was  becoming  the  case  late  last  year  when  high  rates  of  inflation  eroded  real  incomes. 
BIS Review 27/2009 
 3
Fortunately, that should be corrected in 2009 as low global demand will lead to lower inflation 
rates. 
In  recent  times  however,  the  lure  of  the  credit  card  has  become  a  potential  problem. 
Borrowers  must  be  more  prudent  in  accepting  the  offer  of  an  increasing  number  of  credit 
cards. In this regard, the Central Bank has initiated a financial education programme which 
will  include  guidance  on  money  management  and  personal  financial  planning.  This 
programme was launched last year and will continue in 2009, and will draw on presenters 
inside and outside the Bank. For the moment, however, although there has been an increase 
in delinquency as noted in the increase in commercial bank provisioning last year, it is within 
manageable proportions. 
Securitization 
The policy of originate and securitize taken to its extreme in the case of the US market is 
also a development that does not exist here. There is limited securitization here in Barbados. 
In fact there is not sufficient securitization. Entities which were supposed to be securitizing, 
that  is,  issuing  commercial  paper  and  money  market  instruments  were  issuing  certificates 
that looked very much like deposits. Perhaps this is related to the Barbadian desire to avoid 
taking risks, but it shifts the risks on to the institution. In the case of commercial paper, it can 
be traded and could trade at above or below its value, so that the institution does not bear all 
the risk. This allows the lender to take his money out at any time – at a price. In the case of 
deposits the institution has an obligation to return the value of the deposit plus interest at the 
due  date,  unless  some  prior  arrangement  has  been  agreed  as  to  early  removal.  To  this 
extent in the Barbados situation with its tendency to deposit-taking, systems are less liquid. 
However securitization has its merits. It leads to a more liquid market where money moves 
more quickly. In times where liquidity is needed rapidly, thinly securitized markets have their 
downsides, though they tend to be more safe and less volatile. In such cases the strength of 
the balance sheet is more important than changes in the market value of deposit institutions. 
All the balance sheets of financial institutions that I have seen show solvent institutions so 
though this is not the only relevant factor, we start with an advantage. 
Risk management 
Risk-taking is a necessary element in conducting business, and effective risk management 
systems,  together  with  good  governance  strong  regulation  and  supervision  all  serve  to 
mitigate  risk  exposure.  Supervisors  instil  market  discipline  by  employing  strong  licensing 
criteria that ensure the fitness and propriety of directors and executive officers. We should 
not use the opportunity of these hiccups to remove ourselves from risk-taking. We need to 
take  well  considered  risk.  It  is  part  of  the  growth  process.  Enforceable  guidelines  (e.g. 
corporate governance, operational risk management and capital adequacy) and regulations 
must  be  supported  by  effective  ongoing  monitoring  of  risk  exposures  and  monitoring  for 
compliance  with  legal  requirements.  Sometimes  legislation  is  necessary  to  ensure  that 
supervisors have the needed powers of enforcement to intervene at  various stages where 
infractions may be detected so as to avoid escalation of the problem. Both the Central Bank 
of Barbados and the Supervisor of Insurance possess legal powers to conduct inspections of 
their licensees. In some cases the strength of the oversight in the non-bank sector needs to 
be enhanced as was mentioned in the last Financial Sector Assessment programme report. 
Capital controls 
In  the  Barbados  situation,  capital  controls  have  served  us  well.  They  serve  to  control  and 
monitor  cross-border  financial  transactions.  Further,  entities  that  are  licensed  under  the 
Financial  Institutions  Act,  Cap  324  are  additionally  subject  to  credit  exposure  restrictions 
4 
 BIS Review 27/2009
relative to capital – that is levels on lending to a single person or group. Where these are 
below acceptable levels, licensees are given specified time periods to have them corrected. 
This is a key credit risk control and is monitored on a quarterly basis using prudential returns 
submitted by all Central Bank licensees. Institutions are not always perfect, breaches can be 
corrected and the earlier the better, but it must be done in an orderly fashion. A disorderly 
correction is to be avoided. 
Consolidated supervision 
Consolidated  supervision  of  financial  groups  necessitates  collaboration  at  different  levels. 
Memoranda of Understanding among all domestic regulatory agencies are key in facilitating 
information  exchange  and  collaboration.  There  is  such  an  agreement  among  all  domestic 
regulators in Barbados. Regulatory Policy Councils have also emerging in jurisdictions with 
multiple regulatory agencies (Jamaica – 2000, The Bahamas – 2001, Trinidad and Tobago – 
2005) as another forum for collaboration. These are however evolving. The Central Bank of 
Barbados  hosts  a  similar  forum  with  domestic  regulators,  on  which  cross-sectoral 
representatives  from  the  board  of  national  oversight  bodies  such  as  the  Anti-Money 
Laundering  Authority  are  included.  This  serves  as  an  opportunity  to  share  concerns  on 
common issues or issues which affect some or all regulators. It is important also to note the 
ongoing work at harmonization regulatory and supervisory standards by such bodies as the 
Caribbean  Group  of  Banking  Supervisors,  a  group  which  is  over  20  years  old,  works 
collaboratively with banking supervisors in the region. In addition, there is the Offshore Group 
of  Banking  Supervisors,  Association  of  Supervisors  of  Banks  of  the  Americas  which  have 
wider  representation  within  Latin  America  and  the  Caribbean  Financial  Action  Task  Force 
which is focused on anti-money laundering. Barbados is a member of all of these bodies and 
benefits  from  shared  views.  However  there  is  clearly  a  need  for  greater  intra  regional 
collaboration, particularly with respect to crisis management. 
Slipping between the cracks – regulatory arbitrage investment houses 
Regulatory  and  supervisory  regimes  differ  across  the  region  and  models  reflect  shared 
responsibility between central banks or monetary authorities, and government departments. 
Consolidation of regimes has been a gradual process and Barbados is presently considering 
a  revised  model  that  will  see  the  establishment  of  a  Financial  Services  Commission.  For 
example, insurance companies are supervised by the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago. 
This is not so in Barbados and Jamaica. Credit unions are also supervised by the Central 
Bank of Trinidad and Tobago and in Jamaica, by the Bank of Jamaica. This is not the case in 
Barbados. Despite the variance across the region, regulatory arbitrage has been minimized 
as  all  sectoral  supervisors  benchmark  against  international  banking,  securities,  insurance 
and credit union standards and principles. (Regulatory arbitrage refers to a situation where 
regulations differ across jurisdictions and persons pick where they are going to do business 
to take advantage of these differences.) 
Although a standardized CARICOM Financial Services Bill has been drafted, with facilitating 
financial  services  and  investment  Agreements,  which  collectively  will  provide  a  more 
harmonized legislative framework it has not yet been finalised. It (a) establishes consistent 
legal  and  regulatory  requirements  for  financial groups;  and  (b)  engenders  compliance  with 
prudential  norms  (including  capital  adequacy  and  large  exposure  limits),  and  ensures 
evaluation  and  control  of  risk  on  a  group-wide  basis.  In  that  environment  the  rules  and 
guidelines involved would be the same even though the responsibility for oversight may be 
different.  The  pace  of  implementation  has  been  challenged  recently  by  ongoing  efforts  of 
individual  jurisdictions  to  reform  their  own  national  frameworks.  For  example  Trinidad  has 
just passed a new FIA and this would have been pre-occupying their attention.) Global and 
regional  crises  do  not  wait  however  until  we  are  ready.  Recent  new  developments 
BIS Review 27/2009 
 5
necessitate an acceleration of the pace of such work and ongoing events now spur us to re-
evaluate mechanisms to prepare regional approaches to responding to such problems. 
Regional and national responses 
As  we  in  the  region  collectively  grapple  with  the  current  financial  crisis,  originating  in  the 
Trinidad  market  we  will  continue  to  strengthen  our  own  regulatory  and  supervisory 
frameworks at the national level. What we must not assume, is that because it happened in 
Trinidad  it  must  happen  here.  Within  recent  times,  several  regional  jurisdictions  have  had 
Financial Sector Assessment Program reviews performed  by the IMF, or AML/CFT mutual 
evaluations by the  Caribbean Financial Action Task Force. In the Barbados case, banking 
has traditionally received good ratings and findings were uneven as it relates to regulation in 
other sectors. 
The need for increased co-operation 
Given the levels of financial integration globally, and notably, the growing systemic relevance 
of cross-border corporate groups, regulators are aware that they must look to enhance their 
cross-border relations particularly with respect to crisis management. At the last meeting of 
the  Caribbean  regional  Central  Bank  Governors  a  decision  was  taken  that  the  Caribbean 
Group  of  Bank  Supervisors  (CGBS)  should  develop  a  management  protocol  to  deal  with 
events like the one currently being experienced. The CGBS provided an outline of what such 
a  protocol  should  include,  but  it  remains  a  work  in  process  and  has  been  overtaken  by 
events. The plan is to be submitted to Governors for their approval in May 2009. 
One of the key lessons of the global crisis stems from the fact that in an increasingly market-
based  and  interconnected  financial  system,  disturbances  are  likely  to  affect  fundamental 
market mechanisms, such as the distribution of liquidity. This has cross-border implications. 
An adequate appreciation of these dynamics requires a systemic perspective for the analysis 
of  financial  stability  which  normally  lies  with  the  central  banks,  but  clearly  requires  close 
interaction between central banks and other regulatory agencies. Over the past few weeks 
as the Barbados Council of Regulators met twice within the last 3 months – most recently 
last  week  –  to  discuss  areas  of  mutual  concern  and  to  discuss  approaches  to  providing 
mutual support and to put preventative measures in place over the short to medium term. 
The use of macroprudential indicators 
Macro prudential indicators have become more important in the current environment. Rather 
than  concentrating  only  on  the  health  and  performance  of  individual  financial  institutions, 
macroprudential  supervision  uses  a  coordinated  approach.  This  is  necessary  because 
financial institutions can influence asset prices, which can significantly affect the health of the 
economy  as  a  whole.  Greater  emphasis  on  macroprudential  supervision  should  produce 
“early warning” indicators, and macro-stress testing would serve to verify the resilience of the 
system. Already, regional governors through the Caribbean Centre for Money and Finance, 
are proposing this approach and seeking to fund it. 
Stress testing is also being developed largely because the extent to which market values and 
liquidity structures in other countries affect us is growing, more so because our economies 
are intertwined. 
Cooperation from all market participants in this regard can assist in countering the potential 
procyclicality of regulatory requirements and help us to identify early excessive leverage, risk 
concentration and the liquidity mismatch. 
Effective  cross-border  monitoring  will  require  procedures  that  would  ensure  that  measures 
aimed at containing risks and vulnerabilities are identified and implemented. For example, in 
6 
 BIS Review 27/2009
some  situations  in  other  jurisdictions  it  has  been  useful  to  have  exchanges  of  currency 
deposits among central banks. 
The  appropriate  balance  of  responsibility  between  home  and  host  supervisors  is  another 
area that is being addressed. The Icelandic bank failures in particular taught us that when 
there is a problem, rescue procedures and fiscal support are national. It is for this reason that 
many regulators are requiring that operations be set up by way of subsidiaries. This way their 
capital requirements are under the authority of the host supervisor. 
Regulation of liquidity 
New approaches to the management and regulation of liquidity are just as necessary. Indeed 
the  regulation  of  liquidity  has  been  recognised  as  being  at  least  as  important  as  capital 
adequacy.  Financial  intermediaries  can  be  faced  with  liquidity  risk.  However,  the  lack  of  a 
defined international standard has reflected the extreme complexity of the liquidity risk, and 
generally  applicable  quantitative  ratios  are  difficult  to  identify.  Effective  ways  for  assessing 
and limiting the liquidity risks are however important and regulators have already begun to 
examine  the  possibility  of  introducing  specific  ways  of  measuring  and  monitoring  liquidity 
risks. 
Regulation by economic substance 
My  next  point  relates  to  the  regulation  of  near-banks.  Some  jurisdictions  have  already 
commenced to regulate the financial institutions on the principle that if it looks and behaves 
like  a  bank,  then  it  must  be  a  bank.  The  Central  Bank  has  recently  extended  reserve 
requirements  and  securities  requirements  to  finance  companies,  (deposit-taking  Part  III 
companies), a decision taken before the regional problems arose, but which has turned out 
to be timely. 
Crisis management 
Providing emergency liquidity funding can be a challenge in a regional setting. Experience 
has  shown  that  host  countries  may  need  to  maintain  the  capacity  to  protect  the  domestic 
financial  system  on  a  stand-alone  basis,  but  must  do  so  within  a  framework  of  close 
coordination with the home regulator while giving as much regional support as possible. The 
bailouts in Europe are evidence of this. They concentrated on national bailouts but there was 
a coordinated approach. 
Summary 
Barbados’ banking system was adjudged the third best regulated in the Western Hemisphere 
by  the  World  Economic  Forum.  Barbados’  onshore  sector was  adjudged  by  the  IMF  to  be 
resilient to most market shocks. Notwithstanding the strength of the regulatory framework, it 
is  however  possible  for  a  distressed  situation  to  emerge.  There  is  therefore  the  need  to 
continue  to  strengthen  financial  regulation  and  to  enhance  regulatory  resources  in  some 
areas and to be proactive. 
Financial  sector  indicators  reflect  that  all  domestic  entities  are  adequately  capitalized  and 
liquidity in the system is adequate. The recent crises affecting the region make it prudent to 
constantly  reassess  our  systems  and  controls  to  ensure  that  they  remain  robust  in  the 
current dynamic financial environment (as cross-border transfer risk may arise where there 
are  weaknesses  in  group-wide  consolidated  supervision).  We  propose  to  pay  heightened 
attention  to  conglomerate  supervision  in  the  banking  sector,  and  to  improve  the  level  of 
collaboration  between  regulatory  agencies,  both  at  the  national  and  regional  levels,  while 
BIS Review 27/2009 
 7
that  supervisory  processes  are 
flexible  and  proactive.  Despite  our  past 
ensuring 
achievements  there  is  further  room  for  improvement  as  it  relates  to  conglomerate 
supervision. 
Conclusion 
I  have  devoted  most  of  my  presentation  to  the  financial  sector  and  the  banking  sector  in 
particular for which the Central Bank has responsibility because it is critical to confidence in 
the system and can be easily undermined. It is my view that while the financial sector is not 
perfect  it  is  well  run.  International  organisations  confirm  this,  even  when  specific  areas  of 
weakness have been highlighted. However, unless we create a confidence problem, it is the 
global economic recession that is likely to affect us most. We must ensure that our financial 
system  is  safe  and  well  run  by  being  proactive  and  by  taking  corrective  measures  where 
necessary  but  simultaneously  we  must  prepare  ourselves  for  the  impact  of  the  global 
economic recession. 
8 
 BIS Review 27/2009
