Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview with Il Sole 24 Ore 
Interview with Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, and Il Sole 
24 Ore, conducted by Mr Beda Romano, published on 9 April 2009. 
 The  G20  meeting  in  London  has  just  finished.  A  joint  strategy  between  the  largest 
countries in the world has been devised, even if drive is sometimes lacking in many 
areas.  What  is  your  judgement  of  this,  at  least  with  regard  to  international 
cooperation? 
This  meeting  represents  a  very,  very  important  turning-point  in  the  area  of  international 
cooperation. The G20 now seems to be an indispensable forum in the management of this 
crisis. It has to be said that the G20 is not a totally new informal institution. It actually came 
into being at the end of the 1990s as a reaction to the Asian crisis and also proved to be very 
useful  at  that  time.  But  now  it  has  made  a  clear  jump  in  quality,  complementing  very 
significantly  the  G7  or  the  G8.  So,  the  meeting  in  London  was  a  very  important,  historic 
occasion. 
Many  decisions  were  taken:  new  financial  rules,  new  money  for  the  International 
Monetary Fund, a new, more structured set-up for the Financial Stability Forum. Which 
are the most important? 
I would not focus on one particular measure. They are all important and are viewed together. 
It  seems  to  me  that  they  cover  all  the  most  relevant  aspects  of  this  crisis.  What  is  now 
important is that they are introduced quickly, rapidly and as professionally as possible. At this 
point it is also important to progressively introduce anti-cyclical measures, in particular in the 
area of regulations. 
Do  you  mean  by  any  chance  that,  in  spite  of  everything  that  has  happened, 
governments  have  been  slow  to  introduce  measures  to  alleviate  the  effects  of  the 
crisis and to help the economy and the financial system? 
I  wouldn’t  say  that  the governments  have  been  slow.  I  would  say  rather  that  at  the  global 
level – and thus also at the level of the euro area – they have not been quick enough to be 
entirely convincing in the eyes of economic agents. A great deal of support has been decided 
–  in  the  EU,  it  represents  23%  of  GDP  –  but  it  has  not  always  been  implemented  in  an 
effective  manner.  And  this  is  why  the  measures  agreed  in  London  must  be  introduced 
quickly, rapidly and in the most professional way possible. 
And  yet,  Jürgen  Stark,  member  of  the  ECB’s  Executive  Board,  has  criticised  the 
decision  to  increase  the  resources  available  to  the  IMF,  speaking  of  “denaro 
distribuito a man bassa”? 
Jürgen Stark spoke on a personal basis. As regards the IMF resources, the ECB agrees that 
the IMF has an essential role to play in the present circumstances to assist countries in need, 
and  the  gravity  of  the  global  situation  justifies  the  significant  increase  of  the  resources 
available  to  the  IMF.  These  resources  have  to  be  distributed  on  the  basis  of  appropriate 
economic policies in the borrowing countries. As regards the SDRs allocation, there is not yet 
an assessment of the Governing Council, which in any case will have to participate in the 
process. As a central bank we have to remain permanently alert and caring for medium and 
long term price stability – as mentioned in the communiqué of the G20. 
The Chinese authorities have suggested a new reserve currency based on the Special 
Drawing Rights of the IMF, which, after all, represent a basket of currencies. The aim is 
to leave behind a monetary system which is too heavily focused on the dollar. What do 
you think of this idea? 
BIS Review 46/2009 
 1
The  subject  of  exchange  rates  is  by  definition  extremely  delicate.  As  far  as  convertible 
currencies are concerned, I will stick to the positions contained in the last G7 communiqué. I 
would only add that I warmly welcome the statements of Ben Bernanke, Tim Geithner and 
President Obama, that a strong dollar is in the interests of the United States. In this area, it is 
important for all partners to be highly responsible. 
On the subject of the financial situation: markets have been rising over the past few 
weeks, as have raw materials prices. Is there light at the end of the tunnel? Or is it 
wiser to remain cautious? 
I have been asked this question with a certain regularity for 18 months now, both before and 
after  15  September  2008  when  the  crisis  intensified  as  a  result  of  the  sudden  failure  of 
Lehman  Brothers.  We  are  experiencing  a  market  correction  that  is  very  large,  very 
challenging and very turbulent. It is a process that is still under way. We have to demonstrate 
responsibility,  at  the  public  and  the  private  level,  and  we  have  to  be  ready  to  deal  with 
unexpected  events,  which  have  been  a  characteristic  of  this  crisis.  In  short,  we  have  to 
remain permanently alert. 
It seems that the financial crisis spilled over into the economy and that this economic 
crisis  could  in  turn  now  weigh  on  the  financial  system  and  on  banking  results,  for 
example via an increase in the number of failures. 
Until the middle of last September, the crisis was largely financial. You will recall that until the 
failure of a systemic US institution, the emerging economies had not been affected, or barely, 
by the economic slowdown. Following the bankruptcy of the US investment bank, the crisis 
suddenly worsened and spread throughout the whole world, affecting not only the financial 
system but also the real economy at the same time. A type of adverse feed-back loop was 
thus created, which has characterised the last two quarters. I repeat: we are in a period of 
market correction which is still under way and is of a very great magnitude. 
In  this  context,  the  hypothesis  is  being  discussed  in  many  countries  of  just 
nationalising the banks. Some say that this would be a way of giving back confidence 
to  the  markets  and  to  investors,  which  are  still  concerned  that  credit  institutions 
remain too fragile. What do you think of this? 
When  speaking  of  nationalisation,  there  are  two  options.  The  first  option  is  that  the  state 
takes  control  of  a  bank,  but  without  changing  the  legal  framework.  The  company  would 
remain  governed  by  private  law  and  the  government  is  a  simple  shareholder.  The  second 
option  is  that  the  state  changes  the  very  nature  of  the  credit  institution,  which  becomes 
governed by public law. From my point of view, if State control were to prove necessary, it 
would by far be preferable it to be carried out on the basis of the first option. 
The aim is thus to guarantee a temporary state presence in the company, giving the 
government an exit strategy? 
Precisely. The credibility of the choices is also dependent on the existence of a strategy to 
return to a normal situation. In the same way that we, as a central bank, have to have an exit 
strategy  from  monetary  policy  in  exceptional  times,  governments  must  think  of  an  exit 
strategy from extraordinary measures of economic policy. 
For monetary policy, “exit strategy” means that interest rates cannot fall any further? 
For  central  banks  exit  strategy  means  the  clear  path  for  unwinding  the  unconventional 
measures taken. This is essential to guarantee our fellow citizens that they can count on us 
not only to take today’s bold decisions but to make sure that price stability is ensured in the 
medium and long run. 
Coming  back  to  nationalisations,  do  you  believe  that  public  control  of  the  banks  is 
inevitable in order to get out of this crisis? 
2 
 BIS Review 46/2009
In these circumstances it is very important to be humble. And to look at the facts and the 
figures in each particular case. There is certainly not one unique solution for all. In certain 
exceptional cases, however, it could turn out to be necessary and inevitable for the state to 
take control of a credit institution. 
The financial crisis has affected shareholders first and foremost, with the fall of stock 
exchanges  and  shares.  Do  you  think  that  bondholders  will  also  have  to  suffer 
consequences, beyond the fall in prices on the secondary market? 
I  observe  that  governments  throughout  the  world  have  committed  themselves  not  to  allow 
systemically  important  financial  institutions  to  fail.  In  so  doing,  they  have  committed 
themselves to preserve creditors from such failure, whilst shareholders have to accept their 
own risks. This commitment cannot be seen as a half-promise. If we want to eliminate the 
risk of a systemic failure, we have to be clear on this point: ambiguity in this area would be 
harmful. 
Finally, let’s turn to the economic situation in the euro area. The March projections of 
the Eurosystem economists refer to a contraction in economic activity of around 2.7% 
in 2009. Do  you think  they will be revised downwards? How can they be reconciled 
with the much more negative projections of the OECD? 
When we reduced interest rates by 50 basis points in March and by another 25 basis points 
in April, we took into account a further alleviation of inflationary pressures. At the moment I 
am  speaking,  after  these  two  reductions,  we  consider  we  took  into  account  the  additional 
informations which have surfaced since the beginning of March. In any case 2009 will be a 
very difficult year, with a strong contraction in activity. Quarterly data will probably not return 
to positive territory before the course of 2010. We expect a gradual recovery next year, on 
the condition that the economic policy measures announced thus far at the international level 
are introduced, as I have already said, in a rapid and highly professional manner. 
You  have  preannounced  new  developments  in  May.  You  have  not  ruled  out  further 
reductions in the cost of money – the key interest rate is currently at 1.25% – and new, 
unconventional  monetary  policy  measures:  from  the  extension  of  the  refinancing 
operations to the purchase of bonds on the market. Can you give us any more details? 
As  regards  the  main  refinancing  operation  rate  I  have  said,  on  behalf  of  the  Governing 
Council, that I did not exclude that we could – in a very measured way – go down from the 
present  level.  As  regards  the  deposit  facility  rate,  I  said  that  at  0.25%  it  is  already  at  an 
extremely low level and that I did not expect that we will change that level in the period to 
come.  As  regards  possible  further  unconventional  measures,  I  said  indeed  that  the 
Governing  Council  will  take  its  decision  in  our  next  monetary  policy  meeting  in  May.  The 
Governing Council did not want to pre-empt in any respect what we may say then.  
BIS Review 46/2009 
 3
