European Central Bank: Press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank 
and Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 
2 April 2009. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I are very pleased to welcome you to today's 
press conference. We will now report on the outcome of today's meeting of the Governing 
Council. 
On the basis of its regular economic and monetary analyses, the Governing Council decided 
to reduce the key ECB interest rates by a further 25 basis points. This decision brings the 
total reduction in the interest rate on the main refinancing operations of the Eurosystem since 
8 October 2008 to 300 basis points.  
Today's  decision  takes  into  account  the  expectation  that  price  pressures  will  remain 
subdued, reflecting the substantial past fall in commodity prices and the marked weakening 
of  economic  activity  in  the  euro  area  and  globally.  The  latest  economic  data  and  survey 
information confirm that the world economy, including the euro area, is undergoing a severe 
downturn.  Both  global  and  euro  area  demand  are  likely  to  remain  very  weak  over  2009, 
before  gradually  recovering  in  the  course  of  2010.  Available  indicators  of  inflation 
expectations  over  the  medium  to  longer  term  remain  firmly  anchored  in  line  with  the 
Governing Council's aim of keeping inflation rates at levels below, but close to, 2% over the 
medium  term.  A  cross-check  with  the  outcome  of  the  monetary  analysis  confirms  that 
inflationary pressure has been diminishing. After today's decision we expect price stability to 
be maintained over the medium term, thereby supporting the purchasing power of euro area 
households. The Governing Council will continue to ensure a firm anchoring of medium-term 
inflation expectations. Such anchoring is indispensable to supporting sustainable growth and 
employment  and  contributes  to  financial  stability.  Accordingly,  we  will  continue  to  monitor 
very closely all developments over the period ahead.  
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
Reflecting  the  impact  of  the  financial  market  turmoil,  economic  activity  has  weakened 
markedly in the euro area, as domestic demand has contracted in parallel with the downturn 
in the world economy. Available data and survey indicators suggest that economic activity in 
the euro area has remained very weak in early 2009. It is likely to remain very subdued for 
the remainder of the year but is expected to gradually recover in 2010. The substantial fall in 
commodity prices since the summer of 2008 is supporting real disposable income and thus 
consumption. In addition, external as well as domestic demand should increasingly benefit 
from  the  effects  of  the  significant  macroeconomic  stimulus  under  way  as  well  as  from 
measures taken to restore the functioning of the financial system both inside and outside the 
euro area.  
Taking these effects into account, we see the risks to this outlook for economic activity as 
being broadly balanced. On the one hand, there may be stronger than anticipated positive 
effects due to the decrease in commodity prices and to policy measures taken. On the other 
hand, there are concerns that the turmoil in financial markets could have a stronger impact 
on  the  real economy,  as  well  as  that  protectionist  pressures  could  intensify  and  that  there 
could be adverse developments in the world economy stemming from a disorderly correction 
of global imbalances.  
Annual HICP inflation has fallen further, from 1.2% in February to 0.6% in March, according 
to Eurostat's flash estimate. As explained on earlier occasions, the decline in inflation since 
last  summer  primarily  reflects  the  sharp  fall  in  global  commodity  prices  over  this  period. 
Moreover,  signs  of  a  more  broad-based  reduction  in  inflationary  pressure  are  increasingly 
BIS Review 42/2009 
 1
emerging. Looking ahead, base effects stemming from past energy price effects will play a 
significant  role  in  the  shorter-term  dynamics  of  the  HICP.  Accordingly,  we  expect  to  see 
headline  annual  inflation  rates  declining  further  in  the  coming  months  and  temporarily 
reaching negative levels around mid-year. Thereafter, annual inflation rates should increase 
again.  Such  short-term  movements  are,  however,  not  relevant  from  a  monetary  policy 
perspective. Looking further ahead, over the policy-relevant horizon, annual HICP inflation is 
expected to remain below 2% in 2010, reflecting mainly ongoing sluggish demand in the euro 
area and elsewhere. Available indicators of inflation expectations over the medium to longer 
term  remain  firmly  anchored  in  line  with  the  Governing  Council's  aim  of  keeping  inflation 
rates at levels below, but close to, 2% over the medium term.  
The risks surrounding this outlook are broadly balanced. They relate in particular to the risks 
to the outlook for economic activity as well as to risks to commodity prices.  
Turning to the monetary analysis, the latest data confirm the high month-to-month volatility 
of developments in M3 and its components observed since the intensification of the financial 
turmoil in September 2008. Looking through this volatility, the pace of monetary expansion in 
the  euro  area  has  continued  to  decelerate  markedly  and  supports  the  assessment  of 
diminishing risks to price stability in the medium term.  
Developments within M3 clearly reflect market participants' specific investment responses to 
the  intensification  of  the  financial  turmoil,  but  increasingly  also  the  impact  of  the  past 
reduction in the key ECB interest rates. As this reduction has narrowed the gaps between the 
interest rates paid on the different categories of short-term deposits, it has fostered shifts in 
the allocation of funds. For example, the demand for overnight deposits further strengthened 
in February and contributed to the rise in the annual growth rate of M1 to 6.3%, while the 
demand for short-term time deposits weakened considerably. 
The  flow  of  MFI  loans  to  non-financial  corporations  and  households  has  remained  very 
subdued.  The  slightly  negative  flow  of  lending  to  non-financial  corporations  in  February 
reflects a decline in the outstanding amount of loans with a shorter maturity, while the net 
flow in loans with longer maturities remained positive. The decline in short-term lending may 
be indicative of a reduction in loan demand related to the weakening of economic activity. 
However,  supply  effects  have  probably  also  affected  loan  developments.  In  this  respect, 
developments over the past few months may in part reflect ongoing efforts of banks as well 
as the corporate and household sector to reduce the highly leveraged positions built up in 
past years.  
To  sum  up,  today's  decision  takes  into  account  the  expectation  that  price  pressures  will 
remain  subdued,  reflecting  the  substantial  past  fall  in  commodity  prices  and  the  marked 
weakening of economic activity in the euro area and globally. The latest economic data and 
survey information confirm that the world economy, including the euro area, is undergoing a 
severe  downturn.  Both  global  and  euro  area  demand  are  likely  to  remain  very  weak  over 
2009,  before  gradually  recovering  in  the  course  of  2010.  Available  indicators  of  inflation 
expectations  over  the  medium  to  longer  term  remain  firmly  anchored  in  line  with  the 
Governing Council's aim of keeping inflation rates at levels below, but close to, 2% over the 
medium  term.  A  cross-check  with  the  outcome  of  the  monetary  analysis  confirms  that 
inflationary pressure has been diminishing. After today's decision we expect price stability to 
be maintained over the medium term, thereby supporting the purchasing power of euro area 
households. The Governing Council will continue to ensure a firm anchoring of medium-term 
inflation expectations. Such anchoring is indispensable to supporting sustainable growth and 
employment  and  contributes  to  financial  stability.  Accordingly,  we  will  continue  to  monitor 
very closely all developments over the period ahead. 
Regarding  fiscal  policies,  it  is  necessary  that  countries'  commitments  to  a  path  of 
consolidation  in  order  to  return  to  sound  fiscal  positions  are  credible,  respecting  fully  the 
provisions of the Stability and Growth Pact. This is essential to maintain the public's trust in 
the sustainability of public finances, which is important both for the economy to recover and 
2 
 BIS Review 42/2009
for supporting long-term growth. Countries subject to the excessive deficit procedure need to 
comply strictly with the ECOFIN Council recommendations for correcting their deficits. Many 
countries will need to specify further credible consolidation measures for 2010 and beyond. 
Full and consistent implementation of the EU's legal provisions for sound fiscal policies is a 
prerequisite  for  the  maintenance  of  their  credibility  as  one  of  the  pillars  of  the  institutional 
framework of Economic and Monetary Union. 
Turning  to  structural  reforms,  the  Governing  Council  welcomes  the  commitment  of  the 
spring European Council to make full use of the renewed Lisbon strategy for growth and jobs 
in the current situation. The updated recommendations for the euro area countries call for an 
accelerated  implementation  of  reforms  to  support  the  economy,  facilitate  necessary 
adjustments and ensure a high level of growth potential. It remains essential that government 
support  measures  do  not  distort  competition  or  delay  necessary  structural  adjustment 
processes and that governments remain firmly committed to avoiding protectionism.  
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS Review 42/2009 
 3
