Amando M Tetangco, Jr: The BSP and its partners – standing up to the 
global challenges today 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas), at the Stakeholders Awards and Appreciation Lunch for 2009, 
Central Bank of the Philippines, Manila, 14 July 2009.  
 Distinguished  partners  and  special  guests  from  the  private  and  government  sectors,  good 
morning. 
On behalf of the Monetary Board and my colleagues at the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, I 
thank  all  of  you  for  joining  us  today  for  our  Stakeholders  Awarding  Ceremony  and 
Appreciation Lunch.  
As you can tell, this event is important to us. This is the time of the year when the Bangko 
Sentral ng Pilipinas honors its partners who provide outstanding support to our information 
and statistical requirements, as well as to our advocacy programs.  
This year's Stakeholders Awards is made more special by the fact that our partnership has 
gone through a particularly challenging period that saw the worst global financial crisis and 
the most severe economic downturn in decades.  
While the epicenter of the financial turmoil is in the US, shockwaves are being felt worldwide, 
even in emerging economies such as the Philippines.  
Thus,  the  theme  for  our  2009  awarding  ceremony  is  most  appropriate:  "The  BSP  &  its 
Partners: Standing Up to the Global Challenges Today."  
Indeed, we are here today standing up together because we kept our partnership strong and 
fully  functioning  even  in  the  midst  of  a  global crisis.  You  honored  your  commitment  to  the 
Bangko  Sentral,  stood  by  us,  and  never  failed  to  send  us  your  comprehensive  reports  on 
time. 
Thus,  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  and  our  economy  benefited  from  receiving  your 
complete and reliable information on which to base our policy decisions. 
For this, we give all of you your initial award today: a well-deserved long round of applause.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  first  group  of  stakeholders  we  will  recognize  today  are  the 
outstanding  respondents  to  the  following  BSP  surveys:  the  Business  Expectations  Survey; 
Cross-Border Transactions Survey; Foreign Direct Investment Survey; Coordinated Portfolio 
Investment Survey; and Survey on IT and IT-Enabled Services.  
We  will  also  give  awards  to  other  institutions  that  provide  valuable  information  for  the 
formulation of monetary policy in accordance with the BSP's key mandate to promote price 
stability  conducive  to  balanced  and  sustainable  economic  growth.  The  framework  for  our 
monetary policy is inflation targeting – a forward-looking and information-intensive approach. 
Thus,  it  is  imperative  that  the  information  and  statistics  we  receive  are  comprehensive, 
timely, and accurate.  
We cannot overemphasize the importance of keeping prices stable; this allows households 
and businesses to plan over a longer horizon and make informed decisions on consumption, 
investment, savings, and production. 
In  case some  of  you  are  wondering  how  we  have  fared  in  terms  of stabilizing  prices.  The 
answer  is:  with  your  help,  we  have  done  quite  well.  Headline  inflation  has  been  on  a 
downtrend, dropping from 3.3 percent in May to 1.5 percent year-on-year in June, the lowest 
BIS Review 90/2009 
 1
in more than 22 years. Our external accounts have also remained healthy, with a balance of 
payments surplus and a record-high gross international reserves of US$39.6 billion. 
These are positive results from our collaboration. Palakpakan po natin ito!  
Today,  we  will  also  recognize  the  best  commercial  banks  that  facilitate  the  inflow,  and 
reporting,  of  remittances  from  overseas  Filipino.  We  all  know  that  this  is  a  service  that  is 
important not only to overseas Filipinos and their families but also to our economy. On the 
average, remittances represent 10-11% of our GDP.  
Therefore,  let  us  also  congratulate our  banks  that  provide  efficient  and  secure  handling  of 
over one billion dollars in monthly remittances from our overseas Filipinos. Palakpakan din 
po natin sila!  
We will also give special recognition to institutions that have given their unqualified support 
and cooperation for the BSP's economic and financial education program. Let us also give 
them a round of applause!  
Once again, on behalf of the Bangko Sentral, I thank all of our respondents and stakeholders 
who  have  been  our  faithful  partners  through  these  years.  With  your  steadfast  support,  the 
Bangko Sentral will continue to craft and implement effective and responsive monetary and 
banking  policies  that  will  empower  us  and  our  partners  to  face  up  to  the  challenges  that 
come our way.  
Finally, let us keep in mind what the physicist Albert Einstein once said about information. He 
said… and I quote: "Information is a source of learning. But unless it is organized, processed, 
and available to the right people in a format for decision making, it is a burden, not a benefit". 
End of quote.  
Ladies and gentlemen. As partners of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas who have generously 
shared your time in giving us accurate, comprehensive, and timely information with us, you 
have also served our country and our people.  
For  this,  we  are  grateful  and  we  thank  you.  We  do  look  forward  to  many  more  productive 
collaboration with all of you in the years to come.  
Again, my warmest congratulations to all the awardees.  
Mabuhay ang Pilipinas! Mabuhay po tayong lahat! 
Magandang umaga at maraming salamat po sa inyong lahat! 
2 
 BIS Review 90/2009
