Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Comparing financial crises  
Special address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the Tun 
Ismail  Ali  Chair  in  Monetary  and  Financial  Economies:  Lecture  on  Comparison  of  the 
Financial Crises: "Japan and Asia in 1997-1998 vs. US 2008-2009", Kuala Lumpur, 10 July 
2009. 
 This year Bank Negara Malaysia celebrates 50 years of Central Banking. While a number of 
special events are taking place during the course of this year, perhaps the most significant 
one has taken place yesterday. It is most meaningful that I inform you on this occasion of the 
Public Lecture organised in honour of the first Malaysian Governor of Bank Negara Malaysia, 
Tun  Ismail  Mohamed  Ali  that  yesterday  the  new  Central  Banking  Act  for  Bank  Negara 
Malaysia was passed by the Parliament. This new Act represents the culmination of more 
than  two  years'  work  to  address  many  of  the  issues  and  challenges  that  are  confronting 
Central Banks in the 21st century. The Act provides greater clarity of the mandate for which 
the Central Bank is accountable for, ensures adequate powers to undertake these mandates, 
and  ensures  autonomy  in  achieving  these  mandates  thus  providing  for  the  integrity  and 
credibility  of  the  decisions  made  by  the  Bank.  This  is  further  reinforced  by  legislating  the 
checks and balances in the Bank and a higher level of transparency to the Government, the 
legislature,  the  market  and  the  public.  Most  importantly,  this  Act  also  addresses  financial 
stability issues that have surfaced in this current international financial crisis.  
It is my great pleasure to welcome you to the 2009 Tun Ismail Ali Public Lecture. This Public 
Lecture  is  now  organised  in  conjunction  with  the  Tun  Ismail  Ali  Chair  in  Monetary  and 
Financial  Economics  at  the  University  of  Malaya  that  was  established  by  Bank  Negara 
Malaysia in August of 2000 in honour of the late Tun Ismail Mohamed Ali. It is our hope that 
this Chair will contribute towards the advancement of knowledge in the area of monetary and 
financial economics.  
This Public Lecture takes place at a time of a financial crisis that is continues to unfold in the 
advanced  economies  and  that  now  is  having  unprecedented  consequences  on  the  global 
economy.  For  some  parts  of  the  world,  such  as  Asia  ,  the  financial  sector  has  largely  not 
been affected, but the impact has been on the real sector, following the massive contraction 
in world trade. While this crisis started in early 2007, Malaysia has seen the full impact of this 
crisis on our economy in the first half of this year.  
Today, we are very privileged to have with us Professor Dr. Takatoshi Ito, professor at the 
University of Tokyo and this year's holder of the Tun Ismail Ali Chair, to speak to us on the 
"Comparison of the Financial Crises: Japan and Asia in 1997-1998 vs. US 2008-2009".  
The  subject  of  this  lecture  is  important  as  a  greater  understanding  of  the  origins,  the 
dynamics of financial crisis and the options for resolution is essential not only for its effective 
management but also for the lessons that can be drawn to prevent such future crisis. Given 
the severity and far reaching consequences of the current crisis, there has been a greater 
sense of urgency for the international community to come together to work towards a new 
international  financial  architecture  that  would  allow  for  the  more  efficient  functioning  of  not 
only financial intermediation within national economies but also across borders.  
History  has  shown  that  there  have  been  more  than  100  distinct  banking  crises  within  the 
span  of  the  recent  two  decades.  While  the  trigger  factors  for  such  financial  crisis  may  be 
different,  for  most  it  involved  disruptions  in  the  financial  intermediation  process,  the 
downward  spiral  of  asset  prices  and  a  general  loss  in  confidence.  Varying  responses  at 
different stages of the crisis have shown wide ranging degrees of success. The objective to 
be  achieved  is  the  restoration  of  stability  in  the  financial  markets,  the  resumption  of  credit 
BIS Review 87/2009 
 1
flows  and  the  return  of  confidence.  This  would  provide  the  beginning  of  the  recovery  of 
economic activity.  
Malaysia  's  own  experience  in  managing  the  financial  crisis  in  our  part  of  the  world  over 
1997-1998 was that a decisive and comprehensive response at an early stage of the crisis 
not only produced an early recovery but it also reduced the cost of the crisis on the financial 
system and the economy. The crisis was a defining moment for Bank Negara Malaysia . The 
Bank's  efforts  to  sustain  stability  did  not  end  when  the  Asian  financial  crisis  abated,  and 
when  economic  recovery  was  firmly  in  place.  The  key  lesson  was  that  foundations  for 
resilience are built during the good times.  
Once stability was restored, the Bank therefore embarked on a comprehensive restructuring 
and reform of the financial sector. This included the aggressive development of the domestic 
financial markets and the strengthening of the regulatory and supervisory oversight. This has 
been reinforced by a higher level of regional cooperation and collaboration. Therefore, it is 
not what we are currently doing to cope with this international financial crisis but the efforts 
that  have  been  undertaken  over  several  years  that  have  ensured  the  resilience  of  our 
financial system during these most challenging of times.  
Over  the  course  of  these  recent  months,  we  have  witnessed  the  introduction  of  massive 
fiscal stimulus packages, sweeping proposals for regulatory reforms and various unorthodox 
policy measures being introduced to stabilise and restore market confidence in the financial 
system.  Whilst  these  measures  were  necessary  and  have  contributed  towards  some 
stabilisation in global financial markets, more importantly is the long-term sustainability of this 
trend. With the urgency for immediate measures receding, it is hoped that it will give way to 
consensus on finding fundamental solutions that involve regulatory and institutional reforms 
both at the national and international levels.  
Conclusion  
Today,  we  have  the  opportunity  to  listen  to  Professor  Ito's  lecture  on  the  similarities  and 
differences between the Asian Financial Crisis and the Japanese crisis of 1997-1998, and 
the US financial crisis of 2008-2009 and the valuable lessons that can be drawn in a global 
environment that is more complex and interconnected. Professor Ito has written extensively 
on  financial  policy  and  has  been  a  policy  advisor  to  the  Government  of  Japan.  We  look 
forward to benefiting from your experience and wisdom on this subject. 
2 
 BIS Review 87/2009
