Nils Bernstein: Recent economic and financial developments in Denmark  
Speech  by  Mr  Nils  Bernstein,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Denmark,  at  the  Annual 
Meeting of the Association of Danish Mortgage Banks, Copenhagen, 23 April 2009. 
 Thank you for the invitation to speak here today. 
At last year's meeting, I began by saying that economic predictions should always be taken 
with a grain of salt. The same applies this year. 
Today's cyclical picture is a great deal gloomier than I – or others, for that matter – predicted 
a year ago. Expectations of global growth are being adjusted downwards all the time. At the 
moment, growth estimates come and go. The latest international forecasts expect output in 
the  industrialised  countries  to  drop  by  4  per  cent  this  year.  Major  exporting  countries  like 
Germany and Japan are hit especially hard; a decrease in output by more than 5 per cent is 
foreseen.  In  that  case,  the  setback  will  be  of  a  magnitude  not  seen  for  a  long  time.  The 
current outlook is gloomy. But for some time the most pessimistic predictions have tended to 
stick most. 
The global political willingness to address the crisis is one encouraging aspect. There is no 
universal agreement, but so far the world has managed to keep tendencies to profit at the 
expense of others at bay. Let us hope that it continues. The euro plays a major role here. I 
am not blind to the fact that the currencies of some of Denmark's important export markets 
have  depreciated  against  the  euro  and  thus  the  krone.  This  makes  life  hard  for  Danish 
exporters, but we will just have to accept it. And it is a reminder of how important it is to keep 
costs down. 
The  G20  summit  in  London  early  this  month  agreed  to  expand  the  lending  capacity  of 
international financial institutions, including the IMF. In addition, the G20 countries agreed on 
higher  trade  credits  and  a  general  increase  in  the  foreign-exchange  reserves  of  central 
banks.  All  this  amounts  to  astronomical  figures.  Denmark  will  have  to  pay  its  share  of  the 
financing of these commitments. 
A  global  economic  downturn  of  the  magnitude  we  are  witnessing  at  the  moment  must 
necessarily have serious implications for a small open economy like Denmark. Exports have 
declined by almost one fifth over the last six months. And the downward trend continues. 
Last  year,  output  fell  by  more  than  1  per  cent  in  Denmark,  while  it  rose  in  most  other  EU 
member states. This year, we expect output to decline even more strongly than last year, but 
slightly less than in the rest of the EU. Nevertheless, unemployment is expected to continue 
to increase for some time as it typically lags behind demand. No one can say for certain how 
long the increase will continue and how strong it will be. Any calculations we make will have 
a considerable element of uncertainty. According to the latest estimate, unemployment will 
not peak until early 2011 at around 190,000 persons. 
Denmark can use economic policy to mitigate the mounting crisis, but we cannot avoid it – no 
matter  what  we  do.  We  have  already  launched  significant  measures  to  stimulate  private 
consumption  and  activity 
is 
expansionary and has been so for several years. Danmarks Nationalbank's policy rates are 
historically low. We are running out of room to manoeuvre. 
We cannot force consumers to spend more. In the worst case, consumers will save up and 
then spend the money at a time when it would be more appropriate for them to tighten the 
reins.  If  we  cut  to  the  chase,  it  is  a  question  of  how  much  we  can  use  the  building  and 
construction  sector  as  a  cyclical  regulator  to  create  jobs  as  compensation  for  falling 
employment  in  other  sectors  –  exports,  trade,  services  and  the  financial  sector.  We  are 
saying: wait a moment and let us see how the measures already implemented work. After all, 
the  building  and  construction  sector.  Fiscal  policy 
in 
BIS Review 50/2009 
 1
capacity in building and construction is limited. Only recently, the sector was in full alert with 
overheating and shortage of craftsmen, while prices and wages were rising. If we overburden 
the building and construction sector again, history will repeat itself and that could ultimately 
exacerbate the crisis. Finally, the contribution to an overall reduction in unemployment will be 
limited  in  any  case.  And  I  have  not  even  mentioned  the  difficulties  of  ensuring  rational 
planning  of  building  or  construction  projects  moved  forward  or  subsidy  schemes  that 
stimulate initiation of projects. 
Indeed, the crux of the matter here is job creation and not what can be done to mitigate the 
consequences  for  the  unemployed.  Efforts  should  be  directed  at  retaining  and  developing 
competencies, for example, and an extraordinary effort is required to create more places in 
education and training. 
 During  the  last  six  months  of  financial  turbulence,  the  mortgage  system  has  proved  that  it 
can ensure financing of real property. 
Market confidence in the Danish mortgage system has been upheld, against the backdrop of 
mounting difficulties in financing real property in many other countries. 
Monetary policy has been relaxed all over the world. On 3 April, Danmarks Nationalbank was 
able to lower its discount rate to 1.75 per cent – the lowest level since the establishment of 
Danmarks Nationalbank in 1818. Although the lending rate is slightly higher, the short-term 
interest rate is historically low . 
Long-term interest rates have decreased less than policy rates. The central banks of several 
countries,  including  the  UK  and  the  USA,  are  buying  back  bonds  to  force  down  long-term 
interest rates in order to stimulate the economy. It remains to be seen whether the European 
Central Bank will steer a similar course. If it does, long-term interest rates in Denmark could 
also be affected. 
It  is  essential  that  the  current  extraordinary  stimulus  measures  do  not  increase  long-term 
inflationary expectations as this would create problems for the economy in the longer term as 
a result of measures to mitigate the current crisis. 
Thanks to the low policy rates, the banks can borrow from Danmarks Nationalbank at low 
cost.  But  Danmarks  Nationalbank  is  by  no  means  the  only  source  of  financing  for  Danish 
banks.  The  financial  crisis  has  generally  made  it  more  difficult  for  the  banks  to  obtain 
financing in the international money and financial markets. This has entailed higher financing 
costs. The importance of the international money markets as a source of financing has grown 
over the last 10 years as growth in the banks' deposits has lagged behind growth in lending. 
The higher financing costs have been passed on to the banks' customers. Since last autumn, 
the banks have again reduced their interest rates somewhat. The decline in deposit rates has 
more or less mirrored the reduction in policy rates, while lending rates for households and 
the corporate sector have declined a little less. The result is higher interest margins for the 
banks, at a time when losses are expected to increase for a period to come. In addition, the 
banks'  contribution  to  the  financing  of  the  government  guarantee  under  Bank  Rescue 
Package I will amount to kr. 35 billion. Danmarks Nationalbank's interest rates are guidelines 
for the banks' interest rates, but a one-to-one relation should not be expected. 
The  credit  terms  for  bank  and  mortgage  customers  have  been  tightened  further  since  last 
autumn.  This  is  evident  from  Danmarks  Nationalbank's  latest  bank  lending  survey.  The 
tightening  has  been  most  pronounced  for  corporate  loans.  In  the  survey,  the  respondents 
give the more gloomy risk outlook as the main reason. The risks have proved to be greater 
that the institutions expected three months ago. The mortgage-credit institutes also state the 
supplementary  collateral  requirements  for  covered  bonds  as  a  reason  for  tightening  credit 
policies. Contribution rates have been raised. Overall, the institutions expect to tighten their 
credit  policies  further  in  the  next  three  months.  The  survey  also  shows  that  demand  for 
2 
 BIS Review 50/2009
corporate loans has declined in 2009 – a sign that economic activity has shifted to a lower 
gear. 
It is understandable that risk assessments have been tightened against the backdrop of the 
negative  growth  outlook.  Expectations  of  mounting  losses  on  the  stock  of  existing  loans 
entail a more prudent approach when considering applications for new loans. At the same 
time,  credit  quality  is  on  the  decrease.  Does  this  mean  that  Bank  Rescue  Package  II  has 
failed? The answer is no, in my opinion. It has only been possible to apply for funds under 
Bank Rescue Package II for a very short time. Are we already witnessing a credit crunch? 
The  bank  lending  survey  leaves  no  basis  for  concluding  that  loan  applications  from 
borrowers  who  are  considered  creditworthy  under  the  tightened  credit  policies  of  the 
recession  are  rejected  to  any  considerable  extent  on  the grounds  of shortage  of capital  in 
banks and mortgage-credit institutes – yet. 
 Having  said  that,  I  would  still  like  to  repeat  my  request  to  all  banks  and  mortgage-credit 
institutes: it is now possible to strengthen your capital base by means of hybrid core capital 
made available by the government. And, under special circumstances, it is now also possible 
to  convert  such  capital  injections  into  share  capital.  This  might  come  in  handy.  This  is  an 
unusual  scheme,  but  the  current  situation  is  also  unusual.  I  encourage  you  to  carefully 
consider  these  opportunities.  Under  the  prevailing  market  conditions  and  the  economic 
outlook for the next couple of years, you cannot be too careful. And a well-padded financial 
sector is a key prerequisite for turning the tide so that we will again enjoy positive economic 
development. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 50/2009 
 3
