Yandraduth Googoolye: Maintaining the stability of the payments and 
financial system in Mauritius  
Address by Mr Yandraduth Googoolye, First Deputy Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at 
the  launch  ceremony  of  a  Visa  Awareness  Campaign  on  Card  Safety  and  Security,  Port-
Louis, 16 March 2009. 
 Mr Niehaus1  
Distinguished Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Good afternoon 
It  is  indeed  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  be  among  you  today  to  launch  this  “Card  Security 
Week”. The immediate effect of an awareness campaign on card safety and security is that 
users of cards are encouraged to exercise greater care in keeping their cards safe, and other 
stakeholders, banks, card issuers, merchants  to better appreciate the risks involved in the 
use of cards. As time passes, people tend to relax their attitude because they start feeling 
that  it  won’t  happen  to  them  or  firms  start  believing  that  they  have  foolproof  systems. 
Therefore it is important to run such campaigns regularly. 
In the course of this week, a lot will be said and discussed on card safety and security. Card 
safety and security forms part of a broader issue, which is the fight against financial crime. 
Today, I have chosen to share with you some thoughts on how a proper understanding of the 
responsibilities of the main stakeholders, that is the Bank of Mauritius, financial institutions 
and consumers can help in that fight.  
Before  proceeding  any  further,  let  me  set  the  scene  and  briefly  touch  on  the  situation 
regarding the use of cards in Mauritius. 
Background 
The  growth  in  ATMs  and  in  the  number  of  transactions  using  credit  and  debit  cards  has 
continued  to  be  positive.  In  December  2008,  we  had  364  ATMs  and  the  number  of 
transactions using credit and debit cards stood at around 5 million for an aggregate value of 
Rs11 billion. The number of cards in circulation was 1.2 million, that is more than one card 
per adult population. The increased use of cards mirrors an increased sophistication of users 
of financial products as well as increased financial capability. Further, as I had mentioned in 
one  of  my  previous  addresses,  it  has  been  empirically  established  that  increased  use  of 
credit  cards  is  positively  correlated  with  economic  growth  and  exports.  One  of  our  banks 
introduced some two or three years ago the Chip and PIN card, an innovation in the card 
business. I won’t go into the technical details of this type of card, but as Sandra Quinn of 
APACS, the UK payments association remarked in the Banking Technology Magazine, Chip 
and  PIN  has  proved  to  be  instrumental  in  reducing  card  fraud  in  the  UK  high  street.  The 
increase in card fraud losses in 2008 in UK was due, according to her, to UK card details 
being stolen and cloned for use in countries not yet upgraded to Chip and PIN.  
This brief overview gives you an indication of where we actually stand. I now return to the 
theme  I  want  to  address  you  today,  the  responsibilities  of  the  central  bank,  financial 
institutions and consumers in fraud prevention. The Bank of Mauritius has a critical role to 
play  in  creating  an  environment  where  adequate  standards  are  maintained.  It  establishes 
                                                 
1   Mr Charles Niehaus is the General Manager, Sub-Saharan Africa, Visa International CEMEA Region. 
BIS Review 32/2009 
 1
expectations,  norms  and  responsibilities  through  regulation.  Financial  institutions  on  their 
part need to have adequate IT systems and controls to address the risks in their businesses. 
They  also  need  to  provide  access  to  relevant  information  to  consumers  of  their  financial 
products.  Informed  consumers  have  the  responsibility  to  protect  themselves  from  the  risks 
that they can best manage. 
Bank of Mauritius 
The Bank of Mauritius has the responsibility of maintaining the stability of the payments and 
financial  system.  This  responsibility  hinges  on  the  orderly  development  and  efficient 
functioning of the system. The Bank has taken a number of initiatives to further modernize 
the payments system among which are the Cheque Truncation Project, the implementation 
of the International Bank Identification Number (IBAN) and the upgrading of the MACSS. The 
main objective of Cheque Truncation is to enable cheques to be exchanged and cleared on 
the basis of electronic presentment of cheque images and cheque MICR Codeline data. It 
provides  a  number  of  benefits:  faster  clearing  cycles,  faster  cheque  tracing  and  cost 
reduction, the most important one being operational risk reduction through enhanced security 
and automatic detection of forged instruments. Our banks are increasingly engaging in cross 
border  transactions  and  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  implemented  the  IBAN,  which  provides  a 
secured  and  transparent  means  of  international  fund  transfer  via  Straight  Through 
Processing  (STP).  With  a  view  to  furthering  facilitation  of  cross  border  transactions  in  the 
region, the Bank will be a participant and the settlement bank in the Regional Payment and 
Settlement System (REPSS) of the COMESA Clearing House. The MACSS represents the 
main  architecture  for  local  electronic  payments  involving  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  banks, 
government and large taxpayers. This core application, which is based on international best 
practice,  was  recently  replaced.  It  provides  for  advanced  queue  management  for  liquidity 
purposes,  enhanced  security,  increased  availability  and  reduced  transaction  costs.  The 
application  is  very  versatile,  allows  for  multi-currency  transactions  to  be  effected  and 
provides  a  single  platform  for  local  and  cross  border  payments.  The  Bank  is  currently 
carrying out on-line auctions of Treasury Bills, and their automatic settlement using the new 
MACSS application will follow shortly. 
A  sound  regulatory  framework  for  financial  institutions  under  the  purview  of  the  Bank  of 
Mauritius complements these initiatives. Our action is targeted at making financial institutions 
understand that financial crime risks of which fraud risk is an integral part, are risks that need 
to be managed like any other. In our Guideline on Operational Risk Management and Capital 
Adequacy  Determination,  we  require  banks  to  collect  information  on  internal  loss  for 
business  lines,  which  includes  loss  related  to  internal  and  external  fraud.  This  information 
allows  us  to  compare  fraud  experience  across  the  industry  and  to  better  understand  the 
anatomy of fraud risk events.  
We are not directly engaged in fight against financial crime but our objective is prevention. 
So,  as  regulator,  our  focus  is  on  building  the  defences,  our  regulatory  framework.  For 
example,  a  financial  institution,  as  defined  under  the  Banking  laws  cannot  do  business 
without  the  authorization  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius.  Before  granting  a  licence  to  a  financial 
institution, the Bank does an intensive screening of the shareholders and senior officers, as 
we need to be satisfied that persons of doubtful integrity are not in control within or appointed 
at top positions in financial institutions. We set down requirements for financial institutions to 
establish  and  maintain  effective  systems  and  controls  for  managing  their  risks,  including 
countering the risk that their institutions are used to perpetrate financial crime. If a fraudster 
forces the gate i.e. if an actual fraud is perpetrated, it’s not our role to investigate into the 
fraud,  it’s  that  of  the  police.  However,  we  would  look  at  the  systems  failures  and  require 
corrective  measures  from  the  financial  institution.  Our  action  complements  that  of  other 
stakeholders  i.e.  financial  institutions,  police,  government,  other  regulatory  bodies,  other 
institutions engaged in fighting financial crimes, as well as the consumers themselves. 
2 
 BIS Review 32/2009
Financial institutions 
Financial institutions have strong incentives to fight fraud. Frauds cost money. Frauds can 
have  damaging  effects  on  financial  institutions’  reputation,  customers  and  markets.  In  this 
context, financial institutions usually develop fraud strategies, and put in place policies and 
processes to manage fraud risk. However, for any fraud strategy to be effective there should 
be  strong  internal  governance.  Board  members  and  CEOs  should  be  involved.  The  Board 
and  senior  management  should  be  proactive  in  taking  responsibility  for  identifying  and 
assessing fraud risk and the adequacy of the controls put in place. They should allocate the 
responsibility for the day-to-day management of fraud risk to a senior officer. There should 
be clear lines of communication whereby fraud incidents are reported to senior management 
and the board. 
Two areas which financial institutions need to address with respect to card fraud immediately 
come to mind. Firstly, there should be appropriate technology to protect against cloning and 
adequate IT security to prevent data leakage. Secondly, frauds are not the work of outsiders 
only. Sometimes they come from within the financial institutions themselves. This is where 
financial institutions are called upon to exercise due care when recruiting. There should be 
proper screening of employees, anti-fraud training of staff, staff need to apply customer due 
diligence  and 
laundering  and  credit 
delinquencies. The culture of compliance should be embedded throughout the organization. 
Financial institutions have more and more recourse to outsourcing in their endeavour to cut 
down costs. This is not a bad thing in itself. However there is too much reliance on the terms 
of  the  contracts  and  not  enough  assurance  for  example  on  how  third  parties  vet  their 
employees  and  on  how  secure  customer  information  is.  Our  Guideline  on  Outsourcing  for 
Financial  Institutions  sets  down  the  risk  management  framework  and  assists  financial 
institutions in identifying the nature of risks involved in outsourcing and in addressing them 
effectively. 
take  appropriate  measures 
to  prevent  money 
Consumers 
In  the  fight  against  financial  crime,  consumers  also  have  an  important  role  to  play.  While 
financial institutions and the regulator need to make available easily accessible information, 
consumers have the duty to inform themselves. An informed consumer is a better protected 
consumer.  The  Bank  of  Mauritius  launched  as  part  of  its  40th  anniversary  celebrations  a 
customer  education  programme  to  create  better  awareness  in  the  public.  The  Mauritius 
Bankers Association is also actively involved in informing and educating consumers. There 
are  things  though  that  consumers  can  best  manage  themselves;  it  may  happen  that  they 
become  victims  of  fraud  out  of  their  own  negligence.  They  are  responsible  for  the 
safekeeping  of  their  cards,  they  should  keep  their  PIN  secret  or  disclose  their  Card 
Verification Value (CVV) only in secure payments sites. Consumers have the responsibility to 
be honest and may also become whistle-blowers. This leads me to an important aspect of 
the fight against financial crime, the need for the collaboration of all. 
Cooperation 
Financial crime causes real harm to society, from the retired consumer losing his life savings, 
to  the  financial  institution  losing  hundreds  of  millions  of  rupees  and  reaching  as  far  as 
financing terrorist activities. It just cannot be the job of only one body. Already there exists 
industry  cooperation  but  it  needs  to  go  further.  There  should  be  increased  sharing  of 
intelligence.  Collaboration  is  crucial;  financial  institutions,  government,  regulators,  police, 
consumer associations and public need to work together in this fight.  
BIS Review 32/2009 
 3
Conclusion 
There  are  already  plenty  of  good  practices  in  the  industry.  In  the  face  of  the  increasing 
inventiveness of fraudsters, the industry is most of the time lagging behind. We have more 
and more sophisticated criminals constantly on the lookout for new methods to defraud. The 
Financial Services Authority UK has recently published its Financial Risk Outlook 2009 and 
has  highlighted  that  the  tighter  economic  conditions  could  increase  the  incidence  or 
discovery of some types of financial crime. This poses real challenges to the financial sector 
and  brings  the  importance  of  effective  regulation  to  the  forefront.  Regulatees  often  view 
regulation  as  an  impediment  and  this  is  where  a  change  in  mindset  is  required.  In  most 
cases of frauds, it has been found that they had occurred because regulations were short-
circuited. Regulations are here to help regulatees conduct their business better and should 
not be viewed as a barrier.  
To conclude I would like to add that just like the financial crisis has triggered the need for 
concerted  efforts  to  prevent  the  global  financial  system  from  crashing,  I  am  of  the  opinion 
that the fight against financial crime can only be effective if each stakeholder brings in his 
own  contribution.  The  financial  sector  can  then  become  a  very  uncomfortable  place  for 
fraudsters. It is a matter of comfort, though, that we in Mauritius have not had to experience 
serious  frauds  in  recent  years,  which  is  a  testimony  to  the  good  regulatory  framework  we 
have, the effective processes at the financial institutions and the fact that the public is well 
informed. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 32/2009
