Jean-Claude Trichet: Hearing at the Economic and Monetary Affairs 
Committee of the European Parliament 
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the Hearing 
at  the  Economic  and  Monetary  Affairs  Committee  of  the  European  Parliament,  Brussels, 
21 January 2009. 
 les  membres  de 
la  Présidente,  Mesdames  et  Messieurs 
Madame 
la  Commission 
Economique  et  Monétaire,  je  me  réjouis  de  ce  premier  échange  de  vues  avec  votre 
Commission  en  2009.  Cet  échange  a  lieu  quelques  jours  seulement  après  la  réunion  du 
Conseil  des  Gouverneurs  du  15  janvier  consacrée  à  la  politique  monétaire.  De  surcroît, 
mardi dernier à Strasbourg lors de la session plénière dédiée aux dix ans de l’euro, j’ai été 
heureux de noter le soutien de votre Parlement à l’euro et à la BCE. Aujourd’hui, comme le 
veut  la  tradition,  je  commencerai  mon  intervention  par  une  évaluation  de  la  situation 
économique et monétaire, en expliquant les raisons sous-jacentes de nos récentes décisions 
relatives aux taux d’intérêt. Im Anschluss daran möchte ich einige Worte zum Preisausblick 
sagen,  wie  er  sich  im  Eurogebiet  darstellt.  Und  schließlich  werde  ich  auf  Fragen  der 
internationalen  Finanzarchitektur  eingehen.  Dieses  Thema  wird  in  den  nächsten  Monaten 
gewiss noch weiter an Bedeutung gewinnen.  
Economic and monetary developments 
Since  my  previous  appearance  before  the  European  Parliament  on  8  December  the 
economic  outlook  in  the  euro  area  has  continued  to  weaken  and  inflation  has  declined 
further. In December 2008 the inflation rate stood at 1.6%. Moreover, inflationary pressures 
and  inflationary  risks  have  continued  to  diminish.  Looking  ahead,  with  the  appropriate 
medium-term  perspective  for  monetary  policy  and  taking  also  into  account  our  own  policy 
decisions including the most recent one, we expect euro area inflation to remain in line with 
our definition of price stability over the policy-relevant horizon. Risks to price stability over the 
medium term are broadly balanced in the view of the Governing Council of the ECB.  
As  regards  economic  developments,  since  September  last  year  the  financial  turmoil  has 
intensified and broadened. Tensions have increasingly spilled over from the financial sector 
into the real economy. Looking ahead, both global demand and euro area demand are likely 
to  remain  dampened  for  a  protracted  period.  At  the  same  time,  declining  inflation  rates 
should  support  real  disposable  income  in  the  period  ahead,  and  the  euro  area  economy 
should  benefit  from  the  broad  and  far-reaching  policy  measures  that  have  been  decided 
upon over recent weeks.  
However, this outlook remains surrounded by exceptionally high uncertainty. Overall, risks to 
economic growth remain clearly on the downside. They relate mainly to the potential for a 
stronger impact of the financial turmoil on the real economy as well as to concerns about the 
possible  emergence  and  intensification  of  protectionist  pressures  and  to  possible  adverse 
developments  in  the  world  economy  stemming  from  a  disorderly  correction  of  global 
imbalances.  
To lay sound foundations for sustainable growth, all parties concerned should live up to their 
responsibilities.  In  this  respect,  it  is  crucial  to  maintain  discipline  and  a  medium-term 
perspective in macroeconomic policy-making. To pursue a stability-oriented and sustainable 
policy  approach  is  the  best  way  to  preserve  and  enhance  confidence.  The  significant 
measures being implemented by governments to address the financial turmoil should support 
BIS Review 8/2009 
 1
trust  in  the  financial  system  and  ease  constraints  on  credit  supply  to  companies  and 
households.  
Monetary trends in the euro area support the view that inflationary pressures are diminishing. 
Notably,  the  latest  evidence  confirms  a  moderating  rate  of  monetary  expansion.  The 
Governing  Council  has  repeated  its  commitment  to  keep  inflation  expectations  firmly 
anchored in line with its definition of price stability of below, but close to, 2%. This supports 
sustainable  growth  and  employment  and  contributes  to  financial  stability.  It  is  against  this 
background that the Governing Council decided last week to reduce the interest rate on the 
main refinancing operations of the Eurosystem by a further 50 basis points to 2%, bringing 
the total reduction since 8 October 2008 to 225 basis points.  
Medium-term price developments and the process of disinflation 
Let me now look more closely at the medium-term outlook for price developments in the euro 
area, and in particular at the process of disinflation we are currently observing. I will thereby 
address  the  first  topic  proposed.  It  is  essential  here  to  draw  a  clear  distinction  between 
disinflation and deflation. 
Disinflation is a process of falling inflation rates. This process often stems from cost-saving 
developments on the supply side or terms of trade improvements. Such developments can 
sometimes  go  hand  in  hand  with  negative  demand  shocks  as  is  the  case  at  present. 
However, they are per se benign in nature. This is because they sustain real incomes. In the 
current  context,  we  are  witnessing  a  process  of  disinflation  in  the  euro  area,  mainly  as  a 
result  of  a  sharp  fall  in  oil  and  commodity  prices.  To  that  extent  it  is  therefore  a  welcome 
development. The spike in oil and commodity prices that began in 2007 and lasted until mid-
2008 was both inflationary and contractionary. In consequence, the recent decline in these 
prices  is  both  disinflationary  and  expansionary.  By  way  of  example,  car  fuel  prices  fell  by 
15.4% in December 2008 year on year. Their weight of almost 5% in the HICP basket means 
that this explains a significant part of the recent inflation decline. If such favourable supply-
side developments are especially vigorous, disinflation can even temporarily lead to negative 
inflation  rates.  It  is  therefore  very  important  in  such  circumstances  to  keep  medium-term 
inflation expectations well-anchored. 
A deflationary process, by contrast, is a persistent and self-reinforcing decline in a very broad 
set of prices. This spiral is propagated by anticipation of prices declining further in the future. 
Such  negative  inflation  expectations  mean  that  investment  and  consumer  demand  is 
postponed, which would cause a second-round demand shortfall and put further downward 
pressures on prices.  
There is presently no threat of deflation. Indeed, the firm anchoring of inflation expectations – 
to which we are so fully committed – represents the strongest and most reassuring safeguard 
against any risk of a downward spiral of inflation and inflation expectations.  
From all these considerations you will understand that what we are currently witnessing is a 
process of disinflation, driven in particular by a sharp decline in commodity prices. 
International financial architecture 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  second  topic  we  selected,  namely  the  international  financial 
architecture. I consider that the fragility of the global financial system, by which I mean its 
lack of sufficient resilience that has been revealed in the course of the present episode of 
turbulences,  is  not  acceptable.  We  must  draw  all  the  lessons  of  the  crisis,  without  any 
complacency, considering that all the elements of the system must be significantly improved: 
the  quality  of  risk  management,  liquidity  management  and  the  overall  resilience  of  private 
institutions, the transparency of the financial markets, and the clarity of financial instruments.  
2 
 BIS Review 8/2009
As already underlined on the occasion of previous hearings in front of you, this calls first for 
much  more  transparency,  without  any  consideration  of  vested  interests;  second  for  much 
less short-termism in the decision-making processes, contrary to the most recent trends; and 
third  for  a  systematic  elimination  of  the  procyclical  aspects  of  our  regulatory,  prudential, 
accounting  and  taxation  rules,  which  are  amplifying  considerably  the  fluctuations  that  are 
inherent in the functioning of market economies. 
The Financial Stability Forum (FSF) has identified the main avenues for such reforms. What 
we now need is strategic lucidity and, where appropriate, a great deal of political energy to 
counter considerable vested interests. The G20 and the IMF are and will be decisive in this 
respect.  
But a much better functioning of the financial sphere does not suffice. We also need sound 
macroeconomic policies that are sustainable in the medium and long run. In particular, we 
need  to  avoid  the  creation  of  the  large  domestic  and  external  imbalances  which  are  very 
much  at  the  root  of  the  present  difficulties.  An  effective  surveillance  of  macroeconomic 
policies of the major systemically important economies is of the essence. Only the IMF can 
perform this decisive function, provided its mandate is strengthened.  
In terms of institutional set-up, we need two major improvements: 
• 
First, the international financial architecture requires a strengthening of the informal 
groupings, in particular the FSF and the G20. The FSF is unique in that it links all 
the authorities and institutions that have a systemic influence on financial markets, 
which are very largely decentralised and – for many of them – independent from the 
political sphere. The necessary enlargement of the FSF is key. Particularly important 
in  a  time  of  global  crisis  has  been  the  new  authority  of  the  G20,  which  is  a  truly 
global  informal  grouping  in  comparison  with  the  G7,  which  itself  continues  to  be 
useful in a situation where the turbulence comes from the industrialised countries.  
Second, on top of the IMF’s strengthened surveillance mandate, the governance of 
the international financial institutions, particularly the IMF but also the World Bank, 
should become more effective and representative. In particular, a full representation 
of emerging market economies, commensurate with their importance in the global 
economy, is indispensable.  
  By way of concluding my introductory remarks, I would like to stress two points.  
First,  as  regards  euro  area  policies,  persistent  wage  growth  differentials,  induced  by 
structural inefficiencies or misaligned national policies, including wage-setting policies, might 
have  adverse  implications  for  the  cost  competitiveness  of  individual  countries.  National 
authorities  have  the  responsibility  to  address  competitiveness  losses  accumulated  over 
recent  years  by  implementing  structural  reforms  and  ensuring  more  moderate  price  and 
wage  developments.  Regarding  fiscal  policies,  we  welcome  the  European  Council’s 
reconfirmation  of  its  full  commitment  to  sustainable  public  finances.  The  current  economic 
situation calls for prudence with regard to the adoption of extensive fiscal stimulus measures, 
taking  into  account  the  particular  fiscal  situation  in  each  country.  As  I  have  said  before, 
countries can use all the room for manoeuvre provided by the Stability and Growth Pact but 
only  the  room  for  manoeuvre  that  is  in  the  Pact.  The  significant  fiscal  loosening  and  the 
implied increase in government debt should in no case risk undermining public confidence in 
the  sustainability  of  public  finances,  thereby  detracting  from  the  effectiveness  of  a  fiscal 
stimulus.  
Second, I should like to turn briefly to financial supervision issues. The financial crisis has 
heightened  the  importance  of  addressing  issues  relating  to  financial  supervision  in  a 
comprehensive and coordinated manner, both globally and at the European level. 
BIS Review 8/2009 
 3
As  regards  the  European  level,  the  crisis  has  highlighted  the  need  to  analyse  long-term 
solutions to the structure of supervision. To that end, the proposals which will be put forward 
by  the  High-Level  Group  chaired  by  Jacques  de  Larosière  will  represent  an  important 
contribution to the policy discussions.  
Considering the possible options and as underlined in particular by a number of Members of 
Parliament,  Article  105(6)  of  the  Treaty  explicitly  mentions  the  possibility  for  the  Member 
States to decide to confer upon the ECB specific tasks in the domain of financial supervision. 
Reflections  have  started  on  the  specific  role  that  could  be  played  by  the  ECB  and  its 
Governing  Council  should  this  provision  of  the  Treaty  be  activated.  At  this  stage  the 
Governing Council has not yet taken a position on this topic. I will not fail to report to you the 
outcome of these reflections. 
4 
 BIS Review 8/2009
