Lucas Papademos: Financial stability and macro-prudential supervision: 
objectives, instruments and the role of the ECB 
Speech by Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the CFS 
conference “The ECB and Its Watchers XI”, Frankfurt, 4 September 2009. 
 Introduction 
I.  
Over  the  past  two  years,  the  financial  crisis  has  clearly  demonstrated  the  crucial  role  of 
central banks in safeguarding financial stability and the importance of the macro-prudential 
approach to regulation and supervision. As a result, in many countries or economic areas, 
the institutional framework for financial stability, which is being strengthened in the light of the 
lessons learnt from the crisis, incorporates new supervisory tasks and bodies responsible for 
the macro-prudential regulation of systemic risk. And central banks are envisaged to play a 
key  role  in  the  conduct  of  the  macro-prudential  supervision  of  the  financial  system  as  a 
whole. 
In the EU, following the publication of the Report of the de Larosière Group1, the European 
Commission proposed in May 2009 a set of ambitious reforms, including notably the creation 
of  a  new  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  responsible  for  macro-prudential  oversight.  The 
European Council in June 2009 supported the Commission proposal.2
The  establishment  of  a  new  framework  for  macro-prudential  supervision  in  the  EU  has 
highlighted  a  number  of  fundamental  issues  concerning  its  objectives,  powers  and  tools. 
And,  in  particular,  it  has  raised  some  important  questions  on  how  the  conduct  of  macro-
prudential supervision relates to, and complements, the performance of other central banking 
tasks that can also contribute to financial stability.  
In my remarks I will address three questions: 
• 
What is the nature of the relationship between price stability and financial stability? In 
particular, is there a possible policy trade-off for central banks between the objectives 
of securing price stability and safeguarding financial stability? 
What are the objectives, tasks and policy instruments of the envisaged framework for 
macro-prudential supervision in the EU?  
What  is  the  role  of  the  ECB  in  contributing  to  financial  stability  and  the  macro-
prudential supervision of the EU financial system? 
  Price stability and financial stability: is there a trade-off? 
II.  
There is broad consensus that central banks’ main responsibility is to preserve price stability 
and that they also have an important role to play in promoting financial stability. The ECB’s 
objectives  are  clearly  laid  out  in  the  Treaty.  The  primary  objective  is  to  maintain  price 
stability. At the same time, Article 105 (5) of the Treaty stipulates that the ECB/ESCB “shall 
                                                 
1   Report  of  the  High-Level  Group  on  Financial  Supervision  in  the  EU  chaired  by  Jacques  de  Larosière, 
Brussels, 25 February 2009. 
2   Commission Communication, European Council Conclusions. 
BIS Review 103/2009 
 1
in 
the 
financial 
imbalances 
the  unravelling  of 
contribute to […] the stability of the financial system”3. The Eurosystem’s Mission Statement 
states that “we aim to safeguard financial stability…”.4
In many cases, the financial stability mandates of central banks, and the associated tasks to 
be performed, are specified in relatively general terms. There are several reasons for this. 
One reason is the complexity of the concept of financial stability and the challenges faced in 
specifying the associated policy objective in explicit terms. Another reason is that the powers 
and  policy  instruments  necessary  for  the  preservation  of  financial  stability  may  be  shared 
with other authorities. 
At the ECB, we have defined financial stability as “a condition in which the financial system – 
comprising  financial  intermediaries,  markets  and  market  infrastructures  –  is  capable  of 
withstanding  shocks  and 
financial 
intermediation  process  which  are  severe  enough  to  significantly  impair  the  allocation  of 
savings  to  profitable  investment  opportunities”.5  It  is  clear  from  this  definition  that  the 
objective  of  promoting  and  safeguarding  financial  stability  cannot  be  defined  in  terms  of  a 
single  indicator  in  a  reasonably  straightforward  manner,  as  can  be  done  with  the  price 
stability  objective.  Indeed,  it  has  been  argued  that  it  may  be  preferable  or  more  useful  to 
define financial stability as absence of instability”.6  
Notwithstanding,  the  inherent  difficulty  in  defining  the  financial  stability  objective  with 
precision, a key issue for the central bank is the relationship between financial stability and 
price stability. Are these two conditions and the pertinent policy objectives complementary, or 
are  there  situations  in  which  the  simultaneous  attainment  of  these  two  goals  may  pose  a 
policy  trade-off  for  the  central  bank?  And,  if  the  latter  happens  to  be  the  case,  does  the 
central  bank  have  sufficient  powers  and  instruments  to  address  this  trade-off  and  achieve 
each objective without jeopardising the attainment of the other? Let me make a number of 
observations related to these questions. 
In  general,  price  stability  and  financial  stability  complement  and  mutually  reinforce  one 
another.  And,  consequently,  the  pursuit  of  the  pertinent  policy  objectives  does  not  involve 
any  trade-offs.  Price  stability  contributes  to  financial  stability  in  a  number  of  ways.  For 
example,  as  most  financial  contracts  are  expressed  in  nominal  terms,  an  environment  of 
stable  prices  prevents  an  arbitrary  redistribution  of  income  and  wealth  between  borrowers 
and  lenders  that  could  result  from  unanticipated  price  developments  and  lead  to  financial 
stress and potential defaults.  
Moreover, monetary policy that credibly preserves price stability promotes financial stability. 
The  benefits  of  the  ECB’s  credible  commitment  to  maintaining  price  stability  have  been 
demonstrated  during  the  current  financial  crisis.  Through  the  firm  anchoring  of  inflation 
expectations to price stability, the ECB’s monetary policy has minimised the risk of deflation. 
Moreover, stable inflation expectations have enhanced the effectiveness of monetary policy 
decisions in stabilising the economy, which is particularly relevant when nominal policy rates 
                                                 
3   Article 105(5) of the Treaty and Article 3.3 of the Statute of the Statute of the European System of Central 
Banks  and  of  the  European  Central  Bank  state  that  “the  ESCB  shall  contribute  to  the  smooth  conduct  of 
policies pursued by the competent authorities relating to the prudential supervision of credit institutions and 
the stability of the financial system”. 
4   See http://www.ecb.europa.eu/ecb/orga/escb/html/mission_eurosys.en.html. 
5   See ECB Financial Stability Review, June 2009, p. 9. This definition implies that the safeguarding of financial 
stability  requires  the  identification  of  the  financial  system’s  main  sources  of  risk  and  vulnerability,  such  as 
inefficiencies in the allocation of financial resources and the mispricing or mismanagement of financial risks. 
Other  definitions  of  financial  stability  that  have  been  proposed  also  reflect  the  inherent  complexity  of  the 
concept. 
6   A. Crockett (1997), The Theory and Practice of Financial Stability”, GEI Newsletter Issue No. 6, 11-12 July. 
and  R.  Ferguson  (2003),  Should  Financial  Stability  Be  an  Explicit  Central  Bank  Objective?  Fed  Board, 
mentions that “It seems useful…to define financial stability…by defining its opposite: financial instability. “ 
2 
 BIS Review 103/2009
financial  stress.  For  example, 
are very low and face a lower bound. In turn, this has contributed to financial stability, both by 
helping to stabilise economic activity and by reducing the potential risk of a Fisherian-type 
debt deflation spiral.  
Conversely,  a  stable  financial  system  enhances  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  in 
maintaining price stability in various ways, namely by facilitating the smooth transmission of 
monetary  policy  impulses,  by  containing  the  propagation  and  impact  of  macroeconomic 
economic  shocks  through  the  financial  sector,  and  by  reducing  the  incidence  of  shocks 
originating  in  the  financial  sector,  from  bank  failures  or  the  abrupt  unwinding  of  sizeable 
imbalances in financial markets. 
These  observations  imply  that  in  general  monetary  policy  actions  can  contribute  to  both 
preserving price stability and fostering or safeguarding financial stability. This can also hold 
true  during  periods  of 
the  non-standard  measures 
implemented  by  the  ECB  over  the  past  two  years  –  in  particular  the  introduction  of  full 
allotment at fixed rates in the provision of central bank liquidity in the Eurosystem monetary 
market operations – have contributed to financial stability by preventing a shortage of liquidity 
from becoming a widespread solvency problem with adverse effects on financial and price 
stability and the real economy. They have also contributed to price stability by supporting the 
provision of credit beyond what could be achieved through the favourable impact of interest 
rate reductions and by ensuring that the easing of financial conditions induced by policy rate 
cuts would be fully transmitted to firms and households at a time when financial markets and 
institutions were under stress. 
That having been said, there can be situations when the constellation of the shocks affecting 
the  real  economy  and  financial  markets,  in  particular,  the  impact  of  “structural”  or 
“behavioural” changes related to productivity developments or market sentiment, may create 
trade-offs and pose challenges for central banks aiming at the simultaneous preservation of 
price stability and financial stability. Let me give you two examples. There can be situations 
in which financial imbalances emerge – with adverse consequences for future financial and 
price stability – in an environment of stable prices and the associated very low interest rates. 
And,  indeed,  it  has  been  argued  –  and  there  is  evidence  to  support  this  view  –  that  an 
environment of very low inflation and a prolonged period of very low interest rates may be 
conducive to an underpricing of risk, an imprudent increase in leverage and the emergence 
of asset price bubbles. In such an environment, the central bank may face an inter-temporal 
trade  off,  if  it  aims  at  safeguarding  financial  and  price  stability  over  the  longer  term  by 
tightening  the  monetary  policy  stance  because  of  the  potential  impact  of  the  tightening  on 
shorter and medium term price developments.  
Another example is provided by the situation in the euro area and elsewhere during the first 
year  of  the  financial  market  turmoil,  when  inflationary  pressures  increased  because  of  the 
effects  of  sizeable  and  persisting  oil  and  other  commodity  price  shocks,  while  the  pace  of 
economic  activity  was  decelerating  and  the  financial  system  was  experiencing  increasing 
stress.  In  such  a  situation,  the  ECB  had  to  ensure  the  preservation  of  price  stability,  by 
preventing  the  emergence  of  second  round  effects  in  wage  and  price-setting,  while  at  the 
same  time  addressing  severe  money  market  pressures  and  the  impact  of  other  factors 
threatening the stability of the financial system.  
In  such  situations,  involving  possible  policy  trade-offs  in  achieving  the  objectives  of 
preserving  price  stability  and  safeguarding  financial  stability,  and  when  the  determining 
factors and processes that threaten price and financial stability are not positively correlated, 
the central bank should be able to rely on an expanded set of policy instruments that can 
help achieve the two objectives simultaneously. During the first year of the financial market 
turmoil,  the  ECB  addressed  the  unfavourable  combination  of,  on  the  one  hand,  persisting 
and increasing inflation risks and, on the other, sustainable stress in the financial system and 
risks to its stability by using two instruments: the key monetary policy interest rate as well as 
liquidity provision and management. The level of the policy rate was defined so as to achieve 
BIS Review 103/2009 
 3
the primary objective of preserving price stability. At the same time, the Eurosystem engaged 
in active liquidity management in order to mitigate pressures in the money markets and their 
spill-over effects on financial markets and the real economy. This was done by adjusting the 
inter-temporal distribution of liquidity provision within the reserve maintenance period and the 
maturity profile of the refinancing operations, while maintaining the overall supply of central 
bank money broadly unchanged. 
Macro-prudential supervision: its role, objectives and instruments  
III.  
The  need  for  an  extended  set  of  policy  instruments  for  safeguarding  financial  stability  is 
greater in order to prevent the emergence of financial imbalances and the recurrence of a 
financial  crisis.  The  experience  of  the  past  few  years  and  new  evidence  from  research 
strongly  suggest  that  monetary  policy  should  aim  at  containing  excessive  risk-taking  and 
unsustainable  asset  price  developments  that  are  often  associated  with  persistent  credit 
growth  and  rising  leverage.  In  many  circumstances,  central  banks  can  use  policy  interest 
rates to “lean against the wind” of financial market excesses, in a manner which is effective 
and  consistent  with  the  preservation  of  price  stability  over  a  longer  term  horizon.  And  the 
ECB’s monetary policy strategy – with its medium term orientation and the emphasis that it 
places on the analysis of monetary and credit developments – is very well suited for this.  
At  the  same  time,  past  experience  has  also  shown  that  there  are  limits  to  what  can  be 
achieved by relying solely on the interest rate instrument. The presence of short term policy 
trade offs in an environment of very low or even falling inflation, the relative “bluntness” of the 
monetary  policy  tool  and  the  often  difficult  situation  in  terms  of  available  information  and 
analysis,  put  certain  limits  to  the  use  of  monetary  policy  for  financial  stability  purposes. 
Moreover,  market  excesses  and  the  pro-cyclicality  of  the  financial  system  are  also  due  to 
factors  other  than  excessive  credit  growth  and  high  leverage.  Consequently,  other  policy 
tools  must  be  employed  –  notably  regulatory  policy  instruments  –  by  the  supervisory 
authorities in order to reduce procyclicality and also limit the emergence of systemic risks in 
the financial system. This assessment is also compatible with Tinbergen’s rule that, in case 
of  trade-offs  between  objectives,  policy  makers  need  as  many  (independent)  policy 
instruments as objectives, in order to fully achieve them. 
Furthermore, the extraordinary nature and consequences of the financial crisis – and here I 
am  referring  both  to  how  close  we came  to  a global  financial  meltdown  and  to  the  overall 
costs of the crisis for tax-payers in terms of losses in output and employment – have painfully 
demonstrated  the  need  for  improving  and  broadening  the  regulatory  framework,  by 
strengthening both the micro-prudential supervision of individual institutions and the macro-
prudential supervision of the financial system as a whole. 
The current crisis has revealed a general under-appreciation of systemic risks in the existing 
framework  of  financial  regulation  and  supervision,  which  tends  to  focus  on  the  stability  of 
individual  institutions,  markets  and  infrastructures.  The  crisis  also  revealed  that  macro-
financial 
financial 
globalisation  play  an  important  role  in  determining  the  size,  nature  and  propagation  of 
systemic risk. Therefore, it essential – and there is a broad consensus on this – to establish 
an  effective  framework  for  macro-prudential  supervision  that  will  ensure  a  systematic,  all-
encompassing  and  integrated  analysis  of  systemic  risks  as  well  as  the  formulation  of 
appropriate policies to prevent address such risks.  
The macro-prudential approach to supervision focuses on the financial system as  a whole 
and  involves  the  monitoring,  assessment  and  mitigation  of  systemic  risk,  namely  the 
likelihood of failure of a significant part of the financial system. It is important to recognise 
that systemic risk is partly endogenous as it depends on the collective behaviour of financial 
institutions  and  their  inter-connectedness,  as  well  as  the  interaction  between  financial 
markets  and  the  macroeconomy.  Macro-prudential  policies  aim  to  prevent,  or  at  least 
inter-connectedness  of  markets  and 
institutions  and 
factors, 
the 
4 
 BIS Review 103/2009
contain, the build up of financial imbalances and ensure that the financial system is able to 
withstand their unwinding and be resilient to shocks. 
Central banks are well suited to be the authorities mainly responsible for macro-prudential 
supervision  because  of  their  expertise  and  analytical  capabilities  in  the  fields  of  monetary 
and financial stability analysis, as well as due to their closeness to the money and financial 
markets.  The  interlinkages  between  the  financial  system  and  the  macroeconomy  further 
strengthen  the  rationale  for  assigning  to  the  central  banks  the  responsibility  for  macro-
prudential  analysis  and  the  formulation  of  recommendations  concerning  macro-prudential 
policies.  
What  is  the  nature  of  the  policy  instruments  of  macro-prudential  supervision?  Macro-
prudential policies will concern, to a considerable extent, regulatory and supervisory action. 
They could take the form of general guidelines or concrete recommendations relating to the 
calibration of prudential tools. For example, macro-prudential recommendations could involve 
the  adjustment  of  capital  requirements  or  the  setting  of  additional  capital  buffers  in  the 
banking  system  as  a  whole,  or  entail  guidance  regarding  leverage  ratios  and  liquidity 
management.  Macro-prudential  policies  would  not  concern  individual  financial  institutions.7 
While in principle a range of macro-prudential tools is available, the choice of the appropriate 
tools to address emerging systemic risks remains a challenge, requiring further analysis in 
order to identify the most efficient and effective instruments for the implementation of macro-
prudential policies.  
Obviously,  the  new  macro-prudential  approach  to  regulation  and  supervision  has  to  be 
integrated  with  the  existing  micro-prudential  structures.  Macro-  and  micro-prudential 
supervision are complementary components and are part of the overall financial supervisory 
framework.  The  institutional  arrangements  for  the  performance  of  these  two  tasks  must 
ensure  effective  cooperation  and  information  sharing  between  the  institutions  involved  in 
micro- and macro-prudential supervision.  
Let me now focus on the envisaged macro-prudential framework in the EU and on the role of 
the ECB.  
The EU macro-prudential supervisory framework and the role of the ECB 
IV.  
Following the publication of the Report of the de Larosière Group in February 2009 and the 
Commission  Communication  in  May,  the  Ecofin  Council  agreed  in  June  2009  that  a  new 
independent body responsible for the conduct of macro-prudential oversight in the EU should 
be  established,  namely  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB).  The  creation  of  the 
ESRB  was  supported  by  the  European  Council  on  18  and  19  June  2009.  In  the  wake  of 
these decisions, the Commission is preparing legal texts with concrete provisions concerning 
the  establishment  and  functioning  of  the  ESRB,  which  will be  transmitted  to  the  European 
Parliament and the Council in late September. These will be part of a broader package of 
legislative  proposals  including  those  for  establishing  the  three  new  European  micro-
prudential supervisory authorities.  
The European System of Central Banks (ESCB) will play a key role in the functioning of the 
ESRB. The General Board of the ESRB will comprise, as voting members, the Members of 
the General Council of the ECB (27 governors of the national central banks, the President 
and  the  Vice-President  of  the  ECB),  the  Chairpersons  of  the  three  European  Supervisory 
Authorities  (ESAs)  and  a  member  of  the  European  Commission.  Representatives  of  the 
competent national supervisory authorities (one for each Member State) and the President of 
                                                 
7   With  respect  to  the  adjustment  of  capital  adequacy  ratios,  recent  proposals  point  to  adjusting  the  capital 
adequacy  ratio  of  individual  institutions  according  to  their  contribution  to  systemic  risk  or  to  the  degree  of 
compliance with corporate governance standards (see Brunnermeier et al. 11th Geneva Report, 2009). 
BIS Review 103/2009 
 5
its 
the  ESRB  could  complement 
the  Economic  and  Financial  Committee  (EFC)  will  also  attend  the  meetings  of  the  ESRB. 
The  participation  of  all  the  members  of  the  General  Council  of  the  ECB  in  the  ESRB  will 
ensure that the financial stability analysis of the ESRB will benefit from the macro-economic, 
financial and monetary expertise of the EU central banks.  
The  main  task  of  the  ESRB  will  be  to  identify  and  assess  risks  to  the  stability  of  the  EU 
financial system and issue risk warnings when the identified risks appear to be significant. 
When  appropriate, 
risk  warnings  with  policy 
recommendations for remedial action.  
The ESRB will not be responsible for the implementation of macro-prudential policies. The 
final  responsibility  for  implementing  the  ESRB  recommendations  will  remain  with  national 
supervisors and other national authorities. As the ESRB will not implement macro-prudential 
policies, the effective monitoring of the follow-up to its warnings and recommendations and 
their  consistent  and  timely  implementation  will  be  crucial  for  the  performance  and  the 
credibility of the new macro-prudential supervisory framework.  
The  ESRB  will  not  perform  its  tasks  in  isolation;  close  cooperation  with  the  other  EU 
supervisory  authorities  will  be  vital  for  the  success  of  the  new  supervisory  framework. 
Indeed,  according  to  the  Commission  Communication,  the  functioning  of  the  new  EU 
supervisory architecture requires efficient cooperation between the ESRB and the European 
System  of  Financial  Supervision  (ESFS),  comprised  of  the  three  European  Supervisory 
Authorities. This should ensure the appropriate interplay at the EU level between the macro- 
and micro-prudential levels.  
The  ESRB  is  also  expected  to  liaise  with  global  institutions.  In  line  with  the  Commission 
Communication, the ESRB will need to set up arrangements for close collaboration with the 
IMF,  the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB)  and  third  country  counterparts.  This  liaison  with 
external  counterparts  is  expected  to  help  the  ESRB  identify  and  better  assess  risks 
stemming from outside the EU at an earlier stage than would otherwise be the case.  
It is evident from the envisaged activities of the ESRB that its work will be wide-ranging and 
complex. It is the task of the ECB to assist this new body in performing its duties. According 
to  the  Council  Conclusions,  the  ECB  will  provide  analytical,  statistical,  administrative  and 
logistical support to the ESRB. In particular, the ECB will assist the ESRB in the development 
and collection of new statistical data of relevance to the ESRB on a regular basis. The ECB 
will  also  assist  the  ESRB  by  developing  and  maintaining  new  analytical  tools  and 
methodologies  for  the  identification  and  assessment  of  systemic  risks  and  the  issuance  of 
early  risk  warnings,  so  that  the  ESRB  effectively  performs  its  tasks.  This  task  poses 
important  challenges  because  the  identification  and  assessment  of  systemic  risks  require 
special skills and the further development of analytical tools. Models must be developed to 
help structure and analyse the vast amount of information collected for the risk assessment. 
Each model has its pros and cons, and serves different purposes. As financial stability and 
macro-prudential analyses are less developed than those in other policy areas, it is advisable 
to employ a multiplicity of approaches. 
Concluding remarks 
V.  
In conclusion, I would like to stress four points: 
First,  the  ECB  tasks  related  to  its  contribution  to  safeguarding  financial  stability  are 
compatible  with  its  monetary  policy  framework  for  achieving  its  primary  objective  of  price 
stability. Indeed, the ECB’s monetary policy strategy is very well suited for the potential use 
of  the  interest  rate  instrument  in  order  to  “lean  against  the  wind”  of  financial  market 
excesses, in a manner consistent with the preservation of price stability over the medium and 
longer term. 
6 
 BIS Review 103/2009
Second, the establishment of the ESRB and the attribution of macro-prudential tasks to the 
ECB  will  strengthen  the  ECB’s  capacity  (its  power  and  means)  to  contribute  to  financial 
stability, without interfering with the performance of its monetary policy tasks. 
Third,  the  new  body  responsible  for  macro-prudential  supervision  in  the  EU  should  be 
independent in carrying out its tasks and pursuing its objective of assessing and regulating 
systemic  risk.  The  fact  that  the  ESRB  will  be  responsible  for  the  assessment  of  systemic 
risks and the formulation of pertinent policy recommendations, and that it will not be involved 
in  the  implementation  of  these  recommendations  strengthens  the  argument  for  its  policy 
independence. 
Fourth,  the  effective  performance  of  macro-prudential  supervision  in  the  EU  will  require 
addressing  a  number  of  legal,  institutional  and  governance  issues.  There  are  two  key 
requirements for the successful functioning of the ESRB: The first is the establishment of a 
comprehensive  and  relevant  information  base  as  well  as  effective  information-sharing  and 
cooperation  between  the  ESRB  and  the  European  Supervisory  Authorities.  The  second  is 
that suitable and sufficient mechanisms are in place in order to ensure the implementation of 
the macro-prudential recommendations. 
Finally,  I  should  emphasise  that  the  ECB  is  actively  preparing,  in  collaboration  with  the 
national  central  banks,  in  order  to  provide  the  appropriate  analytical  statistical  and 
administrative support to the ESRB. 
BIS Review 103/2009 
 7
