Zhou Xiaochuan: Reform the international monetary system 
Essay by Dr Zhou Xiaochuan, Governor of the People’s Bank of China, 23 March 2009. 
 The  outbreak  of  the  current  crisis  and  its  spillover  in  the  world  have  confronted  us  with  a 
long-existing but still unanswered question, i.e., what kind of international reserve currency 
do we need to secure global financial stability and facilitate world economic growth, which 
was  one  of  the  purposes  for  establishing  the  IMF?  There  were  various  institutional 
arrangements  in  an  attempt  to  find  a  solution,  including  the  Silver  Standard,  the  Gold 
Standard, the Gold Exchange Standard and the Bretton Woods system. The above question, 
however,  as  the  ongoing  financial  crisis  demonstrates,  is  far  from  being  solved,  and  has 
become  even  more  severe  due  to  the  inherent  weaknesses  of  the  current  international 
monetary system.  
Theoretically,  an  international  reserve  currency  should  first  be  anchored  to  a  stable 
benchmark and issued according to a clear set of rules, therefore to ensure orderly supply; 
second,  its  supply  should  be  flexible  enough  to  allow  timely  adjustment  according  to  the 
changing demand; third, such adjustments should be disconnected from economic conditions 
and  sovereign  interests  of  any  single  country.  The  acceptance  of  credit-based  national 
currencies as major international reserve currencies, as is the case in the current system, is 
a  rare  special  case  in  history.  The  crisis  again  calls  for  creative  reform  of  the  existing 
international monetary system towards an international reserve currency with a stable value, 
rule-based issuance and manageable supply, so as to achieve the objective of safeguarding 
global economic and financial stability. 
I.  
The outbreak of the crisis and its spillover to the entire world reflect the 
inherent vulnerabilities and systemic risks in the existing international 
monetary system.  
Issuing countries of reserve currencies are constantly confronted with the dilemma between 
achieving  their  domestic  monetary  policy  goals  and  meeting  other  countries’  demand  for 
reserve  currencies.  On  the  one  hand,  the  monetary  authorities  cannot  simply  focus  on 
domestic  goals  without  carrying  out  their  international  responsibilities;  on  the  other  hand, 
they  cannot  pursue  different  domestic  and  international  objectives  at  the  same  time.  They 
may either fail to adequately meet the demand of a growing global economy for liquidity as 
they try to ease inflation pressures at home, or create excess liquidity in the global markets 
by  overly  stimulating  domestic  demand.  The  Triffin  Dilemma,  i.e.,  the  issuing  countries  of 
reserve  currencies  cannot  maintain  the  value  of  the  reserve  currencies  while  providing 
liquidity to the world, still exists.  
When a national currency is used in pricing primary commodities, trade settlements and is 
adopted  as  a  reserve  currency  globally,  efforts  of  the  monetary  authority  issuing  such  a 
currency to address its economic imbalances by adjusting exchange rate would be made in 
vain, as its currency serves as a benchmark for many other currencies. While benefiting from 
a widely accepted reserve currency, the globalization also suffers from the flaws of such a 
system. The frequency and increasing intensity of financial crises following the collapse of 
the  Bretton  Woods  system  suggests  the  costs  of  such  a  system  to  the  world  may  have 
exceeded its benefits. The price is becoming increasingly higher, not only for the users, but 
also  for  the  issuers  of  the  reserve  currencies.  Although  crisis  may  not  necessarily  be  an 
intended result of the issuing authorities, it is an inevitable outcome of the institutional flaws.  
BIS Review 41/2009 
 1
II.  
1. 
2. 
The desirable goal of reforming the international monetary system, therefore, 
is to create an international reserve currency that is disconnected from 
individual nations and is able to remain stable in the long run, thus removing 
the inherent deficiencies caused by using credit-based national currencies.  
Though the super-sovereign reserve currency has long since been proposed, yet no 
substantive  progress  has  been  achieved  to  date.  Back  in  the  1940s,  Keynes  had 
already proposed to introduce an international currency unit named “Bancor”, based 
on the value of 30 representative commodities. Unfortunately, the proposal was not 
accepted.  The  collapse  of  the  Bretton  Woods  system,  which  was  based  on  the 
White  approach,  indicates  that  the  Keynesian  approach  may  have  been  more 
farsighted. The IMF also created the SDR in 1969, when the defects of the Bretton 
Woods  system  initially  emerged,  to  mitigate  the  inherent  risks  sovereign  reserve 
currencies caused. Yet, the role of the SDR has not been put into full play due to 
limitations on its allocation and the scope of its uses. However, it serves as the light 
in the tunnel for the reform of the international monetary system.  
A super-sovereign reserve currency not only eliminates the inherent risks of credit-
based sovereign currency, but also makes it possible to manage global liquidity. A 
super-sovereign reserve currency managed by a global institution could be used to 
both  create  and  control  the  global  liquidity.  And  when  a  country’s  currency  is  no 
longer  used  as  the  yardstick  for  global  trade  and  as  the  benchmark  for  other 
currencies, the exchange rate policy of the country would be far more effective in 
adjusting  economic  imbalances.  This  will  significantly  reduce  the  risks  of  a  future 
crisis and enhance crisis management capability. 
III.  
The reform should be guided by a grand vision and begin with specific 
deliverables. It should be a gradual process that yields win-win results for all  
The reestablishment of a new and widely accepted reserve currency with a stable valuation 
benchmark may take a long time. The creation of an international currency unit, based on the 
Keynesian  proposal,  is  a  bold  initiative  that  requires  extraordinary  political  vision  and 
courage. In the short run, the international community, particularly the IMF, should at least 
recognize  and  face  up  to  the  risks  resulting  from  the  existing  system,  conduct  regular 
monitoring and assessment and issue timely early warnings.  
Special consideration should be given to giving the SDR a greater role. The SDR has the 
features and potential to act as a super-sovereign reserve currency. Moreover, an increase 
in SDR allocation would help the Fund address its resources problem and the difficulties in 
the  voice  and  representation  reform.  Therefore,  efforts  should  be  made  to  push  forward  a 
SDR allocation. This will require political cooperation among member countries. Specifically, 
the  Fourth  Amendment  to  the  Articles  of  Agreement  and  relevant  resolution  on  SDR 
allocation proposed in 1997 should be approved as soon as possible so that members joined 
the  Fund  after  1981  could  also  share  the  benefits  of  the  SDR.  On  the  basis  of  this, 
considerations could be given to further increase SDR allocation.  
The  scope  of  using  the  SDR  should  be  broadened,  so  as  to  enable  it  to  fully  satisfy  the 
member countries’ demand for a reserve currency.  
Set  up  a  settlement  system  between  the  SDR  and  other  currencies.  Therefore,  the  SDR, 
which is now only used between governments and international institutions, could become a 
widely accepted means of payment in international trade and financial transactions. 
Actively promote the use of the SDR in international trade, commodities pricing, investment 
and corporate book-keeping. This will help enhance the role of the SDR, and will effectively 
reduce  the  fluctuation  of  prices  of  assets  denominated  in  national  currencies  and  related 
risks. 
2 
 BIS Review 41/2009
Create financial assets denominated in the SDR to increase its appeal. The introduction of 
SDR-denominated securities, which is being studied by the IMF, will be a good start. 
Further improve the valuation and allocation of the SDR. The basket of currencies forming 
the  basis  for  SDR  valuation  should  be  expanded  to  include  currencies  of  all  major 
economies, and the GDP may also be included as a weight. The allocation of the SDR can 
be shifted from a purely calculation-based system to a system backed by real assets, such 
as a reserve pool, to further boost market confidence in its value.  
IV.  
1. 
2. 
Entrusting part of the member countries’ reserve to the centralized 
management of the IMF will not only enhance the international community’s 
ability to address the crisis and maintain the stability of the international 
monetary and financial system, but also significantly strengthen the role of 
the SDR. 
Compared  with  separate  management  of  reserves  by  individual  countries,  the 
centralized management of part of the global reserve by a trustworthy international 
institution with a reasonable return to encourage participation will be more effective 
in deterring speculation and stabilizing financial markets. The participating countries 
can also save some reserve for domestic development and economic growth. With 
its universal membership, its unique mandate of maintaining monetary and financial 
stability, and as an international “supervisor” on the macroeconomic policies of its 
member countries, the IMF, equipped with its expertise, is endowed with a natural 
advantage to act as the manager of its member countries’ reserves. 
The centralized management of its member countries’ reserves by the Fund will be 
an effective measure to promote a greater role of the SDR as a reserve currency. To 
achieve this, the IMF can set up an open-ended SDR-denominated fund based on 
the  market  practice,  allowing  subscription  and  redemption  in  the  existing  reserve 
currencies by various investors as desired. This arrangement will not only promote 
the  development  of  SDR-denominated  assets,  but  will  also  partially  allow 
management  of  the  liquidity  in  the  form  of  the  existing  reserve  currencies.  It  can 
even  lay  a  foundation  for  increasing  SDR  allocation  to  gradually  replace  existing 
reserve currencies with the SDR. 
BIS Review 41/2009 
 3
