Christian Noyer: World financial crisis – public and private strategies to 
overcome the crisis 
Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France, at Paris-Europlace, Dubai, 
22 January 2009. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure for me to be here and share some thoughts on the financial crisis and 
on  solutions  that  may  be  found  to overcome  the  situation.  It  is  too  early  to  draw  definitive 
lessons from recent events in financial markets. It is however vital to start reflecting on the 
experience  of  the  last  few  months.  Even  more  in  periods  of  tension  than  in  normal  times, 
action and reflection should reinforce one another. It is at the very moment of managing the 
crisis that we lay the foundations for the future financial system. 
Having said that, I propose to discuss with you two main topics: 
• 
• 
The nature of the financial crisis 
The  policies  implemented  to  address  it  both  from  a  public  and  a  private  sector 
perspective. 
The nature of the crisis 
The crisis first emerged as a liquidity crisis. The first symptoms appeared at the beginning of 
August  2007  when  serious  disruptions  surfaced  on  the  inter-bank  market  in  the  Western 
world. More than a year later, tensions on money markets are still with us. Recent months 
have witnessed abnormal levels of spreads, a shortening of maturities, and the contraction, 
or  even  closure,  of  some  market  segments.  Through  spill-over,  these  tensions  are  also 
affecting  non-financial  corporations  and,  more  broadly  the  financing  of  the  economy.  They 
also  have  spilled  over  to  emerging  market  economies,  which  had  until  the  autumn  2008 
remained largely unaffected. 
The crisis also emerged as a crisis of securitisation. Securitisation is an old and successful 
technique  used  to  refinance  a  range  of  loans.  What  was  new  about  it  is  that  it  got  used 
extensively  in  highly  unstable  financial  structures.  These  were  financing  short-term  illiquid 
and complex assets whose value proved to be uncertain and contingent upon models. The 
instability  of  such  structures  was  largely  masked.  Indeed,  cheap  money  allowed  easy 
refinancing of poor quality debt and of assets with uncertain value. Also, favourable ratings 
and  credit  enhancements  artificially  boosted  the  quality  of  loans  underlying  structured 
products. The rise in defaults on such loans, first on subprime mortgages, triggered a chain 
of reactions whose consequences are still unfolding now. Credit protections proved illusory. 
Liquidity  dried  up  much  more  quickly  than  it  had  appeared.  Rating  agencies  massively, 
suddenly  and  sharply  downgraded  products  which  until  then  were  deemed  of  the  highest 
quality. 
The  demise  of  the  “new”  securitisation  chain highlights  two  fundamental  realities.  The  first 
one  is  that  far  from  being  spread  across  the  whole  system,  credit  risk  was  implicitly  or 
explicitly concentrated in the hands of specific institutions, foremost among which were the 
major  investment  banks.  Hence  the  successive  waves  of  depreciations  of  structured 
products, imposed by accounting rules, with these depreciations in turn fuelling doubts about 
counterparty  risks  and  solvency,  liquidity  constraints  and  further  falls  in  asset  prices.  The 
second  reality  is  that  recent  financial  innovation  served  mainly  to  increase  leverage  in  the 
system. Signs of this are many. Banks’ balance sheets became overstretched. Off-balance 
sheet  vehicles  without  any  equity  proliferated.  Monoline  insurers  guaranteed  volumes  of 
BIS Review 9/2009 
 1
structured products way beyond what their equity position could bear. As you know, leverage 
works both ways. It amplifies gains as well as losses. Amplified gains took the form of the US 
property  boom.  Amplified  losses  are  with  us  now.  The  whole  deleveraging  process  still 
underway has meant, since its start, that financial institutions unable to raise capital had to 
suffer very considerable depreciations on some products, which in some instance wiped out 
their net worth, bringing them to failure. 
Against this background, what about French banks? Of course, they are not immune to the 
crisis. Direct or indirect exposures to toxic assets implied that they too had to record write-
downs; sometimes substantial ones. The liquidity shortage is also hurting and the prolonged 
market disruptions have raised their refinancing costs. That said, our banks are sound and 
robust and still exhibit high solvency ratios, above minimum prudential requirements. Overall, 
they  remain  profitable.  This  is  so  not  least  because  they  benefit  from  regular  sources  of 
income.  They  are  universal  banks;  and  as  such  much  less  vulnerable  to  funding  market 
conditions. Sound and revolving sources of profits are a vital asset at the current juncture. In 
this  context,  French  banks  can  play  an  active  role  in  the  ongoing  restructuring  of  the 
international  financial  sector.  All  in  all,  beyond  sometimes  serious  tensions  and  incidents, 
French  banks  are  now  reaping  the  benefits  of  the  major  advances  in  productivity  and 
innovation they have made over the last two decades. 
Public policy during the crisis both from a public and a private sector perspective  
Past months have seen a marked change in public policy. Having been in a first phase 
geared exclusively to providing liquidity to financial intermediaries, public intervention is since 
last Fall also aiming to support banks’ financing and own funds. This is a significant shift. 
Needless  to  say,  restoring  liquidity  remains  a  pressing  priority.  Inter-bank  markets  have 
shown gradual signs of improvements. Yet, there is still some way to go. To this end, central 
banks  have  mobilised  considerable  ammunition.  A  process  underway  for  over  a  year  has 
culminated  in  the  central  banks  having  adjusted  their  operational  frameworks  in  various 
areas. The maturity and currency of their facilities have been expanded. The range of eligible 
counterparties has been broadened. The tender procedures have been modified with a view 
to ensure unlimited amounts of central bank money. The list of collateral for refinancing has 
been widened. As for the Eurosystem, they have been providing liquidity at a fixed rate for 
unlimited  amount.  Enhanced  international  coordination  between  monetary  authorities  is 
ensuring  that  their  actions  are  part  of  a  consistent  overall  strategy.  These  measures  are 
highly  exceptional  with  indeed  unprecedented  monetary  easing  leading  key  policy  rates  to 
historically  low  levels  and  the  adoption,  in  certain  cases,  of  unorthodox  monetary  policy 
actions.  As  such,  they  should  greatly  contribute  to  restoring  confidence  and  a  smooth 
functioning of money markets. 
Governments have moved aggressively to support banks' solvency and resilience. Since the 
Paris Declaration by euro area member-countries, Europe, under the leadership of France 
until year end, has been acting according to what I consider a sound and consistent action 
plan.  I  won’t  enter  into  the  details.  Just  bear  in  mind  the  three  following  elements.  First, 
authorities are extending guarantees to banks’ refinancing so that they can, in turn, properly 
finance  the  economy.  Second,  significant  reforms  of  accounting  rules  are  now  being 
implemented. Basically, these reforms allow banks to transfer instruments previously marked 
to market to portfolios where that will no longer be the case. They also provide for greater 
flexibility in methods used to value assets whose market has shut down. Third, and lastly, 
governments  have  confirmed  their  willingness,  when  warranted,  to  step  in  and  support 
banks’ capital. 
What  about  France’s  actions?  Government  and  Parliament  very  quickly  put  meat  on  the 
bones of the European principles. A new bill has been passed, which provides for two things. 
First,  it  sets  up  a  EUR  320  billion  funding  vehicle  to  guarantee  banks’  medium-term 
refinancing  (i.e.  up  to  five  years).  This  vehicle  is  strictly  supervised  by  the  French 
2 
 BIS Review 9/2009
Government  and  the  Banque  de  France.  The  guarantee  is  granted  for  a  fee,  so  that  the 
beneficiaries pay costs corresponding to normal market conditions and also with a view to 
protect  taxpayers’  interests.  Second,  the  law  also  creates  a  state-owned  company 
empowered with EUR 21 billion and entitled to subscribe to banks’ subordinated debt issues 
or  preferred  shares.  As  you  know,  six  banks  have  issued  subordinated  debt  and  the 
Government  subscribed  to  these  issues  for  EUR  10.5  billion.  Such  support  boosted  their 
capital position and as a result ensure these banks to keep up their lending to the economy. 
Did the French banks really need such a boost to their solvency and capital? Setting aside 
the Belgo-French bank DEXIA, the answer is “not really”. DEXIA was very specific: because 
of its large exposure to US monoline risks, public recapitalisation was absolutely necessary. 
By contrast, all the other French banks have sufficient own funds, be it in terms of prudential 
requirements  or  in  comparison  with  their  peers  from  other  developed  countries.  Public 
recapitalisation is not aimed at making up for faults or weaknesses. Rather, it is to anticipate 
potential  problems.  Circumstances  are  indeed  exceptional;  even  the  soundest  and  most 
profitable banks cannot take it for granted that they will be able to tap markets to meet their 
funding and capital needs. As long as such uncertainty pervades and markets continue to 
fail, it is the public authorities’ duty to protect the credit system and safeguard the financing of 
the economy. 
The  private  sector  strategies  to  overcome  the  crisis  cover  several  aspects.  First,  I 
would  like  to  mention  the  initiative  to  create  a  compensation  scheme  with  a  central 
counterparty for credit default swaps (CDS). This initiative from the private sector is strongly 
encouraged  by  public  authorities  given  its  importance  for  financial  stability.  Regarding 
institutions  themselves,  different  proposals  are  on  the  table  which  relate  to  their  business 
model and risk profile, to governance and risk management schemes and to disclosure and 
communication policy. 
In  terms  of  risks  profile,  two  main  models  are  intensely  discussed.  Under  the  first  one, 
universal  banks  that  benefit  from  diversified  sources  of  profits  were  better  off  during  the 
crisis.  By  contrast,  specialised  financial  institutions,  especially  those  heavily  engaged  in 
investments  activities,  suffered  significant  losses.  I  have  already  mentioned  the  case  of 
French  banks.  In  the  same  vein,  the  interest  of  Deutsche  Bank  for  Postbank  in  Germany 
stems from the same logic: to diversify sources of funding and of profitability. 
Conversely, the other model under scrutiny focuses on selected core businesses precisely to 
reduce  diversification  in  markets  for  which  in-house  knowledge  and  capacity  may  have 
proved insufficient relative to the risks involved. The move towards this more focused model 
is contributing to the deleveraging process that is deeply needed in some institutions. The 
case of Citibank which is on the verge of selling Salomon Smith Barney illustrates this trend. 
As  far  as  governance  and  risk  management  are  concerned,  major  improvements  are 
needed, and I think, are on their way. It is certainly true that regulation needs adjustments 
and  that  a  more  macro-financial  angle  is  requested  in  order  to  avoid,  for  example, 
procyclicality. 
However, the first responsibility lies with financial institutions themselves that did not develop 
enough  scrutiny  in  risks  analysis,  were  too  much  focused  on  short  terms  profits,  did  not 
integrate  the  cost  of  risks  premium  and  liquidity,  and  in  some  circumstances,  did  not  fully 
understand the likely financial consequences of their behaviour. 
Therefore, strong improvement is needed in terms of risk management and governance at 
the highest level of financial institutions. 
In  terms  of  disclosure  and  communication  policy,  the  crisis  showed  the  importance  of 
transparency.  Financial  institutions  made  a  lot  of  efforts  in  this  respect  in  recent  months. 
They should continue to do so. Authorities will monitor progress on that matter. 
Public  and  private  strategic  improvements  will  help  overcome  the  financial  crisis.  Beyond 
that,  there  is  a  growing  consensus  around  the  need  for  a  fundamental  review  of  the 
BIS Review 9/2009 
 3
foundations of financial regulation. Heads of States of the G20 have mandated changes in 
that matter and set principles to that purpose. The crisis has also rekindled concerns about 
the structure of supervision. 
As you know, at the French President’s instigation, huge efforts are made to think about what 
has been termed a “new Bretton Woods”. Beyond these ambitious words, I do believe it to be 
useful to take a fresh look at the existing financial regulation. As a contribution to this debate, 
I would like to make two final sets of remarks. One has to do with the fluctuations of financial 
systems. The other concerns financial supervision. 
Financial systems that operate in the context of a developed market economy are, by nature, 
subject to cyclical forces. Some are a consequence of the business cycle. Credit activity is 
an obvious example, as credit demand is heavily influenced by economic activity. Others are 
from within financial systems. For instance, financial institutions’ equity position moves in line 
with asset prices especially in a fair value world where fluctuations result in capital gains or 
losses. 
The  challenge  for  the  authorities  is  to  assess  whether  and  to  what  extent  regulations 
reinforce  these  dynamics  and  impact  the  entire  financial  system.  With  these  questions  in 
mind, work is being undertaken to examine the impact of prudential standards. It is also on 
this  basis  that  the  accounting  adjustments  that  I  mentioned  earlier  have  been  made.  The 
need  to  develop  a  “macro-prudential”  policy  is  now  under  debate.  The  general  principle  is 
straightforward: it consists in ensuring that supervision manages to limit risks for the stability 
not only of a particular institution, but also of the entire financial system. Its implementation, 
however,  is  complex.  For  the  moment,  we  are  only  at  a  preliminary  stage,  contemplating 
which tools a macro-prudential policy could be based on, and how these tools could be used. 
As  regards  supervision,  this  crisis  has  shown  the  merits  of  having  the  banking  supervisor 
close to the central bank. The point is not to claim there is an optimal supervisory structure 
that fits any country’s circumstances. Rather, it is to note that a system such as the one we 
have in France has proved very useful in allowing for an in-depth knowledge of the banking 
sector  and  the  various  financial  institutions.  It  also  allowed  for  very  swift  and  timely 
exchanges  of  information,  and,  as  a  result,  allowed  us  at  the  central bank  to  quickly  pass 
sensitive judgments, not least on the usefulness of injecting liquidity. 
Let  me  conclude  by  stressing  what  may  seem  obvious.  We  are  going  through  very 
challenging times, in some respect even unprecedented times. In this context, policy making 
is also about confidence building and financial education. 
Thank you very much Ladies and Gentlemen. 
4 
 BIS Review 9/2009
