Kevin M Warsh: The Panic of 2008 
Speech  by  Mr  Kevin  M  Warsh,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve  System,  at 
Investors  2009  Spring  Meeting, 
Washington DC, 6 April 2009.  
the  Council  of 
Institutional 
 Deterioration in employment conditions. Pullback in consumer spending. Decline of industrial 
production. Retreat in capacity utilization. Falling capital expenditures. These measures are 
objective, all-too-familiar indicators of recessions. They emerge during periodic troughs in our 
economic history. They are thought by most observers to be part of the business cycle. The 
decennial  recessions  of  1981-82,  1991-92,  and  2001-02  were  of  differing  causes  and 
consequences.  But  they  were  alike  in  one  key  respect:  They  were  extremely  disruptive  to 
countless  workers,  businesses,  and  communities.  In  the  case  of  the  United  States,  these 
periods  were  endured,  and  growth  resumed  apace,  matched  by  new  opportunities.  The 
march of growing prosperity, however imperfect and interrupted, continued.1 
Fear.  Breakdown  in  confidence.  Market  capitulation.  Financial  turmoil.  These  words  are 
different,  not  just  in  degree  but  also  in  kind.  They  are  more  normative,  but  no  less 
consequential to the real economy. They are indicative of panic conditions. In panics, once 
firmly  held  truths  are  no  longer  relied  upon.  Articles  of  faith  are  upended.  And  the  very 
foundations of economies and markets are called into question. Some economists, market 
participants,  and  historians  –  not  so  long  ago  –  were  prepared  to  relegate  these  highly 
charged  descriptions  of  despair  to  the  dustbin  of  history.  Government  policies  improved, 
understanding of economics deepened, and markets found a more sustainable equilibrium, 
or so it was thought.  
The  period  of  the  past  16  months  is  already  well  chronicled  in  the  popular  lexicon  as  a 
recession. The recent data are consistent with the view that this recession will endure longer 
and be deeper and broader than most. Characterizing the current period as a "recession" is 
still wanting, insufficient in some important respects. In my view, this period should equally 
be  considered  a  panic,  one  that  preceded,  if  not  made  more  pronounced,  the  official 
recession. Hence, the Panic of 2008, which preceded the calendar year, is a more revealing 
description  of  the  recent  economic  and  financial  travails.  As  I  will  describe,  panics  involve 
generalized fears – often related to financial firms – that magnify economic weakness. The 
encouraging news, I should note, is that panics end. And this panic is showing meaningful 
signs of abating.  
The storied panics in U.S. economic history were generally marked by widespread bank runs 
as depositors lost confidence in large segments of the banking system.2 Such was the case 
in the Panics of 1837, 1857, 1873, 1893, and 1907. Depositors withdrew funds and hoarded 
                                                 
1   The views  expressed herein  are my  own  and do not necessarily reflect the views  of other members of the 
Board  of  Governors  or  of  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee.  I  am  grateful  for  the  assistance  of  Mark 
Carlson, Daniel Covitz, and Nellie Liang of the Board staff, who contributed to these remarks.  
2   Economic historians disagree on the distinction between financial panics and financial crises. In my view, a 
panic  involves  a  more  insidious  set  of  events  in  which  risk  aversion  rapidly  displaces  confidence  and 
individuals  and  institutions  are  forced  to  reexamine  fundamentally  their  world  views.  Financial  crises,  by 
comparison, are more episodic, more localized, and less fundamental to the structure and functioning of the 
financial and economic system. In the case of a financial crisis, confidence may be lost by an institution, or 
even a class of institutions, but faith in the financial and economic system remains largely intact. 
BIS Review 43/2009 
 1
cash, generating increases in currency holdings relative to deposits.3 This loss of confidence 
was not limited to individual depositors.4 During these panics, banks lost confidence in one 
another. Banks withdrew funds in interbank deposits held at money center banks – then the 
central repositories for the reserves of the country's banking system. Increased withdrawals 
of  interbank  deposits  exceeded  the  money  center  banks'  ability  to  meet  demand,  and 
payments  were  suspended  to  other  banks.  The  scramble  for  funds  spilled  over  into  the 
money markets, where rates on call loans to brokerage houses, considered at the time to be 
very liquid investments, soared to extreme levels.  
Sound familiar? This series of events from a century earlier echoes the events of our time. 
Panic  manifested  itself  in  the  summer  of  2007.  Asset-backed  commercial  paper  markets 
seized up in the United States and abroad. Commercial banks lost confidence in each other, 
putting pressure on overnight London interbank offered rates. Strains intensified in the spring 
of 2008 when Bear Stearns could not borrow even on a secured basis. And then the panic 
intensified further in the fall of 2008, as interbank funding markets stopped functioning and 
overnight rates soared to extraordinary levels. When one money market mutual fund "broke 
the buck," fears were raised about others. Fund outflows escalated rapidly, threatening the 
stability of short-term funding to businesses and municipalities. Confidence in money center 
banks  plummeted,  as  was  the  case  a  century  before.  And  market  participants  lost  trust  in 
their counterparties. Extraordinary actions, however, have been taken – with some notable 
success – to lessen panic conditions.  
Panics  involve  losses  of  confidence  in  the  financial system,  when  even  sound  firms  find  it 
difficult  to  borrow.  Panics  are  threatening  to  economic  well-being.  Panics  take  even  less 
kindly  to,  and  often  result  from,  uncertainty.  And  panics  place  a  greater  burden  on  the 
deftness  of  policy  responses  than  recessions  alone.  Our  economic  history  contains  many 
contractions  in  output  –  and  losses  in  wealth  –  that  were  unconnected  to  panics.5  In  the 
Panic  of  2008,  however,  the  breakdown  in  the  financial  sector  has  contributed  to,  and 
exacerbated, the economic downturn.  
Economic and financial conditions 
The current financial and economic turmoil is marked by indicia of both recession and panic 
conditions.  
By  official  measures,  the  current  recession  is  already  significant  in  scale,  scope,  and 
duration. And the deterioration in employment conditions in the current episode already ranks 
comparably to the recession of 1981-82. The unemployment rate is 8.5 percent and likely, in 
my view, to increase steadily through the balance of the year.  
Economic  output,  as  measured  by  gross  domestic  product,  contracted  at  a  rate  of  about 
6-1/4 percent in the fourth quarter of 2008 and is on track to contract sharply again in the first 
quarter, which would put the current contraction among the most severe post-World War II 
recessions.  Though  the  pace  of  decline  is  likely  to  abate,  I  am  decidedly  uncomfortable 
forecasting a sharp and determined resumption of growth in the coming quarters. The panic 
conditions that have marked this period may also have long-run implications. I suspect that 
the process of an efficient reallocation of capital and labor will prove slower and more difficult 
than  is  typical  after  recessions.  Policymakers  should  be  wary  of  policies  that  make  the 
                                                 
3   Milton Friedman and Anna Schwarz (1963), A Monetary History of the United States, 1867-1960 (Princeton: 
Princeton University Press).  
4   See O.M.W. Sprague (1910), History of Crises under the National Banking System (Washington: Government 
Printing Office), p. 259.  
5   See Joseph Davis (2004), "An Annual Index of U.S. Industrial Production, 1790-1915,"  The Quarterly Journal 
of Economics, vol. 109 (4), pp. 1177-1215. See also Sprague, History of Crises, p. 259.  
2 
 BIS Review 43/2009
economy  still  less  capable  of  the  growth,  productivity,  and  employment  trends  that  have 
marked the postwar period.  
In the United States, average stock prices have fallen by 40 percent in 2008 and another 6 
percent  this  year.  The  average  market  capitalization  of  large  banking  firms  plummeted  50 
percent in 2008 and continued to fluctuate significantly this year as uncertainty about their 
earnings  prospects,  potential  balance  sheet  impairments,  and  sustainability  of  business 
models intensified. Greater clarity as to policymakers' objectives for financial intermediation 
would likely prove very constructive to financial markets. More consequentially, in my view, it 
would improve the prospects for economic performance.  
In  the  household  sector,  Federal  Reserve  data  indicate  that  household  net  worth  fell  $11 
trillion  in  2008,  or  about  18  percent,  the  largest  annual  decline  recorded.6  Relative  to 
disposable income, household net worth fell from a ratio of about 6 to one to less than 5 to 
one, erasing about a full year's worth of income in wealth. For the median household, net 
worth  is  estimated  to  have  decreased  at  a  greater  rate  –  23  percent  in  2008.7  Household 
balance sheets may have contracted about another 7 percent in the first quarter, and I am 
watching keenly for that trend to change in subsequent quarters as part of the recovery.  
House  price  declines  accounted  for  much  of  the  decline  in  net  worth  for  the  median 
household. But, more than in previous periods, household wealth was harmed by declining 
share  prices  through  direct  equity  exposure  and  retirement  plan  holdings.  Households  are 
thus  confronting  the  risks  of  income  statement  shocks  through  job  losses  and  more 
significantly  correlated  changes  in  the  value  of  virtually  all  other  assets.  The  heightened 
concern  about  these  risks  is  indicated  by  the  extremely  high  equity  risk  premiums,  which 
reflect, among other factors, the risk that investors who suffered a loss in income may also 
be forced to sell their stocks when valuations are low. Traditional rules of income and asset 
diversification  appear  to  offer  scarcer  protection  than  generally  advertised.  As  a  result, 
households  are  questioning  the  route  to  financial  security.  Homeownership  is  no  longer 
perceived to ensure low-risk capital appreciation. And assurances by investment managers 
to invest in "stocks for the long haul" are being subjected to intense scrutiny. Investors of all 
stripes  –  sovereign  wealth  funds,  large  long-only  institutional  investors,  private  equity 
sponsors, hedge funds, and retail investors – are searching for new rules of asset allocation 
and appropriate risk premiums in an uncertain and unusual economic environment. 
In a typical recession, the mix of balance sheet contraction by households and businesses 
and  of  trends  on  employment  and  production  would  pose  meaningful  challenges  for 
policymakers. I would argue that the challenge is exacerbated when recessionary dynamics 
are compounded by panic conditions.  
Fundamental reassessment 
Previously,  I  argued  that  we  were  witnessing  a  fundamental  reassessment  of  the  value  of 
every asset everywhere in the world.8 This diagnosis seems truer, and still more troubling, 
today. The trading of legacy loans and securities continues to reveal systematic underpricing 
at  issuance  of  once  seemingly  benign  risks  –  credit,  liquidity,  counterparty,  and  even 
sovereign  risks  –  which  are  demanding  continued  reassessment  and  recalibration.  Until 
these assessments are more cleanly refined and more broadly understood, we are likely to 
                                                 
6   The Federal Reserve's flow of funds data for households and nonprofit organizations indicate that net worth 
declined from about $62.7 trillion in the fourth quarter of 2007 to $51.5 trillion in the fourth quarter of 2008.  
7   Data are based on calculations from the Board's Survey of Consumer Finances.  
8   Kevin  Warsh  (2008),  "The  Promise  and  Peril  of  the  New  Financial  Architecture,"  speech  delivered  at  the 
Money Marketeers of New York University, New York, November 6. Indeed, the valuations during the boom 
were predicated on exceptionally low liquidity, credit, and counterparty risk premiums.  
BIS Review 43/2009 
 3
observe  elevated  levels  of  volatility  and  unwillingness  by  many  investors  to  participate  in 
certain asset markets at virtually any price.  
The ongoing reassessment of these risks continued through the first quarter of 2009. Some 
financial  markets  and  economic  actors  are  still  searching  for  a  new  equilibrium;  others 
appear to have called off the search teams altogether until the new equilibrium arrives. Since 
the beginning of 2009, global equity  markets have fallen  about 15 percent, and the global 
market capitalization of financial institutions generally underperformed the broader indexes.9 
Few  sanctuaries  appear  to  exist  from  the  recession  and  corresponding  global  asset 
revaluation.  
These  real-time  economic  and  financial  market  indicators  surely  describe  recessionary 
conditions,  a  period  of  significant  economic  weakness  and  a  global  revaluation  of  asset 
values. But the depth and severity of this downturn are due, I believe, to a more profound 
panic phenomenon. Market participants wonder whether the forms of financial intermediation 
and  functions  of  financial  institutions  –  long  connecting  savers  with  investors  –  will  be 
implemented  in  a  manner  that  will  enhance,  or  reduce,  economic  well-being.  Some  are 
questioning the efficacy of the remaining vestiges of the existing financial architecture and 
remain uncertain of the timing, efficacy, and policy preferences for the financial architecture 
that  will  ultimately  emerge.  Surely,  they  applaud  the  goal  of  policymakers  to  reform  the 
financial system to make it more durable through the cycle and less susceptible to shocks. 
But  some  query  whether  policy  actions  are,  on  balance,  lessening  or  stoking  panic 
conditions.  
Articles of faith 
Headlines have been dominated in recent weeks by the legal rules that govern contracts. To 
be  sure,  markets  function  best  when  economic  actors  comport  themselves  in  a  manner 
consistent with the rule of law.10 Fidelity to the rule of law is not just some aphorism for a 
judicial system to protect property right disputes among private parties. Nor should it be just 
some  preachy  truism  of  economic  development  for  emerging  economies.  Rather,  it  is  the 
linchpin  of  modern  market  economies  like  ours.  And  it  suffers  its  greatest  blow  when  the 
governing authorities are unwilling to uphold their end of the bargain. Nonetheless, despite 
some  highly  publicized  suggestions  to  the  contrary,  I  remain  highly  confident  that  the 
government will work tirelessly to uphold its obligations. Hewing to the rule of law, however, 
may be the easier part. 
The panic bred by the loss of confidence in the underlying financial architecture is difficult to 
remedy beyond the purview of statutes and regulations. A weighty accumulation of unwritten, 
but  no  less  critical,  practices  and  understandings  governs  behavior  and  establishes 
expectations  in  market  economies.  Over  time,  these  informal  understandings  attract  deep 
and loyal followings by economic actors. They become articles of faith. Deviations from them 
tend not to be illegal, but they can markedly change perceptions of risk and return. When that 
happens,  the  resulting  expectations  are  unmoored,  with  significant  and  often  highly 
detrimental consequences for market functioning and economic progress.  
Panics  can thus  be  understood  as  periods  in  which  key  articles  of  faith  are  cast  in  doubt. 
How does this happen? After long periods of economic prosperity – in the most recent case, 
the so-called Great Moderation – articles of faith accumulate. Some of these understandings 
                                                 
9   The  global  equity  markets  underperformed  those  in  the  United  States.  The  Dow  Jones  global  index  fell  15 
percent from January 1, 2009, through March 31, 2009, and global financial institution indexes, such as the 
U.K.-FTSE  350  bank  index,  Japan-Nikkei  500  bank  index,  and  DJ  Euro-bank  index,  fell  27  percent,  12 
percent, and 21 percent, respectively. 
10   10. See John Locke and Friedrich von Hayek, among others. 
4 
 BIS Review 43/2009
are strong and enduring and well grounded; others, more problematic or misplaced; others 
still,  properly  and  promptly  discarded.  Some  of  these  articles  of  faith  are  rooted  in 
government  policies;  others  develop  as  a  matter  of  private  practice.  Regardless  of  their 
cause and contour, when faith is undermined, the resulting fear and ambiguity can accelerate 
the deterioration in economic performance.  
Some key articles of faith have been undermined with respect to some financial institutions. 
And that is as it should be. Risk-management failures at some large, systemically significant 
financial institutions are now legendary. In some cases, investors and counterparties came to 
rely to their detriment on these entities and their financial wherewithal. As wholesale funding 
markets  became  tougher  to  navigate,  many  financial  institutions  suffered,  some  rightly  so. 
But  their  stronger  peers  with  significantly  more  robust  risk-management  practices  also 
appear  to  be  paying  a  heavy  price.  It  is  difficult  for  the  strong  to  thrive,  let  alone  survive, 
when  they  reside  in  a  neighborhood  that  is  being  decimated.  And  when  panic  conditions 
persist and long-held articles of faith lose their following, markets often react indiscriminately. 
Government policies, in my view, should encourage differentiation among firms, even those 
in seemingly close proximity. For policymakers to act otherwise is to risk their own credibility 
and risk undermining the pace of economic recovery.  
Market participants appear equally uncertain about the nature, objective, and duration of the 
relationship between the government and financial institutions. Given the choices available to 
policymakers during the past 24 months, some uncertainty is unavoidable. Consider the saga 
of the government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs). In my judgment, the story of Fannie Mae 
and Freddie Mac exposes perhaps the most consequential negative shock to the financial 
system during this period.  
For  about  a  generation,  the  GSEs  issued  debt  that  was  thought  by  virtually  all  market 
participants to  be  backed  de  facto by  the  U.S.  government.  The  GSEs  traveled  the  world, 
selling  debt  at  rates  and  terms  and  funding  schedules  that  were  largely  comparable  to 
Treasury securities. Some loud protestations aside, government policy – broadly defined – 
tended to countenance investor expectations. At year-end 2007, the outstanding public debt 
of  Fannie  Mae  and  Freddie  Mac  totaled  about  $5.0  trillion,  roughly  comparable  with  the 
publicly  held  Treasury  debt  of  $5.1  trillion,  and  spreads  to  Treasuries  on  their  senior  debt 
amounted to about 30 to 50 basis points, even though the institutions were thinly capitalized 
relative to their asset composition and risk characteristics. 
In the fall of 2008, however, GSE senior debt spreads widened significantly to more than 500 
basis  points.  Market  participants  grew  increasingly  skeptical  of  the  GSEs'  financial  and 
operational  wherewithal  and  were  uncertain  of  the  depth  of  government  support.  When 
markets decided to test policymakers, as markets are especially wont to do during panics, 
the  Treasury  was  forced  to  intercede,  effectively  taking  control  of  the  entities.  Congress 
authorized successive Administrations to take forceful actions, including appropriations of up 
to  $200  billion  to-date,  to  assure  investors  and  counterparties  that  the  institutions  would 
remain  solvent.  These  efforts,  while  necessary  and  well  intended,  have  not  completely 
resolved  the  uncertainty  around  the  GSEs  to  market  participants.  Indeed,  even  after 
extraordinary actions most recently by the Federal Reserve to improve liquidity and market 
functioning in the agency debt markets, confidence in the GSEs is less than markets were 
long accustomed to before this period began.  
When presumptively risk-free, highly liquid assets backed by the highest-grade sovereign are 
subject to large swings in value, the risk-return profile of virtually all other assets becomes 
highly uncertain. The resulting portfolio reallocation boosts demand for Treasury securities, 
and reduces demand for assets that are genuinely riskier, placing upward pressure on risk 
premiums across a wide range of markets. In addition, financial firms that had assumed that 
their holdings of GSE debt were as good as cash were forced to reassess the adequacy of 
their liquidity positions, adding to balance sheet pressures and leading to even greater safe-
haven demands for Treasury securities.  
BIS Review 43/2009 
 5
Across  a  broad  range  of  financial  institutions  and  financial  markets,  an  unhealthy  mix  of 
recession dynamics and panic conditions appear at work. But, in my view, it is predominantly 
the  latter  –  the  uncertainty  with  respect  to  financial  intermediation  and  the  corresponding 
breach of articles of faith – that have exacerbated the downturn.  
Conclusion 
Let  me  offer  several  concluding  observations  that  may  help  frame  a  new  foundation  for 
growth and ensure that discarded articles of faith are repaired, reformed, or replaced. 
The Panic began before the recession and will assuredly end before it. Getting the financial 
intermediation  process  to  function  with  greater  efficacy  –  even  before  a  new  financial 
architecture is firmly established – is a necessary condition to a sustained recovery.  
The Panic is the result of both faulty private practices and flawed public policies. To place 
blame  either  exclusively  on  private  financial  firms  or  chiefly  at  the  doorstep  of  the  official 
sector is incorrect. 
Financial stability demands policy stability. The official sector's policy preferences must be 
communicated clearly, credibly, and consistently and backed by concrete action. 
To accelerate the formation of a new financial architecture, the official sector should outline 
and  defend  a  positive  vision  for  financial  firms  and  welcome  private  capital's  return.  The 
nature and terms of the relationship between financial firms and the official sector should not 
be left in limbo.  
Finally,  and  perhaps  most  important,  policymakers  across  the  government  must  be  ever 
mindful of the long-term consequences of their actions. Fluctuations in economic output and 
employment are unavoidable. As a result, policymakers' objective should be more humble: 
Maximize sustainable economic growth while reducing the incidence, severity, and economic 
fallout  of  future  shocks.  And  we  must  ensure  that  the  long-heralded  strengths  of  the  U.S. 
economy – the resiliency and dynamism in our labor markets, product markets, and, yes, our 
financial markets – are allowed to flourish. In so doing, trust will continue to displace panic in 
our  markets,  and  our  economy  will  ultimately  rebound  with  great  vigor  and  even  greater 
promise. 
6 
 BIS Review 43/2009
