David Longworth: Promoting Canada's economic and financial well-
being 
Remarks by Mr David Longworth, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Greater 
Summerside  Chamber  of  Commerce,  Summerside,  Prince  Edward  Island,  23  September 
2009.  
 Good morning. It's a pleasure to be here. I'd like to thank the Greater Summerside Chamber 
of Commerce for hosting this event.  
In addition to Michael O'Brien, the Bank of Canada's Director for Prince Edward Island, I'm 
here with Allan Paquet and David Amirault, who are the Bank's representatives in the Atlantic 
provinces  for,  respectively,  currency  and  economics.  Allan  and  David  are  the  Bank's  eyes 
and ears for this region, and they help us to keep on top of various currency and economic 
developments. For example, David has been monitoring how the global recession and price 
movements have been affecting PEI industries such as the fishery and tourism. 
I'd like to take this opportunity today to describe the Bank of Canada's work in very general 
terms. Until recently, some people were given to thinking that central banking is – what shall I 
say? – a staid business. But the past two years have proven to be extremely interesting, not 
only for us at the Bank of Canada, but for all our central bank colleagues around the world. 
The Bank's mandate is to promote Canada's economic and financial well-being. Clearly, this 
is an important mandate, and we are determined to demonstrate excellence as we work to 
fulfill  it.  We  conduct  leading-edge  research  and  analysis,  and,  in  doing  so,  we  aim  to  be 
"second to none" among the world's central banks.  
To  fulfill  our  mandate,  we  work  in  four  main  areas  of  responsibility:  currency,  funds 
management, financial system, and monetary policy.  
For  each  of  these  areas,  the  Bank's  approach  is  much  the  same.  First,  we  have  a  clear 
objective. Second, we tend to take a longer-term view of things. Third, we make ourselves 
accountable  by  being  transparent  about  the  tools  we  use,  the  actions  we  take,  and  the 
outcomes of our actions. And, finally, we keep the big picture in mind. 
In my remarks today, I'll talk about each area of responsibility, with particular emphasis on 
the last two – financial system and monetary policy. 
Currency 
Bank notes are the Bank's most tangible product, and, despite the prevalence of credit and 
debit  cards  and  other  means  of  payment,  the  demand  for  cash  continues  to  grow.  The 
objective of our currency function is to provide Canadians with bank notes that are readily 
accepted and secure against counterfeiting. In fact, we quantified this goal as fewer than 100 
counterfeit notes detected annually per million notes in circulation, and we are now meeting 
this  standard.  But  we  intend  to  make  further  progress,  and  our  new goal  is  fewer  than  50 
counterfeits detected annually per million notes in circulation. 
For  some  time,  the  Bank  has  been  developing  Canada's  next  bank  note  series, which  we 
expect to start issuing in late 2011. Planning for a new series of bank notes is a complex job, 
and so necessitates taking a long view. Our anti-counterfeiting strategy is also a long-term 
proposition. It contains four elements. The first is to develop bank notes that are ever-more 
difficult  to  counterfeit.  The  second  is  to  increase  the  routine  verification  of  bank  notes  by 
retailers – our regional staff play an important role here by helping in the training of retailers 
and cash handlers. The third element of the strategy is to maintain the high quality of bank 
BIS Review 113/2009 
 1
notes  in  circulation.  And  the  fourth  is  to  promote  the  deterrence  of  counterfeiting  by  law-
enforcement officers and prosecutors. Regional staff also play key roles in supporting these 
last  two  elements  of  the  strategy  by  liaising  with  financial  institutions  and  with  law-
enforcement agencies.  
As part of its deterrence work, the Bank has established an annual "Law Enforcement Award 
of  Excellence  for  Counterfeit  Deterrence."  This  year,  the  award  was  presented  in 
Charlottetown to the RCMP's National Anti-Counterfeiting Bureau during the conference of 
the Canadian Association of Chiefs of Police. 
Transparency is also important in our currency work. In addition to reporting on the incidence 
of counterfeiting vis-à-vis our targets, we communicate regularly with the public and retailers 
about  the  security  features  in  our  bank  notes,  and  we  publish  the  costs  of  the  currency 
program in our annual report. 
As  to  keeping  the  big  picture  in  mind  –  well,  currency  is  only  one  of  several  means  of 
payment.  The  Bank  conducts  research  on  the  factors  that  influence  choices  in  means  of 
payment,  and  we  monitor  trends.  This  helps  us  to  understand  the  role  of  bank  notes  in 
transactions, and to forecast demand. 
I'll now say a few words about the Bank's second area of responsibility: funds management. 
Funds management 
The Bank of Canada is the federal government's banker, fiscal agent, and adviser on funds 
management.  The  objective  of  this  work  is  to  provide  these  services  effectively  and 
efficiently.  The  responsibility  includes  managing  Canada's  foreign  exchange  reserves,  the 
government's  cash,  and,  in  collaboration  with  the  Department  of  Finance,  the  public  debt, 
including Canada Savings Bonds, which go on sale this year on October 5. As part of this 
responsibility, the Bank also gives advice to the Department of Finance on these issues, as 
well  as  on  issues  that  have  arisen  in  the  context  of  the  financial  crisis.  For  example,  our 
advice  fed  into  the  design  of  the  Insured  Mortgage  Purchase  Program,  which  allowed  the 
federal  government  to  buy  pools  of  insured  mortgages  through  the  Canada  Mortgage  and 
Housing Corporation, as well as the design of the Canadian Secured Credit Facility, which 
was set up to purchase asset-backed securities. 
Managing  and  providing  advice  on  debt  and  reserves  also  require  taking  a  long  view. 
Generally  speaking,  the  management  of  financial  assets  and  liabilities  requires  a  forward-
looking risk-management framework, as well as long-term strategies.  
And  of  course  it's  essential  to  be  completely  transparent  when  it  comes  to  managing 
government  funds  and  public  money.  The  Bank  discusses  the  various  tools  it  uses  and 
reports  on  the  operations  and  actions  it  carries  out  to  manage  financial  assets  and  the 
outstanding  stock  of  federal  debt.  It  does  this  via  its  own  website,  the  Department  of 
Finance's website, and in the Bank's annual report.  
Finally,  in  our  funds-management  work,  we  always  look  at  the  big  picture.  The  range  and 
complexity of operations and the need to carefully manage risk require us to consider a very 
broad picture when we develop our framework for the governance of funds management and 
formulate our policies.  
Now I'll turn to the Bank of Canada's third area of responsibility – the financial system.  
Financial system  
As recent events have made clear, a sound financial system is essential to a well-functioning 
economy. The objective of the Bank's work here is to promote the stability and efficiency of 
the financial system, both domestically and globally.  
2 
 BIS Review 113/2009
To achieve this objective, we again take the long view. Together with other policy-makers in 
Canada and abroad, the Bank strives to develop, and contribute to, policy that will help to 
sustain a stable and efficient financial system over time. This long-term focus aids in creating 
and  maintaining  an  environment  in  which  risks  can  be  properly  assessed  and  sound 
investment  decisions  effectively  made.  That  said,  we  also  have  to  be  nimble,  and  react 
quickly to market developments. For example, since the onset of the financial crisis, we have 
provided  considerable  liquidity  to  the  Canadian  financial  system,  in  a  variety  of  forms.  We 
currently auction liquidity three times a week. 
It is extremely important for a central bank to be transparent in its financial system work. In 
our Financial System Review we communicate, on a regular basis, our assessment of the 
key risks and vulnerabilities, as well as our analysis of certain policy issues. We also provide 
clear  information  about  our  operations.  For  example,  as  the  Bank  provided  liquidity,  we 
communicated  clearly  and  in  a  timely  fashion,  the  relevant  policies  and  principles,  the 
facilities we were using, and the scale of our operations, as well as the status of key markets.  
Financial  markets  have  improved  to  such  an  extent  that  the  demand  for  our  term  liquidity 
facilities has been waning. Of the three facilities that we offer, there is currently no demand 
for the Term Loan Facility, demand for the facility for Private Sector Instruments has recently 
been  half  of  what  we  have  been  auctioning,  and  even  demand  for  Term  Purchase  and 
Resale Agreements, our "workhorse" facility, has declined as conditions in funding markets 
have  improved.  Against  this  background,  the  Bank  announced  yesterday  that  the  first  two 
facilities will expire at the end of October, and that the auctions for the third facility will now 
be held bi-weekly instead of weekly. 
Of course, the financial system has many interdependent elements, and we again must keep 
the big picture in mind. This is especially true in our monitoring of the financial system, in our 
assessment  of  risks,  and  in  our  policy  analysis.  In  the  current  context,  two  aspects  of  our 
policy work are worth noting. First, there were times during the financial crisis when liquidity 
dried up in almost all financial markets. However, not all markets are critical to the proper 
functioning of the financial system, so the Bank has been working to identify "core" markets, 
markets  that,  through  appropriate  policies,  we  would  strive  to  keep  operating  without 
interruption,  even  during  a  shock.  Second,  because  the  regulatory  system  has  tended  to 
focus more on individual financial institutions than on interdependencies or systemic risk, the 
Bank  of  Canada,  like  many  other  central  banks,  has  been  looking  at  ways  to  strengthen 
financial  regulation  by  adding  a  "macroprudential"  orientation  –  that  is,  more  focus  on  the 
system as a whole.  
I'll turn now to the Bank's fourth and final area of responsibility: monetary policy. 
Monetary policy 
Monetary  policy  can  get  complicated,  but  the  objective  is  straightforward:  it's  to  foster 
confidence  in  the  value  of  money  by  keeping  inflation  low,  stable,  and  predictable.  In  an 
agreement with the government of Canada, the Bank has an inflation target of 2 per cent, 
which makes this objective very explicit. 
By its very nature, monetary policy work necessitates having a long view. The Bank achieves 
the inflation target by raising or lowering the target for the overnight interest rate which, in 
turn,  influences  other  interest  rates,  and,  ultimately,  the  overall  demand  for  goods  and 
services. This sequence of events takes time, and monetary policy typically tries to influence 
inflation  6  to  8  quarters  into  the  future.  Put  differently,  monetary  policy  works  with  a 
significant lag, so, when we make our interest rate decisions, we rely on various indicators of 
future inflation, and take a medium-term view of the economy.  
Low,  stable,  and  predictable  inflation  brings  about  real  benefits.  It  allows  consumers, 
businesses, and investors to read price signals clearly, and thus to make financial decisions 
with  confidence.  It  allows  businesses  to  make  long-term  investments  which,  in  turn, 
BIS Review 113/2009 
 3
contributes to sustained job creation. And, importantly, it helps to make the economy more 
resilient to shocks. 
Many  of  you  will  remember  the  days  of  high  and  variable  inflation,  and  can  therefore 
appreciate the progress we've made. Since 1995, total CPI inflation has averaged 2 per cent 
per year. That's a good record, but the Bank is always looking at ways to strengthen its tools 
and the outcomes of monetary policy.  
In response to the global financial crisis and recession, the Bank's monetary policy has been 
very aggressive, and since April of this year, the target for the overnight rate has been one 
quarter  of  one  per  cent  –  that's  effectively  as  low  as  it  can  go.  In  other  words,  we  cannot 
lower  our  policy  rate  any  further  to  provide  economic  stimulus.  Recognizing  the  possibility 
that  additional  stimulus  might  be  required,  we  researched  and  identified  three  additional 
monetary  policy  tools  that  we  could  use.  The  Bank  has  not  used  the  first  two  tools  – 
quantitative  and  credit  easing,  which  involve  the  purchase  of  assets  –  but  they  remain 
available to us.  
We  have,  however,  employed  the  third  tool  identified,  and  that  is  the  use  of  "conditional 
statements" about the future path of monetary policy. In our April monetary policy decision, 
we  said  that,  conditional  on  the  outlook  for  inflation,  the  target  overnight  rate  could  be 
expected to remain at its current, very low level until the end of the second quarter of 2010. 
This longer-term guidance helps to influence interest rates at longer maturities.  
The  Bank  has  also  been  examining  whether  the  inflation-control  framework  might  be 
improved.  Specifically,  in  advance  of  the  next  agreement  that  we'll  sign  with  the  federal 
government in 2011, we've been studying whether 2 per cent is the best target, and whether 
the target should be (as it currently is) the rate of inflation or the path of the price level.  
All to say, our monetary policy work really does take a long view of things.  
Now a word about transparency in monetary policy. I've spoken about the tools we use to 
achieve  the  inflation  target.  With  regard  to  our  actions,  we  make  our  policy  rate  decisions 
eight times a year on a fixed schedule, issue a press release each time, and, four times a 
year,  explain  our  analysis  and  projections  in  detail  in  our  Monetary  Policy  Reports.  The 
outcome  of  monetary  policy  –  total  CPI  inflation  –  is  measurable,  and  our  performance  is 
transparent. I should add a word about "core" inflation. The more volatile price components 
of  the  CPI  –  such  as  fruit,  vegetables,  and  gasoline,  as  well  as  the  effect  of  changes  in 
indirect taxes – can cause a good deal of temporary movement in total CPI inflation, so the 
Bank of Canada uses a core measure of inflation, which excludes these volatile components, 
as a useful guide to policy. The core measure of inflation helps us to "see through" short-term 
volatility when we make our policy decisions. 
As to keeping the big picture in mind: monetary policy focuses on the Canadian economy as 
a  whole,  and  aims  to  achieve  a  national  inflation  rate.  Of  course,  to  get  a  sense  of  the 
national economy, we need to closely monitor regional developments. We have five regional 
offices across the country, including the Atlantic region office in Halifax, from which our staff 
go  out  to  visit  businesses  and  gather  information  on  issues  related  to  the  economy.  We 
communicate  the  highlights  of  this  information  in  our  quarterly  Business  Outlook  Survey, 
which is available on our website. 
So those are the four areas of responsibility in which the Bank of Canada works to carry out 
its mandate.  
Before I conclude, I'll say a few words about the economic outlook and the monetary policy 
decision announced on 10 September. 
The  press  release  that  accompanied  the  announcement  noted  that,  following  a  deep, 
synchronous, global recession, recent indicators point to the start of a recovery in the major 
economies, supported by aggressive policy stimulus and the stabilization of global financial 
markets. In Canada, stimulative monetary and fiscal policies, improved financial conditions, 
4 
 BIS Review 113/2009
firmer  commodity  prices,  and  a  rebound  in  business  and  consumer  confidence  are 
supporting the growth of domestic demand. Combined with recent information on inventory 
adjustments and automotive production, this suggests that GDP growth in the second half of 
2009  could  be  stronger  than  we  projected  back  in  July.  Total  CPI  inflation  is  expected  to 
trough in the current quarter before returning to the 2 per cent target in the second quarter of 
2011 as aggregate supply and demand return to balance. 
The Bank said that, conditional on the outlook for inflation, the target overnight rate could be 
expected to remain at its current level until the end of the second quarter of 2010 in order to 
achieve  the  inflation  target.  The  underlying  macroeconomic  risks  to  the  projection  were 
judged to be roughly balanced. We also noted that persistent strength in the Canadian dollar 
remains a risk to growth and to the return of inflation to target, and that the Bank retained 
considerable flexibility in the conduct of monetary policy at low interest rates.  
Finally,  it  would  be  timely  to  mention  that,  earlier  this  week,  the  Bank  launched  its  new 
medium-term plan. The plan sets out the key priorities for the Bank over the next three years, 
discusses relevant trends and challenges, and lists the measures by which we will gauge our 
performance and make ourselves accountable. This plan, which will soon be posted on our 
website, guides our work over the medium term. It shows that having clear objectives, taking 
the long view, being transparent, and keeping the big picture in mind, will continue to be our 
approach in the years ahead. 
Conclusion 
The  past  two  years  have  been  difficult  for  many  Canadians.  The  financial  crisis  and  the 
recession have taken an economic toll, and they have tested our confidence.  
However, Canadians can have confidence in their central bank. Specifically, you can be sure 
that  the  Bank  of  Canada  will  continue  to  promote  the  country's  economic  and  financial 
welfare,  communicate  its  objectives  clearly,  and  stand  accountable  for  its  actions.  And  we 
will continue to demonstrate a commitment to excellence in all our work. 
These commitments will help to strengthen the economy in both good times and bad, and 
they will help to sustain a stable and efficient financial system. 
BIS Review 113/2009 
 5
