Jürgen Stark: The ECB's monetary policy – preserving price stability in 
times of financial distress 
Speech by Mr Jürgen Stark, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the conference “The ECB and Its Watchers XI”, Frankfurt am Main, 4 September 2009. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Last year at this conference, on 5 September 2008, I said that the previous 13 months had 
been the most challenging in the ECB’s history. The 12 months since then have been even 
more difficult. We have no reason to believe that the period ahead will be much easier, but 
there are at least indications that the challenges will be of a different nature.  
We increasingly see signs that the massive response from governments and central banks 
has been effective and that the global recession is bottoming out. Uncertainty is still high, but 
one of the main challenges to the maintenance of price stability is likely to be the phasing-out 
of the extraordinary and unprecedented measures we have taken.  
The  President  has  just  outlined  the  ECB’s  exit  strategy.  I  will  add  to  his  comments  by 
considering how our monetary policy framework – which has served us well – will be of great 
help in timing the exit correctly. I will also offer some thoughts on fiscal policy.  
Recognising turning points  
The  principles  that  guide  our  decisions  are  quite  clear.  Our  mandate  is  to  maintain  price 
stability over the medium term. As soon as upside risks to price stability emerge in a context 
of an improving macroeconomic environment, it will be time to withdraw the policy stimulus. 
Furthermore, our independence guarantees that we will take the steps necessary to fulfill our 
mandate.  
A  key  issue  will  therefore  be  to  correctly  identify  the  turning  point  in  macroeconomic 
prospects  and  the  emergence  of  upside  risks  to  price  stability.  This  is  in  general  a  very 
difficult  task,  but  it  is  even  more  demanding  now,  mainly  because  of  the  increased 
uncertainty about the sustainability of the economic recovery and the growth potential of the 
euro area economy.  
The decade that preceded the crisis was an exceptionally long period of strong growth in the 
world  economy.  The  high  levels  of  growth  were  however  based  on  large  and  growing 
imbalances,  reflected  in  asset  price  and  credit  bubbles  as  well  as  global  current  account 
imbalances, which ultimately proved to be unsustainable.  
This  means  that  some  of  the  growth  we  experienced  in  the  past  was  probably  above 
potential,  both  in  the  euro  area  and  elsewhere.  Under  these  circumstances,  elusive 
estimates  of  the  scale  of  economic  slack  are  even  less  reliable  as  a  guide  for  monetary 
policy makers.  
Fortunately, the ECB’s monetary policy strategy is well-suited to guide monetary policy in the 
current situation. At a time when academics are reconsidering the mandates and strategies 
of central banks, it is important to stress that our strategy is comprehensive and robust. All of 
you are aware of the main elements of our strategy:  
• 
• 
• 
The quantitative definition of price stability 
The medium-term orientation 
The two pillar-based assessment of risks to price stability  
BIS Review 103/2009 
 1
I would in particular like to highlight that the high priority we attach to the monetary analysis 
offsets any over-dependence on single, potentially flawed indicators and concepts, such as 
the output gap.  
To illustrate this, let me go back to 2005. In that year, the signals from the economic analysis 
remained  rather  mixed  and  our  monetary  analysis  was  indicating  upward  risks  to  price 
stability. This led us to increase interest rates in December 2005 – a move widely criticised, 
also  by  a  number  of  ECB  watchers.  In  retrospect,  however,  the  strength  of  the  economic 
recovery  from  2006  and  onwards  showed  that  our  decision  was  well-timed.  Moreover, 
tightening  monetary  policy  at  an  early  stage  may  have  been  one  important  reason  why 
financial imbalances in the euro area could be kept relatively contained, compared with those 
in some other regions. 
There are few historical precedents for steering monetary policy back to a “normal” path after 
a prolonged period of a very accommodative policy. But one unambiguous lesson from the 
past  is  that  an  over-reliance  on  real-time  assessments  of  the  state  of  the  economy  and  a 
neglect  or  even  misinterpretation  of  monetary  developments  can  contribute  significantly  to 
policy mistakes. 
The textbook example of a premature tightening is the increase in reserve requirements in 
the  US  after  the  Great  Depression.  To  counter  the  potential  inflationary  consequences  of 
excess reserves in the banking sector, central bank reserve requirements were increased in 
1936. In 1937/38, the US economy entered a new recession, which was partly blamed on the 
monetary tightening brought about by the higher reserve requirements. Fiscal policy was also 
tightened. With hindsight, one can say that it was a failure to appreciate the fragility of the 
recovery  and  a  misinterpretation  of  the  inflationary  consequences  of  the  monetary 
developments that led to a too early exit. In addition, the statistical base on which monetary 
authorities had to base their assessment of the state of the economy at that time was thin.  
Examples  of  tardy  exits  from  monetary  accommodation  can  be  found  more  easily  and  in 
more recent times. I will refer to two notable cases. The first case is the “Great Inflation” of 
the 1970s. After the recessions following the first oil price shock, the potential output levels 
were  assessed  too  positively,  leading  countries  to  maintain  expansionary  monetary  policy 
stances for too long. Ultimately, this gave rise to a massive acceleration of inflation. Only a 
few countries managed to avoid the “Great Inflation”. The monetary policy strategies of these 
countries did not rely excessively on Phillips curve-type inflation models but rather took the 
medium-term link between monetary trends and inflation into account.  
The  second  case  concerns  the  period  between  the  stock  market  crash  in  2000  and  the 
outbreak  of  the  global  financial  crisis  in  2007.  After  the  early-millennium  recession  that 
followed the bursting of the dot-com bubble, many central banks around the world lowered 
interest rates and kept them at very low levels for a protracted period of time – in the end for 
too  long.  It  was  probably  a  misperception  of  the  size  of  the  output  gap  after  the  “New 
Economy”  boom  and  of  the  risks  to  financial  stability  that  were  building  up  with  the  rapid 
expansion of credit during this period that induced this late exit. Today, it is widely assumed 
that  the  monetary  easing  during  this  period  exacerbated  the  imbalances  building  up  in 
housing and credit markets that ultimately triggered the crisis. 
The current outlook  
Where do we stand today? There are no deflationary risks. For the moment, both pillars in 
our  analytical  framework  point  to  low  inflationary  pressures.  This  is  why  the  Governing 
Council  assesses  that  current  rates  as  appropriate  and  why  the  policy  rates  were  left 
unchanged yesterday. We also agreed that the 12-month refinancing operation at the end of 
this  month  will  be  conducted  without  a  spread  over  the  rate  at  the  main  refinancing 
operations at the time. 
2 
 BIS Review 103/2009
Annual HICP inflation in August was less negative than in July. We expect inflation rates to 
move into positive territory within the coming months, mainly driven by past developments in 
energy prices. But following the increase this autumn, inflation rates are projected to remain 
at relatively subdued levels in 2010. This reflects the gradual economic recovery we expect 
to see in the course of next year. Both the ECB staff projections for inflation and growth have 
been  revised  slightly  upwards  since  June.  However,  uncertainty  remains  high.  The 
improvements we have seen over the past few months have in part been driven by the fiscal 
stimulus. The still strained financial markets are a further source of uncertainty. The risk of 
deflation in the euro area, which was never substantial, has however clearly receded since 
earlier this year and has now virtually disappeared. 
The  monetary  data  for  July  showed  an  ongoing  parallel  decrease  in  monetary  and  credit 
annual growth. This supports our assessment of low inflationary pressures. At the same time, 
the  latest  month-on-month  growth  rates  of  M3  did  not,  on  balance,  point  to  a  further 
deceleration in monetary growth.  
While developments in M3 contain relevant information about future inflation over medium to 
long-term horizons, developments in M1 typically have good leading indicator properties for 
turning points in real GDP growth in the euro area. But in times of financial turmoil and strong 
policy  responses,  monetary  aggregates  may  be  volatile  and  should  be  assessed  with 
caution.  In  this  respect,  the  recent  buoyancy  of  M1  growth  also  reflects  portfolio 
considerations to hold liquid funds in a period of low opportunity costs and therefore does not 
automatically  point  to  an  equally  strong  upturn  in  the  economic  cycle.  The  information 
content of M1 has however proved to be relatively robust in the past for identifying turning 
points.  At  the  same  time,  the  subdued  M3  growth  may  increasingly  reflect  more  profitable 
investments in longer-term assets due to the emergence of a relatively steep yield curve. 
Overall,  the  monetary  and  the  economic  analysis  indicate  at  present  that  inflationary 
pressure is low. This means that the time for exit has not yet come. But we will continue to 
monitor  very  closely  all  developments  over  the  period  ahead.  Once  the  macroeconomic 
environment improves, we will make sure that the measures taken are unwound in a timely 
fashion  and  the  liquidity  provided  is  absorbed  in  order  to  counter  effectively  any  threat  to 
price stability over the medium to longer term.  
The phasing-out of non-standard measures 
When we consider the phasing-out of the non-standard measures, it is important to keep in 
mind why they were introduced in the first place. The financial turmoil caused disruption on 
the money markets, in particular after the collapse of Lehman Brothers last autumn. Because 
the changes in our key policy rates affect the broader economy initially via money markets, 
we  had  to  take  a  number  of  steps  to  ensure  that  our  policy  changes  were  transmitted 
properly to the rest of the economy. Overall, we refer to the set of non-standard measures 
which we employed as our policy of “enhanced credit support”.  
Let me first take stock of the effectiveness of our non-standard measures so far. Overall, it is 
difficult  to  separate  the  effects  of  the  ECB’s  measures  from  the  effects  of  other  factors. 
Spreads in the money market have come down significantly since last autumn and, together 
with  the  policy  rate  cuts,  have  brought  about  a  substantial  decline  in  lending  rates  to 
households and firms.  
There  has  been  much  focus  on  the  subdued  developments  in  lending  in  recent  months, 
especially  as  our  measures  have  been  designed  to  support  lending  activity.  These 
developments should however be assessed in light of their consistency with stylised facts of 
the business cycle, which in fact indicate that the recent credit developments appear to be 
broadly in line with the currently projected path for real GDP growth. Furthermore, based on 
the  past  regularities,  the  current  levelling-off  of  household  loans  would  normally  be 
associated with a further contraction in loans to corporations until at least early 2010. This 
BIS Review 103/2009 
 3
contraction will presumably be stronger than that for loans to households, as troughs in loan 
growth to non-financial corporations are usually deeper than those for household loans.  
To  shed  some  more  light  on  this  finding,  let  me  first  mention  that  the  historical  evidence 
suggests  that  real  loans  to  households  tend  to  lead  real  GDP  growth  by  about  a  quarter, 
while  loans  to  non-financial  corporations  lag  real  GDP  developments  by  around  three 
quarters. Loans to households are mainly driven by housing market developments, and both 
house  prices  and  interest  rates  tend  to  be  low  during  downturns,  which  increases  the 
attractiveness of borrowing.  
By contrast, the cash flows of firms usually improve in an economic upturn, which may lead 
them to their own funds first and only turn to external financing later. Moreover, banks may 
prefer to expand lending earlier in the cycle to households than to firms because household 
loans are generally better collateralised.  
It  is  obvious  that  we  cannot  maintain  the  current  degree  of  policy  accommodation  and 
enhanced credit support indefinitely. As the President mentioned, the feasibility of a timely 
and  orderly  exit  was  one  of  the  guiding  principles  when  the  non-standard  measures  were 
chosen  and  designed.  Except  for  the  purchases  of  covered  bonds,  the  rest  of  our  non-
standard  measures  have  built-in  and  self-correcting  mechanisms  that  help  to  reabsorb 
liquidity and allow for the normalization of the policy stance once this is justified. 
Let me just elaborate on how and when to phase them out.  
Our operational framework worked well until the financial turmoil escalated in September last 
year, and from an operational point of view, our principal goal will therefore be to re-establish 
the key features of this framework, in particular to revert to a situation where the one-week 
main refinancing operation is the main tool for steering money market rates and where we 
are “rate-takers” in the longer-term money market. 
There are no impediments which may lead to delay when the time of exit is ripe. We are well 
equipped to properly identify the time of exit, and our independence, as it is enshrined in the 
Treaty, ensures that we can take the necessary steps in a timely fashion. Our actions will be 
guided  by  our  mandate  to  maintain  price  stability,  but  the  specific  steps  we  take  to  re-
establish the main features of our operational framework will also depend on the state of the 
money market. It is impossible to forecast these developments with any certainty. But let me 
just briefly flesh out two highly stylised scenarios.  
One  scenario  would  be  that  the  problems  in  money  markets  disappear  before  any  upside 
risks  to  price  stability  emerge.  This  means  that  the  non-standard  measures  could  be 
unwound before rates are raised, and the withdrawal of the measures would not be expected 
to have much impact.  
But  what  if,  under  an  alternative  scenario,  upside  risks  to  price  stability  emerge  while  the 
problems  in  money  markets  persist?  In  this  case,  we  may  have  to  maintain  parts  of  the 
enhanced  credit  support  while  rates  are  raised  in  order  to  counter  upside  risks  to  price 
stability  and  at  the  same  time  ensure  that  the  monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism 
functions properly.  
This  situation  is  more  complicated.  In  particular,  we  cannot  accept  a  situation  in  which 
excess  liquidity  constrains  our  ability  to  steer  money  market  rates  to  higher  levels.  Under 
these  conditions,  it  would  be  crucial  to  re-assess  the  sources  of  funding  constraints  for 
banks.  We  would  have  to  judge  whether  these  funding  constraints  are  a  result  of 
dysfunctional  markets  or  whether  they  only  exist  at  the  individual  bank  level.  In  the  latter 
case, it is obvious that any funding support from the Eurosystem would have to be carefully 
assessed as our operational framework serves the implementation of monetary policy.  
In any case, our operational framework is sufficiently flexible to deal with any such scenario 
effectively.  We  are  well  prepared  to  phase  out  non-standard  measures  in  a  timely  fashion 
and withdraw policy accommodation to counter any threats to price stability.  
4 
 BIS Review 103/2009
The fiscal factor  
A discussion of the unwinding of the measures implemented during this crisis would not be 
complete without a few words on fiscal policy. Unsustainable fiscal policies are an upside risk 
to  price  stability  in  a  number  of  countries  because  we  cannot  rule  out  that  debt-burdened 
governments  may  in  the  end  resort  to  monetary  financing.  This  is  not  an  option  for 
governments  in  the  euro  area,  but  high  inflation  in  other  countries  will  also  make  it  more 
difficult to preserve price stability here.  
The  financial  crisis  has  illustrated  clearly  that  capital  markets  are  wary  of  countries’  fiscal 
imbalances  and  that  concerns  about  fiscal  sustainability  lead  to  higher  risk  premia  on 
sovereign  debt.  Spreads  have  recently  narrowed  somewhat,  but  there  is  no  room  for 
complacency. 
Exit strategies from high fiscal deficits need to be developed and consistently implemented in 
order to contain moral hazard, to forestall a rise in long-term real interest rates and crowding-
out effects, and to ensure the sustainability of public finances. Bringing sovereign debt ratios 
onto a sustainable, downward path represents a key priority for fiscal policy-makers. In this 
respect, the Stability and Growth Pact provides a sound and flexible framework to steer the 
timing and speed of fiscal consolidation.  
Conclusion  
Let me conclude. In response to the crisis, governments and central banks across the globe 
have taken immediate and unprecedented measures. Governments have taken measures to 
rescue the banking sector and stimulate the economy. Central banks have lowered rates to 
very low levels and provided ample liquidity. The key question is when and how to phase out 
these measures.  
This is a challenging task both for governments and central banks, but ex-ante co-ordination 
between fiscal and monetary authorities, as some voices have called for, is not an option. 
This would undermine our independence and therefore violate our mandate. As in the past, 
our policy decisions will exclusively be based on our assessments of risks to price stability.  
I am confident that the ECB’s broad-based monetary policy strategy, which has shown itself 
to be robust, will continue to serve us well in handling these challenges. The fact that our risk 
assessment is rooted both in the economic and monetary analysis ensures that all relevant 
information is taken into account. In particular, the monetary pillar has a disciplinary effect: it 
reminds  us  not  to  ignore  risks  to  price  stability  stemming  from  imbalances  in  money  and 
credit developments. 
The time for exit has not yet come. Both the monetary and the economic analysis give us this 
message at the moment. But I can assure you that we will continue to monitor very closely all 
developments in the period ahead, in order to continue to deliver on our task of maintaining 
price stability over the medium term.  
BIS Review 103/2009 
 5
