Lucas Papademos: ECB Financial Stability Review June 2009 – opening 
remarks 
Opening remarks by Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at 
the press briefing on the occasion of the publication of the June 2009 ECB Financial Stability 
Review, Frankfurt am Main, 15 June 2009. 
The original speech, which contains various charts to the speech can be found on the European Central Bank’s 
website.  
 Introduction  
I.  
My colleagues and I would like to welcome you to today’s press briefing on the occasion of 
the publication of the June 2009 edition of the ECB Financial Stability Review. The financial 
stability assessment contained in the Review has been prepared with the close involvement 
of  the  ESCB  Banking  Supervision  Committee.  The  Review  examines  in  detail  the  main 
trends  and  events  that  characterised  the  euro  area  financial  system  over  the  past  six 
months1  and  it  contains  15  boxes  and  five  special  feature  articles  that  address  topical 
financial stability issues in a more focused and analytical manner. As done for the first time 
last December, we have prepared a summary note that highlights some key messages of our 
analysis and assessment. 
Many  of  the  downside  risks  to  euro  area  financial  stability  that  were  identified  in  the 
December  2008  issue  of  the  FSR  have  crystallised.2  In  particular,  the  further  significant 
deterioration in global macroeconomic conditions as well as sizeable downward revisions to 
growth  forecasts  and  expectations  have  added  to  the  stresses  on  global  and  euro  area 
financial systems. The contraction of economic activity and the diminished growth prospects 
have  resulted  in  a  further  erosion  of  the  market  values  of  a  broad  range  of  assets.  The 
adjustment of bank balance sheets has adversely affected the market pricing of assets and 
the  financial  intermediation  role  of  banks  in  channelling  funds  from  savers  to  investors. 
Moreover, there have been increasing signs of an adverse feedback loop between the real 
economy  and  the  financial  sector  which  poses  new  challenges  for  the  safeguarding  of 
financial stability.  
II.  
Sources of risk and vulnerability 
Risks in the global macro-financial environment  
II.1.  
The primary objective of the Financial Stability Review is to identify the main sources of risk 
to,  and  vulnerability  for,  the  financial  system  stability  in  the  euro  area  and  to  provide  an 
assessment of the system’s capacity to absorb adverse disturbances. As the global financial 
and  economic  turbulence  is  still  ongoing,  let  me  start  by  examining  risks  to  euro  area 
financial  stability  stemming  from  developments  in  the  global  macro-financial  environment. 
                                                 
1   The  analysis  and  assessment  contained  in  the  Review  is  for  the  most  part  based  on  information  that  was 
available until the “cut-off” date of 29 May 2009. 
2   These risks included the possibility of: a further deterioration in the US and the euro area housing markets and 
the impact it could have on banks’ loan quality and the value of securities backed by mortgage-related assets; 
a deeper and more prolonged slowdown in both the global and the euro area economy that could cause a 
sharper and broader deterioration in borrowers’ ability to service their debt; a more pronounced de-leveraging 
by banks, due to persistently high funding costs and concerns about the adequacy of capital buffers, which 
could negatively affect the flow of credit extended to the broader economy; and a surge in financial market volatility 
caused by a further unwinding of positions by hedge funds. 
BIS Review 75/2009 
 1
Over the past eight months, the crisis has broadened and affected most countries, including 
advanced, emerging and developing countries. 
US household sector 
Developments  in  the  US  economy,  particularly  in  the  household  sector,  continue  to  be 
central  to  the  global  financial  stability  outlook.  There  are  two  reasons  for  this:  first,  the 
important  contribution  of  US  consumer  spending  to  global  economic  activity;  and,  second, 
the  continuing  high  exposure  of  global  financial  institutions  to  securities  backed  by  US 
mortgages and consumer loans. According to the IMF, these exposures amount to USD 1.3 
trillion.  
Since  the  end  of  2008,  private  consumption  in  the  US  has  recovered  somewhat  after  a 
significant  decline  in  the  second  part  of  2008.  This  decline  resulted  from  weak  income 
growth,  rising  unemployment  and  a  rapid  deterioration  in  the  balance  sheets  of  US 
households. Total net household wealth in the US declined by USD 7.8 trillion (or 13%) in the 
second half of 2008. The outlook for household wealth in the US depends on many factors, 
amongst  which  the  future  evolution  of  US  house  prices  is  important.  Chart  1  shows  that, 
according to the Case-Shiller futures price index for 10 major US cities, prices are expected 
to  fall  by  a  further  14%  from  their  current  levels,  before  bottoming  out  by  mid-2010. 
Moreover, delinquency rates on mortgages and on all other types of household loans have 
exceeded the peak rates recorded in the previous downturn in 2002-2003. 
US corporate sector 
The  delinquency  rates  on  US  commercial  and  industrial  loans  also  picked  up  but  have 
remained lower than those on household loans and well below the levels reached during the 
2002-2003  recession.  This  suggests  that  the  US  corporate  sector  has  proven  relatively 
resilient  to  the  turmoil  thus  far.  However,  the  outlook  for  the  US  non-financial  corporate 
sector has deteriorated. As shown in Chart 2, US corporate profits fell further in the second 
half of 2008. Both domestic profits and those from the rest of the world contributed to the 
decline  on  a  year-on-year  basis.  The  turn  in  the  corporate  credit  cycle  has  also  been 
reflected in the rise of speculative-grade corporate default rates since the end of 2007, which 
over the course of the next 12 months are projected to reach levels far above the peaks in 
the early 1990s and in 2001. The expected sharp increase in US speculative-grade corporate 
defaults  could  cause  a  widening  of  credit  spreads  and  exacerbate  funding  problems. 
Moreover, it could adversely affect the US labour market and consumer spending. 
Risks in the Emerging Market Economies and in new EU member states 
In  emerging  market  economies,  macroeconomic  conditions  have  continued  to  worsen 
significantly,  reflecting  the  confluence  of  weaker  external  demand,  tighter  financing 
constraints  and  falling  commodity  prices.  In  Central  and  Eastern  Europe,  economic  and 
financial  conditions  deteriorated  sharply,  as  a  consequence  of  reduced  capital  inflows,  the 
collapse of international trade and declining domestic demand. Although the economies of 
these  countries  are  heterogeneous,  many  were  highly  vulnerable  to  a  reduction  in  capital 
flows  because  their  economic  expansions  had  been  financed  to  a  considerable  extent  by 
external borrowing. Reduced external demand has also had a significant impact on several 
countries  in  the  region.  As  a  result,  credit  growth  to  the  private  sector  has  decelerated 
rapidly,  and  there  is  an  emerging  risk  of  a  vicious  circle  between  weakening  economic 
activity  and  deteriorating  asset  quality.  Against  this  background,  as  shown  in  Chart  3, 
sovereign credit default swap (CDS) spreads increased sharply in early 2009, especially in 
those  economies  with  a  large  fiscal  deficit  and  a  wide  current  account  deficit,  and  where 
domestic  demand  has  weakened  significantly.  The  CDS  spreads  have  narrowed 
substantially since March 2009, but they remain at levels well above those in the first half of 
2007. The risk to the euro area economy relates both to the close economic links with these 
countries as well as to the large exposures of a number of euro area banks to the region.  
2 
 BIS Review 75/2009
Risks in the euro area non-financial sectors  
II.2.  
Let  me  now  focus  on  risks  and  vulnerabilities  that  we  have  identified  in  the  non-financial 
sectors of the euro area economy. The intensification of the strains in the financial sector in 
the last quarter of 2008 has set in motion a negative interplay between the financial sector 
and the real economy which emerged more clearly at the beginning of 2009.  
Euro area macroeconomic environment 
The pace of economic activity has slowed significantly since October 2008. Especially in the 
first quarter of 2009, we witnessed a substantial and broad-based contraction of euro area 
activity.  Both  external  and  domestic  demand  are  expected  to  decline  further  in  2009  and 
gradually recover in 2010. As shown in Chart 4, private sector forecasters and international 
institutions have been revising downwards their estimates of real GDP growth for 2009 and 
2010.  
This  assessment  is  broadly  in  line  with  the  June  2009  Eurosystem  staff  macroeconomic 
projections  for  the  euro  area  published  on  4  June,  according  to  which  annual  real  GDP 
growth will range between -5.1% and -4.1% in 2009 and between -1.0% and 0.4% in 2010, 
that revised downwards the ranges of projected GDP growth, particularly for 2009, compared 
with the March 2009 ECB staff macroeconomic projections. The projected gradual recovery 
next year, with rates of growth returning to positive levels by mid-2010, reflects the effects of 
the significant macroeconomic stimulus under way as well as of the measures taken so far to 
restore the functioning of the financial system both inside and outside the euro area. Box 5 of 
the  Review  provides  a  comparison  of  the  amplitude  and  time  profile  of  “normal”  economic 
cycles  with  those  observed  during  past  episodes  of  banking  crises.  The  latter  were 
characterised by a more protracted U-shaped recession, while the former involved a sharp 
decline in activity followed by a swift recovery. 
Nevertheless,  in  recent  weeks,  there  have  been  signs  –  both  within  and  outside  the  euro 
area  –  that  the  pace  of  deterioration  in  activity  is  moderating  and  that  consumer  and 
business sentiment is improving though still remaining at low levels. In addition, there may be 
stronger  than  anticipated  effects  on  activity  stemming  from  the  extensive  macroeconomic 
stimulus  under  way  and  from  other  policy  measures  taken.  Confidence  may  also  improve 
more quickly than currently expected. At the same time, concerns remain about the following 
potential  downside  risks:  a  stronger  impact  on  the  real  economy  from  the  financial  market 
turmoil,  more  unfavourable  developments 
intensification  of 
protectionist pressures and adverse developments in the world economy stemming from a 
disorderly correction of global imbalances. 
labour  markets, 
the 
in 
Euro area non-financial corporate sector  
Concentrating  on  the  euro  area  non-financial  corporate  sector,  lower  sales  volumes  and 
profit  margins  have  caused  a  substantial  weakening  of  corporate  profitability  which  is 
expected to persist in 2010. Firms in the euro area entered the economic downturn with a 
relatively  high  leverage  ratio.  Reduced  profits  hamper  firms’  ability  to  generate  internal 
financing while, at the same time, external financing conditions are likely to remain tight, as 
long as banks continue to de-leverage and other funding markets remain under stress. 
Non-financial corporations’ default rates for both euro area and European firms have started 
to increase. The European speculative grade-rated corporations’ default rate is expected to 
jump  to  almost  20%  by  the  end  of  2009,  as  shown  in  Chart  5.  Furthermore,  credit  rating 
agencies began revising downwards their ratings of non-financial corporations in December 
2008.  Box  6  of  the  Review  takes  a  closer  look  at  the  outlook  for  corporate  defaults.  It 
concludes  that  given  the  extraordinary  nature  of  recent  developments  in  the  financial 
markets, current forecasts could prove too pessimistic despite the sharp decline in economic 
activity. The prospect of global and European speculative-grade corporations’ default rates 
increasing substantially implies a significant risk to the financial system.  
BIS Review 75/2009 
 3
Another  source  of  risk  is  the  commercial  property  market  where  conditions  continued  to 
deteriorate over the past six months. In the first quarter of 2009, commercial property prices 
actually fell in all 13 euro area countries for which data are available. The outlook will remain 
unfavourable  until  economic  and  financial  conditions  improve  and  investor  appetite  for 
commercial  property  returns.  Potential  further  losses  constitute  a  significant  risk  for  many 
banks since commercial property loans in the euro area on average account for about 10% 
of total loans and, in many cases, exposures are even much larger.  
Euro area household sector  
Turning to the household sector, euro area house price increases continued to ease in 2008, 
as shown on Chart 6. In at least six euro area countries house prices have declined on an 
annual basis. These developments have been associated with a moderation of both housing 
demand and supply, but the balance of the changes in demand and supply has been putting 
downward pressure on prices.  
The  annual  rate  of  growth  of  loans  to  the  household  sector  declined  sharply  in  the  final 
quarter  of  2008  and  in  the  first  quarter  of  2009,  reflecting  the  deterioration  in  housing 
markets, weakening economic conditions and prospects, and the ongoing tightening in credit 
standards.  According  to  the  results  of  the  April  2009  ECB  bank  lending  survey,  a  further 
dampening of households’ demand for housing loans is expected due to worsened housing 
market prospects and low consumer confidence.  
II.3.  
Risks in the euro area financial system  
Euro area money markets 
Let  me  now  focus  on  the  euro  area  financial  system.  Over  the  past  few  months, 
developments  in  several  financial  markets  give  rise  to  some  optimism.  Although  market 
liquidity in the euro area is still tight, it has improved appreciably, especially in the interbank 
money market.  
Since mid-February, conditions in the euro money markets improved. This is reflected in the 
lower  utilisation  of  the  ECB  deposit  facility  and  in  higher  overnight  unsecured  interbank 
transaction volumes. More importantly, money market rates have declined substantially and 
the  spreads  between  Euribor  rates  and  EONIA  swap  rates  have  continued  to  narrow,  as 
shown in Chart 7. In late May 2009, the spread between the 3-month Euribor and the EONIA 
swap rate had fallen below 50 basis points for the first time since the collapse of Lehman 
Brothers  in  September  2008.  In  shorter  maturities,  money  market  spreads  have  narrowed 
even further. These positive developments are a consequence of the extensive provision of 
liquidity and other policy measures taken by the Eurosystem. Forward Euribor-EONIA swap 
spreads  in  the  three-month  maturity  indicate  that  these  spreads  are  expected  to  continue 
narrowing in the coming months.  
Euro area government finances 
An important development in financial markets was the marked increase in the net issuance 
of  euro  area  government  debt  securities  at  the  end  of  2008  and  early  2009,  as  shown  in 
Chart 8. New debt issuance has mainly been in the form of short-term debt, partly because 
the steeper yield curve has made short-term financing relatively cheaper. The national bank 
support schemes, which were announced in October 2008, were perceived by investors as a 
credit risk transfer from the private to the public sector. This is reflected in the widening of 
government  bond  spreads  relative  to  Germany  and  the  increasing  divergence  in  CDS 
spreads in the first quarter of 2009, especially in those countries with a weaker public finance 
position and a relatively large financial sector. Since March 2009, however, a narrowing of 
bond  and  CDS  spreads  indicates  some  improvement  in  investors’  confidence  in  the  euro 
area sovereign bond markets.  
4 
 BIS Review 75/2009
Euro area equity markets  
In mature economies, stock market valuations have steadily improved since early March of 
this  year  and  the  major  equity  indices  both  in  the  euro  area  and  globally  have  more  than 
recovered the losses of the first two months of the year, while volatility has also declined. As 
shown on Chart 9, several equity valuation measures, including the ratio of equity prices to 
long-term past corporate earnings, indicate that despite the recent recovery in prices, equity 
market  valuations  in  the  euro  area  are  still  substantially  lower  than  the  peaks  reached  in 
October 2007 and in March 2000, and also below the long-term average level.  
Euro area LCBGs’ earnings and solvency developments  
Turning  next  to  the  euro  area  financial  institutions,  large  and  complex  banking  groups 
(LCBGs) remained under intense financial stress in the last quarter of 2008. Profits and (the 
weighted  average)  return  on  equity  (ROE)  declined  sharply,  as  shown  in  the  left  panel  of 
Chart  10.  This  performance  reflects  partly  further  write-downs  on  structured  product 
portfolios  and  increasingly  the  deterioration  in  the  macroeconomic  environment,  which 
resulted  in  an  increase  in  loan  losses  and  a  decline  in  non-interest  revenue.  In  the  first 
quarter of 2009, euro area banks’ ROE improved somewhat, albeit at a very low level, thanks 
to a more favourable trading environment and better non-interest revenues. The asset quality 
of banks’ loan portfolios will remain a crucial determinant of their performance in the rest of 
the year.  
At  the  same  time,  the  efforts  of  euro  area  LCBGs  to  bolster  their  capital  buffers  have 
contributed to maintaining their current regulatory capital ratios at levels that conform to the 
regulatory minimum requirements. Both the median and the weighted average Tier 1 ratios 
increased  in  2008  compared  with  2007  (from  7.76%  to  8.15%,  and  from  7.7%  to  8.6%, 
respectively). The total capital ratio followed a broadly similar pattern. However, part of the 
recovery in regulatory capital is also due to a reduction in risk-weighted assets and to asset 
shedding at a majority of LCBGs.  
Write-downs and new capital raised 
Since  the  turmoil  erupted,  the  total  reduction  in  net  income  attributable  to  write-downs  of 
global banks on their assets has amounted to just under USD 1 trillion so far. The left panel 
on Chart 11 shows that US banks have accounted for the bulk of the income losses – about 
60% of the overall figure. A further 20% of the global losses was incurred by UK and Swiss 
banks  and  euro  area  banks’  write-downs  also  corresponded  to  20%  of  the  total.  To 
compensate for the large write-downs, euro area LCBGs successfully raised capital in 2008 
–  both  from  private  and  from  public  sources.  By  late-May  2009,  euro  area  banks  had 
received relatively more capital than their US peers in relation to the recorded write-downs, 
as  private  and  public  capital  injections  were  equivalent  to  119%  of  the  write-downs  in  the 
euro area versus 88.5% in the United States. 
Availability of public bank support 
Since  October  2008,  EU  governments  have  implemented  support  measures  to  alleviate 
strains  on  the  European  banking  system.  These  measures  complement  the  extensive 
liquidity support that has been provided by the ECB/Eurosystem and have been implemented 
in  accordance  with  specific  guidance  from  the  ECB  and  the  European  Commission.  The 
bank  support  measures  taken,  which  include  equity  re-capitalisations,  guarantees  of  new 
bank debt and asset relief schemes, are summarised in Box 11 and a tentative assessment 
of  their  effectiveness  is  provided.  The  main  conclusion  is  that  the  measures  have  been 
successful in stabilising the banking system and in bolstering confidence.  
The  take-up  rates  of  the  government  committed  support  to  banking  systems  has  varied 
across  countries  and  across  types  of  measures.  Overall,  the  take-up  rates  are  considered 
satisfactory  taking  into  account  banks’  needs  so  far.  In  particular,  the  use  of  government 
BIS Review 75/2009 
 5
guarantees  on  new  bank  debt  issuance  has  been  indispensable  in  providing  banks  with 
access to medium-term funding when needed, as shown in Chart 12. Looking forward, banks 
should be encouraged to take advantage of the governments’ commitments for support and 
strengthen their capital buffers. This is especially important in order to restore the provision 
of credit to the economy and also because the current ample liquidity provided by the ECB 
will not remain permanently in place.  
Estimated future banking sector losses in the euro area  
A  key  issue  for  bank  performance  and  financial  system  stability  is  the  amount  of  potential 
further write-downs that could be faced by global and euro area financial institutions and the 
additional capital that should be raised by them in order to safeguard their solvency. Box 14 
of the FSR presents the ECB staff estimates of potential write-downs on the securities and 
loans  of  euro  area  banks  which,  for  the  sake  of  comparability  and  transparency,  are 
calculated  following  the  approach  used  by  the  IMF  in  its  Global  Financial  Stability  Report 
published  in  April  2009.  However,  the  ECB  staff  calculations  have  been  based  on  certain 
parameters that can be estimated on the basis of euro area data. Table 1 on Slide 15 shows 
the estimated potential write-downs facing the euro area banking sector.  
The ECB staff estimates suggest that the total amount of potential write-downs of euro area 
banks on their securities and loans over the period 2007-2010 could amount to around USD 
649  billion. Taking  into account  the  write-downs  on  banks’  securities  reported  by  late  May 
2009 and the banks’ loan loss provisions for 2007 and 2008, the potential future losses of 
euro area banks, largely concentrated on their loan exposures, could be around USD 283 
billion until the end of 2010. These potential losses would be cushioned by provisions and 
retained earnings over the next two years.  
I want to stress that estimates of potential future write-downs on banks’ securities and loans 
depend crucially on the assumptions made and the methodology used and they are subject 
to a considerable margin of error. Bearing in mind the significant uncertainty surrounding all 
available  estimates,  further  efforts  are  needed  to  obtain  as  accurate  figures  as  possible 
because  the  magnitude  of  the  expected  potential  write-downs  has  weighed  heavily  on 
investor confidence and has affected already-weakened financial institutions.  
Euro area insurers’ investment exposures  
Finally, allow me to make a few points with regard to euro area insurance companies. Large 
euro area insurers suffered a deterioration in their financial conditions in the second half of 
2008 and the first quarter of 2009. Most of them reported declines in premium income, as 
falling  equity  prices  and  widening  credit  spreads  lowered  the  demand  for  life  insurance 
products.  At  the  same  time,  non-life  insurance  business  lines  were  challenged  by  the 
deterioration  in  the  economic  environment  which  adversely  affected  the  demand  of 
households and firms for their products. In addition, insurers endured a significant erosion of 
their investment income because of stresses in many of the financial markets in which they 
mainly invest, especially corporate bonds and equities. 
As can be seen in Chart 14, the biggest investment exposure of euro area insurers relates to 
corporate and government bonds, on average about 60% of total investment in 2008 for a 
sample of large insurers, up from 46% in 2007. In addition, many insurers have investment 
exposures  to  structured  credit  products.  Continued  high  yields  on  corporate  bond  and 
structured credit products have led to large unrealised losses in many insurers’ “available for 
sale”  bond  portfolios.  Insurers  may  have  to  sell  such  securities  and  realise  losses  if  the 
ratings of the securities they hold are downgraded or in the event of liquidity shortages. In 
addition, realised losses for insurers are likely to increase as corporate bond default rates are 
expected to rise in the period ahead.  
6 
 BIS Review 75/2009
Euro area insurers’ outlook 
The  main  challenge  that  the  euro  area  insurer  sector  is  currently  confronted  with  is  a 
synchronised deterioration in both underwriting and investment income. This is illustrated in 
Chart 14. Insurance underwriting is usually supported by a favourable economic environment 
and the slowdown in economic activity is weighing on the underwriting performance of euro 
area insurers. At the same time, the turmoil in the financial markets continues to weigh on 
insurers in their attempts to generate investment income. 
Overall assessment 
III. 
In  conclusion,  I  will  summarise  our  overall  assessment  of  the  risks  to  euro  area  financial 
stability. Over the past six months, the deterioration in the macro-financial environment has 
continued  to  test  the  shock-absorption  capacity  of  the  euro  area  financial  system.  The 
profitability  of  euro  area  major  banks  has  been  eroded  and  the  prospects  for  a  significant 
turnaround  in  the  short  term  are  not  promising.  These  prospects  weighed  on  investor 
confidence in the resilience of already-weakened financial institutions. Importantly, however, 
capital  buffers  have  been  rebuilt  through  mitigating  actions  taken  by  the  major  banks 
themselves,  as  well  as  through  the  injection  of  capital  by  governments,  and  the  securities 
prices  of  these  institutions  have  responded  positively.  Because  capital  buffers  have  been 
maintained  well  above  the  minimum  regulatory  requirements,  overall  euro  area  LCBGs 
appear  to  be  sufficiently  well  capitalised  to  withstand  severe  but  plausible  downside 
scenarios.  
The main risks identified within the euro area financial system include the possibility of:  
• 
a further erosion of capital bases and a renewed loss of confidence in the financial 
condition of LCBGs;  
significant balance sheet strains emerging among insurers; and  
more widespread asset price declines coupled with high volatility.  
• 
• 
Outside the euro area financial system, important risks include the possibility of:  
• 
• 
US house prices falling further than currently expected;  
an even more severe than currently projected economic downturn in the euro area; 
and  
an intensification of the stresses already endured by Central and Eastern European 
countries.  
 It cannot be excluded that many of these risks could materialise simultaneously. Indeed, this 
could happen if the global economic downturn proves to be deeper and more prolonged than 
currently expected. 
All  in  all,  notwithstanding  the  measures  that  have  been  taken  by  the  Eurosystem  and 
governments to stabilise the euro area financial system and in spite of the recent recovery in 
the equity prices of most major banks, policy-makers and market participants will have to be 
very  alert  in  the  period  ahead.  There  is  no  room  for  complacency  because  the  risks  for 
financial stability remain high, also bearing in mind that the credit cycle had not yet reached a 
trough.  
Banks, in particular, will therefore need to be especially careful in ensuring that they have 
sufficient capital and liquidity buffers to cushion the risks that lie ahead while providing an 
adequate  flow  of  credit  to  the  economy.  Over  the  medium  to  longer  term,  banks  should 
undertake the appropriate restructuring to strengthen their financial soundness and resilience 
to  shocks.  This  may  include  adapting  their  business  models  to  the  new  financial 
environment.  
BIS Review 75/2009 
 7
The commitments made by euro area governments to support the financial sector have been 
sizeable across a range of measures. Given the risks and challenges that lie ahead, banks 
should be encouraged to take full advantage of these commitments, in order to improve and 
diversify  their  medium-term  funding,  enhance  their  shock-absorbing  capacity  and  protect 
sound business lines from the contagion risks connected with troubled assets. 
Thank you very much for your attention. I am now at your disposal for questions. 
8 
 BIS Review 75/2009
