Mark Carney: Summary of the latest Monetary Policy Report 
Opening  statement  by  Mr  Mark  Carney,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  a  press 
conference following the release of the Monetary Policy Report, Ottawa, 23 April 2009. 
 Good  morning.  Paul  and  I  are  pleased  to  be  here  with  you  today  to  discuss  the  April 
Monetary Policy Report, which we published this morning.  
• 
These are difficult economic times with the Canadian economy being buffeted by an 
intense  and  synchronized  global  recession.  In recent  months,  that  global  recession 
has  been  exacerbated  by  delays  in  implementing  measures  to  restore  financial 
stability around the world.  
G-20 policy-makers are now responding to the global crisis with renewed commitment 
to  concrete  initiatives  and  comprehensive  plans.  Our  base-case  projection  is  that 
these policies will be implemented in an effective and timely manner, and their impact 
will reach full force next year.  
As  a  result  of  the  current  global  economic  and  financial  situation,  the  Bank  now 
projects that the Canadian recession will be deeper, that our return to growth will be 
delayed by one quarter to the end of 2009, and that our recovery will be somewhat 
more gradual.  
The broad outlines of the Canadian outlook are the same, but its profile has shifted.  
Canada's real GDP is projected to decline by 3.0 per cent this year, and growth is 
expected to resume in the autumn and accelerate to 2.5 per cent in 2010, and 4.7 per 
cent in 2011.  
Our outlook for inflation is broadly consistent with that in January. Total inflation will 
temporarily fall below zero in 2009, but core and total CPI inflation are expected to 
return to the Bank's 2 per cent inflation target in the third quarter of 2011.  
In  that  context,  on  Tuesday,  the  Bank  lowered  the  policy  interest  rate  by  1/4  of  a 
percentage point to 1/4 per cent, which is judged to be the effective lower bound of 
the  policy  rate.  Conditional  on  the  outlook  for  inflation,  the  Bank  has  committed  to 
holding this rate at 1/4 per cent until the end of June 2010.  
Since  December  2007,  we  have  cut  interest  rates  by  a  total  of  425  basis  points  to 
their  historic  lows  and  lowest  possible  levels.  It  is  the  Bank's  judgment  that  this 
cumulative easing, together with the conditional commitment to keep rates low for a 
considerable period, is the appropriate policy stance to move the economy back to 
full production capacity and to achieve the 2 percent inflation target.  
However,  these  are  uncertain  times  and  if  additional  stimulus  were  to  become 
necessary, the Bank retains considerable flexibility in the conduct of monetary policy 
at low interest rates.  
Because  it  is  important  to  outline  those  alternatives  in  a  principled  and  transparent 
fashion, we published today a framework that describes the Bank's approach to the 
conduct of monetary policy when the overnight interest rate is at its  effective lower 
bound.  
Additional stimulus could be provided through quantitative easing, which involves the 
creation  of central  bank  reserves  to  purchase financial assets  and/or  credit  easing, 
which includes outright purchases of private sector assets.  
         BIS Review 50/2009 
 1
   If the Bank were to deploy either quantitative easing or credit easing, it would act in a 
deliberate and principled fashion.  
- 
The focus of these operations would be to improve overall financial conditions 
in order to support aggregate demand and achieve the inflation target.  
Asset  purchases  would be  concentrated  in  maturity  ranges  in  order  to  have 
the maximum impact on the economy. 
Actions would be taken in as broad and neutral manner as possible. 
The Bank would act prudently, mitigating the risks to its balance sheet and 
managing its ultimate exit from such strategies at an appropriately measured 
pace.  
  Allow me to conclude with a few words on the outlook for the Canadian economy.  
While  there  remains  a  high  degree  of  uncertainty  –  particularly  with  the  Canadian 
economy  dependent  on  forces  beyond  our  borders  –  we  remain  confident  in  the 
prospects of economic recovery in Canada.  
This recovery should be supported by the following factors:  
the gradual rebound in external demand;  
the end of the stock adjustments in Canadian and U.S. residential housing;  
the strength of Canadian household, business, and bank balance sheets;  
- 
- 
- 
-  our relatively well-functioning financial system and the gradual improvement in 
financial conditions in Canada;  
the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar;  
stimulative fiscal policy measures; 
the timeliness and scale of the Bank's monetary policy response.  
  In short, we have a plan to restore confidence and growth, we are implementing this 
plan, and it will work.  
With that, Paul and I would be pleased to take your questions. 
2 
 BIS Review 50/2009
