Glenn Stevens: Financial system developments and their implications for 
the conduct of monetary policy 
Remarks by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to Central Bank 
of Malaysia’s High Level Conference 2009 “Central Banking in the 21st Century: Implications 
of Economic and Financial Globalisation”, Kuala Lumpur, 10 February 2009. 
I thank Kathryn Ford for assistance in compiling this address. 
 It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  be  here  in  Kuala  Lumpur  at  this  celebration  of  Bank  Negara 
Malaysia’s  50th  Anniversary.  The  two  central  banks  actually  have  something  of  a  shared 
history. In the late 1950s, the Commonwealth Bank of Australia, as Australia’s central bank 
was then known, seconded officers to assist with the establishment of Bank Negara. One of 
them,  Tan  Sri  W.H.  Wilcock,  became  Bank  Negara’s  first  Governor  in  1959.  So  it  is  a 
pleasure indeed to be renewing the relationship in this way here today. 
The subject for this session is “The Nexus between Monetary and Financial Stability”. It is 
certainly  a  topical  one.  The  global  financial  system  has  changed  dramatically  since  Bank 
Negara’s early days, both in size and complexity. Yet for all its supposed sophistication, the 
system is still characterised by cycles – as is the case with so much of human behaviour. 
Periods of strong growth, rising asset prices and investor optimism are still followed by sharp 
increases  in  risk  aversion,  falls  in  asset  prices,  investor  pessimism  and  weak  economic 
conditions. What is perhaps novel in recent experience is the scale with which risk appetite 
could be accommodated by the global financial system and, equally, the scale of the damage 
wrought by the ensuing shift to risk aversion. 
All of this has, of course, complicated the operation of monetary and other policies and, in 
some  cases,  threatened  to  overwhelm  them.  With  the  benefit  of  this  experience,  policy 
makers everywhere are working on strengthening their frameworks. In doing so, however, we 
all need to keep in mind that our capacity to predict how financial behaviour will change in 
response to events, and to policy initiatives, will always be imperfect, as will be our capacity 
to keep pace with the latest innovations. Therefore, we need policy regimes that are robust 
enough to be effective despite this limited knowledge. 
These are the issues I will be discussing today. I wish to make clear at the outset that my 
remarks are about the general international issues, not specifically about either Malaysia or 
Australia. 
Financial system complexity and its role in the financial crisis 
In the current cycle, it has been argued that complexity obscured risks that were embedded 
in  certain  financial  instruments  and  activities.  So  what  do  we  mean  by  financial  system 
complexity? 
Three key aspects come to mind: 
• 
the  complex  financial  instruments  that  have  played  such  a  prominent  role  in  the 
current financial turmoil;  
the interactions between financial markets and institutions; and  
the speed and virulence with which problems spread across national borders.  
• 
• 
Each  of  these  elements  has  been  important  over  the  past  two  years.  Financial  innovation 
saw the development of a number of complex products, from asset backed securities (ABS), 
to  structured  credit  products  such  as  collateralised  debt  obligations  (CDOs)  based  on 
portfolios of ABS, and CDO squareds (CDOs of ABS that hold CDOs as collateral) and credit 
BIS Review 14/2009 
 1
derivatives. Only too late was it understood that the prices of these instruments move in a 
highly non linear fashion in response to falling credit quality in the tranches underlying the 
securities. When that began to happen, moreover, there was little or no liquidity in markets 
where  these  instruments  were  traded.  Opacity  was  also  a  problem  insofar  as  the  banking 
system was concerned because such instruments were often not accounted for on balance 
sheet but were issued indirectly through special purpose vehicles.  
At the same time, the activities of financial institutions became much more closely intertwined 
with  financial  markets.  There  was  a  blurring  of  distinctions  between  different  types  of 
institutions and a shift in their relative sizes within the financial system. Banks moved beyond 
their traditional role as deposit takers and lenders to offer a much broader range of financial 
products, including funds management and insurance. The growth of securitisation markets 
(until  recently)  enabled  non  bank  financial  institutions  to  play  a  greater  role  in  credit 
provision, and fostered the expansion of the so-called “shadow banking system”. 
Financial  institutions  also  became  much  more  reliant  on  markets  for  their  own  risk 
management and funding, and in some cases found that disruptions in financial markets had 
a serious impact on their ability to operate. For example, in the United Kingdom, Northern 
Rock’s  heavy  reliance  on  securitisation,  and  its  inability  to  find  an  alternative  source  of 
funding  when  this  market  closed,  was  instrumental  in  its  need  for  official  support  and 
subsequent nationalisation. Similarly, disruptions to markets for credit default swaps, or even 
simple foreign currency swaps, had a significant impact on the operations of institutions that 
relied on these markets to hedge their exposures and manage funding.  
Globalisation has also been important, with much economic and financial activity increasingly 
organised on a transnational basis. Hence, there is much greater interdependence between 
national financial systems – and one of the remarkable features of the recent global turmoil 
has been the speed at which problems have spread across borders at critical moments. 
This  is  true not  only  of  financial  difficulties,  by  the  way,  but  also  of  the  effects  on  the  real 
economy.  Modern  management  of  inventories  and  shipments  has  probably  transmitted 
weaker demand back up through the production chain, across countries, all the way to the 
raw  materials  sector  faster  than  in  the  past.  (This  should,  of  course,  be  stabilising  in  the 
sense that it prevents the old fashioned inventory cycle amplifying the effects of the swings in 
demand.) The slump in trade has also been exacerbated by dislocation in trade credit, which 
is but another manifestation of counterparty risk. 
But something more than just the usual effect of lower US demand via trade channels has 
been  at  work.  The  ubiquity  of  access  to  instantaneous  “news”  –  from  globalised  news 
organisations and via the screens on our desks, CNN and so on – and the pace at which 
households  and  businesses  adjusted  their  expectations  and  behaviour  based  on  this  new 
information  was  surely  a  big  part  of  the  explanation  for  the  highly  synchronised  slump  in 
demand around the world during the final few months of 2008.  
I suspect that economists will debate for years ahead the nature of what has clearly been a 
common shock to all countries. My reading of the episode is that the extraordinary financial 
events of September and October 2008 – several large financial failures, large scale rescues 
of  major  institutions,  enough  incipient  systemic  concerns  about  banking  systems  to  lead 
governments to issue guarantees, investor panic on share markets – were all observed in 
real time by households and businesses right around the world. This caused a collapse of 
confidence, a disengagement from financial and business activity and a much more cautious 
attitude to spending. It has had very large effects on the real economies of most countries. 
Recent challenges for the operation of monetary policy 
How then has all this affected the task of conducting national monetary policies? 
2 
 BIS Review 14/2009
Here I will take some liberties and define monetary policy more broadly than just the setting 
of  the  overnight  interest  rate,  and  include  the  full  gamut  of  central  bank  operations  in 
markets. 
The  first  point  to  note  is  the  international  spillovers  of  the  crisis,  stemming  from  the  cross 
border integration I mentioned earlier. The earliest evidence of this was the way higher term 
funding  spreads  in  money  markets  were  observed  in  many  countries,  even  those  whose 
exposures to the problem assets were trivially small (I include in this group my own country 
and some others in this time zone). In many short term money markets, the spreads between 
overnight rates and 90- or 180-day rates rose significantly, even though not as much as in 
the United States, the United Kingdom or the euro area. These spreads reached extremes in 
most  cases  during  September  and  October  2008,  in  the  midst  of  the  turmoil  following 
Lehman’s  failure.  In  some  cases,  turnover  in  money  markets  dropped  sharply,  almost  to 
zero,  for  anything  other  than  overnight  maturities.  An  important  dimension  of  this 
phenomenon was the shortage of dollar liquidity for non US entities trying to fund their US 
asset positions. The pressure this placed upon swap markets ultimately saw them effectively 
close for a couple of weeks during September. 
In response to these spillovers, central banks did two things. First, they adapted their own 
domestic  policies  for  provision  of  liquidity,  responding  to  the  unusual  term  spreads  by 
widening  the  classes  of  assets  in  which  they  would  transact,  being  prepared  to  push  the 
amount of cash in the system higher than normal, lending on a collateralised basis at longer 
terms and in some instances providing foreign currency from their reserves to swap markets. 
Second,  central  banks  stepped  up  their  collaboration  in  recognition  of  the  mutual 
dependence  of  national  financial  systems.  The  Federal  Reserve  co  operated  with  central 
banks in a number of countries to provide US dollar funding against local currency collateral, 
with the central banks in effect acting as intermediaries. This alleviated the US dollar liquidity 
problems. Subsequent further expansions of these facilities in the United States and Europe 
have,  for  all  practical  purposes,  made  the  dollar  liquidity  shortage  a  thing  of  the  past.  (Of 
course, counterparty risk aversion remains to some extent, which would explain the fact that 
term  spreads  remain  higher  than  prior  to  the  crisis  –  but  that  reflects  questions  over  the 
perceived riskiness of the major institutions, rather than liquidity per se.) On top of this, there 
was also the co ordinated interest rate reduction by the G10 central banks in October. And in 
Asia, there have been further developments of bilateral and multilateral swap agreements. 
The second complication for several countries is that some of the transmission channels of 
monetary  policy  are  not  working  normally.  In  the  boom,  optimism  and  the  search  for  yield 
pushed down the risk premia that were built into the interest rates offered to borrowers, and 
this may have diluted the effect of any increases in policy rates on the ultimate cost of funds. 
But lately, this dynamic has worked powerfully in the reverse direction, with sharply rising risk 
premia  diluting  the  effect  of  lower  policy  rates.  The  most  damaging  instances  of  this  have 
been  in  the  United  States  and  the  United  Kingdom,  where  despite  quite  aggressive 
reductions in the interest rates set by the central banks, rates paid by many borrowers have 
not fallen very much until quite recently. In addition, even where interest rates have declined, 
many banks display an individually understandable, but systemically damaging, reluctance to 
lend. 
Perhaps these impairments of the transmission process could be offset, to some extent at 
least, simply by pushing the policy rate further than would otherwise have been the case. But 
by  now,  the  zero  bound  problem,  which  had  been  a  theoretical  curiosum  until  Japan’s 
experiences over the past decade, is being faced also by the United States and Switzerland, 
and  prospectively  perhaps  by  one  or  two  other  countries.  For  this  reason,  so  called 
“unconventional” policy instruments are starting to come into view in some countries. These 
essentially amount to direct purchases of assets by the central bank, so as directly to affect 
the  price  of  that  asset  and/or  the  balance  sheet  of  the  counterparty,  or  to  act  as 
“intermediator of last resort”. 
BIS Review 14/2009 
 3
A third general issue is that the sheer interconnectedness of all of the major institutions and 
markets makes the framing of particular policy interventions aimed at fostering stability much 
more difficult. Because every linkage cannot possibly be known beforehand, the effect of any 
particular measure is almost impossible to predict with much accuracy. 
The broader issue 
The  current  financial  crisis  has  highlighted  some  of  the  risks  associated  with  this  financial 
system complexity – and the complications they bring for monetary policy are far from the 
only  ones.  Those  charged  with  designing  and  implementing  policies  for  prudential 
supervision, market conduct and deposit insurance, among others, are thinking hard about 
how to refine them. 
Obviously, each episode has its unique elements. In this one, the very low interest rates and 
macroeconomic stability of the past decade or so led investors to lower their perceptions of 
risk and allowed a greater range of borrowers much easier access to finance than before. 
Investor optimism and the search for yield provided the demand side background that was 
associated  with  the  development  of  complex  financial  products.  These  products,  in  turn, 
facilitated the build-up in leverage that allowed investors to achieve higher returns.  
The complexity and opacity of certain financial products and financial institutions’ activities 
made  it  difficult  for  investors  to  develop  a  good  understanding  of  their  counterparties’ 
business and their own exposures. There were no long time series of historical relationships 
that  investors  could  use  to  estimate  the  probability  of  default  associated  with  new 
instruments. Further, the new products and changes in the structure of the financial system 
resulted  in  a  tight  web  of  interconnections  between  institutions  and  markets  that  made  it 
more difficult to determine the correlation of default probabilities across institutions. 
Information  asymmetries  were  also  associated  with  incentive  and  agency  problems.  The 
difficulties  of  assessing  potential  losses  and  limited  transparency,  in  the  presence  of 
competition and investors’ search for yield, may have encouraged some managers to take on 
greater risks than would have otherwise been the case. Rewards systems based on short 
term performance added to these incentive problems. The difficulties involved in measuring 
risk meant that, during the buoyant conditions prior to mid 2007, investors were content to 
outsource  risk  measurement  to  credit  rating  agencies.  Even  then,  investors  did  not  fully 
understand the differences between different products with the same rating.  
But  as  important  as  all  the  new  instruments  and  the  various  interactions  between  them, 
markets  and  institutions  have  been,  it  would  be  a  mistake  to  conclude  that  fancy  new 
instruments  alone  were  the  root  cause  of  the  crisis.  Complexity  was  responsible  for 
obscuring the risks associated with certain financial instruments, but many investors, if they 
were  honest,  would  have  to  admit  that  they  knew  that  they  did  not  fully  understand  the 
instruments, yet they were not deterred from investing. 
In the end, the question remains: why were investors willing, eager even, to invest in such 
complex  products  they  must  have  known  they  did  not  fully  understand?  Why  did  some 
financial institutions allow their business model to become so dependent on particular forms 
of market funding? Yes, the complexity obscured risk. But investors and institutions were not 
deterred by that. The simple point, surely, was that there was too much optimism combined 
with too much leverage. That is neither new, nor particularly complicated. I am prepared to 
assert that it will, periodically, recur. Policy makers across a range of endeavours will need to 
keep that very much in view in the future. 
The challenge for the future 
Turning  to  the  implications  for  the  future  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  we  have  seen  that 
financial  system  complexity  and  the  financial  cycle  have  affected  both  the  overall 
4 
 BIS Review 14/2009
environment in which monetary policy operates and the transmission channels through which 
it affects the economy. 
In response, policy makers clearly have to work hard at understanding the effects of changes 
in economic and financial behaviour and the way they affect the transmission channels. They 
need to monitor a wide range of indicators to assess both financial conditions and the impact 
of  their  decisions  on  the  economy.  It  is  also  important  to  monitor  closely  and  respond  to 
developments  around  the  globe,  as  recent  events  have  demonstrated  that  these  can  be 
rapidly transmitted across borders. In addition, monetary policy authorities need to work in 
collaboration  with  regulators  and  those  responsible  for  financial  stability  to  build  their 
understanding of the financial system. 
In the short term, the situation requires flexibility and a degree of innovation on the part of 
central banks, and on occasion not a little boldness. I think most central banks have been 
prepared  to  embrace  those  principles,  without  abandoning  the  long  term  foundations  on 
which credible policy making must rest. 
As  challenging  as  the  current  environment  is,  however,  some  big  challenges  loom  for  the 
longer  term,  once  the  emergency  has  been  dealt  with.  Complexity  and  uncertainty  have 
always been defining characteristics of the economy. Economic behaviour and the structure 
of  the  financial  system  and  economy  are  continually  evolving.  It  will  never  be  possible  for 
central banks or others to work with full information, nor to predict exactly how their actions 
will be passed through the financial system, nor how they will affect the economy. 
The financial crisis may lead to a certain simplification of the financial sector for a time, with 
the  closure  of  markets  for  many  complex  products,  banks  moving  towards  more  narrow, 
traditional business models and the disappearance of some highly leveraged institutions with 
complex business structures. But the global nature of financial activity and the importance of 
markets to financial institutions are likely to remain, and the cycle of risk taking will eventually 
turn. We certainly want this to be the case, in my view. The problem in the next couple of 
years will not be too many cross border capital flows, but too few; not too much risk taking, 
but too little. A retreat into financial autarky and wholesale shunning of risk would be even 
more damaging than what we have seen to date. 
So  the  challenge  in  the  longer  term  is  to  construct  a  policy  regime  that  handles  all  the 
complexity and cyclicality of the system. We need a robust policy regime that can operate 
effectively, on the assumption that we will never have the full picture of the workings of the 
financial  system  and  the  real  economy.  We  need  policies  that  can  be  effective  on  the 
assumption that private financial systems are periodically prone to “irrational exuberance” – 
but without being predicated on the fallacious assumption that regulators will always know 
best. We need policies that steer away from a retreat to the financial repression of the 1940s 
and  1950s,  but  that  have  a  more  sceptical  view  of  the  latest  financial  innovations,  and  in 
particular  maintain  a  much  greater  degree  of  distrust  of  leverage,  in  all  its  forms.  And  we 
need a system that is more robust in the face of occasional financial failures. 
This  is  a  challenge,  of  course,  for  financial  institutions,  prudential  supervisors  and  those 
responsible  for  seeking  to  maintain  overall  system  stability  alike.  Indeed,  these  two 
perspectives have to be married more effectively than they have been to date. Assumptions 
reasonably made at the level of the individual institution when assessing prudential strength 
– say, about the availability and liquidity of various markets – may turn out to be collectively 
invalid. 
In the case of central banks, surely we cannot avoid another look at the question of monetary 
policy, asset prices and leverage. This has been a long running debate – going at least as far 
back as the early 1990s, in my memory. Distinguished scholars have disagreed on the extent 
to which monetary policy should respond to movements in asset prices over and above their 
BIS Review 14/2009 
 5
estimated impact on inflation via wealth channels, etc. Some argue in favour of “leaning into 
the wind” of asset price swings,1 while others eschew that on various grounds, in favour of 
dealing with the aftermath of asset price busts if and when they occur. 
Several chapters have been written in the story, the most recently completed one being in 
the early 2000s after the “dot.com” boom and bust. I think it could be said that, at that time, 
those  advocating  leaning  into  the  wind  did  not  get  enough  traction  –  I  suspect  mainly 
because growth in the United States was fairly easily restarted after the shallow recession of 
2001 that followed the “dot.com” bust. In the aftermath of the excesses of the subsequent 
period, a new chapter is now being written in this discussion. Knowing the next speaker, Bill 
White, as I do, there will probably be food for thought on the topic here today. 
                                                 
1   See  SG  Cecchetti,  H  Genberg,  J  Lipsky  and  SB  Wadhwani  (2000), Asset  Prices  and  Central  Bank  Policy, 
Geneva  Reports  on  the  World  Economy  No  2,  International  Center  for  Monetary  and  Banking  Studies  and 
Centre for Economic Policy Research, Geneva. 
6 
 BIS Review 14/2009
