Mohammed Laksaci: Investment financing in Algeria  
Speech  by  Dr  Mohammed  Laksaci,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Algeria,  at  the  Japan-Arab 
Economic Forum, Tokyo, 7–8 December 2009. 
 Recent economic and financial developments 
1. 
The  deep  and  synchronized  recession  in  advanced  economies,  which  resulted  from  the 
deepening  financial  crisis  during  2008  and  which  rapidly  spread  to  many  emerging  and 
developing  countries,  appears  to  recede.  Indeed,  the  second  and  third  quarters  of  2009 
recorded  the  first  signs  of  stabilization  and  even  some  signs  of  improvement  in  the  global 
financial  situation.  The  massive  public  interventions  in  many  countries  have  contributed  to 
reducing systemic risks and uncertainties in the financial markets.  
However, signs of malfunctioning in the financial sector remain and commercial banks are 
still dependent on exceptional budgetary support and central banks, in the context of gradual 
recovery  in  some  advanced  countries.  Ensuring  sustainable  growth  anchored  to  financial 
stability remains a major challenge. 
The  spill  over  of  the  impact  of  the  global  financial  crisis  and  recession  to  emerging  and 
developing  countries  is  well  established  in  the  first  half  of  2009,  especially  in  countries 
affected by sudden capital outflows in the context of high exposure of their banking sector to 
international financial markets. In response, recovery plans focussed on supporting domestic 
demand  have  been  implemented  in  a  number  of  emerging  countries,  particularly  in  Asia, 
thereby  contributing  to  stimulating  commodity  export  recovery  in  Latin  America  and  the 
Middle-East. 
With limited exposure to international financial markets, Algeria has not been directly affected 
by the global financial turmoil. However, the sharp decline in oil prices over the second half 
of  2008  significantly  impacted  export  and  budget  revenues.  Despite  this  external  shock, 
macroeconomic performance remained robust in 2009 with: 
– 
international 
financial  position  with  comfortable 
strong  external 
reserves 
(US$ billion146, end September 2009 ) equivalent to 3 years imports of goods and 
services, and low external debt; 
the real effective exchange rate around its equilibrium level; 
continued high growth in the non-oil sector, expected to exceed 9% in 2009 against 
6.1% in 2008; 
sizeable savings in the stabilization fund despite the expected first budget deficit for 
several years; 
contained  inflation,  notably  on  account  of  continued  absorption  by  the  Bank  of 
Algeria of the excess liquidity. 
   The strong economic performance in 2009, in line with the performance of the past several 
years,  reflects  continued  prudent  financial  policies,  sustained  efforts  to  anchor  monetary 
stability,  and  progress  in  strengthening  the  resilience  of  the  banking  sector,  which  have 
supported macroeconomic stability since 2000.  
Savings and investment financing structure 
2. 
Following a period of external financial imbalances and related adjustment programs during 
the  nineties,  Algeria  has  entered,  since  2000,  a  period  of  sustained  increase  in  savings, 
leading  to  a  situation  of  excess  savings  over  investment.  Despite  a  situation  of  increasing 
BIS Review 168/2009 
 1
investment  rates,  the  ratio  of  total  savings  to  GDP  reached  57%  in  2008  against  48%  in 
2004, leading to a context of excess saving rates of 13% to 24,7% over the period. These 
developments  have  allowed  sizeable  reserve  accumulation,  particularly 
from  2004 
(US$ billion  43)  to  2008  (US$  billion  143)  as  a  cushion  against  possible  external  shocks, 
including shocks of a “sudden stop” nature. 
Anchored  to  regained  macroeconomic  stability,  a  large  public  investment  program  was 
launched in 2001 (2001–04) followed by a larger one in 2005 (2005–09). Implementation of 
the two public investment programs significantly stimulated gross fixed capital formation, with 
public investments representing 56.5% of total investment in 2008 up from 40.8% in 2004. 
Over  the  past  five  years,  public  investments  (economic  and  social  infrastructure,  housing, 
agriculture  and  water,  others)  amounted  to  US$  billion  80  (representing  51%  of  a  total  of 
US$ billion  156).  It  should  be  noted  that  foreign  companies,  particularly  from  Asia,  hold  a 
significant position in terms of implementation of the public investment programs. 
In parallel, the national oil company (Sonatrach) implemented ambitious annual investment 
plans over the past 3 years, increasing the annual investment envelope from US$ billion 4.8 
in 2006 to US$ billion 8.5 in 2008. For the past 5 years, the ratio of Sonatrach’s investment to 
total investment reached 17.6% (17.1% in 2008). For 2009, Sonatrach’s investment program 
amounts to US$ billion 16.5.  
Investment  of  the  remaining  sectors  of  the  economy  represented  31%  of  total  investment 
over the period 2004–08. In 2008, this ratio was 26.4%, although investment in these sectors 
increased sharply during this year (+37.4%).  
In  the  context  of  structural  excess  savings  over  investments,  the  structure  of  investment 
financing in Algeria over the past 5 years reflects the predominance of self-financing (82.5%) 
on account of the budgetary financing of the public investment programs. 
Indeed, with significantly increased financing capacity, domestic financing has been the sole 
source  of  public  investments  financing,  at  a  time  where  external  debt  was  significantly 
reduced,  notably  through  advanced  repayments  of  nearly  all  public  external  debt  (which 
amounted to US$ billion 13.9 by end 2003). Domestic public debt has also been significantly 
reduced to a level representing 6.6% of GDP in 2008, down from 18.7% of GDP in 2003. In 
addition,  available  resources  in  the  stabilization  fund  amounted  to  US$  billion  59  by  end 
2008, representing a sizeable self-financing capacity which allows continued implementation 
of the investment program (2009–10) in the context of external shocks. 
While  Sonatrach’s  investments  were  partly  –  although  to  a  large  extent  –  financed  on  the 
company’s  own  resources  over  the  period  2001–04,  accumulated  savings  (reaching 
US$ billion 18 by end 2008) have since allowed for total self-financing of the oil company’s 
investments, with investments in 2009 upstream and downstream significantly increasing, in 
view of the important opportunities in the sector and in line with the objective of achieving 
potential capacity. 
Investment in the remaining sectors of the economy have also been, to a large extent, self-
financed  (44.2%  during  the  period  2004–08)  while  financial  savings  of  private  enterprises 
and  households  increased.  The  share  of  bank  financing,  mainly  domestic,  represented 
50.5% while bond issuance covered 5.3% of financing needs.  
Domestic medium and long term bank loans, which have been substantially increasing over 
the  past  5  years,  have  been  oriented  to  investments  in  productive  non-oil  sectors,  notably 
energy and water sectors where investments have significantly increased. 
Anchored to relatively stable and sustainable resources, the development of credit allocation 
has  been  notable,  with  credit  to  the  economy  increasing  by  15.7%  in  2007  and  18.6%  in 
2008. Growth in the credit to the economy in 2009 remained strong (19.4%, twelve months 
increase  by  June  2009)  at  a  time  where  many  emerging  economies  faced  bank  credit 
contractions. Credit to private enterprises and households represents a large share of total 
allocated credit (54 to 55% over the past 3 years). Medium and long term (investment) credit 
2 
 BIS Review 168/2009
increased by 20.9% in 2008 and 12.9% in the first half of 2009, reflecting favorable domestic 
bank financing conditions.  
In  this  favorable  financing  context,  additional  measures  have  been  introduced  in  the 
Supplementary  Budget  Law  of  July  2009,  aimed  at  further  promoting  credit  to  small  and 
medium size enterprises (SMEs), including increasing the maximum government guaranteed 
credit amount. In the same vein, banks are allowed to extend credit to their affiliates up to 
25% of their tier 1 capital. In addition, additional cleaning of past nonperforming loans (NPLs) 
to public enterprises is being completed by the Treasury. 
Increased  capital  of  the  banks  in  2009,  in  the  context  of  abundant  liquidity  and  sustained 
efforts  to  improve  credit  evaluation  and  risk  management,  should  stimulate  further 
improvement  in  banks’  credit  allocation  to  productive  investment  in  support  of  sustained 
growth. In particular, domestic financing available for companies established in partnership, 
as  encouraged  through  measures  introduced  in  the  Supplementary  Budget  Law,  should 
provide  further  opportunities  to  banks  operating  in  Algeria.  Finally,  banks’  financial 
soundness, as reflected in their global capital adequacy ratio (16.54% in 2008), which is key 
to  ensuring  adequate  financing  of  productive  investment,  should  contribute  to  achieving 
growth potential in the non-oil sectors over the period 2010–14. 
Exchange rate regime stability and foreign investment 
3. 
In  the  context  of  the  liberalization  of  the  exchange  rate  regime,  as  part  of  the  1994–98 
structural  adjustments,  the  process  of  convertibility  of  the  dinar  for  international  current 
transactions was completed in September 1997 when Algeria accepted the terms of Article 
VIII  of  the  International  Monetary  Fund’s  (IMF)  Articles.  In  parallel,  the  monetary  authority 
promulgated in 1995 the regulation on interbank exchange market and related exchange rate 
hedging  mechanisms.  The  operational  framework  was  put  in  place  by  the  Bank  of  Algeria 
and exchange market operations effectively started in 1996. 
The  current  convertibility  of  the  dinar  relates  to  all  current  transactions  of  the  balance  of 
payments  (goods,  services  and  transfers).  Regulation  07–01  of  February  3,  2007  on  rules 
applicable  to  current  transactions  with  the  rest  of  the  world  has  clearly  confirmed  this 
convertibility through its Article 3, which stipulates that: “... payments and transfers related to 
international current transactions are free. They take place through licensed intermediaries”. 
Regarding  foreign  direct  investments,  transfers  of  revenues,  profits,  and  dividends  are 
included in the scope of current convertibility. In case of asset sale or liquidation, transfer of 
the proceeds takes place through licensed intermediaries without delay, commensurate with 
Regulation 05–03 of June 6, 2005 on foreign investments, promulgated in implementation of 
Article 31 of the Ordinance on investment development. 
It should be noted that the measures introduced in the Supplementary Budget Law of July 
2009 do not affect the current convertibility regime nor do they affect capital transfers related 
to  foreign  direct  investments  (FDIs).  The  measures  do  not  give  rise  to  any  exchange 
restriction. The objective of the measures is to ensure the traceability of payments related to 
good faith transactions, hence contributing to combating the parallel sector and ensuring that 
banks operating in Algeria effectively fulfil their responsibility in terms of first-level control of 
the transactions with the rest of the world, in line with the terms of their license. 
Algeria remains committed to the stability of its exchange rate regime, commensurate with its 
commitments  in  the  context  of  Article  VIII  of  the  IMF’s  Articles  and  the  Association 
agreement  with  the  European  Union  (EU),  notably  regarding  current payments  and  capital 
movements. 
Foreign  direct  investment  in  Algeria  is  a  relatively  recent  development  and  has  notably 
followed  the  achievement  of  balance  of  payments  viability.  For  the  past  six  years  
(2003–2008), total FDIs amounted  US$ billion 8.7, of which 47.3% from EU countries and 
BIS Review 168/2009 
 3
25.2% from Asian and Middle-Eastern and North African countries. The share of FDIs in the 
hydrocarbon sector in total FDIs, which reached 55% in 2005, has gradually declined to 42% 
on average during the recent years. Non-hydrocarbon sectors which attracted FDIs include 
the  banking  sector,  chemical  industry,  food  industry,  electricity  sector,  water  desalination, 
and construction material. 
The exchange rate policy is conducted by the Bank of Algeria in the context of a managed 
float regime of the dinar vis-à-vis the currencies of Algeria’s main trade partners. 
Since  2004,  with  a  real  effective  exchange  rate  (REER)  around  the  equilibrium  level  as 
determined by the economy’s fundamentals, exchange rate policy is well in line with external 
stability,  the  latter  being  anchored  to  a  notably  strong  net  external  financial  position.  In 
operational  terms,  the  Bank  of  Algeria  intervenes  in  the  interbank  market  to  ensure  that 
movements in the nominal exchange rate do not affect the long term equilibrium of the real 
effective exchange rate of the dinar.  
In  this  context,  despite  high  volatility  of  consumer  prices  and  exchange  rates  in  trading 
partners, including the sharp decline in oil prices in the second half of 2008 (one of the main 
fundamentals in Algeria’s economy), the REER has remained near its equilibrium level and 
the external financial position remains comfortable. 
4 
 BIS Review 168/2009
