Mario Draghi: 2009 World Savings Day 
Address by Mr Mario Draghi, Governor of the Bank of Italy and Chairman of the Financial 
Stability Board, on the occasion of the 2009 World Savings Day, at the Association of Italian 
Savings Banks (ACRI), Rome, 29 October 2009. 
 The new regulation of finance 
1.  
Conditions in the financial markets have been improving steadily since last spring. Banks are 
again raising funds in the private bond and share markets. The risk premium indicators are 
coming  down.  However,  neither  risk  premiums  nor  funding  costs  have  come  back  to  their 
2007 level, and there is no reason to think this will happen any time soon: the market has not 
forgotten that the crisis was the consequence of its own recklessness. 
Nor is it desirable that it should happen. The magnitude of the economic policy response to 
the crisis testifies to the severity of the trauma. Things will not be the same as before, and all 
financial market participants, starting with the banks, would do well to recognize this. 
The Financial Stability Board is proceeding with the design of new regulatory arrangements 
that  can  give  us  a  financial  system  with  more  capital,  less  debt,  controls  covering  all 
intermediaries that may potentially generate systemic risk, mechanisms to limit the cyclicality 
of the financial system, and methods of governance and executive compensation designed 
to reduce the incentive for excessive risk-taking. In a word, a more prudent and more stable 
financial system better able to sustain the economy. 
We need to introduce new rules to improve the quality of capital and to curb the excesses of 
leverage,  including  the  imposition  of  a  leverage  ratio.  There  will  be  major  corrective 
measures to mitigate the procyclical tendencies of the system. Banks will be required to build 
up  a  capital  buffer  during  the  expansionary  phases  of  the  cycle  to  draw  on  at  times  of 
generalized difficulty. It has already been proposed to mandate a significant increase in the 
capital charges on trading activities and exposures to securitization instruments. 
The  Basel  Committee  has  begun  work  on  the  comprehensive  revision  of  the  notion  of 
regulatory  capital.  For  now,  the  orientation  is  towards  a  restrictive  definition  of  core  tier  1 
capital,  which  for  public  limited  companies  should  be  limited  essentially  to  common  equity 
and  reserves.  All  deductions,  under  this  approach,  would  be  harmonized  according  to 
extremely rigorous criteria and applied exclusively to the highest-quality capital component. 
Limited  derogations  to  take  account  of  the  specific  characteristics  of  cooperative  societies 
are under discussion. 
By the end of the year the Committee will present new provisions on liquidity management 
and  supervision,  so  that  banks  can  deal  with  unexpected  market  stress  better  than  in  the 
past and manage maturity transformation more carefully. 
This set of rules will be subject to a detailed impact study in the course of 2010. The rules will 
be phased in gradually enough not to impede the economic recovery. 
In the first few months of 2009 the United States conducted a stress test to gauge the ability 
of  American  banks  to  withstand  adverse  macroeconomic  conditions.  Thanks  to  the 
publication  of  the  results,  which  reassured  the  markets,  the  US  banks  involved  in  the 
exercise have been able to raise some $150 billion on the market since the beginning of the 
year. Some of them have repaid the funds obtained from the government in advance. 
In  Europe,  the  Committee  of  Banking  Supervisors  (CEBS),  in  cooperation  with  national 
supervisory authorities, the ECB and the Commission, recently concluded a stress test of its 
the  worst-case 
own  on 
leading  European  banking  groups.  Even  under 
the  22 
BIS Review 142/2009 
 1
macroeconomic scenario, all the groups were found to have an adequate capital endowment 
(a tier 1 ratio of more than 6 per cent, compared with a regulatory minimum of 4 per cent). 
Some European banks too have carried out capital increases. Some have repaid, or forgone, 
the public funds made available to them for recapitalization. 
Lowering  the  probability  and  lessening  the  impact  of  the  possible  failure  of  systemically 
relevant financial institutions and strengthening the financial system’s ability to absorb such 
shocks  are  now  key  objectives  of  regulators  worldwide.  Once  the  institutions  have  been 
identified, selective measures will have to be drafted to increase their soundness, to limit if 
necessary their size and range of business, to strengthen the authorities’ crisis-management 
capabilities and to reinforce the infrastructure of the markets. Action is also being stepped up 
to shift derivatives trading onto central platforms or regulated exchanges. 
Proposals to this effect will be presented to the G20 within the next few months. 
The new rules on executive compensation presented by the FSB at the latest G20 summit 
apply  to  top  management  and  to  anyone  who  has  the  power  to  make  decisions  with  a 
significant  impact  on  the  balance  sheet  of  a  bank.  They  provide  that  a  good  part  of 
compensation should be variable, dependent on the bank’s performance, but with payment 
deferred for at least three years and in the form of securities, and with a claw-back clause in 
the event of unsatisfactory performance by the bank or the executive. The aim of these rules 
is  to  counter  excessive  risk-taking,  the  pursuit  of  short-term  gain  and  opacity  in 
compensation. They emphasize disclosure and the control function of the board of directors 
and  the  shareholders.  Above  all,  they  extend  regulatory  jurisdiction  to  the  sphere  of 
executive compensation. A first check on their application is scheduled for March 2010. 
In March 2008 the Bank of Italy introduced principles and implementation guidelines on this 
matter that apply to all banks, thus in part anticipating international developments. Yesterday 
additional  criteria  for  application  were  notified  to  all  intermediaries.  The  most  important 
banking  groups  have  been  asked  to  adapt  promptly  to  the  latest  standards  issued  by  the 
FSB and to plan any corrective measures by the end of the year. 
We  are  now  in  a  decisive  phase.  The  determination  shown  by  international  cooperative 
efforts  in  conceiving  and  drafting  new  rules  for  the  international  financial  system  must  be 
harmonized at international level and implemented rigorously at national level. Protectionism 
– above all financial protectionism – is no way out of the crisis. 
The Italian banks 
2.  
The Italian banking system has weathered the crisis better than many others, but we must 
not  lower  our  guard  because  fragility  still  remains.  Italian  banks’  capital  is  above  the 
minimum  regulatory  requirements.  Data  for  June  show  that  the  five  largest  groups  had 
improved their capital positions compared with the end of 2008. Their total capital ratio, the 
ratio of total capital to risk-weighted assets, rose by 0.6 percentage points to 11 per cent; 
their tier 1 ratio rose by 0.7 points to 7.4 per cent. Their core tier 1 ratio – excluding hybrid 
capital instruments and considering only the highest quality components of capital – rose by 
0.8 points to 6.6 per cent. Their financial leverage remained low by international standards. 
The  rigour  the  Bank  of  Italy  has  applied  in  its  prudential  supervision  of  banks’  capital  has 
protected  them  in  this  critical  phase.  A  more  general  revision  of  the  entire  supervisory 
process has been under way for some time: stress tests are an instrument that we now use 
continuously;  specialist  inspection  teams  are  constantly  present  at  the  largest  and  most 
complex banking groups, to analyze specific questions and risk profiles. 
We  must  not  overlook  the  dangers  inherent  in  a  still  delicate  economic  situation.  Credit 
quality is deteriorating rapidly. In the second quarter of this year the seasonally adjusted ratio 
of new bad debts to total loans rose to just under 2 per cent, from 1.6 per cent in the first 
quarter. The increase was especially large for loans to firms (from 2.1 to 2.6 per cent). 
2 
 BIS Review 142/2009
The  effects  of  the  recession  on  banks’  profits  are  already  significant.  For  the  five  largest 
groups, although their operating income held up well, their first-half profits fell by nearly 60 
per  cent  compared  with  the  first  half  of  2008  owing  to  the  increase  in  provisions  against 
credit risk. Since the beginning of 2009, financial analysts have repeatedly revised their profit 
forecasts downwards. Earnings are expected to recover only in 2011, and even then they will 
remain below the results achieved in 2008. 
It  is  essential  that  banks  allocate  a  significant  volume  of  resources  to  strengthening  their 
capital  bases.  They  must  use  all  the  instruments  available  to  increase  their  capital.  They 
have already begun to do so, with public recapitalizations, the recourse to the private capital 
market, and asset sales. 
Italian tax rules set strict limits on the deductibility of loan writedowns from taxable income, 
stricter  than  those  in  force  in  other  major  European  countries.  This  leads  to  substantial 
deferred  tax  assets  that,  looking  ahead,  new  regulations  will  not  allow  to  be  included  in 
banks’  regulatory  capital.  We  hope  that  the  willingness  of  the  Government  to  re-examine 
these aspects of the tax rules, in relation to the performance of the moratorium on bank debt, 
will be translated into concrete measures that will remove this obstacle to the expansion of 
credit. 
The  changes  on  the  horizon  of  the  international  regulatory  and  market  landscape  closely 
concern Italian banks. 
Under  the  new  arrangements  that  will  prevail  at  global  level,  much  more  capital  will  be 
needed than in the past. It will have to be attracted and remunerated in an earnings setting 
that will be constrained by greater competition. This strategic challenge can only be won by 
banks able to improve the quality of their services and increase their efficiency. 
Italian banks have already demonstrated in years past that they can increase productivity. 
Comparisons  made  by  the  Bank  of  Italy  and  the  Bundesbank  show  how  technological 
progress  and  the  achievement  of  economies  of  scale  through  concentrations  fostered  an 
increase in banking sector productivity in both countries in the decade that began in the mid-
1990s. But productivity in Italy, initially lower, grew at a higher average annual rate (about 3 
per  cent)  than  in  Germany,  benefiting  among  other  things  from  the  privatization  process 
under way in that period. 
Italian  banks  must  also  win  another  strategic  challenge.  They  came  out  of  the  crisis 
fundamentally  unharmed;  they  must  turn  this  favourable  position  into  an  edge  over  their 
competitors and a benefit for their customers.  
Transparency and the protection of savings 
3.  
The Bank of Italy is responsible for overseeing the transparency of banking products. This 
responsibility is entrusted to the Bank by law, it is part of the protection that lawmakers have 
established  for  savings:  entered  into  the  credit  circuit,  these  savings  are  the  fundamental 
ingredient  in  the  financing  of  growth.  Without  customer  confidence,  based  on  adequate 
transparency, this mechanism does not work, growth languishes. 
The cost of current accounts 
a.  
The surveys made by the Bank of Italy show that the average cost of bank current accounts 
has been basically stable. The cost varies considerably around the average, equal in 2008 to 
€114. Other things being equal, accounts opened more than two years ago cost more than 
those opened more recently. There is room to improve the conditions to which customers are 
subject. 
BIS Review 142/2009 
 3
The cost of credit facilities and overdrafts 
b.  
The recent legislative measures on the costs of credit facilities and overdrafts have produced 
some of the desired effects: banks have changed the structure of fees, also with a view to 
recouping the lost income from items that have been banned by law. The initial results of a 
survey  we  recently  conducted  indicate  that  the  fees  introduced  this  year  following  the 
legislative  measures  are  generally  less  costly  than  before  for  customers;  nevertheless,  in 
about a quarter of the cases examined, the new fees are higher than those in place at the 
end  of  2008.  Banks  must  rapidly,  drastically  and  definitively  simplify  the  structure  of 
commitment fees. 
Since  August  the  new  instructions  for  calculating  the  average  percentage  rates  for  the 
purpose of preventing usury envisage the inclusion of all the charges borne by the customer 
for the disbursement of credit, including costs that had previously been excluded, such as the 
maximum overdraft fee, where it is still applied, commitment fees and some insurance and 
broking charges. 
For some categories of transaction, the explicit inclusion of these new items has a significant 
impact, producing threshold rates that are higher than in the past and more representative of 
the  economic  terms  and  conditions  applied  to  customers.  This  will  make  it  possible  to 
counter circumvention of the usury thresholds and also to curb the amount of ancillary costs. 
New rules on transparency and correct conduct 
c.  
In July we issued new rules on the transparency of banking services and correct conduct in 
relations  with  customers.  The  use  of  composite  indicators  for  current  accounts  will  allow 
customers to compare the costs of the different offers available on the market; the year-end 
account  statements  will  contain  a  specific 
the 
advantageousness  of  their  existing  accounts  via  the  Internet  or  at  their  bank.  The  cost  of 
credit  facilities  will  be  made  more  comprehensible,  among  other  things  by  enabling 
customers to calculate and compare in advance the potential cost of the overdraft. 
It is not easy to combine simplicity and completeness of information to customers when the 
products offered are diversified and complex. The new rules pay special attention to the less 
sophisticated customers: standardized documents that can be read at different levels; costs 
of services clearly indicated; a “simple current account” for the basic banking customer, with 
a  fixed  yearly  account  fee;  an  all-inclusive  year-end  account  statement;  practical  guides 
showing  consumers  how  to  choose  the  current  account  or  mortgage  that  best  suits  their 
needs. 
to  customers 
to  verify 
invitation 
The Arbitro Bancario Finanziario  
d. 
The Arbitro Bancario Finanziario (ABF) became operational on 15 October when the Bank of 
Italy  appointed  the  members  of  the  three  panels  established  in  Milan,  Rome  and  Naples. 
This  new  disputes  review  body  can  help  to  improve  the  substantive  balance  between  the 
contracting parties and raise the level of satisfaction of banking and financial service users. 
The  ABF  will  examine  the  merits  of  the  intermediary-customer  relationship;  orient  the 
conduct of intermediaries towards higher standards of correctness and transparency; and, by 
well-organized,  efficient  handling  of  complaints  that  is  attentive  to  the  customer’s  reasons, 
give intermediaries an incentive to pursue preventive settlement of disputes. 
Appeals  to  the  ABF  can  be  presented  at  all  the  branches  of  the  Bank  of  Italy;  special 
operating  units  perform  the  function  of  technical  secretariat  for  the  panels,  evaluating 
whether the documentation submitted by the parties is complete and proper, and carrying out 
the inquiry. An information campaign on the ABF is now under way with a dedicated website 
and widespread distribution of informational material for customers.  
4 
 BIS Review 142/2009
In  this  way,  we  are  completing  our  array  of  initiatives  for  the  effective  improvement  in 
relationships  between 
intermediaries  and  customers.  The  Community  Legislation 
Implementation  Law  for 2008  delegates  powers  to  the  Government  for  the  comprehensive 
reordering  of  the  legislation  on  relations  between  banks  and  customers.  The  numerous 
legislative  measures  of  the  past  years  can  be  set  in  a  systematic  framework  that  clearly 
affirms  the  principles  of  consumer  protection,  fills  in  normative  gaps,  avoids  unjustifiable 
disparities in the treatment of similar matters, and strengthens the sanction apparatus. 
As I recalled in my earlier testimony before the parliamentary committee of inquiry into the 
mafia and other criminal organizations, during periods of crisis – when firms and the financial 
system are most vulnerable to criminal infiltration – action against money-laundering must be 
even more vigilant and vigorous. 
Strict compliance with the anti-money-laundering rules is not only a legal obligation; it is also 
vital  to  banks’  reputation.  The  Financial  Intelligence  Unit  and  the  Bank’s  Supervision 
Departments  have  stepped  up 
the 
complementary  relationship  between  prudential  supervision  and  the  fight  against  money-
laundering is being implemented within the Bank’s own organization. Collaboration with the 
judiciary and the finance police continues to be efficacious. 
But  only  if  top  management  itself  fully  takes  up  the  aim  of  combating  crime  can  banks 
establish  the  organizational  arrangements  that  provide  the  chief  defence  against  money-
laundering. 
In  connection  with  the  so-called  fiscal  shield  for  the  disclosure  of  foreign  assets,  an 
interpretative measure is called for to clear up all uncertainty over intermediaries’ obligation 
to  report  suspicious  transactions  and  reaffirm  the  regular  application  of  the  anti-money-
laundering legislation.  
including  at  bank-branch 
their  controls, 
level: 
The role of the banking foundations 
4. 
The foundations have been an anchor for Italian banks. 
They have accompanied them through the worst storms of the financial crisis, strengthening 
their  capital  and  reserves;  they  are  supporting  them  now  in  the  weak  recovery  that  is 
projected.  Many  have  accepted  sacrifices  in  the  short  term,  thus  contributing  to  the 
soundness  of  the  system,  the  ability  of  banks  to  supply  credit  to  the  economy,  and  the 
enhancement of their own investment in the long term. 
The  crisis  has  shown  how  the  foundations  can  go  beyond  the  function  expected  of 
institutional investors, which have an authoritative voice while clients are entrusting them with 
savings to manage, but their voice fades and dies away when savings are withdrawn. 
The  foundations’  voice  does  not  follow  the  ups  and  downs  of  the  markets,  and  their  gaze 
tends to focus on the medium-long term. The crisis has clearly demonstrated the limits of the 
short-term  view,  dominated  by  the  rush  towards  higher  and  higher  returns  and  exorbitant 
management fees, which in general have now fallen. 
Following the important mergers of two years ago, the Italian banking system needs stability 
to meet the management and strategic challenges that exiting the crisis will pose. It needs 
the Foundations to continue to accompany the strengthening of capital and reserves and to 
persevere in the role of shareholders who are present but do not interfere with management, 
which has been the basis of their success in recent years. 
The  Bank  of  Italy  hopes  that  the  Foundations  will  continue  to  demonstrate  the  same 
farsightedness  that  kept  them  tied  to  their  traditional  strategic  values  at  the  height  of  the 
crisis, and that they will be able to take the long view and contribute to the development of a 
sound banking system ready to face the challenges of international competition.   
BIS Review 142/2009 
 5
Overcoming the recession and returning to growth 
5.  
Thanks  to  the  powerful  support  provided  by  economic  policies,  the  world  economy  has 
resumed  growing,  albeit  at  modest  rates  that  vary  regionally.  According  to  the  latest  IMF 
forecasts, world output, after falling by more than 1 per cent this year, should increase by 
around 3 per cent in 2010; the expansion will be fairly moderate in the advanced economies, 
robust in the emerging and developing countries. 
The downward spiral of our economies in late 2008 and the early part of this year has halted. 
We are less certain that a truly lasting recovery is under way, one that rests on more than the 
extraordinary support of economic policies. 
In Italy, industrial production has contracted by a quarter since March 2008 and GDP by 6.5 
per cent; we are back to the level of twenty years ago in the first case, almost ten years in 
the second. But the most acute phase of the crisis is now past: GDP resumed growth in the 
third quarter after falling constantly for over a year. Although, opinion polls have suggested a 
more favourable outlook since the spring, the signals coming from the quantitative indicators, 
particularly domestic demand components, remain weak. 
Household  consumption  decreased  by  2  per  cent  in  the  year  to  September,  owing  to  the 
contraction in real disposable income and the deterioration in labour market conditions. Over 
the same period employment fell by 3.3 per cent (650,000 jobs), while the ratio of hours of 
Wage  Supplementation  to  total  hours  worked  rose  from  1.5  to  10  per  cent  of  total  hours 
worked. Presumably, more jobs will be lost in the closing months of this year. 
Investment fell by 15 per cent in the same period. Firms’ opinions regarding the conditions 
for investing, although less pessimistic in our September survey than a few months earlier, 
do not indicate a strong upturn. 
None  of  the  contractions  in  output  recorded  during  the  various  recessions  that  Italy  has 
experienced since World War II was as large as on the present occasion, and yet it never 
took less than two years re-gain the pre-recession levels. This time, the recovery could take 
even longer. 
Economic  history  teaches  that  recessions  caused  by  financial  crises  are  longer  lasting. 
Today, we in Italy have the advantage of a lower level of private debt than other economies 
and  a  banking  system  that  has  not  been  damaged  directly  by  the  crisis.  However,  we  do 
need to tackle the structural weaknesses of our economy in order to build a lasting recovery 
that is not founded on exports alone. 
A  year  ago,  on  this  same  occasion,  I  stressed  that  the  sudden  worsening  of  the  crisis 
necessitated to introduce measures to support demand and the income of the worst-hit social 
groups, but always with an eye to the constraints imposed by our large public debt. Now, the 
most urgent need is to resume the path of reform to bring the country back, in the years to 
come,  to  a  high  rate  of  economic  growth,  which  is  also  the  best  guarantee  of  financial 
stability. 
Financing the Italian economy 
6.  
There is no sign of a turning point in lending, as yet. In Italy, lending to business decreased 
by  3  per  cent  on  an  annual  basis  in  the  third  quarter  of  this  year;  lending  to  households 
continued to expand, but slowly. The deceleration was particularly sharp in the case of the 
leading banking groups, the main users of the international wholesale liquidity markets. 
The refinancing difficulties experienced by the banks have been attenuated, partly thanks to 
government  support  and  Eurosystem  operations,  and  their  liquidity  situation  is  returning  to 
normal,  according  to  the  latest  results  of  the  weekly  monitoring  exercise  instituted  by  the 
Bank of Italy in the autumn of 2007. 
6 
 BIS Review 142/2009
A difficult economic situation reduces the demand for credit, while its supply also becomes 
tighter.  This  phenomenon  was  very  evident  during  the  worst  of  the  crisis,  but  now  shows 
signs of easing similar to those found for the euro area as a whole in the ECB’s latest Bank 
Lending Survey. 
The reduction of Eurosystem interest rates led, in Italy, to a generalized lowering of the rates 
applied  to  households  and  firms,  similar  in  scale  and  pace  to  the  rest  of  the  area.  In 
September, the average cost of short-term loans to business was 4 per cent, almost 3 points 
lower than a year before; variable-rate mortgages for households was cut by more than half, 
to 2.3 per cent. The average cost of fixed-rate mortgages fell by one point, to 4.9 per cent. In 
some sectors, however, notably consumer credit, the cost of borrowing in Italy continues to 
be higher than in the rest of the euro area. 
In exceptional situations such as the present, variations in creditworthiness are considerable, 
especially among firms. The banks’ ability to make the right selection of borrowers becomes 
crucially important. 
The crisis overtook our productive system at a time when certain sectors were undergoing a 
laborious reorganization, begun in the middle of this decade. This process must now resume, 
more intense and widespread than before, so that the Italian economy can at last make up 
the  ground  lost  over  the  last  fifteen  years.  The  firms  forced  to  break  off  the  process  by 
market and financial difficulties and those pondering whether to begin it must not be deprived 
of the intelligent, prudent and selective support of credit. This is the greatest contribution that 
the banking system is called upon to make in order to re-launch our economy. 
BIS Review 142/2009 
 7
