Shyamala Gopinath: Changing dynamics of legal risks in the financial 
sector 
Inaugural  address  by  Ms  Shyamala  Gopinath,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of 
India,  at  the  Symposium  on  “Changing  Dynamics  of  Legal  Risks  in  the  Financial  Sector”, 
Kochi, 30 October 2009. 
 It gives me great pleasure to be amidst you all today to inaugurate this Symposium. 
At the outset, I may say that this Symposium on “Changing Dynamics of Legal Risks in 
the Financial Sector” could not have been organized at a more appropriate time than now. 
The recent global financial crisis has brought to light various risks. It has to a great extent 
blurred  the  distinction  between  operational  risks  and  legal  risks.  As  they  say,  each  crisis 
opens  up  opportunities  for  learning  and  innovation;  it  is  just  the  right  time  for  the  legal 
fraternity to put on their thinking cap and investigate which of the many risks that culminated 
in the crisis may be identified as legal risks and what legal steps could have been taken that 
would have mitigated its effects. Contextually in the wake of increased financial integration 
and  globalization,  it  is  essential  that  in-house  legal  officers  also  have  an  understanding  of 
legal risks from a cross border point of view. I have no doubt that a Symposium like this in 
which heads of legal departments of various regulators, banks and financial institutions are 
participating  where  they  will  have  an  opportunity  to  interact  with  distinguished  speakers 
having rich experience in the field, drawn from within the country and abroad, will provide a 
proper direction to identify and deal with legal risks. 
As  a  central  banker  with  three  decades  of  experience  I  have  had  occasions  to  deal  with 
diverse operational problems and difficult issues. I have no hesitation in saying that inputs 
received from the legal department of RBI have been very useful. At times one may feel that 
the legal opinion is a bit too rigid and conservative and fails to recognize the dynamics of the 
sector, but in the end we all need to appreciate that legal risks have to be accorded prime 
consideration and addressed. 
in 
legal 
What is legal risk? 
There appears to be no concrete definition for the expression “legal risk” nor do I venture to 
make  an  attempt  at  defining  it  considering  the  complexities  and  variations  in  the  risks 
involved. The Basel II accord covers “legal” risk under “operational” risk.  
Legal  risk  may  vary  from  institution  to  institution  depending  on  the  manner  in  which  it 
conducts its business and the documentation it follows. The legal risks primarily arise either 
due  to  lack  of  clarity  of  the  documentation  of  the  product  or  the  act  of  the  counterparty. 
Change 
and  Court 
interpretations/proceedings  also  result  in  legal  risk.  Legal  risk  includes  risk  of  non-
enforceability of contract or in-correct documentation resulting in the increased probability of 
loss.  Broadly,  legal  risks  may  result  in  (i)  claims  against  institution,  (ii)  fines,  penalties, 
punitive damages, (iii) unenforceable contracts resulting from defective documentation, and 
(iv) loss of institutional reputation.  
Documentation  forms  an  important  part  of  the  banking  and  financial  sector.  For  many, 
documentation is a panacea to the legal risks that may arise in banking activities. But then it 
has  also  been  realized  and  widely  acknowledged 
these 
documentations.  As  a  result  of  lessons  learnt  from  time  to  time,  the  loopholes  in  the 
documentation  are  attempted  to  be  plugged  by  adding  further  terms  and  conditions  in 
loopholes  exist 
environment 
legislative 
changes 
due 
that 
to 
in 
BIS Review 135/2009 
 1
existing  documents  or  by  adding  further  documents  resulting  in  voluminous  and  confusing 
documentation.  In  banking  there  is  no  end  to  innovation  in  documentation  because,  for 
keeping pace with the changing needs and aspirations of the customers, banks have been 
venturing into various kinds of innovative products. Identifying the legal risks that lurk behind 
modern techno-savvy complex transactions and market jargon, is no easy task. 
The starting point while entering into any financial transaction is the legal capacity to contract 
and this becomes complex to interpret in respect of innovative financial instruments, since 
laws or regulators may not have kept pace with financial innovation. 
The  risk  of  loss  due  to  non-enforceability  of  the  contract  in  a  court  of  law  as  one  of  the 
counterparties  lacks  the  legal  capacity  to  contract  was  witnessed  in  the  case  of 
Hammersmith  &  Fulham,  UK.  In  this  case,  the  city  councils  had  entered  into  a  series  of 
interest rate swaps with banks, which turned out to produce major losses for the councils due 
to increase in British interest rates. The swaps were later ruled invalid by British Courts as 
the city councils did not have the authority to enter into such transactions and were found to 
be ultra vires. As a result, the loss had to be absorbed by the counterparty banks. 
Lessons of the crisis 
Some  of  the  key  legal  risks  faced  by  entities  in  the  recent  financial  crisis  related  to 
bankruptcy  risks,  mis-selling  of  complex  derivatives,  enforceability  of  contracts/agreements 
backing OTC transactions across jurisdictions and the hitherto untested risks in the securities 
market – custodial arrangements, repo transactions, tripartite agreements, securities lending 
etc.  Over  the  past  few  decades  the  rising  complexity  of  financial  markets  and  instruments 
had  also  engendered  a  parallel  legal  paraphernalia  primarily  to  manage  the  counterparty 
risks.  However,  this  was  the  first  occasion  that  this  support  structure  was  put  to  real  test 
internationally. I would like to briefly touch upon the key legal issues and lessons thrown up 
by the crisis in operations of different areas of the financial industry: 
One  of  the  key  issues  faced  in  many  jurisdictions  was  the  heterogeneity  of  resolution 
arrangements where the entity under bankruptcy proceedings had operations across many 
countries. Towards addressing the difficulties faced by regulators on this count, international 
efforts are underway for developing a homogenized resolution framework for entities having 
cross-border operations. A tricky issue in this regard is that a common resolution framework 
may be difficult to achieve given the diverse nature and difficulties in carrying out legislative 
changes since each jurisdiction will want to protect its domestic interests.  
The crisis also highlighted the issue of sharing of information among regulators. Countries 
have different arrangements for sharing such information. This becomes more onerous when 
it  comes  to  sharing  of  information  with  overseas  regulators.  As  countries  become  more 
globalised  the  regulators  may  have  to  consider  arrangements  to  share  appropriate  and 
relevant  confidential  information  of  regulated  entities  with  other  regulators  subject  to 
conditions  and  safeguards  within 
individual  countries’  political  and  economic 
circumstances.  
Huge  derivatives  losses  faced  by  corporates  in  many  countries  has  clearly  underlined  the 
need for sound contractual agreements between the banks and clients. More than that, it has 
highlighted  the  need  for  the  providers  of  service,  particularly  banking  services,  to  have  a 
more responsible approach. Banking as a concept essentially rests on trust and confidence 
and no amount of legal remedies can substitute these.  
The  crisis  has  also  brought  to  the  fore  the  importance  of  sound  legal  agreements  with  all 
counterparties, particularly brokers and other intermediaries in forex and securities markets, 
which  essentially  act  as  agents.  It  is  essential  to  ensure  that  these  intermediaries  are 
regulated in a regime with specific provisions to ensure segregation of assets. The same risk 
applies to global fund managers where it is a 3-tier structure with the fund manager further 
the 
2 
 BIS Review 135/2009
having a link with the brokers. It is better to have some guidelines/oversight on the type of 
broker relationships that the fund manager can enter into.  
It is important to ensure that the collateral rights are enforceable under the relevant law and 
that the agreements provide for keeping collaterals out of the bankruptcy provisions – in case 
of bankruptcy, the bankruptcy administrator has the discretion to decide which obligations to 
enforce  and  which  ones  to  write  off  after  close  out  netting  –  if  collaterals  are  part  of  the 
closeout  netting,  then  there  may  be  a  possibility  of  write  offs  as  part  of  bankruptcy 
proceedings. 
The crisis has also underlined the risks inherent in re-hypothecating assets. Where assets 
are  re-hypothecated,  they  are  at  best  difficult  to  identify  and  extract  in  the  event  of 
bankruptcy. At worst, the assets may never be located, leaving clients to stand in line with 
other creditors to try and get their assets. Perhaps this is a challenge to the legal mechanism 
to  protect  the  interest  of  the  original  holders.  This  highlights  the  flaws  in  the  co-mingled 
account  model  also.  Assets  held  in  co-mingled  accounts  can  be  difficult  to  identify  if  the 
prime broker fails, leaving administrators with the task of identifying which assets belong to 
which clients. Some suggest the use of the tri-party collateral management model in which a 
third party sits between the prime broker and their hedge fund or other clients holding the 
collateral in segregated accounts. However, concentration of such repos with only few banks 
aggravates systemic risk. 
I would like to cite another instance of issues regarding re-use of collaterals. In one case a 
bank  entered  into  Equity  Finance1  and  Standard  Securities  Lending  arrangements  with  a 
number of brokers. The securities lent to the bank by brokers were generally obtained as a 
result of the Equity Finance arrangements between the brokers and their clients. However, 
after the collapse of one of the brokers there was dispute about the ownership of securities 
highlighting the loopholes in the agreement entered. 
Indian experience  
Though the financial services industry in India is of a relatively recent origin, there have been 
many tricky legal issues that the industry has faced over the years.  
I would like to refer to one of the early instances where the legality of a market product, ready 
forward transactions, was decided by the Supreme Court in a landmark judgement.  
Ready-forward  (repo)  transactions  were  quite  popular  in  the  market  in  the  eighties.  But 
immediately after irregularities in Indian capital markets in early nineties, the legality of this 
product  was  challenged.  The  Supreme  Court  of  India2  held  that  ready  forward  contract  is 
severable into two parts, namely, ready leg and forward leg. It further held that the ready leg 
is  valid  but  the  forward  leg  is  not.  Therefore  all  the  repo  transactions  were  treated  and 
accounted as outright sale and purchase transactions. The lending and borrowing nature of 
repo transactions has now been captured in the amendment to the Reserve Bank of India 
Act carried out in 2006 by defining repo and reverse repo transactions.  
Another issue is related to legal validity of OTC contracts. Since derivative transactions may 
be  regarded  as  contracts  for  differences,  they  could  be  regarded  as  wagering  in  nature, 
when cash settled. However, under section 18A of the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 
1956, derivatives traded on a recognized stock exchange and settled on the clearing house 
of  the  recognized  stock  exchange  are  valid.  The  uncertainty  with  respect  to  the  validity  of 
                                                 
1   Equity Finance is a form of Securities Lending where the value of the transferred securities is more than the 
value of the cash received in exchange. 
2   B.O.I Finance Ltd. v. Custodian and others, (1997) 10 SCC 488. 
BIS Review 135/2009 
 3
OTC derivatives was removed by amendment to the Reserve Bank of India Act carried out in 
2006 providing for validity of OTC derivative contracts in certain cases. 
Certain legal challenges faced by banks in India 
During  the  Financial  Sector  Assessment  Program  jointly  undertaken  by  he  Government  of 
India  and  Reserve  Bank,  it  was  found  that  insolvency  matters  take  on  an  average  of  ten 
years  for  resolution.  An  instance  of  a  court  decision  posing  serious  ramifications  to  the 
business  of  banks  was  recently  seen  when  the  Gujarat  High  Court  held  that  sale  of  non 
performing assets by one bank to another is not a permissible form of business for banks. 
Though the matter is now before the Hon’ble Supreme Court, considerable time may be lost. 
Similarly, amendments made by certain States according priority to the dues of State over 
those  of  the  secured  creditors  and  the  recent  decision  of  the  Supreme  Court  holding  that 
such State claims would have predominance, has been highlighted by the banks as posing a 
significant  legal  risk  to  them.  The  fact  that  even  security  interests  created  prior  to  the 
crystallisation  of  State  dues  are  not  getting  priority  is  a  matter  of  grave  concern  for  the 
banking sector. The absence of a single point database for verification of security interests 
created by banks/FIs accentuates the legal risk in security interest creation.  
Another  area  where  banks  are  increasingly  exposed  to  legal  risk  is  the  rising  consumer 
grievances  about  the  services  rendered  by  the  banks.  Many  a  time,  the  lack  of  the 
awareness  among  customers  about  the  niceties  of  the  innovative  products  offered  by  the 
banks leads to customer grievances and resultant litigations. In order to tide over legal risks, 
some of the banks have been incorporating suitable clauses in the agreements which make 
the terms therein tilt in their favour. It is not possible to predict how the courts would treat 
these clauses, if challenged by the customers as unconscionable. This makes it imperative 
that the contracts governing such innovative products clearly exhibit fairness in the terms and 
conditions and are transparent with adequate disclosures and not one sided contracts.  
Even though outsourcing of certain activities, by banks has helped customer service, banks 
have to address the legal risks that may arise owing to breach of confidentiality or any fraud 
that may be committed by their agents as banks would be liable for their acts and omissions 
including any misrepresentations to the customers and breach of any law committed by the 
service providers.  
Legal reforms initiated by RBI  
The RBI has been initiating amendments in law to keep pace with the dynamic market place. 
The enactment of the Payment and Settlement Systems Act, 2007 providing, inter 
(i) 
alia,  for  settlement  finality  and  netting,  is  a  very  big  step  in  ensuring  settlement 
finality resulting from multilateral netting. The settlement that has become final and 
irrevocable  under  this  Act  will  not  be  affected  by  the  passing  of  the  order  of 
adjudication or dissolution or winding up under other laws including Companies Act, 
1956 and Banking Regulation Act, 1949. 
Amendments to the Reserve Bank of India Act providing for validity of certain OTC 
derivative contracts which I referred to earlier. 
The  amendments  to  the  Negotiable  Instruments  Act  providing  for  electronic 
cheques and cheque truncation. 
The Information Technology Act providing for recognition of digital signatures and 
consequent amendments to the Indian Evidence Act, Bankers’ Books Evidence 
Act are some of the recent initiatives undertaken in India.  
(iv) 
(iii) 
(ii) 
But there are still issues which are left to be addressed like cross border insolvency issues, 
jurisdictional issues in cross border transactions etc., which would require a concerted effort 
4 
 BIS Review 135/2009
from the international community. It is advantageous to refer to the recommendations of the 
Committee  on  Financial  Sector  Assessment  in  this  regard.  Some  of  the  legal  reforms 
suggested by that Committee are, 
(1) 
Enactment  of  the  UNCITRAL  Model  Law  on  Cross  Border  Insolvency  with 
modifications suitable to India’s needs, 
Conferring statutory priority to the claim of banks and financial institutions in respect 
of  the  financial  assistance  given  to  rehabilitate  a  sick/weak  company  in  financial 
distress, 
Extension of such priority of claim even while disbursing the assets in liquidation,  
National  Company  Law  Tribunal  (NCLT)  to  be  made  functional  for  any  significant 
improvement in the restructuring process, 
Extension of SARFAESI Act to cover security interest in Agricultural land beyond a 
specified holding (for eg. 5 Acres).  
insertion  of  Section  29A  in  Banking  Regulation  Act  empowering  Reserve  Bank  to 
call for information and returns from the associate enterprises of banking companies 
and inspect the same, if necessary.  
Setting up of the Central Registry urgently to have a central and reliable record of all 
security 
institutions  and  other 
entities/individuals  in  respect  of  both  immovable  and  movable  property  by  a 
separate legislation in respect of the Central Registry.  
interests  created  by  banks  and 
financial 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
(7) 
Legal risks for the regulators 
I  am  sure  that  you  would  acknowledge  that  life  of  Central  Bankers  and  regulators  is  not 
enviable  either.  Regulators  also  face  legal  risks.  In  addition  to  being  exposed  to  the  legal 
risks  arising  out  of  international  contracts  entered  into  as  part  of  their  own  operations 
between banking regulators inter se and the risks arising out of domestic contracts such as 
derivatives  entered  into  with  regulated  entities,  regulators  run  the  risk  of  the  regulatory 
measures taken by them for disciplining the errant entities being quashed by the Courts.  
Our experience is that customers filing suits/complaints in courts and consumer fora implead 
RBI as a party to the case for failing to enforce its circulars. The track record of RBI (and by 
implication  the  legal  department)  in  this  regard  has  been  very  good.  Right  from  the  1962 
decision  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  Palai  Central  Bank  case  upto  the  2007  decision  of  the 
Supreme Court in the case of Ganesh Bank of Kurundwad, the action taken by RBI has been 
upheld.  
However, the point is that the exercise of statutory powers by the regulators is not immune 
from judicial scrutiny. The regulator is expected to act strictly within the four corners of law. 
The  regulator  should  ensure  that  the  decision  making  process  is  fair,  bonafide  and 
reasonable  and  the  decision  is  in  accordance  with  law.  Any  dilution  of  these  standards 
exposes the regulator to legal risk which has far reaching consequences on its credibility.  
Some financial transactions or products introduced by financial intermediaries may fall within 
the domain of more than one regulator. There is a need to have a clear, effective and smooth 
co-ordination  among  the  regulators  to  deal  with  issues  relating  to  regulatory  arbitrage,  tax 
arbitrage  etc.  In  India  the  High  Level  Co-ordination  Committee  comprising  Members  from 
RBI, SEBI, IRDA etc. provides an effective platform facilitating coordinated action. 
BIS Review 135/2009 
 5
Role of in-house lawyers 
In  the  present  day,  the  role  of  in-house  lawyers  has  changed  considerably.  They  can  no 
longer confine to their traditional role of giving legal advice keeping themselves aloof from 
the business requirements of the institutions. The role of an in-house Lawyer becomes most 
prominent as they are best equipped to identify and assess “legal risks”. Their specialized 
knowledge and familiarity with the institutional policies enable them to perform this function. 
The  in-house  lawyers  need  to  understand  the  business  processes  and  the  transactional 
intricacies to assess legal risk. They are expected to apprise the management the nature and 
extent of “legal risks” and help the management to take a well informed commercial decision. 
To  achieve  this,  in-house  lawyers  should  not  hesitate  to  obtain  access  to  all  relevant 
information and should involve themselves in the decision making process of the institution in 
a  proactive  way.  They  should  also  have  sufficient  independence  and  a  separate  reporting 
line to the top management in the organizational structure.  
Concluding remarks 
Perhaps  the  bottom  line  in  the  area  of  legal  risk  management  remains  on  the  choice  of 
counterparty  and  the  understanding  of  the  legal  documents.  The  understanding  of  legal 
documents should be crystal clear without any scope of ambiguous interpretation and match 
with  the  requirements  and  objectives  of  the  parties  concerned.  Due  diligence  during  the 
process  of  preparation  of  the  legal  documents  is  actually  put  to  rigorous  test  only  during 
periods  of  crisis.  At  times  of  crisis/distress,  not  only  the  aggrieved  party  looks  at  the  legal 
recourse  for  remedy,  the  defaulting  party  also  looks  at  legal  loopholes  to  get  out  of  the 
liabilities arising out of the transactions or atleast delay the settlement process.  
In the light of various developments in the fast changing financial markets during the recent 
crisis, the importance of Legal Audit in all financial institutions cannot be overemphasised. 
The  objective  of  the  legal  audit  could  be  to  review  the  various  agreements  with  the 
custodians, counterparties, service providers, etc. The coverage of the audit could include all 
the agreements, the legal title to the foreign assets, liabilities under various laws. Thus, legal 
audit is a health check of the level of risk that can arise due to insufficient or inappropriate 
documentation or lack of understanding acts of a foreign land. The legal audit is a means of 
identifying legal risks and suggesting course correction for smoother sails during crises.  
These are some of the thoughts which I felt were relevant to this Symposium organized by 
the Legal Department of RBI in the Platinum Jubilee year of RBI. I have quickly run through 
the  articles  contributed  by  the  participants  which  are  included  in  the  reading  material 
distributed to you and find these very educative and extremely valuable and very important 
points  have  been  raised  and  well  articulated  arguments  have  been  made.  I  am  sure  this 
Symposium will prove to be fruitful for all of us.  
With these words, I formally inaugurate this Symposium and wish it all success.  
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS Review 135/2009
