Ivan Iskrov: Strengthening the regulatory and supervisory capacity of the 
financial regulators 
Opening remarks by Mr Ivan Iskrov, Governor of the Bulgarian National Bank, at the official 
opening  ceremony  of  the  Twinning  Project  “Strengthening  the  Regulatory  and  Supervisory 
Capacity of the Financial Regulators”, Podgorica, Montenegro, 15 December 2009. 
 Dear Twinning Partners,  
Your Excellencies, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
We  have  gathered  here  to  start  the  Twinning  Project  “Strengthening  the  Regulatory  and 
Supervisory Capacity of the Financial Regulators” funded by the European Union. It is my 
pleasure  and  privilege  as  the  Governor  of  the  Bulgarian  National  Bank,  which  is  the  lead 
institution  managing  this  project,  to  express  on  behalf  of  the  management  of  the  BNB  our 
strong commitment to work with the twinning partners during the next 18 months to achieve 
the  targeted  results.  In  times  of  trouble  when  all  financial  supervisors  are  under  severe 
pressure  and  when  many  projects  in  the  financial  sector  tendered  by  the  European 
Commission  failed  to  find  interest  among  EU  member  states,  we  are  committing  our 
resources,  our  best  experts,  expertise  and  knowledge  to  this  project.  The  Republic  of 
Bulgaria  supports  the  European  prospects  for  the  Western  Balkans,  and  Montenegro  in 
particular. We strongly believe that our joint work will contribute to the country’s progress on 
the path of European integration.  
It  is  by  all  means  a  very  ambitious  project  that  includes  more  than  55  activities  and 
benchmarks,  more  than  10  directives  to  be  transposed,  several  legal acts  to  be  prepared, 
and many internal procedures to be created for a better supervision that complies with the 
international best practices.  
This project comes at a very specific moment for the global financial sector. It aims to create 
conditions for long term economic stability and growth by strengthening the regulatory and 
supervisory frameworks of the capital and financial markets and by improving the institutional 
and regulatory capacities of the financial sector regulators to supervise financial markets and 
institutions in line with the EU acquis. Therefore, the objectives of the Twinning Project are 
fully  in  line  with  the  main  lesson  from  the  crisis  –  that  stability  and  growth  cannot  be 
maintained without a stable and well functioning financial sector.  
First,  let  me  present  our  consortium  and  the  project  team.  The  consortium  unites  the 
experience of a Еurosystem central bank (De Netherlandsche Bank) – with a proven track 
record  of  successful  technical  assistance  projects  for  accession  country  institutions  – 
together  with  the  expertise  of  the  Bulgarian  National  Bank  and  the  Financial  Supervision 
Commission, both having the most recent and relevant experience in EU harmonization in a 
new  Member  State.  This  combination  of  experience  is  further  strengthened  by  the  long-
standing  and  successful  cooperation  between  the  consortium  members.  The  advantage  of 
having a consortium is that it offers larger experience and a broader pull of experts from the 
twinning  partner  institutions.  The  three  consortium  members  have  completed  many 
successful  twinning  projects  in  the  financial  sector  and  have  gained  a  sound  project 
management capacity.  
We  have  strongly  committed  ourselves  to  this  project  for  various  reasons.  We  are 
encouraged by the progress achieved by the financial supervision authorities in Montenegro 
in bringing financial sector regulation closer to the EU requirements. Also, there are many 
signs  of  already  built  cooperation  with  the  Montenegrin  authorities  that  need  further 
strengthening. Bulgaria, the Netherlands and Montenegro are in the same IMF constituency 
BIS Review 168/2009 
 1
which  has  created  good  mutual  knowledge  of  their  economies  and  fostered  long-term 
cooperation on financial issues. 
We  consider  our  experience  relevant  to  Montenegro  not  only  because  of  the  scale  of  the 
economy, but also because of the similarities of the supervisory structures. In the accession 
process  we  have  learnt  several  major  lessons.  Bulgaria  did  not  ask  for  any  transitional 
periods or derogations concerning the banking sector acquis communautaire. Furthermore, 
all  EU  directives  in  this  sector  were  transposed  in  time  and  most  of  them  long  before  the 
deadlines. This approach has turned to be a success since the early adoption of the EU rules 
in  financial  supervision  contributed  to  the  smooth  functioning  of  the  financial  market  and 
fostered the stability of the financial system. One of the main keys to the smooth transition in 
the  accession  process  is  the  cooperation  between  the  institutions  involved  in  financial 
regulation  and  supervision.  The  respect  for  the  independence  of  financial  supervision 
authorities and the cooperation between them is an important indicator for the preparedness 
for  EU  accession.  I  would  like  to  emphasise  in  particular  the  requirement  for  institutional 
financial and personal independence of the central bank as stipulated in article 130 of the 
Lisbon Treaty.  
Let me now turn to the challenges ahead of our project. 
First of all, the EU response to the crisis envisages fundamental changes in both the legal 
and institutional frameworks of financial regulation. Most of the EU directives and regulations 
are currently being changed. (Mr. Simeonov will talk about these later) This is a challenge for 
our project, and I would like to suggest that we take into consideration the latest EU acquis 
communautaire in our joint work. That is why we included in our team the experts who are 
members  of  the  EU  committees  and  working  groups  in  the  area  of  financial  supervision, 
including  the  Committee  of  European  Banking  Supervisors,  Economic  and  Financial 
Committee,  Financial  Services  Committee,  Committee  of  European  Securities  Regulators, 
where all these novelties are constructed. This will help the project to benefit from the most 
recent developments in the EU financial supervision policies and legal framework. 
The other challenge is related with the ongoing crisis which calls for an immediate response 
from  the  national  authorities  and  is  of  utmost  importance.  Therefore,  I  believe  we  have  to 
focus our activities as much as possible on helping the Montenegrin authorities in addressing 
the challenges of the crisis. 
Last but not least, our Project will be implemented by 7 authorities – three of them from EU 
member  states  and  four  from  the  beneficiary  country.  The  strong  commitment  and 
cooperation between the partners is a prerequisite for our success. I would like to thank our 
twinning  partners  for  the  cooperation  we  have  already  established,  owing  to  which  this 
project came to its successful start and will further develop to its ultimate success. I would 
also like to thank in particular the Central Bank of Montenegro, for providing the facilities and 
hosting our resident twinning advisor for the next 18 months. 
I wish success to all of you and to our joint project. 
2 
 BIS Review 168/2009
