Lars Nyberg: In the wake of the financial crisis 
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  Nyberg,  Deputy  Governor  of  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the  HQ  Bank, 
Stockholm, 18 November 2009. 
 I would like to start by expressing my gratitude for having been invited to discuss a few of my 
thoughts  about  what  may  follow  in  the  wake  of  the  financial  crisis.  Make  no  mistake,  the 
crisis is not behind us yet. Many balance sheets in many countries must be adjusted before 
the  world’s  banking  system  can  be  given  a  clean  bill  of  health.  But  the  acute  phase  is 
hopefully over, giving us reason to reflect not just over why developments took the turn that 
they did – many others have already written volumes about this – but also over what should 
be done to prevent these mistakes from being repeated. Much of this discussion deals with 
regulation and supervision and, just like after every crisis, many political initiatives are being 
proposed, some better than others. This is what I intend to talk about today. But there is also 
reason  to  reflect  over  the  interplay  between  financial  stability  and  monetary  policy.  The 
current  crisis  has  indisputably  demonstrated  that  monetary  policy  and  financial  stability 
overlap in many important ways that we in the central banks previously may not have entirely 
considered. I intend to devote the main part of my speech to this issue.  
Bubbles and dangerous imbalances  
Rising  asset  prices  are  currently  the  subject  of  intense  discussion  –  in  Sweden,  because 
house prices have started to rise again in the middle of a recession, internationally because 
prices of financial assets in many newly industrialised countries in Asia and South America 
are rising far more rapidly than expected. Is this a problem? Have bubbles already arisen on 
the asset markets? And, if so, what should we do about it?  
Now, to start with, remember that asset prices can rise, and rise quite far, without necessarily 
becoming what is known as a bubble. Even if these assets become overvalued for a period 
of time, reality usually catches up eventually and prices are adjusted without there being any 
serious macroeconomic effects.1  
A bubble is something else. A bubble always includes an element of speculation, based on a 
belief  that  this  development  will  continue  and  provide  continuously  increasing  prices.  This 
belief leads to increasing investments and, consequently, further price increases. Of course, 
the term bubble also suggests the image of something that will eventually burst, be it with a 
loud bang or with a quieter one.  
Financial bubbles are normally built up during good times when growth is high, investment 
opportunities are plentiful, household incomes are developing favourably and the banks’ loan 
losses  are  minor.  For  example,  the  global  economy  saw  record  growth  in  the  years 
immediately prior to the current crisis. Strong economic development can, to a certain extent, 
justify  increasing  asset  prices  and  higher-than-normal  credit  growth.  However,  experience 
tells  us  that  this  development  often  spills  over  into  an  exaggerated  optimism  about  future 
economic prospects, at the same time as awareness of various risks decreases. Investors 
become increasingly willing to take increased risks, without receiving the compensation for 
                                                 
1  
In  practice,  it  is  not  always  so  easy  to  distinguish  between  a  bubble  and  an  overvaluation  caused  by  a 
generally over-optimistic view of the future. For a more in-depth discussion of the term bubble and the manner 
in which these arise, see H. Dillén and P. Sellin, “Financial bubbles and monetary policy", Sveriges Riksbank 
Economic Review, 2003:3. 
this that would be reasonable over the long term. The price of risk has never been as low as 
in the years prior to the start of the financial crisis in the summer of 2007.  
There  are  both  dangerous  bubbles  and  less  dangerous  bubbles.  One  bubble  that  did  not 
have  such  serious  consequences  when  it  burst  was  the  IT  bubble  at  the  start  of  the  year 
2000. While it was building up, it is true that a number of investments were made that did not 
turn out to be viable, and many investors watched their wealth shrink as the bubble burst. 
However, the macroeconomic consequences were not so major. Growth in Sweden flattened 
out for a few years, but never declined. The IT bubble never formed a major problem from a 
monetary policy point of view.  
Dangerous bubbles are those in which a market experiences not only rising prices, but also 
the  use  of  the  underlying  assets  as  collateral.  This  leads  to  the  unsustainable  long-term 
development of the price of these assets, parallel to unsustainable long-term credit growth. 
As these prices increase, so too does the value of the underlying assets, enabling them to be 
used  as  collateral  for  further  loans.  At  the  same  time,  increased  credits  provide  increased 
purchasing power, allowing prices to rise even more. This can turn into a feedback loop that 
is hard to break. The development of housing markets in the United States and a number of 
other countries in the period leading up to the present crisis are examples of such bubbles. 
The Swedish commercial property  market at the start of our crisis in the 1990s is another 
illustrative example.  
A  current  illustration  was  provided  in  last  week’s  Financial  Times  by  the  well-known 
economist  Frederic  Mishkin,  who,  among  other  research,  carried  out  an  assessment  of 
Swedish  monetary  policy  a  couple  of  years  ago.  Mishkin  emphasised  the  importance  of 
making  a  distinction  between  different  types  of  bubble.  Bubbles  are  dangerous  when  the 
underlying assets are used as collateral and fuel an excessive credit boom. However, this is 
not the situation in the world today. On the contrary, the banks are shrinking their balance 
sheets  and  tightening  their  credit  conditions.  Thus  the  asset  price  increases  that  we  are 
currently seeing in a number of countries hardly constitute a serious problem.  
Sooner or later, bubbles burst and, sooner or later, financial imbalances are corrected. The 
problem is that it is very difficult to predict exactly when this will happen. As we know, asset 
prices can increase relatively rapidly for many years, perhaps as long as a decade, before a 
bubble  arises  and  bursts.  Individuals  expressing  concern  over  the  build-up  of  worrying 
financial imbalances are often regarded as whining pessimists who have failed to realise that 
times  have  changed  and  that  there  is  no  danger  this  time.  I’m  sure  we  all  remember  the 
“New  Economy”  that  everybody  was  talking  about  during  the  build-up  of  the  IT  bubble. 
Technological  developments  had  boosted  long-term  global  growth  to  higher  levels,  which 
was reflected in asset prices. Has anybody forgotten what happened next? However, as has 
been said, no serious macroeconomic problem ever arose from the IT bubble, as it was not 
funded by loans.  
When the correction of a bubble finally takes place, it generally has extensive real economic 
effects,  particularly,  of  course,  if  it  has  been  funded  by  loans.  The  stock  exchange  drops 
sharply, even if no great over-valuation has initially been present on the stock market itself. 
Economic uncertainty and the drop in asset prices mean that consumption and investments 
become heavily subdued. Risk aversion among financial investors increases and the price of 
risk,  credit  spreads,  increases.  The  banks  suffer  increasing  loan  losses  as  the  value  of 
collateral falls and more and more borrowers find that they cannot make repayments. In the 
worst case, the negative interaction between the financial markets and the macroeconomy 
escalates into a financial crisis in which loan losses become so comprehensive that parts of 
the banking sector face problems surviving.  
When a bubble bursts, prices can fall by up to 50 per cent or even more, depending on the 
asset involved and the degree to which this asset has been used as collateral. This fall in 
prices means that the value of collateral decreases and, consequently, the banks start trying 
to  get  their  money  back.  This  may  compel  the  sale  of  assets,  further  forcing  prices 
downwards. The same feedback loop that acted to increase prices during the build-up can 
thus act to push them down during the decline. During the present crisis, we have seen this 
happen to a number of different securities in the balance sheets of many international banks 
and investors.  
Monetary policy consequences  
So  what  does  a  bubble  imply  for  monetary  policy?  Increases  in  credit  growth  and  asset 
prices  stimulate  consumption  and  investments  and  increase  aggregated  demand  in  the 
economy. The economic overheating arising as financial imbalances are built up thus often 
leads to real imbalances in the form of strains on resource utilisation, which, in turn, lead to 
increasing  inflation.  In  such  a  situation,  it  is  natural  for  monetary  policy  to  be  tightened.  A 
tighter monetary policy in the form of higher interest rates naturally serves to counteract the 
build-up of bubbles, as lending becomes more expensive. However, experience tells us that 
increased interest rates are seldom enough to break the trend. Optimism can be such that 
investors are glad to pay the extra interest costs or to accept a correspondingly lower return 
on assets, as they are convinced that prices will continue to rise. For example, in Sweden in 
1989,  the  direct  yield  requirement  on  the  commercial  property  market  lay  at  around  4  per 
cent, while a risk-free five-year government bond had a return of up to 12 per cent. So the 
market preferred an unsecured property asset to a covered bond with a return of 8 per cent 
more! No monetary policy can defeat that kind of optimism.  
Furthermore,  it  could  be  the  case  that  inflation  is  low  despite  the  strong  economic 
development. If this is the case, monetary policy may need to become more expansionary to 
attain  the  inflation  target,  which,  in  turn,  may  fuel  financial  imbalances.  During  the  years 
preceding the current crisis, increasing globalisation resulted in a heavy dampening of import 
prices, which pushed inflation down and contributed to an expansionary monetary policy in 
many countries. Monetary policy thus fuelled the bubble, rather than counteracting it.  
If a crisis becomes really serious, as is the case with the present crisis, the conditions for 
conducting monetary policy become very difficult. The situation became exacerbated when 
rising  risk  premiums  increased  the  interest  rates  affecting  households  and  companies. 
Falling inflation and inflationary expectations led real interest rates to increase even more. 
Although  many  central  banks  have  cut  their  policy  rates  to  almost  zero,  the  expansionary 
effect of this has consequently not been as strong as could have been desired.  
In  addition,  the  more  serious  the  financial  crisis  becomes,  the  more  poorly  the  financial 
markets function. This, in turn, means that monetary policy becomes less effective, that is to 
say  that  changes  in  the  policy  rate  have  less  effect  on  the  economy  than  is  normally  the 
case.  Developments  in  the  present  crisis  provide  a  good  illustration  of  this  phenomenon. 
Many central banks have experienced that changes in the policy rate have not at all had the 
same effect on demand that they have normally. In other words, the transmission mechanism 
between policy rate and the real economy has ceased to function normally.  
During the crisis, parts of the world were affected by an acute credit crunch, entailing that 
fully creditworthy companies encountered difficulty in obtaining credit due to a lack of capital 
in  the  bank  sector.  This,  if  anything,  has  been  characteristic  for  this  crisis,  having  clear 
consequences for the real economy, including the heavy decline in world trade. The credit 
crunch came to be and to remain a monetary policy problem in many countries as the supply 
of credits frequently became more or less insensitive to interest rate changes.  
In  Sweden,  we  only  saw  the  merest  hint  of  such  a  credit  crunch.  For  a  period  during  the 
winter,  major  Swedish  companies  encountered  difficulty  in  obtaining  funding  on  the 
international  credit  markets  and  so  turned  to  the  Swedish  banks,  with  the  result  that  they 
squeezed  out  smaller  companies,  to  a  certain  degree.  The  Swedish  economy,  which  is 
strongly dependent on exports, was also hit hard by the collapse of world trade. Many foreign 
companies  reduced  their  investment  levels  in  order  to  deal  with  their  liquidity  problems, 
which subdued demand for Swedish export goods.  
Some lessons from the crisis  
What lessons can be learned and what do these lessons mean in terms of economic policy 
and the actions of the central banks in the future? Here are a few thoughts, although the list 
is far from exhaustive.  
There  are  serious  shortcomings  in  regulation  and  supervision.  This  is  entirely  evident, 
forming the subject of intensive discussions among politicians and in the media. It is beyond 
the scope of this speech to provide a comprehensive account, so I will make do with pointing 
out a couple of the overall problems.  
One  main  problem  has  been  that  banks  and  other  financial  institutions  have  had  too  little 
capital in relation to the risks they have taken in their balance sheets, whether these risks 
consisted of traditional lending, the holding of various hard-to-value securities or large short-
term  positions  taken  when  trading.  This  meant  that  many  financial  companies,  for  many 
years, were able to provide high returns on equity, higher than in most other industries. But 
when the crisis came, capital was insufficient, forcing a number of governments to contribute 
tax revenues to prevent a collapse of the financial system.  
At present, intensive work is underway in various international forums, above all in the Basel 
Committee, to develop new regulations covering the amount of capital a bank must hold in 
relation to its commitments. Capital adequacy requirements will be placed on liquidity risks, 
which previously lay outside such regulations,  but this is only one of many areas in which 
capital requirements will be strengthened. New forms for equity are also being discussed, for 
example bond loans that, in the event of a crisis – but without requiring the bank to cancel 
payments – can automatically be converted into contingent capital.  
Another  problem  has  been  that  the  supervisory  structure,  which  has  generally  been 
concentrated around the individual banks, missed the risks building up in the financial system 
as a whole. One example of this has been the tremendous growth of credit derivatives over 
the  last  decade,  which,  together  with  the  emergence  of  complicated  and  hard-to-value 
structured products, have been given much of the blame for causing the crisis to develop in 
such  a  serious  direction.  An  immediate  example  for  us  is  the  lending  in  euro  in  the  Baltic 
countries, whose exchange rates are tied to the euro, but where the fiscal policy framework, 
at least in a couple of countries, has turned out to be weak.  
This problem is also being discussed intensively in many places around the world. In terms 
of  European  cooperation,  supervision  will  be  given  a  new  structure,  based  on  proposals 
presented by the European Commission last summer. One element of this proposal is the 
creation  of  a  European  risk  board,  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB),  in  which 
central  banks  and  supervisory  authorities  will  meet  to  discuss  exactly  the  kind  of  overall 
systemic risks that were overlooked in the run-up to the present crisis. Another element is the 
upgrading of the three supervisory committees in which all European supervisory authorities 
collaborate  into  European  authorities  with  somewhat  greater  independence  and  more 
widespread authority than previously. All of this will hopefully be agreed upon by the finance 
ministers in December of this year, while Sweden still holds the Presidency of the EU.2
The costs of financial crises are greater than was previously believed. The present crisis has 
shown  that  the  world’s  financial  markets  are  more  strongly  interlinked  than  there  has 
previously  been  reason  to  believe.  Who  would  have  thought  that  the  collapse  of  a  US 
                                                 
2   This  issue  was  discussed  in  more  depth  in  my  speech  “Towards  a  new  European  supervisory  structure”, 
recently held at SIFMA’s Annual Meeting in New York on 27 October. 
investment  bank  would  cause  the entire  world’s  credit systems  to  break  down?  A  national 
financial crisis can rapidly spread across the entire world if, for example, the value of certain 
assets starts to be brought into question and it is not known in which balance sheet these 
assets have been hidden. The difficulties monetary policy is faced with when markets cease 
functioning normally has also been underestimated, despite previous experiences from, for 
instance, Japan.  
Monetary  policy  and  financial  stability  overlap  in  several  areas.  Following  the  past  year’s 
dramatic  economic  developments,  it  should  be  evident  that  insufficient  financial  stability 
leading  to  a  major  financial  crisis  seriously  impairs  the  preconditions  for  monetary  policy. 
Strategically important markets must be made to function in order to avoid a total collapse. 
Central banks have thus been compelled to undertake a series of unconventional measures, 
partly aimed at maintaining a functioning payments system and partly aimed at improving the 
functioning  of  the  financial  markets,  thereby  contributing  towards  the  desired  effect  of  the 
expansionary monetary policy. At the same time, there exists greater awareness of the fact 
that  a  monetary  policy  that  does  not  adequately  consider  financial  factors  can  lead  to  the 
accumulation  of  serious  financial  imbalances.  Financial  stability  has  been  demonstrated  to 
form an important restriction to the manner in which monetary policy can be applied in crisis 
situations.3
Monetary policy models must become better at capturing the functioning of financial markets. 
In my opinion, the present monetary policy framework, in which monetary policy is aimed at 
stabilising  both  inflation  and  real  development,  still  works  well.  However,  monetary  policy 
analysis needs to be developed, in certain respects, to enable us to make better forecasts 
within this framework. Above all, the monetary policy models used must better capture the 
roles  in  the  economy  of  credit  markets  and  asset  prices,  so  that  the  consequences  of 
financial  imbalances  can  be  analysed.  Not  only  the  price, but  also  the  availability of  credit 
has been discovered to be relevant. However, these assertions do not mean that the present 
models need to be scrapped. They serve us well in periods in which financial imbalances are 
not a major problem and intensive work is currently under way around the world to develop 
these  models  to  better  incorporate  financial  factors.  Neither  can  it  be  required  that  the 
models  capture  serious  financial  crises.  This  would  probably  require  the  development  of 
special analytical tools and models.  
The role of monetary policy must be developed and clarified. Even if improved supervision 
and  regulation  enable  us  to  reduce  the  risk  of  serious  financial  imbalances  accumulating, 
monetary  policy  will  still  face  difficult  dilemmas.  The  financial  markets  have  a  remarkable 
capacity to develop continually and to find  ways past regulation. Consequently, we cannot 
rely on supervision and regulation always succeeding in preventing financial imbalances from 
arising.  In  the  future,  we  will  certainly  continue  to  see  various  forms  of  bubbles,  in  which 
asset prices increase in a manner that is not sustainable over the long term, together with a 
rapid  growth  in  credit.  In  such  cases,  the  central  banks  must  take  a  position  regarding 
whether and to which extent monetary policy should consider this phenomenon.  
The debate regarding the extent to which monetary policy should attempt to counteract the 
unsustainable development of credit growth and asset prices – a policy often called “leaning 
against the wind” – has been spurred by the current crisis. Those who have doubts about 
such a policy maintain that it may entail an unnecessarily tight monetary policy, with costs in 
the  form  of  a  low  utilisation  of  resources  and  low  inflation,  at  the  same  time  as  monetary 
policy is deemed to be a blunt instrument to use against financial imbalances. According to 
this  assessment,  it  would  require  excessively  large  and  costly  interest  rate  increases  to 
prevent  these  imbalances  from  arising.  Such  imbalances,  of  course,  frequently  build  up  in 
                                                 
3   Lars E.O. Svensson discusses this in more depth in his speech ”Flexible inflation targeting: Lessons from the 
Financial Crisis”, held on 21 September 2009 at De Nederlansche Bank, Amsterdam. 
times of great optimism and excessive future confidence, and, in such a situation, increased 
interest rates may have a limited effect on lending and asset prices.  
It  is  entirely  possible  –  and,  in  my  opinion,  perhaps  even  likely  –  that  this  assessment  is 
correct, but I would like to emphasise that there exists a significant degree of uncertainty at 
this  point  in  time.  So  far,  research has  not  had  much  to  say  about  the  ability  of  monetary 
policy  to  counteract  financial  imbalances.  Naturally,  this  observation  also  implies  an 
argument  against  any  policy  that  strongly  advocates  a  monetary  policy  actively  aimed  at 
preventing financial imbalances.  
However, my view is that, in certain situations, it can be appropriate to attempt to counteract 
financial  imbalances  with  a  limited  tightening  of  monetary  policy.  A  tightening  of  monetary 
policy would be likely to have a restraining effect on credit growth and asset prices. Even if 
monetary policy does not succeed in entirely preventing financial imbalances from arising, it 
can limit their extent. The expected macroeconomic consequences following the correction of 
imbalances should then be less serious, particularly if the risk of a serious financial crisis is 
reduced. The clear communication of the reasons for increased interest rates should raise 
public  awareness  of  the  risks  of  financial  imbalances,  which,  in  my  opinion,  may  have  a 
stabilising effect.  
In this example, monetary policy contributes to more stable inflation and resource utilisation 
over  the  slightly  longer  term,  which  should  be  balanced  against  the  short-term  costs  of 
conducting a somewhat tighter monetary policy. This form of monetary policy thus does not 
entail a deviation from flexible inflation targeting, that is to say a monetary policy aimed at 
stabilising  both  inflation  and  the  real  development.  Neither  is  it  an  issue  of  turning  house 
prices or any other asset price into a target variable for monetary policy. On the contrary, it is 
an  illustration  of  flexible  inflation  targeting  in  which  the  destabilising  effect  of  financial 
imbalances  on  inflation  and  resource  utilisation  are  incorporated  into  the  monetary  policy 
assessment.  
The above reasoning is of a highly principle nature and it would require further analysis and 
better  models  before  anything  more  concrete  can  be  said  regarding  the  manner  in  which 
monetary policy should be formulated when financial imbalances are present. However, I am 
prepared to make a few observations on the subject.  
To start with, there are probably many asset bubbles that monetary policy should not directly 
attempt 
those  not  associated  with  strong  credit  growth. 
Furthermore, Swedish monetary policy can hardly prevent stock market bubbles as these are 
primarily  affected  by 
international  stock  market 
developments.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  credit  growth  were  to  develop  in  an  unsustainable 
manner at the same time as housing prices were increasing rapidly, in my opinion, it would 
be reasonable for monetary policy to take this into consideration, even if short-term inflation 
may be low.  
Such considerations characterised the formulation of monetary policy during the years 2005–
2007,  when  the  development  of  housing  prices  and  loans  to  households  restrained  the 
Riksbank from cutting the repo rate as much as would have been the case if monetary policy 
had  only  been  guided  by  inflationary  assessments  for  the  next  two  years.  It  is,  of  course, 
difficult to determine which role this played in counteracting the development of the housing 
market.  At  any  rate,  prices  undeniably  rose  rapidly.  However,  the  fact  that  the  Riksbank 
clearly indicated that the development of household indebtedness and housing prices were 
not sustainable in the long term and that monetary policy considered this circumstance may 
have played an important role in curbing this development. In that case, this is exactly what 
is meant by leaning against the wind. 
to  counteract,  particularly 
in  particular 
international 
factors, 
The housing market today  
Housing prices have recently started to rise again, which has aroused some attention, not 
without reason. It is undeniably remarkable that housing prices are rising and that the rate of 
increase of the banks’ lending to households has started to grow again, at the same time as 
GDP is very weak and unemployment is rising. However, it seems reasonable to believe that 
this  is  because  it  is  inexpensive  to  borrow  money  due  to  the  low  interest  rates  prevailing. 
Rising  stock  market  rates  and  steadily-growing  consumer  confidence  are  certainly  also 
significant.  
Household borrowing to invest in housing is also an effect we actually hoped to achieve by 
implementing  a  low  interest  rate.  It  is  contributing  to  supporting  demand  and  employment. 
Even so, household saving has risen rapidly since 2007, from approximately eight to around 
13 per cent of disposable income.  
Over  the  short  term,  I  do  not  consider  the  development  of  the  housing  market  to  be  a 
problem. Housing prices in Sweden have certainly risen rather rapidly in real terms too, but 
there  are  good  explanations  for  this.  One  such  explanation  is  the  low  rate  of  housing 
construction  in  recent  years,  while  another  is  provided  by  migration  to  metropolitan  areas. 
The  greatest  price  rises,  without  comparison,  are  found  precisely  in  Stockholm,  Göteborg 
and,  above  all,  Malmö.  Due  to  the  taxation  system  and  other  regulations,  we  have  not 
experienced  the  type  of  market  in  which  households  purchase  homes  as  financial 
investments to then rent them out. It is easier for such markets to develop imbalances and 
become subject to rapid and heavy price adjustments.  
However, in the slightly longer term, there is reason to be vigilant. The increase in housing 
prices and in household debt in relation to income that we have seen over the most recent 
ten year period is not sustainable in the long term. There is thus a risk that an imbalance of 
the type I discussed previously will accumulate.  
At  present,  we  cannot  do  much  about  this  with  monetary  policy.  We  need  to  have  a  low 
interest  rate  for  a  longer  period  of  time  in  order  to  stimulate  the  growth  needed  to  help 
Sweden out of the crisis. At present, it is not the time to counteract imbalances by leaning 
against the wind. However, should this development become cause for concern, there are 
other  means  for  making  mortgages  more  expensive  for  households  and  thus  reducing 
demand for housing and subduing price development. One such method would be to require 
greater  mortgage  repayments.  This  would  increase  households’  monthly  expenses  directly 
and  would  thus  be  an  effective  means  of  subduing  demand.  Another  method  would  be  to 
lower the loan-to-value ratio of each property. Both of these possibilities will be open to the 
banks  themselves  when  they  consider  that  there  exists  due  cause.  But  they  are  also 
measures  that  Finansinspektionen  can  prescribe  if  it  is  deemed  that  developments  are 
beginning to be cause for concern. In its recently-published risk report, Finansinspektionen 
discussed these possibilities. We at the Riksbank will make an announcement when we feel 
that a serious imbalance risks accumulating.  
As regards the housing market, I do not believe that the greatest risk is a matter of either 
monetary  policy  or  financial  stability.  The  greatest  risk  is  that  more  and  more  households 
forget that interest rates will be back at normal levels quite soon, which will entail mortgage 
interest  expenditure  of  possibly  three  to  four  times  current  levels  for  those  with  variable 
interest rates. And most households in Sweden have variable interest rates. We occasionally 
hear  from  analysts  or  the  press  that  the  Riksbank  is  not  making  it  sufficiently  clear  that 
interest rates will eventually rise. So let me repeat this once again in clear language, just to 
be  on  the  safe  side.  When  the  economic  upswing  gathers  speed  –  and  the  recovery  has 
already started – interest rates and, accordingly, households’ loan costs will rise very rapidly. 
This should be considered very carefully by those borrowing, just as it should be considered 
very carefully by bank staff handling lending to households. 
