Nils Bernstein: Overview of developments in Denmark 
Speech  by  Mr  Nils  Bernstein,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Denmark,  at  the  Annual 
Meeting of the Danish Bankers Association, Copenhagen, 30 November 2009. 
 The recession in the world economy seems to be over. Most OECD countries are returning 
to  positive  growth  rates.  World  trade  is  slowly  beginning  to  pick  up  again  after  its  sharp 
downturn. 
Turning to Denmark, we currently only have an overview of developments in the first half of 
the year. We still don’t have a full picture of how things have evolved since the early summer, 
but  in  the  assessment of  Danmarks  Nationalbank,  Denmark  is  also  gradually  beginning  to 
move out of the recession that set in around the turn of the year 2008. 
It looks as if our aggregate output bottomed out in mid-2009 at a level of 7 per cent below the 
most recent peak in 2007. 
Most  forecasts  show  that  the  recovery  will  be slow,  and  in  our  assessment  we  will  not  be 
back at the 2007 output level until some time in 2013 at the earliest. The business sector has 
considerable spare capacity, and unemployment is therefore set to rise for another year or 
so.  
Crucial factors will be consumer spending and the contribution from exports to growth. Right 
now the extensive stimulus packages launched in Denmark and abroad, as well as inventory 
adjustments, are the main factors that have halted the slowdown and are once again driving 
the economy forward. It remains to be seen whether this momentum will be self-sustaining 
once the stimulus packages and expansionary fiscal and monetary policies are phased out. 
The  outlook  for  the  coming  years  is  particularly  uncertain  –  much  can  go  wrong  –  but  we 
believe that the economy will gradually recover.  
One of the current challenges is how to finance the large government deficits resulting from 
the expansionary fiscal policies in Denmark and abroad. If these policies are rolled back too 
late, fear of a debt spiral and inflation may push up interest rates. On the other hand, if they 
are  rolled  back  too  early,  the  financial  markets  may,  once  again,  come  under  strong 
pressure. Further stimulus packages may be required.  
This balancing act is very much about ensuring investor confidence in the sustainability of 
the future economic policy. Lack of confidence will cause interest rates to rise, which in turn 
could  trigger  a  downward  spiral  of  increasing  budget  deficits  and  interest  costs.  This  risk 
could  dampen  growth,  so  we  need  to  have  a  sustainable  fiscal  consolidation  plan.  And  a 
sustainable and credible plan requires agreement – not only on the objectives, but also on 
how to achieve them. 
Now  that  the  financial  crisis  is  receding,  it  makes  sense  to  put  the  course  of  events  into 
perspective – and to draw some lessons from these events. This has been the most serious 
financial crisis since the 1930s, and its causes will be the subject of many thick, academic 
volumes of economic literature. 
At this point I can only say that a strong economic upswing in the USA, initially boosted by 
tax cuts and highly accommodative monetary policy, spread to the rest of the world. At the 
same time, the Chinese economy gained a more prominent role. 
The US economy rode on a wave of optimism and a strong propensity for consumers to buy, 
while the Chinese economy gained strength thanks to impressive export growth and massive 
business  investment.  A  very  substantial  US  current-account  deficit  was  to  a  large  extent 
financed  by  surpluses  in  China  and  in  the  oil-producing  countries,  which  profited  from  the 
BIS Review 156/2009 
 1
strong growth in the world economy. The global financial system had access to ample and 
inexpensive liquidity. The hunt for profit took on many shapes, and risk appetite was strong. 
This also affected us here in Denmark. Being a small, open economy, we benefited from the 
international  upswing.  The  ample  supplies  of  liquidity  in  the  international  capital  markets 
enabled  banks  to  supplement  traditional  deposits  with  foreign  loans  for  financing  strong 
growth in lending. In addition to traditional corporate financing, this period was characterised 
by a boom in construction activity and refurbishment – not least in the housing sector. The 
favourable  economic  conditions  also  meant  that  transactions  in  the  financial  sector 
increasingly took on an international dimension, with acquisitions of banks to an extent not 
previously seen. 
The mounting foreign debt burdens of many banks made the sector dependent on continued 
access to international liquidity. 
The ample and inexpensive borrowing opportunities helped to fuel the upswing. The Danish 
upswing  was  driven  by  exports,  private  consumption  and  investment,  while  government 
spending  also  had  a  procyclical  effect.  The  Danish  economy  reached  its  capacity  limit 
towards  the  end  of  2007,  independently  of  the  emerging  financial  crisis,  and  was  already 
reversing  when  Lehmann  Brothers  collapsed  in  September  2008,  sending  shockwaves 
through the financial markets and triggering the economic crisis. The decisive financial blow 
came from abroad, but we had put ourselves in a vulnerable situation when the crisis struck. 
We cannot prevent new crises, but we can, and must, learn from experience. 
Looking  back  over  the  last  decade  or  so,  it  is  evident  that  developments  in  the  Danish 
property market amplified the economic fluctuations in both directions, thereby contributing to 
the difficulties we are now facing. 
Danish  house  prices  showed  an  almost  constant  upward  trend  from  1993  to  2007, 
particularly in 2005 and 2006. Until 2005, growth in property prices during the most recent 
upswing was to a large extent attributable to low interest rates – especially at the short end of 
the  curve  –  deferred-amortisation  loans,  higher  disposable  incomes,  falling  unemployment 
and the tax freeze. 
But the trend became self-fuelling. In the expectation that prices would continue to rise, new 
homes  were  purchased  before  the  old  ones  were  sold.  Property  became  an  object  of 
speculative investment. Driven by expectations, combined with the economic upswing, prices 
of single-family and terraced houses soared by almost 25 per cent within one year from early 
2005.  The increase  was  even  stronger  in  the Copenhagen  area.  A  hike  of that magnitude 
cannot merely be explained by the underlying economic conditions. Expectations also played 
a role. 
The rising property prices added fuel to the upswing. Home equity increased, and consumers 
gained extra purchasing power. We witnessed a strong expansion in construction activities, 
with clear signs of overheating. 
And  last,  but  not  least,  lending  growth  was  particularly  strong  for  banks  with  large-scale 
commitments to the property sector. 
It is characteristic that in the shadow of property-market developments activities took place 
that are now being investigated by the Danish fraud squad. 
The  rollback  of  these  imbalances  has  amplified  the  impact  of  the  international  recession. 
Declining  property  prices  have  not  only  affected  the  building  and  construction  sector,  but 
have  also  exacerbated  the  fall  in  consumption  when  compared  with  other  countries.  As 
regards the financial sector, it is worth noting that the ailing banks are primarily found among 
those that previously displayed the most aggressive lending policies in the property market. 
What does this tell us? 
2 
 BIS Review 156/2009
In a market economy,  crises can never be avoided. We must accept economic downturns 
from time to time. As a small, open economy we cannot guard ourselves against a sudden 
drop in external demand, reducing exports by almost 20 per cent in six months, as we have 
witnessed. 
But  we  can  seek  to  conduct  economic  policy  that  does  not  in  itself  amplify  economic 
fluctuations. 
We have not been good at that. During the upswing, our economic policy was procyclical, 
contributing to the upward trend. 
Too little was done to curb it. You might say that we put the economy into a higher gear in a 
situation when it was already running at a high speed, thanks to factors such as a low level of 
international interest rates. And, overall, we gave the housing market in Denmark too much 
leeway. 
It is the imbalances created in Denmark and abroad during the boom that have brought on 
the current situation. 
As you know, the government guarantee on all deposits with and loans to banks in Denmark 
will  expire  in  just  under  one  year.  This  scheme  is  the  most  extensive  and  necessary  step 
taken in Denmark when the financial crisis really hit us in autumn 2008. Guarantees of this 
size must inherently be  short-lived, and we  must now prepare for the time after its expiry. 
Don’t  count  on  an  extension  of  the  scheme.  It  will  be  replaced  by  an  increased  deposit 
guarantee of kr. 750,000, and until the end of next year its will be possible to subscribe to 
guarantees for individual loans applying until the end of 2013. This deposit guarantee of kr. 
750,000 will cover the vast majority of all private individuals making bank deposits. 
The temporary guarantee scheme for individual issuances is essentially mainly available to 
large  banks.  Danmarks  Nationalbank  is  aware  that  the  sector  is  working  on  umbrella 
schemes that will enable several smaller banks to make joint issues based on government 
guarantees.  Danmarks  Nationalbank  takes  a  positive  approach  to  these  initiatives  and  the 
possibility of accepting them as part of our collateral basis. 
As far as we can see, larger deposits and other financing have to some extent made their 
way  to  some  banks  under  cover  of  the  general  government  guarantee.  Some  degree  of 
adaptation must be expected when this guarantee expires. For the credit extension system 
overall, it is, however, important that the relevant financial institutions take timely action to 
procure financing elsewhere or reduce their lending surplus. The larger banks must take their 
share of responsibility for restoring the smooth operation of the money market. The financial 
crisis  has  clearly  demonstrated  that  banking  is  not  just  another  sector  of  the  economy.  In 
return for the extensive bank rescue packages I expect the banks to face up to their social 
responsibility  and  role  and  to  contribute  actively  to  the  functioning  of  the  markets  without 
government guarantees. 
The  future  financial  architecture  in  Denmark  also  involves  the  expiry  of  the  legislation 
allowing  “the  Financial  Stability  Company”  to  acquire  banks  when  the  general  government 
guarantee expires. As far as I can see, the government’s acquisition of ailing banks has had 
the  desired  effect,  i.e.  banking  transactions  with  traditional  customers  have,  as  far  as 
possible, continued although share capital and other liable capital has been lost. 
The  Financial  Stability  Company  should  still  be  empowered  to  make  acquisitions  –  but 
without any other guarantee than the statutory deposit guarantee. If the financial system is to 
function  without  excessive  assumption  of  risk,  not  only  owners  of  liable  capital  should 
potentially  be  exposed  to  losses  –  but  also  large  investors  and  other  unsecured  creditors. 
What matters is not whether a bank will survive, but whether its activities will be continued. In 
future  the  Financial  Stability  Company  should,  in  a  specific  situation,  be  able  to  carry  out 
appropriate  restructuring,  taking  the  above  aspects  into  consideration.  In  future  the  sector 
should make regular contributions to the deposit guarantee scheme by way of insurance, and 
in  such  a  manner  that  the  bill  for  aggressive  financial  behaviour  is  footed  by  those 
BIS Review 156/2009 
 3
responsible. Action should be taken in this area, with a view to introducing new legislation 
before the summer holiday so that the scheme can take effect when the current legislation 
expires next autumn. 
Finally, I would like to thank the retiring chairman and the Danish Bankers Association for 
good  cooperation  based  on  mutual  trust  in  a  difficult  situation.  I  would  also  like  to  say 
welcome  back  to  the  newly  appointed  chairman.  I  look  forward  to  continuing  our  fruitful 
cooperation. 
4 
 BIS Review 156/2009
