Ben S Bernanke: Financial regulation and supervision after the crisis – 
the role of the Federal Reserve 
Speech  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Boston  54th  Economic  Conference, 
Chatham, Massachusetts, 23 October 2009. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website.  
 The  theme  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Boston's  Economic  Conference  this  year  – 
reevaluating regulatory, supervisory, and central banking policies in the wake of the crisis – 
is  certainly  timely.  Not  much  more  than  a  year  ago,  we  and  our  international  counterparts 
faced the most severe financial crisis since the Great Depression. Fortunately, forceful and 
coordinated  policy  actions  averted  a  global  financial  collapse,  and  since  then,  aided  by  a 
range of government programs, financial conditions have improved considerably. However, 
even  though  we  avoided  the  worst  financial  and  economic  outcomes,  the  fallout  from  the 
crisis  has  nonetheless been  very  severe,  as  reflected  in  the  depth  of  the  global  recession 
and  the  deep  declines  in  employment  both  here  and  abroad.  With  the  financial  turmoil 
abating, now is the time for policymakers to take action to reduce the probability and severity 
of any future crises.  
Although the crisis was an extraordinarily complex event with multiple causes, weaknesses 
in the risk-management practices of many financial firms, together with insufficient buffers of 
capital  and  liquidity,  were  clearly  an  important  factor.  Unfortunately,  regulators  and 
supervisors  did  not  identify  and  remedy  many  of  those  weaknesses  in  a  timely  way.1 
Accordingly,  all  financial  regulators,  including  of  course  the  Federal  Reserve,  must  take  a 
hard  look  at  the  experience  of  the  past  two  years,  correct  identified  shortcomings,  and 
improve future performance.  
Supervisors in the United States and abroad are now actively reviewing prudential standards 
and supervisory approaches to incorporate the lessons of the crisis. For our part, the Federal 
Reserve  is participating  in  a  range of  joint  efforts  to  ensure  that  large, systemically  critical 
financial  institutions  hold  more  and  higher-quality  capital,  improve  their  risk-management 
practices,  have  more  robust  liquidity  management,  employ  compensation  structures  that 
provide appropriate performance and risk-taking incentives, and deal fairly with consumers. 
On  the  supervisory  front,  we  are  taking  steps  to  strengthen  oversight  and  enforcement, 
particularly at the firmwide level, and we are augmenting our traditional microprudential, or 
firm-specific,  methods  of  oversight  with  a  more  macroprudential,  or  systemwide,  approach 
that should help us better anticipate and mitigate broader threats to financial stability. 
Although  regulators  can  do  a  great  deal  on  their  own  to  improve  financial  regulation  and 
oversight,  the  Congress  also  must  act.  We  have  seen  numerous  instances  when 
                                                 
1   Numerous  studies  confirm  these  points.  See,  for  example,  Group  of  Thirty  (2009),  Financial  Reform:  A 
Framework  for  Financial  Stability  (Washington:  Group  of  Thirty,  January);  Markus  Brunnermeier,  Andrew 
Crockett,  Charles  Goodhart,  Avinash  D.  Persaud,  and  Hyun  Shin  (2009),  "The  Fundamental  Principles  of 
Financial  Regulation),"  Geneva  Reports  on  the  World  Economy  –  Preliminary  Conference  Draft  (Geneva: 
International Center for Monetary and Banking Studies, January); The de Larosière Group (2009), The High-
Level  Group  on  Financial  Supervision  in  the  EU  (Brussels:  European  Commission,  February);  Financial 
Services Authority (2009), The Turner Review: A Regulatory Response to the Global Banking Crisis (London: 
FSA,  March);  International  Monetary  Fund  (2009),  Global  Financial  Stability  Report:  Responding  to  the 
Financial  Crisis  and  Measuring  Systemic  Risks  (Washington:  IMF,  April);  and  U.K.  Parliament,  House  of 
Lords, Select Committee on Economic Affairs (2009), Banking Supervision and Regulation, H.L. Paper 101-I 
and H.L. Paper 101-II, session 2008-09 (London: The Stationary Office Limited, June). 
BIS Review 132/2009 
 1
weaknesses  and  gaps  in  the  regulatory  structure  itself  contributed  to  the  crisis,  many  of 
which can only be addressed by statutory change. Notably, to promote financial stability and 
to  address  the  extremely  serious  problem  posed  by  firms  perceived  as  "too  big  to  fail," 
legislative action is needed to create new mechanisms for oversight of the financial system 
as a whole; to ensure that all systemically important financial firms are subject to effective 
consolidated  supervision;  and 
failing, 
systemically  critical  institution  without  seriously  damaging  the  financial  system  and  the 
economy. In the rest of my remarks, I will elaborate on each of these areas. 
to  establish  procedures 
for  winding  down  a 
Strengthening regulations and guidance 
First,  I  would  like  to  report  on  changes  already  under  way  to  strengthen  the  regulatory 
standards that limit the risks taken by financial firms and establish the capital and liquidity 
buffers that they must hold. Through the course of the crisis, it became increasingly clear that 
many  firms  lacked  adequate  capital  and  liquidity  to  protect  themselves  as  well  as  the 
financial system as a whole. These problems became apparent not just in the United States 
but  around  the  world,  necessitating  an  internationally  coordinated  response.  The  Federal 
Reserve has played a key part in the international effort, working through organizations such 
as the Basel Committee on Bank Supervision and the Financial Stability Board. For example, 
we were extensively involved in the Basel Committee's recent decisions to strengthen capital 
requirements for trading activities and securitizations, and we continue to work with domestic 
and foreign supervisors to raise capital requirements for other types of on- and off-balance-
sheet exposures.2
By conducting the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program, popularly known as the stress 
test, U.S. supervisors took a significant step toward ensuring that our banks hold adequate 
levels of high-quality capital.3 Led by the Federal Reserve, the program evaluated the capital 
needs  of  19  of  the  largest  U.S.  banking  organizations  by  estimating  their  expected  losses 
and  earnings  capacity  through  the  end  of  2010  under  a  more-adverse-than-expected 
macroeconomic scenario. Firms that were not projected to have enough high-quality capital 
under this scenario were required to raise additional capital within six months. The release of 
the assessment results last spring increased investor confidence in the banking system and 
helped  open  the  public  equity  markets  to  these  institutions.  Since  January  1,  the  19 
participating firms have raised more than $150 billion of incremental Tier 1 common equity, 
primarily through share issuances, exchanges, and asset sales, increasing their average Tier 
1 Common ratios from 5.3 percent at the end of last year to 7.5 percent on June 30 of this 
year.4  As  one  indication  of  improved  market  confidence  in  those  firms,  their  subordinated 
debt spreads have fallen by nearly one-half since the completion of the assessment.  
Additional  steps  are  necessary  to  ensure  that  all  banking  organizations  hold  adequate 
capital.  Internationally,  the  Financial  Stability  Board  has  called  for  significantly  stronger 
capital standards, and the Group of Twenty has committed to develop rules to improve both 
the quantity and quality of bank capital.5 The Federal Reserve supports these initiatives. The 
structure  of  capital  requirements  should  also  be  reviewed.  For  example,  to  reduce  the 
                                                 
2   See Bank for International Settlements (2009), "Basel II Capital Framework Enhancements Announced by the 
Basel  Committee,"  press  release,  July  13;  and  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (2009), 
Enhancements to the Basel II Framework (Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, July). 
3   For more on the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program, see Ben S. Bernanke (2009), "The Supervisory 
Capital  Assessment  Program,"  speech  delivered  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Atlanta  2009  Financial 
Markets Conference, held in Jekyll Island, Ga., May 11. 
4   The  average  Tier  1  Common  ratio  as  of  June  30,  2009,  has  been  adjusted  to  reflect  the  completion  of 
Citigroup's exchange offer in September 2009. 
5   See Group of Twenty (2009), "Leader's Statement: The Pittsburgh Summit," press release, September 25. 
2 
 BIS Review 132/2009
tendency of current capital requirements to promote credit growth in booms and to restrict 
credit during downturns, the Federal Reserve has supported international efforts to develop 
capital  standards  that  would  be  countercyclical.  Countercyclical  standards  would  require 
firms to build larger capital buffers in good times and allow them to be drawn down – but not 
below prudent levels – during more-stressed periods. We also are working with our domestic 
and  international  counterparts  to  develop  capital  and  prudential  requirements  that  take 
account  of  the  systemic  importance  of  large,  complex  firms  whose  failure  would  pose  a 
significant threat to overall financial stability. Options under consideration include assessing 
a capital surcharge on these institutions or requiring that a greater share of their capital be in 
the form of common equity. For additional protection, systemically important institutions could 
be required to issue contingent capital, such as debt-like securities that convert to common 
equity in times of macroeconomic stress or when losses erode the institution's capital base. 
The crisis also highlighted weaknesses in liquidity management by major firms. Short-term 
secured  funding  of  long-term,  potentially  illiquid  assets  –  through  repurchase  agreements 
and  asset-backed  commercial  paper  conduits,  for  example  –  became  unavailable  or 
prohibitively costly during the worst phases of the crisis, both here and abroad. In response, 
the Federal Reserve helped lead the Basel Committee's development of revised principles 
for sound liquidity risk management, which in the United States are being incorporated into 
new  interagency  guidance  that  reemphasizes  the  importance  of  rigorous  stress  testing  to 
determine  adequate  liquidity  buffers.6  Together  with  our  domestic  and  international 
counterparts, we are also considering quantitative standards for liquidity exposures similar to 
those for capital adequacy, with the goal of ensuring that internationally active firms can fund 
themselves  even  during  periods  of  severe  market 
instability.  With  supervisory 
encouragement,  large  banking  organizations  have,  for  the  most  part,  already  significantly 
increased their liquidity buffers and are strengthening their management of liquidity risk. 
In  addition  to  insufficient  capital  and  inadequate  liquidity  risk  management,  flawed 
compensation practices at financial institutions also contributed to the crisis. Compensation, 
not  only  at the  top  but  throughout  a  banking organization, should appropriately link pay to 
performance  and  provide  sound 
that 
encourage,  even  inadvertently,  excessive  risk-taking  can  pose  a  threat  to  safety  and 
soundness.  The  Federal  Reserve  has  just  issued  proposed  guidance  that  would  require 
banking  organizations  to  review  their  compensation  practices  to  ensure  they  do  not 
encourage excessive risk-taking, are subject to effective controls and risk management, and 
are supported by strong corporate governance including board-level oversight.7
A fundamental element of effective financial regulation is protecting consumers from unfair 
and  deceptive  practices.  The  recent  crisis  clearly  illustrated  the  links  between  consumer 
protection and the safety and soundness of financial institutions. We have seen that flawed 
financial instruments can both harm families and impair financial stability. Strong consumer 
protection helps to preserve household savings and to provide families access to credit on 
terms that are fair and well matched with their financial needs and resources. At the same 
time,  effective  consumer  protection  promotes  healthy  competition 
financial 
marketplace,  supports  sound  lending  practices,  and  increases  confidence  in  the  financial 
system as a whole.  
In  particular,  compensation  plans 
incentives. 
the 
in 
                                                 
6   See Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2008), Principles for Sound Liquidity Risk Management and 
Supervision (Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, September); and Office of the Comptroller 
of the Currency, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, 
Office of Thrift Supervision, and National  Credit Union Administration (2009), "Agencies Seek Comment on 
Proposed Interagency Guidance on Funding and Liquidity Risk Management," joint press release, June 30. 
7   See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2009), "Federal Reserve Issues Proposed Guidance 
on Incentive Compensation," press release, October 22. 
BIS Review 132/2009 
 3
The  Federal  Reserve  has  taken  several  important  steps  to  strengthen  the  protections 
provided  consumers  and  ensure  that  these  protections  effectively  respond  to  market 
changes and emerging risks. As well-informed consumers are better able to make decisions 
in their own best interest, effective disclosures are the first line of defense against improper 
lending.  The  Federal  Reserve  has  pioneered  the  use  of  extensive  consumer  testing  to 
improve the clarity of disclosures, notably for mortgages and credit cards. However, we have 
learned that even the best disclosures may not always sufficiently protect consumers from 
unfair practices. Accordingly, we have written rules providing strong substantive protections 
for mortgage borrowers and credit card users. For example, last year the Board adopted new 
regulations  under  the  Home  Ownership  and  Equity  Protection  Act  to  better  protect 
consumers  with  higher-priced  mortgages.  These  rules  strengthen  underwriting,  restrict 
prepayment penalties, and require escrow accounts for property taxes and insurance. The 
rules  also  address  deceptive  mortgage  advertisements  and  unfair  practices  related  to  real 
estate appraisals and mortgage servicing. More recently, the Board adopted new credit card 
rules to increase transparency and protect consumers from a variety of unfair and deceptive 
acts and practices, rules that were largely incorporated into subsequent legislation. We are 
currently  working  on  rulemakings  in  the  areas  of  overdraft  protection,  reverse  mortgages, 
and gift cards.  
Making supervision more effective  
Let  me  turn  from  regulation  (the  development  of  rules  and  standards  that  govern  banks' 
practices)  to  supervision  (ongoing  oversight  and  enforcement  to  ensure  that  the  rules  are 
being followed). As I noted earlier, the events of the past two years revealed serious failures 
in  risk  management  at  regulated  financial  firms  that,  in  turn,  underscored  the  need  for 
supervisors  to  identify  weaknesses  in  a  more  timely  way  and  to  more  effectively  ensure 
financial  institutions  remedy  the  problems.  The  nature  and  causes  of  these  failures  have 
been outlined in reports issued by a variety of domestic and international groups in which we 
participate.8 As a complement to those efforts, we at the Federal Reserve set up a number of 
working  groups,  drawing  on  expertise  from  throughout  the  Federal  Reserve  System,  to 
evaluate all aspects of our oversight of banking organizations and to develop strategies to 
improve the quality of our supervision. 
Two  important  themes  have  emerged  from  these  efforts.  First,  they  have  reaffirmed  the 
importance of effective consolidated supervision, particularly at large, complex organizations, 
so that supervisors can properly understand risks and exposures that cross legal entities and 
business  lines.  Second,  we  must  combine  a  systemwide,  or  macroprudential,  perspective 
with  firm-specific  risk  analysis  to  better  anticipate  problems  that  may  arise  from  the 
interactions of firms and markets. To support these approaches, we are strengthening our 
supervisory  processes  to  include  analyses  that  draw  on  multiple  disciplines,  updated 
surveillance  tools,  and  more  timely  information  so  that  supervisors  can  identify  emerging 
risks sooner and respond more effectively. I will address each of these themes in turn. 
First, recent experience confirms the value of supervision of financial holding companies – 
especially the largest, most complex, and systemically critical institutions – on a consolidated 
basis, supplementing the supervision that takes place at the level of the holding company's 
subsidiaries.  Large  financial  institutions  manage  their  businesses  in  an  integrated  manner 
with  little  regard  for  the  corporate  or  national  boundaries  that  define  the  jurisdictions  of 
                                                 
8   See, for example, the President's Working Group on Financial Markets (2008), "Policy Statement on Financial 
Market Developments," policy statement (Washington: U.S. Department of the Treasury, March 13); Financial 
Stability  Forum  (2008),  Report  of  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  on  Enhancing  Market  and  Institutional 
Resilience  (Basel,  Switzerland:  FSF,  April  7);  and  Senior  Supervisors  Group  (2008),  Observations  on  Risk 
Management  Practices  during  the  Recent  Market  Turbulence  (Basel,  Switzerland:  Bank  for  International 
Settlements, March 6). 
4 
 BIS Review 132/2009
in  critical 
functional supervisors in the United States and abroad. For example, a nonbank subsidiary 
of  a  financial  holding  company  may  originate  a  mortgage  loan,  sell  it  to  an  investment 
banking  affiliate  to  be  packaged  and  distributed  as  a  security,  which  in  turn  may  be 
purchased  by  an  investment  vehicle  supported  by  a  liquidity  facility  from  a  bank  affiliate. 
Because  financial,  operational,  and  reputational  linkages span  large  and  complex  financial 
firms,  the  risks  borne  by  such  firms  cannot  be  adequately  evaluated  through  supervision 
focused on individual subsidiaries alone. Instead, effective supervision must involve greater 
coordination among consolidated and functional supervisors and an integrated assessment 
of risks across the holding company and its subsidiaries. 
In recognition of these points, the Federal Reserve Board issued guidance a year ago that 
updated  our  approach  to  consolidated  supervision,  tying  it  more  explicitly  to  the  systemic 
significance of individual holding companies and their business lines, such as core clearing 
financial  markets.9  Strengthened 
and  settlement  activities  and  activities 
consolidated  supervision  also  supports  improved  oversight  of  institutions'  compliance  with 
consumer protections. Indeed, building on a pilot project we launched in 2007, we recently 
announced a consumer compliance examination program for nonbank subsidiaries of bank 
holding companies, as well as of foreign banking organizations.10
Second,  our  supervisory  approach  should  better  reflect  our  mission,  as  a  central  bank,  to 
promote financial stability. The extraordinary pressure on financial firms last fall underscored 
how  profoundly  interconnected  firms  and  markets  are  in  our  complex,  global  financial 
system.  Thus,  any  effort  to  address  systemic  risks  will  require  a  more  systemwide,  or 
macroprudential,  approach  to  the  supervision  of  systemically  critical  firms.  More  generally, 
supervisors must go beyond their traditional focus on individual firms and markets to try to 
identify possible channels of financial contagion and other risks to the system as a whole.  
To  improve  consolidated  supervision  and  increase  the  macroprudential  focus  of  our 
oversight,  we  are  improving  existing  supervisory  tools  and  developing  new  ones.  For 
example, drawing on our experience with the recent capital assessment program, we have 
increased  our  emphasis  on  horizontal  reviews,  which  focus  on  particular  risks  or  activities 
across  a  group  of  banking  organizations.  Although  we  have  conducted  horizontal  reviews 
before, the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program of the past spring was both broader in 
scope and conducted differently than many previous horizontal reviews. It involved a broad 
simultaneous  review  of  several 
included  banking 
organizations,  covering  a  majority  of  the  assets  of  the  U.S.  banking  system.  Examiners 
applied  the  same  stress  parameters  to  each  firm,  highlighting  the  relative  strengths  and 
weaknesses among them. Because we simultaneously evaluated potential credit exposures 
across  all  the  firms,  we  were  also  better  able  to  consider  the  systemic  implications  of 
financial stress under adverse economic scenarios. Building on the success of this initiative, 
we will conduct more frequent, broader, and more comprehensive horizontal examinations, 
evaluating  both  the  overall  risk  profiles  of  institutions  as  well  as  specific  risks  and  risk-
management issues. 
The increased complexity of the firms we supervise and the need to consider the systemic 
implications  of  problems  at  individual  firms  underscore  the  importance  of  increased 
collaboration  within  the  Federal  Reserve  System  itself  among  examiners  and  other 
specialists.  The  Federal  Reserve's  ability  to  draw  on  expertise  from  a  range  of  disciplines 
types  of  risk  exposures  at 
the 
                                                 
9   See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation and 
Division of Consumer and Community Affairs (2008), "Consolidated Supervision of Bank Holding Companies 
and the Combined U.S. Operations of Foreign Banking Organizations," Supervision and Regulation Letter SR 
08-9/CA 08-12 (October 16). 
10   See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Division of Consumer and Community Affairs (2009), 
"Consumer Compliance Supervision Policy for Nonbank Subsidiaries of Bank Holding Companies and Foreign 
Banking Organizations," Consumer Affairs Letter CA 09-8 (September 14). 
BIS Review 132/2009 
 5
was essential to the success of the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program, and it will be a 
central feature of our supervision in the future. For example, we are using a multidisciplinary 
approach to develop an enhanced quantitative surveillance program for systemically critical 
institutions. This program will incorporate supervisory information, firm-specific data analysis, 
and  market-based  indicators  to  identify  developing  strains  and  imbalances  that  may  affect 
multiple institutions, as well as specific firms. Our economic and market researchers will work 
in  concert  with  examiners,  market  operations  specialists,  and  other  experts  within  the 
Federal Reserve System. Their efforts will incorporate periodic scenario analysis so we can 
better  understand  the  consequences  of  economic  shocks  for  both  individual  firms  and  the 
financial  system.  Off-site  quantitative  analysis  will  complement  our  traditional  on-site 
supervision,  but  will  be  independently  conducted  to  provide  an  alternative  perspective  to 
traditional examination findings.  
To support and complement these initiatives, we are working with the other federal banking 
agencies to develop more-comprehensive information-reporting requirements for the largest 
firms.  Traditional  bank  regulatory  reports  have  not  been  sufficiently  complete  or  timely  to 
support continuous monitoring and analysis of the dynamic and diverse business activities of 
the largest, most complex organizations. These firms should report systematic, frequent, and 
consistent  information  on  material  firm-wide  exposures,  funding  and  liquidity  profiles,  and 
operating  performance.  Enhanced reporting  requirements  should  not only  help  supervisors 
identify  potential  vulnerabilities  at  individual  institutions  and  in  the  banking  sector  more 
broadly, but should also prompt institutions to better track their own risks. 
When risk-management shortcomings are identified, even if losses have not yet materialized, 
supervisors  must  hold  management  accountable  and  make  sure  that  weaknesses  receive 
proper  attention  at  senior  levels  and  are  resolved  promptly.  We  will  ensure  that  important 
supervisory  concerns  are  communicated  promptly  and  at  a  high  level,  with  more  frequent 
involvement of senior bank management and boards of directors and senior Federal Reserve 
officials.  This  approach  proved  especially  effective  during  the  recent  Supervisory  Capital 
Assessment  Program  and  in  other  circumstances  where  clear  expectations  for  prompt 
remediation were forcefully communicated to large banking organizations. Of course, we will 
use  the  full  range  of  enforcement  tools  at  our  disposal  as  necessary  to  achieve  important 
supervisory objectives. 
Need for legislative action 
Though  the  Federal  Reserve  and  other  supervisors  in  the  United  States  and  abroad  are 
strengthening  the  existing  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework,  it  remains  critical  for  the 
Congress  to  close  regulatory  gaps  and  provide  supervisors  with  additional  tools  for 
anticipating  and  managing  systemic  risks.  The  recent  financial  crisis  clearly  demonstrated 
that risks to the financial system can arise not only from banks, but also from other financial 
firms – such as investment banks or insurance companies – that traditionally have not been 
subject  to  the  type  of  regulation  and  consolidated  supervision  applied  to  bank  holding 
companies.  To  close  this  gap,  the  Congress  should  ensure  that  all  systemically  important 
financial institutions are subject to a robust regime for consolidated prudential supervision. 
Large, complex financial firms that do not own a bank, but that nonetheless pose risks to the 
overall  financial  system,  must  not  be  permitted  to  avoid  comprehensive  and  effective 
supervisory  oversight.  Consolidated  supervision  of  systemically  important  institutions, 
together with tougher capital, liquidity, and risk-management requirements for those firms, is 
needed  not  only  to  protect  the  firms'  stability  and  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  as  a 
whole, but also to reduce firms' incentive to grow very large in order to be perceived as too 
big to fail. 
To  further  ameliorate  the  too-big-to-fail  problem,  the  Congress  should  create  a  new  set  of 
authorities to facilitate the orderly resolution of failing, systemically important financial firms. 
In  most  cases,  federal  bankruptcy  laws  work  appropriately  for  the  resolution  of  nonbank 
6 
 BIS Review 132/2009
financial  institutions.  However,  the  bankruptcy  code  does  not  always  protect  the  public's 
strong  interest  in  avoiding  the  disorderly  collapse  of  a  nonbank  financial  firm  that  could 
destabilize the financial system and damage the economy. In light of the experience of the 
past year, it is clear that we need an option other than bankruptcy or bailout for such firms. 
A  new  resolution  regime  for  nonbanks,  analogous  to  the  regime  currently  used  by  the 
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation for banks, would permit the government to wind down 
a failing systemically important firm in a way that reduces the risks to financial stability and 
the economy. Importantly, to restore a meaningful degree of market discipline and to address 
the too-big-to-fail problem, it is essential that there be a credible process for imposing losses 
on  the  shareholders  and  creditors  of  the  firm.  Any  resolution  costs  incurred  by  the 
government should be paid through an assessment on the financial industry and not borne 
by the taxpayers.  
Beyond strengthening and extending consolidated supervision and making provisions for the 
safe unwinding of failing, systemically important firms, there remains the broader objective of 
monitoring  and  addressing  emerging  systemic  risks.  Because  of  the  size,  diversity,  and 
complexity  of  our  financial  system,  that  task  may  exceed  the  capacity  of  any  individual 
supervisor. The Federal Reserve supports the creation of a systemic oversight council, made 
up of the principal financial regulators. By combining the expertise and information of all the 
relevant  agencies  and  departments,  the  council  would  be  in  the  best  position  to  identify 
developments  that  threaten  the  stability  of  the  system  as  a  whole.  The  council  could  be 
charged,  among  other  things,  with  monitoring  risk  exposures  that  cut  across  firms  and 
markets; analyzing potential spillovers among financial firms or between firms and markets 
that could lead to financial contagion; identifying regulatory gaps; coordinating the responses 
of its member agencies to emerging systemic risks; identifying systemically important firms; 
and periodically reporting to the Congress and the public about emerging systemic risks and 
recommended  approaches  for  dealing  with  those  risks.  In  addition,  to  further  encourage  a 
more  comprehensive  and  holistic  approach  to  financial  oversight,  all  federal  financial 
supervisors  and  regulators  –  not  just  the  Federal  Reserve  –  should  be  directed  and 
empowered to take account of risks to the broader financial system as part of their normal 
oversight responsibilities.  
Conclusion 
As  we  work  together  to  build  on  the  progress  already  made  toward  securing  a  sustained 
economic recovery, we cannot lose sight of the need to reorient our supervisory approach 
and  to  strengthen  our  regulatory  and  legal  framework  to  help  prevent  a  recurrence  of  the 
events  of  the  past  two  years.  As  I  have  described  today,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  been 
actively  engaged  in  this  process.  We  are  working  with  our  domestic  and  international 
counterparts to strengthen the standards governing bank capital, liquidity, risk management, 
incentive  compensation,  and  consumer  protection,  among  other  areas.  We  are  also 
improving  supervision,  and  giving  it  a  greater  macroprudential  focus,  through  enhanced 
consolidated supervision and through the development of new supervisory tools – including 
comprehensive  horizontal  reviews,  off-site  quantitative  evaluations,  and  more  extensive 
information gathering. We are moving quickly to bring unresolved issues to the attention of 
senior management and requiring prompt responses. 
Regulators and supervisors can do a great deal, but comprehensive financial reform requires 
action  by  the  Congress.  Strengthening  consolidated  supervision,  setting  up  a  mechanism 
(such as a systemic oversight council) to identify and monitor risks to financial stability, and 
creating a framework that allows for the safe unwinding of failing, systemically critical firms 
are among the essential ingredients of a new system that will reduce the probability of future 
crises and greatly mitigate the severity of any  that occur. We at the Federal Reserve look 
forward to working closely with the Congress as the legislative process evolves. 
BIS Review 132/2009 
 7
