Duvvuri Subbarao: Should banking be made boring? – an Indian 
perspective 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Duvvuri  Subbarao,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
International Finance and Banking Conference on “Banking – Crisis and Beyond”, organised 
by the Indian Merchants’ Chamber, Mumbai, 25 November 2009. 
 Introduction 
I. 
First  of  all,  my  grateful  thanks  to  the  Indian  Merchants’  Chamber  and  the  Institute  of 
Chartered  Accountants  of  India  for  inviting  me  to  be  the  Chief  Guest  at  this  year’s 
International  Finance  and  Banking  Conference.  The  theme  of  this  conference,  “Banking  – 
Crisis and Beyond” is relevant and timely. The global financial system has been engulfed in 
possibly the deepest crisis of our time shaking our world view of the financial sector to its 
roots. As attention both around the world and here in India shifts from managing the crisis to 
managing  the  recovery,  the  importance  of  consolidating  the  lessons  of  the  crisis  and 
reflecting them in our forward plans can hardly be overemphasized. Being at this conference 
and sharing some thoughts and ideas with you is therefore an opportunity to which I attach a 
lot of value. 
Calls for making banking boring 
II. 
2. 
Banks have been at the heart of the global financial crisis and bankers are widely seen 
as  being  responsible  for  the  crisis.  Quite  understandably,  there  is  a  deluge  of  ideas  and 
suggestions on reforming banks, banking and bankers. One of the more influential ideas, one 
that  has  generated  a  vigorous  debate,  has  been  the  thesis  put  forward  by  the  noted 
economist  and  Nobel  Laureate  Paul  Krugman  that  the  way  to  reform  banking  is  to  once 
again make it boring. 
3. 
Taking a long term historical view, Krugman argues that there is a negative correlation 
between  the  “business  model”  of  banking  and  economic  stability.  Whenever  banking  got 
exciting and interesting, paid well and attracted intellectual talent, it got way out of hand and 
jeopardized the stability of the real sector. Conversely, periods when banking was dull and 
boring were also periods of economic progress. 
4. 
To  support his  thesis, Krugman  divides  American  banking  over  the  past  century  into 
three phases. The first phase is the period before 1930, before the Great Depression, when 
banking  was  an  exciting  and  expanding  industry.  Bankers  were  paid  better  than  in  other 
sectors and therefore banking attracted talent, nurtured ingenuity and promoted innovation. 
The second phase was the period following the Great Depression when banking was tightly 
regulated,  far  less  adventurous  and  decidedly  less  lucrative  –  in  other  words  banking 
became  boring.  Curiously,  this  period  of  boring  banking  coincided  with  a  period  of 
spectacular progress. The third phase, beginning the 1980s, saw the loosening of regulation 
yielding space for innovation and expansion. Banking became, once again, exciting and high 
paying.  Much  of  the  seeming  success  during  this  period,  according  to  Krugman,  was  an 
illusion; and the business model of banking of this period had actually threatened the stability 
of the real sector. Krugman’s surmise accordingly is that the bank street should be kept dull 
in order to keep the main street safe. 
5. 
The boring banking thesis found an echo in other influential voices. In a speech last 
month that attracted wide notice, Mervyn King, Governor of the Bank of England addressed 
the  moral  hazard  issue:  why  were  banks  willing  to  take  risks  that  proved  so  damaging  to 
themselves and the rest of the economy? The problem, according to Governor King, was that 
financial institutions became too important to be allowed to fail. His solution: restrict banking 
BIS Review 152/2009 
 1
to its traditional “utility” function – performing basic retail financial intermediation of deposit 
taking and lending, and providing payment and settlement services; and hive off the riskier 
financial services such as proprietary trading into a separate entity. In what has come quickly 
to be known as the “utility and casino” model, the “utility” will be heavily regulated and will 
enjoy implicit government guarantee while the “casino” will be left to the discipline of market 
forces. 
6. 
Closer home, another equally influential voice – Dr. Y.V. Reddy, former Governor of the 
Reserve Bank of India – weighed in on the issue. In his Guhan Memorial Lecture last month, 
Dr.  Reddy  called  for  “back  to  basics”  in  banking  and  urged  that  banks  must  curb  the 
tendency towards further financialization of deposits they mobilize and must focus instead on 
lending  to  real  sectors  of  the  economy,  particularly  agriculture  and  the  small  and  medium 
industries, that have limited ability to tap the capital markets. 
7. 
Although  neither  Governor  King  nor  former  Governor  Reddy  mentioned  “boring 
banking”,  in  a  sense  both  of  them  were  calling  for  what  can  stylistically  be  interpreted  as 
boring banking. 
8. 
Krugman’s thesis of “boring banking” is interesting, but also debatable. It raises several 
important  questions.  What  were  the  ills  of  the  banking  system  that  caused  the  crisis?  Is 
making banking “boring” a necessary and sufficient cure to those ills? How do the several 
proposals on the table at the international level for reforming banking measure up to the test 
of making banking boring? And, how relevant is the “boring banking” perspective in India? I 
want to use the platform of this conference that you have so kindly provided me to address 
these questions. 
Ills of the banking system that caused the crisis 
III. 
9. 
Let me turn first to the ills of the banking system that caused the crisis. I will not go into 
an extensive analysis of the causes. I will attempt something much more limited – just give a 
brief synopsis to provide a backdrop for the “boring banking” discussion. 
Glass-Steagall Act, financial innovation and risk transmission 
10.  Many believe that the genesis of the crisis can be traced to the repeal in the United 
States in 1999 of the Glass-Steagall Act which mandated the separation of commercial and 
investment  banking  to  protect  depositors  from  the  hazards  of  risky  investment  and 
speculation.  The  repeal  opened  up  opportunities  for  commercial  banks,  investment  banks, 
securities  companies  and  insurance  companies  to  consolidate,  setting  off  a  wave  of 
innovation.  Complex  financial  products  were  created  by  slicing  and  dicing,  structuring  and 
hedging, originating and distributing, all under the belief that real value could be created by 
sheer  financial  engineering.  The  system  was  characterized  by  opacity  and  dissipation  of 
information  with  no  one  having  a  full  picture  of  the  extent  of  risk,  how  it  was  getting 
transmitted across the system and where it resided. 
Globalization of financial institutions and services 
11.  A  very  striking  feature  of  the  financial  crisis  was  its  global  scope  with  no  country 
escaping unscathed. This should not surprise us. The progressive globalisation of financial 
institutions  and  services  over  the  last  two  decades  has  led  to  a  complex  web  of 
interconnected markets, institutions, services and products. Institutions transcended borders; 
markets  became  accessible  in  real  time  and  financial  services  were  available  from 
everywhere.  In  short  financial  markets  and  institutions  declared  “death  of  distance”  and 
“conquest of location”. And when the crisis came, it showed that globalization meant that no 
country can really be an island. 
2 
 BIS Review 152/2009
Proliferation of quasi banks beyond regulatory purview 
12.  As  the  pace  of  globalisation  and  financial  innovation  gained  momentum,  and 
encouraged by an extended period of monetary accommodation, banks entered into areas of 
activity  that  had  earlier  been  the  preserve  of  non-bank  institutions.  Banks  looked  for,  and 
exploited,  opportunities  to  shift  profitable  but  risky  businesses  to  entities  outside  the 
regulatory purview. To economize on capital requirements, banks developed new structured 
products  to  distribute  the  credit  risk,  they  also  found  new  special  purpose  entities  and 
vehicles to handle them. The structured investment vehicles quickly spawned a vast “shadow 
banking”  network  that  operated  and  thrived  outside  the  perimeter  of  bank  regulation.  With 
few regulatory restrictions and no coordinated oversight, they were able to take on risks that 
they  did  not  fully  comprehend.  And  when  the  Minsky  moment  arrived  turning  the  financial 
mania  into  panic,  the  risks  reverted  to  the  parent  banks  causing  financial  turmoil  and 
economic down turn. 
The moral hazard of “too big, too important to fail” institutions 
13.  The  lure  of  profits  encouraged  financial  institutions  to  expand,  transcending  borders 
and business segments, to exploit economies of scale and scope. And this was facilitated by 
the implicit faith of the authorities in “light touch” regulation. Consequently, what we ended up 
with was large financial conglomerates with footprints across the system. These institutions 
knew that their failure would result in a systemic collapse, and that they would therefore be 
rescued at public cost. This acted as a perverse incentive for them to take on risks that we 
now know were imprudent if not reckless. The moral hazard of “too big to fail” is therefore 
reckoned as one of the prime causes of the crisis. 
the  asymmetric  compensation  structures 
Compensation and perverse incentives 
14.  Finally, 
institutions 
encouraged risky behaviour. The variable components of compensations were anchored to 
short-term profits, were one sided (high in good times and at worst zero in bad times) and 
had little or no risk adjustment. This myopic attitude towards long term risk provided perverse 
incentives  to  bank  managements  to  maximise  their  current  compensations  at  the  cost  of 
shareholders, and to maximise leverage without regard to the tail risks to the institution. 
in  many 
financial 
Is “boring” banking a necessary and sufficient solution? 
IV. 
15.  The  ills  of  the  banking  system  listed  above  raise  two  follow-on  questions.  Is  making 
banking  boring  in  the sense  that  Krugman  indicated  a  necessary  and  sufficient  solution  to 
curing those ills and preventing their recurrence? And what will be the cost of making boring? 
Both questions cause much confusion, the first because it has too many answers and the 
second because it has too few. Abstracting from these answers, I will argue that it is neither 
possible nor desirable to make banking boring. 
16.  The narrow banking of the 1950s and 1960s was presumably safe and boring. But that 
was in a far simpler world when economies were largely national, competition was sparse, 
pressure for innovation was low, and reward for it even lower. Bankers of the time, it is said, 
worked on a 3-6-3 formula: pay depositors 3 per cent interest, lend money at 6 per cent and 
head off to the golf course at 3 pm. From the 24/7/365 perspective of today, that may appear 
romantic but is hardly practical. 
17.  The boring banking concept does not appear persuasive even going by more  recent 
evidence and on several counts. First, recall that during the crisis, we saw the failure of not 
only  complex  and  risky  financial  institutions  like  Lehman  Brothers  but  also  of  traditional 
banks  like  Northern  Rock.  What  this  demonstrates  is  that  a  business  model  distinction 
cannot be drawn between a utility and a casino; and if it can, it does not coincide with the 
BIS Review 152/2009 
 3
distinction between what has to be safe and what need not be. Second, in an interconnected 
financial sector, how can a “boring” bank realistically ring-fence itself from what is happening 
all  around?  Let  us  say  a  large  investment  bank,  a  casino  if  you  will,  fails.  Because  of  the 
inevitable interconnectedness, that will cause a break down of trust not just in that particular 
bank  but  in  the  entire  financial  sector.  So  utilities  cannot  expect  to  insulate  themselves 
against the risks being taken by the casinos. Third, the co-existence of utilities and casinos 
can also open up arbitrage opportunities. During “tranquil” periods, financial institutions with 
higher  risk  and  reward  business  models  will  wean  away  deposits  from  narrow  banks.  But 
when problems surface and stresses develop in the financial sector, the position will reverse 
with  the  deposits  flowing  back  into  the  so  called  “boring  banks”  triggering  procyclicality. 
Finally  and  most  importantly,  what  will  be  the  cost  of  boring  banking  in  economic  terms? 
Does  restraining  banking  to  its  core  function  just  to  keep  it  safe  not  mean  forgoing 
opportunities for growth and development? 
18.  There have of course been problems in the way banking evolved around the world – 
problems that were at the heart of the crisis. But clearly the answer is not to adopt Luddite 
solutions  that  take  us  back  decades.  The  solution  is  to  look  ahead  to  what  we  need.  We 
need  to  build  institutions  that  go  beyond  narrow  banking  and  provide  the  whole  gamut  of 
financial services to meet the needs of customers, markets and economies. We need to build 
on the innovations of the last few decades but in doing so build in also correctives based on 
the  lessons  of  experience.  We  need  to  build  a  safe  and  enterprising  banking  sector  that 
supports growth while preserving financial stability. We need to nurture financial markets and 
institutions within clearly defined and effectively supervised boundaries. Doing all of this is 
the basic thrust of the international reform agenda currently under discussion to which I now 
turn. 
International reform initiatives – will they make banking boring? 
V. 
19.  The  reform  initiatives  in  the  wake  of  the  crisis  are  intended  to  rein  in  the  “irrational 
exuberance” of the banking sector, keep it safe and healthy, and make banking an aid for 
growth and macroeconomic stability. What is relevant to our discussion here is that none of 
these  measures  is  aimed  at  making  banking  boring;  on  the  contrary,  several  of  them  will 
likely make banking more challenging and thereby spur innovation of a more value adding 
and  sustainable  variety.  In  order  to  enable  an  appreciation  of  this,  let  me  provide  a  brief 
synopsis of the various initiatives under discussion from the macro and micro perspectives. 
The macro perspective 
20.  One clear lesson of the crisis is that regulation and supervision at the institution level is 
necessary,  but  not  sufficient.  Even  if  each  institution  is  healthy  and  safe  on  a  stand-alone 
basis, systemic risk can build up because of procyclical, herd behaviour – what economists 
call  the  fallacy  of  composition.  It  is  therefore  necessary  to  supplement  micro-prudential 
regulation with macro prudential oversight. 
21.  At  a  macro  level,  to  address  procyclicality  and  contain  leverage,  three  important 
initiatives are underway: (i) development of capital buffers that banks would be required to 
maintain  to  counter  cyclical  effects;  (ii)  requirement  for  institutions  to  set  provisions  on  a 
dynamic basis, i.e. building up buffers in good times to be drawn down in bad times; and (iii) 
developing  a  metric  to  contain  excessive  leverage  in  banks  to  supplement  the  risk  based 
capital ratio. 
22.  A  somewhat  original  idea  proposed  by  Prof.  Raghuram  Rajan,  currently  under 
discussion,  is  to  require  institutions  to  maintain  “contingent  capital”  to  tide  over  systemic 
crisis or idiosyncratic problems. This proposal will potentially require banks to issue long-term 
debt  instruments  that  would  automatically  covert  to  equity  under  specific  triggers.  This 
contingent arrangement will accordingly enable banks coming under stress to quickly buffer 
4 
 BIS Review 152/2009
their capital without imposing any cost on tax payers. All this will not, of course, be costless. 
The challenge is to design the contingent capital provisions in a way that optimally manages 
the trade off between higher cost and lower moral hazard. 
23.  An  important  proposal  aimed  at  mitigating  systemic  risk is  to  impose  a systemic  risk 
capital surcharge on institutions that pose a higher risk to the system because of their size, 
complexity or interconnectedness. There is increasing support for such a measure. In fact, 
Lord Turner, Chairman of the UK Financial Services Authority, went further and argued that 
should such a capital charge prove insufficient, there should be no hesitation in levying a tax 
on  specific  financial  transactions.  The  Turner  proposal  is  based  on  the  premise  that 
regulation should ensure that the financial sector remains within its “socially useful” size.  
24.  Large, interconnected and complex institutions will be subject to additional regulatory 
obligations  in  other  dimensions  as  well.  Importantly,  such  institutions  will  be  required  to 
institute more sophisticated risk management systems, have robust contingency plans and 
put  in  place  “living  wills”  that  can  steer  the  course  of  their  orderly  exit  should  problems  in 
these  institutions  become  unmanageable.  The  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision 
(BCBS) is working on resolution mechanisms for cross border financial institutions with an 
aim to containing risk. 
25.  There  is  a  proposal  to  move  OTC  derivatives  to  central  counterparties  and  charge 
differentiated  capital  for  OTC  derivatives  that  are  cleared  on  a  bilateral  basis.  This  will 
contain systemic risk to some extent. 
26.  Another  lacuna  that  came  into  sharp  focus  during  the  crisis  is  that  while  financial 
activity is increasingly getting international, regulation remains fiercely national. The growing 
cross border nature of banking and banking services underscores the need for a coordinated 
oversight of banking entities, particularly of large and complex institutions. In an ideal world, 
we would have global regulation; because we are in a less than ideal world, we are having to 
settle for a “global framework” that will mandate minimum consistency across jurisdictions in 
regulatory principles that would apply to similar markets, institutions, activities and products. 
27.  Finally,  the  emergence  of  a  large  shadow  banking  system,  typically  with  higher  than 
average  leverage,  has  underscored  the  need  for  their  regulation  and  the  importance  of 
mandating disclosure and reporting requirements. This is coming in the form of expanding 
the  perimeter  of  regulation  to  those  institutions  that  are  “near  banks”  which  are  currently 
unregulated or under-regulated. 
The micro perspective 
28.  Let  me  now  turn  to  the  micro  perspective  which  focuses  on  ensuring  the  safety  and 
soundness of individual institutions.  
29.  First, to ensure that bank exposures are adequately and sufficiently covered by capital, 
various  enhancements  to  the  Basel  II  capital  framework  have  been  finalised.  These 
specifically relate to higher capital requirements for trading book to minimize the opportunity 
for regulatory arbitrage between the trading and banking books. There are also proposals on 
the  table  for  improving  the  quality  of  capital  to  ensure  that  regulatory  capital  is  comprised 
largely of elements having a true loss absorbing capacity in a going concern scenario. 
30.  Second, recognising that solvency of banks can be threatened by illiquidity as much as 
by inadequate capital, work is currently under way to develop a global standard for liquidity 
risk regulation of cross-border banks, and strengthening information sharing on liquidity risk 
among home and host country supervisors. 
31.  Other initiatives under way include promoting compensation structures that reflect the 
underlying  risks  taken  over  a  longer  term  horizon  and  enhanced  oversight  of  credit  rating 
agencies, particularly where ratings are being used for aligning bank risk to regulatory capital 
requirements. 
BIS Review 152/2009 
 5
32.  Collectively,  the  measures  initiated both  at  the macro  and  micro  levels  to  reform  the 
financial sector aim to impart a balanced perspective to banking. The intention is to ensure 
that the stability of the system is preserved, the integrity of core banking is not violated, retail 
customers’ savings and deposits are not jeopardized and that the costs of riskier business 
products and practices are internalized to prevent, or at any rate minimize, externalities. 
Boring banking – an Indian perspective 
VI. 
33.  Let me now turn to Indian banking. The decade of the 80s and 90s and the first decade 
of this century saw several financial crises around the world, many of them centred in banks. 
These crises were sometimes country specific, often regional, and in the case of the current 
crisis,  global  in  scope.  And  in  each  case,  the  banking  sector  became  a  drag  on  the  real 
economy, jeopardized public finances and hurt economic growth. What is noteworthy though 
is  that  even  as  other  countries  and  other  regions  went  through  banking  upheavals,  Indian 
banking remained safe. This is a reflection, in part of our cautious and prudent regulation, 
and in part of the relatively lower globalization of our banking sector. 
34.  All this does not mean that the lessons of the crisis are irrelevant for us. Going forward, 
our banking sector too will acquire an increasingly international character – Indian banks will 
increase their presence abroad while foreign banks will have larger presence in India. The 
task for the Indian banks is to learn to compete abroad and to set the terms of competition at 
home.  It  is  imperative  therefore  for  Indian  banks  to  learn  from  the  successes  and  failures 
around the world, study international best practices and adapt them to the Indian conditions. 
Just as banking around the world is not going to revert to being boring, neither will Indian 
banking get boring. 
35. 
In  fact,  I  will  go  further  and  argue  that  boring  banking  is  an  oxymoron  in  the  Indian 
case.  Here  my  intent  is  to  argue  not  so  much  from  the  perspective  of  a  banking  model  – 
narrow or full service – but from the perspective of the challenges that Indian banks will have 
to meet. Meeting these challenges is going to demand lateral thinking, entrepreneurship and 
management calibre – all a far cry from anything like boring. In order to illustrate this, I will list 
and explain what in my view are four big challenges that Indian banks will need to address. 
First challenge: financial inclusion 
36.  Despite  its  impressive  progress,  commercial  banking  in  India  has  not  penetrated 
sufficiently to serve the large mass of rural, illiterate and poor people in any meaningful way. 
Rough  estimates  indicate  that  of  the  600,000 habitation  centres  in  the  country,  only  about 
30,000 centres are covered by commercial banks. Even this big picture, stark as it is, does 
not fully convey the true extent of exclusion. Furthermore, even where 100 per cent financial 
inclusion is claimed, oftentimes it is inclusion only in a nominal sense. Households have bank 
accounts that remain dormant; few conduct any banking transactions and even fewer receive 
any credit. What we should attempt is quality financial inclusion which aims not at chasing a 
target  but  instead  focuses  on  giving  access  to  at  least  minimal  financial  services  to  the 
currently excluded. 
37.  The Reserve Bank has taken several steps over the last few years to further financial 
inclusion  –  encouraging  “no  frills”  accounts  to  allow  access  to  basic  financial  services, 
initiating and then expanding the Business Correspondent (BC) model and the use of mobile 
phones for extending banking outreach. More recently, we have expanded the categories of 
entities that can be appointed as BCs and also allowed banks to charge a commission for 
services rendered by BCs. There are of course formidable challenges to the BC model that 
we  need  to  address  –  high  maintenance  costs,  small  size  of  transactions,  expanding 
awareness,  improving  communication  skills  and  techniques  for  dealing  with  semi-literate 
people  in  local  languages,  enlisting  the  cooperation  of  the  village  administrations  and 
6 
 BIS Review 152/2009
overcoming  the  constraints  posed  by  lack  of  electricity  and  sometimes  telecommunication 
access. 
38.  What is clear though is that it is not possible to cover a country of a billion plus people, 
spread  over  600,000  habitations,  covering  vast  distances,  with  poor  infrastructure  and 
sometimes inhospitable terrain by traditional brick and mortar branches. 
39.  We need to think laterally, harness technology, adopt effective dissemination practices 
and  reach  out  to  all  the  people  across  the  country  to  provide  at  least  minimal  banking 
services. Financial inclusion is especially valuable as it will at once promote both growth and 
equity. I can hardly overemphasize how big a challenge financial inclusion is for banks, for 
the banking regulator and for the government. Working to meet this challenge can hardly be 
a boring proposition. 
Second challenge: financing infrastructure 
40.  Distinct  from  other  large  emerging  market  economies  which  are  typically  demand 
constrained, India has been, and will remain in the foreseeable future, a supply constrained 
economy. The biggest supply constraint is of infrastructure – physical, social and urban. It is 
widely  recognized  that  poor  and  inadequate  infrastructure  is  adding  to  production  costs, 
denting productivity of capital and eroding the competitiveness of our productive sectors. 
41.  The Eleventh Five Year Plan targets increase in infrastructure investment from around 
5  per  cent  of  GDP  in  2006/07  to  9  per  cent  by  2011/12.  This  translates  to  cumulative 
infrastructure investment over the Plan period of over Rs. 20 trillion (US$ 520 billion). Almost 
one half of this investment is to be funded through debt, and as much as 43 per cent of this 
total debt requirement (21 per cent of overall planned investment) is planned to be financed 
by banks. We have to await the mid-term appraisal of the Eleventh Plan for an update of the 
above numbers. Regardless of any revision the numbers may undergo, what is clear is that 
the financing needs of our infrastructure are huge. 
42.  A  big  issue  in  bank  financing  of  infrastructure  is  the  asset-liability  mismatch.  While 
infrastructure typically requires long term funding, the deposits of banks, their main source of 
funds, are relatively short-term. The problem of asset-liability mismatch in long term financing 
is  not  unique  to  India;  banks  elsewhere  too  face  the  same  problem.  But  in  advanced 
economies, the long term finance space is filled by insurance companies and pension and 
provident funds. If some of the pending legislation gets through, in India too we can expect 
new  sources  of  long-term  financing  to  open  up.  But  until  that  happens,  the  burden  of 
infrastructure financing will have to be met largely by the banks. In order to partly offset this 
problem, the Reserve Bank has, since 2000, allowed banks to enter into take out financing 
arrangements with other financial institutions. 
43.  To  facilitate  financing  for  infrastructure,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  also  relaxed  the 
exposure norms. To avoid concentration risk, banks are mandated to restrict their exposures 
to a maximum of 15 per cent of the banks’ capital funds in case of a single borrower and 40 
per cent in case of a borrower group. These norms are relaxed in the case of financing for 
infrastructure by up to 5 per cent in the case of a single borrower and 10 per cent in the case 
of a borrower group. 
44.  A number of recent measures and several in the pipeline should facilitate greater flow 
of credit to the infrastructure sector. Let me recount a few important ones. First, interest rate 
futures  have  been  reintroduced  recently  and  these  should  aid  banks  in  managing  their 
interest risk more efficiently. Second, repos in corporate bonds are slated to start soon; we 
expect to issue final guidelines by end-November 2009. Third, in the second quarter policy 
review  last  month,  we  announced  the  introduction  of  plain  vanilla  OTC  single-name  credit 
default swaps (CDS) for corporate bonds for resident entities. Fourth, a separate category of 
NBFCs – infrastructure NBFCs – is being introduced. Fifth, banks will be permitted to build 
up  capital  for  “take-out”  exposures  in  a  phased  manner.  Finally,  refinancing  through  the 
BIS Review 152/2009 
 7
special purpose  vehicle,  India  Infrastructure  Finance  Company  Ltd.  (IIFCL),  is  expected  to 
leverage  bank  financing  for  Public  Private  Partnership  (PPP)  projects.  These  measures, 
along  with  existing  ones,  can  be  expected  to  enhance  banks’  ability  to  fund  infrastructure 
projects. 
45.  Going forward, financing infrastructure is going to be a big challenge for the banking 
sector. This huge and growing demand of infrastructure finance will have to be met even as 
banks  wrestle  with  expanding  their  traditional  banking  services.  Apart  from  finding  the 
resources,  banks  will  also  need  to  hone  their  skills  in  appraisal  and  management  of  risks 
inherent  in  infrastructure  financing.  This  is  a  daunting  challenge,  and  hardly  fits  the 
description of a “boring” prospect. 
Third challenge: risk management 
46.  Let me now turn to the third challenge – the challenge of risk management. In the years 
ahead, two big forces will define the environment in which Indian banks will be called upon to 
operate – a rapidly globalizing India and a fiercely competitive banking industry. This means 
in the main that Indian banks will have to upgrade their risk management architectures. In 
this regard, an important lesson thrown up by the crisis is that in addition to managing more 
effectively the traditional risks such as credit risk, operational risk and market risk, banks also 
need to manage some new risks that have proven to be significant such as reputation risk, 
counterparty credit risk, liquidity risk, interest rate risk in the banking book and incremental 
risks  in  the  trading  book.  Expertise  in  risk  management  needs  to  be  complemented  by 
strengthening stress testing techniques. Evidently this calls for substantially broadening and 
sharpening the skill endowment at the institutional level. However, this cannot stop at getting 
a new toolbox and learning how to use it; it has to extend to changing the mindset. Banks 
need to develop a culture of risk management at the institutional level. What the crisis has 
shown  is  that  risk  management  cannot  be  done  in  silos;  it  demands  a  more  integrated 
approach with risks and their interconnections across the entire organization recognized and 
managed synergistically. 
47.  Buffering the capital base of banks is obviously a standard and much needed response 
to  risk  management.  In  this  regard,  countries  around  the  world  are  in  the  process  of 
migrating to the Basel II capital standard. In its current form, the standard provides a menu of 
approaches from simple to advanced to assess credit, market and operational risks and to 
calibrate the capital requirement to the assessed risk. Importantly, the standard provides a 
framework for assessing the new risks that I talked about earlier. 
48. 
India  is  committed  to  adopting  the  international  best  practices  though  with  the 
sequencing and pacing determined by our domestic conditions. As of March 2009, all Indian 
banks have migrated to the simpler approaches of the Basel II standard. The task on the way 
forward is to graduate to more advanced approaches. Towards this end, in consultation with 
banks, the Reserve Bank has now finalized a four-year time frame starting in April 2010 and 
ending  with  March  2014.  Moving  to  advanced  approaches  is  both  skill  and  technology 
intensive. In the first instance, it will therefore necessarily have to be confined to the larger 
banks. While the Reserve Bank will actively facilitate the transition of such larger banks to 
advanced approaches, it is expected that the banks themselves will be proactive in preparing 
themselves to meet the preconditions for the transition in view of the competitive advantages 
it will offer. 
49.  All in all, going forward, risk management is going to involve pushing the frontiers of 
knowledge  and  transforming  that  knowledge  to  practical  policy.  That  can  hardly  fit  the 
description of boring. 
8 
 BIS Review 152/2009
Fourth challenge: further improvements in efficiency 
50.  Let me now turn to the fourth and final challenge on my list which is the challenge of 
further improving the efficiency of banking. But before I look ahead, I need to look back a 
little. The growth acceleration of the Indian economy during 2003–08 is attributable to a host 
of  factors.  Some  of  these  are  tangible  such  as  the  deregulation  of  the  industrial  sector, 
liberalization of external trade and external finance, reform of direct and indirect taxation and 
elimination of controls on doing business. Some of the factors that contributed to growth are 
intangible such as improved productivity, higher efficiency and growing entrepreneurism. We 
often forget to add to this list the contribution made by the financial sector by way of larger 
and  better  quality  financial  intermediation  that  raised  the  level  of  aggregate  savings  and 
channelled  them  to  investment.  Just  one  statistic  will  evidence  this  –  bank  credit  as  a 
proportion of GDP nearly doubled from 29 per cent in end-March 2000 to 56 per cent at end-
March 2009. Even more notable, this rapid expansion of credit has been accompanied by a 
significant improvement in asset quality which is now close to international norms. 
51.  The analysis in the Reserve Bank’s Report on Currency and Finance 2006–08 shows 
that the Indian banking sector has recorded an impressive improvement in productivity over 
the  last  15  years;  many  of  the  productivity/efficiency  indicators  have  moved  closer  to  the 
global  levels.  The  Report  also  shows  that  the  performance  of  public  sector  banks  has 
converged with that of new private sector and foreign banks. More interestingly, contrary to 
popular perception, there is also no significant relationship between ownership and efficiency 
– the most efficient banks straddle all three segments – public sector banks, private sector 
banks and foreign banks. 
Improvement  is  a  never  ending  business,  and  there  are  several  tasks  on  the  way 
52. 
forward. The intermediation cost in India is still high, largely due to high operating costs. Non-
interest  sources  of  income  constitute  a  very  small  share  in total  income  of  banks  in  India. 
Although overall efficiency and productivity have improved, resources are not being utilised 
in the most efficient manner. There is a degree of stickiness and non-transparency in bank 
lending rates. 
53.  The challenge for Indian banks, therefore, is to reduce costs and pass on the benefits 
to both depositors and lenders. This will involve constantly reinventing business models and 
designing products and services demanded by a rapidly growing and diversifying economy. 
As  we  noted  earlier,  in  the  wake  of  the  crisis,  there  are  proposals  at  the  global  level  to 
mandate higher capital standards, stricter liquidity and leverage ratios and a more cautious 
approach to risk. Admittedly, all these safeguards are necessary, but they will also raise the 
banks’ funding costs. What this means is that Indian banks will need to improve efficiency 
even  as  their  costs  of  doing  business  go  up.  This  is  a  challenge  that  will  test  ingenuity, 
perseverance,  ability  to  learn  and  adapt  and  management  skills.  And  this  is  going  to  be 
anything but boring. 
Conclusion 
VII. 
54.  Let me now conclude by summarizing the issues that I have addressed today. I have 
referred to the debate generated by Prof. Krugman’s thesis that “exciting” banking will make 
for an unsafe and unstable financial system and that an important preventive against future 
crises is to restore boring banking. 
55. 
I have argued that making banking boring is neither a cure to the ills that the banking 
system was plagued with before the crisis nor an appropriate path for the future of banking. 
Banking  has  to  evolve,  grow  and  innovate  in  response  to  the  developments  in  financial 
markets and institutions. The excitement lies in responding to the challenges that this growth 
brings. 
56.  From  an  Indian  perspective,  what  banks  do  and  how  well  they  do  it  is  going  to  be 
central to accelerating and sustaining our growth momentum. In particular, I have referred to 
BIS Review 152/2009 
 9
four challenges that the banking sector has to meet head on – deepening financial inclusion, 
financing infrastructure, strengthening risk management and improving efficiency. These are 
formidable challenges, and meeting them is going to be an exciting, rewarding and fulfilling 
opportunity. Perish the thought of Indian banking ever getting boring. 
10 
 BIS Review 152/2009
