George Provopoulos: Key challenges for South East Europe inlight of 
the crisis 
Opening  address  by  Mr  George  Provopoulos,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece,  at  the 
Conference  of  Bank  of  Greece  &  Oxford  University:  “Challenges  and  Prospects  of  South 
East European Economies in the Wake of the Financial Crisis”, Athens, 16 October 2009. 
 I am very pleased to welcome you to the Bank of Greece for this conference, co-sponsored 
by the Bank of Greece and the University of Oxford through the latter’s program on South 
East  European  Studies.  The  focus  of  this  conference  is  the  policy  responses  to  the  most 
severe  economic  and  financial  crisis  that  the  world  has  faced  since  the  Great  Depression 
and the key challenges that lie ahead for South East Europe in light of the crisis. 
This morning, I would like to share with you some thoughts about policy responses to the 
crisis. I will also provide some observations on the challenges that lie ahead. I will have more 
to  say  about  the  major challenges  facing  the  economies  of  South  East  Europe  during  this 
afternoon’s panel discussion. My remarks about policy will deal with three broad issues: first, 
the response of the Governing Council of the European Central Bank to the crisis; second, 
the pace at which the extraordinary monetary and fiscal stimuli now being provided should be 
withdrawn;  and,  third,  the  need  to  develop  a  macro-prudential  approach  to  financial 
regulation. 
Monetary policy 
Exceptional times call for exceptional measures. The policy response of the ECB to the crisis 
has been rapid, bold and frequently unconventional. 
With  the  intensification  and  broadening  of  the  crisis,  beginning  in  October  2008  the  ECB 
Governing Council reduced its key policy rate from 4.25 per cent to 1.00 per cent in a period 
of only seven months. This was an extraordinary response for a central bank that had, until 
that  time,  moved  at  a  measured  pace  in  changing  rates,  abiding  by  the  principle  that  a 
certain  degree  of  persistence  in  policy-rate  changes  increases  the  effectiveness  of  rate 
adjustments.1  
Interest-rate reductions may not be very effective, however, during times of extreme stress 
when conventional channels of monetary-policy transmission are blocked or impaired. In the 
aftermath  of  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers,  financial  markets  froze  and  credit 
intermediation collapsed. Uncertainty pervaded the markets, counterparties were viewed with 
suspicion, and the flow of credit all-but halted. In these circumstances, the ECB undertook a 
number of non-standard measures to enhance the flow of credit and support the functioning 
of the money market. Our approach consists of five broad elements. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
First, the full accommodation of banks’ liquidity needs at a fixed rate. 
Second, the expansion of the list of assets used as collateral. 
Third, the lengthening of the maturities of long-term refinancing operations. 
Fourth, the provision of liquidity in foreign currencies. 
                                                 
1   See  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  “Credit  Alertness  Revisited”,  paper  presented  at  the  symposium  on  “Financial 
stability and macroeconomic policy”, sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, 
Wyoming, 22 August 2009. 
BIS Review 127/2009 
 1
 Fifth,  purchases  of  covered  bonds  in  order  to  stimulate  a  market  that  has  been 
traditionally an important source of funding for banks. 
In  addition  to  this  exceptional  support  to  domestic  financial  markets,  the  ECB  has  also 
provided assistance to non-euro-area financial markets. For, example, we have entered into 
either swap or repo arrangements with Denmark, Sweden, Hungary, and Poland. Moreover, 
E.U. countries have strongly supported recent measures to increase IMF resources through, 
among other vehicles, bilateral loans to the Fund, an SDR allocation, IMF gold sales, and a 
quota  increase.  In  turn,  the  Fund  has  responded  to  the  crisis  with  a  record  lending 
commitment,  which  includes  programs  to  Belarus,  Bosnia-Herzegovina,  Hungary,  Iceland, 
Latvia, Poland, Romania, Serbia, and the Ukraine. 
In  addition  to  the  foregoing  actions  by  the  ECB,  euro-area  governments  launched  major 
fiscal-stimulus  programs  while  supporting  banks  with  guarantees  and  capital  injections. 
Together, these measures reduced uncertainty and increased confidence, contributing to an 
improvement in economic and financial conditions. 
Exit strategy 
With  the  recovery  in  the  euro  area  in  its  initial  stages,  and  with  economic  activity  still  far 
below  pre-crisis  levels,  it  is  too  soon  to  begin  a  withdrawal  of  the  stimulus  measures. 
Nevertheless,  the  development  of  a  medium-term  macroeconomic  framework  for  the  post-
crisis period will be crucial. It will help facilitate the achievement and maintenance of a sound 
fiscal position and the ability of the monetary authorities to deliver price stability. It will also 
help  foster  financial  stability.  The  challenge  will  be  to  choose  the  correct  timing  of  the 
withdrawal  so  as  to  avoid:  first,  a  premature  unwinding  of  public  interventions;  second, 
jeopardizing the achievements in stabilizing economic and financial conditions; third, letting 
these measures continue for too long, with risks of distorting incentives and damaging public 
balance sheets. Among the factors that will shape the ECB’s approach to exiting the non-
standard measures are the following: 
• 
First,  we  will  act  with  the  aim  of  securing  price  stability  in  the  medium-term.  By 
implication, any non-standard measure that may pose a threat to price stability will 
be promptly withdrawn. If no such risk exists, a measure can be maintained in case 
of significant financial-market tensions. 
Second,  we  have  built  a  degree  of  phasing  out  into  the  exit  process  through  the 
design of our measures. In the absence of new policy decisions, several of these 
measures  will  unwind  naturally,  for  example,  through  pre-determined  termination 
dates. 
Third,  the  ECB’s  operational  framework  comprises  a  broad  set  of  instruments  so 
that the exit strategy can be formulated in a flexible way. For example, the interest-
rate corridor allows short-term interest rates to be changed while keeping some non-
standard  measures  in  place  should  the  need  arise.  Therefore,  the  Governing 
Council  can  choose  the  way  in  which  interest-rate  action  is  combined  with  the 
unwinding of the non-standard measures. 
  Let me turn to the issue of the exit from expansionary fiscal policies. In my view, an important 
medium-term  risk  to  sustained  recovery  revolves  around  deteriorating  fiscal  positions.  The 
large increases in fiscal deficits and public debt incurred to provide stimulus to the economy 
have already raised concerns in financial markets, as suggested by the widening sovereign 
spreads relative to pre-crisis levels, for economies with large fiscal burdens. If the recovery 
were to stall, followed by a prolonged period of very-low growth, deficits and debt could swell 
to difficult-to-sustain levels. Governments will, therefore, need to start addressing mounting 
long-run fiscal challenges by committing to large reductions in deficits once the recovery is 
on a solid footing and advancing reforms that will put public finances on a more sustainable 
2 
 BIS Review 127/2009
path. I need to add that Greece is among the euro-area countries for which the challenge of 
medium-term fiscal viability is especially urgent. 
Financial sector regulation 
The best way to manage a crisis is to prevent it happening. At the root of the market failure 
that  led  to  the  crisis  was  optimism  bred  by  a  long  period  of  high  growth,  low  real  interest 
rates, and policy failures. One such failure was that financial regulation was not equipped to 
address the risk concentrations and distorted incentives underlying the financial innovations. 
This  circumstance  raises  another  medium-run  challenge.  The  present  crisis  has  revealed 
that  macro-prudential  factors  play  an  important  role  in  determining  the  size,  nature,  and 
propagation of systemic risk. Therefore, it is essential to establish an effective framework for 
macro-prudential supervision that will ensure a systematic analysis of risks, as well as the 
formulation of policies to address such risks. 
Let me say a few words about the framework for macro-prudential supervision envisaged for 
the E.U. Following the publication of the Report of the de Larosiére Group in February 2009, 
the  Commission  issued  a  package  of  draft  legislation  in  late  September  with  the  aim  of 
creating a European Systemic Risk Board – or ESRB. The main task of the ESRB will be to 
identify and assess risks to the stability of the EU financial system and issue risk warnings 
when the identified risks appear significant. Several features of the proposed framework are 
important. 
• 
First, the European System of Central Banks will play a key role in the functioning of 
the  ESRB.  The  voting  members  of  the  ESRB’s  General  Board  will  include  the  27 
governors of the EU’s national central banks and the President and Vice President 
of the ECB. 
Second,  the  ECB  will  be  assigned  the  task  of  ensuring  sufficient  human  and 
financial resources for the ESRB’s Secretariat. 
Third, the ESRB will not be responsible for the implementation of macro-prudential 
policies.  That  responsibility  will  remain  with  national  authorities  and  national 
supervisors. 
Fourth,  since  the  ESRB  will  not implement  macro-prudential  policies,  the  effective 
monitoring of the follow-up to its warnings and recommendations and the consistent 
and  timely  implementation  of  the  recommendations  will  be  crucial  for  the 
performance and the credibility of the new macro-prudential supervisory framework. 
The creation of the ESRB will, in my view, constitute a historic step forward, putting in place 
an important building bloc of an EU financial-stability framework that is consistent with the 
objectives of creating a single market.  
   Challenges for Southeastern Europe 
Some  of  the  policy  challenges  facing  the  euro  area  also  need  to  be  addressed  by  the 
countries in Southeastern Europe. Moreover, many of the countries in Southeastern Europe 
are confronted by additional challenges. Let me mention some of these challenges, as well 
as some questions that we may wish to consider during the course of this conference. 
• 
First,  prior  to  the  crisis  many  countries  in  the  region  ran  large  current-account 
deficits underpinned by capital inflows. As the crisis demonstrated, however, capital 
flows can be subject to abrupt and sharp reversals. What policy measures can be 
used to deal with surges of capital inflows and their sudden reversals? 
BIS Review 127/2009 
 3
   Second,  much  of  lending  in  the  economies  concerned  has  been  denominated  in 
foreign  currencies.  This  situation  can  lead  to  corrosive  feedback  loops  between 
banking crises and foreign-exchange crises, compounding the effects of each. What 
policies  can  be  taken  to  safeguard  domestic  banking  systems  from  exposure  to 
foreign-currency borrowing? 
Third, some banking systems of euro-area countries have relatively-high exposures 
in  the  countries  of  South  East  Europe.  In  addition  to  the  measures,  including 
bilateral MOUs among some national central banks, that have already been taken, 
what other actions would help minimize the risks that may arise from strong financial 
linkages? 
Fourth, many of the economies in Southeastern Europe tend to be relatively closed. 
Moreover,  the  trade  linkages  among  the  countries  of  Southeastern  Europe 
themselves  are  quite  limited.  In  other  words,  the  shares  of  the  exports  of  each 
country in Southeastern Europe to the rest of the region tend to be relatively small, 
given the geographical proximity of our countries. These shares are typically in the 
range of 15 per cent to 30 per cent. What accounts for this circumstance and how 
can we boost both the level of trade in goods and services, and intra-regional trade 
among our economies, thus helping to generate a virtuous cycle of growth? 
These are some of the issues that perhaps can be addressed.  
I look forward to a lively discussion.  
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 127/2009
