Yves Mersch: Islamic finance – partnerships opportunities between 
Luxembourg and the Arab countries 
Speech  by  Mr  Yves  Mersch,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Luxembourg,  at  the 
5th Economic Forum Belgium-Luxembourg-Arab Countries, Brussels, 17 November 2009. 
 Excellencies, Governor, ladies and gentlemen, good morning,  
I am very pleased to be here today, and I would like to thank the Arab-Belgium-Luxembourg 
Chamber of Commerce for inviting me and especially its general secretary Mr. Hijazin.  
Based  on  the  agenda  of  this  5th  Economic  Forum,  I  am  looking  forward  to  hearing  and 
learning  and  to  explore  potential  partnerships  opportunities  between  Luxembourg  and  the 
Arab countries in the field of Islamic finance, which receives an increasing attention.  
In  this  perspective,  I  welcome  and  consider  as  essential  such  conferences  that  promote 
greater  awareness  of  important  developments  within  international  banking.  Despite  its 
traditional  approach,  Islamic  finance  is  a  key  “innovation”  in  the  financial  area  since  the 
seventies  and  I  expect  that  today’s  conference  will  provide  an  excellent  opportunity  to 
exchange information and ideas on current issues relating to this important sector.  
While  efficient  reactions  to  the  global  financial  and  economic  crisis  have  been  taken  by 
government  and  central  banks  worldwide  to  stabilise  the  financial  conditions  of  banks  and 
reduce  funding  pressures,  this  unprecedented  turmoil  reinforces  the  need  to  revisit  our 
economic  and  financial  paradigm.  The  crisis  suggests  to  some  to  deviate  from  markets 
driven economies and behaviours and to explore more ethical and humanistic values to drive 
sustainable value creation. 
One stream in this context is Islamic finance promoting an alignment with the real economy. 
Based  on  its  prohibition  of  leverage  activities,  its  principles  of  justice  and  participation, 
Islamic finance is said to contribute to the reduction of the risk perception in the economy 
and hence its safe recovery. 1
Specialists estimate the volume of Islamic investments to exceed USD 750 billions and the 
pool of investible assets in the countries of the Persian Gulf and South East Asia to reach 
USD 5,000 billions.2
In  this  part  of  the  world,  a  non  negligible  part  of  the  European  population  has  ethical 
investment  and  placement  needs  based  on  the  Shari’ah  that  have,  so  far,  not  yet 
appropriately been addressed by the conventional banking offering. As of today, more than 
38  millions  Muslims  live  in  Europe,  representing  more  than  5%  of  the  population.3 
Government and financial institutions alike try to cater for these needs. 
Intrinsic  difficulties 
the 
management of their liquidity and I will review how central banks, have engaged into different 
initiatives to solve these issues so far. I will also share with you some considerations on the 
challenges  that  may  arise  when  introducing  Islamic  financial  services  into  the  European 
framework. 
institutions  remain  however  related 
financial 
Islamic 
for 
to 
                                                 
1   Chris Morris (2009) et al., “Has the crisis shown the strengths or the weaknesses of Islamic finance?”, IFM 
Global Market Monitor, 21 October. 
2   Gilles Saint Marc (2008), “Finance islamique et droit français“, presentation to the Finance Commission of the 
French Senate, 14 May, page 3. 
3   Luis  Lugo  (2009)  et  al.,  “Mapping  the  Global  Muslim  Population”,  Pew  Forum  on  Religion  &  Public  Life, 
October. 
BIS Review 149/2009 
 1
As central bankers in Europe, we welcome a wide variety of banking approaches such as the 
Islamic  one.4  Our  purpose  is  to  focus  on  the  implications  for  safety  and  soundness  of 
institutions  engaging  in  Islamic  finance  and  ultimately  their  potential  risk  for  the  banking 
system.  As  a  result,  while  banking  authorities  are  committed  to  adapt  and  to  be 
accommodating for Islamic finance within the European regulatory framework, it is crucial to 
continuously ensure a level playing field, requiring from Islamic financial institutions the same 
high licensing and supervision standards to those expected from conventional ones.  
Although banking authorities in Europe are certainly not competent in religious issues and do 
not  intend  to  replace  the  official  Muslim  scholars  to  take  a  position  and  interpret  Shari’ah 
precepts, it is important that the banking and financial authorities become more familiar with 
the  principles  and  practices  specific  to  Islamic  finance  in  order  to  make  appropriate 
supervisory and regulatory judgments.  
As  early  as  2005,  the  Banque  centrale  du  Luxembourg  was  the  host  of  an  awareness 
programme co-organised in Luxembourg with the Islamic Financial Services Board. This was 
followed  by  various  efforts,  supported  notably  by  the  Luxembourg  government,  the  fund 
administrators,  the  University  in  order  to  identify  obstacles  to  solve  and  opportunities  to 
enhance for the development of Islamic Finance in Luxembourg. 
The  Government  has  instructed  the  tax  authorities  to  come  up  with  proposals  in  order  to 
have  a  level  playing  field  and  ensure  tax  neutrality  for  Shari’ah  compliant  transactions 
(essentially Sukuk and Murabaha). 
I have participated, along with a number of my colleagues of other central banks, in several 
conferences both in Europe, the Gulf region and South East Asia, in an effort to stay abreast 
of developments in this market and to emphasize our continuing interest in this.5
This  flexible  approach  for  Islamic  investment  products  and  services  out  of  Luxembourg 
originated  in  the  late  seventies,  when  the  Islamic  Banking  System  Holdings  Limited 
Luxembourg was established as first Islamic financial institution in Europe. This was followed 
by the establishment of Takafol S.A.,6 a life insurance company in December 1982.7 Those 
initiatives  paved  the  way  for  future  successful  Islamic  development  which  was  continuous 
since  then.  According  to  the  most  recent  statistics,  there  are  today  15  Sukuk  listed  in 
Luxembourg for a combined value of EUR 5 billions.8 Luxembourg is the first jurisdiction in a 
non  Muslim  country9  for  the  domicile  of  Shari’ah  compliant  funds  with  nearly  40  funds 
managed and promoted by leading global investment companies1. Earlier this year, a major 
German  bank  launched  its  new  platform,  domiciled  in  Luxembourg,  called  Al  Mi’yar  to 
facilitate the issuance of Shari’ah compliant securities. 
Some  of  the  features  of  Shari’ah-compliant  investment  are  designed  to  attract  Western 
investors  looking  for  socially  responsible  investment  schemes  and  who  are  not  only 
interested in the risk/reward relationship of their investment, but who are also concerned with 
                                                 
4   Christian  Noyer  (2009),  “Global  stability,  the  future  of  capital  markets  and  Islamic  Finance  in  France”, 
Euromoney Seminars, Islamic Paris Conference, Paris, 29 September. 
5   “3rd Islamic Financial Services Forum: The European Challenge”, jointly organised with the Financial Stability 
Institute and hosted by Banque de France on Islamic liquidity management, Paris, 3 March 2009. 
6   Now denominated Solidarity Takafol S.A, based in Luxembourg. 
7   Parker (2009), ”Luxembourg promotes as domicile of choice for funds”, Arab News, 18 May. 
8   Amount and number as of 28 October 2009, source Bourse de Luxembourg. For information, on 12 August 
2009,  the  Luxembourg  stock  exchange  has  listed  a  €1.5  billion  Sukuk  issued  by  Petroliam  Nasional, 
Malaysian state owned Oil Company. 
9   Luxembourg is the 4th domicile for Shari’ah compliant funds in the world with 7% of them following Malaysia 
(23%), Saudi Arabia (19%) and Kuwait (9%) – see Ernst & Young’s Islamic Funds & Investment Report 2009, 
page 72. 
2 
 BIS Review 149/2009
issues of accountability and social responsibility. As you all know, based on the precepts of 
the Shari’ah, Islamic funds invest in ethical and non leveraged enterprises which for those 
reasons have a low risk profile. 
Despite  the  relative  success  of  Islamic  financial  services in  Luxembourg  regarding  notably 
the  investment  funds  and  the  Sukuk,  not  all  of  the  regulatory  challenges  raised  by  these 
Islamic  institutions  have  been  resolved  –  challenges  that  arise  from  looking  to  introduce 
Islamic  financial  principles  into  a  regulatory  framework  that  was  structured  without  these 
principles in mind. However, these issues are not specific to Luxembourg only and exist in 
the whole western countries.10
One example of issues that precisely fits into the role of a central bank is the absence of an 
appropriate market of Shari’ah instruments to facilitate the management of the liquidity needs 
of Islamic banks or Islamic financial institutions and funds. 
The  prohibitions  of  interest  rate  as  well  as  the  lack  of  a  dedicated  infrastructure  and 
adequate instruments prevent the Islamic banks from developing a viable value proposition: 
rejecting leverage and speculative transactions, Islamic banks need to have greater amount 
of  capital  and  to  sustain  a  higher  liquidity  ratio  than  their  conventional  counterparts.  As  a 
result,  their  activities  turn  to  be  less  profitable  and  less  competitive  compared  to  those  of 
their conventional counterpart when addressing the same customer segment. The structural 
obstacles together with the lack of technical and contract standardization ultimately prohibit 
Islamic  financial  institutions  from  succeeding  in  the  competitive  financial  landscape  where 
consumers make rational choice not only driven by religious principles. 
In order to facilitate the emergence of a resilient Islamic financial market in Europe, we have 
to adapt and shape the infrastructure and supervisory environment to allow efficient and cost 
effective trading and clearing for a significant number of investment-grade Islamic financial 
papers across the whole maturity spectrum. In this perspective, it is worth noting that in the 
current turbulent period, raising finance through Sukuk issuance appears to be cheaper than 
recurring to conventional bonds due to the burgeoning demand for Islamic instruments.11  
To  reflect  the  specific  needs  of  Shari’ah-compliant  finance,  the  AAOIFI  (Accounting  and 
Auditing  Organization  for  Islamic  Financial  Institutions)  and  the  IFSB  (Islamic  Financial 
Services Board) are working on developing international supervisory standards for instance 
to  improve  the  corporate  governance  frameworks  or  implement  capital  adequacy  and  risk 
management standards for Islamic financial institutions.12  
In  closing,  let  me  emphasize  that,  the  Banque  centrale  du  Luxembourg  has  applied  for 
membership  to  the  Islamic  Financial  Service  Board  and  would  be  the  first  central  bank  in 
Europe to participate to this international standard setting organisation. We also second staff 
to  become  familiar  with  Islamic  finance  and  study  the  before  mentioned  issues,  notably 
liquidity management. 
Despite the lack of detailed and scientific studies about the potential effect of Islamic finance 
on  the  price  and  financial  stability,  the  resilience  of  Islamic  banks  to  the  recent  crisis13 
                                                 
10   Cf. Gilles Saint Marc (2008), “Finance islamique et droit français“, presentation to the Finance Commission of 
the French Senate, 14 May, page 3. 
  Cf.  “3rd  Islamic  Financial  Services  Forum:  The  European  Challenge”,  jointly  organised  with  the  Financial 
Stability Institute and hosted by Banque de France on Islamic liquidity management, Paris, 3 March 2009. 
11   Robin  Wigglesworth  (2009),  “Islamic  bonds  spark  rush  of 
interest“,  Financial  Times, 
10 November;  “Has  the  crisis  shown  the  strengths  or  the  weaknesses  of  Islamic  finance?”,  Global  Market 
Monitor, 21 October. 
international 
12   Norbert Hellmann (2009), “Finanzkrise taucht Islamic Banking in ein neues Licht”, Frankfurt Börsen-Zeitung, 
10 November. 
13   Durmus Yilmaz (2009), “Islamic Finance: During and after the global financial crisis”, Istanbul, 5 October. 
BIS Review 149/2009 
 3
practically  demonstrates  the  positive  diversification  effect  they  could  play,  contributing 
therewith  to  a  systemic  equilibrium.  Moreover,  Islamic  finance  acts  as  a  natural  hedging 
scheme restricting excessive credit boom in so far as it links the supply of financing (what 
would conventional banks call credit) to the growth rate of the economic activity.  
Thank you very much. 
4 
 BIS Review 149/2009
