Mark Carney: Current issues in household finances 
Remarks  by  Mr  Mark  Carney,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  The  National  Forum 
(Canadian Club of Toronto and Empire Club of Canada), Toronto, 16 December 2009. 
 Introduction 
As  the  holiday  season  approaches,  our  attention  turns  naturally  to  the  home  front. 
Accordingly,  my  comments  this  afternoon  will  focus  on  households.  I  would  like  to 
concentrate  in  particular  on  the  implications  of  Canadian  household  finances  for  financial 
stability in our country.  
I spoke here in Toronto a year ago, almost to the day. Then, the global financial sector crisis 
was  buffeting  the  real  economy.  Businesses  were  postponing  large  investments,  and 
households were hesitating over major purchases. It was clear then that 2009 would be a 
difficult year, and so it has proved. With more than 400,000 jobs lost and a $30 billion fall in 
output, the Canadian economy has suffered a deep, albeit brief, recession.  
Today,  the  outlook  has  improved.  While  significant  fragilities  remain,  the  global  economic 
recovery is now supported by several factors. First, feedback between financial markets and 
the real economy has reversed direction. In most major economies, the inventory cycle has 
turned  and  housing  sectors  are  stabilizing.  In  addition,  considerable  fiscal  expansion  and 
monetary stimulus are supporting domestic demand.  
Nonetheless,  the  Bank  expects  underlying  private  demand  in  many  economies  to  recover 
only  slowly,  as  significant  balance  sheet  and  structural  adjustments  have  yet  to  run  their 
course. In particular, the rebound in U.S. consumption is projected to be more moderate than 
in  previous  cycles.  This  will  have  direct  implications  for  Canada.  While  the  Canadian 
economy will likely grow faster than the other G-7 countries next year, the Bank expects our 
recovery to be more protracted and more reliant on domestic demand than usual (Chart 1). 
In the near term, Canada will grow despite – not because of – the pace of external activity.  
The behaviour of Canadian households will thus be particularly important. Before turning to 
that in more detail, I would like to briefly review the challenges facing U.S. households, both 
for their direct impact on Canada and for the insights they offer for financial stability. 
U.S. household sector 
For  a  generation,  U.S.  households increasingly  “saved”  through  capital  appreciation  rather 
than  from  current  income.  Over  the  last  three  decades,  U.S.  consumer  spending  grew 
substantially faster than national income, driving the ratio of consumption to GDP from 62 per 
cent to a record 70 per cent (Chart 2). In the same period, the personal savings rate fell from 
11 per cent of disposable income to 1 per cent, while household debt doubled from 84 per 
cent of disposable income to 165 per cent.1  
Financial  innovations,  including  home  equity  loans  and  securitization,  drove  these  trends. 
Initially, 
financial  system  efficiency,  diversified  risk,  and  smoothed 
consumption.  Over  time,  however,  these  financial  technologies  were  applied  increasingly 
indiscriminately. Prudence gave way to exuberance to the extent that the subprime-mortgage 
increased 
they 
                                                 
1  Household  debt  includes  the  liabilities  of  households,  non-profit  organizations,  and  unincorporated 
businesses, as the debt of the latter is ultimately a claim on the household sector. 
BIS Review 168/2009 
 1
market  became  a  mainstay  of  the  expansion.2  When  the  U.S.  housing  bubble  collapsed 
under its own weight, households with the least resilience were the hardest hit.  
An important lesson of the American experience was that the costs were not confined to the 
most vulnerable households. In a now-familiar chain, problems in subprime quickly spread to 
prime mortgages, structured products in general, core funding markets, and, ultimately, the 
capital bases of most major financial institutions. Eventually, virtually every financial asset in 
the world was repriced. Financial stability is as much about linkages as it is about specific 
risks. Shocks can have large, unanticipated consequences. 
A lengthy period of adjustment for the U.S. consumer has just begun (Chart 3). A decline of 
roughly 30 per cent in wealth has promoted a quadrupling of the U.S. personal savings rate 
to  4.5  per  cent.  Nonetheless,  household  debt  levels  have  not  fallen  substantially,  and 
consumer spending as a share of GDP actually rose to a new high of 71 per cent in the third 
quarter.3  Given  the  historic  declines  in  net  worth  and  the  need  to  save  for  retirement,  it 
appears clear that U.S. household savings need to remain elevated for an extended period of 
time.  
The new equilibrium for household savings will depend on multiple factors, including wealth 
effects, risk aversion, the evolution of the financial system, the employment outlook, and the 
credibility of fiscal policy.4 The Bank currently projects that the U.S. personal savings rate will 
average  around  5.5  per  cent  over  the  next  two  years.  This  judgment  is  consistent  with 
ultimately  stabilizing  the  U.S.  net  foreign  liability  position  and  rebuilding  U.S.  household 
wealth.5  
This  sustained,  higher  savings  rate  will  produce  a  historically  weak  recovery 
in 
U.S. consumer spending and accounts for the Bank’s relatively subdued forecast for overall 
U.S. economic growth (Chart 4).  
Canada’s household sector 
Canadian  household  finances  were  in  better  shape  going  into  the  crisis  than  those  of 
Americans. The Canadian personal savings rate was higher and household debt was lower 
(Chart 5). The ratio of consumer spending to GDP, at 55 per cent, was below the longer-term 
average in Canada. As a consequence, when the crisis struck, Canadian households were 
less vulnerable.  
Moreover,  throughout  the  downturn,  Canadian  labour  and  housing  markets  held  up  better 
(Charts 6 and 7), meaning that the incomes and net worth of Canadians were not as hard hit 
as  those  of  Americans  (Chart  3).  So,  while  there  is  no  doubt  the  financial  crisis  and 
accompanying recession have been painful here, Canadians have had less need to increase 
savings to restore their balance sheets.  
Still, Canadians have saved more. The personal savings rate in this country rose to an eight-
year high of 5.5 per cent in the second quarter. The Bank projects that this rate will moderate 
only slightly over the medium term. We view the sharp increases in household savings as 
                                                 
2  Residential  investment  accounted  for  roughly  14  per  cent  of  GDP  growth  from  2003  to  2005,  inclusive. 
Subprime mortgages accounted for 20 per cent of new mortgage originations in 2005 and more than 22 per 
cent in 2006. 
It is worth noting that in an environment of rising unemployment, the savings rate of U.S. households that are 
working has risen even more sharply than the aggregate numbers suggest. 
3 
4   For  example,  Ricardian  equivalence  predicts  that  households  would  save  more  in  response  to  higher 
government deficits, anticipating the future tax liabilities required to address the rising public debt. 
5  To the 2002–04 average over the next five years. 
2 
 BIS Review 168/2009
largely precautionary, that is, reflecting uncertainty about the economic outlook and financial 
conditions. 
As the economy begins to grow again and confidence is gradually restored, we expect that 
some of these precautionary savings will be unwound, and that some consumers will take 
further advantage of unusually low borrowing rates. Indeed, our current stimulative monetary 
policy  is  meant,  in  part,  to  encourage  such  behaviour.  Stronger  growth  in  domestic 
consumption  will  be  necessary  to  offset  weak  external  demand  in  order  to  restore  the 
Canadian economy to balance and inflation to target. Recent data have been consistent with 
these expectations. 
Going forward, there are risks, on both the upside and the downside, to this outlook for the 
Canadian  personal  savings  rate.  Canadian  households  could  remain  more  cautious, 
chastened by  the  recent  financial and  economic  trauma,  leading  to  more  durably  elevated 
savings.  Some  of  the  issues  brought  to  the  fore  by  the  crisis,  such  as  retirement  funding, 
could also alter household savings behaviour over the nearer term. Over the next few days, 
the federal, provincial, and territorial finance ministers will meet to discuss these issues, in 
recognition  of  their  importance  to  Canadians.  Finally,  more  protracted  U.S.  and  global 
recoveries  could  restrain  Canadian  households,  by  affecting  both  the  confidence  and 
economic prospects of Canadians.  
On  the  other  hand,  there  is  a  risk  that,  as  growth  returns,  the  resilience  of  Canadian 
households through the crisis could lead to declines in the savings rate that are sharper, and 
increases in household borrowing that are larger, than the Bank has projected.  
Whatever happens, the Bank’s monetary policy reaction to consumer behaviour will always 
be driven by its implications – taken in conjunction with all other relevant factors – for inflation 
over the medium-term horizon.  
Households and financial stability in Canada 
Household finances are also important for financial system stability. As was painfully learned 
from  the  U.S.  experience,  a  stable  financial  system  is  fundamental  for  the  effective 
functioning of the economy and the financial welfare of citizens. 
In this regard, there are two important considerations. First, financial and price stability share 
common  determinants  but  have  different  time  horizons.  Inflation  continuously  reflects  real 
shocks  and/or  policy  responses,  while  financial  vulnerabilities  are  much  less  predictable. 
They  develop  over  time  and  can  persist  for  longer  than  expected.  Simply  put,  behaviour 
consistent  with  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  could  simultaneously  build  financial 
stresses  over  a  longer  horizon.  Second,  when  evaluating  the  financial  condition  of 
Canadians,  we  need  to  look  beyond  the  aggregate  for  possible  changes  in  distribution  of 
debt among households.  
The  Financial  System  Review  (FSR)  is  a  semi-annual  Bank  publication  that  examines 
developments  in  the  financial  system  and  provides  an  analysis  of  policy  directions  in  the 
sector.  In  our  most  recent  FSR,  we  judge  that  most  of  the  risks  to  the  stability  of  the 
Canadian financial system have ebbed in recent months. At the same time, our assessment 
of the risks related to household balance sheets is that they have increased further. 
As noted in the FSR, the vulnerability of Canadian households to adverse wealth and income 
shocks  has  grown  in  recent  years.  Aggregate  debt  levels  have  risen  sharply  relative  to 
income. Those debt levels have continued to grow fairly rapidly this year, unusually so for a 
recession.6 For some households, this additional indebtedness has translated into increased 
                                                 
6  Real consumer credit, including home equity lines of credit, has grown at a 7 per cent pace over the past year, 
in contrast with the outright declines during the recessions of the early 1980s and 1990s. 
BIS Review 168/2009 
 3
financial stress. Personal bankruptcies in Canada rose 41 per cent in the third quarter from 
the  same  period  a  year  ago,  leaving  the  number  of  bankruptcies  as  a  proportion  of  the 
population at its highest level since 1991. Delinquency rates on loans have risen as well, with 
the proportion of mortgages with payments in arrears three months or more having increased 
by half over the past year.  
Stress testing the Canadian household sector  
To  understand  better  the  vulnerability  of  Canadian  households,  and  the  consequences  for 
financial stability, the Bank undertakes regular stress tests. The June FSR reported on the 
potential impact of a more severe economic downturn on households. The results illustrated 
that  a  hypothetical  increase  in  unemployment  could  produce  loan  losses  for  financial 
institutions representing about 10 per cent of their Tier 1 capital.7  
While  the  near-term  risks  from  a  further  sharp  deterioration  in  labour  markets  have 
diminished,  the  Bank  believes  that  overall  risks  to  financial  stability  arising  from  the 
household  sector  have  continued  to  increase.  In  particular,  the  combination  of  sustained 
growth  of  household  debt  relative  to  income  and  a  rising  interest  rate  environment  could 
increase the vulnerability of households to an adverse shock. In the current FSR, the Bank 
conducts  stress-test  scenarios  to  examine  the  potential  impact  of  growing  debt  and  rising 
interest  rates  on  the  debt-service  ratio  of  Canadian  households  (Table  1).  We  look  at 
scenarios such as these, not because we think they are the most likely outcome, but rather 
to  provide  an  assessment  of  downside  risks  that  could  potentially  generate  stress  in  the 
Canadian financial system. 
The simulation generates a scenario indicating that, by the middle of 2012, almost one in ten 
(9.6  per  cent)  Canadian  households  would  have  a  debt-service  ratio  greater  than  40  per 
cent, the threshold above which households are considered financially vulnerable (Table 2). 
Moreover,  the  percentage  of  debt  owed  by  these  vulnerable  households  would  almost 
double. Both of these metrics are well above their recent peaks.8  
While these simulation results are purely illustrative, they give pause for reflection. It would 
not  be  healthy  to  have  almost  20  per  cent  of  household  debt  extended  to  vulnerable 
households. Nor is it necessary to secure our recovery. 
The risks are not isolated to the most vulnerable. A shock to economic conditions could be 
transmitted to the broader financial system through deterioration in the credit quality of loans 
to households. In such an event, increased loan-loss provisions and reduced quality of the 
remaining loans could lead to tighter credit conditions more broadly and, in turn, to mutually 
reinforcing declines in real activity and in the health of the financial sector. While the broader 
effects  are  difficult  to  anticipate  with  precision,  some  sectors,  such  as  retail  and  housing, 
would likely be affected more than others. Such a shock would also affect certain segments 
of the capital markets, such as credit card securitization. More fundamentally, strains on the 
household  sector  could  also  cause  a  more  generalized  rise  in  risk  premia,  with  attendant 
negative implications for a variety of asset prices. 
                                                 
7  This  is  the  direct  impact  and  excludes  indirect  effects  from  induced  stress  on  businesses  and  financial 
markets. 
8  Both  these  metrics  peaked  in  2000  when  7.4  per  cent  of  Canadian  households  had  a  debt-service  ratio 
greater than 40 per cent, and the percentage of debt held by these households reached almost 14 per cent. 
Data available goes back to 1999. 
4 
 BIS Review 168/2009
Conclusion 
At present, the risks arising from the Canadian household sector are relatively low. Indeed, 
by some measures, Canadian household finances appear quite healthy. The current rate of 
mortgage  arrears,  for  example,  remains  more  than  one-third  below  its  peak  in  the  early 
1990s. Going into the crisis, Canadian households carried considerably less debt than their 
American  counterparts.  That  remains  true  today.  Data  released  Monday  show  that 
rebounding  housing  and  financial  markets  increased  Canadian  household  net  worth  to 
589 per cent of disposable income by the end of the third quarter, above its 10-year average.  
While asset prices can rise and fall, debt endures. Moreover, the linkages between the real 
economy and the financial sector are complex, non-linear, and often opaque. That is why we 
cannot afford to be complacent. Indeed, one objective of using the FSR to profile risks to the 
Canadian financial system is to help prevent these risks from materializing. When risks are 
still manageable is precisely the best time to act. We must be vigilant, and all parties must 
fulfill their responsibilities. 
Responsibility starts with the individual. Our advice to Canadians has been consistent: We 
have  weathered  a  severe  crisis  –  one  that  required  extraordinary  fiscal  and  monetary 
measures.  Extraordinary  measures  are  the  means  to  an  end:  the  return  to  the  ordinary. 
Although we expect the recovery to be gradual and protracted, these measures are working. 
Ordinary times will eventually return and, with them, more normal interest rates and costs of 
borrowing. It is the responsibility of households now to ensure that in the future, when the 
recovery  takes  hold  and  extraordinary  measures  are  unwound,  they  can  still  service  their 
debts.  
Similarly,  lenders  have  responsibilities.  Financial  institutions  should  actively  monitor  risk 
stemming from households and not take false comfort derived from mortgage insurance and 
past performance of household credit. As our simulations suggest, the overall credit profile of 
Canadian households could well shift if debt continues to grow at current rates. The Bank 
expects that Canada’s financial institutions will continue to apply their high standards of risk 
management, for which they are being justly lauded the world over.  
Policy-makers and regulators, including the Bank of Canada, have responsibilities, as well. 
The Bank is working intensively with the Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions 
(OSFI)  at  the  Basel  Committee  on  the  design  of  new  international  capital  and  liquidity 
standards. The Bank collaborates closely with the Department of Finance and discusses with 
federal  agencies,  as  required,  to  monitor  evolving  risks  and  take  appropriate  actions.  The 
Bank’s  ongoing  research  and  analysis  of  the  financial  system,  including  the  work  I  have 
discussed today, is an important element of our commitment to helping ensure Canada has a 
resilient,  secure  financial  system  that  enhances  the  economic  and  financial  welfare  of  all 
Canadians. 
 
BIS Review 168/2009 
 5
  6 
   BIS Review 168/2009
  7
 BIS Review 168/2009 
    8 
 BIS Review 168/2009
  9
 BIS Review 168/2009 
  10 
 BIS Review 168/2009
