Elizabeth A Duke: Envisioning a future for housing finance 
Speech  by  Ms  Elizabeth  A  Duke,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  Mortgage  Foreclosure  Policy  Conference,  Chicago,  10  December 
2009. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website. 
 Good afternoon. I want to thank the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago for this opportunity to 
offer my perspectives on the housing market – a topic of paramount importance to us all. The 
conference theme suggests that I take you on a retrospective journey about homeownership 
in  the  past,  bring  you  into  the  present  day  with  thoughts  about  the  current  challenging 
conditions, and leave you with insights on the future state of mortgage finance and housing 
policies.  With  the  holiday  season  upon  us,  I  must  admit  that  I  find  this  trip  reminiscent  of 
Ebenezer Scrooge’s journey in A Christmas Carol. The Ghost of Homeownership Past might, 
in retrospect, remind us of a seemingly idyllic time in our nation’s history, with high and rising 
homeownership rates, while the Ghost of Homeownership Present would likely describe one 
of the bleaker periods in our nation’s economy. But I hope that the Ghost of Homeownership 
Yet  to  Come  would  be  much  cheerier  than  Dickens’  spectral  visitor  and  would  show  us  a 
future  with  a  housing  and  mortgage  finance  system  that  functions  efficiently  and  provides 
adequate safeguards for consumers, lenders, and investors going forward. I’m afraid I cannot 
describe for you, as assuredly as Dickens might, just what that future market will look like, 
but I will share my thoughts on some general principles that, I would argue, we should look 
for in new market structures or practices that may emerge.  
Responsible home ownership and housing finance 
Let  me  establish  from  the  outset  that  I  believe  responsible  homeownership  has,  for  many 
years,  proven  to  be  good  business  and  good  public  policy.  The  benefits  derived  from 
sustainable  homeownership  –  including  robust  local  investment  and  household  financial 
stability  –  bring  value  to  a  community.  Homeownership  has  been  the  principal  means  for 
many families to build wealth and financial stability over time, to use this wealth as a further 
investment  in  education  and  entrepreneurship,  and  to  transfer  this  wealth  to  future 
generations.  Lenders  who  engage  in  safe,  sensible  underwriting  help  to  ensure  that 
borrowers are matched with loan products that they can repay. In turn, borrowers can use 
debt  to  buy  a  productive  asset  that  they  could  not  otherwise  purchase.  Although  leverage 
gained a bad name in the recent crisis, responsible and sustainable leverage can normally 
help more individuals become homeowners sooner.  
The scarcity of available mortgage lending at present – especially the lack of relatively low-
down-payment  products  beyond  the  Veterans  Administration  (VA)  and  Federal  Housing 
Administration (FHA) market – most hurts modest-income households who lack other assets. 
This makes it especially difficult for first-time and minority homebuyers to enter the market. 
Going  forward,  the  challenge  will  be  to  encourage  responsible,  well-underwritten  loan 
products  for  these  segments  of  the  market  while  banning  lending  activity  that  is  unfair  or 
deceptive.  
Homeownership Past 
Depending  on  how  far  back  you  walk  with  the  Ghost  of  Homeownership  Past,  you  might 
reach  a  seemingly  idyllic  world  where  all  mortgages  were  simple  contracts  made  by  local 
institutions lending for their own portfolios to consumers who could make a substantial down 
BIS Review 167/2009 
 1
payment  and  had  excellent  credit.  But  in  that  ostensibly  happy  place,  many  responsible 
consumers  were  excluded  from  the  benefits  of  homeownership,  funds  for  lending  were 
limited, and lending institutions ultimately found themselves with unmanageable interest rate 
risk. In the 1990s and the earlier part of this decade, financial engineering in the secondary 
market for mortgages led to the development of more flexible products, efficient underwriting 
systems, and alternatives for new borrowers to enter the market – all good outcomes when 
done  right.  Experimentation,  technological  advances,  and  data  modeling  allowed  for  the 
development  of  niche  mortgage  products  that  could  better  meet  the  needs  of  particular 
subgroups  of  potential  borrowers.  These  tools,  when  coupled  with  other  risk  mitigants, 
allowed greater numbers of Americans to buy, and stay in, homes they could afford.  
But  not  all  of  this  innovation  proved  to  be  positive,  for  either  borrowers  or  investors.  The 
market  overheated.  Mortgages  became  increasingly  complex  and  opaque,  as  did  the 
mortgage-backed securities that were then offered to investors. Risk innovation became risk 
layering. A speculative mentality took hold among investors and consumers who expected 
limitless  house  price  appreciation.  Borrowers  overreached;  risk  mitigation  peeled  away  as 
niche products were mass marketed; lenders made and purchased mortgage loans with lax 
underwriting  standards;  and  investors  relied  too  heavily  on  what  turned  out  to  be  faulty 
ratings of poorly structured securities. All of this contributed to a housing price bubble that, as 
we are all too aware, eventually burst. In response, the surviving lenders severely curtailed 
credit availability.  
Homeownership Present 
The lingering effects of this recent history continue to be felt in today’s housing market. We 
are  now  seeing  high  delinquency  rates  in  every  category  of  mortgages.  While  defaults  in 
2007 and 2008 were elevated by poor underwriting practices and the use of inappropriate 
mortgage products, the current deterioration reflects to a greater degree job losses and lower 
house prices. In addition, reduced home equity has impaired borrowers’ abilities to refinance 
their  mortgages  or  sell  their  homes  to  cope  with  income  loss,  unexpected  expenses,  or 
adverse  life  events.  Numerous  public,  private,  and  nonprofit  efforts  are  underway  to  keep 
these  delinquencies  from  becoming  a  wave  of  foreclosures.  For  example,  the  Federal 
Reserve’s  program  of  purchasing  government  agency  mortgage-backed  securities  has 
significantly reduced mortgage rates, which, in combination with the Administration’s Home 
Affordable  Refinance  Program  (HARP),  has  enabled  millions  of  families  to  reduce  their 
mortgage payments this year. Hundreds of thousands of homeowners are making reduced 
payments  through  trial  modifications  under  the  Home  Affordable  Modification  Program 
(HAMP).  While  these  numbers  are  encouraging,  the  real success  will  be  in  the  number  of 
foreclosures  actually  averted  through  successful  permanent  modifications.  At  the  Board  of 
Governors in Washington, and at the regional Federal Reserve Banks across the country, we 
are  providing  data  and  bringing  together  different  parties  from  the  private,  public,  and 
nonprofit sectors to encourage strategies for refinance, loan modifications, short sales, and 
other alternatives to preventable foreclosures.  
The  Federal  Reserve  System  also  supports  local  and  regional  initiatives  to  address  the 
negative effects that large numbers of foreclosures can have on individual consumers and 
their surrounding communities. Neighborhood Housing Services of Chicago is probably one 
of the finest examples of such efforts. In the mid-1990s, NHS of Chicago identified predatory 
lending as a threat to the neighborhoods it served. In collaboration with the City of Chicago 
and many others including – I am proud to say – the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, NHS 
formed the Home Ownership Preservation Initiative (HOPI). As other communities across the 
country  experienced  similar  problems,  this  initiative  became  a  model  for  foreclosure 
prevention and neighborhood stabilization efforts elsewhere. This is important, tireless work 
and much remains to be done.  
2 
 BIS Review 167/2009
With  respect  to  new  lending,  data  collected  under  the  Home  Mortgage  Disclosure  Act 
(HMDA) for 2008 tell the story of a fractured market for housing finance as private mortgage 
lending came to a standstill and new lending depended heavily on government support. The 
number of active mortgage companies fell 25 percent from 2006 to 2008, in part because the 
warehouse  lines  of  credit  that  mortgage  companies  depended  on  to  fund  their  loans 
contracted significantly. In addition, overall demand for housing slowed appreciably. Indeed, 
the number of mortgage applications in 2008, 14.2 million, was about half the 2006 level and 
the lowest in more than a decade. Such a low level of applications suggests that potential 
borrowers were wary of entering the housing market or feared being turned down for a loan.  
The 2008 HMDA data also show a dramatic increase in loans made by FHA and VA, whose 
share of total mortgage originations were higher than at any time in the 19-year history of 
HMDA  reporting.1  These  government-backed  loans  have  been  characterized  as  the 
alternative for borrowers with a weaker credit record in the absence of a subprime market. In 
addition,  they  are  presumably  attractive  at  the  moment  because  they  are  among  the  few 
affordable options for buyers with stronger credit records but only modest savings available 
for a down payment.  
In  the  recent  past,  such  borrowers  would  have  used  a  so-called  “piggyback”  mortgage  – 
effectively borrowing part of the down payment – or secured private mortgage insurance to 
compensate  for  a  higher  loan-to-value  (LTV)  ratio.  According  to  data  from  the  National 
Association of Realtors, the typical first-time homebuyer over the past several years has had 
a down payment of less than 10 percent of the purchase price of the home.2 Securing even 
that much has historically been a barrier to home purchase, especially among lower-income, 
younger, or minority households.3 Yet higher LTV loans that help overcome this barrier also 
pose higher credit risk.  
Striking  the  right  balance  in  loan  underwriting  is  critically  important  but  has  proven  very 
difficult. The development of more flexible underwriting standards was originally hailed for the 
potential  to  help  millions  of  families  become  homeowners.  But  at  some  point,  a  line  was 
obviously  crossed,  standards  were  dangerously  lowered,  and  loans  were  underwritten 
without  any  regard  for  a  borrower’s  ability  to  repay.  When  home  prices  fell  and  jobs  were 
lost, borrowers who did not have other assets to tap were left exposed. So the question is: 
How  can  the  market  re-emerge  with  enough  flexibility  to  allow  more  families  to  achieve 
homeownership in a responsible way, while avoiding the mistakes of the recent past?  
Achieving credit quality and availability 
Some  would  argue  that  most  of  the  really  risky  behavior  is  now  out  of  the  market.  But, 
unfortunately, the backlash has restricted a lot of perfectly responsible lending as well. Banks 
are reluctant to put any but the lowest possible risk loans in their portfolios. And the market 
for new private mortgage loan securitizations is essentially closed. Thus, borrowers face tight 
underwriting  requirements,  even  if  their  own  risk  profile  looks  relatively  “safe”  by  historical 
standards.  Moreover,  even  homebuyers  with  the  requisite  down  payment  realize  that  their 
home equity is much less liquid than in the past. Once, borrowers could count on cash-out 
refinancing or home equity lines of credit as a means of cheaply accessing their home equity; 
                                                 
1   Robert B. Avery, Neil Bhutta, Kenneth P. Brevoort, Glenn B. Canner, and Christa N. Gibbs, “The 2008 HMDA 
Data:  The  Mortgage  Market  during  a  Turbulent  Year,”  (Draft).  Article  forthcoming  in  the  Federal  Reserve 
Bulletin. In 2008, the reported HMDA share of FHA-insured home loans was 21.5 percent. The percentage of 
HMDA reported FHA loans had not reached nearly 20 percent since 1990 (18.1). 
2   National Association of Realtors Profile of Homebuyers and Sellers. 
3   The National Association of Realtors, “2009 Housing Opportunity Pulse Survey.” The NAR annual telephone 
survey of 1000 adults shows “…eight in 10 (borrowers) still consider having enough money for downpayment 
and closing costs to be the biggest obstacle to buying a home.” 
BIS Review 167/2009 
 3
these avenues are now much more restricted. A risk-averse renter might prefer to keep his 
assets readily available rather than lock them up in a house. On balance, even taking into 
account  the  excesses  of  the  bubble  period,  it  appears  that  lenders  have  now  tightened 
underwriting  terms  so  much  that  the  lack  of  credit  availability  is  at  least  partially  an 
impediment to homeownership.  
As we work to correct the problems of the recent past, we must keep in mind the importance 
of access to credit. If anything, the recent mortgage meltdown and sharp pullback in lending 
only  demonstrates  how  critical  it  is  for  the  economy  to  have  a  well-functioning  housing 
finance market. With the old mortgage system in disarray, we are, one hopes, within sight of 
a  new  and  stronger  system.  While  there  are  many  structural  permutations  that  might 
characterize the new system, I would suggest we focus on four core principles for evaluating 
proposals:  
Adequate  consumer  protection.  First  and  foremost,  any  new  system  must  contain 
adequate  protections  for  consumers.  In  the  aftermath  of  widespread  abuses,  consumers 
need to feel confident that they can satisfactorily negotiate a reasonable mortgage.  
Transparency. Second, there must be transparency at all levels. Retail products should be 
as transparent as possible, so that consumers find it easy to understand the terms and risks 
of  their  mortgages.  Lenders  and  servicers  should  also  make  as  much  information  as  is 
reasonably feasible available to investors. Indeed, adequate information for due diligence is 
likely a prerequisite to attract capital back to the mortgage market.  
Simplicity.  Third,  the  new  system  should  encourage  simplicity.  Retail  mortgage  contracts 
ought  to  be  as  simple  as  possible.  Too  often,  the  complexity  of  mortgages  has  served  to 
confuse borrowers and make it more difficult to make informed decisions.  
Similarly,  the  complexity  of  the  securitizations  into  which  mortgages  were  packaged  made 
analysis  difficult  for  investors.  These  structures  turned  out  to  be  especially  fragile  when 
stressed with high defaults and subsequent losses. After the crash, with delinquencies rising, 
investors found modeling the cash flows under alternative scenarios confusing and uncertain. 
While complexity may prove to be an inevitable byproduct of financial innovation, investors 
will likely demand much simpler instruments going forward.  
Properly  aligned  incentives.  Finally,  the  new  system  should  feature  clear  roles  and 
properly aligned incentives for all players. Too often in the recent turmoil, we saw examples 
of misaligned interests and competing objectives. For instance, there is evidence that some 
loan officers and mortgage brokers may have been as concerned about whether loans were 
profitable to them personally as they were about whether the borrower could actually repay.4 
Servicers, too, turned out to have interests that were not always aligned with investors, and 
different tranches of investors themselves had competing interests that they tried to impose 
onto servicers. Certainly, greater clarity about roles and responsibilities, and the associated 
compensation  of  participants  in  the  origination  chain,  will  help  all  parties  understand,  and 
properly align, incentives.  
Homeownership yet to come 
Under these guiding principles, what would a new mortgage market look like?  
                                                 
4   See  “Did  Securitization  Lead  to  Lax  Screening?  Evidence  from  Subprime  Loans”  Benjamin  Keys,  Tanmoy 
K. Mukherjee, Amit Seru, and Vikrant Vig, Quarterly Journal of Economics 125, (February 2010). 
4 
 BIS Review 167/2009
Lending practices  
The Federal Reserve has already taken steps to implement and enforce safeguards to shield 
consumers from hazards in the market. In recent years, we have created a blanket of new 
protections  for  consumers  under  the  Home  Ownership  and  Equity  Protection  Act,  adding 
layers of defenses for borrowers as they participate in the economy.5 The new rules, most of 
which went into effect on October 1, target higher-priced loans, where borrowers are most 
vulnerable to abuse. Our new rules require that lenders verify borrowers’ abilities to repay 
these “riskier” mortgages, ban prepayment penalties if payments may increase in the loan’s 
early  years,  require  escrows  for  taxes  and  insurance,  and  prohibit  a  range  of  misleading 
advertising practices.  
Under Truth in Lending we also have recently proposed revised mortgage disclosure forms 
for all loans. These new forms were developed through consumer testing to ensure that they 
provide information that is useful and understandable to consumers. These disclosures are 
designed  to  focus  consumer  attention  on  mortgage  features,  such  as  variable  rates,  that 
might  be  appropriate  for  some  consumers,  but  potentially  risky  for  others.  And  we  have 
proposed to ban compensation that gives originators incentives to steer borrowers to loans 
with  higher  rates  or  disadvantageous  terms.  We  would  encourage  comments  on  these 
proposals; the public comment period is open until December 24.6  
Despite  efforts  to  improve  disclosures  and  ban  egregious  practices,  obtaining  a  mortgage 
and purchasing a home is still a significant and complex transaction. Evidence indicates that 
consumer  counseling,  whether  for  pre-purchase  or  foreclosure  prevention,  leads  to  better 
outcomes for consumers.7 This is likely to remain true even if we do a better job of providing 
much-needed  financial  education.  So  it  would  make  sense  to  include  strong  incentives  to 
obtain counseling and strong support for housing counselors in our toolkit of the future.  
Secondary market  
While  these  important  consumer  protections  will  help  restore  borrower  confidence, 
restoration of investor confidence may not come as easily. Whether the ultimate vehicle is 
covered  bonds,  loan  securitizations,  or  some  other  model,  a  mechanism  for  channeling 
investment funds into housing finance will be critical to meeting the demands of a normally 
functioning housing market. Restoration of the residential housing finance market will require 
more than liquidity. At a minimum, it is likely to require access to information, standardized 
contracts, and simplified structures.  
In the past, potential investors found it difficult to access loan-level data on the deals they 
were investing in. At best, market participants had access to underwriting and performance 
information  only  after  the  deal  had  been  issued.  Even  then,  complete  information  on 
borrower  leverage  –  such  as  through  “silent  seconds”  or  junior  liens  obtained  after  the 
origination of the first – was difficult, or expensive, to come by.  
Some of the security structures that proliferated late in the credit boom contained features 
that, whatever their initial purpose have served to obfuscate the relationship between loan 
performance  and  security  cash  flow.  Securities  also  differed  markedly  in  the  governing 
contracts, notably the pooling and servicing agreements, or PSAs. These crucial documents 
were  hundreds  of  pages  long,  differed  across  deals,  and  the  agreements  themselves, 
                                                 
5   See Regulation Z (12 CFR Part 226), which implements the Truth in Lending Act and the Home Ownership 
and Protection Act. 
6   See Federal Register notices for Regulation Z – Closed-end Mortgages and Regulation Z – Home Equity Line 
of Credit. 
7   See Neil S. Mayer, Peter A.  Tatian, Kenneth Temkin, Charles A. Calhoun, “National Foreclosure Mitigation 
Counseling Program Evaluation: Preliminary Analysis of Program Effects,” Urban Institute, November 2, 2009. 
BIS Review 167/2009 
 5
despite  being  obsessively  detailed,  failed  to  address  a  scenario  of  rapidly  mounting  credit 
losses.  
Future securities will benefit from as much standardization as possible across contracts, and 
the  contracts  will  have  to  spell  out  clearly  how  they  can  be  amended  to  deal  with 
unforeseeable circumstances. Recognizing that no contract will ever be able to specify rules 
for all possible contingencies, contracts should specify a governance structure for decision-
making in extreme circumstances.  
Servicers  
Servicers have not always been the most visible part of the mortgage business. Responses 
to  this  current  crisis,  however,  including  attempts  to  make  large-scale  loan  modifications, 
have  pointed  to  the  critical  role  that  servicers  play  through  their  direct  interaction  with 
borrowers. Yet, there have been problems. Many servicers did not have – and some may still 
not  have  –  adequate  systems  and  personnel  in  place  to  deal  with  the  sheer  scale  of  the 
foreclosure crisis. Servicers are concerned about the competing interest of investors and the 
threat  of  litigation  for  pursuing  alternatives  to  foreclosure.  In  turn,  some  investors  have 
questioned servicers’ incentives.  
In the future, servicer contracts will need to provide clear guidance and incentive structures 
that lead to transparency and certainty in loan modifications and other loss mitigation tools. 
Performance under such contracts will require servicers to make investments in staffing and 
information  technology  infrastructure.  And  finally,  in  the  future,  compensation  for  servicers 
likely will need to recognize the different resources required for loss mitigation as opposed to 
simple payment accounting and forwarding.  
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac  
It would be unrealistic to expect the private mortgage market to rebound without defining the 
ongoing  role  of  Fannie  Mae  and  Freddie  Mac.  These  government  sponsored  enterprises 
(GSEs) have continued to issue large quantities of securities even as private securitization 
faltered, apparently because investors have continued to believe that the government stands 
behind  them.  That  experience  suggests  that,  at  least  under  the  most  stressed  conditions, 
some form of government backstop may be necessary to ensure continued securitization of 
mortgages. However, restarting the GSEs in their old forms would do nothing but ask for a 
repeat  of  recent  history.  Without  getting  into  specific  proposals  today,  I’ll  simply  say  that 
whatever is the ultimate future for Fannie and Freddie, market participants will need to see a 
clear  roadmap  for  both  the  individual  institutions  and  the  role  of  government  in  housing 
finance before private markets can begin to map a course for themselves.  
Conclusion 
Today I have attempted to outline a framework for a better-functioning mortgage market that 
protects  consumers  and  provides  transparency  to  lenders,  investors,  and  all  market 
participants.  This  is  the  housing  finance  market  we  need  to  create  if  responsible 
homeownership is to return as a safe and viable option for the majority of consumers. It is a 
market that would be attractive and profitable for lenders, servicers, and investors who are 
prepared to engage in prudent, responsible, and transparent business practices.  
Lending, when done responsibly, is good for business. Homeownership, when sustainable, is 
good for consumers. Leverage, when used judiciously, is critical to a functioning market. It 
would  be  hard  to  overestimate  the  damage  that  has  been  done  to  the  housing  market  in 
recent  years,  and  especially  to  the  millions  of  families  that  are  suffering  the  devastating 
consequences of foreclosure. It would be equally difficult to overestimate the damage that 
would be done in the future if we must live with a chronically impaired mortgage market. We 
6 
 BIS Review 167/2009
absolutely  need  to  change  our  systems  so  that  they  function  properly,  support  the 
emergence  of  simpler,  more  transparent  markets,  ensure  aligned  incentives  among  all 
parties,  and,  above  all,  protect  consumers.  That,  I  would  hope,  is  the  market  of 
Homeownership Yet to Come.  
BIS Review 167/2009 
 7
