Ignazio Visco: Challenges to international cooperation in the wake of the 
global crisis  
Speech  by  Mr  Ignazio  Visco,  Deputy  Director  General  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  at  The  Italian 
Chamber of Commerce and Industry for the UK XXXI Annual Conference “A New Approach 
for Global Economic and Social Growth”, London, 16 October 2009.  
1.  
The unfolding of the crisis  
 Origins  
1.1  
Whether the global crisis that has hit the world economy so severely since August 2007 was 
rooted in macroeconomic causes is an open question. To be sure, the trigger and proximate 
causes  of  the  crisis  were  essentially  financial,  originating  in  a  specific  segment  of  the  US 
financial  system,  i.e.  the  subprime  mortgage  market.  Nevertheless,  I  believe  that  financial 
excesses could not have developed to the extent they did if the macroeconomic environment 
had not been characterised by large saving-investment imbalances, very low interest rates 
and asset price misalignments. These factors helped create the conditions in which financial 
innovations  and  regulatory  failures  caused  serious  dysfunctions  in  the  US  and  global 
financial  system.  The  general  climate  of  excessive  optimism  that  those  macroeconomic 
conditions  supported  certainly  contributed,  with  risk  managers  and  supervisors  allowing 
financial vulnerabilities to grow basically unchecked.  
Signals of macroeconomic stress, which interacted with financial system flaws to create very 
serious fragilities, had been manifest at least since the late 1990s. The most evident were 
the dramatic fall in the saving rate of American households, from around 7 per cent in the 
early 1990s to near zero in 2005-2007, and the persistence and significant widening of the 
US external deficit (from 1.6 per cent of GDP in 1997 to 6 per cent in 2006), against growing 
surpluses in a number of emerging economies, in particular China (from 1.3 to 11 per cent of 
GDP between 2002 and 2007) and the oil exporting countries.  
Focussing on the role of policies in sustaining this pattern of highly unbalanced growth and 
on how they reacted to the various shocks – geopolitical, technological and economic – to 
the global economy, two factors appear to have played a major role.1 The first was the great 
increase  in  US  and  global  liquidity,  in  part  owing  to  the  generally  accommodating  US 
monetary  policy  stance.  This  accompanied  a  protracted  expansion  of  consumer  spending 
financed by growing household indebtedness. At the same time, low interest rates triggered 
a search for yield that squeezed risk premiums on whole classes of assets and so tended to 
make financial conditions even more favourable for a broad range of borrowers. Abundant 
liquidity and credit expansion, as well as regulatory failures in some markets, helped feed an 
uncommonly synchronised global boom in house prices.  
The  second  element  was  the  decision  by  China  and  other  rapidly  growing  emerging 
economies  to  peg  their  currencies  to  the  dollar  as  a  way  of  supporting  their  essentially 
export-led growth model. Not only did this imply basically importing the generally easy US 
monetary  stance;  most  importantly,  it  produced  an  enormous  accumulation  of  official 
reserves (from $168 billion to $1.9 trillion in China between 2000 and 2008, 40 per cent of 
the increase in the world as a whole), perhaps as a self-insurance response in the wake of 
the Asian crisis of 1997-98. Largely invested in US financial and monetary instruments, these 
                                                 
1   See Visco (2009b). 
BIS Review 128/2009 
 1
reserves helped to finance the massive US deficit in the current account of the balance of 
payments and to maintain very low interest rates along the whole length of the yield curve.  
Both of these policies were attractive in the short term but unsustainable in the long run. In 
fact,  when  global  supply  encountered  bottlenecks  in  the  form  of  shortages  of  primary 
commodities  and  as  inflationary  pressures  started  to  materialize,  the  Federal  Reserve 
progressively tightened monetary policy, and house prices started to fall. At that point, the 
serious risk exposures that had been built up within the financial system suddenly became 
apparent, precipitating the turmoil. The relevance of this broad set of interrelated factors – 
macroeconomic as well as financial – in creating a crisis of these proportions is evident in the 
way  the  crisis  was  so  rapidly  propagated  across  financial  markets  and  then  to  the  real 
economy,  not  just  in  the  industrialised  world  but  globally.  It  was  the  unbalanced  world 
consumption patterns that transformed what might otherwise have been a very serious but 
limited episode of financial turmoil into a fully-fledged global economic crisis, with plunging 
world trade and output. When the United States stopped serving as “consumer of last resort” 
the  whole  world  suffered  from  insufficient  aggregate  demand  precisely  because  of  the 
unbalanced consumption patterns.  
The real economic consequences  
1.2  
The  crisis  has  left  deep  scars.  In  the  advanced  economies  the  IMF  projects  the 
unemployment rate to reach 9.3 per cent in 2010, almost 4 percentage points above the low 
point registered in 2007; the shortfall in GDP, relative to potential, is projected to reach 4 per 
cent this year and to remain just slightly below this level in 2010.2 But predicting the exact 
dimensions of this slack is complicated, since the crisis is also likely to affect potential output 
in various ways that are difficult to quantify. 
Past experience shows that the repercussions of financial crises in terms of lost output are 
both significant and sustained: the IMF has estimated that seven years after the start of a 
major crisis gross domestic product is still, on average, ten percentage points below where it 
would  have  been  had  it  continued  on  the  previous  trend.  However,  growth  paths  after  the 
initial  output  decline  have  differed  widely  in  historical  experiences:  while  in  some  cases 
output gradually returned toward the pre-crisis trend, in others the gap widened over time. It 
is probably still too early to tell which type of adjustment pattern will prevail this time.  
While there is consensus on the fact that the level of potential output in advanced countries 
is  likely  to  be  reduced  permanently  as  a  result  of  lower  investment  and  structural 
unemployment, estimates of the size of this loss vary widely, around 3 to 5 per cent. What 
will  happen  to  its  future  growth  rate  is  even  more  uncertain.  Both  the  IMF  and  the  OECD 
have assumed so far that, as a first approximation, it should be unaffected. However, one 
could argue that we may be at the beginning of a major structural change, certainly in the 
financial sector and perhaps in the economy as a whole: uncertainties over the recovery of 
demand  and  the  process  of  deleveraging  in  the  financial  sector  could  hamper  not  only 
investment but also the accumulation of human capital and innovation, with likely negative 
effects on potential output growth.  
Policy responses and the outlook  
1.3 
Policy makers’ response was generalized and remarkably well coordinated. Official interest 
rates were lowered rapidly; in many countries they are still near zero. Central banks injected 
liquidity in unprecedented quantities, extending the range of their instruments for action. The 
severity of the crisis has created a vast international consensus on the need to accompany 
monetary action with fiscal expansion. For the G-20 economies, crisis-related discretionary 
                                                 
2  
IMF (2009). 
2 
 BIS Review 128/2009
fiscal measures are estimated at about 2 per cent of GDP in 2009 and 1.5 per cent in 2010, 
over the 2007 baseline. To this, we should add the substantial cost of various measures – 
capital injections, guarantees on bank liabilities, relief of impaired assets, liquidity and bank 
funding support – enacted in most countries to sustain the banking systems.  
This  powerful  response  averted  the  danger  of  a  systemic  collapse  and  helped  to  restore 
market confidence and bring back a more “normal” risk appetite. The cost of money market 
funding has come down considerably and worry over the health of the banking system has 
been  allayed.  Corporate  risk  spreads  have  narrowed  to  levels  close  to  those  prevailing 
before the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers in September 2008.  
Recently,  the  global  economy  has  begun  to  grow  again,  but  the  recovery  appears  to  be 
sluggish,  uneven  and  highly  dependent  on  policy  support.  According  to  the  IMF  central 
forecast, after contracting by 1 per cent in 2009 global activity should return to growth of 3 
per cent in 2010 thanks to a modest upturn in the advanced economies and more vigorous 
expansion  in  the  emerging  and  developing  countries.  By  way  of  comparison,  the  average 
world economic growth rate between 2002 and 2007 was around 5 per cent. It is important to 
stress  that  there  is  considerable  uncertainty  around  this  scenario,  and  forecasters’  current 
views  about  the  strength  of  the  recovery  span  a  wide  range.  For  example,  while  private 
forecasters  expect  US  GDP  growth  to  reach  around  2½-3  per  cent  in  2010,  the  IMF  is 
projecting only 1½ per cent growth.  
One may wonder why we are still considering the predictions of economic forecasters after 
their dismal recent performance, which surprised even Her Majesty the Queen. We should 
not  forget  that  forecasting  activity  permits  the  consistent  organisation  of  our  ideas  and 
hypotheses  about  the  most  plausible  path  of  the  main  economic  aggregates.  This  is 
particularly useful  to  analysing  the effects  of  policy  actions,  which  usually  come  with  time-
lags and through many channels. It goes without saying that economic forecasters are not 
fortune-tellers, and their projections always come with explicit or implicit probabilistic ranges 
of possible outcomes. But it is also true – to quote the great social scientist Herbert Simon – 
that unless the phenomena to be predicted “are sufficiently regular that they can simply be 
extrapolated  …  our  predictions  will  generally  be  only  as  good  as  our  theories”.3  Some 
occasions  are  particularly  marked  both  by  the  lack  of  sufficient  regularity  in  the  data 
observed  and  by  difficulty  in  properly  using  our  theories  to  anticipate  the  non-linear 
consequences  of  economic  and  financial  decisions.  This  calls  for  special  care,  better 
discussion of alternatives and greater consideration of the possibly severe consequences of 
what  may  be  seen,  ex  ante,  as  rare  events.  But  modesty  in  our  evaluation  of  economic 
projections should only be seen as a call for more transparency and better analysis, not as a 
refusal to use quantitative assessments based on an informed and probabilistic reading of 
the available evidence.  
Anyway,  the  general  view  of  the  latest  official  projections  is  very  cautious  and  correctly 
postulates that the support deriving from the fiscal stimulus and inventory rebuilding cannot 
last forever. Beyond the short term, it still remains to be seen how soon and how far private 
demand  –  consumption  and  investment  –  can  take  up  the  slack  and  give  rise  to  a  self-
sustaining recovery.  
In fact, in much of the industrial world private consumption is still stagnating at best, and its 
weakness appears even more significant if one excludes the effects of temporary measures, 
such  as  the  various  “cash  for  clunkers”  schemes  in  the  United  States  and  in  the  major 
continental European countries, or the reduction of the VAT in the United Kingdom. To the 
extent that subsidies have merely brought part of households’ planned expenditure forward, 
once  these  programmes  expire  consumption  may  lapse  again.  With  anaemic  demand 
prospects and with banks still curbing credit as they deleverage, investment too is bound to 
                                                 
3   Simon (1972), p. 170. See also Visco (2009a). 
BIS Review 128/2009 
 3
be sluggish at best for some time. And without a pick-up in the pace of investment it is hard 
to imagine any return to a healthy growth path.  
The  main  risk  is  that  rising  unemployment  rates  will  undermine  household  confidence  and 
depress  spending.  As  long  as  jobs  are  still  being  lost,  there  is  plenty  of  potential  for 
destabilizing  feedbacks.  Lower  employment  can  trigger  more  mortgage  defaults  and  put 
additional  stress  on  key  financial  institutions.  In  other  words,  as  long  as  the  employment 
picture continues to worsen, the risk that things could deteriorate again remains great.  
2.  
Challenges for international cooperation  
Repairing the financial system  
2.1  
One of the main challenges is to complete the repair of the financial system so that it can 
support  the  return  to  sustained  and  stable  growth.  As  the  financial  markets  appear  to  be 
regaining confidence, it is important that the reform momentum not be lost. The decisions of 
the  G-20  summit  in  Pittsburgh  point  to  a  renewed  effort  to  overcome  the  deep  flaws  that 
affected the financial environment prior to the eruption of the crisis.  
Although the question of capital requirements for banks is certainly most prominent, it should 
be considered only part of the solution. To discourage excessive leverage, the quantity and 
quality  of  bank  capital  should  be  raised.  But  it  is  also  of  paramount  importance  that  the 
perimeter  of  regulation  be  extended  to  cover  all  systemically  important  institutions. 
Regulatory systems must be harmonised to limit the potentially disruptive repercussions of 
regulatory arbitrage. In this context, the prudential framework should be designed to prevent 
the  pro-cyclical  accumulation  of 
financial  vulnerabilities  during  booms  and  sharp 
deleveraging during crises.  
There  is  also  widespread  recognition  of  the  need  to  reform  corporate  governance  in  the 
financial  sector,  so  as  to  align  executive  compensation  with  long-term  performance  and 
ensure greater transparency. All these measures should help deal with the threat posed by 
institutions “too big or too interconnected to fail”. Better mechanisms should be devised to 
limit the costs of failure, but widely shared solutions are still to be found. Resolution plans 
and  a  stronger  capitalisation  may  mitigate  but  will  not  eliminate  the  financial  fallout  of  the 
bankruptcy of one of these institutions and the related moral hazard.  
Rebalancing the sources of global growth  
2.2  
Whatever shape the future financial system may take, it is urgent to rebalance the sources of 
global growth. At present, the main priority of monetary and fiscal policies in all the advanced 
and in many emerging countries is still to support economic recovery by compensating for 
the weakness of private demand and countering the effects of financial deleveraging. As a 
result  of  the  crisis  and  the  strong  policy  response,  the  public  finances  have  deteriorated 
notably.  Under  current  policies,  budget  deficits  in  the  advanced  countries  are  projected  to 
remain very large and gross public debt may rise over the next five years above 110 per cent 
of GDP, from 80 per cent before the crisis.  
If  maintained  for  too  long,  the  substantial  fiscal  and  monetary  stimulus  enacted during  the 
past  year  could  become  a  new  source  of  instability.  So  the  most  challenging  task  for 
economic policy is timing what are now called “exit strategies”, i.e., when and how to phase 
out these exceptional measures. This involves striking a delicate balance. As the recovery of 
final  demand  is  likely  to  be  lacklustre  for  some  time,  support  should  not  be  withdrawn 
prematurely. At the same time, credible exit strategies are crucial to reassure the markets as 
to the commitment to price stability and a return to sound and sustainable public finances.  
Central  banks  have  already  made  it  clear  that  they  have  the  tools  necessary  to  withdraw 
excess  liquidity,  and  are  determined  to  do  so  as  soon  as  conditions  warrant.  The  most 
4 
 BIS Review 128/2009
delicate  challenge  is  to  choose  the  appropriate  timing  and  speed  for  exiting  from 
“unconventional”  measures  and  for  raising  interest  rates.  In  this  process,  the  strength  and 
durability of the recovery will have to be taken into account, as well as the progress toward 
financial system repair.  
In designing the appropriate fiscal policy response, it is important to take expectations into 
account.  The  economic  slowdown  partly  reflects  the  pessimistic  expectations  of  economic 
agents. A well-designed and well-targeted fiscal plan can help the recovery by boosting the 
confidence of households and businesses. Also the financial markets’ reaction to any given 
level of public debt is powerfully influenced by their expectations on future fiscal behaviour. 
Accompanying  the  fiscal  stimulus  with  credible  action  to  right  the  public  finances  in  the 
medium term can limit the rise in interest rates stemming from a temporary upsurge in debt. 
This  strategy  is  particularly  important  for  countries  with  high  debt  or  a  weak  reputation  for 
fiscal rectitude.  
The  problem,  particularly  at  the  present  juncture,  is  how  to  make  this  commitment  to 
medium-term  consolidation  credible  while  preserving  the  necessary  flexibility  in  the  short 
term. On the one hand, the commitment to a long-term objective may not be credible without 
an indication of how to get there. On the other hand, because the shape and strength of the 
economic  recovery  are  so  uncertain  right  now,  and  because  the  premature  end  to  fiscal 
stimulus  could  easily  derail  it,  governments  may  find  it  difficult  to  stick  to  pre-announced 
fiscal targets.  
Going forward, the need to move towards more sustainable fiscal positions will require tough 
policy choices in a number of countries. Although the challenges posed by the projected rise 
in health and pension costs connected to population ageing have been well known for some 
time, with substantial comparative assessments produced by the European Commission, the 
IMF and the OECD,4 the fiscal costs of the crisis have now sharply reduced the margins for 
manoeuvre,  and  addressing  those  challenges  can  no  longer  be  postponed.  Governments 
need to commit credibly, now, to curb the future growth of those entitlement programs; this 
could provide space for a more gradual removal of fiscal support. However, the manner in 
which  the  eventual  consolidation  is  carried  out  will  also  be  important.  If  the  mix  of 
expenditure  cuts  and  (probably  unavoidable)  tax  increases  could  be  engineered  so  as  to 
minimize  the  adverse  impact  on  medium-term  growth,  the  consolidation  would  be  less 
painful.  For 
the  penalization  of  growth-enhancing 
expenditures,  such  as  R&D  investment,  education  and  overall  human  capital  formation, 
should be avoided.  
Over the medium term, the crucial factor for sustained growth is a better balance in global 
demand. The rise in US private-sector saving and the sharp fall in investment, partly offset by 
a larger public sector deficit, appear to have cut the US current account deficit from 5.3 per 
cent of GDP in 2007 to 2.6 per cent in 2009, as projected by the IMF. The Chinese surplus 
has also been reduced, from 11 to about 8 per cent. However, most of these corrections are 
due to cyclical, not structural, factors.  
If the recovery is driven by demand in the surplus countries – not only emerging Asia, but 
also  Japan  and  some  European  countries  –  then  some  real  correction  of  imbalances  is 
possible. A major rebalancing of world demand from deficit to surplus countries presupposes 
coherent movements in exchange rates. I do not intend to pinpoint exactly where exchange 
rates should be. After all, no one knows what is the correct or “fair” value of a currency. But 
the risk of a disorderly adjustment in exchange rates has to be averted. I think the solution is 
instance,  as  much  as  possible 
                                                 
4   See, for the most recent assessment, the report by the European Commission (2009), where on the basis of 
current  policies,  the  age-related  public  expenditures  (especially  for  pensions,  health  and  long-term  care)  to 
GDP ratio is still projected to increase in the European Union, on average, by about 3 percentage points by 
2035 and 5 percentage points by 2060. 
BIS Review 128/2009 
 5
unlikely to consist either in asking countries with dollar-peg regimes to shift abruptly to a fully 
flexible regime or in the quest for the “holy grail” of a single world currency – which would 
require  very  high  flexibility  in  the  markets  for  goods  and  services  in  all  the  national 
economies. As the rebalancing of world demand proceeds, reasonable solutions based on 
intermediate regimes, such as target zones or bands and currency baskets, should not be 
dismissed out of hand.  
There  is  now  a  growing  awareness  of  the  importance  of  rebalancing,  as  the  Pittsburgh 
summit acknowledged. However, it is still not evident how (and whether) any given country 
will in fact implement such shared understanding. If the current situation does not change, 
shifts in saving and investment will not be able to correct global imbalances, thus feeding the 
expectation  of  significant  exchange  rate  adjustments  and  triggering  potentially  disorderly 
movements.  
The increasing role of international cooperation  
2.3  
In the last few months several fundamental changes in the IMF’s modus operandi have been 
agreed, as well as an increase in its financial size. First, the Fund’s lending framework has 
been reformed radically. In particular: (a) conditionality has been simplified and tailored to the 
varying strengths of countries’ policies and fundamentals; the IMF will rely more on pre-set 
qualification criteria (ex-ante conditionality) and less on traditional (ex post) conditionality as 
the  basis  for  access  to  its  resources;  (b)  a  new  Flexible  Credit  Line  (FCL)  has  been 
introduced, for countries with very strong fundamentals, policies, and track records of policy 
implementation. Countries eligible to the FCL are granted large and upfront access to Fund 
resources,  within  limits  to  be  assessed  on  a  case-by-case  basis  and  with  no  ongoing  (ex 
post)  conditions;  (c)  the  traditional  stand-by  lending  arrangements  have  been  made  more 
flexible, to enable high access on a precautionary basis for members that do not qualify for 
the  FCL;  (d)  non-concessional loan  access  limits  for  countries  have  been  doubled (to  200 
and  600  per  cent  of  quota  on  an  annual  and  cumulative  basis,  respectively),  in  order  to 
bolster  countries’  confidence  that  adequate  resources  would  be  available  to  meet  their 
financing needs.  
Second, and perhaps more important, the Fund’s lending capacity has been trebled from the 
pre-crisis  level,  from  $250  billion  to  $750  billion.  A  number  of  advanced  and  emerging 
countries  have  volunteered  to  lend  new  resources  for  more  than  $500  billion,  through 
bilateral loans and IMF notes purchase agreements.  
On the whole, the IMF’s lending toolkit has been re-oriented from crisis resolution to crisis 
prevention, and the substantial increase in financial capacity has enhanced its credibility as a 
multilateral insurance mechanism. The FCL plays a special role in this new framework. Its 
success so far (as in the cases of Mexico, Poland and Colombia) bears witness of a radical 
shift in the sentiment of the potential beneficiaries.  
Third, a decision has been taken to allocate new Special Drawing Rights (SDRs) equivalent 
to $250 billion, two fifths of which to emerging and developing countries. SDRs are a means 
for IMF members to obtain freely usable currencies from other members, and they therefore 
help to increase countries’ international reserves.  
One purpose of these reforms is to convince emerging countries to abandon the quest for 
self-insurance through the massive accumulation of official reserves against potential crises 
and  go  over  instead  to  a  mutually  accepted  system  of  multilateral  insurance  provided  by 
international financial institutions. In recent years, many emerging market economies have 
relied upon reserves for their precautionary needs. Some countries, especially those running 
persistently  large  current  account  surpluses,  have  accumulated  reserves  far  above  any 
reasonable benchmark.  
However, large reserve holdings can generate costs both for individual countries and for the 
world economy as a whole. For an individual country, the issuance of domestic debt aimed at 
6 
 BIS Review 128/2009
absorbing  excess  liquidity  from  abroad  carries  a  fiscal  cost  if  the  domestic  interest  rate  is 
higher than the return on official reserve assets; furthermore, and perhaps more importantly, 
the  country  risks  large  capital  losses  if,  sooner  or  later,  its  currency  is  revalued.  More 
generally,  large  reserve  holdings  entail  a  misallocation  of  resources  that  could  have  been 
more  efficiently  invested  domestically.  From  a  global  standpoint,  the  accumulation  of 
reserves in some countries has been the counterpart of the external deficits run by others, 
which have been a key co-driver of the crisis, the global recession, and the collapse of world 
trade.  
Does  this  imply  that  the  IMF  can  act  as  international  lender  of  last  resort  and  provide  full 
coverage of the potential needs of its members? I do not believe that time is ripe for such a 
bold  move.  While  the  IMF  is  now  well-equipped  to  mitigate  the  economic  disruption  from 
sudden  stops  in  capital  flows  and  from  the  perceived  need  for  excessive  (and  expensive) 
official  reserves,  I  am  convinced  that  sound  macro-financial  policies  at  the  country  level 
remain  essential  to  strong,  sustainable  and  balanced  global  growth.  In  an  interdependent 
world  these  policies  should  take  into  account,  as  much  as  possible,  the  spillovers  to  the 
global economy.  
Here is where the IMF’s surveillance function can play a decisive role. In the recent past the 
Fund has failed to get major countries to steer their domestic policies towards reducing their 
large external imbalances. To be sure, this was an extremely difficult task, since the logic of 
surveillance rests on the postulate that policy makers should cede a measure of sovereignty 
in the interest of international cooperation. Unfortunately, this happened only in a very small 
part.  
Going forward, the global crisis might have had the beneficial effect of forcing policy makers 
to think outside the box, i.e. to act cooperatively to rebalance world demand and steer the 
global  financial  system.  This  is  a  very  big  challenge,  and  one  should  not  cultivate 
exaggerated  expectations.  However,  we  should  acknowledge  that,  in  this  respect,  in  less 
than a year the G-20 and the Financial Stability Board have become the new protagonists: 
the first, as a sort of world economic “steering committee”, which availing itself of the IMF’s 
analysis  and  advice  can  enhance  international  cooperation  on  all  fronts  and  help  achieve 
balanced  and  sustainable  growth;  the  second  –  enlarged  and  institutionalized  from  its 
predecessor, the Financial Stability Forum – to make substantive progress in the key task of 
setting out financial and regulatory standards that will also involve the Basel committees, as 
well as the Fund.  
3.  
Structural reforms to sustain growth  
Structural reforms in times of crisis  
3.1 
Rebalancing  cannot  be  achieved  without  sound  structural  economic  policies.  The  joint 
statement released at the G-20 summit in Pittsburgh acknowledges that a strong recovery 
will  necessitate  “macroeconomic  policies  that  promote  adequate  and  balanced  global 
demand  as  well  as  decisive  progress  on  structural  reforms  that  foster  private  domestic 
demand, narrow the global development gap, and strengthen long-run growth potential.”  
In the aftermath of the economic crisis, pro-growth structural reforms may be held back. As 
the main focus of policy-making during the recession has been demand support, the issue of 
structural reform may well be downplayed or even set aside. In part this may reflect political 
reasons:  insofar  as  reforms  have  short-term  costs,  the  political  appetite  for  them  could  be 
low. But this would be a lost opportunity.  
The  reform  action  must  not  be  halted  by  more  urgent  needs  linked  to  the  current  crisis.  It 
must  continue  to  remove  the  obstacles  to  growth  that  lie  in  low  levels  of  competition  and 
several  rigidities  in  product  and  labour  markets.  A  constant  monitoring  of  the  progress  in 
each country should provide an important stimulus for action. This is the aim of the OECD 
BIS Review 128/2009 
 7
program Going for Growth, launched in 2005, which provides a sort of structural surveillance 
on OECD member countries. A possible extension outside the OECD membership could be 
a significant step forward.  
The nature of the present crisis demands a general review of financial regulation around the 
world. Specifically, there is a need to broaden the perimeter of regulation and to adopt new 
rules. After the years in which markets were presumed to be self-regulating and public rules 
were abolished or greatly relaxed, the financial landscape will now have to be reshaped with 
more  pervasive  regulation,  both  domestically  and  internationally.  This  is  a  necessary  step 
toward ensuring a functioning financial system and fostering the return of confidence to the 
credit markets.  
There is a risk, understandable, that for some time regulation of financial markets might turn 
out, ex post, to be even too heavy. We should be careful not to extend this pro-regulation 
attitude to other product and service markets where some regulatory easing is needed. Were 
not this the case, the outcome would be to weaken competition and increase monopolistic 
rents, favoured by administrative burdens and inefficiencies. Innovation and the evolution of 
productivity  would  be  impaired  in  the  long  run,  with  negative  consequences  for  economic 
growth.  
However, policy action must be carefully designed to avoid flawed structural interventions or 
measures that could jeopardise the benefits of recent reforms. The early retirement schemes 
introduced in many European countries were intended to foster youth employment, but after 
a good many years most of them proved to be failures. Similarly, incentive schemes targeted 
to  specific  sectors  risk  creating  a  dangerous  dependence  on  public  support  and  should 
accordingly be phased out quickly.  
Support to domestic demand in emerging economies  
3.2  
In  most  economies  with  external  surpluses,  it  is  crucial  to  establish  the  conditions  for 
expanding  private  consumption  and  investment.  Take  China,  for  instance.  In  2008  the 
Chinese current account surplus of 10 per cent of GDP was equivalent to about a third of the 
total surplus of Asia (including Japan) and the major oil exporting countries. Gross domestic 
saving  amounted  to  50  per  cent  of  GDP.  Such  high  saving  (half  of  it  generated  by  the 
business sector) together with very low household consumption (35 per cent of GDP, half the 
ratio for the United States) are striking by international standards. Underlying these figures 
are  very  substantial  reinvested  earnings  and  the  high  household  propensity  to  save  (on 
average 25 per cent of disposable income), mainly out of precautionary motives.  
Lack of basic social services – health care, education and pension benefits – for a rapidly 
ageing population, together with credit constraints, has greatly increased the need for self-
insurance. At the same time, an output structure intensely skewed towards capital-intensive 
industries,  the  underdeveloped  state  of  financial  markets  and  privileged  access  to  bank 
lending by large state-owned enterprises are all factors inducing firms to finance investment 
largely out of retained earnings. In this context, demand-side reforms are needed to reduce 
precautionary saving, while supply-side measures should aim at shifting output composition 
more towards labour-intensive activities, chiefly in the service sectors.  
As for social services, the recent health care reform is a step in the right direction, although 
the share of the anti-crisis stimulus package allocated to overall social welfare programs is 
small indeed compared to that going to infrastructure and other public investments (0.5 and 
11 per cent of GDP respectively).  
The service sector would benefit greatly from financial system reforms to stimulate credit to 
small and medium-sized enterprises, which until now have been severely constrained.  
This could prompt the emergence of a large middle class and lead to a better distribution of 
income, thereby increasing the overall propensity to consume.  
8 
 BIS Review 128/2009
Reforms to boost growth in the advanced economies  
innovation  and  productivity  growth.  The  deregulation  of 
3.3  
The Chinese case, and that of the emerging countries in Asia generally, differs from other 
countries  running  an  external  surplus  or  a  small  deficit.  For  Japan  and  some  European 
countries,  such  as  Germany  and  Italy,  where  the  scope  for  fiscal  manoeuvre  is  limited, 
structural  reforms  should  be  directed  at  the  sectors  where  heavy  regulation  limits 
competition,  hindering 
the 
telecommunications  market  in  the  1980s  and  1990s  helped  to  spark  the  formation  of  new 
companies and the introduction of new products, thereby raising demand. Something similar 
could  be  done  for  professional  services  and  retail  trade,  which  are  still  characterised  by 
relatively pervasive regulation. These are reforms that would not be difficult to implement and 
would entail potentially very large gains in potential output.  
We are probably going to experience what many commentators are already calling a “jobless 
recovery”. In fact, unemployment is rising all over the advanced world: in the United States 
the  rate  is  expected  to  hit  double  digits  within  the  next  few  months  and  to  stay  there 
throughout much of 2010. The fiscal and monetary stimulus have saved a lot of jobs, but it is 
widely recognized that extra effort is needed to help employment to recover quickly.  
What is particularly disturbing in the current juncture is that jobless workers tend to remain 
unemployed for longer than in the past, to the detriment of their human capital. This tendency 
must be countered by a proper reform effort: the evolution of potential output depends on the 
level of a society’s human capital. As the G-20 said, “Each of our countries will need, through 
its own national policies, to strengthen the ability of our workers to adapt to changing market 
demands and to benefit from innovation and investment in new technologies, clean energy, 
environment,  health,  and  infrastructures”.  Active  labour  market  policies  may  help  workers 
acquire the skills that will be needed as the economy revives. This has implications not only 
in the short term – enabling people to find jobs and so increasing their spending power – but 
in the long term as well – by raising productivity. Both in Britain and Italy there is a growing 
awareness of the need to improve our education system in order to seize the opportunities 
offered  by  innovation  and  technological  progress.  This  can  be  achieved  by  raising  the 
population’s  level  of  training  and  education  (in  Italy  it  is  the  lowest  among  the  advanced 
economies),  so  as  to  boost  productivity  and  assist  low-skilled  people.  Better  educational 
attainment and wider distribution of educational resources should help close socio-economic 
gaps  and  promote  social  mobility,  as  is  described  in  considerable  detail  in  the  British 
government’s “New Opportunities” White Paper.5  
The severity of the crisis, its pervasiveness across countries and economic sectors, has led a 
good  many  commentators  and  policy  makers  to  question  the  validity  (and  predictive 
capability) of economics as a science. I beg to differ, although of course I do not deny that 
our knowledge, understanding and predictive ability can be substantially improved. I agree 
that  rapid  innovation  and  globalization,  particularly  evident  in  the  financial  markets,  have 
produced an environment whose implications have not been adequately appreciated. But it 
should  be  recognized 
the  building-up  of  very  serious 
macroeconomic imbalances were pointed out repeatedly – to be sure, with some dissenting 
views as to their unsustainability. What has been lacking, along with an adequate response 
of regulators to the build-up of financial risk, has been the recognition of the need to reduce 
the misalignments in real and financial asset prices and to cooperate and act collectively to 
counter the global imbalances.  
Further, as suggested above, I still believe that much can be done to improve the working of 
our economies at the structural level. I think that the analysis and the empirical evidence on 
the sources of economic growth still support what I wrote introducing, soon after the bursting 
of  the  dot-com  bubble  and  in  a  different  capacity  than  the  one  I  now  have,  a  detailed 
the  warning  signs  of 
that 
                                                 
5   HM Government (2009). 
BIS Review 128/2009 
 9
summary  of  research  conducted  at  the  OECD.  Namely,  “contrary  to  simplistic  beliefs, 
regulatory reforms are  not the same as unconstrained deregulation, enhanced competition 
does  not  mean  uncontrolled  laisser-faire,  and  the  reduction  of  excessive  employment 
protection  does  not  inevitably  imply  widespread  job  insecurity.  The  quest  for  most 
appropriate  conditions  to  foster  investment  opportunities  and  economic  growth  needs  to 
focus  on  enhancing  market  efficiency  and  innovation,  promoting  the  accumulation  of 
knowledge and increasing the diffusion of new technologies”.6   
Conclusion  
4.  
The  challenges  for  the  international  community  are  formidable,  the  recovery  is  still  in  its 
infancy, halting. But we must not miss the opportunity to start reforming our economies to 
make the productive system more efficient and more resilient to shocks. 
The G-20 summits here in London last spring and more recently in Pittsburgh have displayed 
remarkable  consensus  on  analysis  and  remedies.  All  the  countries  agreed  to  adopt  a 
Framework  for  Strong,  Sustainable  and  Balanced  Growth,  underlying  the  need  for  more 
systematic international cooperation. Many reform measures have already been taken and 
others  should  follow  soon.  The  response  of  markets  and  analysts  has  been  generally 
positive, although a number have questioned the real willingness to apply the reforms. Some 
recall Much Ado About Nothing; others, worse still, cite what Tomasi di Lampedusa has the 
Prince of Salina say in The Leopard at the time of Garibaldi’s conquest of Sicily: “Change 
everything so that nothing changes”. Now more than ever, we must reject any such stance 
and  work  to  strengthen  the  current  recovery  and  safeguard  the  future  health  of  our 
economies. To this end, we need to encourage a pro-reform attitude – in the international 
monetary system as well as in the advanced and emerging economies – and to make sure it 
is  translated  into  concrete  actions,  to  maintain  the  momentum  in  our  collective  and 
cooperative efforts.  
References  
European  Commission  (2009),  “The  2009  Ageing  Report:  Economic  and  Budgetary 
projections for the EU-27 Member States (2008-2060)”, European Economy, 2.  
HM  Government  (2009)  “New  Opportunities  –  Fair  Chances  for  the  Future”,  presented  to 
Parliament by the Minister for the Cabinet Office, London, January.  
IMF (2009), World Economic Outlook, October.  
OECD (2003), The Sources of Economic Growth in the OECD Countries, OECD, Paris.  
Simon, H. (1981), The Sciences of the Artificial, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.  
Visco,  I.  (2009a),  “The  Financial  Crisis  and  Economists’  Forecasts”,  BIS  Review,  49, 
available at http://www.bis.org/review/r090423f.pdf.  
Visco,  I.  (2009b),  “The  Global  Crisis:  the  Role  of  Policies  and  the  International  Monetary 
System”, BIS Review, 87, available at http://www.bis.org/review/r090715e.pdf.  
                                                 
6   OECD (2003). 
10 
 BIS Review 128/2009
