Ric Battellino: Australia’s foreign trade and investment relationships 
Remarks by Mr Ric Battellino, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the 3rd 
Annual Australian Parliamentary Conference, Perth, 6 November 2009. 
 Thank you for the invitation to take part in this panel discussion. 
Given  the  international  focus  of  this  session,  I  thought  I  would  make  some  observations 
about the changes taking place in Australia’s trade and investment relationships with other 
countries and what they mean for the domestic economy. 
Facts on international trade 
1.  
Let me start with some facts on international trade. After a period of relative stability in the 
1980s and early 1990s, Australia’s trade relationships have changed significantly in the past 
decade. This has been driven by the rise of China and, more recently, India. 
• 
China has now become Australia’s largest export market, taking almost one quarter 
of our exports; 10 years ago, less than 5 per cent of our exports went to China; 
India has gone from being a relatively insignificant export market 10 years ago to 
taking 7 per cent of our exports now. 
 Interestingly, the rise in the share of exports going to China and India has not come at the 
expense of our other large markets in Asia – Japan and Korea. Rather, the offsetting decline 
has been in exports to the United States, New Zealand, South America and Africa. The result 
is that the share of our exports going to the Asian region, which was already high, has risen 
further, to around 70 per cent. 
Many  people  have  noted  that,  with  China  and  India  still  at early  phases  of  their  economic 
development, it is likely that they will continue to grow strongly for many years yet, and so will 
their demand for resources. It is hard to argue with that conclusion, though we should keep in 
mind  that,  like  all  countries,  China  and  India  will  experience  economic  cycles  around  this 
trend. 
In the case of our imports, China has also increased its share sharply over the past decade, 
from 6 per cent to 17 per cent. While Europe as a whole, and the countries of South East 
Asia as a group, have larger shares, China is the single largest individual country supplying 
goods to Australia. China’s growing share of Australian imports in recent years has mainly 
been at the expense of the United States and Japan, though part of this change in shares 
has  been  due  to  United  States  and  Japanese  companies  relocating  some  manufacturing 
plants to China. 
In  short,  over  the  past  decade  there  has  been  a  very  significant  refocusing  of  Australia’s 
international trade towards China and, more recently, towards India. 
Facts on foreign investment 
2.  
In  the  public  consciousness,  China  has  also  figured  prominently  when  it  comes  to  foreign 
investment. The facts, however, show that, even though Chinese investment in Australia has 
increased in recent years, it currently accounts for only a very small share of foreign capital 
invested in Australia. 
Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) data indicate that, at the end of 2008, Australian assets 
owned by Chinese entities stood at around $8 billion. This is less than half of one per cent of 
total  foreign  investment  in  Australia,  and  puts  China  a  long  way  down  the  list  in  terms  of 
BIS Review 139/2009 
 1
importance  as  a  source  of  investment.  Looked  at  from  China’s  perspective,  Australia 
accounts for an even smaller share of its total offshore investment – less than one quarter of 
one per cent. Furthermore, this share has not changed much in recent years suggesting that 
China’s  investment  in  Australia  has  grown  in  line  with  its  accumulation  of  foreign  assets 
globally.  This  would  indicate  that  China  does  not  have  a  particularly  strong  bias  towards 
Australian investments. 
The  ABS  figures  probably  understate  the  true  level  of  Chinese  investment  in  Australia, 
because  they  do  not  identify  as  Chinese  any  investment  from  China  that  was  channelled 
through custodial accounts held in third countries (typically those in major financial centres 
like London). Any such investment, however, would be of a portfolio nature rather than direct 
investment resulting in the control of companies. 
One of the reasons why China may be getting a higher public profile in the area of foreign 
investment  is  that  in  the  past  couple  of  years  it  has  accounted  for  a  large  share  of  the 
proposals put to the Foreign Investment Review Board (FIRB). In 2007/08, for example, over 
20  per  cent  of  the  number  of  investments  approved  by  FIRB  were  from  China.  However, 
most of these entailed only small projects and, by value, the share was less than 5 per cent. 
The figures for 2008/09, while not yet available, are likely to be higher due to the approval of 
Chinalco’s  intended  investment  in  Rio  Tinto,  though  in  the  end  that  investment  did  not 
proceed. 
When it comes to foreign investment, Australia’s main relationships are still very much with 
traditional partners such as the United Kingdom and the United States. The largest holding of 
foreign  investment  in  Australia  is  by  the  United  Kingdom,  reflecting  a  history  of  over  200 
years of investment and the fact that, as a major financial centre, a lot of investment coming 
to  Australia  from  other  parts  of  the  world  is  channelled  here  via  UK  funds  managers.  The 
United Kingdom accounts for 25 per cent of the outstanding value of foreign investment in 
Australia.  The  United  States  is  not  far  behind,  at  24  per  cent.  In  terms  of  the  flow  of  new 
investment, the United States has been by far the largest source over the past decade. 
Investment  in  Australia  by  Asian  countries,  whether  measured  in  terms  of  the  stock 
outstanding or the flow of new investment, remains small in comparison. Japan is by far the 
largest  Asian  investor  in  Australia,  with  a  share  of  5  per  cent;  other  Asian  countries’ 
investments in Australia are noticeably smaller. 
If  we  look  at  Australian  investment  overseas,  the  relationship  is  even  more  skewed  to  the 
United States; over the past decade almost half of all the foreign investment by Australians 
went to the United States. Europe was the next largest destination for our savings, while the 
amounts going to Asia were relatively small. 
As a broad summary, the conclusion I would draw from these figures is that while Australia is 
very  much  linked  into  Asia  (and  particularly  China)  in  respect  of  trade  flows,  in  terms  of 
investment flows it is mainly linked to the United Kingdom and the United States. 
What does this mean for the Australian economy and Australian markets? 
3.  
Let me start with financial markets. 
One does not have to follow financial markets too closely to know that developments in US 
financial  markets  have  a  big  influence  on  our  markets  here  in  Australia.  The  correlation 
between  the  Australian  and  US  stock  markets,  and  between  the  Australian  and  US  bond 
markets, is very high. Most mornings, one can get a pretty good idea of how the Australian 
share market will open simply by looking at what happened to US share markets overnight. 
Similarly, US news has an important influence on the Australian dollar exchange rate and on 
the price of many of the resources that Australia sells. 
It  used  to  be  the  case  that  the  US  economy  also  had  a  big  influence  on  Australia’s  real 
economy. For much of my working life at the Reserve Bank, if one was able to pick what was 
2 
 BIS Review 139/2009
happening  to  the  US  economy,  one  had  a  pretty  good  indication  of  what  was  going  to 
happen  to  the  Australian  economy.  Correlations  between  Australian  and  US  GDP  growth 
used to be very high. 
US news still dominates the daily flow of economic and financial information from overseas, 
and  so  still  plays  a  dominant  role  in  shaping  perceptions  about  what  is  happening  in  the 
world economy. But the correlation between the United States and the Australian economies 
has nonetheless declined noticeably over the past decade. In particular, the United States 
has  had  two  recessions  –  one  in  2001  and  the  current  one  –  which  have  had  a  relatively 
muted impact on Australia. 
There  are  no  doubt  many  factors  that  have  contributed  to  this.  One  of  them  is  that  the 
growing trade linkages between Australia and China are increasingly pulling the Australian 
economy  away  from  the  United  States  towards  China.  China  is  our  largest  export  market, 
and  Australia  is  the  largest  supplier  of  bulk  commodities  to  China,  so  our  economies  are 
becoming very intertwined. 
Various  people,  including  Glenn  Stevens  and  Phil  Lowe  from  the  Reserve  Bank  and  Ken 
Henry  from  the  Treasury,  have  recently  spoken  about  the  implications  of  this  for  the 
Australian economy in the medium term. This topic is also attracting considerable attention in 
the media. 
Three themes emerge when people look at these issues. 
The first is that Australia will most likely face an extended period of prosperity in the years 
ahead. Some of this will come about through strong real economic growth, due, for example, 
to  increased  investment  and  higher  export  volumes.  Some  of  it  could  also  come  via  high 
commodity prices. If, as has occurred over the past five years, the supply chain involved in 
the  production  of  resources  in  Australia  (and  elsewhere)  struggles  to  keep  up  with  rising 
Chinese demand, commodity prices will remain high. The fact that commodity prices are still 
at a level that is historically high, despite the severity of the global recession, indicates that 
the demand/supply balance in commodity markets remains fairly tight. It could tighten further 
as the global economic recovery gets under way. 
A second theme is that this prosperity could put strains on the economy, and not all sectors 
may share in it. It is possible, for example, that some sectors of the economy will suffer as 
labour and capital are competed away by the faster-growing sectors. 
In  general,  workers  are  likely  to  be  in  short  supply,  leading  to  strong  demand  for  skilled 
migrants  and  therefore  fast  population  growth.  This,  in  turn,  will  have  flowon  effects  for 
housing markets. 
Investment, which is already high by the standards of developed economies, will need to rise 
further. A large part of this is likely to be imported. Similarly, the financing of this investment 
will  most  likely  require  increased  capital  inflow.  We  could  therefore  see  a  widening  in  the 
current  account  deficit,  possibly  to  higher  levels  than  previously  experienced,  matched  by 
increased capital inflow. 
The  third  theme  is  that  the  forces  affecting  the  economy  could  pose  a  number  of  policy 
challenges. Glenn Stevens dealt with these at some length in his talk last night, so I won’t go 
over that ground again here. It is worth keeping in mind, however, that these challenges are 
about the medium term, not the immediate future. There is also no reason why they should 
be beyond our capacity to handle. 
BIS Review 139/2009 
 3
