Usha Thorat: Learning from crises 
Text of the “Institute of Banking and Finance (IBF) Distinguished Speaker Series” lecture by 
Mrs Usha Thorat, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Institute of Banking 
and Finance (IBF), Singapore, 12 October 2009. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The  late  John  Kenneth  Galbraith,  Harvard  Economics  Professor  Emeritus,  attributed  the 
longevity of his book The Great Crash 1929 – published in 1955 and never since out of print 
– to the tendency of history to threaten a repeat. "Each time it has been about to pass from 
bookstores," he wrote in a later foreword, "another speculative episode – another bubble or 
the ensuing misfortune – has stirred interest in the history of this, the great modern case of 
boom and collapse, which led on to an unforgiving depression." So here we are again. The 
financial crisis that has engulfed credit markets over the recent period has pushed the old 
Keynesian economist's book back into the Amazon charts.  
"Bad distribution of income" is the first of five weaknesses of the U.S. economy that Galbraith 
cites  in  his  definitive  work  on  the  stock  market  collapse.  Though  Galbraith  says  it  was  5 
percent, not 3 percent, of Americans who received one-third of personal income in 1929, he 
says  this  well-heeled  group  played  a  crucial  role  in  the  crash.  "The  collapse  in  securities 
values affected in the first instance the wealthy and the well-to-do. But in the world of 1929 
this was a vital group. The members disposed of a large proportion of the consumer income; 
they were the source of the lion's share of personal savings and investment". 
History has an eerie way of repeating itself and memory of the pain of busts, according to 
Galbraith, is perhaps the best regulator 
In the latest best seller The Ascent of Money, Niall Ferguson has also highlighted the fact 
that the income of the median household in US has scarcely changed since 1980, increasing 
by  just  7  per  cent  in  the  last  18  years  while  their  borrowings  multiplied  several  times  and 
made what seemed a sub prime mortgage crisis to a full blown global financial crisis. 
In  the  current  global  crisis,  no  country  has  been  spared  be  it  big  or  small,  developing  or 
developed, relatively insulated or more open. The shock has impacted both the financial and 
real sectors although it was financial sector led. In India, the impact though significant, has 
not been to the same extent as in other parts. This is partly attributed to the curbs India still 
has  on  the  capital  account,  but  mainly  to  the  dominance  of  domestic  expenditure  – 
consumption and investment – and high savings rate, leading to a balanced macro economy, 
having small current account deficits. Nevertheless, the impact has been felt by the domestic 
credit equity and forex markets leading to slowing down in the growth rate and employment 
generation. Still, the country is the second fastest growing economy in the world with over 6 
% growth projected for the current year. 
The topic of my talk is “Learning from crises”. As Galbraith recalled it is amazing how the 
same mistakes get repeated. Hence I think we owe it to the system to recollect and recount 
lessons from crises. The key lessons are how to anticipate and take pre-emptive action and 
equally  important,  once  you  are  in  the  middle  of  it,  how  to  respond  effectively  viz.  crisis 
management. Post crisis, the critical issues are – how do we put in systems and buffers that 
can  cushion  the  impact  of  economic  cycles  and  booms  and  busts  that  are  so  typical  of 
market driven systems. 
During the journey I have traversed in the RBI, I have been witness to many crisis situations 
of differing dimensions, especially since 1991. Delving into the past I feel veteran enough to 
share these experiences and draw lessons.  
BIS Review 129/2009 
 1
The BOP crisis of 1991  
This  was  a  major  crisis  in  the  country.  In  mid  1991,  the  foreign  exchange  reserves  of  the 
country  were  down  to  11  days  imports,  even  what  little  reserves  that  remained  were  not 
unencumbered. While the crisis was triggered by increase in oil prices and the Gulf war, the 
underlying factors were the macro imbalance in the form of unmanageable current account 
and fiscal deficits. External debt servicing as a proportion of current receipts increased from 
10.2  per  cent  in  1980-81  to  35.3  per  cent  of  current  receipts  in  1990-91.  The  responses 
included curbing imports through a system of administrative controls for large value letters of 
credit,  giving  incentives  for  exports,  pledging  of  gold  reserves  with  Bank  of  England  and 
Bank of Japan, devaluation of the Indian Rupee, issuing attractive bonds in foreign currency 
to  Non-Resident  Indians,  encouraging  return  flow  of  capital,  an  amnesty  scheme  through 
gold bonds, borrowing from multilateral institutions, etc., and so on. The long term response 
included major reforms in trade industry foreign investment fiscal and financial sector paving 
the way for development of equity, forex money and government securities markets. There 
were  fundamental  changes  in  monetary  management  consequent  upon  stoppage  of 
automatic monetisation of the government deficit and switch over to an auction based market 
borrowing for meeting the fiscal deficits.  
Many valuable lessons were learnt from the crisis: 
• 
• 
Exchange rates should not be overvalued for long periods. 
Providing  exchange  guarantees  by  the  central  bank  or  government  are  best 
avoided.  
On the external account, liberalising equity flows first is a better option followed by 
commercial credit and longer term debt , while limiting the access to foreign debt by 
the financial sector.  
Central  bank  funding  of  the  government  in  the  primary  market  should  not  be 
resorted to. 
Excessively high remuneration on reserve requirements erodes monetary control. 
Financial  sector  repression  –  excessive  interest  controls  and  credit  rationing  –  is 
deleterious to growth.  
A strong financial sector requires prudential regulation and effective supervision.  
Removing or reducing entry barriers to facilitate more competition. 
Coordinated  action  by  the  Government  and  the  central  bank  with  a  well  knit 
professional team working together greatly facilitates the process.  
    The securities irregularities of 1992 
The  irregularities  reflected  speculative  buying  in  the  stock  market  funded  by  bank  liquidity 
through repurchase transactions in government securities and bonds, facilitated by a nexus 
between  brokers  and  banks.  In  part  this  reflected  a  way  of  earning  higher  yields  in  an 
otherwise  administered  interest  rate  structure.  Such  transactions  were  done  against  bank 
receipts where there were no underlying government securities. The events that led to these 
irregularities  could  be  attributed  to  weaknesses  and  lack  of  transparency  in  the  market 
infrastructure  for  government  securities,  excess  liquidity  with  public  sector  undertakings, 
nexus between banks and brokers and inadequate internal controls that led to bank funds 
flowing  to  the  stock  markets  fuelling  abnormal  stock  price  increase.  Poor  internal  controls 
were  reflective  of  low  levels  of  computerisation  and  reliance  on  manual  processing. 
Consequences  resulted  when  a  settlement  failure  triggered  panic  and  the  irregularities 
surfaced in the open. RBI had to undertake a series of investigations to unravel the irregular 
2 
 BIS Review 129/2009
transactions  and  fix  responsibility.  A  Joint  Parliamentary  Committee  (JPC)  constituted  to 
investigate into these operations required enormous resources of the management.  
There were several positive fall outs of this crisis:  
• 
Acceleration  of  capital  market  reforms  and  introduction  of  screen  based  order 
matching  systems  with  commensurate  depository  custody  clearing  and  settlement 
arrangements that are continuously upgraded.  
Institution  of  a  delivery  versus  payment  mechanism  for  settlement  of  trades  in 
government  securities  initially  in  RBI  but  later  led  to  establishment  of  a  central 
counterparty  in  the  form  of  CCIL  (Clearing  Corporation  Of  India)  which  today 
undertakes guaranteed settlement for government securities, repos in G Secs and 
forex market trades.  
Dissemination  of  information  on  all  individual  transactions  in  the  government 
securities market on a daily basis and currently on real time basis.  
Tightening of internal controls in investment transactions. 
Removal of administered interest rates –currently only the savings bank deposit rate 
is fixed by the RBI, while all other deposit rates are deregulated.  
institutions  and 
Strengthening  supervision  over  banks  and  other 
financial 
establishment of the Board for Financial Supervision (BFS) in 1994 with the primary 
objective  of  undertaking  supervision  of  the  financial  sector  comprising  commercial 
banks, financial institutions and non-banking financial companies. 
Recognition of the possibility of systemic risk in the absence of proper assessment 
of  counterparty  risk  and  well 
functioning  securities  markets  with  greater 
transparency. 
Focused  attention  on  the  role  of  the  regulator  which  ensures  adherence  to 
regulations in letter and spirit and need for greater accountability.  
      Imbroglio caused by dealings of Non-Banking Financial Companies in 1997 
Non-Banking Financial Companies (NBFCs) have been historically subjected to a relatively 
lower  degree  of  regulation  vis-à-vis  the  banks,  the  higher  rates  of  return  on  deposits  they 
could offer enabled them to attract a large base of small savers and a potential threat to the 
stability of the financial system. Added to these was the fact that operations of NBFCs were 
characterised by several distinctive features viz. no entry barriers, no requirement for large 
investment in fixed assets and inventories, freedom to open branch offices, all of which led to 
their proliferation in an unbridled manner. A few such companies which were perceived as 
well-functioning,  well-managed  and  financially  healthy  and  consequently  had  a  large 
depositor base, defaulted in repayment of deposits, leading to the realisation that the extant 
framework was inadequate to monitor and regulate these companies. Though there were no 
systemic problems, confidence of the depositors in the NBFCs as a sector was eroded and 
the Reserve Bank faced the risk of loss of reputation. In a specific instance, the in-principle 
approval given by the Reserve Bank to start a bank was used by the entity to mobilise huge 
funds from the unsuspecting public and the payable-at-par cheques issued by the entity on a 
leading commercial bank resulted in a huge exposure and default to the bank because of the 
lag between the timing of payments and providing funds cover.  
The learning points were: 
• 
Recognition of the possibility of regulatory arbitrage between the entities regulated 
by banks and non banking financial companies and between the securities regulator 
and the bank regulator.  
BIS Review 129/2009 
 3
 Need  for  legal  powers  to  regulate  the  activities  of  NBFCs,  including  framing  of 
guidelines  for  compulsory  registration,  stringency  in  conditions  for  deposit-taking 
companies akin to banks, and applicability of prudential norms for such companies.  
In the recent period, it has been noted that, even if not accepting deposits, these companies 
can contribute to systemic risk as they access public funds and participate in various markets 
(debt, equity and foreign exchange markets). Hence capital ratios and a quarterly system of 
reporting were introduced for large non-deposit taking NBFCs in 2007.  
Asian crisis of 1997 – the first global contagion 
The  South-East  Asian  crisis  started  with  stock  market  and  currency  crashes  followed  by 
financial  crisis  which  spilt  over  to  the  real  sector.  It  changed  irrevocably  the  way  Asian 
countries look at issues of financial stability. The Indian market was not immune and even 
though  there  was  a  general  belief  that  some  correction  in  the  rupee  was  required,  the 
pressure on the rupee in later part of the year required RBI to intervene to maintain orderly 
conditions.  Withdrawal  of  funds  by  foreign  institutional  investors  (FIIs)  hit  the  equity  and 
foreign exchange markets and the sale of foreign exchange by RBI also affected the money 
and bond markets. In addition to intervention, monetary and administrative measures had to 
be taken to stabilise markets. The impact on the domestic interest rates and liquidity was the 
cost to be paid for restoring stability. The government borrowing programme was managed 
through  private  placement  and  subsequent  open  market  operations  when  the  markets 
stabilised.  
The learning points were:  
• 
Need  for  complementarity  between  macroeconomic  stability  and  financial  stability 
and exchange rate management for preserving competitiveness and confidence in 
the economy. 
Need for closer supervision and regulation of banks and other financial institutions. 
During asset price booms it is important to ensure that banks’ exposure to capital 
markets  and  real  estate  is  not  excessive  and  to  understand  that  banks  can  be 
subject  to  foreign  exchange  risk  even  without  any  currency  mismatches  in  their 
books, when their constituents have huge unhedged exposures. 
Management of capital account is important for countries having chronic CAD and 
where inflation and interest rates are persistently over global levels.  
Dollarisation of the domestic market or internationalisation of the domestic currency 
can both require careful management. 
Financial stability emerged as a specific objective of policy as the cost of instability 
to the real sector is huge especially on the vulnerable segments of society.  
    Urban Co-operative Banks – the weak link 
The tightening of regulation over the banking and NBFC sectors saw the gravitation of risk to 
the lightly regulated Urban Co-operative Banks (UCBs) which were under dual regulation of 
the RBI and the registrar of cooperative societies. The stock market crash in 2002 triggered a 
payments  problem  and  it  was  found  that  the  nexus  between  the  broker  and  a  large  UCB 
(Madhavpura  Mercantile  Co-operative  Bank)  led  to  huge  exposure  to  the  broker  and  the 
bank collapsed. The systemic implication was that hundreds of small UCBs had exposure to 
this bank and the collapse of these banks would have been very disruptive though confined 
to a small region. The Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation (DICGC) had to 
make a large payout to the collapsed bank under a restructuring package and averted the 
domino  effect.  But  the  Madhavpura  Bank  collapse  led  to  erosion  in  public  confidence  and 
4 
 BIS Review 129/2009
there were a series of UCB failures across the country. The immediate measures taken were 
to  ban  connected  lending,  exposure  to  share-brokers  and  inter-UCB  deposits.  The 
supervisory system – both on-site and off-site – was triggered and strengthened. In 2004, all 
new branch and bank expansion was stopped and a vision document was put out in 2005 
which provided for a MoU with the state governments to work out a way for non-disruptive 
exit  of  weak  UCBs  while  simultaneously  incentivising  the  growth  of  strong  banks. 
Subsequently various resolution options have been provided such as merger with or without 
support from DICGC, restructuring of liabilities, introduction of new capital-like instruments, 
and transfer of assets and liabilities. The UCB sector has seen a reduction in the number of 
weak banks from 725 to 496. 102 banks have gone out of the system through mergers and 
liquidation. DICGC has also strengthened its claim payments system to ensure that prompt 
relief is given to small depositors of failed banks. 
The lessons learnt were: 
• 
In dealing with a crisis arising out of interconnectedness, breathing time needs to be 
provided through liquidity injection. 
Reduce  interconnectedness  within  the  financial  system  as  it  leads  to  a  “moral 
hazard” problem of “too interconnected to fail”. 
The most lightly regulated entity in the financial system becomes the weakest link. 
The system's weakest link becomes a source of reputation risk and erosion in public 
confidence. 
Even though under dual regulation, the bank regulator has to use its powers more 
effectively and take steps to resolve weak banks.  
   Failure of a fairly significant mid sized commercial bank in 2004 
The Global Trust Bank Ltd, a private sector bank had reported substantial growth and was 
growing  too  fast.  The  bank’s  balance  sheet  was  flawed  and  disclosures  inadequate.  Very 
large capital market exposures and shortfall in provisioning were the causes for downfall of 
the  bank.  The  common  depositor  does  not  have  the  wherewithal  to  study  bank  balance 
sheets  before  making  a  deposit,  but  even  the  institutional  investors  seem  to  be  gullible 
investors. It was also realised that even though insolvent, a bank can carry on without a run 
as long as it has adequate liquidity or access to liquidity. Interestingly, even at the time of 
moratorium, the bank had huge inter-bank borrowings and deposits reflecting the confidence 
placed by other banks and institutional investors or the moral hazard view that banks will not 
be allowed to fail. Auditor accountability came under focus. The problem had to be dealt with 
heads  on  when  all  avenues  and  options  for  revival  by  the  promoters  and  directors  failed. 
Compulsory amalgamation with a public sector bank was resorted to.  
This experience gave us valuable lessons of how to deal with a bank run.  
• 
The  process  of  resolution  should  be  swift  and  decisive  and  preferably  over  the 
weekend.  
In a computerised system with 24/7 banking, and large retail base, the preparation 
for a moratorium has to be much more meticulous than in traditional banking. 
Role of media is critical and in any crisis management media management has to be 
given priority. We actually had to go on media to give out reassurances about the 
bank to stop the run. 
Adequate  liquidity  and  currency  needs  to  be  kept  ready  to  stem  a  run  once  the 
resolution strategy is decided. 
A moratorium is useful to give breathing time to put a resolution package in place 
but hardship requests can become tedious to handle.  
    BIS Review 129/2009 
 5
Institutional factors  
This decade has been one of challenges in managing capital flows both inflows and outflows. 
Both  monetary  policies  and  prudential  policies  have  been  used  through  a  variety  of 
instruments to manage the macro economic and financial stability challenges arising out of 
large capital flows, external shocks such as 9/11, political uncertainty, geo political events, 
and  have  called  for  vigilance  and  prompt  actions.  While  evolving  policy  instruments  to 
manage these conditions such as the Market Stabilisation Scheme for sterilising the impact 
of inflows are important I would like to flag a few critical institutional factors which I think are 
required  to  be  encouraged  and  made  part  of  the  automatic  trigger  mechanisms  in  the 
system. I would like to turn to these: 
Problem recognition  
The meaning of being vigilant is to be able to constantly scan the horizon and recognise that 
a problem is brewing and take pre-emptive action before the problem becomes disruptive. 
The  indicators  could  be  asset  values,  excess  credit  growth,  large  unhedged  exposures, 
continuing current account deficits financed by short term credit, weakly regulated entities in 
the  system,  opportunities  for  regulatory  arbitrage,  large  leveraged  positions,  prolonged 
periods  of  liquidity  excesses  or  shortages;  or  the  tendencies  of  entities  to  leverage, 
especially by exploiting the inter-linkages in the financial system . 
Committee approach  
As  part  of  crisis  management,  it  is  necessary  to  have  a  harmonised  approach.  First  it  is 
essential to have close coordination with the Government. As in 1991, this was an important 
requirement  in  responding  to  the  recent  crisis.  Putting  in  place  an  institutional  mechanism 
and  systems  that  can  facilitate  continuous  dialogue  and  co-ordination  between  those  in 
charge  of  monetary  policy,  debt  management,  foreign  exchange  management,  regulation 
and supervision of banking entities, supervision of non-banking entities, securities markets 
regulation and the like is a sine-qua-non. Within each of these segments it is crucial to be in 
sync. We have a Financial Markets Committee (FMC) in the central bank consisting of senior 
executives  responsible  for  monetary  policy  and  operations,  debt  management  and  foreign 
exchange  reserves  management.  The  FMC  meets  at  least  once  every  day  in  the  morning 
and  emergent  meetings  are  also  convened  when  there  are  episodes  of  sharp  volatility  in 
equity markets, or when any of the other markets are significantly affected. Other regulatory 
departments  including  the  department  responsible  for  payment  system  also  get  involved 
during such times. The Committee keeps in touch with the securities regulator (SEBI), the 
stock  exchanges  especially  the  clearing  and  settlement  corporation  of  the  exchanges,  the 
Clearing Corporation of India Ltd. (CCIL) and the like. We also have a Crisis Management 
Group that meets whenever a crisis is anticipated or occurs.  
Inter-regulatory co-ordination 
Financial  sector  harmonisation  among  the  securities,  insurance,  pension  fund  and  bank 
regulators is enabled through the High Level Co-ordination Committee on Financial Markets 
(HLCCFM).  The  HLCCFM  is  headed  by  the  Governor,  RBI  and  meets  as  and  when  felt 
required.  The  Ministry  of  Finance  provides  the  secretariat.  Sub-committees/groups  formed 
among  SEBI,  IRDA,  PFRDA  and  RBI,  meet  to  discuss  and  sort  out  issues  relating  to 
developments in the financial markets having implications cutting across different regulators. 
Institutionalised and formal approach to decision making in a crisis has the benefit of building 
on the experience of the members.  
6 
 BIS Review 129/2009
Consultative approach  
We  have  also  reaped  the  advantages  of  using  external  experts  in  our  policy  making.  We 
have  a  Technical  Advisory  Committee  for  Monetary  Policy  consisting  of  academicians, 
practitioners and experts, which tenders advice to RBI on monetary policy stance. There is 
also  a  Technical  Advisory  Committee  that  consists  of  financial  sector  experts  from  areas 
such  as  banking,  academics,  government,  stock  exchanges,  credit  rating  agencies  and 
market representatives. This committee meets once a quarter to deliberate on developments 
in money, foreign exchange and government-securities markets and offers advice on policies 
for regulation, growth and further reforms in financial markets, including products, practices 
and institutional arrangements. 
Capacity building 
Equally  crucial  is  the  need  to  develop  people  and  systems  to  deal  with  scenarios  and 
contingencies, which can be achieved only through a sustained process of capacity building. 
Giving exposure through participation in meetings at local and international levels, allowing 
officers  even  at  fairly  junior  levels  to  be  part  of  the  dialogue  process  at  the  top  levels  in 
various  co-ordination  fora,  enormously  helps  in  nurturing  talent.  A  consultative  and 
participative approach to decision making through setting-up of working groups consisting of 
a  mix  of  internal  and  external  people  with  clearly  set  tasks  and  time-lines  not  only  casts 
responsibility but also aids developing expertise. Emphasis in these groups is on harnessing 
collective wisdom and balanced judgement, typical of a college-like atmosphere for decision 
making.  
Robust infrastructure 
I am referring to the development of sound market infrastructure for payments and settlement 
for  all  financial  transactions  as  also  market  infrastructure  for  trading  reporting  information 
dissemination  and  clearing  settlement.  CCPs  for  clearing  and  settlement  of  equity 
government securities forex and money markets are in place following the best practices laid 
down by IOSCO/CPSS. The infrastructure for electronic payments and RTGS are now taken 
for granted.  
Summing up  
A lot has been talked about the current crisis and the response. Most of these talks are on 
the website. I would just like to say that the major learning from this crisis is that globalization 
has meant that no country is immune from the happenings in global financial markets. Also, 
at  one  level,  the  presence  of  complex  and  interconnected  financial  entities  across  several 
jurisdictions with regulators at the national level has posed huge challenges in ensuring that 
there  is  no  regulatory  arbitrage  and  that  there  is  coordination  amongst  regulators.  Even 
within a jurisdiction, it is recognized that all regulators have to deal with systemic risk and 
there is need for inter regulatory dialogue and vigilance.  
At the macro level, Asian countries and Latin American countries have learnt lessons from 
their  own  past  currency  and  financial  crises  and  have  built  up  reserves  and  have 
strengthened  their  financial  systems  apart  from  consciously  developing  their  financial 
markets. But they have been careful to ensure that their banks are not involved excessively 
in  toxic  assets  or  innovative  transactions.  Even  so,  the  countries  have  had  to  face  the 
consequences of falling global trade and GDP and unemployment and slowing credit growth. 
Macro  economic  imbalances  continue  though  they  have  reduced.  Savings  is  increasing  in 
the western world and consumption increasing in the East.  
Ultimately,  we  all  have  to  be  concerned  about  the  real  sector  and  recognize  that  financial 
sector development is not a goal by itself but is intended to enable the growth, not just of the 
BIS Review 129/2009 
 7
rich,  but  more  importantly  inclusive  growth  cutting  across  all  segments  of  the  society  and 
regions. As regulators and central banks, it is our duty to ensure this. 
8 
 BIS Review 129/2009
