Daniel K Tarullo: Supervising and resolving large financial institutions 
Speech  by  Mr  Daniel  K  Tarullo,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  Institute  of  International  Bankers  Conference  on  Cross-Border 
Insolvency Issues, New York, 10 November 2009.  
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website. 
 Proposals for the creation of a special resolution process for large financial firms have rightly 
assumed prominence in the wake of the financial crisis. Some events during the crisis have 
also  focused  attention  on  the  difficult  problems  often  created  by  the  failure  of  a  large, 
internationally active financial firm. In my remarks this afternoon I want to elaborate a bit on 
the  relationship  between  resolution  processes  and  an  effective  overall  system  of  financial 
regulation and supervision in both the international and domestic spheres.1  
At  the  risk  of  some  oversimplification,  I  would  state  that  relationship  as  follows:  First,  an 
effective domestic resolution process is a necessary complement to supervision that would 
bring  more  market  discipline  into  the  decisionmaking  of  large  financial  firms,  their 
counterparties,  and  investors.  Second,  the  high  legal  and  political  hurdles  to  harmonized 
cross-border resolution processes suggest that, for the foreseeable future, the effectiveness 
of  those  processes  will  largely  depend  on  supervisory  requirements  and  cooperation 
undertaken  before  distress  appears  on  the  horizon.  I  would  further  suggest  that  the 
importance of proposed requirements that each large financial firm produce a so-called living 
will is that this device could better tie the supervisory and resolution processes together.  
A resolution regime for large, interconnected firms 
During the financial crisis, serious distress at a large financial firm presented authorities in 
the  United  States  and  many  other  countries  with  only  two  realistic  alternatives.  First,  they 
could  try  to  contain  systemic  risk  by  stabilizing  the  firm  through  capital  injections, 
extraordinary liquidity assistance, or both. Second, they could allow the firm to fail and enter 
generally applicable bankruptcy processes.  
Faced  with  the  possibility  of  a  cascading  financial  crisis,  most  governments  selected  the 
bailout option in most cases. Yet this option obviously risks imposing significant costs on the 
taxpayer  and  supports  the  notion  that  some  firms  are  too-big-to-fail,  with  consequent 
negative effects on market discipline and competitive equality among financial institutions of 
different  sizes. 
too-big-to-fail  perceptions  undermine  normal  regulatory  and 
supervisory  requirements.  However,  as  the  Lehman  Brothers  experience  demonstrated, 
permitting the disorderly failure of a large, interconnected firm can indeed unleash just the 
systemic consequences that motivated the bailouts.  
The desirability of a third alternative is thus obvious – a special resolution process that would 
allow  the  government  to  wind  down  a  systemically  important  firm  in  an  orderly  way.  As 
compelling as the case for such a process is, the debate around resolution proposals has 
shown how challenging it is to craft a workable resolution regime for large, interconnected 
firms  that  will  effectively  advance  the  complementary  –  but  at  times  competing  –  goals  of 
financial  stability  and  market  discipline.  Still,  I  think  there  are  certain  key  features  that  are 
essential.  
Indeed, 
                                                 
1   The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of other members of the Board of Governors. 
BIS Review 141/2009 
 1
First, any new regime should be used only in those rare circumstances where a firm's failure 
would have serious adverse effects on financial stability. That is, the presumption should be 
that generally applicable bankruptcy law applies to non-bank financial firms. One way to help 
ensure  that  the  regime  is  invoked  only  when  necessary  to  protect  the  public's  interest  in 
systemic stability is to use a "multi-key" approach – that is, one that requires the approval of 
multiple agencies and a determination by each that the high standards governing the use of 
the  special  regime  have  been  met.  Once  invoked,  however,  the  government  should  have 
broad authority to restructure or wind down the company in an orderly way. This authority 
should include – among other things – selling assets, liabilities, or business units of the firm, 
transferring the systemically significant operations of the firm to a new bridge entity that can 
continue  these  operations,  and  repudiating  burdensome  contracts  of  the  firm,  subject  to 
appropriate compensation. 
Second, there should be a clear expectation that the shareholders and creditors of the failing 
firm  will  bear  losses  to  the  fullest  extent  consistent  with  preserving  financial  stability. 
Shareholders  of  the  firm  ultimately  are  responsible  for  the  organization's  management  (or, 
more likely, mismanagement) and are supposed to be in a first-loss position upon failure of 
the firm. Shareholders, therefore, should pay the price for the firm's failure and should not 
benefit from any rehabilitation of the firm through a government-managed resolution process. 
To  promote  market  discipline  on  the  part  of  the  creditors  of  large,  interconnected  firms, 
unsecured creditors of the firm should also bear losses, although the extent of these losses 
and the manner in which they are applied likely would need to depend on the facts of the 
individual case.  
Third, the ultimate cost of any government assistance provided in the course of the resolution 
process to prevent severe disruptions to the financial system should be borne by the firm or 
the financial services industry, not by taxpayers. The scope of financial institutions assessed 
for these purposes should be appropriately broad, reflective of the fact that a wide range of 
financial  institutions  likely  would  benefit,  directly  or  indirectly,  from  actions  that  avoid  or 
mitigate threats to financial stability. However, because the largest and most interconnected 
firms  likely  would  benefit  the  most,  it  seems  appropriate  that  these  firms  should  bear  a 
proportionally larger share of any costs that cannot be recouped from the failing firm itself. To 
avoid pro-cyclical effects such assessments should be collected over an extended period. 
International efforts on resolution issues 
The  looming  or  actual  failure  of  a  large,  internationally  active  financial  firm  inevitably 
complicates  the  already  challenging  process  of  resolution.  Mismatches  in  the  amount  and 
maturities of assets and liabilities held by the firm in the various countries in which it operates 
can lead host governments to take special action to protect the interests of depositors and 
creditors. Different insolvency regimes apply to separately incorporated subsidiaries across 
the  world.  Some  of  those  regimes  may  be  substantively  inconsistent  with  one  another,  or 
may not account for the special characteristics of a large international firm. 
A  natural  response,  which  one  can  find  peppered  through  various  law  journals  over  the 
years, is to propose an international treaty that would establish and harmonize appropriate 
insolvency regimes throughout the world. Just to state the proposition is to see the enormous 
hurdles to its realization. The task of harmonizing divergent legal regimes, and reconciling 
the  principles  underlying  many  of  these  regimes,  would  be  challenge  enough.  But  an 
effective international regime would also likely require agreement on how to share the losses 
and possible special assistance associated with a global firm's insolvency. 
Despite  the  good  and  thorough  work  being  undertaken  in  both  the  Basel  Committee  on 
Banking  Supervision  (Basel  Committee)  and  the  Financial  Stability  Board,  we  must 
2 
 BIS Review 141/2009
acknowledge  that  satisfyingly  clean  and  comprehensive  solutions  to  the  international 
difficulties occasioned by such insolvencies are not within sight.2 It would certainly be useful 
if jurisdictions could at least broadly synchronize both standard bankruptcy and any special 
resolution procedures applicable to a failing financial firm. But even this significant advance 
would not settle many of the nettlesome problems raised by a cross-border insolvency. 
It thus seems reasonably clear that effective management of these problems will, at least for 
the foreseeable future, require regulatory coordination and supervisory cooperation before a 
large firm's failure becomes a real possibility. In one sense, this observation reinforces the 
importance  of  the  international  agenda  for  strengthening  capital  and  liquidity  standards.  It 
also  counsels  continued  attention  to  efforts  to  ensure  that  globally  active  institutions  are 
subject  to  effective  consolidated  supervision,  and  that  information-sharing  arrangements 
among home and host country supervisors are well designed and implemented. To this end, 
the key supervisors and central banks for each of the largest global banks will begin to meet 
regularly to discuss crisis planning, with particular attention to contingency liquidity planning. 
The  crisis  demonstrated  that  issues  around  cross-border  liquidity  support  are  difficult. 
Liquidity pressures may arise in unexpected places; time for coordination will be short; and 
failures  in  one  jurisdiction  likely  will  spread  quickly  to  other  jurisdictions.  The  Basel 
Committee and the Committee of European Banking Supervisors are working on definitions 
of liquid assets, common stress testing metrics and structural balance sheet measures. We 
are  actively  discussing  the  appropriate  division  of  responsibility  between  home  and  host 
authorities to provide liquidity support and the related issue of how to approach cross-border 
branch  operations.  Some  have  called  into  question  the  traditional  assumption  that  home 
country  authorities  will  be  willing  and  able  to  support  all  of  the  worldwide  operations  of  a 
banking group headquartered in its jurisdiction. What approach to substitute remains unclear, 
however, beyond the obvious need for broad international consistency and careful calibration 
with other prudential requirements. 
One  of  the  key  issues  identified  by  the  Basel  Committee's  Cross-border  Bank  Resolution 
Group  is  the  complexity  and  interconnectedness  of  the  largest  organizations.  Often  the 
complexity is motivated by tax or regulatory factors, rather than a clear business purpose. 
Given  the  way  these  firms  are  structured  and  their  linkages  to  key  systems  and  other 
institutions, resolution of such an organization will carry significant risk of spillovers to other 
key  markets,  payments  systems,  or  systemically  important  institutions.  The  Cross-border 
Bank Resolution Group consequently recommended developing initiatives that would result 
in simpler, less connected structures.  
Living wills and improved management information systems  
This  point  leads  us  to  one  much-discussed  idea,  that  of  firm-specific  resolution  plans  – 
sometimes  referred  to  more  colorfully,  though  not  wholly  accurately,  as  living  wills.  In  one 
variant  of  the  idea,  each  internationally  active  bank  would  be  required  to  develop,  and 
potentially to execute, its own resolution plan – literally to plan for its own demise. Such a 
requirement could doubtless be helpful to some degree, but it has notable limitations.  
Most obviously, it is very difficult to predict in advance of a crisis which parts of the firm will 
be  under  greatest  stress,  what  geographical  regions  may  be  affected  most  severely,  and 
what  the  condition  in  various  markets  and  economies  will  be,  as  well  as  the  stability  of 
counterparties  and  similarly  situated  institutions.  Furthermore,  governments  may  be 
                                                 
2   See  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  Cross-border  Bank  Resolution  Group  (2009),  Report  and 
Recommendations  of  the  Cross-border  Bank  Resolution  Group  (Basel:  Basel  Committee,  September),  and 
Financial Stability Forum (2009), FSF Principles for Cross-Border Cooperation on Crisis Management (Basel: 
FSF, April 2). (The Financial Stability Forum subsequently was renamed the Financial Stability Board.) 
BIS Review 141/2009 
 3
understandably  reluctant  to  rely  too  much  upon  a  wind-down  plan  developed  by  an 
internationally active financial firm that so mismanaged itself that it is on the brink of failure, 
placing other institutions at peril. Finally, management of an institution can be expected to 
seek  to  preserve  as  much  value  for  shareholders  as  possible  in  its planning,  whereas  the 
supervisors'  objective  in  a  crisis  is  to  achieve  an  orderly  resolution,  which  will  often  entail 
winding down or restructuring the insolvent firm in ways that effectively wipe out shareholder 
interests.  
The living will requirement could be broadened so as to make it into a potentially very useful 
supervisory tool for healthy firms, as well as a resource in the event that resolution became 
necessary. Under this approach, the firm would, in addition to developing a resolution plan, 
be required to draw up a contingency plan to rescue itself short of failure, identify obstacles 
to  an  orderly  resolution,  and  quickly  produce  the  information  needed  for  the  supervisor  to 
orchestrate  an  orderly  resolution.  These  plans  will  need  to  evolve  as  the  organization's 
business and economic conditions evolve and will need to become a regular part of normal 
supervisory processes. 
A living will of this type could remove some of the uncertainty around a possible resolution. It 
would force firms and their supervisors to review contingency plans regularly. As part of their 
ongoing oversight, supervisors could target the areas where a firm's planning falls short of 
best  practice.  Indeed,  by  focusing  on  the  legal,  contractual,  and  business  relationships 
among the firm's subsidiaries, this requirement could yield significant benefits for prudential 
supervision in normal times, quite apart from its benefits in a stressed environment.  
Central  to  the  success  of  a  living  will  as  a  supervisory  tool  is  the  quality  of  information  it 
would make available in a crisis. Some of the information would be relatively static. A firm 
would have to inventory all its legal entities, along with the legal regimes applicable to each 
one,  and  map  its  business  lines  into  legal  entities.  A  firm  also  would  have  to  document 
interaffiliate guarantees, funding, hedging, and provision of information technology and other 
key services. This information would be needed to deal with any crisis, no matter what its 
specific form.  
Supervisory discussions will be essential to determine the scope and nature of the rapidly 
changing information that would be needed under each firm's living will. It can be expected to 
include matters such as credit exposures, funding, unpledged collateral and available lines of 
credit, cash flows, earnings, capital, and so forth – all coded by identifiers such as business 
line, legal entity, counterparty, and legal jurisdiction to allow for the ready retrieval of critical 
information  needed  depending  on  the  nature,  location,  and  type  of  stress.  Much  of  this 
information can change monthly, daily, or even intraday.  
Once  the  centrality  of  accurate,  comprehensive  information  is  understood,  it  becomes 
apparent that a very significant upgrade of management information systems (MIS) may be 
the only way for the firm to satisfy living will requirements. Improved MIS are also needed for 
ongoing  risk  management  at  the  institution.  One  of  the  lessons  of  the  recent  crisis  is  that 
many  firms  had  inadequate  information  systems  to  measure  and  manage  their  risks. 
Improvements  in  automated  MIS  capacity  will  likely  involve  considerable  expense.  Again, 
though, the result will be improvements in risk management that will help avoid a crisis at the 
firm, as well as to manage such a crisis successfully should it nonetheless occur.  
Supervisory demands for improved MIS could have another benefit. Just as a homeowner 
has an incentive to shed belongings to reduce the expense of moving, so a financial firm may 
have a powerful incentive to simplify its organizational structure and rationalize relationships 
among its corporate entities in order to reduce the cost of developing comprehensive MIS 
that enables an organization to retrieve information in multiple formats across jurisdictions, 
business  lines,  and  legal  entities.  Simpler  structures  can  also  be  encouraged  by  re-
emphasizing existing supervisory guidance requiring banking organizations to measure and 
manage their risks not only on the global, consolidated level, but also on a legal entity basis. 
Together, the information requirements of living wills and the need to measure and manage 
4 
 BIS Review 141/2009
risks  at  the  legal  entity  level  can  help  create  the  right  incentives  for  firms  to  simplify  their 
structures  without  necessarily  requiring  a  supervisor  to  delve  into  the  details  of  a  banking 
group's structure.  
Conclusion 
All the work on resolution, both domestically and internationally, is important and necessary. 
But we must be realistic about what it can accomplish. In light of what has happened over the 
past 18 months, it is imperative that governments convince markets that they can and will put 
large  financial  firms  into  a  resolution  process  rather  than  bail  out  its  creditors  and 
shareholders.  Yet  no  one  can  guarantee  that  future  resolutions  of  systemically  important 
firms will proceed smoothly or predictably. Resolution mechanisms must be understood not 
as  silver  bullets,  but  as  critical  pieces  of  a  broader  agenda  directed  at  the  too-big-to-fail 
problem.  Measures  such  as  strengthening  capital  standards  and  bringing  all  systemically 
important firms within the perimeter of regulation are other essential elements of that agenda.  
BIS Review 141/2009 
 5
