Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: Monetary policy, credit flows and small and 
medium-sized enterprises 
Speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, San Casciano Val di Pesa, 18 October 2009. 
 I would like first of all to thank the organisers of this event for their invitation, which allows me 
to speak about monetary policy, credit developments and the situation of small and medium-
sized enterprises (SMEs) in the euro area.  
I will structure my comments as follows: after briefly outlining the importance of SMEs in the 
euro area, I will examine the situation in the banking sector and discuss some aspects of the 
process of bank restructuring in the euro area. I will look at bank lending developments in the 
euro  area,  before  analysing  some  of  the  evidence  on  SMEs’  access  to  finance  which 
emerged from a recent survey conducted by the ECB. I will conclude with some observations 
concerning the economic outlook and the role that monetary policy can play in this context. 
In brief the main conclusions are as follows: first of all, the situation in the euro area banking 
sector  improved  in  the  first  half  of  2009.  Nevertheless,  a  number  of  considerable  risks 
remain, some of which might even have increased. Second, the volume of bank loans to the 
non-financial private sector has been modest in recent months. That said, given the severity 
and duration of the recent crisis, this trend does not deviate particularly from the empirical 
regularities observed for previous economic cycles. Third, the survey on SMEs indicates that, 
despite having been less successful than large companies as regards their applications for 
bank loans in the first half of 2009, the majority of SMEs received some or all of the amount 
applied for. Fourth, it is probable that loans to non-financial corporations will remain modest 
over the coming months; this would be in line with past evidence, which suggests that the 
trend of such loans tends to lag developments in GDP by a few quarters. Fifth, the ECB has 
introduced numerous  measures,  both  ordinary  and  extraordinary,  to  support  the euro  area 
economy in general and the banking sector in particular. It would be difficult to do more. It is 
now  time  for  the  banking  sector  to  implement  the  necessary  process  of  recapitalisation  in 
order to restore confidence and support growth. 
The importance of SMEs in the euro area 
Let  me  start  by  pointing  out  the  importance  of SMEs  in  the  euro  area.  SMEs  –  which  are 
usually defined as firms with less than 250 employees – play a very important role: over 99% 
of  firms  are  SMEs  and,  in  the  non-financial  corporate  sector,  they  produce  60%  of  total 
turnover  and  employ  70%  of  employees.  Their  activities  are  essential  to  fostering 
entrepreneurship, competition, innovation and growth.  
Examining this sector is important for the ECB because there are differences between SMEs 
and large firms with regard to the transmission of monetary policy, owing in particular to the 
fact that SMEs are more dependent on bank financing than large firms. It thus follows that 
the financing conditions faced by SMEs are linked especially closely to the situation in the 
banking sector, and in particular to that of small banks, which are the main lenders to SMEs. 
On 
the 
creditworthiness  of  SMEs.  This  relative  opaqueness  may  be  countered  to  some  extent  by 
“relationship lending”, which enables the bank to build up expertise over time with regard to 
the business and the financial situation of its borrower. 
face  greater  difficulties  when  assessing 
the  other  hand,  banks  generally 
BIS Review 129/2009 
 1
The euro area banking system 
Before examining SMEs’ access to bank finance in greater detail, I would like to look at the 
situation  in  the  banking  system.  I  will  focus  on  banks’  deleveraging  during  the  past  few 
quarters and the effects on banks’ earnings as well as their capital ratios. In addition, I will 
compare the lending behaviour of large banks with that of smaller banks. 
Since the start of the financial turmoil in the third quarter of 2007, banks have begun to scale 
down  their  investment  in  financial  assets,  as  seen  in  Chart  1.  This  behaviour  is  in  sharp 
contrast to the intense accumulation of financial assets observed previously and reflects the 
adjustment of banks’ balance sheets in the context of the general deleveraging process. The 
decline in the annual growth rates of assets has been most visible in short-term loans and 
deposits  as  well  as  in  liquid  assets,  such  as  equities  and  mutual  fund  shares.  The  sharp 
contraction  in  interbank  deposits  has  mainly  reflected  the  freezing  of  the  interbank  market 
following  the  onset  of  the  financial  turmoil,  in  the  context  of  which  euro  area  monetary 
financial institutions (MFIs) withdrew their short-term deposits placed at banks. In addition, 
euro area banks have scaled down their deposits with other counterparts outside the euro 
area. As well as downsizing their external assets, banks initially scaled down their investment 
in marketable assets. By contrast, partly related to “relationship banking”, the growth rates of 
long-term  loans  have  held  up.  Banks’  investment  in  long-term  debt  securities  even 
accelerated  in  early  2009;  indeed,  MFIs  stepped  up  their  purchases  of  government  debt 
securities,  reflecting  the  generous  liquidity  situation  in  an  environment  of  heightened  risk 
aversion. 
While  the  slowdown  in  the  growth  rate  of  assets  in  principle  limits  the  earning  capacity  of 
banks,  other  factors  contributed  in  the  first  half  of  2009  to  a  marked  improvement  in  the 
profitability of large banking groups in the euro area. Net interest income was the main factor 
behind this improvement, owing to the positive slope of the yield curve and wider operating 
margins. In addition, trading income recovered strongly as financial markets rebounded after 
the first quarter of 2009. Finally, revenues from fees and commissions held up remarkably 
well throughout the financial turmoil. 
At the same time, a number of significant risks remain and some may have even increased. 
First, the slowdown in the growth of assets held by euro area banks limits their future earning 
capacity  in  terms  of  interest  and  investment  income.  Second,  a  deterioration  in  the  credit 
quality of borrowers may put a drag on banks’ future earning capacity. In fact, while large and 
complex banking groups seem to be gradually absorbing the losses they suffered on their 
securities holdings, driven in part by the reclassification of assets, they have reported sharply 
higher provisions for loan losses. 
Let me now turn to capital ratios. The recovery in the earnings of large and complex banking 
groups in the euro area, together with a slowdown in the growth rate of both risk-weighted 
and total assets and an increase in capital, from both public and private sources, has meant 
that  the  capital  ratio  of  the  average  banking  institution  has  typically  been  relatively  stable. 
There is, however, considerable divergence between groups. A somewhat reassuring finding 
is that the institutions which reported the largest increases in loan loss provisions also seem 
to  have  the  highest  capital  buffers.  This  may  mitigate  the  solvency  risks  originating  from 
deteriorating asset quality in the future. 
A breakdown of banks by size 
Against this background, it is not surprising that banks’ balance sheet constraints played a 
greater role during the recent financial turmoil, leading to a tightening of credit standards by 
banks, as shown in Chart 2.  
The bank lending survey for the euro area, from which this information is taken, distinguishes 
between large banks and smaller banks. In particular with respect to the greater relevance of 
smaller banks for SME financing, it is therefore of interest to distinguish between the lending 
2 
 BIS Review 129/2009
of large banks and that of smaller banks in the euro area. Since mid-2007, and in particular 
during the initial phase of the financial turmoil, large banks have overall tightened their credit 
standards for loans to enterprises somewhat more than smaller banks. The outlook for the 
economy in general and for individual firms contributed most to the tightening, in Italy as well 
as in the euro area as a whole.  
The deteriorated access to capital market financing during the financial turmoil contributed 
significantly to  the  tightening  of credit  standards.  It  played  a  much  more  important  role  for 
large banks than for smaller banks, which rely less on capital market financing. The difficult 
liquidity  conditions  in  the  market  also  played  a  somewhat  more  important  role  for  large 
banks, possibly because money market financing represents a greater share of their overall 
financing. All this may explain why the net tightening of credit standards was greater for large 
banks than it was for smaller banks. 
However,  both  large  and  smaller  banks  tightened  their  credit  standards  more  on  loans  to 
large  firms  than  on  loans  to  SMEs.  This  was  especially  the  case  at  the  beginning  of  the 
financial turmoil, but the net tightening was still slightly stronger for large firms in the second 
quarter of 2009. This may be surprising, given that there is a general perception that access 
to finance has of late become more difficult in particular for SMEs.  
The pattern of a stronger net tightening for loans to large firms can also be observed in Italy. 
This  indicates  that  both  large  banks  and  large  firms,  which  rely  more  on  market-based 
financing, were initially more strongly affected by the financial turmoil than smaller banks and 
SMEs.  
Since  the  second  quarter  of  2008,  however,  the  differences  in  lending  behaviour  between 
large  and  smaller  banks  have  diminished.  This  probably  indicates  that  the  economic 
downturn has played a major role in the general tightening of standards when evaluating the 
creditworthiness of firms.  
Let me now turn to the question of how banks have tightened their credit standards. Both 
large and smaller banks have done so predominantly by increasing loan margins. In Italy, the 
net tightening of margins on average loans was similar to that for the euro area as a whole.  
At  the  euro  area  level,  large  banks  increased  margins  on  loans  to  enterprises  somewhat 
more  than  smaller  banks,  which  is  in  line  with  the  overall  stronger  net  tightening  of  credit 
standards. The increase in margins was particularly pronounced in 2008, but was lower in 
2009, as illustrated by Chart 3. Besides the increase in margins, the non-interest terms and 
conditions  of  bank  loans  were  also  tightened  considerably  by  banks.  As  examples,  let  me 
mention the increasing collateral requirements and loan covenants, as well as rises in non-
interest charges.  
This is in line with evidence from a survey on the access to finance of SMEs in the euro area, 
which I will shortly discuss in more detail. However, I would like to mention at this point the 
results  of  the  SME  survey  with  respect  to  the development  of  the  terms  and  conditions  of 
bank loans in the first half of 2009. The bank lending survey and the survey on SMEs’ access 
to finance present an overall similar picture. 
For  the  first  half  of  2009,  euro  area  SMEs  point  especially  to  a  deterioration  in  the  non-
interest  terms  and  conditions,  such  as  charges,  fees  and  commissions.  In  addition,  a 
considerable  net  share  of  SMEs  reported  an  increase  in collateral  requirements  and  other 
non-price terms and conditions, such as loan covenants and information requirements. This 
reported deterioration was, in net terms, much higher than that observed for interest rates. 
Italian  SMEs  also  reported  a  tightening  of  non-interest  terms  and  conditions,  but  –  by 
contrast  with  average  developments  in  the  euro  area  as  a  whole  –  they  reported  a  slight 
decline in interest rates. Indications of a fall in interest rates are also found in the other two 
large euro area countries (Germany and France) and are in line with the evidence we have 
from aggregate bank interest rate statistics. This somewhat more positive picture compared 
BIS Review 129/2009 
 3
with  the  euro  area  average  indicates  considerable  heterogeneity  of  developments  across 
countries, to which I will return in a few minutes. 
Bank lending in the euro area 
Let me now turn to actual developments in bank loans in the euro area. The growth of banks 
loans  to  the  private  sector  has  declined  considerably  during  the  financial  turmoil,  and  in 
recent  months  the  volume  of  lending  has  reached  the  lowest  levels  seen  since  the  early 
1980s, as can be seen in Chart 4. In the case of households, there have been recent signs 
that the downward movement has come to a halt. More precisely, the annual growth rate of 
loans to households has gradually fallen from the peak recorded in April 2006, when it stood 
at  close  to  10%,  to  levels  of  close  to  zero  in  recent  months  (-0.2%  in  August  2009)  (see 
Chart 5). However, if the distortionary effect of the derecognition of loans on banks’ balance 
sheets related to the securitisation of loans to the private sector is taken into account, the 
growth of loans to households appears to be still positive and stabilising. The annual growth 
rate  of  loans  to  non-financial  corporations,  by  contrast,  fell  from  its  recent  peak  of  almost 
15% in April 2008 to 0.7% in August 2009 (see Chart 6). It should be noted that these figures 
cover  all  non-financial  corporations,  small,  medium-sized  and  large,  and  do  not  provide  a 
breakdown  of  the  data  by  size  of  firm.  In  the  case  of  non-financial  corporations,  the 
moderation  in  lending  has  thus  continued,  a  fact  which  has  raised  some  concerns  among 
market  observers  that  companies,  and  SMEs  in  particular,  may  be  suffering  from  a  true 
“credit crunch”.  
Against the background of these concerns, it is important to make a number of observations.  
First, looking ahead it is likely that loans to enterprises may moderate further before starting 
to recover. This would also be in line with past evidence, which indicates that the growth of 
loans  to  non-financial corporations tends  to  lag  GDP  growth  by  about  three  quarters.  This 
may  be  related  to  the  fact  that  non-financial  corporations  usually  see  their  cash  flows 
improve  early  in  an  economic  upturn  and  thus  tend  to  finance  working  capital  and  fixed 
investment with internal funds first, and only later with external financing. Given the current 
projections of a stabilisation in economic activity in the second half of this year, a turning-
point in loan growth may not be reached before early 2010.  
Second, recent credit developments appear to be fully in line with past historical regularities, 
once  we  take  into  account  the  severity  and  duration  of  the  recession.  Indeed,  the  current 
crisis may be the most severe seen since the 1930s. However, caution is warranted when 
interpreting these developments. Not only are deviations from average historical regularities 
observed, but the full impact of the recent severe crisis is still uncertain. 
Third, it is clear that both supply and demand factors have driven credit developments in the 
euro area so far, as confirmed by the evidence provided by the bank lending survey. Overall, 
our  assessment  is  that  credit  developments  have  thus  far  been  affected  more  strongly  by 
factors associated with weak macroeconomic conditions, such as lower credit demand and a 
decrease in the average level of creditworthiness of potential borrowers. However, supply-
side factors have also played a role and should not be underestimated. 
SMEs’ access to finance  
I will now turn to some more direct evidence on SMEs’ access to finance in the euro area 
provided  by  a  recent  ECB  survey.  This  survey,  which  was  conducted  for  the  first  time  in 
June-July 2009, asks firms across the European Union about their financing conditions over 
the  previous  six  months,  meaning  broadly  the  first  half  of  2009  in  this  case.  This  survey 
should  help  over  time  to  fill  the  gap  regarding  information  on  the  financing  conditions  of 
SMEs in the euro area, since quantitative statistics provide very little evidence on the actual 
situation.  
4 
 BIS Review 129/2009
I will present some of the key findings of this survey, as it provides a comprehensive picture 
of the financial situation of SMEs in the euro area and their access to financing over the first 
half  of  2009.  The  survey  evidence  provides  input  into  the  discussion  on  constraints  in  the 
access to finance of firms, and SMEs in particular. At the same time, given that this is the 
first time the survey has been conducted, the results of the survey should be interpreted with 
caution. 
I will start with the turnover and profit situation of SMEs in the first half of 2009. Thereafter, I 
will turn to the most interesting results of the survey in the current economic situation, namely 
the  evidence  on  SMEs’  access  to  finance  and  their  experience  when  applying  for  a  bank 
loan. Last but not least, I will briefly add some evidence on the heterogeneity across euro 
area countries.  
Let me start with the financial situation of firms in the euro area. Overall, SMEs’ assessment 
of  their  financial  situation  is  more  negative  than  that  of  large  firms  (see  Chart  7).  This 
suggests that SMEs were more strongly affected by the crisis up to the first half of 2009. For 
instance,  a  higher  net  share  of  SMEs  than  of  large  firms  reported  that  their  turnover  had 
decreased.  Turnover  and  cost  developments  had  a  negative  impact  on  firms’  profits. 
Consequently,  a  higher  share  of  SMEs  than  of  large  firms  said  that  their  profits  had 
deteriorated in the first half of the year. 
Given the economic situation, it may come as no surprise that a limited share of euro area 
SMEs  (10%)  also  reported  a  deterioration  in  their  own  capital  (the  share  of  large  firms 
reporting a decline was lower).  
These developments certainly had an impact on the response to applications for bank loans 
and, more generally, on the availability of bank loans to euro area firms in the first half of 
2009.  
Notwithstanding the deterioration in the economic situation, the majority of SMEs report that 
they were successful in applying for a bank loan in the first half of 2009 (see Chart 8). This is 
one of the main findings of the survey. It provides a very useful overall picture of bank loan 
supply and helps to answer the question of whether SMEs experienced financing constraints 
in the first half of 2009. In the period under review, 60% of the SMEs that had applied for a 
bank  loan  received  the  full  amount  they  had  requested.  An  additional  17%  said  they  had 
received at least part of the amount requested, so that 77% of SMEs received either all or 
part of the requested bank loan. By contrast, 12% of SMEs had their bank loan application 
rejected. 
Unfortunately,  we  are  not  yet  in  a  position  to  compare  these  results  over  time  to  assess 
whether these shares are high or low. Still, even in times of sound economic growth, some 
SMEs  will  always  be  unsuccessful  in  obtaining  the  financing  they  have  applied  for,  for 
reasons such as insufficient business plans. However, there seems to be a clear relationship 
between the size and age of a firm and its success in applying for a loan. The larger and 
older the firms were, the more successful they were in obtaining a loan. Indeed, about twice 
as many applications for bank loans by SMEs as those by large firms were rejected.  
Availability of external financing 
Firms that had an external financing need and therefore had applied for a loan in the first half 
of 2009 were rather sceptical in their assessment of the availability of external financing (see 
Chart 9). Large firms were somewhat more negative in their assessment than SMEs. This is 
in line with the evidence from the bank lending survey that the tightening of credit standards 
was more pronounced for large firms than for SMEs. As already mentioned, this may come 
as a surprise, as SMEs are generally perceived to be affected more than large firms by a 
deterioration in access to finance.  
BIS Review 129/2009 
 5
The availability of bank loans tends to be related to the general economic situation, which 
affects the financial situation of the individual firm. Hence, it is not surprising that both factors 
played a major role in bank loan availability, not only according to the assessment of banks 
in the bank lending survey, but also according to the assessment of firms in the new survey. 
However, in addition to such demand-related factors, firms are of the view that factors related 
to the supply of credit also played some role in the deterioration of bank loan availability. In 
their view, banks’ willingness to lend decreased, which may suggest that lending restrictions 
were in place.  
The situation in the largest euro area countries 
Let  me  now  touch  on  some  of  the  main  results  for  the  largest  euro  area  countries.  While 
overall  developments  are  most  important  for  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy,  it  is  also  worth 
examining the considerable heterogeneity across different countries in the access to finance 
of SMEs in the first half of 2009.  
Regarding  turnover  and  profit,  SMEs  in  Germany  and  France  were  above  the  euro  area 
average,  in  the  sense  that  fewer  SMEs  reported  a  net  deterioration.  SMEs  in  Italy  were 
around the euro area average, but those in Spain were far below the average. The economic 
situation  is  clearly  reflected  in  SMEs’  assessment  regarding  the  deterioration  in  the 
availability  of  external  financing.  Again,  SMEs  in  Germany  and  France  reported  a  smaller 
deterioration in the availability of bank loans than the euro area average. The figure for Italy 
was  slightly  better  than  the  euro  area  average,  while  Spanish  SMEs  were  much  more 
negative in their assessment of their access to bank loans. A similar picture emerges when 
investigating  the  success  of  applications  for  bank  loans.  While  Spanish  SMEs  reported  a 
lower success rate, French firms reported the highest, followed by Germany and Italy.  
In  sum,  comparing  the  data  on  bank  loans  with  the  results  of  the  survey  on  SMEs,  it  is 
possible  to  conclude  that  the  modest  growth  in  bank  loans  granted  to  the  non-financial 
private  sector  in  recent  months  is  mainly  due  to  the  weak  macroeconomic  conditions. 
However, it has also been affected to some extent by supply-related factors, which have had 
a negative impact on bank lending conditions.  
Some forward-looking considerations  
Let me finally turn to some forward-looking considerations and the role that monetary policy 
can play.  
According to the forecasts of the main international organisations, the economic recovery is 
likely  to  proceed  gradually  and  unevenly,  in  a  context  of  continued  high  uncertainty  and 
possible further deleveraging on the part of banks. Further ahead, as the economic recovery 
strengthens, banks should be in a position to enhance their capital ratios, thereby increasing 
their capacity to provide loans.  
I would like to refer in this respect to the latest guidelines of the Basel Committee with regard 
to capital requirements and the implementation of Basel II. Regulatory capital requirements 
are central to our discussion, as there are clear links between banks’ capital management, 
the loan-granting process and credit supply. While a stronger alignment with actual economic 
risk is necessary, it is also important that the new requirements do not imply excessive pro-
cyclicality.  When  I  speak  of  “pro-cyclicality”,  I  am  referring  to  the  interactions  between  the 
financial  and  real  sectors  of  the  economy,  which  tend  to  be  mutually  reinforcing  and  to 
amplify  business  cycle  fluctuations.  Just  as  a  period  of  economic  growth  will  tend  to  be 
accompanied  by  excessive  risk-taking  on  the  part  of  financial  institutions,  strong  credit 
growth,  asset  price  bubbles  and,  ultimately,  the  building-up  of  systemic  risks,  a  strong 
contraction in economic activity may lead to a marked slowdown in financial flows, including 
credit, which hinders the recovery. Pro-cyclicality implies that capital requirements are loose 
6 
 BIS Review 129/2009
in a boom, allowing banks to lend more in relation to their capital, while they are tight in a 
downturn, which induces banks to cut back lending to the private sector even further than 
they  would  in  the  absence  of  these  requirements.  While  these  mechanisms  are  to  some 
extent  justified  by  the  different  degrees  of  risk  prevailing  in  the  different  phases  of  the 
business cycle, it is important that they do not lead to the excessive effects I just described.  
The pro-cyclical impact of regulatory capital requirements is currently being analysed by the 
relevant  authorities,  including  the  ECB.  These  assessments  could  provide  a  basis  for 
developing an appropriate counter-cyclical buffering mechanism, which is a precondition for 
enhancing financial stability over the medium to long term. 
Beyond  regulatory  capital  requirements,  euro  area  banks  need  to  stabilise  their  earnings 
streams so that organic capital growth can be restored, solvency ratios can be safeguarded 
and  asset  growth  can  gradually  resume.  As  I  have  already  mentioned,  in  order  for  credit 
markets  to  recover,  it  is  not  only  credit  supply  that  will  need  to  expand,  but  also  –  and 
possibly to a larger extent – credit demand, which depends on several factors, including GDP 
growth,  unemployment  and  inflation,  which  in  turn  affect  the  expectations  of  banks’ 
customers.  
As regards the role of monetary policy, the exceptional circumstances related to the financial 
crisis led to the introduction of extraordinary measures. Our aim was to support the liquidity 
in  the  financial  system  and  (indirectly)  to  enhance  the  flow  of  credit  to  the  private  sector, 
above and beyond what could be achieved through policy interest rate reductions alone. In 
particular, we have fully accommodated banks’ liquidity needs at fixed interest rates, we have 
further expanded the list of collateral that we accept in our operations and we have provided 
liquidity for longer periods, of up to one year. Through such one-year refinancing operations, 
we provided €442 billion in June and an additional €75 billion two weeks ago. In addition, we 
have provided liquidity in foreign currencies, notably the US dollar, to address the needs of 
euro  area  banks  to  fund  their  dollar  assets.  Finally,  we  have  been  buying  covered  bonds 
directly  since  July  this  year,  as  this  market  segment  is  an  important  source  of  funding  for 
banks. This has led not only to a reduction in the interest rates on such transactions, but also 
to a revival in a market which had dried up, or even to the establishment of such markets in 
countries where they did not yet exist, such as Italy. 
It is difficult to ask more of monetary policy in a market economy. Our role is limited to the 
provision  of  liquidity  to  solvent  banks.  This  role  does  not  include  the  recapitalisation  and 
restructuring of the banking system, which is an important step to restore trust in the financial 
sector. We expect banks to take a more active role in the process of recapitalisation. As the 
ECB  has  stressed  a  number  of  times,  banks  must  take  full  advantage  of  government 
measures  to  support  the  banking  sector,  in  particular  as  regards  recapitalisation,  not  least 
because the banking system cannot be supported indefinitely by the extraordinary measures 
taken by central banks. An exit strategy will inevitably need to be implemented in due course. 
Banks which decide not to make use of government support measures must find alternative 
sources, in the market, in order to be ready to step up their lending to the real economy once 
the  recovery  begins.  While  the  slowdown  in  bank  lending  observed  in  recent  months  can 
perhaps in part be explained by the fall in economic activity, the failure of banking flows to 
pick up when demand recovers would be more difficult to justify. It would then be difficult to 
justify a situation in which individual incentives, those of bank managers and shareholders, 
are not aligned with the collective incentives to support the economy. We should not forget 
the  experience  of  Japan  over  the  past  decade,  where  delays  in  restructuring  and 
recapitalising the banking system undermined the recovery after the crisis. 
I am certain that this will not happen in Europe, if all parties play their part responsibly and 
are conscious of the role that each component of the economic and financial system must 
perform,  in  particular  when  faced  with  critical  circumstances  such  as  those  we  have 
experienced  recently.  For  our  part,  I  believe  that  the  European  Central  Bank  has 
demonstrated over this period that it is living up to its responsibilities. 
BIS Review 129/2009 
 7
Thank you for your attention. 
Chart 1: Euro area MFI sector’s financial assets transactions 
(percentages) 
Source: ECB Euro Area Accounts. 
 
Chart 2: Changes in credit standards applied to the approval of loans or credit lines to 
enterprises 
(net percentages of banks contributing to tightening standards) 
 Source: Euro area bank lending survey. Notes: The net percentage refers to the difference between the sum of 
the  percentages  for  “tightened  considerably”  and  “tightened  somewhat”  and  the  sum  of  the  percentages  for 
“eased  somewhat”  and  “eased  considerably”.  The  net  percentages  for  the  questions  related  to  the  factors  are 
defined  as  the  difference  between  the  percentage  of  banks  reporting  that  the  given  factor  contributed  to  a 
tightening and to an easing.  
 8 
 BIS Review 129/2009
Chart 3: Changes in terms and conditions for approving loans or credit lines to 
enterprises  
(net percentages of banks reporting tightening terms and conditions) 
 Source: Euro area bank lending survey. 
 
 
 
Chart 4 - MFI loans to the private sector in the euro area 
(percentage changes) 
Source: ECB. 
 
 
BIS Review 129/2009 
  9
Chart 5 - MFI loans to households in the euro area 
(percentage changes) 
Source: ECB. 
 
 
 
Chart 6 - MFI loans to non-financial corporations in the euro area 
(percentage changes) 
Source: ECB. 
 
10 
   BIS Review 129/2009
Chart 7: Financial situation of euro area firms, change over the preceding six months 
(percentages of respondents) 
 Source: ECB/European Commission survey on the access to finance of SMEs. 
 
 
 
Chart 8: Outcome of the applications for external financing by euro area firms over the 
preceding six months 
(percentages of firms that have applied for external financing) 
Source: ECB/European Commission survey on the access to finance of SMEs. 
BIS Review 129/2009 
  11
Chart 9: Availability of external financing for euro area firms, change over the 
preceding six months 
(percentages of respondents) 
 Source: ECB/European Commission survey on the access to finance of SMEs. 
 
 
 
Background charts: 
Chart A: Short-term MFI interest rates on new loans  
(percentages per annum, monthly averages) 
 12 
 BIS Review 129/2009
Chart B: Long-term MFI interest rates on new loans  
(percentages per annum, monthly averages) 
 
 
 
Chart C: MFI loans to households in the euro area: contributions by country 
(percentage points; annual percentage changes; quarterly, quarterly data are averages, nsa) 
 Source: ECB. 
BIS Review 129/2009 
  13
Chart D: MFI loans to non-financial corporations in the euro area: contributions by 
country  
(percentage points; annual percentage changes; quarterly, quarterly data are averages, nsa) 
Source: ECB. 
 14 
 BIS Review 129/2009
Chart E: MFI loans to households in the euro area: annual growth by country 
(percentage changes) 
    Source: ECB. 
BIS Review 129/2009 
 15
Chart F: MFI loans to non-financial corporations in the euro area: annual growth by 
country 
(percentage changes) 
    Source: ECB. 
16 
 BIS Review 129/2009
