Paul Tucker: The crisis management menu 
Speech by Mr Paul Tucker, Deputy Governor for Financial Stability at the Bank of England, 
at the SUERF, CEPS and Belgian Financial Forum Conference: “Crisis Management at the 
Cross-Roads”, Brussels, 16 November 2009.  
 It is a great pleasure to be here today. The current crisis has thrown up so many lessons in 
so many dimensions of the “rules of the game” for the financial system, that I congratulate 
the  organisers  on  devoting  a  whole  conference  to  crisis  management.  That  in  itself  is  a 
meaty enterprise. But a vital one.  
By  way  of  setting  the  scene  for  today’s  conference,  I  will  offer  the  Bank  of  England’s 
perspective  on  the  various  components  of  a  crisis  management  package:  central  bank 
liquidity insurance for viable firms and markets; firm recovery plans, and contingent capital; 
resolution  plans  for  winding  down  failed  businesses,  including  payouts  from  deposit-
insurance  regimes;  and  official-sector  support  operations,  including  emergency  liquidity 
assistance and Capital of Last Resort. Every country’s authorities need a policy on each of 
these components, because some day in the future our successors will find that, however 
good, the improvements our generation makes in the structure, regulation and supervision of 
the financial system will let them down. 
A  thread  that  runs  through  the  discussion  is  how  to  preserve  the  core  financial  services 
provided to the economy through periods of extreme stress without bailing out banks’ equity 
holders or uninsured wholesale creditors. That is the essence of the “Too Big/Important To 
Fail” debate. It is not so much that the top management of banks consciously swing for the 
fences,  but  rather  that  wholesale  credit  may  be  systematically  too  cheap  for  banks,  and 
perhaps  other  intermediaries  too,  unless  the  usual  market  disciplines  of  failure  can  apply. 
The international community is, rightly, increasingly focused on this. And, in particular, it is 
good news that the G20 Finance Ministers and Governors have asked the Financial Stability 
Board to pursue it. To quote the theme of this conference, “TBTF” is probably the definitive 
Cross-Roads issue.  
Central bank liquidity insurance: discount window lending against wide collateral 
I shall begin with the central banker’s role as lender of last resort, the one area where there 
was quite a lot of thinking ahead of this current crisis. 
Even so, one of the things many central banks, including the Bank of England, confronted 
over the past two years or so was that, when conditions are bad enough, the central bank will 
inevitably lend to solvent and viable firms against a very wide range of collateral. Since we 
will end up doing so, it is wise to acknowledge that in advance. But, crucially, it is also wise to 
set the terms so as to avoid subsidising or encouraging imprudent liquidity management by 
firms  in  normal  circumstances.  That  is  one  of  the  principles  which  underpin  the  Bank  of 
England’s own new, permanent liquidity facilities introduced just over a year ago. The other 
principles are that: 
• 
• 
Our liquidity insurance should absolutely not cut across monetary policy. 
In lending against a wide class of collateral, the central bank must apply appropriate 
haircuts, and must be capable of valuing the assets and of managing them in the 
event of a counterparty default. Our haircuts are published and include various add-
ons  for  particular  risks.  And  the  underlying  assets  accepted  as  collateral  should 
have a viable underlying market. 
BIS Review 144/2009 
 1
    As a means of effecting the delivery of insurance, secured loans (repo or collateral 
swaps) are preferable in most circumstances to outright purchases, as during the life 
of a loan central banks can update the value of the security, the collateral margins 
and other terms that control the risk to them. 
Such  lending  against  wider  collateral  should  routinely  be  for  sufficiently  long 
maturities  to  help  forestall  panic  by  avoiding  rollover  risk  for  the  firms  without 
exposing central banks to risk by tying them in for unduly long periods. 
Permanent facilities providing bilateral liquidity insurance should routinely be made 
available  only  to  commercial  banks  (and  other  authorised  deposit  takers).  They 
unavoidably need such insurance because their deposit liabilities are money, giving 
them a vital role, as monetary institutions, in the economy and financial system. 
But such public facilities should not be available to banks where in the judgment of 
the  central  bank  there  are  serious  question-marks  over  their  viability  or  solvency. 
(As  I  shall  discuss  later,  that  need  not  exhaust  our  menu  for  providing  liquidity  to 
individual firms in support operations.1) 
But  the  most  vital  principle  is  to  avoid  creating  perverse  incentives  for  banks  to  take 
excessive  liquidity  risk.  There  are  two  elements  to  this.  One  is  the  importance  of  the 
regulatory  regime:  making  banks  hold  a  minimum  stock  of  truly  high-quality  liquidity. 
Internationally, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision and, in the EU, the Committee 
of European Banking Supervisors are working on that. In the UK, the FSA is committed to 
defining core liquidity as just that: inalienably liquid. Defining core liquidity in terms of assets 
that are eligible for rediscount at the central bank, as some have argued, is in our view a 
dangerous course to take. It could have the unhelpful effect of making central banks lenders 
of first rather than of last resort.  
The second element in avoiding perverse incentives is the terms on which liquidity insurance 
is  available  from  the  central  bank.  Setting  the  right  pricing  is  not  easy.  Two  approaches 
could,  in  principle,  be  adopted.  One  would  be  to  charge  an  ex  ante  fee,  say  annually,  for 
access to the liquidity facilities, perhaps based on how much liquidity risk individual banks 
had been taking. So far as I know, no central bank has done that yet, but it should not be 
ruled  out  as  an  idea.  The  other  approach  is,  of  course,  to  charge  a  premium  interest  rate 
upon  the  facilities  being  drawn  on.  The  Bank  of  England  has  adopted  a  schedule  for  our 
Discount Window Facility under which the rate charged increases with the size of a drawing 
relative to the bank’s size, and also with the illiquidity and riskiness of the collateral provided. 
We want to underline that banks will end up paying more to draw on the insurance line if they 
are  overly  reliant  on  illiquid,  risky  collateral  –  implying  that  their  balance  sheet  was  overly 
exposed to liquidity risk. These considerations have to be taken into account if central banks 
are to lend against very broad asset classes; for example, as we flagged earlier in the year, 
the Bank of England will be deciding over the coming months whether to extend the collateral 
eligible in our Discount Window to portfolios of loans to companies and households and of 
equities.  The  Bank  of  England  also  charges  a  premium  rate  if  a  bank  borrows  from  us 
against  assets  comprising  securitisations  of  loans  they  originated  themselves.  This  is 
because  there  needs  to  be  an  incentive  to  make  such  securities  marketable;  and,  more 
important,  it  can  help  to  protect  us  against  one  of  the  most  basic  risks  in  banking  –  the 
correlation between the quality of a bank’s underwriting standards and its solvency.  
Although central banks need to be ready to lend against a wide range of collateral, we do still 
need to be careful about precisely what we take. To that end, my colleagues Paul Fisher and 
Sarah  Breeden  will  be  developing  criteria  for  the  structure  and  disclosures  around  the 
                                                 
1  
In the UK, support operations can be effected under the Tripartite Memorandum of Understanding between 
the UK’s Tripartite authorities (HMT, FSA and Bank). 
2 
 BIS Review 144/2009
securitisations that will be acceptable to us in steady state. The ECB is conducting a similar 
exercise. Since that may have some read across to the development of the market itself, I 
hope we can count on active industry collaboration as we undertake that work. 
Before  moving  on,  I  should  pause  for  a  moment  on  the  Bank’s  principle  that  our  routinely 
available liquidity insurance facilities should be available only to commercial banks. Now, we 
do of course realise that, especially in the US, a number of other kinds of financial firm or 
vehicle  have  been  given  access  to  special  liquidity  assistance  during  this  crisis:  finance 
companies, money funds, securities dealers. But in terms of the reform agenda, to our mind 
this  underlines  the  importance  of  ensuring  that  a  shadow  banking  system,  running  big 
maturity  mismatches  but  offering  capital  certainty  and  instant  liquidity  to  savers,  does  not 
grow just beyond the perimeter of bank regulation. This is not an issue just in the US. It was, 
after  all,  the  suspension  of  redemptions  by  European  enhanced-return  money  funds  that 
triggered  the  money  market  crisis  in  August  2007.  This  part  of  the  reform  agenda  –  the 
restructuring of the continuing shadow banking system – must not be neglected. 
Market maker of last resort? 
The purpose of providing liquidity insurance to banks is well known – having been developed 
since Bagehot’s day and before. It serves us well to put a finger in the dyke, with a view to 
preventing  a  liquidity  panic  developing  unnecessarily  into  a  solvency  problem  through  the 
forced-sale of assets. 
But this crisis has reminded everyone that it is not only firms that can suffer liquidity runs. 
Markets can too.  
Liquidity insurance facilities that underpin banks' funding are obviously helpful to preserving 
market  liquidity,  as  they  increase  the  probability  of  bank-dealers  being  able  to  finance 
unwanted inventory.  
But arguments have been advanced during the crisis that the authorities should be able to 
act  more  directly  to  preserve  market  liquidity,  especially  if  bank-dealers  withdraw  from 
market-making because they become capital constrained. That is, essentially, the origin of 
suggestion that central banks should stand ready to act as Market Makers of Last Resort.2 
As the amount of credit that gets intermediated via markets rather than via institutions grows, 
the need for a MMLR grows too.  
This is by no means straightforward, and not only because it is not central to our inheritance. 
Whereas  lending  to  a  bank  does  with  certainty  give  that  bank  more  liquidity,  entering  a 
market  as  a  buyer  does  not  automatically  enhance  the  liquidity  of  that  market  in  a 
sustainable  way.  Also,  whereas  central  banks  protect  themselves  against  risk  in  secured 
loans by requiring more collateral if conditions deteriorate, an outright purchase is a one-off 
transaction; there’s no going back to renegotiate the price afterwards.  
By  analogy  with  the  more  familiar  “LOLR”  function,  the  following  thoughts  suggest 
themselves for debate in our community. 
• 
As with LOLR, central banks should only engage in MMLR operations that do not 
interfere with monetary policy.  
A MMLR should aim to buy at a discount to the fundamental value of a risky asset, 
with  the  implicit  bid-ask  spreads  unattractive  relative  to  peacetime  conditions  in 
private markets but impliedly better than those available during the crisis itself. The 
                                                  
2   For  example  see,  Buiter  W  and  Sibert  A  (2007),  “The  Central  Bank  as  Market  Maker  of  Last  Resort”, 
Maverecon – Willem Buiter’s Blog (http://maverecon.blogspot.com/2007/08/central-bank-as-market-maker-of-
last.html). 
BIS Review 144/2009 
 3
  purchase  mechanism  should  be  designed  to  reveal  information  about  the  state  of 
the market and the fairness of prices paid.  
While  the  risk  inherent  in  outright  purchases  cannot  be  avoided,  the  MMLR 
absolutely must stay within the capacity determined by its capital resources. 
And  crucially,  the  MMLR  should  aim  to  be  catalytic,  helping  ideally  to  kick-start  a 
market rather than replace it. And it should avoid propping up markets that would 
not  be  fundamentally  viable  once  the  liquidity  crisis  subsided.  The  underlying 
objective is, as elsewhere, to help to maintain continuity of the crucial services that 
the financial system provides to the economy. 
In  big  picture  terms,  the  Bank  of  England’s  programme  of  auctions  to  purchase  small 
amounts  of  a  fairly  wide  range  of  sterling  corporate  bonds  can  be  viewed  as  one 
manifestation of that broad approach to MMLR. The aim has been to aid improvements in the 
liquidity of the market, including by reducing the inventory risk to “market makers”.  
But our community is some distance from thinking through the extent to which this kind of 
thing should feature as a permanent part of our armoury. While not an urgent issue, it is an 
important one given the increasing role of capital markets in our financial system.  
Recovery plans, and contingent capital  
Whether provided to individual firms or to markets, routine liquidity insurance will not always 
suffice. Sometimes a liquidity problem is triggered by fundamental problems. Sometimes a 
liquidity crisis creates credit problems through the effects of a fire sale of assets. Firms must 
plan for distress. Not only is that in the interests of the financial system and, indeed, of the 
economy more widely, it is in the interests of firms themselves. At not a few distressed firms 
around  the  world,  at  times  over  the  past  three  years  the  leadership  “lost  it”  under  the 
pressure of events. Contingency planning is essential. Regulators must make firms do it – 
properly. And that means for really disagreeable scenarios. 
As the UK’s FSA has recently explained,3 the clear recommendation of the G20-sponsored 
Financial Stability Board is that these contingency plans need two, distinct components. A 
recovery plan for maintaining a going concern. And a resolution plan for firms that, however 
regrettably,  need  to  be laid  to  rest. The  objective  in  each  case  is  to  maintain  the  financial 
system’s provision of essential services to the economy. 
Firms themselves need to play a leading role in drawing up “recovery plans”. At least two 
components are needed, roughly corresponding to liquidity and capital. First, a contingency 
funding plan (CFP). Too few banks of any size seem to have had one in any serious way. 
There  was,  for  example,  too  little  focus  on  the  effects  of  ratings  downgrades  on  collateral 
calls and on the availability of lines of credit. And too little attention was paid to core liquidity 
holdings: a treasury portfolio comprising the FRNs issued by other banks does not leave a 
distressed bank with many options in the face of system-wide stress. Banks need to know 
exactly what assets they hold in which securities-depository systems; how long it would take 
to  deploy  them;  and  which  are  eligible  in  which  central  banks’  routine  facilities.  Too  few 
banks had that information readily to hand. Maybe they do now. They should. 
The FSA has very kindly agreed to share with the Bank of England the CFPs of banks (and 
building  societies)  where  relevant  to  our  functions.  As  well  as  helping  us  to  discharge  our 
financial stability responsibilities more broadly, this will be useful in making sense of requests 
to draw from our Discount Window Facility.  
                                                 
3   FSA  DP09/4:  Turner  Review  Conference  Discussion  Paper,  “A  regulatory  response  to  the  global  banking 
crisis: systemically important banks and assessing the cumulative impact”. 
4 
 BIS Review 144/2009
Second  and  beyond  liquidity  planning,  recovery  can  involve  derisking.  This  might  mean 
laying  off  risk,  shedding  positions  or  even  selling  businesses.  Once  in  distress,  banks 
absolutely  must  be  prepared  to  shrink  their  franchise  in  order  to  sustain  themselves.  That 
may  entail  having  businesses  set  up  within  groups  in  a  way  that  would  facilitate  sale,  if 
necessary. Sometimes what a group regards as its core franchise will not map exactly into 
what the authorities think of as the essential economic services it provides. That is obviously 
for discussion between firms and their regulators, who need to be ready to exercise powers 
to force risk-reduction and recapitalisation where necessary to preserve the soundness of the 
enterprise and the stability of the system.  
“Derisking”  is  all  about  the  capital  resources  of  banks  in  the  face  of  idiosyncratic  or 
widespread stress. There is, therefore, a read across from the “Living Wills” exercise to the 
question of how much capital banks should hold. Almost no amount of capital is enough if 
things  are  bad  enough.  Which  is  why  contingent  capital  might  potentially  be  an  important 
element in banks’ recovery plans, as the Governor set out recently in Edinburgh.4  
This would not be the kind of hybrid capital that mushroomed in the decade or so leading up 
to the crisis. The familiar types of subordinated debt can absorb losses only if a bank is put 
into liquidation, and so really has no place in regulatory capital requirements as we cannot 
rely  on  liquidation  as  the  only  resolution  tool.  It  has  been  a  faultline  in  the  design  of  the 
financial system as a whole that banks issued securities that counted as capital for regulatory 
purposes,  and  on  which  they  could  therefore  leverage  up,  but  with  institutional  investors 
treating them as very low risk investments backing household pension and annuity savings.  
By  contrast,  contingent  capital  would  be  debt  that  converted  into  common,  loss-absorbing 
equity if a bank hit turbulence. It is, in effect, a form of catastrophe insurance provided by the 
private sector.  
Why should long-term savings institutions and asset managers be prepared to provide such 
insurance? One possible reason is that if enough of them were to do so for enough banks, it 
might  well  help  to  protect  the  value  of  their  investment  portfolios  more  generally.  If  ever  it 
needed to be demonstrated, the current crisis has surely put it beyond doubt – not only for 
our generation but for the next one too – that serious distress in the banking system deepens 
an economic downturn and so impairs pretty well all asset values. By taking a hit in one part 
of  their  portfolio  by  providing  equity  protection  to  banks,  institutions  might  well  be  able  to 
support the value of their investments more widely. And the trigger for conversion from debt 
into equity could be at a margin of comfort away from true catastrophe; say, a percentage 
point or so above the minimum regulatory capital ratio.  
Of  course,  this  would  entail  a  structural  shift  over  time  in  investment  portfolios.  But  the 
system might be able to manage that adjustment. After all, it managed the all together less 
desirable adjustment to the development of the existing hybrid capital markets. But demand 
for contingent capital is, inevitably, uncertain at this stage. As are the terms on which it will 
be provided. We welcome the growing private sector focus on this.  
                                                 
4   King Mervyn A. (2009), “Speech by Mervyn King, Governor” to Scottish Business Organisations, Edinburgh, 
October  2009.  See  also  Tucker  P  M  W  (2009a),  “Remarks  by  Paul  Tucker”,  Panel  session  at  the  Turner 
Review Conference, London, March 2009 (pp. 5) and Tucker P M W (2009b), “The repertoire of official sector 
interventions in the financial system: last resort lending, market-making, and capital”, Bank of Japan’s 2009 
International Conference, Tokyo, May 2009 (pp. 19). In the academic community, the idea was aired in “An 
Expedited Resolution Mechanism for Distressed Financial Firms: Regulatory Hybrid Securities”, Squam Lake 
Working Group on Financial Regulation, April 2009, Council on Foreign Relations. Dudley, William C. (2009) 
“Remarks by William Dudley” at the Institute of International Bankers Membership Luncheon, New York City, 
October 2009. 
BIS Review 144/2009 
 5
Resolution of bank failures 
If recovery plans prove wanting, then distressed banks need to be “resolved” – laid to rest, 
but  without  undermining  crucial  economic  services.  Sometimes  the  best  course  will  be  a 
straightforward,  whole-bank  liquidation,  with  retail  depositors  receiving  a  payout  from  the 
insurance fund. But, alternatively, resolution can involve selling the deposit book – and so the 
vital payments services – to another bank. Good assets might go with the deposits, or be 
transferred elsewhere. Bad (or at least unsaleable) assets go into run off. Choosing the best 
course is central to effective resolution planning.  
To split up and transfer the different parts of a bank, the authorities obviously need specific 
and extensive powers. The broad model is provided by the Deposit Insurance Corporations 
of  the  USA  and  Canada.  The  UK  has  recently  introduced  such  powers,  having  learnt  the 
hard way that we needed them. A number of other countries in the EU adapt their normal 
corporate insolvency regime for the special structure of banks, but do not all have the option 
to  break  up  and  transfer  different  parts  of  the  business.  This  is  the  subject  of  the  recent 
consultation paper published by the European Commission.5  
In the UK, the Bank of England has become the Special Resolution Authority. We have been 
helped by the hands-on operational expertise necessary for our market operations and for 
running the wholesale payments system. This new responsibility has given us an interesting 
vantage point on the preconditions for effective resolution. In the first place, let me tell you 
that  it  is  very  information-intensive.  It  requires  a  lot  of  detail  on  how  a  bank’s  business  is 
structured and run. And that information needs to be available at an early stage. Amongst 
many things, it includes details of netting and derivative contracts, and I am struck that, in the 
US, the FDIC now requires troubled banks to demonstrate that they could report each day 
the relevant details of derivative portfolios. The Bank of England plans to consider whether or 
not something like that might be warranted in the UK. More generally, the UK FSA has said 
that the authorities will need to be assured that firms are able to provide the necessary data 
to assess resolution options and to execute the authorities’ chosen strategy.  
But it is not just the resolution authority which needs lots of information. Potential bidders for 
all or parts of an ailing bank do too – of the kind typically offered to bidders in a “friendly” 
M&A transaction. Banks probably need routinely to maintain such “Data Rooms” as part of 
their contingency plans – something which the FSA is examining.  
As  will  be  abundantly  clear  from  this  brief  review,  the  “recovery  and  resolution  plan” 
enterprise  requires  the  regulators  to  work  closely  with  the  resolution  authorities,  and  with 
central  banks  as  liquidity  providers.  In  the  UK,  wearing  our  “resolution  authority”  hat,  the 
Bank hopes to be able to work closely with individual banks and the FSA in helping to specify 
and guide what is needed in practice. My colleague Andrew Bailey will be discussing in more 
detail tomorrow one of the issues raised by past cases.  
The enterprise also entails thinking beyond the resolution of modest-sized domestic banks. 
Both  the  US  and  UK  authorities  are  exploring  how  to  extend  resolution  regimes  to  bank 
holding  companies  and  to  other  types  of  firm  that  could  prove  systemically  significant  in 
some  circumstances.  As  present,  no  one  thinks  that  Large  and  Complex  Financial 
Institutions could be resolved at all smoothly, as the rescues of the past twelve months show.  
Cross-border resolutions and the international “living wills” exercise 
There  is,  therefore,  a  substantial  international  dimension  to  this  work,  which  is  being 
facilitated by the Financial Stability Board. Over the next few months, the top 25 or so banks 
                                                 
5   Communication from the European Commission, An EU Framework for Cross-Border Crisis Management in 
the Banking Sector, 20 October 2009. 
http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/bank/crisis_management/index_en.htm#overview
6 
 BIS Review 144/2009
and  dealers  in  the  world  will  be  working  with  the  authorities  to  produce  recovery  and 
resolution plans. The effort will involve not only line supervisors but also resolution authorities 
and  central  banks.  Firms  are  expected  to  produce  recovery  plans.  For  obvious  reasons, 
resolution plans need to be produced by the authorities, while still drawing on inputs from the 
firms.  In  the  UK,  the  FSA  has  recently  published  how  they  will  approach  this  international 
effort.6  
It is a formidable task. Working with the FSB secretariat, my role, as chairman to the Cross-
Border Crisis Management Working Group, will be to help colleagues to flush out the issues, 
so  that they  can  be  properly  debated  and  reviewed  by  G20  Ministers  and  Governors  later 
next year. With the European Commission on the FSB and also the resolution working group, 
I hope that will also help to inform work at the European level.  
There will quite probably be hard questions. They could include whether something needs to 
be  done  about  the  complex  structures  and  organisation  of some  banks.  Another  big  issue 
might be which services truly need to be maintained. Whether there are conflicts between the 
insolvency  laws  and  special  resolution  regimes  of  different  countries  that  would  materially 
impede effective resolution for some groups. And another would be whether losses can in 
the future credibly be made to fall on wholesale creditors. Maybe even about burden sharing 
amongst  national  authorities  if  fiscal  support  proves  unavoidable  when  an  internationally 
active  bank  fails.  In  all  this  the  objective,  of  course,  is  to  get  to  a  place  where  taxpayers’ 
resources are not needed, implicitly or explicitly, to underpin the national and international 
credit systems. And some of those operational questions, therefore, shade into the broader 
debates about the structure and regulation of the financial system.7
Of that list of issues, I should highlight two today.  
The first is the entanglements and conflicts that can exist between home and host insolvency 
and resolution laws. There is, for example, a first-order difference between, on the one hand, 
countries whose regime effectively permits a de facto ring-fencing of locally domiciled assets 
for local depositors and, on the other hand, those that treat liquidation as a joined-up, global 
exercise, with all unencumbered assets shared pro rata across senior unsecured creditors. 
These issues are not new. They were highlighted nearly twenty years ago by the closure of 
BCCI’s operations around the world.8 Subsequently, in Europe, insolvency law for banks was 
improved through the Credit Institutions Reorganisation and Winding-Up Directive. There is a 
single-entity insolvency regime for any bank incorporated in the EEA, applying to the parent 
bank  and  also  to  all  its  branches  throughout  the  EEA.  We  also  have,  in  the  Settlement 
Finality Directive, a sound legal basis for the integrity of wholesale payments transfers in the 
event of a default, without which the effects of failure could be truly devastating. And in the 
Financial  Collateral  Directive,  we  have  an  assurance 
insolvency  or 
reorganisation  measures  cannot  be  applied  to  prevent  or  delay  counterparties  of  a  failed 
institution from exercising their rights to close out, net and/or enforce their security interests 
that  national 
                                                 
6   Financial  Services  Authority  Turner  Review  Conference  Discussion  Paper,  “A  regulatory  response  to  the 
global banking crisis: systemically important banks and assessing the cumulative impact”, FSA DP 09/4. 
7   King Mervyn A. (2009), “Speech by Mervyn King, Governor” to Scottish Business Organisations, Edinburgh, 
October 2009. 
8   Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (1992). “The insolvency liquidation of a multinational bank”, Bank for 
International Settlements. Its key conclusions were: (1) when closing a multinational bank, supervisors should 
pay attention to the nature and timing of communications among themselves and of their communications with 
creditors, shareholders and management; (2) the nature of liquidation rules may be relevant to the manner in 
which multinational banks are supervised; (3) differences in liquidation rules across jurisdictions in a winding-
up can affect returns to depositors and other creditors and the operations of deposit protection schemes; and 
4) coordination and cooperation between liquidators can affect the returns to creditors in a liquidation and can 
be affected by the role of supervisors in a liquidation. 
BIS Review 144/2009 
 7
in  order  to  realise  financial  collateral.  But  we  do  not  yet  have  compatible  bank  resolution 
regimes, and some existing Directives were designed without resolution in mind.  
We now have another chance. The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision has published 
an  extensive  review  of  impediments  to  the  resolution  of  cross-border  banks  arising  from 
national  insolvency  laws,  resolution  regimes,  or  supervisory  practices.  And  the  European 
Commission  has  recently  launched  a  consultation  asking  what  changes  to  the  European 
legislative framework are needed to address these issues. We need to focus on who should 
take what concrete actions. I think the FSB will be picking up that issue. 
Resolution and support operations: who should pick up the tab? 
The second issue concerning resolution I want to say something about is the allocation of 
losses  to  creditors  and  to  the  official  sector  from  support  operations.  The  formal  position 
varies between support for insured deposits and for other creditors.  
Deposit insurance, and risk-based premia 
Insured deposits are, of course, insured. It is often assumed that governments stand behind 
such  schemes.  But  governments  do  not  have  pick  up  the  final  tab.  Such  schemes  are 
ultimately  paid  for  by  the  banks  themselves.  Whether  schemes  are  funded  or  not, 
governments have a legal right to make recoveries from the residual banking industry over 
the succeeding years.  
There is, still, a question of the basis of the levy. This arises most clearly in a system which 
guarantees 100% repayment up to some meaningful amount (now £50,000 in the UK). While 
it has many merits, complete cover affects the dynamics of the market place in a potentially 
unhelpful way. It makes it easier for banks to pay up for deposits. The implied signal that a 
bank offering a high return would be taking greater risk than others, as it would have to, does 
not  matter  to  the  depositors.  They  are  covered,  and  so  are  induced  to  place  their  money 
wherever they can achieve the best returns.  
That  is  a  recipe  for  imprudent  risk  taking.  One  possible  way  of  addressing  it  would  be  to 
make  such  risk-taking  banks  pay  a  higher  levy  into  the  insurance  scheme.  The  Bank  of 
England thinks that this deserves serious consideration, and it is now the subject of debate in 
the UK.  
Beyond deposit insurance: how can the industry bear the cost of rescues? 
During  the  current  crisis,  around  the  world  governments  have  gone  much  further  than 
protecting only insured depositors – uninsured wholesale creditors have been bailed out too. 
The need for such support operations was evident if complete systemic collapse was to be 
averted. But it does raise big questions looking ahead – of fairness and of incentives. Once 
more, we need some principles for what are in effect official Capital of Last Resort (CofLR) 
operations.  
One  possible  starting  point  is  how  central  banks  have  learned  to  think  about  bespoke 
liquidity-support  operations,  so  called  Emergency  Liquidity  Assistance.  After  explicitly 
recognising that occasionally liquidity support operations can end up providing de facto risk 
capital if the recipient deteriorates, the late Eddie George offered some thoughts on this in 
1993;9  “central  banks  are  not  in  the  business  of  providing  public  subsidy  to  private 
                                                 
9   “The pursuit of financial stability”, LSE lecture by the late Eddie George, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, 
1997;  and  Mervyn  King’s  September  2007  letter  to  the  Treasury  Select  Committee,  “Turmoil  in  financial 
markets: what can central banks do?” 
8 
 BIS Review 144/2009
shareholders. If we do provide support, we will try to structure it so that any losses fall first on 
the shareholders and any benefits come first to us. And any support we provide will be on 
terms that are as penal as we can make them, without  
precipitating  the  collapse  we  are  trying  to  avoid  ………  We  look  for  a  clean  exit.  The 
company may be required to run down or restructure its operations, under our surveillance, 
to the point where it can do without our support. We aim to protect the system, not to keep in 
being  unviable  banking  capacity  …...”  And,  paraphrasing  Mervyn  King  in  2007:  “if  the 
[authorities]  underwrite  any  [risk]  that  threatens  to  damage  the  economy  as  a  whole,  it 
encourages the view that as long as a bank takes the same sort of risks that other banks are 
taking then it is more likely that their problems will be insured ex post.”  
That  provides  a  useful  context  for  the  debate  about  whether  the  cost  of  bailouts  can 
somehow be recovered from the industry. Compared with a year ago, a number of ideas are 
now in circulation. One possibility is to establish a fund in advance. Another is to raise a levy 
on the surviving banks.  
An  argument  in  favour  of  the  former  is  that  it  would  raise  contributions  from  risky  banks 
before  they  fail.  And  it  would  allow  the  levies  to  be  related  to  the  size  of  their  uninsured 
creditors,  as  some  in  the  US  have  suggested.10  But  I  do  just  wonder  whether  it  would  be 
realistic to raise, and over the decades sustain, a sufficiently large fund.  
The alternative, as I have discussed before,11 is to raise a levy from surviving firms after the 
event.  This  would  have  to  be  linked  to  a  systemic-crisis  threshold  being  passed  for  the 
deployment  of  public  funds.  And  the  basis  for  deciding  how  much  was  recovered  from 
individual  firms  would  need  to  be  both  clear  and  principled.  In  particular,  it  would  be 
important  to  try  to  incorporate  features  that  enabled  costs  of  failures  somehow  to  fall  to 
uninsured,  wholesale  creditors.  Those  who  finance  the  system  in  the  good  times  need  to 
have incentives to price for risk.  
Summary  
This has been a fairly high-level survey of the instruments on the crisis management menu. 
They are, of course, interlinked. They also bear on the wider debates about the structure and 
regulation  of  the  financial  system.  Perhaps  most  obviously,  the  feasibility  of  producing 
recovery and resolution plans will feed into international and domestic decisions on minimum 
capital  requirements  for  banks  in  general  and  on  the  mooted  add-ons  for  so-called 
systemically significant firms. The weaker a recovery plan and the greater the obstacles in 
the way of its effective resolution, the more capital (and liquidity) a bank is going to have to 
hold.  This  is  why  emerging  interest  in  Contingent  Capital  instruments  is  so  important.  If 
CoCos could form a material part of recovery plans, the landscape might just be transformed.  
And that in turn goes to the big issue. Whether our community can find ways of distributing 
the costs of official sector support operations back to the system and its uninsured creditors 
rather  than  to  the  general  taxpayer.  If  we  can  achieve  that,  market  discipline  would  be 
enhanced. We need to hang on to “market discipline” as a watchword in these debates. The 
goal of re-regulation – of redrawing the rules of the game for the financial system – should 
not  be  to  reintroduce  the  wisdom  of  the  state  into  micro  decisions  about  how  to  run 
businesses. But rather to put market discipline at the heart of a market economy. An effective 
                                                 
10   See  the  recent  statement  by  Sheila  C.  Bair,  Chairman,  Federal  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation,  to  the 
Financial Services Committee; US House of Representatives (29 October, 2009). 
11   See Tucker P M W (2009b), “The repertoire of official sector interventions in the financial system: last resort 
lending, market-making, and capital”, Bank of Japan’s 2009 International Conference, Tokyo, May 2009 (pp. 
18). 
BIS Review 144/2009 
 9
framework  for  crisis  management  drawing  on  the  lessons of  this  crisis  can  take  us  in  that 
direction.  
10 
 BIS Review 144/2009
