Njuguna Ndung’u: Achievements, challenges and reform initiatives for 
the banking sector in Kenya 
Keynote address by Professor Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at 
the Kenya Institute of Bankers’ Annual Dinner, Nairobi, 20 November 2009. 
 Chairman, Kenya Institute of Bankers; 
Distinguished members of the Council here present; 
Distinguished guests; 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
1. 
I  am  pleased  to  join  members  of  the  banking  fraternity  for  the  Kenya  Institute  of 
Bankers (KIB) Annual Dinner. This event has over the years become the premier event for 
Kenyan bankers to toast to their successes, ponder on the challenges in the year and more 
importantly reflect on opportunities in the coming year. I must therefore salute the Chairman 
and Council of the Kenya Institute of Bankers for consistently organizing this forum over the 
years. I am honoured to be the one to deliver the Keynote Address at this important dinner. I 
will  keep  my  remarks  brief,  as  I  do  not  want  to  stand  between  you  and  the  festivities  that 
follow tonight. 
2. 
The year has been a challenging one not just for the banking sector but also for the 
economy at large. The global financial crisis that escalated in 2008 drove down our efforts 
through  second  and  third  round  effects.  However  efforts  by  all  players  to  stimulate  the 
economy dampened the effects of the crisis in Kenya. Globally, efforts by governments have 
stemmed the crisis and the green shoots of recovery are beginning to sprout. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: On the monetary policy front, the Central Bank conducted 
3. 
a procyclical monetary policy in the year with a view to stimulating private sector credit and 
economic  growth.  The  Monetary  Policy  Committee  (MPC)  lowered  the  Central  Bank  Rate 
(CBR) from 8.5 percent to 7.75 percent and the Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) from 6.0 percent 
to  4.5  percent  between  December  2008  and  September  2009.  These  efforts  managed  to 
lower  and  stabilize  short-term  interest  rates.  The  reduction  of  the  Cash  Reserve  Ratio 
induced  banks  to  expand  credit  to  the  private  sector  and  thus  stimulate  economic  growth. 
Analysis of the banking sector indicators shows that gross loans to most sectors increased in 
absolute terms.  
4. 
But the cost of credit and interest rates spread remain high. The spread is a major 
challenge in the banking sector because it acts as an impediment to expansion of credit and 
development  of  financial  intermediation  and  signals  inefficiency  in  the  sector.  We  need  to 
come together, the market and the regulators, to deal with structural binding constraints that 
prevent the cost of credit to re-align itself with available incentives, market conditions as well 
as returns on investment.  
Ladies and Gentlemen: Allow me now to briefly focus on the performance of the 
5. 
banking sector. In 2009, the Kenyan banking sector has continued to exhibit resilience in the 
midst of the global financial turbulences. The performance posted by banks and mortgage 
finance companies in the first three quarters of 2009 surpassed expectations as exhibited by 
the following indicators as at the end of September 2009: 
• 
The  sector’s  assets  increased  by  11  percent  from  Ksh.  1.18  trillion  in  September 
2008  to  Ksh.  1.31  trillion  at  the  end  of  September  2009  as  banks  continued  to 
expand their lending portfolio. 
Deposits increased from Ksh. 895 billion in September 2008 to Ksh. 1 trillion on the 
back of deposit mobilization and expansion of branch networks by banks. 
 BIS Review 158/2009 
 1
    The  Total  Capital  to  Total  Risk  Weighted  Assets  Ratio  stood  at  20  percent  which 
was above the statutory minimum of 12 percent. This is an indicator that the sector 
has a reasonable cushion against periodic shocks. 
The  sector’s  average  liquidity  at  end  of  September  2009  was  40.8  percent  well 
above the statutory minimum of 20 percent. 
The  profit  before  tax  for  the  banking  sector  increased  by  7  percent  from 
Ksh. 34.68 billion for the period ended 30 September 2008 to Ksh. 36.95 billion for a 
similar  period  in  2009.  This  reflects  the  increased  business  from  expansion  and 
diversification drives by banks.  
The  number  of  branches  stood  at  918,  an  increase  of  130  branches  from  the 
corresponding period in 2008. 
Ladies and Gentlemen:  It  is  worth  noting  that  in  the  year,  significant  steps  were 
6. 
made in operationalising a credit information sharing mechanism for the banking sector. The 
Banking (Credit Reference Bureau), 2008 Regulations became operational in February 2009. 
The  Regulations  empower  the  Central  Bank  to  license  and  supervise  Credit  Reference 
Bureaus  (CRBs).  The  bureaus  will  collate  credit  information  from  banks  that  will  facilitate 
credit risk decisions. This is the most significant step towards building information capital. It 
will  allow  us  to  influence  the  collateral  technology  in  use  currently.  The  licensed  Credit 
Reference Bureaus will join the family of financial sector actors.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  The  National  Payments  System  sits  at  the  centre  of  the 
7. 
financial system. It is imperative that payments systems are secure and efficient. The Central 
Bank continues with its initiatives to modernize the national payments system. Accordingly, 
from 1 October 2009, value capping was effected with all payments above Kshs. 1 million 
being  made  through  the  Real  Time  Gross  Settlement  System  (RTGS).  This  initiative  will 
enhance  the  security  and  efficiency  of  high  value  payments.  Let  me  at  this  juncture  thank 
banks,  government  ministries  and  other  market  players  for  their  support  in  implementing 
value capping. The Central Bank will continue working with all concerned players to educate 
the public on value capping and to address implementation bottlenecks that may arise. 
8. 
Whilst initiatives to modernize the payment system continue, we remain cognizant of 
the  cash  based  nature  of  our  economy.  The  Central  Bank  is  therefore  reviewing  currency 
management to ensure availability of “clean money” at a reasonable cost to Kenyans. The 
Bank  is,  in  conjunction  with  the  Kenya  Bankers  Association  (KBA),  exploring  the 
establishment  of  currency  centres.  These  centres  are  expected  to  reduce  the  operational 
costs incurred by banks in moving cash to existing Central Bank branches. This move is also 
expected to support the provision of “clean” notes and coins to Kenyans across the country. 
Pilot currency centres identified jointly with KBA in Nyeri, Meru and Nakuru are expected to 
be operational very soon once modalities are finalized. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: As I draw to a close, let me briefly highlight developments 
9. 
in the bond market with regard to infrastructure bonds. The Central Bank successfully raised 
Ksh. 18.5 billion for the Government through an infrastructure bond in February 2009. This 
bond has not only facilitated financing of the Government’s infrastructure program but also 
set the pace for the issuance of similar bonds by corporate entities.  
10. 
The recent successful bond issuances by KENGEN and Safaricom are illustrative of 
this trend. The success of these bonds undoubtedly would not have been possible without 
the support of the banking sector. We look forward to this continued support including the 
recently  launched  Second  Government  Infrastructure  Bond.  This,  coupled  with  automated 
trading in the Nairobi Stock Exchange will be important for a vibrant bond market.  
11. 
Central Bank and also the policy drive provided by the Vision 2030 blueprint. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: These developments are in line with core mandates of the 
2 
 BIS Review 158/2009
Finally,  as  we  draw  towards  the  festive  season,  let  me  wish  you  happy  holidays  and  a 
rewarding 2010.  
Thank you and God bless you. 
BIS Review 158/2009 
 3
