T T Mboweni: Not there yet – charting a future for Africa 
Address by Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 12th Kgosi 
Edward  Patrick  Lebone  Molotlegi  (EPL)  Annual  Memorial  Lecture,  Phokeng,  10  October 
2009.  
 Introduction  
I thank Mmemogolo Semane Molotlegi for inviting me to deliver this, the 12th annual lecture 
in memory of the late Kgosi Edward Patrick Lebone Molotlegi. This event has become one of 
the most celebrated days in the calendar of the Bafokeng, African people and all those who 
truly treasure Africa’s development from wherever they come. I am truly honoured to be here 
today.  
It is always difficult to meet the challenge of delivering lectures such as this, particularly when 
talking about someone among his own people, who know him much better than one can ever 
claim. I am aware that a lot has been written about the history of the Bafokeng, and I am not 
going to repeat that. I am also equally aware that you cherish the legacy of Kgosi Edward 
Patrick  Lebone  Molotlegi  through  the  many  truly  impressive  programmes  which  attempt  to 
deal with the challenges that the Bafokeng face today.  
I want to acknowledge that the founders of this community had prescience and foresight that 
ought to be emulated by many African peoples. The thought of acquiring land for themselves 
in the 19th century with the attendant legal title to it, owning the resources beneath the soil, 
ranks the founders of the Bafokeng pretty high in any leadership group. This at a time when 
the world had not taken notice of the precious metal, platinum, in general and the platinum 
group of metals in particular. In the recent past the Bafokeng have steadily begun to reap 
some  benefits  from  these  resources,  thanks  to  the  founding  fathers  of  the  Bafokeng 
community.  
Over the years the Bafokeng have been blessed with many good and outstanding leaders 
who  have  successfully  kept  the  community  together,  but  also  left  no  stone  unturned  in 
protecting that which is their heritage. Today we are meeting in honour of one of these giants 
of our society, His Majesty Kgosi Edward Patrick Lebone Molotlegi. We all know about his 
running battles with the past oppressive regimes and their stooges, who wanted to denude 
this community of its heritage. Kgosi chose to defend his people, an act that invited the wrath 
of  the  then  regime,  who  detained  and  harassed  him  and  his  family  until  he  went  to  seek 
refuge amongst the Batswana in Botswana. With the advent of democracy in South Africa, 
however,  he  returned  and  continued  to  lead  his  people  until  his  passing  on  in  1995. 
Unfortunately,  Kgosi  Mokgwaro  George  Molotlegi  left  us  too  soon  thereafter.  Kgosi  Leruo 
stepped  forward  and  here  he  is,  continuing  the  work  of  his  forebears.  The  day  you  were 
enthroned was a most unforgettable one.  
We are all too aware that Kgosi Leruo has a challenging task before him but he has already 
demonstrated  that  he  has  the  requisite  leadership  capability.  And  as  we  remember  Kgosi 
Edward  Patrick  Lebone  Molotlegi,  we  lower  our  banner  also  in  remembrance  of  my  dear 
brothers Moholwane and Fosi.  
In the midst of a global recession  
As we meet here today, we are all too mindful of the fact that we are in the midst of one of 
the most severe economic recessions since the 1930s. We all know the trigger point of the 
crisis,  being  the  US  sub-prime  housing  market  and  its  subsequent  spread  through  the 
banking  sector  and  financial  markets.  The  collateral  damage  has  been  of  unimaginable 
proportions.  Today,  the  US  investment  banking  model  is  all  but  a  thing  of  the  past,  more 
BIS Review 127/2009 
 1
regulations  for  banks  are  on  the  way  (bankers  are  not  trusted  anymore!)  and  many 
reputations have been damaged.  
for 
lacklustre  demand 
lower  commodity  prices  and 
The global economic recovery  
The financial crisis that started in 2007 has developed into the deepest economic recession 
since the Second World War. Most developed economies started to contract from mid-2008, 
and the International Monetary Fund’s (IMF) latest published projections indicate that, as a 
group, they would contract by 3,4 per cent in 2009. Individually, some countries face even 
worse scenarios: Japan is expected to contract by 5,4 per cent, and Germany by 5,3 per cent 
in 2009.  
It  was  impossible  for  emerging-market  and  developing  countries  to  escape  the  effects  of 
such severe contractions in the advanced economies, and they soon experienced the spill-
over  effects  of 
their  exports. 
Nevertheless, as a group, they are faring significantly better, with growth expected to be 1,7 
per  cent  in  2009.  In  particular,  China  and  India  managed  to  maintain  some  growth 
momentum, providing a much needed cushion for the global economy  
There are now some signs of stabilisation in the developed economies and there is a general 
expectation  that  the  worst  of  the  recession  is  over,  although  the  recovery  is  not  by  any 
means expected to be fast and smooth. It would appear that the world-wide co-coordinated 
policy response has borne fruits. The significant reduction in interest rates coupled with the 
huge injection of fiscal stimuli which is currently estimated to be in the region of 2 per cent of 
world  gross  domestic  product  in  the  past  year,  has  proven  to  be  vital  in  stimulating  the 
recovery in many countries.  
The most recent (August 2009) OECD composite leading indicators (CLIs) point to recovery 
in  all  the  major  economies.  Projections  released  by  the  IMF  last  week  indicate  that  world 
growth is expected to average -1,1 per cent in 2009 as compared to -1,4 per cent envisaged 
in July 2009. Of interest is that the world economy is expected to grow at an estimated 3,1 
per  cent  in  2010.  This  represents  a  0,6  percentage  point  upward  revision  to  the  forecasts 
released  three  months  ago.  It  is  encouraging  to  note  that  much  of  this  growth  is  being 
underpinned by the emerging and developing countries which are expected to grow at 5,1 
per  cent  in  2010  compared  with  4  and  7  per  cent  projected  in  July  2009.  The  HSBC 
Emerging  Markets  Index  (EMI)  released  recently,  which  is  meant  to  reflect  economic 
conditions and prospects in developing countries, provides additional support to the view that 
emerging  markets  will  lead  the  global  economic  recovery.  Most  emerging  markets  have 
recorded a strong economic performance in the third quarter of 2009 and leading indicators 
point to further improvements ahead.  
Financial markets conditions have improved somewhat in many countries as is evident from 
the  stock  market  rallies  and  recent  rise  in  commodity  prices.  In  general,  sentiment  within 
financial markets seems to have rebounded. The support provided by central banks in the 
credit markets has played a significant role in the current recovery process. But it is not time 
to celebrate.  
Global  inflation  is  expected  to  remain  relatively  subdued  in  the  foreseeable  future. 
Projections by the IMF show world inflation moderating from 6,0 per cent in 2008 to 2,5 per 
cent in 2009, before accelerating marginally to 2,9 per cent in 2010. Inflation in the advanced 
economies is projected around zero per cent in 2009, whilst in emerging-market economies 
as  group  inflation  is  expected  to  be  around  5,5  per  cent.  The  moderate  global  inflationary 
pressures are essentially due to the widening negative output gaps in many economies.  
2 
 BIS Review 127/2009
Some concerns  
While  there  are  signs  that  the  global  economic  recovery  is  well  underway,  there  are  still 
numerous challenges ahead. Firstly, the pace of recovery is likely to be slow, protracted and 
uneven across countries. The recovery in the advanced economies is expected to be slower 
than in the emerging-market economies. Advanced economies are expected to grow by an 
average  1,3  per  cent  next  year  as  compared  to  the  projected  5,1  per cent  growth  rate  for 
developing and emerging economies. This may have implications for our domestic recovery 
to the extent that our export sectors are dependent on the performance of the industrialised 
economies. Fortunately our trade with emerging markets, particularly with China, has been 
expanding in recent years, and the recovery in Asia could encourage exports to that region. 
Banking  sector  concerns  still  persist  in  some  countries  which  could  hinder  the  pace  of 
recovery in these countries.  
There  is  little  doubt  about  the  need  for  structural  reforms  at  both  the  international  and 
national levels. While consensus has been reached at an international level on how to reform 
and strengthen financial markets, the measures to be adopted and structural reforms to be 
implemented at the national level will be more challenging.  
Then there is the issue of the timing of the appropriate exit strategies from the current policy 
stance. Monetary and fiscal stimuli will have to be withdrawn at some stage in such a way as 
not to undermine the current recovery. The lessons of the 1930s appear to have been learnt; 
namely, that if the stimuli is withdrawn too quickly, the process of recovery is undermined. 
However, fiscal deficits cannot be expanded indefinitely and will have to be reversed, while 
excessive monetary policy accommodation may not only became inflationary down the line, 
but may in fact sow the seeds of the next asset price bubble. So a fine balance has to be 
found between the recovery and its sustainability.  
The slow response of consumer expenditure coupled with subdued developments in labour 
market conditions will be of particular concern to policymakers. In the advanced economies 
in particular, the declines in property and stock market prices have had significant negative 
wealth effects. Traditionally the US consumer is the main driver of growth in that country, but 
the rebuilding of household balance sheets could take some time and constrain the recovery 
in expenditure. While much of the current recovery is being induced by an inventory cycle, if 
the new production is not consumed, the recovery could be reversed.  
The bottom line is that, while the downturn appears to have bottomed out, the strength of the 
recovery will remain uneven and uncertain across countries.  
As  we  reflect  on  these  developments,  many  questions  still  require  answering  from  policy-
makers  and  society  in  general.  How  do  we  prevent  the  emergence  of  another  severe 
recession? How do we as African countries learn the lessons from this recession? One thing 
for certain is that there have been significant outflows of capital to the developed countries. 
Many banking facilities have been undermined. Again this poses the question about what the 
structural  ownership  of  banks  in  our  economies  should  be  in  the  future.  Although  we  all 
rejoice when one or the other bank in our economies is owned by non-resident shareholders, 
the question arises as to the sustainability of such a model? Let me not be misunderstood: 
we  need  foreign  direct  investment  in  the  same  way  as  we  want  our  own  banks  and  other 
companies to invest abroad. This is a globalised world and cross border investment flows are 
part of that. But still, the questions remain.  
These  and  other  questions  would  have  been  asked  by  Kgosi  Edward  Patrick  Lebone 
Molotlegi.  
A finite resource  
This area, like the rest of the region, depends heavily on mining the platinum group of metals 
as a major economic activity. We all know that all minerals are a finite resource – there are 
BIS Review 127/2009 
 3
limited reserves and we, therefore, have to ensure that we bequeath wealth unto the future 
generations of Bafokeng. If anything, the global slowdown experienced earlier in the demand 
for metals, indicates that we, like the leadership here has noticed, cannot depend solely on 
these resources.  
This point is best illustrated by the fact that South Africa was once a global leader in gold 
mining and gold constituted well over fifty percent of South African exports, well that is no 
longer the case. South Africa has been overtaken by China as the world’s number one gold 
producer. This is largely due to gold reserves in this country being depleted and what little is 
left  getting  more  and  more  difficult  to  extract  as  mining  becomes  a  deeper  and  deeper 
activity and, therefore, too costly and a high risk effort. It is today a misnomer to speak of 
Johannesburg as the city of gold as there is no more gold mining in the city other than the 
reprocessing  of  those  mine  dumps.  Gauteng  and  eGoli  only  bring  fond  memories  of  gold-
mining  in  and  around  Johannesburg.  The  challenge  that  we  face,  and  I  know  it  is  being 
confronted head-on here, is that one day our mineral resources will be depleted and we have 
to depend on other economic activities.  
South Africa's Diamond Coast illustrates the point further. Globally, according to forecasts, 
known diamond reserves are expected to run out in 30 years. As the precious gem runs out, 
previously vibrant towns in Namaqualand are becoming ghost towns – schools, houses and 
clinics stand mostly deserted. It is reported that, since 2007, the De Beers mining company 
has drastically reduced its operations at its Namaqualand mines, reducing staff from about 
3000 to 250.1 This is a major blow to that region and provides enough proof that what the 
leadership of Bafokeng have identified for a diversified economy is appropriate and will stand 
us in good stead in the future.  
A matter that is closely associated with mining is the challenge of substitution. As prices of 
commodities  continue to  increase, the  consumers  of  these  commodities  always  attempt  to 
look  for  cheaper  substitutes.  In  the  early  70’s,  as  most  of  us  are  no  doubt  aware,  copper 
mines in Zambia, which were the main source of income and also the largest providers of 
employment, were forced to scale down their operations as the price of copper plummeted 
and  consumers  joined  the  rush  to  find  substitutes.  The  consequences  for  the  Zambian 
economy were terrible, to say the least. Although the demand for copper worldwide is still 
high, attempts to find substitutes have increased over the years.  
In the recent past, prices of all commodities have hit historically high levels. Just to remind all 
of us, the price of the North Sea Brent crude oil peaked at US$145, 66 per barrel on 3 July 
2008 and some analysts were calling for the price to reach US$200. The price of gold also 
increased  to  US$1050  per  fine  ounce  on  8  October  2009.  Finally,  the  price  of  platinum 
increased  to  US$2308  on  4  March  2008  before  declining  to  the  current  levels  of  around 
US$1332.  At  this  elevated  price  of  platinum,  global  car  manufacturers  started  looking  for 
substitutes  to  use  in  the  manufacture  of  catalytic  converters.  There  was  talk  that  some 
manufacturers  were  at  an  advanced  stage  in  developing  a  substitute  for  platinum  in  the 
manufacture of these catalytic converters. Earlier talk was that the most probable substitute 
was palladium which, at least, is part of the platinum group of metals.  
In pointing out these challenges a suggestion is not being made that we should cease all the 
mining  production.  The  point  being  made  here  is  that  while  platinum  might  be  the  most 
significant source of revenue for this community today; this will demand of us to re-double 
our diversification efforts within the context of a well defined and strategic plan. And that is 
exactly what is been done in this community.  
                                                 
1   SA’s  diamond 
devastated.htm. 
towns  devastated 
-  http://www.miningmx.com/news/diamonds/SA's-diamond-towns-
4 
 BIS Review 127/2009
lifelong 
investments 
learning  and 
in  education, 
therefore  made  major 
Diversification is fundamental  
I am most certainly impressed by the forward thinking that obtains in this community. Your 
diversification programme will most certainly guarantee sustenance beyond the availability of 
mineral resources and is testimony to the quality of leadership that is to be found here. It is 
indeed laudable that the Bafokeng have recognised this need, as shown in the portfolio of 
investments that includes telecommunications, financial assets, manufacturing, services and 
cultural development programmes. And if there is one thing I know about the Bafokeng that 
is  their  ability  to  implement.  That  capability  is  found  wanting  in  many  countries  on  our 
continent and also in parts of our own spheres of government.  
One marvels daily at countries that do not have the benefit of mineral resources like us, but 
have done wonders for themselves. Take a city- state like Singapore which does not have 
any mineral resources, let alone enough land for agriculture, but has managed to develop to 
such impressive levels (a high income status). Opening a Human Capital Summit recently, 
the  Prime  Minister  of  Singapore,  Mr  Lee  Hsien  Loong,  said:  “For  a  small  country  like 
Singapore,  acquiring  and  nurturing  human  talent  is  a  matter  of  survival.  Without  much  of 
anything else, we rely on human ingenuity and effort to build our economy and society. We 
have 
talent 
development.”2  
In fact, the major manufacturing centres of Asia, such as Japan, Singapore, and Hong Kong, 
have few or no significant natural resources. South Korea, for example, was at almost the 
same  level  of  development  as  Ghana  50  years  ago.  While  the  latter is  well  endowed  with 
natural resources and has recently discovered oil, South Korea has none of these but has 
successfully grown its economy to be ranked 14th by GDP at purchasing power parity.  
There are possible and practical responses. The question then arises, why Africa is not using 
its mineral and other resources to the benefit of its people? There is the possibility of (the 
tired subject of) beneficiation which has really not been pursued much in Africa. We seem, as 
Africans, to have been satisfied to continue as “extractive economies”. I gather that platinum 
jewellery is very much in demand in certain parts of the market. I am quite certain that the 
leadership  of  this  community  has  already  considered  and  explored  this  possibility  for 
beneficiation  as  this  might  make  a  significant  contribution  to  the  economic  and  social 
development of Phokeng and Rustenburg. We have the opportunity through existing bursary 
and scholarship programmes to send some of our young people to study and understand all 
the technical issues around jewellery manufacturing.  
Another  challenge  is  the  manufacture  of  catalytic  converters.  South  Africa  has  a  well-
developed  car  manufacturing  capability  with  car  plants  in  East  London,  Port  Elizabeth, 
Durban  and  nearby  Pretoria  in  Rosslyn  and  Silverton.  It  would  seem  that  opportunities 
abound in the manufacture of catalytic converters. As the community explores many of the 
new  frontiers  of  economic  development,  there  will  be  many  agenda  items  such  as  the 
challenge that might be posed by considering tasks such as these. One thing is for certain, 
there will always be many cars on the road which have catalytic converters!  
Growing  human  capital  and  developing  leadership  are  crucial.  Endowment  with  natural 
resources should  spur even  larger  investment  in  expanding  the  talent  pool.  It  is gratifying, 
therefore, to acknowledge that the Royal Bafokeng Holdings, the entity responsible for the 
management and development of the commercial assets of the Royal Bafokeng community, 
has  the  following  focus  areas:  health,  education,  entrepreneurship  development,  social 
development and sports development.  
                                                 
2   Speech  by  Mr  Lee  Hsien  Loong,  Prime  Minister,  at  the  Singapore  Human  Capital  Summit  opening,  29 
September 2009, Raffles city Convention Centre. 
BIS Review 127/2009 
 5
Embracing modernity  
In  today’s  globalised  world  all  countries  and  communities  are  faced  with  the  challenge  of 
embracing change, new technologies and communications systems. Some might try to resist 
change by keeping old traditions and continuing to do things in the same old way with the 
danger  of  being  left  behind  and  thus  condemning  their  future  generations  to  “poverty, 
backwardness, ignorance and disease”. Today, we know that many great nations have made 
a  deliberate  choice  to  learn  from  others  for  survival.  This  quest  to  learn  from  others 
continues. It is fairly easy to obtain a green card in the United States of America if one has 
the skills that they need and which are in short supply globally. In sport this is so common to 
a point of nationhood being made a joke. All you have to ask is how many Brazilian soccer 
players have been naturalised to play for national teams outside Brazil. South Africa has also 
exported many cricket and rugby players to many countries. Despite the danger of overuse 
of  non-citizens,  all  nations  can  benefit  by  learning  from  others.  Xenophobia  is  a  backward 
tendency.  
In  the  speech  by  the  Prime  Minister  of  Singapore  cited  above,  he  refers  to  the  Chinese 
example: “For example, last year  China launched the “One Thousand Talents Scheme” to 
attract  top  global  research  talent  to  base  them  in  China.  Major  Chinese  cities  such  as 
Shanghai  and  Shenzhen  have  also  launched  their  own  schemes  to  bring  in  professionals 
from other parts of the world. If a country like China, with a population of approximately 1, 3 
billion people and the largest number of PhD candidates in the world, still needs to draw in 
overseas talent, the rest of us must have an even stronger imperative to do so.”3  
The  challenge  of  nationhood  and  embracing  modernity  and  learning  from  others  is  well 
captured by Thomas Friedman in his famous book “The Lexus and the olive tree”4. In 1992 
he was on an assignment as a journalist to Japan and visited the Lexus factory which was 
the most memorable in his life. At that time, the factory was producing 300 luxurious sedan 
cars each day, made by 66 human beings and 310 robots. Humans were there mostly for 
quality control and robots were doing all the work. In Beirut and Jerusalem, where he had 
lived for many years, people whom he knew very well were fighting over who owned which 
olive tree. He goes on to assert that olive trees are important as they represent everything 
that roots them, anchors them, identifies them and locates them in the world. Olive trees give 
them  warmth  and  all  that  is  associated  with  human  security.  But  the  human  race  at  times 
fights over the olive tree.  
The  symbolism  in  this  Lexus  and  the  olive  tree  brings  out  the  challenge,  on  one  hand,  of 
either  having  intentions  to  build  a  Lexus,  which  represents  “sustenance,  improvement, 
prosperity and dedication to modernisation” and all that goes with it, for example, embracing 
innovation  and  sending  human  beings  to  the  moon.  On  the  other  hand  we  may  be 
preoccupied with the fight over who owns the olive tree.  
Conclusion  
Kgosi Leruo, I accepted the invite to speak at this gathering with the aim of posing the day to 
day  questions  which  might  have  some  bearing  on  Africa’s  development.  Kgosi  Leruo, 
working together with his collective, has already gone a long way towards dealing with these 
challenges in this small but well-known community. He has demonstrated quality leadership 
and,  therefore,  no-one  is  better  placed  to  protect  the  legacy  of  all  the  previous  leaders  of 
Bafokeng  than  him.  Let  all  those  who  appreciate  the  efforts  of  genuine  African  leadership 
support the challenging task of protecting the memory and legacy of Kgosi Edward Patrick 
Lebone.  
                                                 
3  
4   Thomas Friedman, 2000, The Lexus and the Olive tree, Harper Collins Publishers. 
Ibid. 
6 
 BIS Review 127/2009
You lead a people whose earlier leaders had foresight while others were pre-occupied with 
fighting over the ownership of the olive tree. They were modern in thinking when they sent 
those men to work in the diamond mines in Kimberley and used their earnings to acquire this 
prosperous land.  
This task, keeping the memory of the past leadership of this community alive, is our burden. 
This can be done by looking beyond the present and chart a future for all our people, this 
community and beyond.  
Perhaps you may build a Lexus in Phokeng.  
Thank you very much. Kea leboga!  
BIS Review 127/2009 
 7
