European Central Bank: Press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank 
and Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 
Venice, 8 October 2009. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  our 
press conference here in Venice. I would like to thank Governor Draghi for his kind hospitality 
and to express our special gratitude to his staff for the excellent organisation of the meeting 
of  the  Governing  Council.  We  will  now  report  on  the  outcome  of  today’s  meeting  of  the 
Governing Council, which was also attended by Commissioner Almunia. 
On the basis of its regular economic and monetary analyses, the Governing Council decided 
to leave the key ECB interest rates unchanged. The current rates remain appropriate. The 
incoming information and analyses since our last meeting in early September have confirmed 
our  previous  assessment.  While  annual  HICP  inflation  was  still  slightly  negative  in 
September, according to Eurostat’s flash estimate, it is expected to turn positive again in the 
coming months and to remain at moderately positive rates over the policy-relevant horizon. 
At the same time, the latest information further supports our view that the euro area economy 
is  stabilising  and  is  expected  to  recover  at  a  gradual  pace.  However,  uncertainty  remains 
high. As regards medium to longer-term inflation expectations, they remain firmly anchored in 
line with the Governing Council’s aim of keeping inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over 
the  medium  term.  The  outcome  of  the  monetary  analysis  confirms  the  assessment  of  low 
inflationary  pressure  over  the  medium  term,  as  money  and  credit  expansion  continues  to 
moderate.  Against  this  background,  we  expect  price  stability  to  be  maintained  over  the 
medium term, thereby supporting the purchasing power of euro area households. 
Let me now explain our assessment in further detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
Available survey indicators continue to signal an ongoing stabilisation of economic activity. In 
particular,  the  euro  area  should  benefit  from  a  recovery  in  exports,  the  significant 
macroeconomic stimulus under way and the measures taken to restore the functioning of the 
financial system. In addition, following the substantial negative contributions in the first half of 
2009,  the  inventory  cycle  is  expected  to  contribute  positively  to  real  GDP  growth  in  the 
second half of the year. However, uncertainty remains high and the volatility in incoming data 
warrants  a  cautious  interpretation  of  the  available  information.  Overall,  the  recovery  is 
expected  to  remain  rather  uneven.  It  will  be  supported  in  the  short  term  by  a  number  of 
temporary factors but is likely to be affected over the medium term by the process of ongoing 
balance sheet correction in the financial and the non-financial sector of the economy, both 
inside and outside the euro area. 
In the view of the Governing Council, the risks to this outlook remain broadly balanced. On 
the  upside,  there  may  be  stronger  than  anticipated  effects  stemming  from  the  extensive 
macroeconomic stimulus being provided and from other policy measures taken. Confidence 
may  also  improve  more  quickly,  the  labour  market  deterioration  may  be  less  marked  than 
previously expected and foreign demand may prove to be stronger than projected. On the 
downside, concerns remain relating to a stronger or more protracted negative feedback loop 
between  the  real  economy  and  the  financial  sector,  renewed  increases  in  oil  and  other 
commodity  prices,  the  intensification  of  protectionist  pressures  and  the  possibility  of  a 
disorderly correction of global imbalances.  
With  regard  to  price  developments,  annual  HICP  inflation  stood  at  -0.3%  in  September, 
according to Eurostat’s flash estimate, compared with -0.2% in August. The current negative 
inflation rates are in line with previous expectations and reflect largely base effects resulting 
from  the  movements  in  global  commodity  prices  a  year  ago.  Also  owing  to  base  effects, 
BIS Review 123/2009 
 1
annual inflation rates are projected to turn positive again in the coming months. Thereafter, 
over  the  policy-relevant  horizon,  inflation  is  expected  to  remain  in  positive  territory,  with 
overall price and cost developments staying subdued reflecting ongoing sluggish demand in 
the  euro  area  and  elsewhere.  In  this  context,  it  is  important  to  re-emphasise  that  inflation 
expectations  over  the  medium  to  longer  term  remain  firmly  anchored  in  line  with  the 
Governing Council’s aim of keeping inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium 
term.  
Risks to this outlook remain broadly balanced. They relate, in particular, to the outlook for 
economic  activity  and  to  the  evolution  of  commodity  prices.  Furthermore,  increases  in 
indirect taxation and administered prices may be stronger than currently expected owing to 
the need for fiscal consolidation in the coming years. 
Turning to the monetary analysis, the latest data confirm that developments in broad money 
and  credit  growth  remain  subdued.  In  August,  the  annual  growth  of  M3  and  loans  to  the 
private sector declined further to historically low rates of 2.5% and 0.1% respectively. This 
parallel  deceleration  in  money  and  credit  growth  confirms  our  previous  assessment  of  a 
moderate  underlying  pace  of  monetary  expansion  and  low  inflationary  pressures  over  the 
medium term. 
The  ongoing  deceleration  in  annual  M3  growth  has  continued  to  be  accompanied  by  a 
strengthening in annual M1 growth, which in August rose further to 13.6%. The strength of 
M1 reflects the fact that narrower spreads between the rates on different short-term deposits 
have fostered shifts in the allocation of funds from, in particular, short-term time deposits to 
overnight deposits. At the same time, the steep slope of the yield curve may have supported 
shifts from M3 to longer-term deposits and securities outside M3.  
The  overall  flow  of  bank  loans  to  the  non-financial  private  sector  remained  subdued  in 
August. In the case of households, the latest data suggest that the decline in loan growth has 
been  levelling  off  at  low  rates  of  expansion.  In  the  case  of  non-financial  corporations, 
following  a  few  months  of  negative  flows,  the  flow  of  loans  was  again  slightly  positive  in 
August.  Looking  through  the  volatility  in  monthly  data,  loan  growth  continues  to  be  very 
subdued.  This  is  in  line  with  the  lag  that  normally  prevails  between  trends  in  economic 
activity and developments in loans to enterprises. In this respect, given the subdued levels of 
production and trade, as well as the ongoing uncertainty with regard to the business outlook, 
further  weak  developments  in  loans  to  non-financial  corporations  in  the  coming  months 
appear  likely.  At  the  same  time,  the  ongoing  improvement  in  financing  conditions  should 
support  the  demand  for  credit  in  the  period  ahead.  Against  the  background  of  highly 
demanding challenges, banks should take appropriate measures to strengthen further their 
capital bases and, where necessary, take full advantage of government measures to support 
the financial sector, particularly as regards recapitalisation.  
To  sum  up,  the  current  rates  remain  appropriate.  The  incoming  information  and  analyses 
since our last meeting in early September have confirmed our previous assessment. While 
annual HICP inflation was still slightly negative in September, according to Eurostat’s flash 
estimate,  it  is  expected  to  turn  positive  again  in  the  coming  months  and  to  remain  at 
moderately  positive  rates  over  the  policy-relevant  horizon.  At  the  same  time,  the  latest 
information  further  supports  our  view  that  the  euro  area  economy  is  stabilising  and  is 
expected  to  recover  at  a  gradual  pace.  However,  uncertainty  remains  high.  As  regards 
medium  to  longer-term  inflation  expectations,  they  remain  firmly  anchored  in  line  with  the 
Governing Council’s aim of keeping inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium 
term.  Cross-checking  the  outcome  of  the  economic  analysis  with  that  of  the  monetary 
analysis  confirms  the  assessment  of  low  inflationary  pressure  over  the  medium  term,  as 
money  and  credit  expansion  continues  to  moderate.  Against  this  background,  we  expect 
price  stability  to  be  maintained  over  the  medium  term,  thereby  supporting  the  purchasing 
power of euro area households. 
2 
 BIS Review 123/2009
As the transmission of monetary policy works with lags, we expect that our policy action will 
progressively  feed  through  to  the  economy  in  full.  Hence,  with  all  the  measures  taken, 
including our latest 12-month longer-term refinancing operation of 30 September, monetary 
policy  is  providing  strong  ongoing  support  to  the  economy.  Once  the  macroeconomic 
environment improves, the Governing Council will  make sure that the  measures taken are 
unwound in a timely fashion and that the liquidity provided is absorbed in order to counter 
effectively  any  threat  to  price  stability  over  the  medium  to  longer  term.  By  so  doing,  the 
Governing  Council  will  continue  to  ensure  a  firm  anchoring  of  medium-term  inflation 
expectations.  Such  anchoring  is  indispensable  to  supporting  sustainable  growth  and 
employment  and  contributing  to  financial  stability.  Accordingly,  we  will  continue  to  monitor 
very closely all developments over the period ahead. 
As regards fiscal policies, the need for ambitious and realistic fiscal exit and consolidation 
strategies  is  becoming  increasingly  pressing.  It  is  vital  that  governments  put  in  place 
concrete  structural  measures  and  convincingly  communicate  that  they  are  committed  to 
ensuring the sustainability of public finances. Governments should design their consolidation 
plans in line with the provisions of the Stability and Growth Pact, ensuring that consolidation 
starts  as  soon  as  possible  and  at  the  latest  when  the  recovery  takes  hold.  These  plans 
should  also  be  accompanied  by  a  strengthening  of  national  budgetary  frameworks. 
Consolidation efforts should be stepped up in 2011 and will need to exceed significantly the 
benchmark of 0.5% of GDP per annum set in the Stability and Growth Pact. In countries with 
high deficit and/or debt ratios, the annual structural adjustment should reach at least 1% of 
GDP. In view of the rapidly increasing public expenditure ratios, as well as projected further 
expenditure pressures owing to higher interest burdens and ageing-related costs, countries’ 
structural measures should focus on the expenditure side. 
Turning to structural reforms, in all countries more efforts are crucial to support sustainable 
growth  and  employment  as  it  is  likely  that  the  financial  crisis  has  affected  the  productive 
capacity  of  our  economies.  In  particular,  appropriate  wage-setting,  sufficient  labour  market 
flexibility  and  effective  incentives  to  work  are  required.  At  the  same  time,  policies  that 
enhance  competition  and  innovation  are  urgently  needed  to  speed  up  restructuring  and 
investment and to create the business opportunities and productivity gains needed to ensure 
a sustained recovery.  An appropriate restructuring and consolidation of the banking sector 
should  also  play  an  important  role.  Sound  balance  sheets,  sound  risk  management,  and 
transparent  as  well  as  robust  business  models  are  key  to  strengthening  the  financial 
soundness  of  banks  and  their  resilience  to  shocks,  thereby  laying  the  foundations  for 
sustainable economic growth and financial stability.  
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS Review 123/2009 
 3
