Daniel K Tarullo: Financial regulation – past and future 
Speech  by  Mr  Daniel  K  Tarullo,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve System, at the Money Marketeers of New York University, New York, 9 November 
2009.  
 Systemic crises typically reveal failures across the financial system. The crisis that unfolded 
over  the  past  two  years  is  no  exception,  with  fundamental  problems  apparent  in  both  the 
private and public sectors. There were massive failures of risk management in many financial 
firms and serious deficiencies in government regulation of financial institutions and markets. 
But the breadth and depth of the financial breakdown suggest that it has much deeper roots. 
In  many  respects,  this  crisis  was  the  culmination  of  changes  in  both  the  organization  and 
regulation of financial markets that began in the 1970s. An appropriately directed response 
must build on an understanding of this history.  
In my remarks this evening I will begin by reviewing the origins of the crisis, as a prelude to 
discussion  of  the  elements  of  a  reform  agenda  that  I  believe  to  be  reasonably  clearly 
established.  I  will  close  with  some  thoughts  on  the  very  important  question  of  whether 
additional  regulatory  methods  will be  necessary  to  provide  the  foundation  for  a stable  and 
efficient financial system.1   
The origins of the crisis 
Shortly  after  President  Franklin  Roosevelt's  inauguration  in  1933,  Congress  enacted 
sweeping new measures that would define financial regulation for decades. The creation of 
the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) countered the problem of bank runs and 
panics  by  insuring  the  bank  accounts  of  the  vast  majority  of  Americans.  Along  with 
preexisting  restrictions  in  the  National  Banking  Act  and  state  laws,  the  Glass-Steagall  Act 
established a regulatory system that largely confined commercial banks to traditional lending 
activities  within  a  circumscribed  geographic  area.  At  the  same  time,  the  Securities  Act  of 
1933  and  the  Securities  Exchange  Act  of  1934  brought  increased  transparency  and 
accountability  to  the  trading  and  other  capital  market  activities  that  were  now  essentially 
separated from commercial banking.  
This regulatory approach fostered a commercial banking system that was, for the better part 
of  40  years,  quite  stable  and  reasonably  profitable,  though  not  particularly  innovative  in 
meeting the needs of depositors and borrowers. The new FDIC insurance, the 1933 statutory 
prohibition of interest payments on demand deposits, and the Fed's Regulation Q upper limit 
on interest rates paid on savings deposits had together suppressed competition for deposits 
among  banks  and  made  retail  deposits  a  highly  stable  source  of  relatively  attractive 
financing.  
The  turbulent  macroeconomic  developments  of  the  1970s,  along  with  technological  and 
business  innovations,  helped  produce  an  increasingly  tight  squeeze  on  the  traditional 
commercial banking business model. The squeeze came from both the liability side, in the 
form of more attractive savings vehicles such as money market funds, and from the asset 
side,  with  the  growth  of  public  capital  markets  and  international  competition.  The  large 
commercial  banking  industry  that  saw  its  lending  to  large  and  medium-sized  corporations 
threatened by their increasing access to public capital markets sought removal or relaxation 
of  the  regulations  that  confined  bank  activities,  affiliations,  and  geographic  reach.  While 
                                                 
1   The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of other members of the Board of Governors. 
BIS Review 140/2009 
 1
supervisors differed with banks on some important particulars, they were sympathetic to this 
industry  request,  in  part  because  of  the  potential  threat  to  the  viability  of  the  traditional 
commercial banking system.  
The period of relative legal and industry stability that had followed the 1933 legislation thus 
gave way in the 1970s to a nearly 30-year period during which many prevailing restrictions 
on banks were relaxed. A good number were loosened through administrative action by the 
banking  agencies,  but  regular  and  important  statutory  measures  headed  in  the  same 
direction.  This  legislative  trend  culminated  in  the  Gramm-Leach-Bliley  Act  of  1999,  which 
consolidated  and  extended  the  administrative  changes  that  had  allowed  more  extensive 
affiliations of commercial banks with investment banks, broker-dealers, merchant banks, and 
other financial firms. By the turn of the century, the Depression-era cluster of restrictions on 
commercial banks had given way to a regulatory environment in which they could operate 
nationally,  conduct  a  much  broader  range  of  activities  within  their  own  operations,  and 
affiliate with virtually any kind of financial firm.  
These  changes  enabled  a  series  of  acquisitions  that  resulted  in  a  number  of  very  large, 
highly  complex  financial  holding  companies  centered  on  a  large  commercial  bank.  At  the 
same time, independent investment banks had grown into a group of very large, complex, 
and highly leveraged firms. Of course, financial engineering had been rapidly changing the 
character of the financial services sector as a whole. Securitization and associated derivative 
instruments were merging capital markets and traditional lending activities, fueling the growth 
of what has become known as the shadow banking system. Financial institutions relied for a 
significant  portion  of  their  financing  on  short-term  capital  market  sources  that  were  often 
poorly matched with the maturity structure of the firm's assets. As a result, both the asset mix 
and sources of funding of many financial firms had shifted dramatically.  
The regulatory system had also evolved, notably through progressively more detailed capital 
requirements  and  increasing  demands  that  banking  organizations  enhance  their  own  risk-
management  systems.  Supervisors  counted  on  capital  and  risk  management  to  be  supple 
tools  that  could  ensure  stability  even  as  financial  activities  changed  rapidly.  Truthfully, 
though, there was no wholesale transformation of financial regulation to match the dramatic 
changes in the structure and activities of the financial industry. In particular, the regulatory 
system did not come close to adequately accounting for the impact of trading, securitization, 
and some other capital market activities on both traditional banking and systemic risk.  
The consequences of this neglect were dramatic. When questions arose about the quality of 
the assets on which the shadow banking system was based – notably poorly underwritten 
subprime  mortgages  –  a  classic  adverse  feedback  loop  ensued.  With  lenders  increasingly 
unwilling 
institutions  made 
increasingly  distressed  asset  sales,  which  placed  additional  downward  pressure  on  asset 
prices, thereby accelerating margin calls for leveraged actors and amplifying mark-to-market 
losses for all holders of the assets. The margin calls and booked losses would start another 
round in the adverse feedback loop.  
Meanwhile,  as  shown  by  the  intervention  of  the  government  when  Bear  Stearns  and  AIG 
were failing, and by the repercussions from the failure of Lehman Brothers, the universe of 
financial  firms  that  appeared  too-big-to-fail  during  periods  of  stress  included  more  than 
insured depository institutions and extended beyond the perimeter of traditional safety and 
soundness regulation. The extension of funds by the Treasury Department from the Troubled 
Asset  Relief  Program  (TARP)  and  guarantees  by  the  FDIC  from  the  Temporary  Liquidity 
Guarantee Program to each of the nation's largest institutions in the fall of 2008 revealed the 
government's  view  that  a  very  real  threat  to  the  nation's  entire  financial  system  was  best 
addressed by shoring up the nation's largest financial firms.  
to  extend  credit  against 
liquidity-strained 
these  assets, 
2 
 BIS Review 140/2009
The agenda for reform 
The need for a thorough overhaul of the financial regulatory system is thus borne out not only 
by  our  frighteningly  close  brush  with  financial  collapse  in  the  fall  of  2008,  but  also  by  the 
degree to which too-big-to-fail perceptions and capital-market sources of systemic risk had 
been permitted – if not encouraged – by regulatory developments in the preceding decades. 
A  post-crisis  reform  program  will  ultimately  be  judged  adequate  only  if  it  addresses  these 
problems head-on. A reform agenda aimed at these problems has, in fact, taken shape this 
year, although important components remain the subject of active debate. Let me take a few 
minutes  to  set  forth  the  outlines  of  that  agenda,  which  includes  both  changes  by  financial 
regulatory agencies acting under their existing authority and new legislation.  
The first important item on the reform agenda is to extend the perimeter of regulation so that 
any  firm  whose  failure  could  have  serious  systemic  consequences  will  be  subject  to 
consolidated supervision, including minimum capital and liquidity requirements. As last year's 
events  showed,  systemic  problems  can  arise  from  the  activities  of  non-banking  firms  but, 
under  present  law,  these  requirements  apply  only  to  firms  owning  a  commercial  bank. 
Indeed, there is an incentive to shift riskier activities into unregulated firms.  
A second item is to strengthen the prudential rules applicable to supervised institutions. This 
component  of  a  reform  program  has  manifold  elements.  There  is  little  doubt  that  capital 
levels  prior  to  the  crisis  were  insufficient  to  serve  as  an  adequate  buffer  against  loss  and 
constraint on leverage, particularly in some of the largest financial institutions. Working with 
our counterparts in the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, U.S. supervisory agencies 
have  already  increased  capital  requirements  for  trading  activities  and  securitization 
exposures,  two  of  the  areas  in  which  losses  were  especially  high.  We  are  moving  toward 
agreement  on  modifying  existing  rules  to  improve  the  quality  of  capital  used  to  satisfy 
minimum capital rules, with a particular emphasis on the importance of common equity.  
Liquidity issues have rightly garnered considerable attention in the aftermath of the crisis. It 
has  always  been  recognized  that  a  solvent  financial  institution  can  be  brought  down  by 
liquidity  problems.  That,  of  course,  is  one  traditional  justification  for  reserve  requirements. 
But  the  tightly  wound,  often  complex  channels  of  financing  characteristic  of  the  shadow 
banking  system,  including  the  wholesale  funding  practices  of  many  regulated  institutions, 
simply  outraced  conventional  liquidity  risk  management  assumptions.  The  bank  regulatory 
agencies  are  implementing  strengthened  guidance  on  liquidity  risk  management  and 
weighing proposals for quantitatively based requirements.  
A third part of the reform agenda is to use market discipline more effectively as a regulatory 
and supervisory tool. Too-big-to-fail perceptions weaken normal market disciplinary forces by 
producing a distorted set of incentives in which counterparties of a large institution may not 
price into their extensions of credit the full risks assumed by the institution. The management 
and  shareholders  of  the  too-big-to-fail  institution  may  regard  themselves  as  holding  a  put 
option and may, accordingly, be motivated to take greater risks with the cheaper funds now 
available to them. The assumption, of course, is that the government will bail out a large firm 
encountering  severe  distress,  to  preclude  potential  contagion  from  the  direct  or  indirect 
effects  of  a  disorderly  bankruptcy.  The  enormous  concerns  with  this  moral  hazard  effect 
explain the focus in current reform proposals on a special resolution procedure that raises 
the real prospect of losses for shareholders and creditors of even the largest financial firms.  
The  fourth  item  on  the  current  reform  agenda  is  to  increase  the  effectiveness  of  the 
consolidated  supervisory  process,  particularly  for  the  largest  institutions.  In  the  years 
preceding the crisis, bank holding company supervision was principally focused on protecting 
the  commercial  banks  within  a  holding  company.  Too  little  attention  was  paid  to  the  risks 
faced, and created, by the entire holding company, including affiliates principally involved in 
trading and other capital market activities. This weakness may be partially explained by the 
supervisory  approach  embedded  in  the  Gramm-Leach-Bliley  Act,  with  its  emphasis  on  the 
functional  supervision  of  affiliates  in  a  holding  company.  But  it  was  also  the  case  that  not 
BIS Review 140/2009 
 3
enough  supervisory  scrutiny  was  given  to  the  risks  associated  with  securitization,  the 
common exposures of different affiliates, and the implications of the explosion of off-balance-
sheet assets.  
This is an especially appropriate moment to describe what the Federal Reserve is doing to 
reorient  the  supervision  of  large  institutions,  since  today  we  announced  results  of  the 
implementation of the capital plans formulated last spring as part of the special Supervisory 
Capital Assessment Program (SCAP). As you will recall, the unprecedented SCAP process 
was begun last February, during one of the darkest periods of the financial crisis. Led by the 
Federal Reserve, a multidisciplinary team from the bank regulatory agencies assessed the 
amount  of  capital  that  would  be  needed  by  the  19  largest  bank  holding  companies  to 
withstand  losses  in  an  adverse  stress  scenario  through  2010,  and  still  remain  sufficiently 
capitalized to meet the needs of their creditworthy borrowers.  
In  May  we  publicly  released  the  results  of  that  assessment.  Ten  of  the  firms  needed 
additional  capital.  By  early  June  they  had  each  submitted  plans  for  realizing  the  specified 
capital  buffers.  Today  was  the  deadline  for  implementing  these  plans.  As  we  announced 
earlier in the day, nine of the 10 bank holding companies that were determined to need the 
raise,  or  improve  the  quality  of,  their  capital  have  met  or  exceeded  their  required  capital 
buffers.  The  tenth  firm,  GMAC,  is  expected  to  meet  its  buffer  by  accessing  the  TARP 
Automotive  Industry  Financing  Program  administered  by  the  U.S.  Treasury.  These 
institutions have increased common equity by more than $75 billion, mostly through issuance 
of  new  shares,  conversions  of  preferred  to  common  stock,  and  sales  of  businesses  and 
assets.  
The immediate effect of the completion of the assessment phase of SCAP was to provide 
important information about the condition of the 19 institutions at a time of substantial stress 
and uncertainty in financial markets. The SCAP clearly helped to restore public confidence in 
the banking system. Through its demonstration of the importance of individual assessments 
of  firms'  capital  needs,  improved  management  information  systems  in  complex  firms,  and 
horizontal  reviews  of  large  institutions,  SCAP  will  also  have  longer-lasting  effects  on  the 
supervision of large institutions.  
One  particularly  important  byproduct  of  the  SCAP  was  a  renewed  supervisory  focus  on 
institutions' ability to assess their own capital adequacy – specifically their ability to estimate 
capital  needs  and  identify  available  capital  resources  during  very  stressful  periods.  The 
uncertainty associated with capital needs in such periods is one among numerous reasons 
for  firms  to  maintain  substantial  capital  buffers.  However,  to  the  degree  that  firms  cannot 
demonstrate their capacity to conduct rigorous internal capital assessments, supervisors will 
demand  even  higher  capital  cushions.  SCAP  revealed  significant  deficiencies  in  the 
information  and  quantitative  risk  assessment  capabilities  of  some  firms.  Currently,  we  are 
conducting a horizontal assessment of internal processes that evaluate capital adequacy at 
the  largest  U.S.  banking  organizations,  focusing  in  particular  on  how  shortcomings  in 
fundamental  risk  management  and  governance  impair  firms'  abilities  to  estimate  capital 
needs for their specific exposures and activities.  
The  Federal  Reserve  is  also  putting  in  place  a  permanent  quantitative  surveillance 
mechanism for the large, complex financial organizations we supervise. This mechanism will 
incorporate supervisory information, firm-specific data analysis, and market-based indicators 
to identify developing strains and imbalances that may affect multiple institutions, as well as 
emerging  risks  to  specific  firms.  The  work  will  be  performed  by  a  multidisciplinary  group 
composed of economic and market researchers, supervisors, market operations specialists, 
and  accounting  and  legal  experts.  Periodic  scenario  analyses  will  be  used  to  evaluate  the 
potential impact of adverse changes in the operating environment on individual firms and on 
the system as a whole. This program will be distinct from the activities of on-site examination 
teams, so as to provide an independent supervisory perspective, as well as to complement 
the  work  of  those  teams.  It  will  provide  both  improved  microprudential  supervision  of  the 
4 
 BIS Review 140/2009
largest  institutions  and  a  foundation  for  a  macroprudential  dimension  in  our  supervisory 
activities.  
Supplementing the reform agenda 
The administrative and proposed legislative measures I have discussed present a strong set 
of reforms around which a consensus seems to be developing, at least in general terms. But 
many participants in the public policy debate on regulatory reform believe that more will need 
to  be  done  to  ensure  the  safety  and  soundness  of  financial  institutions,  guard  against 
systemic risk, and substantially contain the too-big-to-fail problem.  
Some  additional  potential  regulatory  devices  are  already  under  active  consideration,  both 
among U.S. bank supervisors and in international forums. These include proposals to create 
special charges on firms based on their systemic importance, to require contingent capital 
that  would  be  available  in  periods  of  stress,  and  to  counter  pro-cyclical  tendencies  by 
establishing special capital buffers that would be built up in boom times and drawn down as 
conditions deteriorate. Each of these ideas has substantial appeal. A number of thoughtful 
proposals  are  being  discussed,  though  each  idea  presents  considerable  challenges  in  the 
transition from good idea to fully elaborated regulatory mechanism.  
Yet  to  gain  traction  are  proposals  for  what  might  be  termed  structural  measures  –  that  is, 
steps that would directly affect the nature and organization of the financial services industry. 
But discussion of such concepts is clearly increasing.  
One  suggested  approach  is  to  reverse  the  30-year  trend  that  allowed  progressively  more 
financial  activities  within  commercial  banks  and  more  affiliations  with  non-bank  financial 
firms. The idea is presumably to insulate insured depository institutions from trading or other 
capital  market  activities  that  are  thought  riskier  than  traditional  lending  functions,  although 
separating trading from hedging and other prudent practices associated directly with lending 
is not an altogether straightforward proposition.  
In  any  case,  this  strategy  would  seem  unlikely  to  limit  the  too-big-to-fail  problem  to  a 
significant degree. For one thing, some very large institutions have in the past encountered 
serious  difficulties  through  risky  lending  alone.  Moreover,  as  shown  by  Bear  Stearns  and 
Lehman,  firms  without  commercial  banking  operations  can  now  also  pose  a  too-big-to-fail 
threat. Still, imposition of higher capital and liquidity requirements for riskier trading and other 
capital  market  activities  can,  if  well  devised  and  implemented,  achieve  some  of  what 
proponents of this approach seem to have in mind.  
Another approach is to attack the bigness problem head-on by limiting the size of financial 
institutions. It is notable that current law provides very little in the way of structural means to 
limit  systemic  risk  and  the  too-big-to-fail  problem.  The  statutory  prohibition  on  interstate 
acquisitions  that  would result  in  a commercial  bank  and its affiliates  holding  more  than  10 
percent  of  insured  deposits  nationwide  is  the  closest  thing  to  such  an  instrument.  Policy 
commentators might usefully attempt to develop similarly discrete mechanisms that could be 
beneficial in containing the too-big-to-fail problem.  
This  exercise  would,  at  a  minimum,  require  development  of  valid  and  administrable 
standards  for  judging  when  systemic  risk  or  too-big-to-fail  problems  would  be  materially 
increased, as well as a more complete understanding of what efficiencies attach to very large 
or  complex  financial  institutions,  and  thus  what  social  benefits  might  be  lost  by  limiting  or 
reducing  their  size.  Thus  considerable  work  would  need  to  be  done  before  evaluating  the 
promise of these ideas. But, as I have said before, further elaboration of these ideas could be 
very useful in advancing our understanding of the dimensions of the too-big-to-fail problem.  
BIS Review 140/2009 
 5
Conclusion 
In closing, let me reiterate the importance both of moving ahead with the administrative and 
legislative  reform  agenda  that  I  described  earlier  and  of  continuing  investigations  of 
complementary  or  alternative  regulatory  approaches.  These 
into  possible 
alternatives  should  not  be  used  as  an  excuse  to  delay  consideration  of  current  legislative 
proposals.  But  the  justifiable  focus  of  policymakers  on  achieving  these  administrative  and 
legislative changes should not crowd out open-minded consideration of additional measures.  
inquiries 
6 
 BIS Review 140/2009
