Syed Salim Raza: Reflections on financial sector dynamics 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Syed  Salim  Raza,  Governor  of  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan,  at  the 
Institute of Bankers, Karachi, 18 June 2009. 
 It gives me great pleasure to chair this event organized by the Institute of Bankers and to 
share  some  thoughts  with  senior  bankers  and  the  distinguished  personalities  attending.  I 
wish to congratulate all those who have passed the IBP examination and have qualified for 
the awards to be distributed today. They deserve much appreciation on their achievement. I 
am sure the banking industry will utilize their knowledge for the larger benefit of our society 
and economy. 
I would like to take this opportunity to share some views on emerging trends in the financial 
sector.  Even  though  financial  institutions  in  Pakistan  have  remained  largely  insulated  from 
the shocks of the global financial crisis, we cannot ignore the implications of events which 
started  in  the  summer  of  2007  in  the  global  financial  system.  The  crisis  brought  forth  the 
realization that organizations which are not just too-big-tofail but also too-interconnected-to-
fail,  are  the  major  source  of  systemic  risk.  It  reinforced  the  fact  that  complete  reliance  on 
mathematical  model-based  risk  management  systems  is  insufficient  in  assessing  the  wide 
array of risks faced by the financial sector, some of which need a more qualitative analysis 
and judgment. Most importantly, it showed how its protracted duration severely impaired the 
basic  function  of  the  financial  sector  i.e.  efficient  allocation  of  resources  in  the  process  of 
financial  intermediation.  As  I  will  elaborate,  the  regulatory  focus  in  Pakistan  has  strived  to 
prevent  and  mitigate  the  occurrence  of  these  factors  as  the  financial  sector  continues  to 
evolve and progress.  
The  banking  sector  in  Pakistan  has  undergone  a  sea  change  in  the  last  few  years.  The 
unprecedented performance in terms of profitability, in building up a resilient capital base as 
reflected  in  the  aggregate  Capital  Adequacy  Ratio  (CAR),  implementation  of  Basel  II  and 
stringent provisioning requirements etc. have all contributed in providing a cushion against 
shocks from both the external and domestic macro-financial environment. Banks in Pakistan 
have been able to withstand the headwinds from weakening macroeconomic fundamentals 
since  FY07.  Now  that  the  economy  is  poised  for  a  turnaround,  the  banking  sector  has  an 
even more emphatic role to play in supporting the real sector by meeting its financing needs.  
Admittedly,  banks  face  a  challenging  environment  going  forward:  first,  there  is  increased 
credit risk in the industry, a large part of which emanates from the nature of economic cycles. 
Credit booms inevitably lead to higher NPLs in subsequent years. The loan portfolio of the 
banking  sector  registered  an  annual  average  growth  of  over  20.0  percent  in  recent  years 
(CY02 to CY07). Some correction in the loan portfolio was, therefore, to be expected. Also, 
the build-up of macroeconomic pressures which eventually led to a slowdown in economic 
growth in FY09 aggravated the increase in NPLs  of the banking system. This is a cyclical 
process and is expected to stabilize with the improvement in macroeconomic fundamentals. 
Sensitivity analysis by the SBP suggests that the banking sector is well placed to withstand 
credit risk shocks of a modest nature. The provisioning coverage ratio of around 70 percent 
at  end  March  2009  also  shows  a  prudent  and  proactive  approach  towards  credit  risk 
management. 
Secondly, competition from NSS instruments offering a relatively higher rate of return has put 
increasing  pressure  on  banks’  deposit  generation  capacity.  Since  the  beginning  of  FY09, 
NSS instruments have seen a net inflow of Rs 206.7 billion, as compared to Rs. 86.6 billion 
in  FY08.  On  one  hand  this  augurs  well  in  substantiating  financial  savings  and  meets  the 
government’s  objective  of  raising  funds  for  deficit  financing  from  non‐bank  sources. 
However  it  does  also  imply  that  banks  need  to  make  concrete  efforts  to  ensure  sustained 
BIS Review 120/2009 
 1
deposit  growth  by  tapping  the  unbanked  market,  increasing  financial  penetration  and 
facilitating the process of financial intermediation.  
Third, given the associated pressure on profitability levels, small banks faced the challenge 
of meeting the minimum capital requirements (MCR) specified by the State Bank of Pakistan 
in  2008.  In  response  to  the  challenges  in  the  macro-financial  environment,  we  have 
rationalized the MCR and the time period in which it needs to be implemented, thus providing 
breathing  space  to  the  industry  in  difficult  conditions,  fostering  competition  and  a  level-
playing field in the industry.  
Notwithstanding these developments, banks in Pakistan are meeting the financing demands 
of not just the private sector, but as seen in the recent past, of the public sector enterprises 
as well. Private sector credit to GDP ratio has declined from 26.2 percent in FY08 to 20.2 
percent  by  April  FY09.  Such  developments  reinforce  the  need  for  diversification  in  the 
available financing options. One of the most illustrative examples of the grave implications of 
a  skewed  financial  sector  is  the  East  Asian  crisis,  where  banks  were  the  predominant 
provider  of  finance.  Post-crisis  reflection  on  events  brought  forth  the  realization  of  the 
significance  of  alternative  debt  markets  and  in  particular,  money  and  bond  markets,  as  a 
complementary  source  of  finance.  Moreover,  the  continued  integration  and  deepening  of 
financial markets is a significant issue for policy  makers, and particularly for central banks 
entrusted with the formulation and implementation of monetary policy, since well-integrated 
and  efficient  financial  markets  are  crucial  in  ensuring  a  smooth  transmission  of  monetary 
impulses to the economy.  
Indeed, banking sector dominance is an impediment to the fundamental principle of market 
competition;  it  leads  to  inefficiencies  and  therefore  to  sub‐optimal  outcomes  in  the  loan 
market, which may jeopardize the stability of the financial system. Consider the following:  
(i) 
When  the  banking  sector  has  to  face  competition  from  a  well  developed  local 
currency  bond  market,  it  is  forced  to  improve  the  efficiency  of  its  operations  and 
develop  corporate  financial  services  beyond  primary  lending.  In  Pakistan,  the 
banking sector faces very little competition from the corporate debt market. Indeed, 
extraordinary  banking  spreads,  as  witnessed  in  Pakistan  recently,  provide  some 
evidence  of  the  lack  of  strong  competition  and  efficiency  in  Pakistan’s  financial 
markets. So our capacity for corporate finance remains undeveloped.  
The short tenor of bank loans, itself a consequence of the nature of banks’ deposits 
in  Pakistan,  leads  to  maturity  mismatch  issues  in  the  banks’  asset  and  liability 
portfolios.  This  essentially  means  that  long-term  funding  needs  are  financed  by  a 
consistent roll-over of short-term loans and in times of tight liquidity, borrowers may 
find  themselves  unable  to  roll  over  their  maturing  obligations.  Access  to  bond 
markets  then  serves  the  purpose  of  a  complimentary,  rather  than  the  alternative 
source  of  finance,  as  encapsulated  in  the  much  cited  example  of  the  essential 
“spare tyre” that a financial system needs. This is particularly true when a growing 
economy  like  Pakistan  needs  to  raise  sufficient  funds  for  financing  long‐term 
infrastructure projects. 
When firms can raise their own funds through the issuance of market bonds, they 
are less dependent on banks and therefore not vulnerable to difficulties that banks 
might face. This also puts pressure on banks to diversify and widen their portfolio 
and service range, as they no longer possess captive clients. Consequently, banks 
can focus more on enterprisers in the economy that typically face credit constraints 
due to their small size, relatively new stage of development, or simply asymmetrical 
information. At present, the banks’ loan portfolio is highly skewed towards big sized 
loans. Only 0.5 percent of total bank borrowers with loans size of more than Rs 10.0 
million  take  up  71.7  percent  of  banks’  loan  portfolio.  Among  others,  this  indicates 
high  concentration  risk  in  the  banking  sector.  Default  of  any  of  the  three  largest 
fund-based  exposures  can  cause  the  aggregate  CAR  to  fall  below  the  minimum 
(ii) 
(iii) 
2 
 BIS Review 120/2009
(iv) 
requirements. These risks can be easily managed in the presence of well developed 
capital markets.  
One inherent characteristic of bond and securities finance is the provision of better 
risk-sharing  than  banks.  When  securities  are  spread  across  a  large  number  of 
individuals,  the  risk  is  more  efficiently  diversified.  Better  risk  sharing  then  is  an 
incentive  for  creditors  to  commit  themselves  for  longer  periods  of  time,  thus 
facilitating the borrowers in meeting their long-term funding needs. Indeed, all this 
adds up to the stability of the financial system. 
Similar to the trend observed in most Asian countries, the major drivers of financial assets in 
Pakistan are deposits and government bonds, whereas corporate bond issuances remain a 
miniscule portion, with the total outstanding (listed) issues at Rs. 66.2 billion (0.5 percent of 
GDP). Pakistan Investment Bonds (PIBs), introduced in the year 2000, remain the longest 
tenor sovereign bonds, providing the benchmark yield curve for private issuances, whereas 
National  Savings  Schemes  (NSS),  on  the  other  hand,  with  tenors  up  to  10  years,  provide 
risk‐free investment options to retail and institutional investors. The funds mobilized through 
NSS reached Rs. 1.3 trillion by end April-09 (9.9 percent of GDP).  
Historically, the key obstacle to the development of the corporate debt market has been the 
competition for long term investment alternatives from the NSS instruments, which offer zero 
risk yields higher than returns on corporate bonds. In order to align NSS rates with market-
based  yields  on  instruments  of  similar  tenors,  the  yields  on  NSS  instruments  were  first 
reduced, and then pegged to the yields on the government’s market-based long term bonds. 
From March 2000, institutional investors were barred from incremental investment in NSS. 
These  measures  helped  in  developing  bond  market  to  some  extent  as  the  number  of 
issuance increased subsequently. The corporate sector issued 69 TFCs worth Rs 45.7 billion 
during FY01 to FY07. Market activity slowed down in the following years due to both overall 
slowdown  in  economic  activities  and  the  policy-reversal  by  the  government  to  re-allow 
institutional  investment  in  NSS.  The  corporate  sector  issued  only  two  bonds  worth  Rs  6.1 
billion during FY09. 
In  view  of  the  above,  the  following  factors  could  potentially  facilitate  the  development  of  a 
debt market in Pakistan.  
(i) 
The  banking  sector,  which  has  a  virtual  monopoly  on  providing  financing  to  all 
sectors  of  the  economy,  can  play  a  central  role  in  the  development  of  the  debt 
market.  Banks  are  often  among  the  most  important  issuers,  holders,  dealers, 
advisers,  underwriters  and  guarantors  in  the  market.  Given  the  skewed  nature  of 
their  balance  sheets  with  maturity  mismatch  issues,  banks  can  issue  long-term 
bonds for Asset Liability Management (ALM). This is particularly relevant from the 
perspective of financing long term projects. To further manage their risk profiles in 
changing interest rate environments, there are now sophisticated risk‐management 
tools such as Interest Rate Swaps (IRS) at their disposal.  
The central bank has a crucial role in promoting secondary market trading of debt 
securities  –  by  improving  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  implementation. 
Efforts to reduce the volatility of short-term interest rates, while credibly signaling the 
policy stance, go a long way in increasing investor confidence while promoting the 
maturity  transformation  of  financial  intermediaries’  portfolios.  Moreover,  stable 
money  market  rates  foster  repo  activity  and  anchor  the  yield  curve  as  trading 
develops  in  longer  maturities.  SBP  has  focused  essentially  on  improving  the 
transmission  of  the  policy  rate,  by  managing  market  liquidity  and  maintaining  the 
O/N  repo  rates  close  to  the  discount  rate.  This  approach  has  proved  to  be  very 
effective and SBP will continue to work towards further improving the mechanisms 
of monetary policy implementation. 
(ii) 
BIS Review 120/2009 
 3
(iii) 
Development of the term structure of interest rates depends on regular issues in the 
primary  market,  increased  trading  activity  in  the  secondary  market,  and  providing 
ease  of  entry  and  exit  to  both  the  issuers  and  the  investors.  Regular  auctions  of 
Pakistan Investment Bonds (PIBs) since May 2006 is a step in this direction.  
Developing bond markets and enhancing the capacity of public- and private-sector borrowers 
to issue long-dated, domestic currency denominated debt securities is high on the country’s 
policy agenda. Among other factors, the presence of the requisite investor base is crucial for 
the  development  of  both  the  primary  and  the  secondary  markets  in  debt  securities.  The 
regulatory  environment  should  provide  the  right  incentive  framework  to  encourage  both 
individual and institutional investors to invest, and trade in, debt instruments. A wide range of 
investors,  with  varying  risk  preferences,  time  horizons  and  trading  motives  would  ensure 
active trading and liquidity.  
Having shared these thoughts, I would like to conclude by saying that SBP stands committed 
to  develop  and  diversify  the  financial  sector  in  order  to  enhance  its  role  in  supporting 
economic  growth.  Pakistan  is  standing  at  a  juncture  where  investment  in  infrastructure  is 
crucially  needed  to  facilitate  the  process  of  economic  growth.  The  very  nature  of 
infrastructure projects, where funding is required for long tenors and cash flows only start to 
materialize  after  a  certain  time,  is  such  that  options  for  effective  financing  will  only  be 
possible  once  there  is  requisite  support  from  the  development  of  the  local  currency  bond 
market  and  the  financial  sector  provides  access  to  a  wide  range  of  diversified  financing 
options.  
4 
 BIS Review 120/2009
