Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: Payments are becoming European 
Speech  by  Ms  Gertrude  Tumpel-Gugerell,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European Central Bank, at the EPC SEPA Direct Debit launch event, Brussels, 13 October 
2009. 
 SEPA Direct Debit launch 
We are here today to celebrate the forthcoming launch of the SEPA Direct Debit (SDD). We 
are very pleased that this important step in the process of European integration towards a 
single payments area will soon be taken. On 2 November 2009 the SEPA Direct Debit will be 
launched by the European Payments Council. From November onwards, direct debits in euro 
will be possible from anywhere in the European Union and even beyond.1  
A direct debit payment is considered to be one of the most convenient ways of paying bills, 
especially  for  recurring  expenses,  because  customers  can  be  sure  of  paying  on  time, 
provided  that  there  are  sufficient  funds  in  their  accounts,  and  companies  can  be  sure  of 
receiving  the  money  on  time.  It  is  also  one  of  the  most  efficient,  because  the  collection 
process  can  be  fully  automated.  It  is  also  a  very  safe  means  of  payment,  and  it  is  worth 
emphasising that the SDD will have a higher level of security and customer protection than 
some of the major existing domestic direct debits.  
The  SDD  complements  the  SEPA  Credit  Transfer  (SCT),  which  was  launched  as  early  as 
January  2008.  Although  it  has  been  possible  to  make  cross-border  credit  transfers  for 
decades, the launch of the SCT marked the start of a new era, with faster transactions and 
lower  costs.  The  advent  of  a  European  direct  debit  is  a  truly  new  payment  service  at  a 
European level. The introduction of these two basic products has laid the foundations for a 
fully  harmonised  retail  payments  market.  The  SEPA  (Single  Euro  Payments  Area)  project 
has  already  delivered  its  first  results.  These  will  also  form  the  basis  for  innovative  new 
developments in payments, in particular a pan-European online payment solution, as well as 
in mobile payments and electronic invoicing. 
It is true that, when travelling or even living in a foreign country, one of the things that takes 
some getting used to is local payment habits and standards. When taking up office at the 
ECB in Frankfurt, I, too, had to open an extra bank account for my German payments and 
acquaint myself with German payment rules, standards and practices.  
This experience is shared by many bank customers – both individual and corporate – who 
have accounts in more than one country or do business with companies in other countries.  
There  are  therefore  many  benefits  of  a  harmonised  retail  payments  market  with  common 
instruments, i.e. SEPA. As 50% of the cross-border trade of euro area countries is with other 
euro  area  countries,  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises  will  benefit  immensely  from  the 
harmonisation  across  national  borders  within  the  euro  area.  Also,  large  companies  that 
operate  in  almost  every  European  country,  such  as  mobile  phone  operators,  energy 
suppliers and petrol station chains, will gain from SEPA. For those companies, managing up 
to 27 bank accounts, 27 standards for electronic communication with the bank or 27 different 
sets of requirements for card payment terminals is a truly costly business.  
The  Eurosystem  therefore  continues  to  strongly  support  the  creation  of  SEPA,  in  which 
“individuals and companies are able to make cashless payments throughout the euro area 
                                                 
1   SEPA comprises the countries of the EU plus Norway, Iceland, Liechtenstein, Switzerland and Monaco, as 
well as oversees territories of EU countries. 
BIS Review 125/2009 
 1
from  a  single  payment  account  anywhere  in  the  euro  area,  using  a  single  set  of  payment 
instruments  as  easily,  efficiently  and  safely  as  they  can  make  them  today  at  the  national 
level”.  
SEPA  is  needed  in  order  to  move  towards  a  more  integrated,  competitive  and  innovative 
payments market in Europe, which will bring substantial economic benefits.  
Celebrating the SDD launch today is indeed very reassuring for the whole SEPA process, 
and  for  all  the  efforts  that  are  going  into  this  project,  not  least  for  us  at  the  ECB,  who 
wholeheartedly support the SEPA project. I am often asked the question: “Has the financial 
crisis made banks less likely to support the SEPA projects?” My response is usually that, as 
a  result  of  the  crisis,  banks  are  once  again  focusing  on  their  core  business,  which  is 
attracting  savings,  providing  loans  and  offering  payment  services.  In  terms  of  offering 
payment  services,  SEPA  provides  a  competitive,  efficient  and  innovative  retail  payments 
market in Europe. Less money is available for IT projects, but the business case for SEPA 
has not changed. I have noted that more than 2,500 banks have already signed up for the 
SDD  service,  which  is  a  outstanding  achievement,  and  one  that  few  people  had  dared  to 
hope for just eight months ago. Back then, the EPC was deliberating whether to launch the 
SDD on time, because many obstacles were still seen to be in the way. It also means that I 
can finally use my Austrian bank account for my German payments. 
Still,  despite  the  success  of  SEPA  so  far,  there  are  major  challenges  ahead  of  us  in  the 
SEPA implementation process.  
I would like to mention three areas, in particular. First, SEPA for Cards, second, the overall 
SEPA migration process and, third, the governance of the SEPA project in the future.  
SEPA for cards 
Card  payments  are  growing  in  popularity.  The  recent  “World  Payments  Report  2009”2 
confirms this. Despite the financial crisis, on a global basis, cashless payments increased by 
8.6% to 250 billion transactions per year in 2008 and, of this growth, card payments are the 
strongest driver. Within the European Union, card payments reached a total of 29.5 billion 
transactions in 2008, likewise a growth rate of 8.6%.3 This shows the immense potential of 
this method of payment in generating revenue for the financial industry through growth, even 
at a time when interchange fees are under pressure.  
SEPA  offers  tremendous  opportunities  for  a  further  harmonisation  of  the  use  of  cards, 
making them an even more attractive means of payment. In essence, card payments need to 
be  positioned  as  a  real  alternative  to  cash:  efficient,  fast  and  guaranteed.  We  are  very 
pleased that progress is now being made with the initiatives to create an additional European 
card scheme. Some businesses are even being set up not far from here in Brussels.  
SEPA migration  
I will now turn to the second challenge, namely the overall SEPA migration process and the 
question of a possible end-date. While the use of SCT has been increasing steadily since 
their launch in January 2008, they had reached 4.5% of the overall credit transfer volume in 
August 2009.4 Needless to say, this is far behind the figure for the legacy products and not 
really satisfactory.  
                                                 
2   Capgemini, RBS and EFMA, World Payments Report 2009, September 2009. 
3   ECB, Payments Statistics (formerly known as the Blue Book) (see www.ecb.europa.eu). 
4   ECB, SEPA SCT indicators (see http://www.ecb.europa.eu/paym/sepa/timeline/use/html/index.en.html). 
2 
 BIS Review 125/2009
However,  there  are  some  positive  signs  ahead:  Public  administrations  in  several  countries 
are planning to migrate to the SEPA products later this year or in the first half of 2010, and 
companies with cross-border activities are expected to migrate in larger numbers after SEPA 
Direct Debit has also been launched in November 2009.  
Will  the  migration  process  be  quick  enough  by  itself  or  does  it  require  an  extra  push? 
Research has shown that a long period of maintaining dual systems is costly for all. So what 
will make industry and/or customers stop using the old products and switch to SEPA? You 
will remember that the SEPA process was only taken seriously by industry in reaction to an 
EC  Regulation.5  Although  supporters  of  a  SEPA  migration  end-date  seem  to  be  in  the 
majority, opposition to the concept is not negligible. However, we have to realise that SEPA 
is  not  just  about  making  life  easier  for  European  citizens  and  companies  by  removing 
obstacles  to  cross-border  payments.  SEPA  is  also  about  removing  barriers  to  the  single 
market, introducing more competition to the payments industry and speeding up innovation.  
The  Eurosystem  will  continue  its  efforts  to  foster  a  general  understanding  among 
stakeholders that setting a realistic but ambitious end-date for migration to SCT and SDD is a 
necessary step in order to reap the benefits of SEPA. Ten years after the introduction of the 
euro as the single currency, it is high time to complete the introduction of the euro in the field 
of single payment instruments.  
SEPA governance 
In connection with the migration challenge, the question arises as to the future governance of 
the  SEPA  project.  So  let  me  talk  about  this  now.  In  the  Sixth  SEPA  Progress  Report,  we 
suggested  that  improvements  may  be  needed  to  the  overall  governance  of  SEPA.  To  be 
clear,  I  am  not  speaking  about  the  governance  of  the  EPC  itself.  Improvements  in  SEPA 
governance may be needed to foster the process towards a truly integrated retail payments 
market in Europe. These improvements are related, in particular, to stakeholder involvement, 
transparency  and  the  SEPA  migration  progress.  Is  market  self-regulation  sufficient  to  find 
solutions for these issues?  
The  Eurosystem  –  together  with  the  European  Commission  –  recognises  that  a  new, 
overarching  body,  consisting  of  a  broad  range  of  stakeholders,  could  tackle  and  resolve 
issues that are slowing the realisation of SEPA. But I want to repeat that this body would not 
replace  the  current  arrangements.  The  EPC  would  remain  responsible  for  the  design  of 
payment services. The new body, by contrast, would focus entirely on identifying key issues 
of concern to public authorities and other stakeholders. Moreover, it would define priorities 
and promote action. In addition, it would work on fostering a common understanding among 
users. As I have said, it should not by any means replace or hamper the functioning of the 
EPC, nor should it take over the dialogue with end-users on its precise schemes, frameworks 
and  standards.  Within  the  Eurosystem,  we  are  currently  working  on  the  modalities  for  this 
“SEPA Council” while working together closely with the European Commission.  
Conclusion 
I will conclude by saying that it remains the goal of the Eurosystem to promote the advent of 
an  integrated,  efficient and  innovative  retail  payments  market  in  the  euro  area.  The  SEPA 
project  should  be  as  much  a  part  of  a  bank’s  core  business  as  the  provision  of  efficient 
payment  services  to  its  customers.  Now  that  we  have  a  single  market  for  goods  and 
services, we need a single market for payments to actually pay for these goods and services. 
                                                 
5   Regulation (EC) 2560/2001 on cross-border payments in euro (recently revised by Regulation (EC) 3655/09). 
BIS Review 125/2009 
 3
SEPA is also necessary to complete the introduction of the euro as the single currency of 
329 million European citizens and to foster financial integration in Europe.  
The launch of the SDD marks a further step forward in the process of European integration 
towards a single payments area. I congratulate all those who contributed to this milestone. 
Thank you! 
4 
 BIS Review 125/2009
