Durmuş Yılmaz: Role and responsibilities of emerging economies in the 
global monetary system  
Speech by Mr Durmuş Yilmaz, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, at 
the conference on "Where Is Global Finance Heading?", Istanbul, 2 October 2009. 
 Dear Guests,  
I would like to welcome you all to Istanbul. It is a great pleasure for us to host this conference 
and  such  a  distinguished  group  of  central  bankers,  academics  and  experts.  I  hope  this 
meeting, together with the upcoming events, will be helpful in shedding light on the future of 
the global financial system. 
It has been almost two years since the surfacing of global financial crisis of epic proportions 
and we are still dealing with its repercussions. One can easily identify a variety of reasons for 
its occurrence: Global macroeconomic imbalances certainly played a key role. Deficiencies in 
financial  regulations  and  lack  of  coordination  among  monetary  authorities  and  regulatory 
institutions played even a bigger role. Policy makers were quite complacent during the build 
up in asset bubbles. Accommodative monetary policies enabled access to cheap money. 
High  leveraged  transactions  magnified  the  amount  of  liquidity  created  through  financial 
system. Search for high yields led to excessive risk taking and use of complex instruments. 
Compensation  scheme  in  the  financial  sector  encouraged  short-term  bias.  Above  all, 
believed that with the use of complex financial instruments, one can wipe out the risk from 
balance sheets. However, risks only changed form and address in the financial system, just 
like the energy continuously transforms in the physical universe. 
Almost  all  economists  agree  that  we  are  heading  to  a  slow,  gradual  and  painful  recovery. 
And as a central banker who has spent almost 30 years in this profession, I can tell you that 
it is a miracle itself to have so many economists agree on one issue with so much vigor and 
conviction. 
The future of the global financial system will be shaped by the lessons we derive from our 
current experience. The ongoing crisis revealed that preventive measures put in place at the 
local level by national authorities may not be effective to address global problems. 
It also underlined the importance of international cooperation and coordination in designing 
and  implementing  economic  policies.  It  is  clearly  understood  that  the  only  way  to  prevent 
future crises at the global scale is multilateral cooperation. However to establish and sustain 
multilateral  cooperation  is  not  an  easy  task.  As  (John  Maynard)  Keynes  once  said,  “The 
biggest problem is not to let people accept new ideas, but to let them forget the old ones.“ It 
is very likely that economic agents will try to hold onto their old habits when the effects of the 
crisis subdue. 
Appeals on regulators will pile up for a more lenient implementation of rules, regulations, and 
policies. Politicians will face pressure from their constituents to give priority to local concerns 
at the expense of global coordination. Dominant academic paradigm may restrict those who 
radically incorporate lessons of these days into their studies. And of course, central banks, 
as always, will be criticized for spoiling the party at its hottest moment by taking away the 
punch bowl. We should be aware that keeping the old habits will only give us a new and may 
be more severe crisis in the near future. 
Thanks to the global efforts, lessons derived from the crisis have already started to initiate 
dramatic  changes  in  the  global  financial  governance.  There  have  been  encouraging 
developments  in  recent  months  to  design  a  new  global  financial  system  to  prevent  future 
crises. In the recent meeting of G-20 finance ministers and central bank governors, member 
BIS Review 120/2009 
 1
countries confirmed their commitments to the principles of strengthening transparency and 
accountability,  enhancing  sound  regulation,  promoting  integrity  in  financial  markets,  and 
reinforcing international cooperation. I believe the establishment of Financial Stability Board 
with  increased  participation  of  emerging  countries  is  a  critical  step  in  achieving  these 
objectives. 
In  recent  years,  as  a  byproduct  of  market-oriented  structural  reforms  and  prudent 
macroeconomic  policies,  the  share  of  emerging  countries  in  world  output  and  their  role  in 
global  financial  markets  has  significantly  increased.  Now,  we  are  faced  with  a  more 
diversified  group  of  countries  with  different  objectives  and  interests.  Since  the  rise  of 
emerging  economies  has  dispersed  economic  power,  decision-making  process  and 
international cooperation has become more complicated. For legitimacy and effectiveness of 
measures  and  also  for  better  global  governance,  emerging  economies  should  involve  in 
decision-making process and be part of the solution. 
However, emerging countries should also be aware of the fact that more power in decision-
making process comes with more responsibilities. Both developed countries and emerging 
market  countries  share  the  blame  in  global  economic  imbalances  that  worsened  the 
magnitude of current crisis. In theory, the adjustment of imbalances should have taken place 
through  either  exchange  rates  or  interest  rates  or  both.  Mainly  developed  countries 
prevented that adjustment on the interest rates, whereas emerging market countries joined 
their counterparts by preventing adjustment on the exchange rates. 
Today,  many  people  debate  the  need  for  a  new  global  reserve  currency,  creation  of  an 
international  clearing  system,  enhancing  the  role  of  central  banks,  and  establishment  of  a 
supranational body to safeguard global economic and financial system. These discussions 
are necessary and maybe overdue. 
A  global  reserve  currency  might  be  needed  to  alleviate  the  tension  between  appropriate 
monetary policy of the reserve currency country and that of the global economy. Creating an 
international clearing agency between trade partner countries may be useful to reduce the 
need for accumulating foreign exchange reserves. 
A  supra-national  body  may  be  the  only  solution  for  the  externality  problem  in  the  Bretton 
Woods  system  and  its  successor,  so  called,  the  Bretton  Woods  II.  Main  responsibilities  of 
central banks may be enhanced to the stability of asset prices as well as prices of goods and 
services. 
Of course, as a central banker, I am fully aware that identifying asset bubbles is not an easy 
task and it may also be challenging to convince the public and politicians about the necessity 
of  raising  policy  rates  at  a  time  when  economy  is  booming  but  the  prices  of  goods  and 
services  are  stable.  However,  the  recent  crisis  has  demonstrated  that  central  banks  may 
ignore imbalances in financial markets at their own peril. 
Today, we have a unique opportunity to discuss the future of the global financial system and 
the  role  and  responsibilities  of  the  emerging  economies.  I  believe  that  the  timing  and  the 
framework  of  this  conference  will  provide  ample  opportunity  for  sharing  new  ideas  and 
highlight some critical lessons to reshape a better global financial system for a more resilient 
and stable global economy. 
Once  again  I  extend  my  warm  welcome  to  all  participants.  I  also  want  to  thank  the 
distinguished  participants  for  their  valuable  contributions.  I  hope  you  enjoy  both  the 
conference and your stay in Istanbul. 
2 
 BIS Review 120/2009
