Andrew Bailey: Recovery and resolution plans 
Remarks by Mr Andrew Bailey, Executive Director for Banking Services and Chief Cashier of 
the  Bank  of  England,  at  the  Santander  International  Banking  Conference,  Madrid, 
17 November 2009. 
I am grateful to Victoria Cleland, Chris Daniels, Iain De Weymarn, Andrew Hauser, Andrew Hewitt, Tony Lomas, 
Orla May, Maggie Mills, Sally Reid, Paul Tucker and Andrew Wardlow for their comments and advice. 
 It is a pleasure to be in Madrid today, not least because finding time to reflect on the future of 
the banking system means that we are at some distance from the urgent fire-fighting that has 
characterised  the  past  two  autumns.  But  I  would  not  wish  thereby  to  downplay  the 
importance and urgency of the rebuilding task. The past two autumns were in many ways 
taken  up  with  doing  what  had  to  be  done  in  crisis  conditions.  And  what  had  to  be  done 
involved  the  use  of  public  money  on  a  scale  that  has  been  unprecedented  and  was 
previously unimaginable. There was nothing easy about that task, and from the perspective 
of resolving the problems of the system too often we have had to grit our teeth, accept that 
“we are where we are” and get on with the job in hand. Fire-fighters don’t get to choose the 
fires they fight, or even sometimes how they fight them. 
But fire prevention is better than fire-fighting. We cannot justify having a banking system that 
depends on the use of public money to douse the fire when the crisis comes. And we also 
cannot allow conditions to exist where risks are taken on the basis that this backstop exists. 
“Too big” or “Too important to fail” are shorthand for institutions that exist in their chosen form 
as  a  result  of  underwriting  with  public  money.  I  don’t  believe  that  there  is  anything 
controversial about a statement that no industry can take on a form which is a consequence 
of such a massive potential, and of course recently actual, call on public money. 
The big issue is therefore what to do to correct the situation. There are three elements to the 
debate:  regulation,  structure  and  resolution.  We  can  re-design  and  re-build  the  fire 
prevention systems in the existing landscape. This is the regulation element. At the heart of 
this  is  action  on  capital  requirements,  including  a  role  for  contingent  capital  and  larger 
liquidity buffers. 
But we may also conclude that we want to prevent fires by having a different landscape of 
buildings – a town planning solution in which the structure of the industry is re-drawn. And in 
the past, cities were rebuilt with that objective in mind. This is the structure element. 
But, whichever combination of these courses we choose to take, we cannot guarantee that 
there  will  be  no  fires  in  the  future,  and  we  would  be  extremely  foolish  if  we  made  that 
promise. And, the odds are that the cause of the next one will not be the same. I have been 
involved in mopping up problems in banks long enough to have been involved in Barings, 
which was an idiosyncratic fraud, not a sector-wide problem. This is the resolution element. 
In short, we need better fire prevention and better fire-fighting. In the UK we took a major 
step earlier this year by creating a Special Resolution Regime. But that is not the end of the 
response to the crisis. Rather, it is where “living wills” or what we now prefer to call Recovery 
and Resolution Plans, or RRPs, come in. I want to spend the rest of my time setting out what 
I think should be the role and form of these plans, and why they should be critical tools both 
for banks themselves, banking supervisors and resolution authorities. 
I have been struck by the strength of support for RRPs. In April, the G20 leaders endorsed a 
set  of  principles  from  the  Financial  Stability  Board  that  include  strong  encouragement  for 
firms  to  maintain  contingency  plans  and  procedures  for  use  in  a  wind  down,  with  regular 
reviews  to  ensure  that  they  remain  accurate  and  adequate.  The  Financial  Stability  Board 
cross-border Crisis Management Working Group, chaired by my colleague, Paul Tucker, has 
BIS Review 156/2009 
 1
published principles aimed at strengthening the ability of authorities to deal with a crisis in 
certain cross-border financial groups. In the UK, the FSA has recently issued a consultation 
paper on RRPs, and an important initial pilot exercise will involve reviewing the contingency 
plans and procedures of the major firms as they draw them up over the coming months. The 
timetable for this work is ambitious with the plans being drawn up in the first quarter of next 
year,  but  that  is  necessarily  so.  The  FSA  and  the  Bank  of  England,  working  together,  will 
review and challenge the submissions to assess their credibility. 
RRPs  need  to  be  owned  by  financial  institutions  at  Board  level.  They  should  be  of  such 
importance that Boards need to understand that they are responsible for them. 
At  the  heart  of  the  role  of  these  plans  is  taking  a  forward-looking  view  of  the  threats  that 
should be tackled. This is a clear change of approach. It builds from the work already done to 
embed stress testing into the toolkit. Stress tests are useful but limited tools. They provide a 
forecast  of  what  we  think  is  most  likely  to  happen  in  the  future  conditional  on  a  set  of 
assumptions on what the future will bring. There are three obvious limitations to stress tests 
used on their own. First, typically they are a single point forecast of what could happen rather 
than a distribution of outcomes conditional on a range of stresses. Second, because stress 
tests tend to take the form of point forecasts, they assume that we can predict the form of the 
next crisis, and typically they will place too much weight on the recent past to predict what 
will happen next. And third, they don’t tell us what we should do about the stress. So stress 
tests are useful but nowhere near sufficient. 
RRPs are a big step beyond that and one that should complement stress tests. The objective 
of a recovery plan should be to set out how a bank may react to a whole range of stresses 
and the steps that it could plausibly take to head off the impact of these stresses in order to 
avoid  formal  resolution  actions  in  the  event  of  failure.  Recovery  plans  should  encompass 
contingency funding plans and the use of contingent capital instruments as well as the sale 
of  assets  and/or  business  lines.  They  should  not  assume  the  use  of  extraordinary  public 
support. A key element of the recovery plan is that it should make management more aware 
of the risks run in their businesses while they can still manage out of a stressed situation, 
thus reducing the likelihood of failure. This calls for a sharper use of risk management tools 
and  systems.  To  be  blunt,  I  have  seen  too  many  banks  in  the  past  two  years  where  the 
systems simply did not support that sort of management under stress. I should also add that 
both  internal  and  external  auditors  must  play  their  full  part  in  providing  assurance  that 
recovery plans are robust. Recovery plans must be ready to implement if it comes to it, but 
they should I hope and expect be used on a regular basis to test the robustness of business 
models,  by  having  management  rigorously  ask  the  question,  “Can  I  recover  from  these 
stressed scenarios with my current business model?”. 
The  second  leg  of  RRPs  is  the  resolution  plan.  Resolution  plans  must  be  produced  and 
owned  by  the  authorities,  since  only  we  can  determine  how  best  to  apply  the  tools  of  our 
regime. But firms have a vital role to play in these plans. They will have the best sense of the 
existence of impediments to a resolution plan, for instance the existence of negative pledges 
that could obstruct emergency lending and how to remove these impediments. Second, firms 
must produce and maintain the information that is necessary to enable a resolution plan to 
be enacted, and understand the problems and issues that would arise in a resolution from 
the way their firm operates. The last point is critical – it is not a data dump process. 
There are two key objectives for resolution plans. First, to make it more straightforward and 
less  costly  for  resolution  authorities  to  resolve  firms  by  creating  a  permanent  state  of 
readiness.  Second,  as  a  means  to  deal  with  the  “too  complex  to  resolve”  state  by 
demonstrating where structures need to be changed. This is all about reducing the cost of 
resolution  and  thereby  the  risk  to  the  stability  of  the  system.  Just  like  recovery  plans, 
resolution plans need to be there to be used, and I can assure you that the Bank of England, 
in  its  role  as  a  resolution  authority,  will  be  placing  great  emphasis  on  the  existence  of 
credible and useable resolution plans. They will be a tool for the authorities rigorously to ask 
2 
 BIS Review 156/2009
the  question,  “With  this  structure  and  business  model,  could  I  achieve  a  resolution  at  an 
acceptable cost”. This will be true for domestic banks and for those operating across borders, 
and  in  the  case  of  the  latter  there  is  a  large  amount  of  work  to  be  done  to  ensure  both 
complete coverage of resolution regimes and that they can work together. 
I have emphasised that I see RRPs as a device to enable tough questioning of structures 
and business models. I want finally to illustrate the sorts of questions that should arise by 
referring briefly to a couple of well known cases of the last two years or so. 
Let me start with Northern Rock, the first casualty in the UK and use this case to illustrate the 
role of a recovery plan. Had there been one, the Northern Rock recovery plan should have 
challenged the management and the Board on how its business model could adapt to and 
survive the closure of its key funding markets, given the sheer scale of its dependence on 
securitisation. Likewise, how could it have handled a serious stress when it had pursued a 
business model of aggressively taking market share by squeezing its net interest margin and 
accepting more borrower default risk? And then moving further into the guts of the bank, how 
would it deal with stress to a funding model where the bank was excessively dependent on 
cash deposits from the securitisation master trust but with a hard rating agency trigger linking 
that funding to the position of the bank, thus creating a severe amplification of any stress? 
Finally on Northern Rock, how would the bank deal with a funding stress when it was having 
to encumber such a high proportion of its good quality assets in order to over-collateralise its 
securitisation master trust?  
A very good example of the need for resolution plans is the case of Lehmans in Europe. Two 
questions  are  relevant  here:  what  should  the  resolution  plan  have  contained;  and  what 
changes to its organisation and operations might have made the massive task of dealing with 
Lehmans  more  straightforward?  You  will,  I  hope,  appreciate  that  I  can  only  scratch  the 
surface  of  the  Lehmans  case  in  the  time  available  so  I  apologise  for  the  laundry  list 
approach. Starting with the useful content of a resolution plan: a detailed balance sheet for 
all relevant corporate entities in the group at the most recent month end; a clear mapping of 
financial  and  operational  interdependencies  between  affiliates;  wind-down  plans  for  all 
business  areas  linked  to  a  comprehensive  information  data  room;  and  a  contact  plan  for 
major stakeholders. 
Now, listing the changes to Lehmans’ organisation and operations that should have resulted 
from drawing up robust RRPs: corporate entity based accounts and management information 
to supplement the business-line version (because corporate entities fail); clear segregation of 
handling  client  asset  activities;  controls  over  depositing  client  money  with  affiliates; 
employees  hired  by  the  entity  for  whom  they  work;  a  clear  record  of  each  entity’s  title  to 
business  and  associated  intellectual  property;  robust  risk  systems  that  allow  ready 
provenance  of  the  balance  sheet;  contracts  for  the  provision  of  key  business  services  (eg 
banking systems) that allow continuity of provision of services in the event of a resolution; 
and arrangements for continuity of access to payment and settlement systems. 
This has been a very brief run through some very relevant case studies. But I hope it has 
illustrated the role that RRPs should play and the pressing need to have them in place. RRPs 
have come a long way in a short period of time, which is both essential and gratifying. But, of 
course,  we  haven’t  actually  produced  any  yet.  This  situation  will  not  last  much  longer, 
certainly not in the UK, because the authorities are very keen to see real implementation of 
RRPs, alongside the continuing international work on them. One thing is for sure – you will 
hear a lot more about Recovery and Resolution Plans. Thank you. 
BIS Review 156/2009 
 3
