Jan F Qvigstad: Outlook for the Norwegian economy 
Address by Mr Jan F Qvigstad, Deputy Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), 
at Sparebank 1 Fredrikstad, 4 November 2009.  
The  text  below  may  differ  slightly  from  the  actual  presentation.  The  speech  is  based  on  the  assessments 
presented  at  Norges  Bank’s  press  conference  following  the  Executive  Board’s  monetary  policy  meeting  on  28 
October and Monetary Policy Report 3/09. 
    BIS Review 139/2009 
 1
The operational target of monetary policy in Norway is low and stable inflation, with annual 
consumer price inflation of close to 2.5 per cent over time. In recent years, average inflation 
has been close to, but somewhat below 2.5 per cent. Consumer price inflation has generally 
been  somewhat  below  target  since  2003  and  monetary  policy  was  then  oriented  towards 
pushing up inflation. In 2007 and 2008 inflation picked up to slightly above target. Inflation 
expectations  were  firmly  anchored and  the  key  policy  rate was  gradually  raised  to a  more 
normal  level.  Inflation  close  to  target  and  firmly  anchored  inflation  expectations  were 
essential  for  monetary  policy  to  be  effective  when  substantial  cuts  were  made  in  the  key 
policy rate in autumn 2008 and the beginning of 2009.  
It has been a year since financial turbulence developed into a full-blown crisis and resulted in 
the most severe downturn in the global economy since the Second World War. The financial 
crisis eroded confidence in banks, counterparties and contractual partners.  
The measures implemented by central banks and governments have had a stabilising effect 
on financial markets. Credit and money market premiums have decreased and activity has 
picked up. Daily fluctuations have become less pronounced. 
 
  With the improvement in financial markets over the past six months and the increase in the 
credit  supply,  global  trade  is  now  picking  up  slightly,  albeit  only  gradually  and  from  a  low 
level.  Manufacturing  output  has  recently  risen  in  the  US,  Japan  and  many  emerging 
economies, while it continues to fall – albeit at a slower pace – in many euro area countries. 
Manufacturing output in Japan and the US is still at a very low level. Despite the pickup in 
growth, capacity utilisation in advanced economies will remain very low for the next two-three 
years. 
2 
 BIS Review 139/2009
  Uncertainty in equity markets has eased and risk premiums are lower, reflected in a rise in 
leading US stock indices of more than 50 per cent since equity markets bottomed out at the 
beginning of March 2009. Oslo Børs has risen by about 70 per cent since the beginning of 
March. 
 
  The price of oil has risen somewhat since the June Report, and has doubled since the trough 
in  December  2008.  Metals  prices  have  also  risen.  The  increase  in  oil  prices  reflects  low 
growth in oil production, more positive expectations as to the world economy and a weaker 
US dollar.  
BIS Review 139/2009 
 3
  On the other hand, OECD oil inventories are still ample and OPEC spare production capacity 
is higher than in the preceding years, while oil demand remains weak.  
 
  Key rates are close to zero in many countries. Several central banks have signalled that key 
rates will be kept low for a long period, and key rate expectations abroad have fallen. Pricing 
in the market indicates an expected rise in key rates in a number of countries after the turn of 
the year.  
4 
 BIS Review 139/2009
 The krone depreciated considerably in the second half of 2008, but has since appreciated 
again. Stronger risk appetite and market expectations of a somewhat earlier rise in interest 
rates in Norway have probably contributed to the krone appreciation. Lower capital outflows 
from  the  Government  Pension  Fund  –  Global  have  probably  also  made  a  contribution. 
Trading  in  NOK  has  picked  up  since  summer  and  foreign  exchange  market  liquidity  has 
improved. 
The projections are based on the assumption that the krone will depreciate somewhat from 
the current level. It is for example assumed that the real krone exchange rate will gradually 
revert to its historical average.  
The  krone  is  floating  and  fluctuates  somewhat.  It  has  shown  a  tendency  to  appreciate  in 
favourable times and fall in value in response to negative shocks in the Norwegian economy. 
 
 BIS Review 139/2009 
  5
Nonetheless, budgetary policy and the petroleum fund mechanism contribute to stability in 
the krone, as is clearly reflected in the movements in the krone in recent years compared 
with the currencies of other open economies with substantial exports of raw materials, such 
as Australia and New Zealand. 
The outlook for the Norwegian economy is better than for most other advanced economies. 
The  rebound  in  activity  will  probably  occur  more  rapidly,  with  inflation  maintaining  a 
somewhat higher level than in many other countries. Monetary policy measures, combined 
with  petroleum  investment  and  growth  in  public  spending,  have  boosted  activity.  The 
downturn in the Norwegian economy may be relatively mild. 
 
  The Norwegian authorities implemented a range of measures to mitigate the impact of the 
crisis  on  the  Norwegian  economy.  As  a  result,  the  liquidity  crisis  did  not  turn  into  a  bank 
solvency crisis or a crisis in the real economy.  
Norges Bank reduced the key policy rate considerably last autumn. The key policy rate has 
been reduced further in 2009 to 1.25 per cent. Norges Bank also stepped up its supply of 
liquidity to banks in the form of short- and long-term loans. The arrangement whereby banks 
could  exchange  covered  bonds  (OMF)  for  government  securities  made  a  contribution  to 
securing long-term funding for banks. Strong growth in government spending fuelled demand 
for goods and services.  
The authorities supply risk capital to Norwegian banks through the Norwegian State Finance 
Fund to strengthen banks’ solidity. The Government has also provided increased loans and 
guarantees to Norwegian export industries, and has raised lending limits for state banks. In 
addition, Folketrygdfondet (the Government Pension Fund – Norway) has been permitted to 
increase its purchases of bonds.  
6 
 BIS Review 139/2009
  The extraordinary monetary and liquidity measures implemented were tailored to a situation 
in which financial markets no longer functioned. In Norway, it has been appropriate to start 
winding down the unconventional measures earlier than in other countries: 
In recent months, Norges Bank has not supplied liquidity through the currency swap lines or 
liquidity in foreign currency.  
Loans in NOK at long maturities have not been provided since February.  
Surplus liquidity in the banking system was increased to more than NOK 100 billion, but is 
now close to a more normal level. This motivates banks to revert to money market funding. 
The  swap  arrangement  involving  covered  bonds  (OMF)  in  exchange  for  government 
securities has made an essential contribution to securing banks’ long-term funding. The first 
signs  that  the  covered  bond  market  was  beginning  to  function  appeared  in  spring.  The 
minimum  price  in  the  swap  arrangement  has  been  raised  by  0.9  percentage  point,  from 
NIBOR-0.2  percentage  point  to  NIBOR+0.7  percentage  point.  Use  of  the  arrangement  is 
currently being phased out. 
Norges Bank eased its collateral requirements to enable banks to increase their borrowing in 
the central bank. This measure is now being reversed.  
Norges Bank has also announced that the share of a bank’s borrowing facility that can be 
based on collateral in the form of bank bonds will gradually be reduced. Covered bonds will 
continue to be eligible as collateral. 
Mainland GDP increased in Q2 after two quarters of negative growth. Growth was somewhat 
higher  than  expected,  reflecting  solid  growth  in  public  sector  demand  and  private 
consumption. In September, Norges Bank’s regional network contacts reported that activity 
had  edged  up  in  Q3.  The  main  contribution  came  from  industries  providing  goods  and 
services to households and the public sector.  
Despite  a  moderate  rebound  in  both  domestic  and  international  activity,  prospects  for 
manufacturing and the building and construction sector remain relatively weak. After falling 
for a long period, manufacturing production picked up again in July and August.  
The  decline  in  new  orders  and  order  reserves,  in  the  shipbuilding  industry  among  others, 
nevertheless indicates a low manufacturing production level in the period ahead. According 
BIS Review 139/2009 
 7
to the regional network, manufacturing production is expected to remain unchanged over the 
next half-year. Overall production in the building and construction sector is also expected to 
remain  virtually  unchanged,  with  increased  activity  in  the  construction  sector  underpinning 
production. Enterprises in the service sector expect production to pick up over the next half-
year.  Regional  network  enterprises  in  the  retail  sector  report  that  production  is  rising  and 
expect continued growth ahead. 
 
  The  petroleum  sector  is  having  a  stabilising  effect  on  overall  demand  via  new  investment, 
maintenance  and  operations.  Petroleum  investment  has  increased  considerably  in  recent 
years, but is projected to fall somewhat towards the end of 2009. According to the petroleum 
investment intentions survey from Statistics Norway, petroleum investment will remain high in 
2010.  Exploration  and  production  spending  appear  to  be  increasing  markedly,  but  the 
increase will to some extent be offset by reduced spending on goods and services for field 
development and fields in operation. The change in investment composition will contribute to 
reducing demand for goods and services from the Norwegian supplier industry.  
Several investment projects are planned on the Norwegian continental shelf for the coming 
years. There are indications that some of the planned investments will require an oil price of 
around USD 70 per barrel to be profitable. Our projections are based on a rise in the oil price 
in line with oil futures prices. These prices suggest that the oil price in 2010 and 2011 will be 
USD 5-10 above the current level. Petroleum investment is therefore projected to be high in 
the period 2010-2012. 
Should the global growth outlook deteriorate again, the price of oil may fall markedly. This 
might  lead  to  a  decline  in  oil  investment  and  also  have  an  adverse  impact  on  the  wider 
Norwegian economy. On the other hand, a fall in oil prices normally results in a depreciation 
of the krone. Should the krone depreciate for an extended period, inflation may become too 
high.  With  lower  oil  prices,  the  economic  outlook  will  deteriorate,  but  the  overall  effect  on 
inflation of a marked fall in oil prices and a weaker krone is not clear cut. 
8 
 BIS Review 139/2009
  The  sharp  decline  in  activity  among  trading  partners  has  reduced  demand  for  Norwegian 
export  products.  The  decline  in  Norwegian  exports  has  occurred  slightly  later  and  been 
somewhat more moderate than observed in a number of other countries. After a sharp fall in 
exports in the first half of 2009, foreign trade statistics indicate that traditional merchandise 
exports have increased somewhat this autumn. Norges Bank’s regional network reports that 
the export industry is expecting approximately unchanged activity over the next half-year.  
The cost level in the Norwegian business sector is now about 15 per cent higher than the 
average  for  the  period  since  1970,  measured  in  terms  of  relative  wages  in  a  common 
currency. Since wage growth is higher in Norway than abroad, relative costs will rise ahead 
even  if  the  nominal  krone  exchange  rate  should  remain  unchanged.  This  will  put  many 
Norwegian  firms  in  a  demanding  position  in  terms  of  international  competition,  which  may 
influence  location  decisions  ahead.  Export  growth  is  expected  to  pick  up  ahead,  but  at  a 
slower pace than expected market growth abroad.  
The contraction in private investment has been somewhat more moderate in Norway than in 
a  number  of  other  countries  over  the  past  year,  even  though  business  investment  also 
dropped  sharply  in  Norway.  Corporate  credit  growth  is  slowing,  but  Norges  Bank’s  third-
quarter bank lending survey indicates that enterprises’ access to bank credit has improved 
and  that  this  tendency  will  continue  in  2009  Q4.  At  the  same  time,  borrowing  in  the  bond 
market has become more accessible and less costly. The decline in business investment will 
probably come to a halt in the course of 2010 as growth recovers, funding conditions improve 
further  and  interest  rates  remain  low.  Banks’  tightening  of  credit  standards  has  been  less 
pronounced for households than for enterprises. All the banks participating in Norges Bank’s 
lending survey expect credit standards for households to remain unchanged ahead.  
 
BIS Review 139/2009 
 9
    Lower interest rates in the period to summer and easier access to residential mortgage loans 
have fuelled housing demand. House prices have shown a seasonally adjusted increase of 
approximately 14 per cent since the trough in November 2008, and the decline in household 
credit growth has levelled off. Housing investment may start to increase towards the middle 
of next year. 
10 
 BIS Review 139/2009
  Interest rates in Norway are low. This has led to renewed growth in household consumption, 
and there are prospects that household demand will continue to rise. According to surveys 
carried out by TNS Gallup and Opinion, household expectations with regard to the outlook 
ahead are more optimistic now than they were in autumn 2008. In addition, housing wealth 
has improved as a result of higher house prices, which may underpin growth in consumer 
spending.  
We have limited experience to indicate how the interest rate at the current low level will affect 
output  and  prices  over  time.  If  growth  in  household  demand  proves  to  be  stronger  than 
expected, the interest rate may be raised to a higher level and more rapidly than currently 
envisaged.  
 
BIS Review 139/2009 
   11
Fiscal policy is expansionary this year, and according to the National Budget for 2010, fiscal 
policy  will  provide  further,  albeit  milder  expansionary  impulses  to  the  economy  next  year. 
Under the fiscal rule, the government budget deficit should be reduced to about 4 per cent of 
the  capital  in  the  Government  Pension  Fund  –  Global  when  activity  in  the  economy  has 
resumed a normal level. Norges Bank’s projections are based on the technical assumption 
that the structural, non-oil budget deficit in 2011 and 2012 will remain unchanged from the 
level in 2010. If growth in the Government Pension Fund – Global is lower than in previous 
years, the deficit will still be more than 4 per cent of the Fund’s capital, even after capacity 
utilisation  has  risen  to  a  normal  level.  If  economic  developments  are  broadly  in  line  with 
projections, fiscal policy conducted in accordance with the fiscal rule could result in a lower 
interest rate and a weaker krone than projected.  
Unemployment is high in many countries. Unemployment in Norway has not risen as sharply 
as previously projected. The number of registered unemployed was 2.8 per cent of the labour 
force  in  October,  unchanged  from  September.  This  is  very  low  compared  with  other 
countries.  
 12 
  BIS Review 139/2009
The  decline  in  employment  has  been  less  marked  than  the  fall  in  activity  would  imply. 
Unemployment may be low partly because it may have taken time for enterprises to adapt 
their workforces to the sharp fall in production, and partly because some enterprises have 
decided to maintain their workforces in anticipation of a pickup in demand. In many sectors, 
the level of employment is nevertheless high in relation to output, and productivity in the past 
year has been at its lowest level since 1988.  
The  projections  are  based  on  the  assumption  that  productivity  will  gradually  improve, 
reducing the pressure on firms’ costs somewhat. The projections are also based on improved 
profitability through an increase in prices. If firms instead reduce employment more rapidly 
and  markedly  in  order  to  improve  productivity,  that  will  lead  to  higher  unemployment  and 
lower wage and price inflation than projected. The interest rate may then be kept lower for a 
longer period than currently envisaged in order to ensure that inflation returns to target. 
 Wage  growth  is  projected  to  decrease  to  around  4  per  cent  in  2009.  Weak  manufacturing 
profitability  as  a  result  of  both  a  fall  in  product  prices  and  a  low  productivity  level  suggest 
moderate wage growth ahead. At the same time, wage growth among trading partners is low. 
As a result, the competitiveness of internationally exposed industries may weaken further in 
the  period  ahead.  In  isolation,  this  may  contribute  to  curbing  wage  growth.  On  the  other 
hand, continued relatively low unemployment in Norway will contribute to pushing up wage 
growth. Wage growth is projected to increase to 4¼ per cent in 2010, rising further to 4¾ per 
cent towards the end of the projection period.  
The severe cyclical downturn and the decline in commodity prices have resulted in very low 
consumer price inflation in many countries. The year-on-year change in consumer prices is 
negative in the US, the euro area, Sweden, Japan and China. Core inflation is more stable, 
but  has  also  edged  down  recently.  Moderate  growth  prospects  and  lower-than-normal 
capacity  utilisation  in  most  advanced  economies  will  lead  to  low  consumer  price  inflation 
among our main trading partners throughout the projection period.  
The key policy rate was reduced to prevent inflation from falling too far below target and to 
mitigate the impact of the global downturn on the Norwegian economy. Underlying consumer 
price inflation in Norway has slowed in recent months to an estimated rate of just below 2½ 
per  cent,  reflecting  the  effects  of  lower  wage  growth,  reduced  capacity  utilisation  in  the 
Norwegian economy and low inflation abroad. Although the krone depreciation last autumn 
has pushed up import prices, the effect of the depreciation is probably now waning.  
 
BIS Review 139/2009 
 13
  After a period of falling productivity, unit labour costs are high. The projections are based on 
an increase in firms’ margins ahead through an increase in prices. Inflation will nevertheless 
be  curbed  by  slower  wage  growth  from  2008  and  a  gradual  rise  in  productivity  growth. 
Somewhat  further  ahead  higher  wage  growth  will  push  up  the  rise  in  prices.  The  krone 
exchange  rate  has  appreciated  from  weak  levels.  Combined  with  the  fall  in  prices  for 
imported  consumer  goods  measured  in  foreign  currency,  this  will  push  down  the  rise  in 
prices for consumer goods in the short term. 
Consumer price inflation is expected to fall to somewhat below 2 per cent in 2010, and then 
gradually pick up to around 2.5 per cent towards the end of the projection period.  
 
Interest rates are low, resulting in renewed growth in household consumption. At the same 
time, house prices are rising. Over time, household borrowing may surge again and saving 
 14 
 BIS Review 139/2009
may  fall.  With  low  productivity,  higher  corporate  costs,  growth  in  household  demand  and 
higher capacity utilisation, inflation may gradually become too high. This would indicate that 
the interest rate should be raised.  
On the other hand, a marked increase in the interest rate in Norway and a wider interest rate 
differential  between  Norway  and  other  countries  may  entail  a  risk  of  a  stronger-than-
projected  krone,  resulting  in  an  inflation  level  that  is  too  low.  This  would  indicate  that  the 
interest rate should not be raised too rapidly. 
Monetary policy cannot fine-tune developments in the economy, but it can mitigate the most 
severe effects when the economy is exposed to shocks. Overall, the outlook and the balance 
of risks suggest that the key policy rate should be gradually increased in the period ahead. 
The  projections  are  uncertain.  New 
information  may  reveal  aspects  of  economic 
developments  that  suggest  the  Norwegian  economy  is  following  a  different  path  than 
projected.  Higher  capacity  utilisation  or  a  weaker  krone  may,  on  the  one  hand,  result  in 
higher-than-projected inflation. On the other hand, inflation may be lower than projected if the 
krone  remains  strong  or  productivity  picks  up  more  rapidly.  Should  the  krone  appreciate 
considerably more than projected, the interest rate may be increased to a lesser extent or 
later than currently envisaged. 
The key policy rate should be in the interval 1¼-2¼ per cent in the period to the publication 
of  the  next  Monetary  Policy  Report  on  24  March  2010  unless  the  Norwegian  economy  is 
exposed to new major shocks. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 139/2009 
 15
