Anna Maria Tarantola: Supervision of foreign banks in Italy 
Remarks by Ms Anna Maria Tarantola, Deputy Director General of the Bank of Italy, at the 
25th Anniversary  of  the  Foundation  of  the  Association  of  Foreign  Banks  in  Italy,  Milan, 
20 November 2009. 
 Introduction 
1. 
I am happy to participate in this seminar marking the quarter century since the foundation of 
the Association of Foreign Banks in Italy. 
I witnessed the beginning of the association with the encouragement of Guido Rosa, Vittorio 
Foroni Lo Faro and Remigio Saracino, who were always ready to bring up the problems that 
foreign banks, mainly present with branches back then, encountered in Italy. These twenty-
five  intense  years  have  seen  a  succession  of  phases  of  growth  and  recession,  enormous 
changes  in finance  and  the  real  economy,  the  opening  up  of  national  markets,  the  steady 
integration of the main financial systems and the introduction of the euro. 
The last two years have been particularly difficult, marked by a deep and far-reaching crisis 
that, in the financial sector, has made evident  distorted incentives, opportunistic behaviour 
and widespread vulnerabilities which often had not been fully perceived. 
The crisis now seems to be loosening its grip. The main international institutions agree, on 
the basis of the latest cyclical indicators, that economic activity has stopped contracting; the 
improvement  in  the  indicators  of  consumer  and  business  confidence  suggest  the  coming 
months will bring a recovery, though a slow one. The state of the financial system has also 
improved; the wholesale and retail markets, fundamental for the procurement of funds and 
the exchange of financial products, appear to be gradually getting back into gear. 
But  we  are  far  from  the  pre-crisis  levels  of  output  and  employment.  In  many  countries, 
including Italy, the magnitude of the crisis and its effects on the real economy are such that 
years of rapid growth will be needed to return to those levels. 
The weak international recovery we are seeing is mainly driven by the support measures put 
in place by the governments of the main countries. The expansion is proceeding at a faster 
pace  in  the  emerging  countries,  in  particular  those  of  Asia,  which  have  shown  a  greater 
capacity to resist and react – perhaps in part because of the lessons learned in the crisis at 
the end of the last millennium. Hopefully, careful and consistent economic policies will enable 
this wave of recovery to extend fully to the advanced economies and Italy. 
In the financial field, the major items on the agenda are two: to swiftly put into place a new 
regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  that  remedies  the  deficiencies  brought  out  by  the 
crisis, and to make the financial system fully operational again so as to ensure, in Italy as 
elsewhere, the flow of resources needed to accompany and sustain the economic recovery. 
The process of stabilizing and strengthening the financial system and rewriting the rules is 
proceeding  according  to  the  calendar  set  by  the  leaders  of  the  G20  and  the  Financial 
Stability  Board  (FSB).  The  set  of  reforms,  once  enacted,  should  increase  the  financial 
system’s  resilience  to  shocks,  encourage  the  development  of  models  for  intermediation 
oriented  to  long-term  results,  and  eliminate  the  incentives  for  excessive  risk-taking  by 
stimulating  more  far-sighted  behaviour  based  on  the  sound  and  prudent  management  of 
intermediaries.  
Concerns that the banking system will be unable to provide sufficient support to the economy 
are particularly strong in Italy, not least because of the financial structure of our small and 
medium-sized enterprises, heavily dependent on bank credit and historically skewed towards 
short-term  debt.  The  crisis  can  –  and  must  –  be  an  opportunity  for  resolute  action  to 
BIS Review 168/2009 
 1
rebalance the structure of firms’ liabilities. In their selection activity, banks must be able to 
assess firms’ long-term growth potential, to assist them in their development. 
In  this  context,  the  contribution  of  foreign  banks  can  be  significant,  especially  in  some 
segments  of  the  economy.  In  Italy  today,  the  branches  and  subsidiaries  of  foreign 
intermediaries account for one fifth of all bank intermediation, a share comparable to that of 
many other advanced economies. An analysis of the past is useful not only to identify the 
contribution 
terms  of 
competitiveness, innovation and the quality and quantity of services provided – but also to 
outline their possible future contribution. This has several determinants: the types of foreign 
intermediaries, their business model, their objectives, their results and the impact on prices.  
The Bank of Italy is following these matters closely; indeed, it could not do otherwise. I will 
therefore retrace some of the stages of the success story of foreign banks’ expanding role in 
Italy and highlight the difficulties that must be overcome so that this progress may continue to 
the benefit of the Italian economy, and the implications for the Bank of Italy.  
foreign  banks  have  made 
their  host  markets  – 
that 
to 
in 
Internationalization 
2. 
There  are  several  reasons  why  a  bank  may  decide  to  enter  foreign  markets:  i)  to  take 
advantage of the host country’s growth potential and thereby tap new profit opportunities; ii) 
to follow its own customers abroad; and iii) to diversify its activity. 
A recent survey by the European Central Bank of the drivers of the international expansion of 
the largest European banking groups highlighted two main factors. Some 80 per cent of the 
respondents declared that expansion abroad was aimed at exploiting growth opportunities in 
the host market and thereby increasing profit margins, while 59 per cent cited the need to 
provide  services  to  their  customers  operating  abroad;1  business  diversification  was  a  less 
important goal. 
In  the  past  decade  the  integration  of  international  financial  systems  has  intensified  and 
extended  to  the  banking  system.  In  many  countries  the  number  and  the  market  share  of 
foreign intermediaries have grown as a result of the expansion of banking groups’ activities 
beyond  national  borders  and  the  increase  in  cross-border  mergers  and  acquisitions.  The 
process, initially involving the financial markets of the emerging countries, has spread to the 
mature economies, albeit to a more limited extent.2  
In the European Union, cross-border bank mergers and acquisitions have increased in both 
number and value. Between 2005 and 2007 more than 350 were carried out, largely between 
intermediaries from different countries. The trend abated in 2008, owing to the international 
financial crisis, but it did not come to a halt, with cross-border mergers and acquisitions down 
in number but up in value from the previous year.3  
At the end of 2007 branches and subsidiaries of foreign banks accounted for a little less than 
30 per cent of total bank assets in the European Union. Foreign banks have a particularly 
large market share in the United Kingdom, where it exceeds 50 per cent thanks above all to 
London’s central  role  in  international  finance.  It  is  also  large  in  the  European  Union’s  new 
member  countries,  in  connection  with  the  acquisition  of  major  local  banks  by  foreign 
intermediaries.  In  the  euro-area  countries,  foreign  banks’  share  of  total  assets  averages 
about 20 per cent. The share of loans granted by non-domestic institutions has doubled in 
                                                 
1   European Central Bank, EU Banking Structures, 2008. 
2   Committee  on  the  Global  Financial  System,  Foreign  direct  investment  in  the  financial  sector  of  emerging 
market economies, Bank for International Settlements, 2004. 
3   European Central Bank, Financial Integration in Europe, 2009. 
2 
 BIS Review 168/2009
the last ten years, rising from just under 4 to about 8 per cent of outstanding loans to EU 
residents (from 26 to 37 per cent for bank and financial counterparties). 
Foreign banks are major players in the economies of central and eastern Europe, where they 
contributed  to  the  privatization  of  the  banking  system  after  the  collapse  of  communism.  In 
those countries the leading international banks raised the efficiency of the financial system 
with  transfers  of  know-how  and  technology,  improved  the  allocation  of  credit  and  brought 
stability  after  the  severe  financial  crises  of  the  early  1990s.  However,  the  recent  financial 
crisis has revealed the risks deriving from the excessive concentration of the credit markets 
and their vulnerability to events originating in the foreign banks’ home countries. 
In the mature economies of Europe, the nature of the benefits and risks generated by the 
integration of banking systems is similar but their scale is smaller. 
Within  the  European  Union  we  have  seen  a  reduction  in  interest  rate  differentials  and 
convergence towards the most competitive levels. 
Foreign banks in Italy 
3. 
I said that foreign banks are spurred to enter a country by the growth prospects of specific 
market  segments  in  which  the  host-country’s  intermediaries  do  not  enjoy  locational 
advantages or are lagging in adapting their supply. Our own history provides more than one 
example of this. 
The  number  of  foreign  intermediaries  in  Italy  has  risen  continually  in  the  last  twenty-five 
years, from just over thirty in the mid-1980s to more than one hundred today. Their market 
share  is  significant.  In  2007,  the  latest  year  for  which  we  have  data  for  an  international 
comparison,  their  share  of  total  bank  assets  was  17.4  per  cent,  higher  than  the 
corresponding  figures  in  Germany,  France  and  Spain  (11.1,  12.9  and  11.6  per  cent, 
respectively).  It  declined  slightly  in  the  first  half  of  this  year,  to  16  per  cent,  owing  to  the 
international financial crisis and the exit of some intermediaries from the Italian market. 
Foreign  banks’  reasons  for  entering  Italy  have  changed  over  the  years.  A  first  substantial 
inflow dates from the late 1970s and early 1980s, in parallel with the growth in world trade 
and  the  business  expansion  of  multinational  corporations.  Many  foreign  banks  began  to 
operate  in  Italy  through  branches,  mainly  in  order  to  serve  prime  customers  on  the  spot. 
Another  factor  of  no  small  importance  was  their  objective  of  taking  advantage  of  the 
administrative  constraints  then  burdening  the  operations  of  Italian  banks.  In  particular, 
foreign intermediaries could exploit their parent banks’ foreign currency funding, which they 
used to make foreign currency loans to both non-bank customers and Italian banks, and the 
possibility of raising funds at moderate costs on the interbank market. 
Foreign banks accounted for about 4 per cent of total assets, with a higher market share for 
loans  to  non-bank  customers  and  for  commitments  and  contingent  liabilities.  The  profit 
margins they achieved on both loans and investments were substantial, especially compared 
with those obtaining in their home countries. 
In  this  first phase,  marked  by  strong  regulatory  constraints  on  the  activity  of  Italian  banks, 
foreign intermediaries helped decisively to expand the range of services, especially financial 
services,  offered  to  customers.  On  the  other  hand,  their  scant  presence  in  retail  banking 
markets limited their contribution to the growth in competition. 
Starting in the mid-1980s the Italian banking system underwent progressive liberalization and 
modernization  whose  milestones  were  the  removal  of  the  ceiling  on  the  growth  in  bank 
lending,  the  abolition  of  the  securities  investment  requirement  and  the  lifting  of  the 
restrictions on branching. All this affected the activity of the foreign banks, which contracted – 
significantly in several instances – in some business segments. By 1990 their share of total 
assets had fallen to 2.6 per cent and that of loans to non-bank customers to 3 per cent. 
BIS Review 168/2009 
 3
In response to these developments, foreign intermediaries moved increasingly into wholesale 
financial  markets,  which  were  relatively  backward  at  the  time  but  with  good  potential  for 
growth:  they  quickly  expanded  their  presence  in  securities  business,  asset  management 
services, correspondent banking (cash management for customers, as well as hedging and 
foreign exchange transactions) and investment banking (in particular raising funds directly on 
the capital market by placing equity and bond issues and syndicated loans). 
In the mid-1990s, the foreign banks’ off-balance-sheet transactions exceeded 42 per cent of 
the  system’s  total,  mainly  owing  to  the  large  volume  of  forward  business  in  securities  and 
derivatives. 
Throughout this phase, the most popular type of establishment was still the branch, which 
was more flexible and better suited to supply policies centred on specific ranges of services 
geared to a limited time horizon. 
When, in the 1990s, the European regulatory framework was completed with the institution of 
freedom of establishment and home country control, a level playing field was created for the 
activity of local banks and foreign banks and competition intensified further. The creation of a 
single  banking  market  in  Europe  drastically  altered  entry  procedures  for  EC  banks,  which 
now had a quicker method of access – simple notification to the Bank of Italy – that obviated 
the need for endowment funds for their branches. Supervision of the foreign establishments 
of EU banks was entrusted to the home country authorities, except in respect of liquidity. 
The  process  of  integration  accelerated  with  the  introduction  of  the  single  currency,  which 
acted as a catalyst for the main corporate projects of industrial and financial reorganization. 
Partly as a result of these developments, foreign institutions have entered the Italian market 
in greater numbers in recent years, and increasingly in traditional banking business, seeking 
to exploit not only the growth potential of the retail and mid-corporate sectors but also Italian 
households’ considerable saving capacity. 
Entry into the retail market was achieved mainly by takeovers of local banks and financial 
companies, not least to gain the competitive advantage stemming from local roots and close 
customer relations. Subsidiaries of foreign banks operate as networks of their international 
groups they belong to; their commercial policies are geared to expansion, to enlarging the 
network and strengthening links with the product companies of the foreign parents. 
Between 1990 and 2005, the market share of foreign intermediaries rose from 2.6 to 8 per 
cent of total assets. It has expanded further since then, to around 16 per cent in the first half 
of 2009. 
There  has  been  a  substantial  increase  in  foreign  intermediaries’  lending  to  households 
(Table  2).  Operators  specializing  in  mortgage  lending  and  consumer  credit  using  credit 
scoring  techniques  have  entered  the  Italian  market.  This  development,  which  facilitated 
households’  access  to  these  forms  of  finance,  also  led  to  innovations  in  the  types  of 
contracts,4  longer  durations,  higher  loan  ceilings,  and  a  larger  percentage  of  financial  risk 
than  the  Italian  average.  In  the  first  half  of  this  year,  15  per  cent  of  the  mortgage  lending 
market and 28 per cent of the personal finance market were accounted for by foreign banks, 
compared with 0.2 and 7.7 per cent in 1990. Their customer deposits have also increased, 
albeit more slowly than lending, rising from 1 per cent of the total in 1990 to over 9 per cent 
in 2008. 
Currently,  foreign  banks  are  present  in  Italy  in  a  wide  variety  of  formats  (branches, 
subsidiaries, significant shareholdings); they occupy a leading role for a broad selection of 
                                                 
4   Casolaro,  L.,  L.  Gambacorta,  and  L.  Guiso  (2005),  “Regulation,  formal  and  informal  enforcement  and  the 
development  of  the  household  loan  market.  Lesson  from  Italy”,  Bank  of  Italy  Working  papers  (Temi  di 
discussione) no. 560, September. 
4 
 BIS Review 168/2009
products  ranging  from  corporate  banking  services  to  wholesale  market  operations  and 
clearing  and  settlement  services,  from  project  finance  to  asset  management  and  financial 
advice, and from leasing to traditional banking.  
In  certain  segments,  such  as  depositary  bank  services,  local  government  financing  and 
consulting, and the structuring and sale of derivative instruments, foreign banks play a major 
role. Their branches and subsidiaries account for almost a quarter of the total securities held 
for  custody,  a  share  that  may  increase  significantly  if  and  when  the  sales  announced  by 
several large Italian groups go through. It is important that the advantages of the possible 
economies of scale be passed onto customers and that the services provided be effectively 
adapted to the needs of Italian operators. 
The Italian branches of foreign banks have seen their profits suffer as a result of the crisis 
since their business tends to be concentrated in the investment banking sector, which has 
borne the brunt of the downturn. Their earnings have become negative. 
Subsidiaries,  on  the  other  hand,  have  had  generally  positive  results.  All  of  them  were 
profitable  in  2008  and  in  some  cases  their  gross  income  and  gross  operating  profit 
increased. These results are particularly important when compared with those of the foreign 
parent  companies,  many  of  which  sustained  heavy  losses  and  a  substantial  rise  in 
allocations to provisions. 
The reason for the better performance of Italian subsidiaries is their focus on retail banking. 
Cost-cutting measures, including downsizing, also contributed. 
The differences between the types of business of branches and subsidiaries are reflected in 
the recent performance of lending by the two categories. In the case of branches, for a long 
period, and until the summer of 2008, the rate of growth in lending was over 20 per cent, 
owing  to  the  sharp  expansion  of  syndicated  loans  to  medium-large  firms  and  financial 
companies; it then progressively contracted, to turn negative by 5.6 per cent in September 
2009, as a result of the impact of the crisis on wholesale operations. By contrast, subsidiaries 
continued  to  record  higher  rates  of  growth  than  the  system  average,  for  lending  to  both 
households and firms. 
Empirical analyses by the Bank of Italy5 indicate that foreign banks have helped to increase 
customer  mobility,  particularly  in  the  case  of  households,  and  encouraged  product 
innovation. 
The increased competition led to a drop in interest rates on medium and long-term mortgage 
loans to households. The annual reduction averaged about 15 basis points over the period 
1997–2006 and 18 basis points in the last five years. More recently, the average collateral on 
medium and long-term loans has also decreased, presumably as a result of rising loan-to-
value ratios. 
The  entry  of  foreign  banks  does  not  appear,  however,  to  have  affected  the  interest  rates 
applied to firms, either on short or on medium-to-long-term financing. This is probably due to 
the difficulty foreign banks have in evaluating projects to be financed because of their lack of 
local  roots  and  hence  of  a  close  relationship  with  borrowers.  Even  in  the  case  of  firms, 
however, the presence of foreign banks has been accompanied recently by a tendency to 
reduce the collateral on medium and long-term loans. 
                                                 
5  
Infante  L.  and  P.  Rossi  (2009),  “The  Retail  Activity  of  Foreign  Banks  in  Italy:  Effects  on  Credit  Supply  to 
Households and Firms”, Bank of Italy Working papers (Temi di discussione) no. 714, June. 
BIS Review 168/2009 
 5
Supervision 
4. 
The changes in the presence of foreign banks operating in Italy and in their business models 
have  led  to  major  alterations  in  the  approach  taken  by  supervision.  These  developments 
have been strongly influenced by the progress of international financial integration, above all 
in Europe. 
In the single European market the principle of home-country control means that branches of 
banks  from  other  member  states  are  subject  to  a  significantly  different  supervisory  model 
from  that  applied  to  subsidiaries  established  under  Italian  law.  Controls  on  the  former  are 
entrusted  almost  entirely  to  the  home-country  authorities,  with  the  notable  exception  of 
liquidity risk, which is monitored by the host country. The Bank of Italy monitors liquidity risk 
in  various  ways;  since  September  2008  controls  have  been  tightened  and  banks  are  now 
required to maintain a positive net liquidity position on maturities up to one month. When the 
strains were at their height, direct steps were taken in respect of foreign parent banks, with 
the help of the relevant supervisory authorities. Specific measures of an extraordinary nature 
can be adopted for branches of foreign banks with a significant volume of deposits raised in 
Italy. 
The Bank of Italy’s supervision of branches includes important controls on the transparency 
of banking services offered to customers and against money-laundering, about which I will 
say more shortly. 
Controls on subsidiaries are more intensive and resemble those applied to Italian banks. In 
keeping with the new prudential framework established in the Basel II Accord these must be 
coordinated  between 
the  home-  and  host-country  authorities.  This  highly  ramified 
supervisory  system  involving  various  authorities  with  different  powers  makes  the  task  of 
supervision  a  complex  and  difficult  one,  in  a  setting  in  which  foreign  intermediaries  are 
exposed to an expanding array of risks, including operational and reputational risks. 
As in its supervision of Italian banks, the Bank of Italy increasingly directs and calibrates its 
activity  based  on  risks and  their  importance.  To  comprehend  their  evolution  and  impact,  it 
has held more meetings with the subsidiaries of foreign groups. This dialogue is useful for a 
timely  and  in-depth  analysis  of  operational choices, in  the context  of  those  taken at  group 
level,  and  of  the  risk  management  and  control  systems.  Inspections,  including  those  of  a 
partial nature, have been intensified. 
A start has been made on action to strengthen internal control systems, which were found to 
be inadequate in some cases. The reaction has been positive, but the process of adapting to 
higher standards is not yet complete. The corporate culture of several big financial groups 
requires a thorough rethinking in order to forge a new relationship between business units 
and control functions. These controls must be assigned greater importance than in the past. 
The performance of depositary banks’ activities require organizational structures and working 
processes capable of curtailing the operational and reputational risks to which custodians are 
subject.  The  regulatory  framework  governing  this  sector  in  Italy  fosters  reliable  and 
transparent  conduct:  for  example,  the  distinction  between  management  companies  and 
depositary banks makes it easier to control their operations, the quality of valuations and the 
actual amount of assets held for custody. This arrangement has prevented the emergence of 
similar risks to those seen in other systems. Efforts must continue to make this activity even 
more effective and secure for customers. 
Derivatives  business  can  expose  banks  to  major  legal  and  reputational  risks,  as  the 
numerous ongoing legal disputes testify. For some time now we have intensified our activity 
on  this  front,  both  by  reminding  banks  of  the  need  for  proper  conduct  and  careful  risk 
assessment, and through the monitoring of the phenomenon, including via targeted on-site 
controls. We must not lower our guard. 
One aspect that can condition supervisory activity is the availability of full information on the 
activity of foreign branches, and to some extent also of the subsidiaries present in Italy, when 
6 
 BIS Review 168/2009
their role is merely to distribute products developed abroad, often in London. In these cases 
it becomes difficult to obtain, even during on-site examinations, the documentation needed to 
reconstruct the operations of the foreign intermediary in Italy; in some cases the transactions 
in question are complex, exposing banks to high operational, legal and reputational risks that 
are difficult to quantify. In accordance with the division of responsibilities under Community 
legislation,  there  is  a  need  for  greater  cooperation  between  foreign  intermediaries  and  the 
authorities of the countries in which they offer their services. 
Improvements in transparency are necessary: foreign intermediaries must also comply with 
the  advertising  obligations,  follow  the  rules  on  contracts  and,  in  general,  set  up  customer 
relations on a completely correct basis. It is essential, in particular, that a careful selection be 
made  of  agents  responsible  for  distributing  credit  cards,  a  sector  in  which  several  foreign 
banks are very active. 
A qualitative leap is also called for on the sensitive issue of money laundering, with a greater 
commitment by top management, more intensive staff training and more stringent controls. 
At  times  we  have  found  the  phenomenon  to  be  underestimated  by  foreign  parent  banks 
when setting up programmes for organizing and reorganizing their Italian units. 
The supervision of foreign banks must reconcile the requirements of control over institutions 
that can have systemic importance in the national territory with the powers of the supervisory 
authority in the country where the parent company is established. This is a delicate process, 
requiring a balanced and pragmatic approach. The Bank of Italy has stepped up the activity it 
performs  in  the  colleges  of  supervisors.  In  addition  to  validating  internal  risk-measurement 
systems, the colleges’ activities have gradually – and not without difficulty – been extended 
to broader issues, concerned with the very stability of cross-border banking groups. 
Developments in regulation and supervision 
5. 
The integration of the markets and the broad process of internationalization can facilitate the 
spread of instability, even if localized at first, and require a coordinated response. This is why 
it  is  essential  not  only  to  proceed  rapidly  to  introduce  new  common  rules  for  the  financial 
sector,  aimed  at  reducing  the  risk  of  systemic  crises,  but  also  to  achieve  greater 
homogeneity  in  their  actual  application  and  to  strengthen  cooperation  between  national 
supervisory authorities. The proposals for reform of the rules touch on numerous issues: the 
capital adequacy of banks, the size of the regulatory perimeter, the planning of measures to 
attenuate  the  pro-cyclicality  of  banking  activity,  capital  buffers,  the  introduction  of  limits  on 
the  financial  leverage  of  intermediaries,  the  improvement  of  corporate  governance  and 
executive  compensation  mechanisms,  the  role  of  systemically  important  intermediaries, 
integration  between  macro-prudential  and  micro-prudential  supervision,  and  international 
coordination between authorities in supervising cross-border institutions. 
Effective  supervision  of  international  groups  and  the  institution  of  a  truly  integrated 
monitoring  process  will  require  overcoming  the  divergences  still  found  between  the 
approaches  of  the  various  authorities,  especially  in  the  definition  of  the  scope  of 
consolidation for banking groups, the application of Basel Pillar 2, the treatment of liquidity 
risk,  the  reporting  of  off-balance-sheet  vehicles,  accounting  standards  and  prudential 
reporting. 
The FSB, under the leadership of the Governor of the Bank of Italy, has concluded that the 
international  college  of  supervisors  is  the  most  suitable  instrument  for  strengthening 
cooperation and information exchange among the national supervisory authorities involved in 
the oversight of cross-border groups. This instrument, already current within the European 
Union  and  amply  utilized  in  Italy,  will  be  reinforced  in  the  near  future  and  extended  to  all 
cross-border  groups.  To  make  action  more  effective,  a  clear  legislative  framework  and  a 
precise definition of the powers and duties of colleges are necessary. For the most part, they 
have  worked  well  as  the  place  for  information  exchange  but  have  not  developed  a  real 
BIS Review 168/2009 
 7
capability  for  the  joint  assessment  of  the  risks  of  groups  and  their  components  or  for  the 
effective coordination of supervisory action. 
Colleges’ decision-making powers need to be reinforced, with machinery for settling disputes 
and  a  powerful  coordinating  role  for  the  consolidated  supervisor.  This  process  should  be 
complemented by greater recognition of the role of the parent company under  Community 
legislation on banking groups to establish a proper distribution of costs and benefits among 
all the components of the group. The Italian law on banking groups can offer useful points of 
reference here. 
In addition, colleges need to become the forum for the integrated risk assessment of groups 
and their main components, in order to plan supervisory action and corrective intervention. 
This  requires  the  development  of  common  methodologies  and  the  sharing  of  information, 
including  through  central  databases  accessible  to  all  the  authorities  within  the  college,  to 
favour joint monitoring of the main risks. 
There  have  been  problems  in  the  management  of  crises  involving  cross-border  groups.  In 
particular, what is lacking is agreement on the method for sharing the costs of intervention. In 
practice,  government  support  has  gone  exclusively  to  the  national  members  of  troubled 
groups  and  not  to  sustain  the  group  as  a  whole.  Supervisory  colleges  have  not  played  a 
central role when group crises have occurred, as would have been desirable. Even in cases 
in which cooperation was thought to have produced a good degree of uniformity in regulatory 
approaches,  national  needs  and  practices  prevailed.  The  “too-big-to-fail”  syndrome  is 
currently  under  discussion  in  international  fora,  with  various  proposed  remedies,  including 
the  imposition  of  additional  capital  requirements  and  other,  more  radical  proposals  for 
reducing the size and interdependence of group structures with global systemic relevance. 
The debate is still just beginning, and the eventual results could have a considerable impact 
on market integration. 
The European Commission has worked up a set of proposals to improve cooperation among 
national supervisors, harmonize crisis management and resolution measures and clarify the 
standards for sharing the costs of banking crises among countries. 
The most significant proposals are for: enhancing the quality and quantity of information that 
home and host supervisors exchange, both in normal times and in crises; host supervisors’ 
participation 
important  branches  or 
subsidiaries;  creating  a  new  European  System  of  Financial  Supervisors  (ESFS)  grouping 
three  sectoral  agencies  (the  European  Banking  Authority,  the  European  Insurance  and 
Occupational Pensions Authority and the European Securities Markets Authority), for more 
effective  supervision  over  the  major  European  groups;  and  forming  a  new  European 
Systemic Risk Board, in order to sharpen the macro-prudential focus of supervisory policy. 
A few weeks ago the Commission released a consultation document setting out its projects 
for  enhancing  supervisory  authorities’  early  intervention  at  ailing  banks,  and  their  crisis 
management and resolution. The idea is to revise European company and bankruptcy law, 
together with compulsory deposit insurance schemes, and, more generally, the financing of 
crisis intervention measures. 
The set of regulatory changes under consideration, once implemented, will have significant 
impact on the conduct of banking supervision over national and foreign intermediaries alike 
and  on  the  roles  and  responsibilities  of  the  various  authorities.  There  will  be  a  period  of 
intense  dialogue  with  intermediaries,  whose  organizational  and  business  models  could  be 
affected. 
including  when 
in  colleges, 
the  case 
involves 
Conclusion 
6. 
I believe that the Italian experience over the past twenty-five years has been positive on the 
whole. Foreign banks have significantly enlarged their presence in Italy and helped spread 
8 
 BIS Review 168/2009
new business models, different even from those of their own home markets. These foreign 
intermediaries contributed substantially to the growth of the Italian banking industry in terms 
of  innovation,  service  quality  and  quantity,  and  stiffer  competition.  Italian  savers  and 
investors benefited. The contribution was greater in some market segments, less noticeable 
in others. 
During the recent crisis, in Italy – unlike other countries – the presence of foreign banks did 
not  cause  strains  or  inflict  losses  on  Italian  savers  and  investors.  However,  more  highly 
diversified  lines  of  business  and  the  rapidly  evolving  external  environment  have  increased 
risk  exposure,  especially  in  some  segments.  The  Bank  of  Italy  has  accordingly  adjusted 
supervisory  approaches  and  instruments  to  guarantee  the  continued  effectiveness  of  its 
action, adapted to the evolution of risks. In recent years the chief focus has been on liquidity, 
operational, legal and reputational risks. 
The closer integration of financial markets heightens the danger of contagion. The debate on 
the  effectiveness  of  supervision  over  the  major  cross-border  groups,  with  their  often  over-
complex  organization,  is  still  under  way.  Obviously,  this  is  a  question  that  ranges  beyond 
national  confines.  If  the  crisis  was  –  unquestionably  –  global,  then  the  review  and 
reinforcement of the supervisory architecture needs to be as internationally coordinated as 
possible.  The  regulatory  response  to  cure  a  financial  system  that  has  proven  to  be 
borderless and highly interconnected cannot be marked by divergent national emphases and 
approaches. It must follow common guidelines and methods of application based on shared 
principles.  Otherwise,  we  would  be  leaving  ourselves  open  to  regulatory  arbitrage  and 
opportunism on the part of the large global players. In this new framework there cannot and 
must  not  be  any  room  for  supervisors  to  favour  their  own  financial  marketplace  by  light 
regulation. 
There  is  now  broad  international  consensus  on  the  need  for  common  rules,  uniform 
supervisory  measures,  severe  and  cogent  enforcement,  enhancement  of  the  role  of 
supervisory  colleges  and  cooperation  among  authorities.  Hopefully,  this  consensus  will 
translate rapidly into practical action. 
The Bank of Italy is convinced that stepped-up cooperation and collaboration is the best way 
to minimize the risk of new crises and avoid the recurrence of the severe damage sustained 
in the last two years.  
As  the  authority  responsible  for  prudential  supervision  in  Italy,  we  scrupulously  apply  the 
rules agreed on internationally and in Europe, in tandem with especially careful and severe 
controls. This we do every day. Recent experience has shown that it is necessary to maintain 
this course. 
BIS Review 168/2009 
 9
Annex (Tables and Figures) 
Table 1 
Presence of foreign banks in the EU countries 
(with reference to the end of 2007) 
Number of foreign  
intermediaries present  
(branches and subsidiaries) 
of which: 
branches 
Market share of 
foreign intermediaries 
(total assets ) 
   
Belgium 
Bulgaria 
Czech Republic 
Denmark 
Germany 
Estonia 
Ireland 
Greece 
Spain 
France 
Italy 
Cyprus 
Latvia 
Lithuania 
Luxembourg 
Hungary 
Malta 
Netherlands 
Austria 
Poland 
Portugal  
Romania 
Slovenia 
Slovakia 
Finland 
Sweden 
United Kingdom 
 
MU – 13 
EU – 27 
Source: Based on European Central Bank data. 
85 
21 
34 
31 
123 
13 
69 
35 
127 
239 
99 
33 
13 
8 
151 
30 
16 
50 
53 
54 
36 
34 
11 
25 
33 
24 
264 
 
1111 
1711 
 10 
 58 
5 
14 
22 
84 
8 
32 
27 
80 
88 
82 
25 
2 
3 
43 
6 
3 
23 
27 
14 
24 
10 
3 
10 
25 
16 
174 
 
596 
908 
 24.8 
81.6 
91.5 
19.3 
11.1 
98.8 
46.7 
23.2 
11.6 
12.9 
17.4 
32.1 
58.0 
83.7 
95.0 
57.4 
42.6 
17.6 
26.9 
70.5 
23.0 
82.1 
28.5 
95.9 
65.3 
9.3 
53.4 
 
19.5 
28.7 
of which: 
branches 
6.9 
4.0 
8.9 
5.0 
2.1 
11.2 
10.2 
9.6 
7.8 
2.2 
9.5 
11.8 
0.0 
8.0 
15.9 
1.6 
0.0 
2.5 
1.2 
4.1 
6.8 
4.8 
0.6 
19.6 
5.3 
9.0 
42.3 
 
4.9 
14.2 
BIS Review 168/2009
Table 2 
Market shares of foreign banks in Italy 
(annual averages with reference to bank branches and subsidiaries) 
 1984 
1990 
1995 
2000 
2005 
2008 
2009 (1) 
Total assets 
Interbank assets 
Loans 
 mortgage loans 
 personal loans 
Securities 
 
Deposits 
Interbank liabilities 
Off-balance-sheet items 
Commitments and 
contingent liabilities  
Securities held for custody 
 
Total branches and subsidiaries 
2.6 
6.0 
3.0 
0.2 
7.7 
1.5 
 
0.9 
9.7 
6.1 
 
24.4 
2.2 
5.2 
15.7 
2.7 
0.3 
6.2 
6.3 
 
2.0 
16.3 
5.4 
 
42.6 
5.6 
7.1 
12.9 
5.8 
5.7 
14.2 
10.1 
 
2.9 
19.3 
10.6 
 
16.8 
9.0 
7.9 
13.3 
9.0 
5.8 
27.7 
9.9 
 
4.7 
24.0 
11.3 
 
6.9 
10.7 
16.4 
20.6 
16.2 
12.5 
35.4 
17.6 
 
11.2 
32.7 
13.5 
 
27.3 
28.7 
16.2 
17.1 
15.8 
15.2 
27.5 
12.0 
 
9.3 
27.6 
12.3 
 
11.9 
33.3 
4.2 
9.8 
5.2 
0.7 
11.5 
1.6 
 
1.0 
13.7 
8.6 
 
29.5 
1.9 
       of which: branches 
3.3 
8.6 
4.0 
0.2 
0.1 
1.2 
 
0.2 
12.5 
6.9 
 
28.6 
1.3 
Total assets 
Interbank assets 
Loans 
 mortgage loans 
 personal loans 
Securities 
 
Deposits 
Interbank liabilities 
Off-balance-sheet items 
Commitments and 
contingent liabilities  
Securities held for custody 
 
 
Source: Supervisory reports. 
(1) Average of the first 6 months of the year. Some items may have different definitions from the past owing 
to changes in the reporting procedures. 
4.1 
14.2 
2.0 
0.2 
0.2 
5.2 
 
0.8 
15.0 
4.4 
 
40.9 
4.5 
4.8 
9.9 
3.0 
0.7 
3.0 
7.9 
 
1.4 
15.0 
6.2 
 
15.3 
7.2 
5.4 
10.3 
6.3 
2.6 
9.0 
4.3 
 
3.2 
20.3 
5.2 
 
4.6 
8.5 
9.4 
12.5 
7.7 
3.6 
3.5 
7.6 
 
3.0 
22.1 
5.5 
 
20.0 
14.5 
8.9 
10.7 
7.2 
4.6 
5.6 
5.9 
 
2.2 
19.3 
5.1 
 
7.8 
10.8 
1.8 
5.0 
1.9 
0.1 
0.0 
1.3 
 
0.2 
8.7 
4.9 
 
23.0 
1.5 
       BIS Review 168/2009 
 11
Figure 1 
Number of foreign banks present in Italy 
(with reference to bank branches and subsidiaries) 
changes over the year
total foreign banks
of which: branches
110
90
70
50
30
10
-10
1984
1989
1990
Source: Supervisory reports. 
1985
1986
1987
1988
 12 
 1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
 BIS Review 168/2009
Figure 2 
Loans by EU banks to non-residents (1) 
(amount by residence of counterparty  
as a percentage of total outstanding loans) 
6
5
4
3
2
1
other euro-area countries
remainder of the European Union
0
Sept.-97
March-98
Sept.-98
March-99
Sept.-99
March-00
Sept.-00
March-01
Sept.-01
March-02
Sept.-02
March-03
Sept.-03
March-04
Sept.-04
March-05
Sept.-05
March-06
Sept.-06
March-07
Sept.-07
March-08
Sept.-08
  Source: European Central Bank. 
(1) Outstanding loans granted by banks having their registered office in the European Union to non-institutional 
customers resident in other EU countries. The counterparties do not include monetary financial institutions. 
BIS Review 168/2009 
 13
