Spencer Dale: 2009 – a review of the economic year  
Remarks  by  Mr  Spencer  Dale,  Executive  Director  and  Chief  Economist  of  the  Bank  of 
England,  at  the  Chairman’s  Annual  Breakfast,  Essex  Institute  of  Directors,  Billericay, 
2 December 2009. 
 I would like to thank Rohan Churm, Julia Giese and Chris Young for their considerable help in preparing these 
remarks. The views expressed are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of other members of the Monetary 
Policy Committee. 
Introduction 
Thank you for the invitation to speak to you this morning.   
On the occasion of the Chairman’s Annual breakfast, I thought it would be fitting to look back 
over the events of the past year. A year which started with our country – together with much 
of  the  rest  of  the  world  –  in  economic  freefall.  A  year  in  which  many  firms  and  families 
suffered  significant  hardship,  as  output  fell  markedly  and  unemployment  rose.  But  a  year 
which  is  ending  with  signs  that  the  economy  is  stabilising  and  has  turned  a  corner  on  the 
road to recovery.  
Financial crisis and collapse in confidence 
The  financial  crisis  obviously  predates  the  beginning  of  this  year.  The  first  signs  of  the 
instability can be traced back to at least the summer of 2007, when the emerging sub-prime 
mortgage  crisis  in  the  United  States  and  the  resulting  pressure  on  banks’  balance  sheets 
around the world led to a sharp tightening in the availability of credit. But the severity of the 
crisis increased dramatically following the failure of Lehman Brothers in the autumn of 2008. 
Confidence in the very essence of banking – as well as in individual financial institutions – 
was shaken to its core and the most severe banking crisis for almost a century was triggered. 
As  we  now  know,  this  led  to  a  deep  and  highly  synchronised  global  recession.  Output  in 
virtually every corner of the world fell sharply. Global trade flows contracted by a staggering 
15% in the two quarters following the failure of Lehmans. Over the same period, output at 
home is estimated to have fallen by 4 1/4% – the largest fall in UK GDP over a two-quarter 
period since quarterly records began. 
The speed and severity of the downturn cannot be explained solely by the tightening in credit 
conditions.  The  impact  of  the  banking  crisis  was  greatly  amplified  by  the  accompanying 
collapse in business and household confidence.  
Firms’  concerns  about  their  ability  to  access  the  working  capital  needed  to  run  their 
businesses was compounded by the bleak and uncertain prospects for demand. In response, 
production was slashed and business spending was severely curtailed. Stock levels were run 
down at an unprecedented pace, as companies met demand from existing inventories and 
economised on working capital. Faced with growing spare capacity there was little incentive 
for businesses to invest in new plant and machinery, and capital expenditure contracted by 
almost 20% in the first six months of 2009 alone. The retrenchment of companies was also 
evident  in  the  labour  market  as  firms  laid  off employees,  reduced  working  hours and  bore 
down on earnings. Wage freezes became commonplace.  
Similarly, households pulled back sharply on their spending and increased their savings. This 
retrenchment by households was partially driven by the slowing in earnings growth and the 
fall in asset prices. But it was amplified by the pronounced rise in fears of unemployment and 
the increased uncertainty about the economic outlook.  
BIS Review 159/2009 
 1
Risk of vicious downward spiral 
The  fall  in  households’  and  firms’  confidence  proved  mutually  reinforcing  and,  to  some 
extent, self-fulfilling: both households and firms expected conditions to weaken sharply and 
both cut back on spending. The contraction in consumer expenditure helped to validate firms’ 
concerns about future demand. Likewise, the falls in employment and squeeze on incomes 
reinforced households’ fears about future earnings prospects. And the worsening economic 
environment  in  turn  exacerbated  the  weakness  of  the  banking  system.  As  the  quality  of 
banks’ loan books deteriorated, the supply of bank credit tightened even further.  
Individually, this pulling back on the part of households, firms and banks made sense. But, 
collectively, it threatened a vicious downward spiral: the fact that each part of the economy 
was retrenching at the same time risked a collapse of aggregate spending in the economy. In 
turn, this raised the spectre of price deflation and all its associated ills.  
Policy response 
In such situations, it falls to policy to break the ensuing vicious cycle.  
This  lesson  had  been  sorely  learned  from  the  Great  Depression.  The  magnitude  of  the 
shocks hitting the world economy over the past year or so – as measured for example by the 
initial  contraction  in  global  industrial  production  –  appears  comparable  with  the  Great 
Depression  of  the  1930s.1  But,  in  the  Great  Depression,  global  industrial  output  declined 
fairly  continuously  for  three  full  years.  In  contrast,  global industrial  output  on  this occasion 
seems to have broadly stabilised in a little over a year.  
There are many differences between now and the 1930s. However, I have little doubt that 
one of the key factors contributing to the quicker stabilisation of activity this time around has 
been the speed and decisiveness with which policy throughout the world responded to the 
twin threats of a failing banking system and falling confidence.  
At  home,  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  cut  interest  rates  from  5%  to  0.5%  in  just  six 
months. And with interest rates close to their lower bound, the Committee in March of this 
year voted to start a programme of asset purchases financed by the issuance of central bank 
reserves, otherwise known as “quantitative easing”.  
These extraordinary actions were intended to reduce the risk of inflation falling below the 2% 
inflation target that the Bank of England is mandated to meet. They do so in a number of 
ways.  The  reduction  in  Bank  Rate  by  lowering  interest  payments  on  loans  has  improved 
many companies’ cash flows at a time when turnover is weak and working capital is scarce. 
A  similar  effect  has  operated  for  households:  borrowers  with  floating  rate  mortgages  in 
particular have seen their monthly repayments fall sharply. More generally, by reducing the 
returns  on  saving,  the  fall  in  interest  rates  has  encouraged  households  and  businesses  to 
spend.  
The  MPC’s  programme  of  asset  purchases  has  further  stimulated  demand  by  injecting 
additional  money  directly  into  the  economy.  The  Bank’s  purchases  of  government  bonds 
encourage  investors  to  diversify  into  alternative  assets,  such  as  corporate  bonds  and 
equities.  The  Bank  is  also  operating  directly  in  commercial  paper  and  corporate  bond 
markets to improve the functioning of those markets. Both actions have helped to boost the 
prices  of  corporate  assets,  reducing  yields  and  lowering  the  cost  to  companies  of  raising 
funds in capital markets. This in turn should help to stimulate increased spending.  
The dramatic easing in monetary policy occurred alongside a range of Government policies. 
Most  importantly,  the  Government’s  actions  to  provide  both  capital  and  liquidity  were 
                                                 
1  See Eichengreen and O’Rourke (2009). Romer (2009) makes a similar point. 
2 
 BIS Review 159/2009
instrumental in stabilising the banking system. The temporary reduction in VAT and the car 
scrappage  scheme  have  boosted  household  spending  and  provided  short-term  support  to 
retailers and the car industry. And the Government’s Business Payment Support Service has 
reportedly enabled almost a quarter of a million small and medium-sized firms to delay tax 
payments.  
There are encouraging signs that these policy actions have been successful and the risk of a 
severe adverse feedback loop – as households, companies and banks simultaneously try to 
retrench – has been avoided. The banking system has stabilised. Measures of business and 
household confidence have recovered significantly. And the most recent ONS estimates for 
the  third  quarter  suggest  that  the  contraction  in  consumer  and  business  spending  may  be 
beginning to abate. 
Corporate liquidations and unemployment: better than feared  
The prompt and large policy actions are likely to be one reason why corporate failures have, 
to date, not increased by as much as might have been feared. Although output has fallen by 
more than in either the 1980s or 1990s recessions, liquidations have risen by less than at the 
same  stage  of  those  downturns.  Companies  have  benefited  from  the  fall  in  debt  servicing 
costs  associated  with  the  sharp  reduction  in  Bank  Rate  and  by  the  Government  scheme 
allowing them to defer tax payments. And by supporting corporate credit markets, the Bank’s 
asset purchase programme has also helped some firms to bypass banks and access capital 
markets  directly.  I  fully  recognise  that  the  asset  purchase  programme  has  not  been  as  of 
much help to many small and medium-sized enterprises – many of whom are represented 
here  today  –  who  are  not  able  to  access  capital  markets  and  are  largely  reliant  on  bank 
credit. However, I would contend that even the SME sector has benefited indirectly from the 
programme of asset purchases, such as from the accompanying fall in Libor rates.  
In a similar vein, although there has been a substantial fall in employment over the past year 
or  so,  the  extent  of  the  job  losses to  date  has,  if  anything,  been  less  than  we  might  have 
feared given the falls in output. This may partly reflect the greater degree of wage flexibility 
that has been apparent in this recession compared to that in either the 1980s or 1990s.2 A 
substantial  element  of  the  workforce  appears  to  have  been  able  to  protect  their  jobs  by 
accepting slower wage growth.  
By  comparison  with  the  past,  these  relatively  limited  increases  in  liquidations  and 
unemployment are likely to have been important in mitigating the severity of the downturn. 
Large numbers of corporate failures are very damaging to the economy, with the loss of the 
skills and experience that firms have built up over the years, as well as of their investment in 
machinery  and  equipment,  and  with  the  shedding  of  jobs.  Indeed,  the  relatively  muted 
increase  in  company  liquidations  in  this  recession  may  have  helped  to  limit  the  falls  in 
employment. Moreover, the fact that more of the burden of firms’ adjustment to the recession 
has been spread over the workforce as a whole in the form of lower wages, rather than being 
concentrated  on  those  losing  their  jobs,  is  likely  to  have  lessened  the  fall  in  consumption. 
This is both because households may find it easier to borrow to smooth their consumption if 
they  still  have  a  job  and  because  it  may  have  limited  the  extent  to  which  households 
increased their savings as a precaution against the possibility of future job loss. 
Structural adjustments 
But  the  response  of  policy  and  the  emerging  recovery  should  not  obscure  the  fact  that 
structural adjustments need to occur in our economy. The banking system faces a significant 
                                                 
2  For more information see the box on page 29 of the August Inflation Report. 
BIS Review 159/2009 
 3
challenge to wean itself off the current substantial levels of official support and to return to a 
position  in  which  it  can  lend  normally.  Households  may  need  to  re-evaluate  their  financial 
positions  in  the  face  of  the  more  uncertain  economic  environment.  And  the  need  for  a 
substantial reduction in the fiscal deficit is clear. 
Monetary policy cannot and should not prevent those adjustments from happening. They are 
necessary for the long-run health and stability of our economy. Rather, the job of monetary 
policy  is  to  ensure  that  these  adjustments  occur  in  as  orderly  a  manner  as  possible  and 
within an economic environment which is consistent with hitting the 2% inflation target.  
Prospects for 2010 and beyond 
So what does the next year hold in store? 
The economy appears to have turned. Although output is estimated to have contracted in the 
third quarter of this year, there is a range of evidence from business surveys, from the Bank’s 
regional Agents, and from recent indicators that the economy has begun to stabilise and that 
we are likely to be moving into a period of renewed expansion. 
Whenever an economy is in recession, especially a recession as deep as this one, it can be 
hard  to  see  where  growth  will  eventually  come  from.  However,  as  I  have  discussed,  the 
easing  in  monetary  and  fiscal  policy  is  providing  considerable  support  to  the  emerging 
recovery.  That  stimulus  is  reinforced  by  the  substantial  depreciation  of  sterling.  Sterling  is 
around a quarter below its mid-2007 level and – as many of you here today will know from 
your own experiences – this has helped to improve the ability of UK companies to compete in 
both  overseas  and  domestic  markets.  Output  will  also  receive  a  further  fillip  as  the 
adjustment of inventories by companies runs it course. 
However,  the  on-going  structural  adjustments  that  I  mentioned  are  likely  to  give  rise  to  a 
number of economic headwinds that may impede the recovery. Credit conditions are likely to 
remain tight for some time as banks repair their balance sheets. And the need for public and 
household finances to adjust to the changed economic environment will weigh on spending.  
Balancing these factors, my view of the outlook for GDP growth is in line with the projections 
contained in the Bank’s Inflation Report published last month. It is likely that, as the recovery 
takes  hold,  output  will  grow  at  rates  above  its  historical  trend  for  a  while.  But  this  growth 
needs to be seen in the context of the sharp fall in the level of output over the past eighteen 
months and the margin of spare capacity that was opened up as a result. The recovery in the 
level of economic activity is likely to be relatively slow.  
CPI  inflation  looks  set  to  increase  sharply  in  the  near  term,  reflecting  higher  petrol  price 
inflation  and  the  reversal  of  last  year’s  temporary  reduction  in  VAT.  Indeed,  it  is  quite 
possible that the Governor will have to write a letter to the Chancellor early in the New Year 
explaining  why  inflation  is  more  than  one  percentage  point  above  the  inflation  target.  But 
monetary policy can do very little to affect these short-term movements in inflation. Further 
out, the downward pressure from the persistent margin of spare capacity is likely to cause 
inflation  to  fall  back  below  the  2%  inflation  target,  although  this  pressure  should  gradually 
fade as the economy recovers.  
Implications for policy 
What implications does this have for the stance of monetary policy?  
At our most recent meeting in November, the Monetary Policy Committee voted to maintain 
Bank Rate at 0.5% and to increase the scale of asset purchases to £200 billion. However, 
you may have noticed that there was a split vote amongst the Committee last month, and 
that I voted to maintain the scale of the asset purchase programme at £175 billion. 
4 
 BIS Review 159/2009
It is important not to make too much of this difference. I fully recognised the potential benefits 
of a more expansionary policy given the downside risks to the economy. However, I was also 
wary  of  the  potential  risks  of  such  a  policy.  My  main  concern  reflected  the  considerable 
uncertainty about the degree of spare capacity in the economy and the behaviour of inflation 
when  output  is  growing  at  above  trend  rates.  These  uncertainties  are  always  present,  but 
come to the fore in situations like the current environment in which there is a very substantial 
degree  of  economic  slack.  In  order  to  keep  inflation  on  track  to  hit  the  inflation  target  this 
slack needs to be eliminated. However, given the uncertainties about the precise margin of 
spare  capacity  and  the  behaviour  of  inflation  as  this  spare  capacity  is  being  closed,  my 
preference was to aim to grow the economy a little less rapidly.  
I was also concerned that further substantial injections of liquidity might result in unwarranted 
increases  in  some  asset  prices.  I  should  stress  that  I  do  not  think  there  is  any  strong 
evidence to suggest that any of the increases in asset prices seen to date are out of line with 
the improving economic outlook and the desired impact of our asset purchase programme. 
Rather, I was conscious that the current stance of monetary policy – in which Bank Rate is 
very low and substantial amounts of liquidity are being injected into the economy – increases 
the likelihood that asset prices may move out of line with their fundamental values and that 
this could be costly to rectify were it to occur. It is a risk that we need to be alert to. 
However, as I suggested, it is important not to make too much of these differences; all MPC 
members – myself included – were of the view that a significant degree of monetary stimulus 
needed to be maintained in order to meet the inflation target.  
Conclusion 
The economy has come a long way over the past year. At the time of this annual breakfast a 
year  ago,  output  was  in  freefall,  the  banking  system  was  in  near  meltdown,  business  and 
consumer confidence had evaporated, and there was a very real risk of a serious economic 
depression. Monetary policy has played a critical role in the stabilisation of the economy. We 
have  turned  a  corner  on  the  road  to  recovery.  But  there  is  a  long  way  to  go  with  many 
challenges ahead as the economy moves into better balance. In facing these challenges, the 
Monetary Policy Committee will do whatever it takes to ensure that inflation remains on track 
to hit the target.  
References 
Eichengreen,  B.  and  K.H.  O’Rourke 
http://www.voxeu.org/index.php?q=node/3421, 1 September 2009. 
Romer, C.D. (2009), “Back from the Brink”, 
http://www.whitehouse.gov/administration/eop/cea/BackFromTheBrink, speech given at 
the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, 24 September 2009. 
(2009), 
“A  Tale  of  Two  Depressions”, 
BIS Review 159/2009 
 5
