Durmuş Yılmaz: Green shoots – how vigorous and how sustainable?   
Speech by Mr Durmuş Yilmaz, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, at 
the  Conference  on  “Green  shoots  –  how  vigorous  and  how  sustainable”,  IMF-World  Bank 
Annual Meetings 2009, Istanbul, 5 October 2009. 
 Ladies and gentlemen,   
First of all, I would like to welcome everyone to Istanbul. It is a great pleasure for me to be 
here  addressing  such  a  distinguished  audience  as  we  convene  for  the  2009  Annual 
Meetings. 
“Green shoots” has been a popular metaphor to describe the recovery process. And today, I 
will try to elaborate on our path to build a career as a prudent gardener. I want to begin with 
discussing the path that brought us to this crisis. Then, I will talk about the recovery signals in 
both global and Turkish economy. I will conclude my speech with my thoughts on the solidity 
and sustainability of these signals. 
As is well known, financial strains originated in advanced economies abruptly mutated into a 
full-blown crisis and had a devastating effect on international capital markets. As the crisis 
intensified,  measures  of  perceived  risk  escalated  to  record  levels  and  major  financial 
institutions  suffered  massive  losses.  At  the  same  time,  liquidity  shortages,  tighter  credit 
conditions, and heightened uncertainty were associated with a sharp decline in both private 
consumption and investment spending. In fact, many economies fell into recession or have 
seen their growth rates decline sharply. As a consequence, global trade contracted, financial 
flows dried up, and unemployment rates soared. 
The global financial system is still under stress; but one can see some signs of recovery in 
the global financial markets and economic indicators around the world. Unprecedented policy 
reactions to the crisis taken by governments and central banks worldwide have managed to 
stabilize the financial markets and reduced liquidity concerns. Especially, thanks to ease of 
tension in the global financial markets, emerging market equities have boosted and spreads 
have  narrowed.  Commodity  prices  have  rebounded  from  their  recent  low  levels  while 
capacity  utilization  and  industrial  production  have  globally  recovered  modestly.  As  a 
consequence,  international  institutions  like  the  IMF  and  OECD  announced  that  the  global 
economy will recover sooner than expected and they are getting more and more optimistic 
regarding their projections. 
In the words of Winston Churchill who had seen the sunlight after the darkest days of the 
Second World War: “This may not be the end. It is not even the beginning of the end. But it 
is, perhaps, the end of the beginning.” 
Dear Guests,   
A key characteristic of the recent crisis was that it combined an acute international financial 
crisis  with  an  outright  global  recession.  At  the  same  time,  synchronized  countercyclical 
policies were implemented by both advanced and emerging economies in response to global 
turmoil. In my opinion, it would be better to briefly elaborate on these distinctive features of 
the recent crisis to have a better understanding of the nature of the recovery going forward. 
Recent research highlights that episodes of financial stress are more likely to be associated 
with  deeper  and  longer  downturns.  This  is  particularly  true  for  banking-related  financial 
stress, and helps explain the severity of the recent crisis. Another factor that exacerbated the 
fallout from the recent crisis was the aggressive use of certain financial instruments. While 
derivatives  can  be  effectively  used  for  hedging  purposes,  use  of  these  instruments  for 
speculative gains with high leverage also allows for potentially unlimited losses. 
BIS Review 123/2009 
 1
The  global  recession  was  another  distinctive  feature  of  the  recent  crisis.  The  downturn  in 
economic  activity  was  virtually  synchronized  across  both  advanced  and  emerging 
economies. 
Increasing  interdependence  owing  to  the  rapid  pace  of  globalization,  as  well  as  the  rising 
contribution of emerging economies to global growth is among the main factors behind the 
synchronous behavior of global economic activity. Taken together, this implies that there may 
be less of a role for exports during the recovery. Also the unprecedented fiscal and monetary 
policy  initiatives  implemented  across  major  economies  makes  this  crisis  truly  unique.  The 
awareness regarding the threat to financial and economic stability has emerged across both 
advanced  and  emerging  economies.  To  this  end,  policy  dialogues  –  particularly  those 
fostered  during  international  forums  –  served  to  catalyze  simultaneous  fiscal  stimulus 
packages across some of the largest advanced and emerging economies. 
On the monetary policy side, at first, many economies cut interest rates sharply with waning 
inflationary  pressures.  However,  as  the  financial  stress  intensified  and  the  economic 
contraction deepened, policy rates rapidly approached the zero interest rate floor. With their 
economies still under acute strain, central banks in some advanced economies responded by 
implementing  a  series  of  unconventional  measures.  The  goal  of  these  measures  was  to 
provide  markets  with  ample  amounts  of  liquidity  to  help  restore  the  health  of  financial 
systems  balance  sheets,  and  thereby  to  reactivate  the  provision  of  credit  to  the  real 
economy. However due to stress in the financial sector, the effectiveness of the transmission 
mechanism  of  monetary  policy  may  be  hampered  to  some  extent.  And  the  usefulness  of 
conventional countercyclical monetary policy may be relatively limited during financial crises. 
Distinguished Guests,   
The  global  economy  is  still  in  unchartered  territories  creating  lots  of  confusion  among  the 
policymakers  on  the  consequences  of  the  monetary  and  fiscal  stimulus  steps  taken  so  far 
globally.  Most  governments  have  taken  fiscal  measures  to  mitigate  the  effects  of  global 
turmoil  either  by  decreasing  tax  rates  or  increasing  public  investment  spending  and 
expenditures.  So  far  we  see  a  consensus  about  the  need  for  accommodative  monetary 
policies  around  the  globe.  On  the  other  hand,  high  public  debt  of  the  most  developed 
economies  has  aroused  serious  concern  on  debt  sustainability.  According  to  the  OECD 
projections, by 2017 gross public debt as a share of GDP is expected to rise sharply to 125% 
in the US, 160% in the UK, 125% in France, and over 100% in Spain. 
Sooner  or  later,  with  the  recovery  of  global  economy,  money  supply  pumped  up  to  the 
system involves the risk of inflation if the central banks miss the soft spot in the timing of the 
exit  strategies.  The  solution  I  believe  is  the  announcement  of  credible  consolidation  plans 
going forward in stabilizing global economy in order to reduce the risk of wilting the green 
shoots. 
Therefore, it is vital for both monetary and fiscal authorities resolve the issues of long term 
fiscal sustainability and price stability. 
Esteemed Guests,  
Following my opinions about the recent developments in global economy, I would like to talk 
about the Turkish economy and our recent implementation of monetary policy. 
The global turmoil has adversely affected financing facilities and external demand, and led to 
a  significant  slowdown  in  economic  activity  in  developing  countries.  We  also  had  our  fair 
share  of  it.  The  Turkish  economy,  which  had  been  growing  for  27  quarters  in  a  row, 
experienced a severe contraction during the last quarter of 2008 and the first quarter of 2009. 
The higher share of cyclically sensitive exports, firms’ dependence on external financing, and 
high  level  of  production  capacity  were  all  factors  that  exacerbated  the  severity  of  the 
recession. 
2 
 BIS Review 123/2009
Parallel to the contraction in aggregate demand coupled with the sharp drop in commodity 
prices, inflation plummeted markedly. Easing of concerns over inflation enabled us to focus 
on containing potential adverse effects of global financial turmoil on the domestic economy 
without compromising our price stability objective. With the reversal of global developments 
fueling inflation in the last quarter of 2008, the Central Bank took prompt action to cut interest 
rates and adopted a pioneer role among emerging markets. The analysis conducted by the 
CBT indicates that policy rate cuts of a total of 950 basis points have alleviated the severity 
of excessive volatility in economic activity. 
The developments since November 2008 in domestic financial markets and falling inflation 
have confirmed the accuracy of our projections and the policy rate-cut decisions, increasing 
the confidence in monetary policy. As a consequence of the measures taken and the limited 
recovery in risk perceptions, the level of market interest rates today is below the pre-global 
crisis level in both nominal and real terms. Having neutral interest rates at lower levels during 
economic recessions is an expected development in well-functioning economies, but it has 
never  been  experienced  in  Turkey  before.  This  development  should  be  perceived  as  an 
indicator of the normalization of the Turkish economy. 
Despite  the  marked  deterioration  in  economic  activity  in  Turkey,  there  were  at  least  three 
factors  that  prevented  an  outright  depression.  These  factors  were  the  soundness  of  the 
financial system, low levels of Turkish household indebtedness, and an assertive monetary 
policy stance, which aimed at mitigating the impact of the crisis on the domestic economy. 
Reviewing  these  factors,  albeit  briefly,  would  allow  a  better  understanding  of  Turkey’s 
economic prospects. 
The  Turkish  financial  system  proved  to  be  resilient  to  the  financial  crisis  relative  to  many 
other  emerging  economies.  Unlike  some  of  its  peers,  the  Turkish  banking  system  did  not 
require any rescue packages or other forms of government support throughout the crisis. The 
robustness  of  the  Turkish  financial  system  was  to  a  large  extent  a  consequence  of  the 
financial reforms implemented in the aftermath of the 2001 financial crisis we experienced in 
Turkey. 
Therefore, in contrast to many other countries that have recently revised or put into practice 
restructuring,  supervisory,  and  regulatory  frameworks,  many  of  these  were  already 
established  in  Turkey  several  years  ago.  Furthermore,  leading  into  the  recent  crisis,  the 
Turkish  financial  system  was  well  capitalized  –  with  capital  adequacy  ratios  exceeding  18 
percent – and had relatively low loan-to-deposit and leverage ratios, as well as low levels of 
foreign  exchange  rate  exposure.  Relative  strength  of  the  financial  sector  enabled  the 
implementation  of  rapid  and  front  loaded  rate  cuts.  No  bail  out  scheme  or  other  forms  of 
public  support  needed  during  this  period.  This  has  provided  room  for  expansionary  fiscal 
policies. 
In  addition  to  the  sound  structure  of  the  financial  system,  low  levels  of  household 
indebtedness relative to other emerging economies also contributed to the resilience of the 
Turkish  economy  during  the  crisis.  Monetary  tightening  implemented  by  the  Central  Bank 
between 2006 and 2008 played a critical role in curbing the lending growth and checking the 
rise in household debt. Prudent and preemptive measures taken by the Banking Regulatory 
and  Supervision  Agency  in  the  last  7  years  prevented  the  spread  of  exchange  rate  risk 
among  households.  The  share  of  foreign  currency-denominated  loans  in  the  current  debt 
stock of households is rather small compared to other emerging economies, especially those 
in Central and Eastern Europe. Financial markets seemed to have appropriately appraised 
these factors, as the risk premium in Turkey deteriorated by a smaller extent when compared 
to many other emerging economies during the peak of the crisis. 
Relative  stability  in  financial  markets  of  Turkey  has  provided  our  bank  more  policy  space 
relative  to  many  other  emerging  economies.  The  Central  Bank  of  Turkey  has  used  this 
opportunity  to  guide  expectations.  As  expectations  were  further  aligned  with  the  policy 
intentions of the CBT, bond yields decreased to historically low levels. This is an important 
BIS Review 123/2009 
 3
development,  because  in  previous  crises  real  interest  would  tend  to  increase,  thereby 
exacerbating the severity of the economic contraction. Current situation reflects the improved 
effectiveness  of  Turkish  monetary  policy  and  highlights  the  transformation  of  Turkish 
economy. 
Dear Participants,  
Turkey  has  always  had  a  great  climate  for  Green  Shoots  to  blossom.  Our  recent  crisis  in 
2001 was followed by a strong “V” shaped recovery process. However, despite the signs of 
partial improvement in domestic consumption in recent months, its strength and durability is 
questionable. We expect that demand uncertainty  and low levels of capacity utilization will 
continue to weigh down on investment spending and employment. High unemployment will 
continue to contain private consumption demand and blur the prospects for a solid recovery. 
Despite some recent easing, tightness in financial conditions still persists and the tightening 
of business loan lending standards continued – albeit at a slower pace – during the second 
quarter. 
We predict that bank lending rates for consumer loans would follow gradually, as the lagged 
effects of cumulative easing of 950 basis points since November 2008 would start to ease 
credit conditions towards the last quarter of this year. However, the current unfavorable labor 
market  conditions  are  expected  to  restrain  the  recovery  in  consumption,  and  therefore 
domestic demand conditions would continue to support disinflation. 
The  fiscal  discipline  is  crucial  in  maintaining  low  levels  of  medium  and  long-term  interest 
rates for the recovery of both consumption and investment. The implementation of a credible 
fiscal framework would bring down risk premiums further, and hence lead to a permanent fall 
in longer-term interest rates. This, in turn, would foster investment and labor demand, and 
thereby support the recovery process, providing the Green Shoots with the breathing room. 
Therefore, the determined execution of the medium-term program to ensure fiscal discipline 
and  debt  sustainability  would  have  an  expansionary  rather  than  contractionary  impact  on 
economic activity. 
In sum, while Turkish economy contracted sharply during the recent crisis, its well capitalized 
and sound financial system is likely to support the economic activity along the recovery. In 
fact, recent GDP releases suggest that economic activity in Turkey displayed a solid rebound 
in the second quarter. Therefore, we feel that the worst episode of the crisis is now behind 
us, which should in turn support Turkey’s economic prospects. 
However,  it  remains  to  be  seen  whether  recent  improvements  in  leading  indicators  will 
translate  into  a  long  lasting  and  durable  recovery,  since  part  of  the  rebound  reflects  the 
impact of the fiscal stimulus packages. The situation is similar across the globe: recovery has 
started  in  the  global  economy,  yet  the  extraordinary  policy  measures  taken  since  the  last 
quarter of 2008 makes it harder to interpret the underlying trends. Given the elevated levels 
of unemployment and ongoing de-leveraging process, the recovery is likely to be gradual. 
Distinguished Guests,   
Let  me  close  my  speech  by  turning  to  the  main  theme  of  this  session.  Overall,  I  am 
encouraged to recognize initial signs of recovery but also I am anxious that the green shoots 
that have sprouted may still expose to a spring frost. “Green shoots” may not be vigorous 
enough and important downside risks still remain. 
However, unlike a couple of quarters ago, we should also acknowledge that we can now at 
least talk about upside risks – that is, “blossoming shoots”. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 123/2009
