Nout Wellink: Managing complexity 
Speech by Dr Nout Wellink, President of the Netherlands Bank and Chairman of the Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  at  the  NautaDutilh  seminar,  Bussum,  10  November 
2009. 
 I have been informed that the topic for discussion will be the new balance between banks 
and  supervisors  in  the  financial  system.  This  is  an  issue  I’m  happy  to  address.  However, 
before doing so, let me first say a thing or two about complexity in the financial system. 
How should we treat complexity? 
Let me start by stating the obvious. A solid financial sector is crucial to the functioning of our 
economy.  Its  existence  allows  the  efficient  allocation  of  capital  between  different  activities 
and across time, and promotes the efficient spreading of risk within society. Today, it is hard 
to think of any form of economic activity that is not in some way dependent on its existence. 
Therefore, the stakes are high in the current debate on financial sector regulation. After the 
events  of  the  last  two  years,  everyone  agrees  that  change  is  needed.  However,  opinions 
differ about the kind of change we need. First, there are those that see the complexity of the 
financial system as the root of the problem, and therefore propose to constrain finance much 
in the way it was until the 1980's. Some suggestions along this line are narrow limits on the 
activities of banks, splitting supposedly “safe” banks from banks engaging in capital market 
activities,  or  constraining  specifications  of  financial  products  to  those  pre-approved  by 
authorities.  Second,  there  are  those  who  think  that  complexity  itself  is  not  the  root  of  the 
problems,  but  rather  circumstances  allowed  the  complexity  of  the  financial  system  to 
contribute  to  the  crisis.  They  believe  that  the  goal  of  regulatory  changes  should  not  be  to 
decrease  complexity  per  se.  Rather,  they  think  complexity  should  be  made  more 
manageable. 
In this debate, I find myself squarely backing the second view. The reason for this is that I do 
not believe complexity in itself to be a bad thing. Complex systems are designed, in many 
cases, to be more useful and efficient than simple ones. Radios from the 1950s – of the kind 
I used when I was an amateur broadcaster – are much simpler than the ones we have today. 
Yet  today,  thanks  to  innovation  and  rising  complexity,  radios  have  become  cheaper  and 
more reliable. And, on top it all, they offer a much wider range of functionality and are easier 
to use. Cars are another example where complexity and technology has been used to make 
them safer, rather than more hazardous. Wonderfully named features as ABS and ESC are 
only  possible  because  of  innovation  driving  growing  complexity  in  car-making.  This  is  the 
kind of complexity that keeps drivers safe every day. 
The finance industry also offers us some wonderfully names symbols of complexity, such as 
RMBS and  CDS.  Unfortunately, unlike their counterparts in the car industry, these are not 
currently associated with safety and reliability. So it is clear that innovation and complexity 
may  have  improved  the  system’s  ability  to  allocate  capital  efficiently  in  many  cases,  but 
certainly  not  in  all.  This  implies  we  should  go  back  to  the  drawing  board  to  improve  the 
resilience  of  the  financial  system.  But  it  does  not  mean  we  should  go  back  to  the  past. 
Innovation  cannot  be  undone  and  the  idea  that  tomorrow’s  problems  can  be  solved  by 
yesterday’s regulation strikes me as overly simple and even dangerous, as it could constrain 
the  possibilities  for  financial  system  to  allocate  capital  around  the  world  and  transfer  risk 
efficiently. 
While we are at the drawing board, we also need to address the issue of containing systemic 
risk. The new financial system as a whole, as well as its individual institutions, will need to be 
BIS Review 147/2009 
 1
more  resilient  to  shocks.  The  present-day  financial  system  is  a  complex  system, 
characterized  by  a  high  level  of  interconnectedness.  Therefore,  monitoring  the  financial 
system  as  a  whole,  and  the  linkages  between  its  elements,  has  become  all  the  more 
important. Such “macro-prudential” supervision mechanisms help to spot sources of financial 
instability at an early stage. A positive development in this regard is the establishment of the 
European Systemic Risk Board next year. But changes are also at hand to strengthen each 
financial institution individually. And some of these changes will have a profound effect on 
the balance between banks and supervisors. 
Managing complexity 
This brings me back to our topic of discussion. The balance between banks and supervisors. 
What changes are necessary for individual banks and supervisors, in order to strengthen the 
resilience of the financial system and manage its complexity? 
Let’s start by looking at changes for individual banks. Some policy proposals have received 
ample attention in the debate. In order to make the financial system more resilient to shocks, 
each  individual  bank  will  need  to  hold  a  bigger  capital  buffer  than  before.  This  can  be 
achieved through higher overall buffers, increases in capital charges for specific activities, or 
a combination of the two. Furthermore, the quality of capital buffers needs consideration to 
ensure that they can absorb shocks while the bank is still functioning. Banks’ leverage will 
have to be limited in some shape or form. 
Banks also have a responsibility to actively manage their own complexity. In this regard, I 
think a proposal that is rightly being considered is that of “living wills”. Living wills are plans 
drawn  up  by  banks  for  an  orderly  wind-down  of  operations,  in  case  they  are  not  able  to 
continue  operating  on  a  going-concern  basis.  This  would  be  very  beneficial  to  financial 
stability  in case  of  a  large-scale  default.  Lehman  Brothers,  for  instance,  was  composed  of 
over 3000 legal entities at the time of its demise. Better guidance on how the organization 
could  be  properly  wound  down  would  have  made  life  considerably  less  stressful  for  its 
supervisors, counterparties and administrators, as well as the financial system as a whole. 
As an aside, the legal profession has a role to play here as well. The number of entities may 
be one useful proxy for the level of complexity in an organization, but the combined length of 
all the contracts determining the mutual obligations between these entities surely is another. 
At the end of the day, one of the key qualities of the legal profession is to make complexity 
more  manageable  by  providing  market  participants  with  clear,  unambiguous  and  concise 
contracts rather than the opaque, heavily cross referenced and nearly inaccessible piles of 
paper that one too often encounters in practice. Here, as always, more is less, less is more. 
True craftsmanship produces documentation that even a layman can appreciate and more 
importantly, understand. 
By  comparison,  I  think  the  changes  needed  in  the  supervisor’s  toolbox  have  not  always 
received the same amount of attention. These changes are crucial, though, to ensure that 
supervisors are well-equipped to ensure the resilience of the financial system in a complex 
world. Recent events have again confirmed that in some cases, our options for intervention 
are limited and can only be exercised at a late stage. For the supervisor to be effective in an 
increasingly complex and interconnected world, it will need more power to intervene at an 
earlier point in time. Internationally, promising policy has already been implemented in this 
regard, such as the Special Resolution Regime in the United Kingdom. 
Making it work 
As  I  see  it,  banks  should  welcome  all  these  measures.  Bigger  capital  buffers  and  the 
existence of living wills enhance the stability of the financial system. So does the existence of 
a more powerful supervisor with an enhanced toolkit. Financial instability in the end threatens 
2 
 BIS Review 147/2009
the  survival  of  all  banks,  not  just  the  ones  that  spark  a  crisis.  Therefore,  a  more  effective 
design and supervision of the financial system is in the interest of every individual bank. 
Finally, banks should also be keenly aware that the option to manage complexity will not be 
on the table forever. Society’s patience with the financial sector has already been put to the 
test, and is not unlimited. It can perhaps accept that a complex system fails once; it would be 
unlikely to accept the risk of another failure. If banks do not take their responsibility to show 
that lessons have been learned from the crisis, a serious threat exists that legislators may 
opt for overly simple solutions that try to reduce complexity at any price and, from a societal 
perspective,  are  suboptimal.  Therefore,  all  parties  in  the  financial  system  should  work 
together to show that complexity can be properly managed for the benefit of society. 
BIS Review 147/2009 
 3
