Axel A Weber: How to implement efficiently the EU regulatory and 
supervisory package proposed by the de Larosière group in the EU and 
global context?  
Introductory statement by Professor Axel A Weber, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, 
at the Financial Forum 2009, Gothenburg, 30 September 2009. 
 Introduction 
1  
Ladies and gentlemen, Mr Solbès 
Thank  you  for  allowing  me  the  opportunity  to  elaborate  on  some  aspects  of  the 
implementation of the de Larosière recommendations. 
Coming  from  Germany,  where  the  Bundesbank  is  not  the  supervisory  authority  but  is 
involved  in  the  supervisory  process,  I  would  first  like  to  focus  on  cooperation  between 
national central banks and supervisors before turning to the role of the new EU authorities.  
2 
How to ensure appropriate cooperation between national central banks and 
supervisors in the EU countries where these functions are segregated? 
The question correctly implies that close cooperation between central banks and supervisors 
is essential. Central banks have an undisputed responsibility in the field of financial stability. 
They  can  benefit  from  their  traditional  focus  on  systemic  risk  and,  especially,  from  their 
knowledge of area-wide developments in the money and securities markets and in payment 
and market infrastructures.  
Establishing  close  cooperation  with  supervisors  ensures  that  synergies  between  these 
central  bank  and  supervisory  activities  can  be  exploited.  In  addition,  close  cooperation 
enhances the efficiency of the supervisory system by reducing overlaps of work. In fact, one 
lesson from the current crisis is the need for a close interaction between micro- and macro-
prudential analysis.  
Practical cooperation can be organised fairly informally with regular high-level discussions on 
how to deal with strategic issues and problems as well as by the creation of working groups 
to deal with specific topics. 
On  a  more  formal  basis,  cooperation  between  central  banks  and  supervisors  could  be 
organised via “Domestic Standing Groups” in which the Ministry of Finance may also take 
part, ensuring the participation of all parties with a role in safeguarding or restoring stability. 
In Germany, BaFin, the Bundesbank and the Ministry of Finance have held regular meetings 
in such a format since 2002. 
As  is  the  case  in  Germany,  cooperation  between  national  central  banks  and  supervisory 
authorities could be even more formalised. The central banks could be substantially involved 
in  the  supervisory  process.  In  Germany,  the  Bundesbank  –  in  close  cooperation  with  the 
supervisory  authority  BaFin  –  is  entrusted  with  the  ongoing  supervision  of  institutions, 
whereas the sovereign functions rest with the supervisor. 
Needless to say, the division of labour has to be clearly defined to avoid overlaps. Naturally, 
this  requires  statutory  definitions  of  tasks  and  responsibilities.  For  one  thing,  we  have 
sovereign  measures  issued  by  the  financial  supervisor:  regulatory  measures  concerning 
institutions, especially general decrees and administrative acts, including auditing orders. For 
another, the central bank is responsible for the ongoing monitoring of institutions, including 
the evaluation of documents submitted by institutions and external auditors’ reports, as well 
as performing and evaluating audits of banking operations.  
BIS Review 120/2009 
 1
But an efficient division of labour also needs additional guidelines or cooperation agreements 
which  describe  supervisory  instruments  in  more  detail  and  lay  down  procedures.  Such 
guidelines or agreements relate to, for example, supervisory planning, meetings with senior 
management,  drawing  up  banks’  risk  profiles  but  also  further  details  of  reporting  and 
notification systems.  
I think it is fair to say that this model of a formalised close cooperation worked pretty well in 
the crisis.  
Still,  there  is  a  lingering  debate  in  Germany  on  a  more  far-reaching  reform  of  banking 
supervision.  As  you  may  be  aware,  this  will  probably  also  be  a  topic  for  the  new  coalition 
government that is about to be formed. 
The Bundesbank stands ready to assume greater responsibilities in supervision. Therefore, 
the debate should be on how to design the supervisory framework for the future. 
I expect that the Bundesbank would be closely involved in any reform initiative right from the 
outset and that we would be given the opportunity to provide our own input in designing a 
revised supervisory structure in Germany.  
We are convinced that the independence of monetary policy and a more prominent role in 
the supervision of banks and insurance companies can be reconciled. 
Any such reform must contribute to aligning further the national and European supervisory 
structures as they evolve. 
Success factors for level 3 committees evolving towards 3 EU authorities? 
3  
First, I would like to say that I explicitly welcome the Commission proposals on the design of 
the  new  supervisory  architecture  in  the  EU.  Given  the  complexity  of  the  whole matter,  the 
proposals  are  a  very  helpful  and  crucial  milestone.  They  now  have  to  be  analysed  and 
discussed  thoroughly.  We  have  a  unique  opportunity  to  reshape  the  supervision  of  the 
financial system in order to make it more resilient. Therefore, we have to be very careful to 
avoid blind spots as well as inefficient overlaps in the competencies and the practical work of 
the various institutions involved in the supervisory process, at the national as well as at the 
EU level. 
According  to  the  ECOFIN  conclusions,  the  “European  System  of  Financial  Supervisors” 
should  be  established  as  an  operational  network  with  shared  and  mutually  reinforcing 
responsibilities.  At  the  EU  level,  we  shall  have  the  three  new  “authorities”  and  a  cross-
sectoral  committee  with  specific  tasks  in  fostering  convergence  of  supervisory  rules  and 
practices in Europe, whereas the national supervisors are to remain responsible for ongoing 
supervision.  
Experience  of  the  crisis  indicates  that  strengthening  supervisory  coordination  is  crucial  in 
dealing with the current problems and helping to restore confidence. 
The  objectives  of  the  new  framework,  according  to  the  ECOFIN/European  Council,  are  to 
upgrade  the  quality  and  consistency  of  national  supervisors;  to  strengthen  supervision  of 
cross-border  groups,  in  particular,  by  setting  up  supervisory  colleges  for  all  major  EU 
financial groups and by moving towards a single rule book. 
The ECOFIN and the European Council also stipulate that the activities or decisions of the 
new authorities should not impinge on the fiscal responsibilities of the Member States and 
that  any  binding  decision  by  the  new  authorities  or  the  Commission  must  be  subject  to 
Community courts. 
These  key  messages  from  the  ECOFIN  conclusions  match  perfectly  with  what  might  be 
considered to be the “success factors” of the new framework. Due account should be taken 
of  these  when  discussing  and  deciding  the  details:  continuation  of  a  cooperative  working 
2 
 BIS Review 120/2009
style  within  what  should  be  an  operational  network  rather  than  a  centralised  supervisory 
system.  
The envisaged binding powers of the new authorities in relation to the national supervisors 
should  be  interpreted  as  a  means  of  speeding  up  the  process  of  convergence  and  of 
strengthening the supervisory system, not as a sign of a hierarchy. It should not be forgotten 
that the decision-making bodies of the new authorities comprise the national supervisors. 
In  this  context,  I  do  not  agree  with  the  proposed  possibility  of  decisions  taken  by  the  new 
authorities being communicated directly to financial institutions. I do not want to get into a 
discussion on fundamental legal issues. However, even from a political perspective or with 
regard to a possible response on the part of the general public, it is important that one should 
refrain  from  direct  intervention  vis-à-vis  financial  institutions.  Communication  with  the 
institutions in such matters is solely the responsibility of the competent supervisors. 
There was a political consensus to upgrade the three committees to authorities with specific 
powers, including some binding powers over the national supervisors. However, the current 
Commission  proposal  goes  further,  giving  the  three  authorities  direct  powers  to  take 
decisions that affect the industry. Apart from the legal issues this raises, this approach risks 
establishing  a  parallel  system  of  national  responsibility  –  which,  incidentally,  ECOFIN  is  in 
favour of maintaining –, and decisions from a supra-national authority. Taking due account of 
the fundamental principles of subsidiarity and proportionality, it would be more appropriate to 
address recommendations to the national supervisory authorities only under the terms of the 
earlier consensus. 
As concerns the appropriate institutional settings, the structure of the new authorities should 
ensure  a  balance  of  full  involvement  and  efficiency.  With  regard  to  the  composition  of  the 
“Board  of  Supervisors”  at  the  EBA,  it  is  important  that  supervisors  and  central  banks  are 
represented, fully reflecting their responsibilities at the national level. This is also important in 
order to create a close link between macroprudential and microprudential analysis. 
Last  but  not  least,  even  though  strengthening  supervisory  powers  at  the  EU  level  is 
important, these reforms absolutely must be aligned with global initiatives, given that major 
European  banks  are  also  acting  globally.  In  this  regard,  it  is  essential  to  establish  global 
supervisory  colleges  which  can  adapt  their  composition  and  procedures  to  the  individual 
supervisory needs of each specific financial group. 
Thank you for your attention. I am looking forward to your comments. 
BIS Review 120/2009 
 3
