Jean-Claude Trichet: Macro-prudential supervision in Europe 
Text  of  The  Economist’s  2nd  City  Lecture  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the 
European Central Bank, London, 11 December 2009. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,  
I  am  very  pleased  to  be  in  London  today  and  would  like  to  thank  The  Economist  for  the 
opportunity to deliver this City Lecture.  
As  regards  the  topic,  I  thought  that  this  would  be  an  opportunity  to  reflect  on  the  future 
macro-prudential  supervision  in  Europe.  We  are  gradually  beginning  to  see  beyond  the 
current crisis and consider ways to strengthen the resilience of the financial system. This is a 
project to which macro-prudential oversight can make an important contribution.  
I will begin by saying a few words on the current condition of the euro area financial system. 
Then  I  will  make  the  case  for  macro-prudential  supervision  in  the  single  market  of  the 
European Union and discuss the issue of the conduct of macro-prudential supervision. I will 
conclude with some remarks on the issue from the point of view of the financial sector itself. 
The current condition of the euro area financial system 
1. 
Let me start by saying a few words about how we at the European Central Bank regard the 
current situation in the financial system in the euro area. The ECB’s Vice President, Lucas 
Papademos,  will  present  our  comprehensive  assessment  very  soon,  based  on  the 
publication of the next edition of the ECB’s Financial Stability Review. 
As is the case in all significant financial systems, an overall assessment of the health and 
vulnerability  of  the  euro  area  financial  system  calls  for  a  very  deep  analysis.  There  is  in 
particular  a  considerable  degree  of  diversity  in  the  financial  performance  of  large  financial 
institutions in the euro area. Some are still in the process of deleveraging, while others show 
a rising appetite for risk. 
It  is  also  quite  a  challenge  to  disentangle  what  can  be  considered  “self-sustainable” 
developments in the recent market recovery from those developments that might be highly 
dependent on the unprecedented programmes of official support to the financial system that 
are still in place. 
As  a  result  of  these  support  measures  –  in  combination  with  the  fiscal  stimulus  and  the 
improving  macroeconomic  outlook  –  the  strains  on  the  euro  area’s  financial  system  have 
been  clearly  diminishing  over  the  past  few  months,  and  a  financial  market  recovery  has 
begun, which, in some areas, looks very significant.  
Since March this year, improvements in financial markets have been broad-based. Euro area 
money  market  spreads,  especially  at  shorter  maturities,  have  narrowed  continuously  and 
remain  at  low  levels.  There  are  also  signs  that  unease  about  counterparty  credit  risk  is 
abating.  This  is  reflected  in  longer-term  spreads  between  interbank  deposits  and  repo 
interest rates, which have also steadily declined. Corporate bond and equity markets have 
continued to recover.  
These developments improved in the financial performance of banks in the euro area. Yet 
the  crisis  in  securitisation  and  structured  products  –  and  the  consequences  of  an 
irresponsible  originate-and-distribute  model  –  are  not  yet  behind  us.  And  the  next  big 
challenge for banks is already being felt. 
That challenge stems from the consequences of the impact of the financial crisis on the real 
economy, notably the deterioration in the quality of loan portfolios. There has been a surge in 
BIS Review 166/2009 
 1
provisions  for  loan  write-offs.  In  the  third  quarter  of  this  year,  the  provisions  of  large  euro 
area  banks,  measured  as  a  percentage  of  total  loans,  were  significantly  higher  than  in 
previous periods. Depreciation of the loan portfolios has led to another wave of write-downs, 
initiated in the first half of the year, following the first wave of write-downs in the second half 
of 2008, which arose mostly from mark-to-market losses on structured products. 
Not surprisingly, given its nature, this second wave is affecting a wider range of institutions. It 
also emphasises the scale of the challenge that banks face when seeking to strengthen their 
profitability.  
So  even  though  regulatory  capital  ratios  for  large  euro  area  banks  now  broadly  stand  at 
higher levels than before the crisis, the necessity to increase capital must be stressed in the 
case of a number of institutions. I urge banks to take full advantage of the recent recovery in 
their profitability to strengthen their capital positions, rather than to distribute a large part of 
their profits or to pay out unwarranted levels of compensation or bonuses.  
Stronger balance sheets will help the banks to fulfil their essential function to the economy – 
that is, to lend. The ECB has provided exceptional measures, which we call ‘enhanced credit 
support’, not for the banks themselves but to enable them to finance the broader economy. 
They must take up and maintain this responsibility.  
As I have indicated, the heart of the financial system is starting to beat at much more normal 
frequencies  again,  but  nobody  should  overlook  the  many  wires  and  tubes  through  which 
emergency medicine continues to be administered. 
A  key  question  for  us  at  the  ECB,  as  for  other  central  banks,  concerns  the  timing  of  the 
withdrawal of the medicine to avoid the threat of addiction or dependency. We have made 
clear that we will unwind enhanced credit support in a timely and orderly fashion.  
Last  week  we  began  to  initiate,  in  a  gradual  fashion,  the  unwinding  from  some  of  these 
exceptional  measures.  We  are  helped  by  the  fact  that  all  our  exceptional  measures  were 
designed with eventual phasing-out in mind.  
The case for macro-prudential supervision in the EU 
2. 
Let me now move to the core topic of my lecture today. The three questions that I would like 
to address are: why is macro-prudential supervision desirable for the European Union; how 
should it be organised; and what are the implications for the financial sector?  
Let me look at the question of desirability first.  
The  financial  crisis  has  been  revealing  in  many  respects.  It  has  revealed  the  scale  of  the 
potential fallout from the failure of large financial institutions. It has revealed the fragility of 
the  financial  system  to  features  and  trends  that  cut  across  institutions,  markets  and 
infrastructures.  And  it  has  illustrated  the  amplitude  of  the  consequences  of  the  adverse 
feedback loop between the financial system and the real economy. 
All  three  elements  I  have  just  described  are key  features  of  systemic  risk:  first, contagion; 
second, the build-up of financial imbalances and unsustainable trends within and across the 
financial system; and third, the close links with the real economy and the potential for strong 
feedback effects.  
In short, the crisis has revealed the fundamental importance of systemic risk. The purpose of 
macro-prudential supervision is to identify sources of systemic risk and recommend remedial 
action.  
Of the three elements I have mentioned, contagion and the link to the real economy are the 
least novel in this financial crisis. They have been observed in many previous crises. 
The  element  that  had  been  more  unexpected  in  the  current  crisis  is  the  rigour  with  which 
systemic risk has been triggered by the collective behaviour of financial institutions and the 
2 
 BIS Review 166/2009
ways in which they interact in financial markets. The crisis has highlighted the importance of 
improving  our  understanding  of  interconnectedness  in  the  financial  system,  both  via  the 
direct links between financial institutions and the indirect ones created in financial markets.  
The crisis has taught us that major risks can emerge from within the financial system itself. It 
was not the real economy that threw the financial system into disarray, but the reverse.  
Endogenous  risks  –  risks  that  emerge  from  within  the  financial  sector  –  can  have  many 
causes. They may arise, for example, because large parts of the system rely on the same 
sources of funding, or because they have similar exposures – to rising financial imbalances, 
to currency mismatches and to widespread mis-pricing of risk.  
We  have  also  seen  that  turbulence  can  arise  from  relatively  modest  initial  shocks.  The 
system is so interconnected that what looks stable can turn out to be “meta-stable”, which 
means  potentially  highly  instable.  Snow  on  mountain  slopes  can  be  meta-stable,  looking 
pristine and tranquil yet turning into an avalanche after only a minor disturbance.  
The meta-stability of a system is a complex concept, which calls for analysis of the interplay 
between  diverse  phenomena.  In  financial  systems,  these  phenomena  include  herd 
behaviour,  complex  networks  of  relationships  between  counterparties,  and  contagion  from 
common  or  correlated  exposures  to  particular  asset  classes.  They  also  include  the 
undesirable  pro-cyclical  effects  of  prudential  rules,  of  accounting  rules,  of  credit  rating 
agencies, and of compensation systems that put undue emphasis on short-term earnings.  
On this last point, I will say that the so-called bonus culture is one of the many factors that 
can  drive  the  financial  system  in  the  wrong  direction  –  away  from  intermediation  to  self-
referential speculation; away from medium-term stability to short-term orientation; and away 
from being a service sector to being a self-serving sector. 
I have outlined the key features of systemic risk that underlie the need to establish a new 
framework  of  macro-prudential  supervision.  In  the  case  of  Europe,  there  is  still  one  more 
reason, and that is the existence of the single European market. The single market makes 
the financial system much more fully integrated than it would otherwise have been – in terms 
of how it is set up, in terms of how it is regulated and in terms of the linkages with the real 
economy that itself is structured by the single market of the EU.  
Cross-border  and  cross-sectoral 
fostered  by 
integration  within 
competition, freedom of establishment and the free flow of capital. The extent of integration 
within the EU’s financial sector is a substantial achievement and it should be safeguarded in 
the aftermath of the crisis. About 40% of foreign claims by UK banks are in the euro area, 
and roughly the same share can be observed in the opposite direction.1  
Therefore, we Europeans have all the reasons to create a framework for macro-prudential 
oversight at the level of the single market of the 27 member countries of the European Union. 
The single financial market is a crucial component of the overall single market project, and 
macro-prudential supervision should enhance the resilience of this market.  
financial 
the  EU 
is 
The conduct of macro-prudential supervision 
3. 
The desirability of macro-prudential supervision is clear. And from that naturally spring the 
objectives – to mitigate and prevent systemic risks to financial stability in the EU on the basis 
of identified vulnerabilities and systemic risk assessments. Now we must turn to my second 
question and ask how such supervision should be conducted.2  
                                                 
1  BIS data on foreign claims by nationality of reporting bank (ultimate risk basis), 2009Q1. 
2  See also L. Papademos, “Financial stability and macro-prudential supervision: objectives, instruments and the 
role of the ECB”, Speech of 4 September 2009. 
BIS Review 166/2009 
 3
Almost  everywhere  in  the  world,  central  banks  are  seen  as  playing,  or  called  to  play,  an 
important role in macro-prudential supervision.  
In  my  view  there  are  very  good  reasons  for  that.  On  top  of  their  key  involvement  in  the 
financial sector, central banks possess three main features that are qualifying themselves for 
that  function:  they  are,  by  their  very  nature,  anchors  of  stability;  they  are  medium-term 
oriented; and they are independent. 
Central  banks  have  traditionally  been  active  in  financial  stability  analysis.  Of  course,  from 
financial  stability  analysis  to  macro-prudential  supervision  is  yet  another  step.  Financial 
stability describes the overall resilience of the system, focusing on imbalances and stresses 
in the financial system in the aggregate. While macro-prudential supervision takes a similarly 
broad view, it must also focus on specific sources of instability or specific groups of financial 
institutions, adding the policy component to the oversight function.  
Overall, the effectiveness of macro-prudential supervision depends on many inputs, including 
quantitative or qualitative information from supervisors, regulators, macroeconomists, market 
participants and other stakeholders in seeking to identify systemic risks and proposing policy 
responses. 
The analysis for systemic risk surveillance and assessment is indeed very demanding,3 and 
as much of the credibility of the entire framework depends on it. In my view, the most difficult 
pieces  will  be  the  analysis  of  the  implications  of  interlinkages  in  complex  systems  and 
understanding how a potential risk might spread throughout the system.  
Risk surveillance and risk detection call for early warning indicators and approaches capable 
of indicating when the financial system as a whole or parts of the system are approaching a 
“danger zone”. Risk identification calls for the monitoring of a comprehensive set of macro-
financial  variables  and  forward-looking  indicators.  This  task  will  require  a  detailed 
understanding  of  the  channels  through  which  emerging  risks  are  transmitted.  I  spoke 
yesterday  in  Cambridge  about  the  analytical  challenges  underlying  systemic  risk  and  the 
various research avenues that are being pursued.  
The  other  challenge  for  effective  macro-prudential  supervision  concerns  the  quality  of 
recommendations  themselves.  Here,  the  key  lies  in  their  specificity.  The  more  specific 
recommendations are, the easier is their implementation in concrete actions. It is here where 
knowledge  of  supervisory  and  regulatory  authorities  has  to  enter  the  equation.  It  is  an 
important  component  of  macro-prudential  assessments  and,  in  particular,  in  the  design  of 
recommendations  on  the  appropriate  policy  actions  needed  to  contain  the  build-up  of 
financial vulnerabilities or to mitigate material risks.  
Specific  warnings  require  close  input  from  supervisors,  regulators  and  from  all  public  and 
private  stakeholders.  This  is  the  reason  why  a  credible  framework  of  macro-prudential 
supervision should be set up very broadly, combining a variety of perspectives and closely 
coordinated with micro-prudential supervisors.  
Macro-prudential  recommendations  will  not  be  addressed  to  individual  institutions.  This 
remains the sole prerogative of micro-prudential supervisors. Instead, they will be addressed 
to  regulators,  supervisors  or  other  authorities  so  as  to  foster  regulatory  and  supervisory 
policies.  These  authorities  have  instruments  which  can  steer  variables  such  as  maturity 
mismatches,  excessive  credit  growth,  leverage,  or  the  risk  appetite  of  market  participants. 
While it might not be desirable or feasible to target these variables directly, prudential policy 
instruments – individually or in combination – can affect them indirectly.  
                                                 
3  The  Bank  of  England  released  an  interesting  analysis  of  the  role  of  macro-prudential  policies  in  November 
2009, highlighting many of the analytical challenges as well. The ECB has undertaken a series of research in 
the field of systemic risk. 
4 
 BIS Review 166/2009
Macro-prudential  supervision  will  not  and  should  not  be  a  substitute  for  micro-prudential 
supervision.  Rather,  it  should  complement  micro-prudential  supervision;  it  has  been 
conceived because the deep integration of the financial system has made it too difficult to 
ensure systemic stability while focusing on financial institutions one at a time.  
In providing specific warnings and recommendations, based on a comprehensive analysis of 
systemic  risk,  an  effective  framework  of  macro-prudential  supervision  can  close  the  gap 
between the analysis of financial stability and micro-prudential supervision.  
Setting up a formal framework for macro-prudential supervision will also help to coordinate 
macro-prudential policies more effectively at the international level. This will be particularly 
important for the EU, given the depth of its financial integration with the rest of the world.  
Implications for the financial sector 
4. 
Let  me  turn  to  the  last  part  of  my  lecture  and  reflect  on  the  possible  implications  for  the 
financial sector.  
The  financial  sector  has  an  important  stake  in  a  well-functioning  macro-prudential 
supervision  framework  and  will  ultimately  benefit  from  it.  The  industry  should  be  closely 
involved  in  such  a  framework,  as  information  and  insights  from  market  participants  will  be 
essential inputs.  
Any well-functioning macro-supervisory framework needs the support of market participants, 
because a rigorous monitoring of systemic risks will require continuous market intelligence. 
Contact  with  market  participants  will  be  essential  for  detecting  important  trends,  such  as 
growing  financial  imbalances,  convergence  of  business  models,  similarities  in  investment 
strategies and innovations in financial instruments – to name just a few.  
It will be of immense value to establish a structured dialogue with the financial industry to this 
end. Anecdotal evidence will be of little relevance if there is no possibility to drill down to the 
sources of risk on the basis of well-founded information and a regular dialogue with market 
participants.  
I understand that there may be concerns that this will impose an additional reporting burden 
on  the  industry.  In  my  view,  this  should  not  happen.  To  the  extent  that  macro-prudential 
oversight requires micro-prudential data, the latter should be available from supervisors, and 
full confidentiality will be ensured. Any additional reporting would be exceptional.  
Macro-prudential supervision should also avoid leading to an excessive burden of regulation. 
The  legal  principle  non  bis  in  idem  applies  to  regulation:  the  financial  sector  cannot  be 
regulated twice. The aim of macro-prudential supervision is to provide better regulation – and 
if possible much better, not in quantity but in quality.  
Indeed,  I  foresee  several  benefits  for  the  financial  industry  from  well-functioning  macro-
prudential oversight.  
The first and main benefit is of course a more stable financial system, which is as much to 
the advantage of all players in the industry as it is to everyone in the wider economy.  
The  second  benefit  is,  as  I  have  just  mentioned,  better  regulation,  rather  than  more 
regulation.  Better  regulation  combines  micro-prudential  and  macro-prudential  perspectives. 
Macro-prudential  policy  advice  should  allow  market  participants  to  internalise  the  potential 
effects of systemic risk in conducting their business. This should enable financial institutions 
to improve their forward-looking capacity in decision-making, taking corrective measures with 
sufficient lead time, and being more resilient to market tensions if and when they arise. 
The third set of benefits lies at the technical level. The analytical progress that will go hand in 
hand with a strengthening of macro-prudential oversight should benefit financial institutions’ 
in-house risk analysis. 
BIS Review 166/2009 
 5
This  applies  in  particular  to  the  large,  complex  and  interconnected  institutions,  on which  a 
substantial part of the macro-prudential analysis is likely to be centred, as these institutions 
tend to contribute significantly to the level of risk of the overall system. For example, there 
are likely to be benefits for the further enhancement of financial institutions’ internal models, 
including stress testing, notably by taking account of system-wide factors and macro-financial 
variables.  
A better understanding of the concept and measurement of systemic risk will lead to more 
accurate  indicators  of  aggregate  leverage,  correlation  and  concentration  of  exposures  to 
specific asset classes and of a firm’s interconnectedness.  
With a view to enabling better measurement of key elements in systemic risk analysis, it is 
the  responsibility  of  financial  institutions  to  continue  to  enhance  the  transparency  and 
granularity  of  their  individual  reporting.  This  could  improve,  for  example,  individual  firms’ 
assessment  of  counterparty  risks.  Better  measurement  will  also  allow 
for  better 
management. Risk management decisions will be better informed. And financial institutions’ 
preparedness for specific risks will be enhanced.  
Conclusion 
5. 
Let me draw to a close by referring to the concrete legislative proposal currently underway 
that  will  establish  a  macro-prudential  framework  for  the  EU.  This  is  the  planned 
establishment of a European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) on the basis of the proposals of 
the High-level group chaired by Jacques de Larosière.  
I am pleased to see that there has been broad support for the legislative proposals in the 
Ecofin council, and I would like to pay tribute to the European Commission and the Swedish 
Presidency for preparing and advancing these proposals. The European Parliament, which 
has always been very committed to advancing European supervision at the micro and the 
macro level, is currently examining these proposals and preparing its decision. In my hearing 
on Monday this week, I very much appreciated the opportunity to present to the Parliament’s 
Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs our perspective on this matter.  
The ECB, as an institution of the European Union as a whole, as an institution of the 27 EU 
Member States, has been invited to provide support to the ESRB. The Ecofin concluded that 
the ECB should provide analytical, statistical, administrative and logistical support, in close 
cooperation with all the national central banks from the 27 states.  
The  ECB’s  General  Council,  which,  together  with  the  three  heads  of  the  European 
Supervisory  Authorities  and  the  Commission,  will  be  the  nucleus  of  the  ESRB,  has  been 
meeting at least four times a year since 1999. The General Council prepares and approves 
the  Convergence  Reports,  contributes  to  the  functioning  of  the  exchange  rate  mechanism 
ERM  II  and  is  involved  in  a  wide  range  of  central  banking  tasks,  including  legal  opinions, 
statistical issues and accounting, as well as a regular review of monetary policies in the EU.  
As central bankers, we are aware of the challenge of jointly contributing to the stability of the 
EU financial system. As I have highlighted, the enhanced resilience of the financial system 
should stand out as the highest-order objective of the institutional and market reforms that 
are being implemented in the wake of the financial crisis.  
Macro-prudential supervision in the EU will count on the active role of the 27 governors of the 
National  Central  Banks,  including  the  very  active  involvement  of  Mervyn  King  as  the 
governor of the Bank of England, and on the full participation of the heads of the European 
Supervisory  authorities  and  the  Commissioner.  It  will  count  also  on  the  close  link  to  the 
national supervisory authorities, particularly here the FSA and its chairman, Lord Turner. Set 
up in this way, it will provide a significant contribution to the resilience of the financial system.  
We have to succeed. At stake is not only the stability of one of the world’s largest financial 
systems, but also the support from the over 490 million citizens in the European Union who 
6 
 BIS Review 166/2009
are watching our efforts very closely. We have counted very heavily on their support for the 
financial system, and they would not forgive us if we had to do so a second time.  
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 166/2009 
 7
