Stefan Ingves: Financial stability – where are we heading? 
Speech by Mr Stefan Ingves, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, to the Swedish Bankers’ 
Association, Stockholm, 19 November 2009. 
 The title of my speech today is “Financial stability – where are we heading?” Some people 
would no doubt answer this question, and perhaps with a certain amount of justification, by 
saying  that  we  are  moving  backwards  –  back  to  a  world  in  which  the  financial  system  in 
general and the banks in particular are constrained by additional regulations and restrictions. 
Those  of  us  who  have  been  around  for  a  while  have  seen  that  there  is  a  movement,  a 
pendulum that swings backwards and forwards between more and less regulation, and right 
now the pendulum is swinging towards increased regulation. However, we are not moving 
back  to  the  world  we  were  in  before  the  deregulation  programmes  of  the  1980s.  In  this 
respect  we  are  moving  forward  towards  something  new.  Hopefully,  we  are  heading  for  a 
more stable – and efficient – financial system.  
Today  I  will  discuss  a  number  of  proposals  for  changes  in  the  international  regulation  of 
banks. It is not yet clear which of these proposals will actually be implemented. It is therefore 
important that legislators and authorities now conduct a thorough analysis of the proposals 
that  are  under  discussion  in  the  international  debate  before  we  can  decide  which  of  them 
really need to be implemented. I dare to promise, however, that in one way or another it is 
going to become more expensive to be a bank.  
On the one hand, the repo rate is very low just now. We also count on keeping the repo rate 
low  until  the  autumn  of  2010  to  meet  the  inflation  target  and  support  the  recovery  of  the 
Swedish economy. We are also complementing the low repo rate with fixed-rate loans to the 
banks at longer maturities to ensure that monetary policy has the desired effect. The aim is 
to contribute to continued low interest rates on loans to companies and households. In this 
situation, generally introducing regulations that would make it more expensive for the banks 
to lend would directly contradict this aim. I would therefore like to emphasise that most of the 
regulatory changes that I will discuss today should not be implemented before the crisis is 
well and truly over and the situation in the financial system has returned to normal. 
On  the  other  hand,  between  1993  and  2003  the  assets  of  the  major  Swedish  banks 
increased from 120 per cent of GDP to 140 per cent of GDP, and subsequently – in 2008 – 
to 370 per cent of GDP. Although the financial crisis is helping to temporarily slow down the 
rate of increase of the banks’ assets as a percentage of GDP, the historical pattern indicates 
that the Swedish financial sector will remain sizeable or continue to grow. This means that 
the  financial  sector  is  of  considerable  importance  to  the  national  economy  and  it  is  thus 
reasonable that the State should intervene in the workings of the financial system.  
In  the  wake  of  the  crisis,  one  element  of  the  discussion  has  been  that  regulation  and 
supervision have to date focused too much on individual institutions and too little on the risks 
that were generated in other parts of the system. There is a lot of talk about the need to build 
structures that can prevent systemic risks, a so-called macroprudential framework. Exactly 
what  a  macroprudential  framework  contains  is  still  unclear.  It  seems  to  mean  somewhat 
different things to different people. I have therefore simply decided not to use this term today. 
Instead I intend to discuss the content of future efforts to prevent systemic risks without even 
mentioning the term macroprudential or its Swedish equivalent – a word that we have not yet 
invented. 
About the crisis: something old, something new and something borrowed  
Running a bank is about creating and maintaining confidence. When a bank makes losses – 
or  it  is  feared  that  it  will  make  losses  –  capital  is  required  to  cover  these  losses  so  that 
confidence is not undermined. When the crisis became really serious, the banks did not have 
sufficient capital to retain confidence. This resulted in a liquidity crisis. 
The  liquidity  crisis  became  so  severe  because  the  banks  had  become  increasingly 
dependent on short-term market funding. When it became apparent that impaired loans were 
in circulation but that no one really knew where they were and to what extent, confidence in 
the  banks  disappeared.  The  market  participants  stopped  lending  to  the  banks.  The  banks 
also  stopped  lending  to  each  other  and  when  it  also  became  impossible  to  sell  previously 
liquid assets or to use them as collateral for loans the liquidity crisis had definitely arrived. 
One lesson that we have learned from this is how quickly liquid markets can become illiquid. 
We  also  know  that  the  participants  and  the  authorities  underestimated  how  seriously  the 
markets would be affected by the crisis. But, when the price of an asset falls it is no longer 
possible  to  borrow  as  much  money  on  this  asset.  Participants  are  then  forced  to  sell  the 
asset to acquire liquidity. If many small – or a few large – participants sell at the same time 
then prices fall even further. From the point of view of an individual participant it is rational to 
decide  to  lend  less  or  to  sell  the  asset.  However,  the  collapse  in  market  prices  that  is  a 
consequence of these decisions affects everybody. The impact this has on the market is, in 
other words, a negative external effect. 
Selling assets at “bargain-basement” prices should normally attract buyers. But exactly the 
opposite  happened.  There  was  uncertainty  about  the  actual  value  of  some  complex  and 
untransparent  assets,  which  explains  why  the  buyers  disappeared.  Another  explanation  is 
that the participants were too similar to each other – they had the same portfolios and used 
the same analysis models. In the situation that arose, they all reacted in the same way: they 
shouted “Sell!”.  
Capital  
It is primarily the responsibility of the banks themselves to ensure that they have sufficient 
capital  to  retain  confidence  when  losses  increase.  Nevertheless,  a  conclusion  that  can  be 
drawn  from  the  crisis  is  that  the  capital  adequacy  regulations  were  and  are  too  generous, 
both  in  terms  of  how  much  capital  a  bank  should  have  and  in  terms  of  the  quality  of  the 
capital. 
An example may illustrate what the capital adequacy regulations permitted and still permit. 
Assume that we a house buyer who borrows SEK 1 million and mortgages his house to 100 
per cent. We can estimate the risk weighting for mortgages at 10 per cent. The risk-weighted 
assets  for  the  loan  will  then  be  SEK  100  000.  The  total  capital  requirement  is  8  per  cent, 
which means that the bank must hold capital amounting to SEK 8 000. The more relevant 
Tier 1 capital requirement is 4 per cent, so the Tier 1 capital held must amount to SEK 4 000. 
Thirty per cent of the Tier 1 capital may be hybrids of different types. This means that a bank 
can get away with equity – real share capital and accrued profits – of SEK 2 800 to provide 
cover for a loan of SEK 1 million. Does SEK 2 800 in loss-absorbing capital provide sufficient 
resilience for a loan of SEK 1 million? 
My  answer  is  no,  it  does  not.  The  market’s  requirements  are  also  often  higher  today.  I 
welcome the international discussion on a general increase in the capital requirements once 
the  crisis  is  over.  More  capital  is  needed.  I  also  think  it  is  positive  that  the  quantity 
requirements governing the capital in the capital base and the regulations governing hybrid 
capital  will  be  tightened  up  and  harmonised.  Better  capital  is  also  needed.  Ultimately, 
resilience is measured by common risk-bearing share capital. 
The discussion now underway in the international arena also concerns whether the banks’ 
resilience  can  be  strengthened  by  having  regulations  that  require  the  banks  to  build  up 
capital buffers when times are good that they can then use when times are bad. To a certain 
extent, the build-up of capital buffers may also counteract the procyclical tendencies of the 
financial system by means, for example, of new regulations that increase the price of lending 
when times are good and reduce it when times are bad. 
Another  method  that  is  similar  in  principle  is  to  allow  the  banks  to  make  provisions  for 
expected losses in economic upturns. The banks would thus build up a buffer against bad 
times in their accounting. In this context, the international discussion centres around which 
method – capital buffers or provisions – is most appropriate. Using capital has the advantage 
that it provides greater transparency and is more difficult to manipulate than provisions. 
We are also now aware that the capital adequacy regulations can allow too high a level of 
debt if the risk weightings used are based on data that is too short term. The introduction of a 
non risk-weighted capital requirement that simply aims to prevent leverage ratios becoming 
too high is thus being considered internationally. This capital requirement would be binding if 
the risk-weighted capital requirements fall below a certain level and would thus represent an 
ultimate limit for how much a balance sheet could expand. 
At the moment, it is uncertain which of all these proposals will be implemented. However, I 
am  convinced  that  the  capital  requirements  will  be  tightened  up  in  one  way  or  another, 
although this will only be done once things have returned to normal. 
Liquidity 
Stricter  capital  requirements  will  generally  strengthen  confidence  in  the  banks  and  thus 
reduce the liquidity risk. But this will not be enough. The banks must also take responsibility 
and ensure that they are adequately prepared to handle stress situations. The current crisis 
also gives us reasons to consider more direct and specific liquidity regulations.  
When  confidence  in  the  banks  disappeared  and  the  sources  of  liquidity  dried  up,  many 
central  banks,  including  the  Riksbank,  were  forced  to  provide  liquidity  to  keep  the  system 
going. We provided liquidity not only in kronor, we offered loans in dollars too. It is easy for 
us to provide kronor – we produce them ourselves – but we have to acquire dollars in some 
other way. In this case we were able to do this through our swap agreement with the Federal 
Reserve.  
One  of  the  lessons  of  the  crisis  as  far  as  the  Riksbank  is  concerned  is  that  our  currency 
reserve must be large enough to meet the foreign currency needs of the Swedish banks in a 
crisis situation. One alternative that may be considered in order to dampen this need is for 
the Riksbank to introduce a reserve requirement in currencies other than kronor if the banks 
have substantial exposures in foreign currencies. This reserve requirement could in principle 
entail the banks building up a liquidity buffer in foreign currency via the Riksbank. We are at 
present studying the possibility of using reserve requirements in more detail. 
The central banks should not need to provide liquidity in the way they have done over the 
last two years. It is therefore reasonable to also tighten up the requirements governing the 
banks’ liquidity management. The Basel Committee is now working on a global standard for 
liquidity management. Under this standard, both short-term and long-term requirements will 
be imposed on the banks. The banks will be required, for example, to hold sufficient non-
leveraged and highly-liquid capital to be able to meet the short-term need for liquidity in a 
stress situation. The long-term requirement relates more to structural aspects with the aim of 
preventing the risks that market funding and sizeable differences in maturities can lead to. 
This  is  a  question  of  quantitative  requirements  for  liquidity  matching  between  the  banks’ 
funding and assets. 
Governance to prevent systemic risks – the road ahead 
I  would  now  like  to  say  a  few  words  about  the  road  ahead  for  the  authorities’  efforts  to 
prevent  systemic  risks.  Today,  the  Riksbank  has  an  overall  responsibility  for  the  financial 
system. Finansinspektionen is responsible for the stability of individual institutions, but also 
has  a  responsibility  for  the  system  as  a  whole.  Together,  our  task  is  to  try  to  steer  the 
financial system away from instability and towards stability. The main responsibility for this of 
course lies with the banks themselves.  
The  institutional  frameworks  give  Finansinspektionen  the  effective  tools  that  directly  affect 
behaviour – the possibility to change the capital requirements, impose sanctions, prohibit or 
stipulate  measures  and,  ultimately,  to  withdraw  permits  and  licenses.  The  role  of  the 
Riksbank,  on  the  other  hand,  is  to  exert  influence  by  conducting  a  dialogue  with  the 
participants and issuing warnings about the risks that arise. The “Financial Stability Report”, 
which we publish twice a year, is a central tool in this work. The idea is that our warnings 
should  influence  the  banks  in  the  following  way:  if  the  Riksbank  points  out  that  a  risk  has 
arisen at a bank, the bank itself should take action to retain the confidence of the market in 
its  operations.  If  the  bank  itself  does  not  take  action,  the  bank’s  counterparties  and 
customers should at least react and take account of the risk in their pricing. 
When we now look back we must be self-critical and admit that we did not see the liquidity 
crisis  that  developed  in  the  financial  system  in  time.  We  did,  however,  issue  repeated 
warnings  about  the  development  of  risks  in  the  Baltic  countries  and  the  fact  that  risk  in 
general  was  priced  too  low  on  the  financial  markets.  Unfortunately,  our  warnings  in  these 
cases were not sufficiently acted upon. 
Another  lesson  to  be  learned  from  the  crisis  is  therefore  that  we  –  the  authorities  and 
perhaps  also  the  financial  participants  –  must  be  better  at  seeing  the  whole  picture  and 
understanding  the  systemic  consequences  of  individual  decisions  and  actions.  The 
authorities must also be given the opportunity to act when an untenable build-up of systemic 
risk  is  observed.  This  may  require  new  tools.  This  does  not  necessarily  mean  that  the 
Riksbank  should  be  in  charge  of  these  new  tools.  Instead,  the  close  cooperation  between 
various authorities needs to be constantly developed. 
In  practice,  “new”  tools  may  mean  applying  “old”  individually-oriented  regulations  more 
bluntly  than  previously.  If,  for  example,  the  aim  is  to  dampen  mortgage  lending,  a  blunter 
application of the regulations may mean that even banks that have been restrictive in their 
lending  are  affected  by  higher  costs  or  stricter  regulations,  for  instance  because  the 
authorities introduce higher capital requirements, amortisation requirements or regulations on 
loan-to-value.  These  new  costs  and  restrictions  will  be  motivated  by  systemic  concerns 
rather than the need to safeguard the stability of an individual bank.  
A lively discussion is also underway at present on whether central banks should use policy 
rates  to  a  greater  extent  to  correct  imbalances  on  individual  markets.  For  example,  the 
Riksbank has been encouraged in the media to prevent a bubble developing on the housing 
market.  We  naturally  take  house  prices  into  account  in  our  macroeconomic  assessments, 
and  the  Riksbank’s  interest  rate  policy  has  in  turn,  through  its  effect  on  the  households’ 
interest  expenses,  a  considerable  impact  on  the  development  of  prices  on  the  housing 
market. But the repo rate is not a suitable instrument for the fine tuning of individual markets. 
It affects, positively or negatively, demand in the economy in a very broad sense. At present, 
we  are  conducting  the policy  that we  believe  is  necessary  to  meet  the  inflation  target  and 
support the recovery of the Swedish economy. 
When it comes to preventing systemic risks such as a prolonged unbalanced development of 
the housing market, the repo rate is too blunt an instrument to do the job on its own. The 
repo rate should only be considered if the systemic risk is such that it affects our possibility to 
meet the inflation target and support the stabilisation of the real economy and the financial 
markets. 
There  are  instead  other  and  probably  more  important  factors  than  the  repo  rate  when  it 
comes to avoiding an unbalanced development of the housing market. This perhaps relates 
above all to effective regulation and supervision. It is also important that the banks and the 
households make realistic assessments of housing costs in the period ahead and that they 
ensure  that  in  all  new  borrowing  there  is  a  margin  for  higher  interest  rates  than  those  we 
have today. 
However, even though regulation and supervision are sharper tools in the work to promote 
stability than the repo rate, it is of course not the case that monetary policy has no impact in 
this context. An important challenge in the period ahead, as I see it, will be to try to find an 
appropriate mix between regulation and supervision on the one hand and monetary policy on 
the  other.  So,  how  should  the  authorities  act  if,  for  example,  they  suspect  that  a  property 
bubble is developing and that this may lead to a serious increase in systemic risk? 
Dialogues with and warnings to the banks will continue to be important tools. However, our 
experience shows that warnings are not always heeded to the extent they should be. The 
authorities therefore need to be able to use more concrete and more costly measures, partly 
to achieve more effective communication and partly – if warnings do not help – to affect the 
behaviour of the participants more directly. 
A recurring issue in international discussions is what types of measure are most effective in 
influencing risk behaviour. Can we influence behaviour best by controlling prices, that is by 
applying regulations that make lending more expensive, or by using quantitative regulations? 
Let me return to the mortgage example I used above. Controlling prices would in this case 
entail an increase in the capital requirement for mortgages. In the EU, for example, it has 
been discussed whether the capital requirement should to a greater degree depend on the 
leverage ratio. Quantitative regulations could include stipulating amortisation requirements or 
regulating  the  loan-to-value  for  mortgages.  Economists  usually  advocate  price  control,  but 
the arguments for price control are not as strong when we are facing an either/or situation – 
crisis or no crisis. In such situations, price control may entail too much uncertainty and thus 
make it necessary to control the behaviour of the participants in a more concrete way. The 
choice between price control and quantitative regulations thus requires a lot of thought, both 
on the general level and when designing specific regulations. 
Influencing behaviour by regulating capital is however, not the only form of price control that 
is being discussed. More direct control by levying charges is also under discussion in various 
international arenas. 
One  element  of  this  discussion  concerns  the  regulation  of  systemically-important  banks. 
Risks in systemically-important banks also entail the risk that problems will spread to other 
parts of the economy, that is there are external effects. It is thus not unreasonable to expect 
that this systemic risk should be internalised. Several different measures are therefore under 
discussion  to  achieve  this.  One  possibility  is  to  introduce  a  special  capital  surcharge  for 
systemically  important  banks.  Another  is  to  introduce  a  charge  for  systemically-important 
banks. In Sweden, the latter idea could be realised by allowing a risk-differentiated stability 
charge to reflect the higher systemic risk that a systemically-important bank entails. 
Another  possibility  that  is  being  discussed  is  to  ensure  that  systemically-important  banks 
have  sufficient  capital  by  creating  a  debt  instrument  that  is  automatically  converted  into 
capital when capital adequacy falls below a certain level. During the bank crisis of the 1990s, 
I was in fact involved in designing such an instrument.1
In this context, the form of the regulations that govern the handling of distressed banks is in 
fact quite important. If the regulations are ineffective the systemic risk, all else being equal, 
will  be  higher.  The  cost  that  should  be  internalised  in  the  banks  operations  will  then  be 
unnecessarily high, which in turn will make financial services unnecessarily expensive. It is, 
in  other  words,  very  important  to  create  an  effective  regulatory  framework  that  makes  it 
possible to take decisive action to handle distressed banks at an early stage in both Sweden 
and abroad. 
                                                 
1   The  Swedish  Bank  Support  Authority  promised  Föreningsbanken  that  the  State  would  acquire  preference 
shares if capital adequacy fell below 9 per cent. At the same time, the State was given the right to acquire 
shares if the capital fell below 8.5 per cent. In order to give the bank an incentive to quickly phase-out this 
support in the event that the State did acquire shares, the agreement stipulated that the preference shares 
would be converted to common stock with extra voting rights if they were not redeemed within three years. 
The internationalisation of the financial system – a challenge  
Cross-border banks generate a particularly negative external effect. If a cross-border bank 
experiences  problems  in  one  country,  the  costs  incurred  are  distributed  between  the 
countries in which the bank operates. From the authorities’ point of view, the problem is that 
it is difficult today to prevent a systemic risk that arises and develops in another country. 
The principle that is applied in the EU today, the so-called home country principle, states that 
it is the authority in the country where the company concerned has its registered office that is 
responsible for supervision. This means that if a bank has a branch in another country the 
authority  in  the  bank’s  home  country  is  responsible  for  supervision,  but  if  a  bank  has  a 
subsidiary bank in another country then the authority in the country concerned is responsible. 
The crisis has demonstrated that the home country principle in its current form is inadequate 
for preventing cross-border risks. 
An  example  inspired  by  the  situation  in  the  Baltic  countries  may  clarify  the  problem  that 
cross-border banks pose to national authorities. Assume that we have a Swedish bank that 
borrows in foreign currency on the international market. The bank then forwards this money 
to a subsidiary bank in another country. The subsidiary in turn lends the money to an end 
customer.  If  we  now  assume  that  the  borrower  is  unable  to  repay  the  loan,  for  example 
because he has borrowed in a currency other than the one he has his income in, then the 
subsidiary bank may find it difficult to repay its loan from the parent bank. The parent bank 
may then in turn find it difficult to repay its loan. This means that the liquidity risk in foreign 
currency  ends  up  in  Sweden  although  the  lending  that  created  the  risk  took  place  outside 
Sweden’s borders. 
The  best  solution  for  limiting  the  liquidity  risk  is  that  the  central  bank  or  the  supervisory 
authority in the country where the risk develops takes action. However, if the authority in this 
country does not deal with the situation we must ask ourselves whether the situation poses a 
serious  risk  to  the  Swedish  banks  and,  if  so,  whether  we  should  act,  for  example  by 
introducing a  reserve  requirement  in  foreign  currency  for  the  Swedish  bank.  Action  on  the 
part of the Riksbank is a second best solution, but this alternative is probably still better than 
doing nothing at all. We will therefore investigate the measures we can take to better limit the 
risks that are built up outside Sweden in the future. In this connection, the possibility to set 
reserve requirements is one of the alternatives we are investigating. 
At the same time, it is important that central banks and other authorities develop their ability 
to cooperate across national borders, particularly within the EU. Not least, we must learn to 
accept  that  someone  will  have  to  put  their  foot  down  when  a  cross-border  risk  develops, 
even though this may create a certain amount of fuss. 
The  new  European  authorities  –  in  the  case  of  the  banks  primarily  the  European  Banking 
Authority – are intended to act as arbitrators between national authorities on certain specific 
and limited issues. Although the right of the EU authorities to override the national authorities 
is limited, there are signs of a new tendency to transfer power to these international bodies. 
A risk council – the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) – is also to be set up in the EU 
with a special responsibility for the supervision of macro-financial stability. Even though the 
powers of the ESRB will be limited, this still represents an important step on the road towards 
a better consensus regarding the cross-border risks that exist and how they should be dealt 
with. An issue which in my opinion should be high on the agenda of the ESRB is lending in 
foreign currencies. 
Concluding remarks  
At the beginning of this speech I expressed the hope that we are heading towards a more 
stable  and  efficient  financial  system.  The  crisis  has  shown  that  we  must  reform  regulation 
and supervision so that we can better prevent financial crises. We need to concentrate more 
on ensuring that we have a resilient system and not just resilient institutions. The sum total of 
all the resilient parts does not automatically mean that we have a resilient whole. 
In  the  course  of  my  professional  life  I  have  experienced  two  financial  crises  in  my  own 
country. This is at least one crisis too many and I definitely do not want to see a third. This is 
why I believe it is important to move from words to action and to make sure that regulations 
and tools that make it possible for us to conduct effective stability work are put in place. 
However, now that the pendulum is swinging towards increased regulation, we must also be 
careful  to  ensure  that  the  reforms  retain  the  ability  of  the  financial  system  to  perform  its 
functions  effectively  –  that  is  credit supply,  payment  mediation  and  risk  management.  The 
banks  themselves  have  a  primary  responsibility  for  a  stable  and  efficient  financial  system. 
But the authorities also need to be able to apply regulations and tools more forcefully than 
previously.  
Thank you! 
