Donald L Kohn: Policy challenges for the Federal Reserve 
Speech by Mr Donald L Kohn, Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve  System,  at 
the  Kellogg  Distinguished  Lecture  Series,  Kellogg  School  of 
Management, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois, 16 November 2009. 
 I titled my talk "Policy Challenges for the Federal Reserve." I did that before I knew what I 
was  going  to  discuss,  because  just  about  any  topic  involving  the  Federal  Reserve  would 
entail policy challenges. So let me begin by narrowing the topic just a bit: I would like to talk 
about the challenges that lie at the intersection of monetary policy and financial stability.  
Our economy is just beginning to recover from a horrendous episode in which mispricing of 
risk  –  especially  in  home  mortgage  lending,  but  more  broadly  as  well  –  led  to  financial 
instability  that  in  turn  led  to  a  severe  recession.  Much  attention  is,  appropriately,  being 
focused  on  the  implications  of  this  episode  for  the  reform  of  financial  regulation.  The 
Congress, financial regulators, and analysts are debating those critical issues.  
I  will  focus  on  some  possible  implications  of  the  recent  episode  for  monetary  policy.  The 
questions I want to address are, first, how should we take account of financial stability in the 
conduct  of  monetary  policy  –  for  example,  should  financial  stability  be  another  specific 
responsibility  of  monetary  policy,  in  addition  to  its  responsibilities  for  promoting  maximum 
employment and stable prices? And second, what do the crisis and our response imply for 
the  monetary  policy  tools  of  the  Federal  Reserve?  I  don't  have  the  answers  to  these 
questions,  but  I  thought  it  would  be  useful  to  discuss  them.1  Importantly,  I  speak  only  for 
myself, not for my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee.2  
Monetary policy and financial stability  
Traditionally,  most  analysts  thought  that  when  monetary  policy  successfully  promoted 
economic stability, it would also promote financial stability. When business cycle swings are 
moderate and inflation rates are low and predictable, households and firms can make and 
follow through on long-term plans for spending, saving, and investment. Lending institutions 
can better evaluate the likely profitability of capital projects, thus reducing their risk of credit 
loss. And the moderate swings in long-term interest rates and other asset prices that were 
thought to be fostered by such an environment should tend to limit the exposure of balance 
sheets.  
However, although monetary policy over the past several decades did help foster economic 
stability, some have questioned whether it also contributed substantially to the lax practices 
that  led  to  the  buildup  of  financial  vulnerabilities  and  the  resulting  severe  recession.  Two 
aspects of the Federal Reserve's conduct of monetary policy are cited by these critics. One, 
some  assert  that  we  responded  asymmetrically  to  movements  in  asset  prices,  easing 
aggressively in response to declines and not tightening correspondingly when asset prices 
rose. This perceived asymmetry is alleged to have given market participants the sense that 
they could engage in a one-way bet – that the Federal Reserve would cushion asset-price 
declines with cheap money but would not increase interest rates to make it more expensive 
                                                 
1  
I have addressed the first of these questions before - most recently a year ago in a speech given at the Cato 
Institute - but in light of the experience  over the past several  years, it seems appropriate to reexamine the 
issue.  (See  Donald  L.  Kohn  (2008),  "Monetary  Policy  and  Asset  Prices  Revisited,"  speech  delivered  at  the 
Cato Institute's 26th Annual Monetary Policy Conference, Washington, November 19.) 
2   Brian Madigan of the Board's staff contributed to these remarks. 
BIS Review 143/2009 
 1
for them to finance bets that asset prices would rise. Second, some believe that the Federal 
Reserve kept policy too loose around 2003 and then tightened too slowly and predictably in 
2004 and 2005, in effect encouraging if not underwriting the bubble in house prices that lay 
behind so many of our troubles over the past two years.  
My  perspective  is  that  policymakers  have  kept  their  eyes  firmly  on  medium-term 
macroeconomic stability – that is, on the legislated objectives of maximum employment and 
stable prices. We responded to developments in asset and credit markets to the extent that 
they  affected  the  macroeconomic  outlook,  but  we  did  not  assign  them  extra  weight  in  our 
deliberations.  In  particular  we  did  not  react  asymmetrically  to  asset-price  developments;  it 
only looks that way on the surface because asset prices tend to rise slowly and fall rapidly. 
Had we been more ready to ease than to tighten monetary policy, the economy would have 
tended  to  run  above  its  productive  potential  on  average  and  inflation  would  have  risen.  In 
fact, inflation fell over the 1980s and 1990s.  
Inflation  did  rise  from  2004  through  the  middle  of  2008,  but  largely  because  the  prices  of 
petroleum and other commodities increased. Those increases reflected rising demand from 
rapidly  industrializing  emerging  market  economies,  not  easy  monetary  policy  in  the  United 
States.  As  we  went  through  this  period,  a  variety  of  measures  of  resource  utilization, 
underlying inflation rates, and market indicators of future commodities prices gave us good 
reason to believe that our policy was consistent with a return of headline inflation to a low 
and  stable  underlying  trend.  We  did  raise  interest  rates  gradually,  in  accord  with  our 
announcements  that  the  federal  funds  rate  was  likely  to  rise  at  a  "measured  pace,"  but 
following this path was dependent on economic conditions evolving about as we anticipated. 
Similarly, in the current circumstances, the Federal Open Market Committee has emphasized 
that its expectation that the federal funds rate is likely to remain at an exceptionally low level 
"for  an  extended  period"  depends  on  the  outlook  for  resource  utilization,  inflation,  and 
inflation expectations following the trajectories we expect.  
A  policy  focused  on  price  and  economic  stability  over  the  medium  run  and  that  responds 
symmetrically to inflationary and deflationary shocks can nonetheless contribute to excessive 
leverage,  risk-taking,  and  maturity  transformation,  and  indeed  that  appears  to  have 
happened;  to  some  extent,  we  were  the  victims  of  our  own  success.  Improved  monetary 
policy after the 1970s, along with a host of other factors, including technological advances 
and  greater  global  integration  of  capital  and  product  markets,  helped  reduce  the  size  and 
frequency of fluctuations in output and lower inflation. This economic performance evidently 
led investors to become complacent about economic risks – for example, the risk that house 
prices could fall, and the small probability of a major downturn in the economy.  
Moreover,  persistently  modest  inflation  gradually  reduced  inflation  expectations,  which 
brought  down  nominal  interest  rates.  The  tendency  toward  lower  interest  rates  was 
accentuated earlier this decade by the sluggish recovery of investment from the recession of 
2001,  which  combined  with  high  saving  propensities  in  the  growing  economies  of  Asia  to 
lower real interest rates globally. The expectations of many investors about the returns they 
should  be  receiving  apparently  adjusted  slowly  to  the  new  reality  of  low  nominal  interest 
rates, exacerbating the so-called search for yield that contributed to these investors venturing 
into  riskier  and  more  complex  assets.  And  the  benign  economic  environment  encouraged 
intermediaries to lower credit standards and to try to pick up a little extra return by borrowing 
for  the  short  term  to  fund  long-term  lending,  leaving  them  increasingly  leveraged  and 
vulnerable.  
But while monetary policy may have helped establish a stable macroeconomic environment 
in which investors overreached for yield, many other factors contributed to the financial crisis. 
Inadequate risk assessment and management by many financial market participants and the 
lagging adjustment of public oversight to the evolving structure of financial markets and rising 
risk levels were, in my view, the critical causes of the most severe financial crisis since the 
2 
 BIS Review 143/2009
1930s.  And  addressing  these  problems  is  the  first  priority  and  most  effective  safeguard 
against a repetition of the severe dislocations we experienced.  
But does avoiding such a repetition also require monetary policy to include financial stability 
along with price stability and high employment in the objectives it tries to accomplish with its 
policy adjustments? When the monetary authorities judge that important asset prices or rates 
of credit expansion are deviating from sustainable long-run trends, should they adjust their 
policy setting to damp those price and credit movements – beyond whatever actions might 
be  called  for  to  preserve  macroeconomic  stability  over  the  usual  two-three-year  planning 
horizon for monetary policy?  
To preview, I don't think we know enough to answer those questions with any confidence – to 
judge whether the benefits of such extra action would outweigh the costs. Given our state of 
knowledge,  we  should  keep  monetary  policy  focused  on  our  mandates  for  maximum 
employment and stable prices. I can't rule out circumstances in which additional monetary 
policy  actions  specifically  targeted  at  perceived  asset  price  or  credit  imbalances  and 
vulnerabilities would serve the pursuit of our mandate over the medium term. But given the 
bluntness  of  monetary  policy  as  a  tool  for  addressing  developments  that  could  lead  to 
financial  instability,  the  side  effects  of  using  policy  for  this  purpose,  and  other  difficulties, 
such circumstances are likely to be very rare. I continue to believe that the best approach is 
to promoting financial stability is to strengthen supervision and regulation.  
Conducting monetary policy with additional emphasis on financial stability would imply that 
inflation and economic activity would generally be somewhat more variable over the medium 
run.  Households  and  businesses  might  have  greater  difficulty  planning  saving  and 
investment because they would be less certain of the medium-term trajectory of the economy 
and  prices.  Moreover,  greater  inflation  variability  might  reduce  the  credibility  of  the  central 
bank's pursuit of price stability, reducing its ability to lean against deviations in output as well. 
Another analytical point that should be taken into account when contemplating extra policy 
action is that the cost of using monetary policy to damp perceived asset-price or credit-driven 
imbalances would depend on the prevailing conditions in the economy. In general, the further 
the  economy  is  from  price  stability  or  full  employment,  the  greater  the  costs  of  further 
deviations.  For  example,  raising  interest  rates  and  restraining  output,  employment,  and 
inflation to lean against an incipient asset bubble will hurt more when inflation is already well 
below  our  objective  or  unemployment  is  high  than  when  we  are  contemplating  small 
deviations around long-run steady-state values.  
From this perspective, the key analytical question is whether, by accepting somewhat larger 
deviations of employment and inflation from the levels otherwise attainable, we are able to 
sufficiently enhance financial stability in a way that significantly reduces the probability of a 
very  severe  financial  crisis  and  the  attendant  serious  economic  costs.  In  my  view,  the 
theoretical and empirical models that would underpin this approach and its implementation 
are  not  adequately  developed.  Particularly  in  the  absence  of  reliable  models  to  guide  us, 
policymakers  attempting  to  conduct  such  a  policy  would  confront  serious  challenges  in 
identifying  threatening  imbalances  and  in  calibrating  and  timing  effective  and  appropriate 
policy actions.  
Moreover, a cursory review of the evidence is not encouraging regarding the direct use of 
monetary  policy  to  promote  financial  stability.  For  example,  would  a  small  adjustment  in 
policy rates damp the optimism or complacency that was feeding the speculative excesses 
producing an asset or credit bubble? We don't know. But the impression from our experience 
in 1999 is that tightening policy had no effect on the intensity of dot-com speculation. And the 
housing bubble and the spread of lax mortgage lending practices built up for several years 
after we began raising interest rates in 2004. If policy adjustments intended to deflate asset 
prices or credit expansion only reduced inflation and output without affecting the bubble, they 
will have ultimately  moved the economy further from its sustainable path when the bubble 
BIS Review 143/2009 
 3
breaks. And if large adjustments are necessary to damp speculation, medium-term variations 
in the economy will be commensurately greater.  
In addition, timing policy action accurately is critical to realizing greater benefits than costs in 
leaning  against  potential  speculative  excesses.  Adjusting  policy  shortly  before  a  bubble 
breaks, when its existence will be most evident, is not likely to be optimal, as it will do little to 
damp the excesses and will add to the downward pressure on the economy. Central banks 
would need to spot these threats very early, when they may not be generally recognized as 
divergences from fundamentals. Efforts to spot emerging imbalances early would raise the 
odds  on  identifying  developments  as  threats  to  stability,  when  in  fact  they  are  natural  and 
sustainable adaptations to changing relative prices, for example, from  shifts in technology. 
Even with the access to the wide range of data, sophisticated models, and market analysis 
enjoyed by central banks, our ability to discern deviations of asset prices from fundamental 
values is very limited.  
The difficulties I've just outlined lead me to a strong preference for using prudential regulation 
to deal with potential problems in credit and asset markets. Historically, bank supervision has 
been focused on individual institutions rather than on the system as a whole. Unfortunately, 
such microprudential regulation in practice was not as effective as it should have been, and 
an  important  challenge  for  policymakers  will  be  to  strengthen  the  supervision  of  individual 
institutions. However, the experience of this crisis also strongly suggests that policymakers 
need to pay close attention to developments across the financial system – that is, to engage 
in  macroprudential  supervision  and  regulation.  Both  microprudential  and  macroprudential 
oversight are essential to making the financial system more resilient to the inevitable cycles 
in  asset  prices,  and  less  prone  to  large  cycles.  In  this  regard,  many  improvements  are 
possible:  better  alignment  of  regulatory  capital  requirements  with  risk;  making  capital 
requirements  less  procyclical;  identification  of  systemically  important  intermediaries  and 
holding  them  to  standards  commensurate  with  their  importance  in  the  financial  system; 
improved techniques for supervision of all intermediaries; spotting emerging increases in risk 
and  adjusting  regulation  to  address  those  problems;  and  addressing  the  elements  in  the 
financial  markets  that  tend  to  amplify  cycles,  such  as  accounting  and  margining  practices. 
The  list  of  potential  regulatory  changes  is  long;  without  more  experience,  the  efficacy  of 
some of these adjustments is hard to assess; and putting them into practice will be difficult. 
But proceeding with careful analysis and implementation of these approaches would seem to 
have a better chance of yielding net benefits to our economy than using monetary policy to 
damp asset and credit cycles beyond what is required to keep our economy on an even keel.  
Current  circumstances  well  illustrate  the  challenges  of  using  monetary  policy  as  a  tool  to 
promote  financial  stability.  The  prices  of  riskier  assets  have  risen  rapidly  in  the  past  few 
months,  with,  for  example,  equity  prices  recovering  a  considerable  portion  of  their  earlier 
decline and risk spreads on corporate bonds dropping substantially. In addition, commodities 
prices have risen and the dollar has retraced a good portion of its run-up last fall and winter. 
These  developments  have  led  some  observers  to  question  whether  another  round  of 
potentially  destabilizing  asset-price  movements  is  in  train.  The  movements  in  asset  prices 
reflect several factors. One is a reversal of the extreme panicky conditions of late last year 
and earlier this year when extraordinary uncertainty about the economy and the soundness 
of  many  counterparties  led  to  a  widespread  flight  to  liquidity  and  safety.  As  the  economy 
stabilized  and  then  began  to  improve,  as  financial  markets  became  less  volatile,  and  as 
additional  information  about  the  health  of  individual  borrowers  emerged,  investors  have 
become more willing to shift back into longer-term and riskier assets. The rise in commodities 
prices  probably  reflects  the  turnaround  in  economic  prospects,  especially  with  many 
resource-importing emerging market economies leading the rebound.  
Another  important  factor  has  been  the  very  low  level  of  policy  interest  rates  in  the  United 
States  and  in  most  other  industrialized  economies.  Indeed,  one  of  the  purposes  of  these 
policies is to induce investors to shift into riskier and longer-term assets in order to lower the 
cost  and  increase  the  availability  of  capital  to  households  and  businesses.  The  more 
4 
 BIS Review 143/2009
accommodative financial conditions, in turn, are intended to induce an increase in spending 
at a time when the level of output is expected to remain depressed for some time relative to 
the capacity of the economy to produce.  
As I've already noted, our abilities to discern the "correct" values of assets is quite limited. At 
present, however, the prices of assets in U.S. financial markets do not appear to be clearly 
out of line with the outlook for the economy and business prospects as well as the level of 
risk-free interest rates. Most bond spreads and equity premiums are still appreciably higher 
than a few years ago and comparable to their levels in past recessions. Moreover, money 
and  credit  have  been  quite  weak,  suggesting  that  asset  price  movements  have  not  been 
fueled  by  increased  leverage  that  would  leave  financial  intermediaries  vulnerable  to  a 
reversal  of  recent  gains.  The  improvement  in  the  spreads  and  functioning  of  securities 
markets has not been accompanied by any loosening of very tight credit conditions for bank 
credit; indeed, banks have continued to tighten terms and standards in recent months, albeit 
at a slowing rate.  
Still, my current assessments could be wrong – asset prices may in fact be in the process of 
rising  excessively.  However,  consider  the  complications  of  using  monetary  policy  to  lean 
against a presumed bubble at this time. A decision to reduce monetary accommodation now 
would  mean  taking  immediate  steps  to  raise  short-term  interest  rates  or  to  reduce  the 
support for private credit markets by selling longer-term securities that the Federal Reserve 
has acquired over the past year. Tightening financial conditions at a time when an economic 
recovery  has  just  begun,  when  labor  markets  are  continuing  to  weaken,  when  inflation  is 
below its optimal level for the longer run, and when significant strains persist in the financial 
system  would  incur  a  considerable  short-run  cost  in  order  to  achieve  possible  long-run 
benefits  whose  extent  is,  at  best,  quite  uncertain.  Still,  we  will  need  to  be  alert  to  any 
tendencies  for  movements  in  prices  for  commodities  and  assets  to  result  in  a  sustained 
increase  in  inflation  and  inflation  expectations;  unanchored  inflation  expectations  would 
ultimately destabilize output and undermine our ability to foster higher levels of employment. 
And we need to continue to work with banks to improve their risk-management and credit-
evaluation  systems  so  that  the  banks  are  not  vulnerable  to  unexpected  movements  in 
interest rates or asset prices in the future.  
In sum, it seems to me that under most circumstances monetary policy is not the appropriate 
tool  to  use  to  address  asset-price  developments  or  growing  vulnerabilities  in  financial 
markets. As I argued earlier, microprudential and macroprudential policies seem likely to me 
to be more effective and targeted at the problem than monetary policy adjustments, and in 
my  view  these  tools  should  be  the  first  that  policymakers  deploy.  From  my  perspective, 
central bankers would need convincing evidence that such other tools would be inadequate 
and  that  significant  asset-price  misalignments  were  developing  that  would  have  serious 
economic costs before attempting to use monetary policy to address them.  
Federal Reserve tools to provide liquidity in stress situations 
In addition to highlighting shortcomings in the U.S. regulatory regime, the financial crisis also 
raised  questions  about  the  adequacy  of  the  Federal  Reserve's  tools  for  monetary  policy 
implementation, particularly in periods of economic stress, and for crisis management more 
generally.  In  routine  circumstances,  the  Federal  Reserve  implements  monetary  policy 
primarily through open market transactions, with the discount window playing an important 
but supporting role. Customarily, the bulk of the Federal Reserve's assets are U.S. Treasury 
securities,  and  the  Federal  Reserve  uses  short-term  repurchase  (repo)  transactions, 
generally in relatively small amounts, to make the adjustments to the quantity of reserves in 
the  banking  system  that  are  necessary  to  achieve  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee's 
target for the federal funds rate. Notably, the Federal Reserve's counterparties for these repo 
transactions are a small number (currently 18) of broker-dealers, known as primary dealers. 
Even though these dealers do not have reserve requirements, and indeed are not permitted 
BIS Review 143/2009 
 5
to  hold  reserves  at  the  Federal  Reserve,  the  dissemination  of  reserves  from  the  Federal 
Reserve's open market  transactions conducted through the primary dealers, who pass the 
funds  on  through  the  highly  liquid  money  markets,  is  largely  sufficient  in  routine 
circumstances  to  implement  monetary  policy  smoothly.  Ordinarily,  little  credit  is  extended 
through the discount window; banks are able to obtain their funding and reserves in the open 
market  and  generally  turn  to  the  window  only  to  cover  very  short-term  liquidity  shortfalls 
arising  from  operational  glitches  as  opposed  to  more  fundamental  funding  problems.  This 
structure  allows  the  Federal  Reserve  to  implement  policy  quite  efficiently  in  routine 
circumstances with minimal interference in private credit markets.  
However, during the financial crisis, some aspects of the Federal Reserve's monetary policy 
implementation framework worked less well than in routine circumstances. A hallmark of the 
financial  crisis  was  the  impaired  functioning  –  and  in  some  cases,  even  a  complete 
breakdown – of critical financial markets. Market participants became highly uncertain about 
several  matters,  such  as  the  financial  strength  of  their  counterparties;  the  future  value  of 
assets, including any collateral they might be lending against; and how their own needs for 
capital and liquidity might evolve. They fled to the safest and most liquid assets and would 
not  engage  in  the  trading  and  arbitrage  that  usually  transmit  monetary  policy  impulses 
throughout the financial system. For example, from the early days of the crisis, trading in the 
interbank funding markets for terms longer than overnight dried up considerably. The greatly 
reduced access of banks to term funding likely was an important factor that contributed to a 
sharp pullback in their willingness to lend to households and firms.  
The fact that primary dealers rather than commercial banks were the regular counterparties 
of the Federal Reserve in its open market operations, together with the fact that the Federal 
Reserve  ordinarily  extended  only  modest  amounts  of  funding  through  repo  agreements, 
meant that open market operations were not particularly useful during the crisis for directing 
funding to where it was most critically needed in the financial system. The Federal Reserve 
attempted to address the reduced availability of term funding to banks partly by lowering the 
cost of discount window credit and by increasing the maximum maturity of such credit from 
1 day to 30 days and then later to 90 days. However, banks' willingness to use the discount 
window was greatly undermined by their concerns about the "stigma" that they would bear if 
their  use  of  the  window  somehow  was  detected  by  counterparties  or  market  analysts.  To 
address banks' need for term funding, the Federal Reserve created the Term Auction Facility 
(TAF),  under  which  it  auctions  large  blocks  of  term  funds  to  banks.  The  TAF  combines 
aspects of open market operations and the discount window. The legal form of the TAF is the 
same as that of regular discount window loans. But by providing funds through an auction 
mechanism  rather  than  through  a  standing  facility,  the  TAF  resembles  open  market 
operations  rather  than  the  standard  discount  window  and,  partly  as  a  result,  it  appears  to 
have  largely  avoided  the  stigma  problem  that  limited  the  effectiveness  of  the  discount 
window. Important questions for the Federal Reserve going forward are whether the benefits 
of the TAF warrant its maintenance on an ongoing basis or whether, now that the TAF has 
been  developed,  it  can  be  brought  off  the  shelf  sufficiently  quickly  if  warranted  by 
circumstances.  
The dysfunction in money markets was by no means limited to the United States. In globally 
integrated  financial  markets,  many  banks  overseas  had  dollar  obligations  that  they  were 
financing with short-term dollar borrowing. When funding markets were disrupted, the intense 
bidding of these banks for dollar financing put upward pressure on interest rates in the United 
States. To relieve this pressure, the Federal Reserve entered into liquidity swaps with foreign 
central  banks  to  enable  those  central  banks  to  lend  dollars  to  commercial  banks  in  their 
jurisdictions. We also need to decide whether and in what form we should keep this type of 
liquidity provision readily available for possible future use.  
Although  the  Federal  Reserve  routinely  conducts  open  market  operations  through  primary 
dealers,  as  noted  above,  it  also  does  so  through  an  auction  mechanism;  that  mechanism 
implies both that no individual firm has any assurance of access to Federal Reserve liquidity 
6 
 BIS Review 143/2009
and that the aggregate amount of funds provided through open market operations does not 
bear any direct relationship to dealers' funding needs. The Federal Reserve does not have 
legal  authority  to  lend  to  firms  other  than  depository  institutions  in  routine  circumstances. 
Moreover, given that dealers are not subject to the type of regulation and supervision applied 
to banks, routine lending to such firms could lead to moral hazard, with dealers' access to 
central  bank  liquidity  increasing  their  incentives  to  take  excessive  risks.  Thus,  no  regular 
standing facility for primary dealers is maintained, even though, like large commercial banks, 
primary dealers are highly leveraged, engage in significant maturity transformation, and are 
closely  interconnected  with  the  rest  of  the  financial  system.  Dealers  ordinarily  fund 
themselves primarily in the triparty repo market, borrowing heavily to finance their securities 
positions.  However,  during  the  financial  crisis,  dealers'  access  to  triparty  funding  declined 
sharply. Concerned with declining collateral values, repo counterparties increased required 
interest  rates  and  ratcheted  down  the  lendable  values  of  collateral.  As  a  consequence, 
dealers were forced to dump assets on the market in fire sales, further driving down collateral 
values.  To  break  this  vicious  cycle  and  head  off  the  collapse  of  the  financial  system  that 
could have ensued, the Federal Reserve determined that it was necessary to lend to primary 
dealers  on a  fully  collateralized  basis.  Later  in  the  crisis,  the  Federal  Reserve  took  similar 
actions  to  lend  in  support  of  money  market  mutual  funds,  which,  like  primary  dealers, 
resemble banks in their economic function but lack regular access to the discount window.  
Both  of  these  actions  were  based  on  clear  authority  found  in  section  13(3)  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Act,  but  they  required,  consistent  with  the  statutory  provision,  that  a  five-member 
majority of the Federal Reserve Board determine that "unusual and exigent circumstances" 
prevailed – a determination that had not been made in decades. An important question for 
the future is what kind of authority we should have to lend to certain key groups of nonbank 
financial  intermediaries  or  in  support  of  markets.  The  Federal  Reserve  Act  was  designed 
when most credit flowed through banks, but over time securities markets have assumed a 
much  more  prominent  role  in  the  distribution  of  credit.  Our  ability  to  preserve  financial 
stability may be enhanced by making sure the Federal Reserve has authority to lend against 
good collateral to other classes of sound, regulated financial institutions that are central to 
our financial markets – not on a routine basis, but in some circumstances when the Board of 
Governors  finds  that  the  absence  of  such  lending  would  threaten  market  functioning  and 
economic stability. The collateral would have to be of good quality and the institutions sound 
to minimize any credit risk the Federal Reserve might take. And the institutions would need 
to be tightly regulated and closely supervised to limit the moral hazard of permitting access to 
the discount window, even when such access is not routinely granted. I want to be quite clear 
that I am not referring to lending under section 13(3) to individual troubled institutions, like 
American International Group. That sort of lending is more appropriately done by the fiscal 
authorities and conducted only in association with the exercise of new authority to resolve 
systemically important financial institutions.  
There are clear disadvantages to expanding the safety net to cover a wider range of firms as 
we did in the recent crisis. But we have seen that when market functioning is or could be 
substantially impaired, the effectiveness of our regular monetary policy tools is considerably 
diminished, with potentially severe economic consequences. In these circumstances, lending 
in  support  of  markets  and  classes  of  important  intermediaries  becomes  an  essential 
extension  of  monetary  policy  to  foster  our  legislated  mandate  of  promoting  maximum 
employment and stable prices.  
Conclusion 
After  a  serious  setback  to  economic  stability  such  as  we  have  recently  experienced, 
monetary  policymakers  must  ask  whether  the  strategies  and  tools  they  have  been  using 
need to be adapted to fulfill their responsibilities for price and economic stability in modern 
financial markets. As with most interesting policy questions, the answers aren't entirely clear. 
BIS Review 143/2009 
 7
I've  tried  to  outline  some  of  the  issues  here  in  the  hope  of  fostering  further  discussion  of 
these critical questions.  
8 
 BIS Review 143/2009
