Ric Battellino: Some comments on bank funding 
Remarks  by  Mr  Ric  Battellino,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  the 
22nd Australasian Finance & Banking Conference, Sydney,16 December 2009. 
 I would like to thank Michael Davies, Anna Brown and Tegan Hanrick, who undertook the research for this talk. 
One of the widely drawn lessons from the financial crisis is that banks should source more of 
their funding from deposits and less from short-term debt markets.  
I want to spend some time today talking about this, focusing in particular on:  
• 
• 
• 
• 
how significant are the benefits of such a shift?  
how feasible is it for banks to shift their funding sources?  
what is the impact on banks’ cost of funds? and  
what are the implications for the level of interest rates?  
Bank funding  
Banks in Australia have reasonably diverse funding bases: deposits account for 43 per cent of 
funding,  split  fairly  evenly  between  households  and  businesses;  domestic  capital  markets 
provide a further 19 per cent of funding; and foreign capital markets 28 per cent. Securitisation 
and equity account for 3 per cent and 7 per cent of funding respectively (Graph 1).  
Graph 1 
  Since  mid  2007,  the  share  of  banks’  funding  that  has  come  from  deposits  has  risen  by 
5 percentage points, with increases in both household and business deposits. Banks have 
used these funds to replace some of their short-term capital market debt. 
The increased use of deposit funding has been evident in both the major banks and in the 
regional  banks.  The  foreign-owned  banks,  in  contrast,  have  experienced  a  fall  in  the 
proportion of funding coming from domestic deposits (Graph 2). 
BIS Review 166/2009 
 1
Graph 2 
 How stable are bank deposits? 
Assessing the relative  stability of banks’ various funding sources is not straightforward, as 
there  can  be  significant  variation  even  within  each  category  of  funding.  For  example, 
government-guaranteed  deposits  are  “stickier”  than  non-guaranteed  deposits,  household 
deposits tend to be stickier than corporate and institutional deposits, while internet deposits 
are  less  stable  than  other  at-call  deposits.  Deposits  from  corporates  and  other  financial 
institutions are unlikely to be much more stable than short-term debt, particularly in a crisis. 
Offshore capital market funding can be less stable than domestic capital market funding, as 
during crises investors often have a strong home bias.  
The  behavioural  maturity  of  a  given  funding  source  can  also  be  very  different  from  the 
contractual  maturity,  especially  during  financial  crises.  It  is  the  behavioural  maturity  that 
matters  most,  and  during  a  severe  crisis  this  can  shorten  significantly  for  many  funding 
sources.  This  is  because  banks  can  come  under  pressure  to  allow  term  deposits  to  be 
redeemed early and to buy back short-term capital market debt. While a bank could try to 
enforce the contractual maturity on its funding, the reality is that, unless the bank is already 
in great difficulty, this could draw attention to itself and accentuate its problems.  
Another issue is that the behaviour of new depositors attracted through more competitive 
pricing may also be very different from that of existing depositors. These new deposits are 
likely to be more price sensitive and less stable. The benefit, in terms of funding stability, 
which  comes  from  increasing  deposits  through  competitive  pricing,  may  therefore  be 
somewhat illusory.  
How do Australian banks compare internationally? 
There  is  a  common  perception  that  banks  in  Australia  make  less  use  of  deposits  to  fund 
themselves  than  do  banks  in  other  countries.  However,  the  difference  between  Australian 
banks  and  their  overseas  peers  is  sometimes  exaggerated  by  inconsistencies  in  the  data 
across countries.  
Table 1 contains some data the Reserve Bank has put together on deposit funding for the 
major  banks  in  Australia,  Canada,  Germany,  Japan,  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  United 
States. We have tried to make the data as consistent as possible although they are probably 
still  a  long  way  from  being  fully  consistent.  The  data  show  that,  contrary  to  popular 
2 
 BIS Review 166/2009
perception, the share of funding from deposits for the major banks in Australia is similar to 
that for the major banks in Germany, Japan, the United Kingdom and the United States.1 
 
Table 1 
Share of domestic and foreign deposits in total funding1 
December 2008, per cent 
 Major banks 
61 
77 
56 
69 
60 
56 
Australia 
Canada  
Germany  
Japan  
United Kingdom  
United States  
1  Data based on the major banks in each country. Deposits include CDs. Total funding equals total liabilities, 
excluding derivative liabilities.  
Sources: central banks, national statistical agencies, banks’ financial statements, Standard and Poor’s, RBA. 
 
Another  commonly  quoted  metric  used  to  support  the  case  that  Australian  banks  are 
underweight deposits is the relatively high ratio of loans to deposits in Australia. The ratio for 
the major banks in Australia is around 130 per cent, whereas in most overseas countries the 
ratio varies between 80 per cent and 100 per cent (Table 2). However, as I have noted, this 
is  not  due  to  Australian  banks  having  lower  deposit  funding.  The  high  ratio  of  loans  to 
deposits reflects differences in asset composition. Banks in Australia mainly have loans on 
the asset side of their balance sheet, whereas banks overseas often have large holdings of 
debt securities. This results in a higher ratio of loans to deposits in Australia. But, rather than 
being a weakness, I would regard this as a strength of the Australian banks, as events of the 
past couple of years have shown that holdings of securities can be more risky than loans. 
Table 2 
Ratio of loans to deposits1 
December 2008, per cent 
 Major banks 
Australia 
Canada  
Germany  
Japan  
United Kingdom  
United States  
1  Data based on the major banks in each country. Foreign and domestic loans and deposits (including CDs).  
Sources: central banks, national statistical agencies, banks’ financial statements, Standard and Poor’s, RBA. 
131 
91 
97 
79 
89 
96 
                                                 
1  The figures for deposit shares in the table are higher than the figures quoted earlier in this talk because of 
definitional differences. To allow international comparisons, the figures for deposits in the table include CDs 
and are for the banking group, and hence include overseas as well as domestic operations. The denominator 
used to measure total funding is on-balance sheet liabilities (excluding derivatives) rather than total funding 
including equity and securitisation. 
BIS Review 166/2009 
 3
How far can banks lift their deposit ratios? 
An individual bank has a large amount of discretion in the way it funds itself, as it can bid 
more aggressively for the type of funds it wants and compete them away from other banks. 
The banking sector as a whole, however, has much less flexibility. For the banking sector as 
a whole to increase its use of deposit funding, it needs to  be able to induce a shift in the 
structure of the financial system away from financing through capital markets to on-balance 
sheet  funding  through  the  banking  sector.  Put  another  way,  for  the  banking  system  as  a 
whole, the share of deposits in total funding can increase only to the extent that investors 
reduce their holdings of securities and place the proceeds on deposit with banks.  
There are limits to the extent this can happen since there are a range of structural, economic 
and  cultural  factors  that  shape  the  composition  of  a  financial  system,  and  these  do  not 
change quickly. In fact, the trend in most economies is for savings over time to move away 
from simple instruments such as bank deposits towards debt securities and equities.  
To try to shift savings back to deposits would require a reversal of these trends, and there 
must be doubts about how feasible that would be. There is also the question of whether it 
would be sensible from the point of view of the overall functioning of the economy and the 
financial system.  
As I noted earlier, over the past year Australian banks as a whole have managed to increase 
the  share  of  their  funding  that  comes  from  deposits.  However,  the  bulk  of  this  occurred 
during  the  period  of  high  risk  aversion  late  last  year  and  early  this  year,  when  investor 
perceptions were that bank deposits were safer than debt securities and unit trusts. Over the 
past six months, as risk appetite among investors has returned, the deposit funding share of 
banks  has  stopped  rising.  It  would  seem  that  banks  have  largely  exhausted  the  available 
opportunities to induce investors to increase their holdings of bank deposits. The so-called 
“deposit war” among banks is producing very attractive interest rates for depositors but little 
net benefit for the banking system as a whole in terms of increasing deposit funding.  
What is happening to the cost of deposits? 
The  increased  competition  by  banks  for  deposits  has  added  substantially  to  their  cost  of 
funds. It used to be the case that on average banks paid about 125 basis points less than the 
cash rate on deposits. Now they are paying interest rates that are on average in line with the 
cash  rate  (Graph  3).  In  the  case  of  term  deposit  “specials”,  which  are  the  main  vehicle 
through which banks are currently competing for deposits, interest rates can be as much as 
several hundred points above the cash rate. 
Graph 3 
4 
  BIS Review 166/2009
Table 3 shows how the cost of various types of funding for the major banks has changed, 
relative to the cash rate, since the start of the financial crisis in mid 2007. It shows that the 
cost of new deposits has risen on average by 147 basis points relative to the cash rate over 
that  period.  This  rise  was  mainly  driven  by  an  increase  of  about  250  basis  points  in  the 
relative cost of term deposits. The cost of short-term debt relative to the cash rate has not 
changed much over the period, while the cost of new long-term debt has risen by 173 basis 
points relative to the cash rate. 
Table 3 
Estimated change in cost of new funds relative to  
the cash rate – major banks 
Since July 2007 
 Deposits  
– transactions 
– savings  
– term  
Short-term debt (incl CDs) 
Long-term debt  
Total 
Source: RBA. 
Basis points 
147 
250 
36 
250 
13 
173 
108 
 
The table indicates that the push by banks to increase the share of their funding that comes 
from deposits has added substantially to their costs. At the same time, the cost of long-term 
debt has risen sharply relative to the cash rate because of the global crisis.  
These  changes  in  banks’  cost  of  funds  relative  to  the  cash  rate  have  meant  that  the 
relationship  between  bank  lending  rates  and  the  cash  rate  has  also  become  looser.  It  is 
difficult for banks to adjust their lending rates in line with changes in the cash rate when the 
cost of their funds is rising substantially relative to the cash rate.  
We estimate that if banks had not adjusted their lending interest rates to reflect their higher 
cost of funds over the past couple of years, they would now be incurring losses (Graph 4). 
That would have threatened their ability to keep raising funds and, in turn, their capacity to 
lend. In the event, early in the financial crisis, banks did not pass on all of the increase in 
their  cost  of  funds,  but  recently  increases  in  lending  rates  have  run  ahead  of  the  cost  of 
funds. Banks’ margins are now a little wider than at the start of the crisis, and therefore are 
adding to profits. 
BIS Review 166/2009 
 5
Graph 4 
 The  margin  between  the  cash  rate  and  banks’  lending  rates  receives  considerable  public 
attention.  This  is  understandable  because  changes  in  it  are  very  visible.  This  margin, 
however, can change for many reasons, so it is difficult to interpret. A widening in it might be 
due  to  banks  making  unjustified  increases  in  their  lending  rates,  or  it  might  reflect  market 
developments that have pushed up banks’ cost of funds relative to the cash rate.  
Some have argued that variability in this margin means that monetary policy is less effective. 
This, however, misses the very important point that the Reserve Bank takes account of the 
changing  relativities  between  the  cash  rate  and  other  interest  rates  when  setting  the  cash 
rate. Other things equal, if interest rates in the economy are rising relative to the cash rate, 
there is less need for the cash rate to rise.  
The more relevant margin is that between the average interest rate on bank loans and the 
average cost of the funds used by banks to finance their loans. This is usually referred to as 
banks’ net interest margin.  
Between 2000 and 2007, the net interest margin on the major banks’ Australian operations 
had narrowed by about 100 basis points (Graph 5). This was driven by competition, and was 
made  possible  by  sizeable  reductions  in  banks’  operating  costs  over  that  period,  which 
allowed banks to continue operating profitably despite falling margins. 
Graph 5 
6 
  BIS Review 166/2009
As  I  mentioned,  early  in  the  financial  crisis,  the  banks’  net  interest  margin  was  squeezed 
further, as the cost of funds rose sharply and banks did not fully pass this on to interest rates 
on loans. Over the past year or so, however, margins have widened again, and they are now 
about 20 basis points above pre-crisis levels.  
This  recent  widening  in  the  net  interest  margin  has  been  largely  due  to  wider  margins  on 
banks’ business lending. The margin on variable housing loans is much the same today as it 
was at the start of the crisis; it had fallen until recently and the increase in home loan interest 
rates in December restored it to around its pre-crisis level.  
Margins  on  business  loans,  however,  are  now  substantially  higher  than  they  were 
immediately  before  the  crisis.  This  comes  after  a  prolonged  period  when  margins  on 
business loans had narrowed.  
Margins  on  business  loans  tend  to  vary  over  the  economic  cycle,  reflecting  changes  in 
perceptions  of  risk  by  banks.  During  periods of  a  strong economy,  banks  tend  to  cut  their 
margins as they see business loans as being less risky. In contrast, when the economic and 
business outlook is uncertain and loan losses are rising, as has been the case over the past 
couple of years, banks see loans as being more risky and margins widen.  
With the economy and business climate now improving, the economic justification for wider 
margins on loans is becoming less compelling, so it would be reasonable to assume that, in 
a competitive banking sector, we should see margins level out soon. Over the past couple of 
months, there have been some signs that this is starting to occur.  
What does this mean for monetary policy? 
As I have noted, over the past couple of years, the interest rates that matter in the economy 
– the rates on housing and business loans and the rates on deposits and debt securities – 
have  all  risen  relative  to  the  cash  rate  (Graph  6).  The  Reserve  Bank  has  taken  these 
changing relativities into account in its monetary policy decisions.  
Graph 6 
One of the implications of doing so, however, is that it has altered the relativity of the cash 
rate compared with its historical ranges. I want to end with a few words on this, and what it 
means for the interpretation of monetary policy settings.  
 BIS Review 166/2009 
 7
As you know, the cash rate is currently 3.75 per cent. This is still 50 basis points below the 
previous  cyclical  low  of  4.25  per  cent  in  2001.  On  the  surface  this  might  suggest  that  the 
cash  rate  is  still  unusually  low.  However,  with  other  interest  rates  in  the  economy  having 
risen by at least 100 basis points relative to the cash rate over the past couple of years, they 
are now above their previous cyclical lows.  
Another way to think about this is that the current level of deposit rates, housing loan rates 
and business loan rates would have been consistent, before the crisis, with a cash rate of at 
least 4.75 per cent.  
Taking these considerations into account, it would be reasonable to conclude that the overall 
stance  of  monetary  policy  is  now  back  in  the  normal  range,  though  in  the  expansionary 
segment of that range.  
The appropriateness of this will be monitored by the Reserve Bank over the months ahead in 
the light of the data becoming available on economic activity and inflation. 
8 
 BIS Review 166/2009
