A D Mminele: Recent economic developments in South Africa 
Remarks by Mr A D Mminele, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
Citigroup Global Issues Seminar, Istanbul, 4 October 2009.  
 Introduction  
1.  
Good  afternoon  ladies  and  gentlemen,  and  thank  you  to  Citigroup  Global  Markets  for 
providing the opportunity for us to interact and for me to share some thoughts with you on 
recent economic developments in South Africa.  
It has been just over two years since the dawn of the global financial crisis, and just more 
than  12  months  since  we  all  thought  the  end  of  the  world  was  upon  us  when  Lehman 
Brothers collapsed. Financial institutions have written-off more than USD1,5 trillion in losses, 
governments and central banks around the world have taken unprecedented actions in an 
attempt  to  restore  stability  to  financial  systems  and  to  prevent  the  global  recession  from 
becoming  entrenched.  The  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF),  the  Bank  for  International 
Settlements  (BIS),  and  various  other  institutions  have  been  working  tirelessly  on  several 
fronts to help countries, closely tracking economic and financial developments, giving policy 
advice, putting together forums to deal with issues related to regulation and supervision and 
assisting  emerging  markets  and  low-income  economies,  some  of  which  were  innocently 
caught up in the crisis.  
Fortunately,  in  South  Africa’s  case,  there  was  no  need  for  any  unconventional  policy 
measures,  and  there  was  no  need  to  focus  directly  on  financial  stability  issues  as  the 
domestic  banking  and  financial  system  has  remained  sound.  Money  market  operations 
continued as normal, and the interbank market has not experienced any difficulties.  
In discussing recent developments in South Africa I will limit my remarks to real economic 
developments, recent monetary policy developments, balance of payments and will also very 
briefly  touch  on  fiscal  policy  developments  and  the  state  of  our  banking  system.  I  will  be 
happy to respond to questions, as best as I can, pertaining to other areas that may be of 
particular interest to you.  
Real economic developments  
2.  
Last year this time, I delivered a speech at an investor gathering much like this one. I noted 
at the time that South Africa had been relatively shielded from the direct effects of the sub-
prime  crisis.  The  challenges  at  that  time  were  mainly  around  increased  financial  market 
volatility,  heightened  risk-aversion  resulting  in  less  portfolio  inflows  and  higher  costs  for 
raising  capital  in  international  markets.  However,  it  was  apparent  then  already,  that  as  an 
increasing  number  of  developed  and  emerging  economies  moved  into  recession,  South 
Africa, as a small and open economy, would not be able to avoid the spillover effects thereof. 
The only thing which was uncertain was the magnitude of the spillover.  
Indeed,  domestic  economic  activity  had  already  started  to  slow  on  account  of  tighter 
monetary  policy  applied  between  2006  and  2008,  resulting  in  slowing  domestic  demand. 
However, the real impact of the decline in global growth started to be felt in the fourth quarter 
of 2008, when for the first time in a decade, the domestic economy contracted. In the first 
quarter  of  2009,  the  domestic  economy  officially  entered  into  a  recession  and  a  third 
consecutive  quarter  of  negative  growth  was  recorded  in  the  second  quarter  of  this  year. 
South Africa was somewhat lagging the rest of the world.  
Initially, the declines in economic activity were concentrated in the manufacturing sector, but 
as  international  conditions  deteriorated,  the  slowdown  filtered  through  to  other  sectors  as 
BIS Review 121/2009 
 1
well.  The  strongest  contractions  were  recorded  in  the  export-oriented  sectors.  Virtually  all 
sub-sectors of the manufacturing industry were adversely affected and manufacturing output 
contracted by almost 20,0 per cent in the first half of 2009. Significantly reduced demand for 
basic metal and mineral products as well as lower international commodity prices weighed 
heavily  on  output  in  the  mining  sector,  which  contracted  by  almost  17,0  per  cent.  The 
performance of the mining sector in the first half of 2009 was not that significantly different to 
the first half of 2008, when it contracted by 11,0 per cent mainly as a result of power supply 
problems. The tertiary sector was weighed down by a contraction in output by the financial 
services  sector,  contracting  for  the  first  time  since  1992,  as  credit  extension  slowed  and 
capital  market  activity  was  subdued.  Consequently,  all  three  major  sectors  –  primary, 
secondary and tertiary – recorded negative real growth in the first half of 2009.  
It  came  as  no  surprise  then  that  the  labour  market  shed  jobs  on  a  broad  front,  but  most 
notably in the manufacturing, construction and mining sectors. Following a period of robust 
growth  between  2004  and  2007,  employment  in  both  the  private  and  public  sectors 
increased, pushing the unemployment rate down from 28 per cent in 2004 to 21,9 per cent in 
the  fourth  quarter  of  2008.  In  the  second  quarter  of  2009,  the  unemployment  rate 
unfortunately increased to 23,6 per cent.  
The Reuters consensus forecast estimates that the economy will contract by around 2,0 per 
cent  in  2009,1  before  growing  at  2,3  per  cent  in  2010.  Based  on  the  composite  leading 
business indicator, which has been increasing for the last few months, we may emerge from 
the recession later this year. Like in other parts of the world, there is uncertainty as to the 
strength of the recovery we are going to see.  
Monetary policy  
3.  
During  2008  the  MPC  was  more  concerned  about  the  generalised  nature  of  the  inflation 
dynamics that were brought about primarily by the succession of supply side shocks. It was 
only in the latter part of the year that global developments began to have a significant impact 
on the economy. The contraction in output, and hence the widening output gap, combined 
with an easing in inflationary pressures, allowed for a change in the monetary policy stance. 
The  MPC  also  decided  to  meet  more  frequently  in  order  to  assess  the  rapidly  changing 
operating  environment  in  a  timeous  manner  and  to  be  able  to  act  appropriately  when 
deemed necessary. Given the lag in the reaction of inflation to interest rate changes, and its 
focus on the medium to long-term expected inflation trajectory, the MPC decided to reduce 
the repurchase rate by 500 basis points between December 2008 and August 2009, despite 
the fact that inflation was still above the upper end of the inflation target range.  
At the most recent MPC meeting in September, the repo rate was left unchanged at 7,0 per 
cent. The MPC is of the view that the risks to the inflation outlook appear to be fairly evenly 
balanced,  and  with  the  current  monetary  policy  stance,  the  most  recent  forecast  indicates 
that  inflation  should  return  to  within  the  target  range  on  a  sustained  basis  by  the  second 
quarter of 2010.  
Upside risks to this forecast are mainly high increases in administered prices, above-inflation 
increases in nominal unit labour costs, as well as to an extent oil price developments. On the 
other hand factors such as weak consumption expenditure, weakness in credit aggregates, 
and  the  relatively  strong  exchange  rate  of  the  rand  will  provide  downside  pressure  on 
inflation. 
                                                 
1   Reuters consensus forecast, August 2009 survey. 
2 
 BIS Review 121/2009
Balance of payments  
4. 
The  contraction  in  real  gross  domestic  product  and  the  steep  decline  in  the  volume  of 
merchandise imports in the first half of 2009 led to a turnaround in the deficit on the trade 
account in the second quarter of 2009. South Africa’s trade balance, which had registered 
deficits since the third quarter of 2005, consequently changed from a deficit of R53,4 billion in 
the first quarter of 2009 to a surplus of R26,6 billion in the second quarter. The contraction in 
domestic economic activity since the middle of 2008 has also had a positive impact on the 
deficit  on  the  country’s  services,  income  and  current  transfer  account  with  the  rest  of  the 
world.  Owing  to  a  combination  of  continued  lower  net  income  and  other  service-related 
payments to non-residents, the deficit on this account narrowed considerably. As a result, the 
negative balance on the current account of the balance of payments improved from 7,0 per 
cent  of  gross  domestic  product  in  the  first  quarter  of  2009  to  3,2  per  cent  in  the  second 
quarter.  This  deficit  was  financed  through  a  combination  of  direct  and  portfolio  investment 
inflows.  
Banking sector developments  
5.  
South  African  banks  have  been  largely  shielded  against  the  direct  effects  of  the  global 
financial crisis. Apart from a sound regulatory framework, reasons were, among others, the 
fact  that  domestic  banks  had  not  invested  heavily  in  high-risk  securities  or  complex 
structured  products  and  had  very  limited  foreign  credit  exposure  in  their  loan  books.  Not 
surprisingly, though, the banking sector’s operating environment deteriorated, as a result of 
the adverse economic developments both in South Africa and internationally. This was felt by 
banks  mainly  through  continuously  rising  credit  impairments.  Impaired  advances  as  a 
percentage of gross loans and advances increased to 5,5 per cent at the end of June 2009 
from 2,3 per cent in January 2008. Nevertheless, the weaker asset quality of banks at this 
stage is not a source of major concern. Banks have maintained high capital levels, with the 
capital-adequacy ratio for the banking sector amounting to over 13,7 per cent in June 2009, 
and continued to be profitable, albeit at a lower level.  
Fiscal policy  
6.  
As a member of the G20 and in support of the commitments made to address the impact of 
the  financial  crisis,  South  Africa’s  fiscal  and  monetary  authorities  have,  like  in  many  other 
countries,  implemented  counter-cyclical  policies.  The  prudent  management  of  the  public 
finances during periods of robust growth has created the necessary space for fiscal policy to 
be expansionary during periods of slower growth.  
The expansionary fiscal policy, combined with monetary policy easing, should play a strong 
role  in  supporting  both  short  and  long-term  economic  growth  and  employment  creation.  In 
addition  continued  investment  in  a  broad  range  of  infrastructure  should  contribute  to 
improving the productive capacity of the economy. The central bank is not overly concerned 
at this point in time about the impact of expansionary fiscal policy on inflation, as it is suitable 
given current conditions.  
Outlook  
7.  
It  would  appear  that  the  actions  taken  collectively  and  individually  in  global  markets  have 
borne fruit. A number of economies have since moved out of recession and forecasts from 
the  IMF  and  OECD  are  looking  more  encouraging  than  just  a  few  months  ago.  How 
permanent  this  improvement  is,  however,  remains  to  be  seen.  Caution  is  warranted, 
nonetheless, as temporary monetary and fiscal stimulus measures may be providing a false 
sense of security.  
BIS Review 121/2009 
 3
As for South Africa, although growth continued to contract in the second quarter of this year, 
the pace of contraction slowed from -6,4 per cent in the first quarter to -3,1 per cent in the 
second quarter. The manufacturing sector appears to be turning the corner; the Purchasing 
Manager’s Index seems to be steadily climbing back towards the 50 threshold. Businesses 
and  consumers  are  also  more  optimistic  as  reflected  by  the  confidence  indices.  The 
composite leading indicator of the South African Reserve Bank has been increasing during 
the last three, indicating that a recovery can be expected by the end of the year.  
Conclusion  
8. 
In conclusion, there are encouraging signs that the global slowdown may have reached its 
lower turning point. There remains a high degree of uncertainty attached to the speed and 
extent of the recovery, however, the swift manner in which authorities reacted have certainly 
borne fruit. Developments in the South African economy are very much influenced by global 
economic developments. While we lagged on the way down, it is likely that we will lag on the 
way up.  
Taking  cognisance  of  the  global  financial  and  economic  environment,  and  domestic 
developments  with  regard  to  growth,  monetary  policy  will  remain  primarily  focused  on 
inflation management.  
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 121/2009
