Giovanni Carosio: Global remittances 
Remarks  by  Mr  Giovanni  Carosio,  Deputy  Director  General  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  at  the 
International  Conference  of  Remittances,  G8  Global  Remittances  Working  Group  plenary 
meeting, Rome, 9 November 2009. 
 Immigrant workers’ remittances are a substantial component of international financial flows. 
The total inflow to developing countries in 2008 is estimated at $330 billion, up 15 per cent 
on 2007 and twice as much as in 2004. This amount is more than three times the volume of 
aggregate official development assistance and three times net private debt inflows.  
That  remittances  can  be  a  powerful  lever  for  economic  development  is  demonstrated  not 
only by economic theory but by economic history. Take the case of Italy. In both periods of 
exceptionally rapid growth (1895–1913 and 1950–1970), remittances were a crucial factor, 
eliminating the external constraint. In more recent times, Italian emigration has waned, and 
Italy – historically a source of emigration – has become an increasingly attractive destination 
for migrants (since the late 1980s immigration has regularly outweighed emigration). Since 
1999, Italy has recorded a net outflow of migrants’ remittances.  
The  Heads  of  State  and  Government  of  the  G8  countries,  which  are  the  main  remittance-
sending  economies,  first  dealt  with  remittances  at  the  Sea  Island  Summit  in  2004.  Since 
then, a number of initiatives have been taken to improve information on remittance flows, to 
facilitate transfers and reduce fees, to ensure the safety and integrity of financial flows and to 
enhance their developmental impact. From the very start the Bank of Italy has contributed to 
this  agenda,  since  most  of  the  G8  goals  in  this  sphere  fall  within  the  Bank’s  institutional 
mandate. In the last four years, for instance, our research department has produced papers 
on  the  role  of  remittances  in  the  Mediterranean  countries,  their  impact  on  output  growth 
volatility and their effects on external payments crises.  
As  to  balance-of-payments  statistics,  the  Bank  of  Italy  has  contributed  to  the  international 
effort  to  harmonize  statistical  concepts  and  definitions  and  to  improve  data  collection 
methodologies.  In  2006  the  Bank  introduced  a  new  data  gathering  system  based  on 
information  from  money  transfer  operators  on  customers’  gross  remittance  transfers.  The 
new  system  has  greatly  improved  data  quality  and  is  a  methodological  landmark 
internationally.  
In the course of this year the G8 authorities have focused their work on immediate solutions 
to  apply  the  first  of  the  General  Principles  for  International  Remittances  Services,  namely: 
“The market for remittances should be transparent and have adequate consumer protection”.  
In  line  with  this  principle,  many  countries  are  developing  national  remittance  price 
comparison  databases  in  order  to  increase  market  transparency,  providing  information  to 
migrants who want to send money home that should enable them to acquire the information 
essential to informed choice.  
At  present  the  market  for  remittances  is  not  always  fully  transparent.  Two  issues  are 
particularly relevant: total price and speed of service.  
The  cost  of  a  money  transfer  is  not  actually  easy  to  calculate  due  to  two  variable 
components, i.e. transfer fee and exchange rate. Consequently, the consumer may not know 
exactly the amount of money the receiver will get. The difficulty is compounded for migrants, 
who  due  to  poor  financial  education,  language  barriers  and  time  constraints,  may  have 
difficulty  in  accessing  certain  services,  in  particular  bank  services.  This  may  result  in  the 
impossibility of comparing alternative remittances services and finding the most economical.  
BIS Review 154/2009 
 1
The  ready  availability  of  information  fosters  competitive  markets,  as  demand  will  tend  to 
concentrate on the most efficient remittance service providers, those offering quick service at 
lower cost.  
The national websites compliant with the World Bank standards provide all the information 
required for informed decisions: the fees charged, the exchange rate applied and the time 
necessary for the money to be available.  
The  Bank  of  Italy  welcomes  the  creation  of  a  national  price  comparison  website  and  will 
support  its  management,  facilitating  data  collection  and  providing  information  on  the  most 
significant corridors and on the latest updates in the retail payment market.  
This  initiative  is  consistent  with  the  overall  approach  taken  by  the  Bank  in  performing 
payment  system  oversight,  whose  aim  is  to  promote  efficiency.  In  this  particular  market 
efficiency is all the more important in view of the enormous impact that remittances may have 
on the economy of an emerging country. The analysis of the pricing of a payment instrument 
is one of the key indicators of a market’s performance: when the price reflects the cost of the 
payment instrument, the market is efficient. Efficient funds transfer, with no waste of time or 
money, enables migrants to channel their earnings to productive ends.  
In Italy the regulatory framework on transparency in the payment market will be enhanced by 
the Payment Services Directive. The objectives of the new legal framework are to heighten 
competition  in  the  retail  payment  market,  strengthen  user  protection  and  develop  more 
efficient payment services. A special set of provisions is dedicated to transparency: the two 
main  lines  of  action  are  elimination  of  non-explicit  price  mechanisms  and  achievement  of 
greater certainty on the terms applied in the supply of payment services.  
National legislation has to transpose the obligations laid down under these provisions with 
regard to “two-leg” transactions only, those in which both payment service providers (if there 
are  more  than  one)  are  located  within  the  EEA.  But  Italy  has  opted  for  broader  scope, 
extending the transparency rules also to one-leg transactions in which only one of the service 
providers is located in the EEA. The information requirements concern both the conditions of 
the  service  (ex  ante  transparency)  and  the  effective  execution  of  the  transaction  (ex  post 
transparency). They vary with the nature of the payment service contract and the needs of 
the customer.  
A new category of payment service provider is also envisaged by the Directive: the “payment 
institution”.  This  represents  an  opportunity  for  businesses  with  a  network  structure  and 
extensive distribution channels, such as mobile phone operators and large retailers, who will 
be  subjected  to  rules  laid  down  by  the  oversight  authorities  to  ensure  adequate  quality  of 
payment services.  
It goes without saying that the new regime will benefit remittances.  
The Bank of Italy also monitors technological innovation in the remittances market. A study 
the  Bank  is  currently  conducting  on  mobile  payments  has  found  that  most  operators  are 
interested in developing new remittance payment services using mobile phones. In fact, in 
the emerging countries mobile phones are already being used successfully to transfer money 
internationally. In the opinion of the mobile phone operators interviewed, in the medium-to-
long  term  it  will  be  possible  to  deploy  mobile  payments  applications  for  remittances  on  a 
large scale in Italy as well.  
To conclude, a number of initiatives in both the regulatory environment and the market may 
have a significant impact on the remittances industry, increasing transparency and efficiency.  
The Bank will continue to support these initiatives while monitoring the remittances market as 
part of its institutional mandate for oversight on the payment system, economic research and 
supervision of financial institutions.  
In  view  of  the  social  and  economic  impact  that  remittances  have  on  the  everyday  life  of 
migrants and the increasing attention of the G8 authorities, we hope that along the lines of 
2 
 BIS Review 154/2009
this  Italian  initiative,  and  of  those  in  other  countries,  remittance  price  databases  will  be 
introduced in many countries around the globe. 
BIS Review 154/2009 
 3
