Jean-Claude Trichet: Remarks on the occasion of the European Banker 
of the Year Award 
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the Award 
ceremony organised by the Group of 20 +1, Frankfurt am Main, 17 November 2009. 
 Mr Prime Minister, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I  am  very  pleased  to  be  here  again  this  year  and  to  be  paying  tribute  to  Jean-Claude 
Juncker, Prime Minister of Luxembourg and President of the Eurogroup.  
As  regards  the  “European  Banker  of  the  Year”  award,  I  warmly  congratulate  both  Jean-
Claude Juncker and the jury for this decision.  
My main aim for today is to say how honouring Jean-Claude Juncker is a very good choice 
for many reasons. I have known Prime Minister Juncker for many, many years and we have 
cooperated  ever  more  closely:  first  in  the  general  European  context;  then  through  my 
association  with  the  Eurogroup;  and  finally  in  the  current  crisis,  where  governments  and 
central banks have stood shoulder to shoulder.  
Let  me  briefly  review  Mr  Juncker’s  career  and  achievements.  Born  in  the  western  part  of 
Luxemburg, Mr Juncker studied law and earned his degree at Strasbourg University in 1979. 
A brilliant and dazzling rise followed: Mr Juncker became member of the government at the 
age of 28, first as Secretary of State and afterwards Minister for Labour. He was appointed 
Finance Minister at 35 and Prime Minister at 41. Throughout his career, Mr Juncker has been 
committed  to  Europe  and  participated  in  the  birth  of  the  Euro,  being  one  of  the  major 
architects of the Maastricht Treaty. His European convictions came to the fore in 2005, when 
he  submitted  the  Constitutional  Treaty  to  referendum,  putting  his  own  premiership  on  the 
line.  
With  Luxembourg  nestled  between  two  large  countries,  Mr  Juncker  is  a  very  visible 
representative  of  his  country  in  the  international  arena.  At  the  same  time,  he  is  widely 
appreciated as a very efficient behind-the-scenes negotiator on European issues, not least 
because he can see them from both the German and the French perspective. He once said – 
I quote here from the laudatory statement on the occasion of Mr Juncker being awarded the 
Charlemagne Prize in 2006 – that “institutional life in Europe is a bit like life in the animal 
kingdom – a flea can drive a lion crazy, but there is no known example of a lion driving a flea 
crazy. That shows how important it is to find the right balance between great and small.” This 
quote illustrates his strong belief in his country’s strategic role as a mediator alongside the 
larger European countries. 
Beyond that, Jean-Claude Juncker is currently the longest serving prime minister in the EU. 
This testifies to his leadership and the trust that he inspires in people. He also appears to be 
immune  to  what  academic  literature  has  come  to  label  “Juncker’s  say”.  On  the  need  for 
structural reforms, he once remarked that “we politicians know what to do, but what we do 
not  know  is  how  to  get  re-elected”.  Dear  Jean-Claude,  I  imagine  that  many  of  your  fellow 
heads of government look to you from time to time for guidance on how you have managed 
to succeed. 
Praise  for  Mr  Juncker  must  also  pay  tribute  to  his  leadership  skills  –  as  President  of  the 
Eurogroup – during the current financial and economic crisis. Since 2005, Mr Juncker serves 
as  the  first  permanent  President  of  the  Eurogroup.  Under  his  leadership,  the  Eurogroup 
provided  essential  input  to  the  concerted  action  plan  adopted  by  the  euro  area  Heads  of 
BIS Review 146/2009 
 1
State or Government on 12 October 2008, which was a key step in designing a framework 
for an EU policy response.  
In this context let me emphasise my appreciation for the full respect Jean-Claude Juncker 
has for the independence of the European Central Bank, which I qualified some years ago as 
the “fierce independence” of the central bank. As President of the ECB, I regularly attend, 
together with the Vice-President, the monthly meetings of the Eurogroup. Mr Juncker attends 
the meetings of the ECB’s Governing Council. The exchanges of views on these occasions 
help us, as policy-makers, to understand each others’ policy concerns while fully respecting 
each other’s responsibilities. I wish to take this opportunity to thank you, Jean-Claude, for the 
fruitful cooperation that we have enjoyed over the past few years. 
There is yet another aspect I admire about Mr Juncker, and this is his mastery of language. 
La maîtrise des langues en Europe est primordiale, car l’enjeu et le grand défi européen c’est 
la  création d’un  sentiment  collectif européen  mais  aussi  et  surtout  pouvoir  parler  le  même 
langage alors que l’on parle des langues différentes. C’est faire en sorte que, concrètement, 
les messages politiques soient entendus partout de la même manière quand bien même ils 
seront émis dans des langues différentes. Je me rappelle une pensée du philosophe Edgar 
Morin  qui  disait  que  “le  génie  européen  n’est  pas  seulement  dans  la  pluralité  et  dans  le 
changement,  il  est  dans  le  dialogue  des  pluralités  qui  produit  le  changement”  (Penser 
l’Europe).  C’est  pourquoi  Jean-Claude  Juncker,  avec  sa  parfaite  maîtrise  des langues,  est 
bien placé pour être au coeur du dialogue des pluralités qui constituent l'universel européen.  
Luxemburg  ist  ein  Beispiel  wie  verschiedene  Sprachen  und  Kulturen  in  einem  Land 
harmonisch  miteinander  leben,  sich  gegenseitig  befruchten  und  zu  einer  gemeinsamen 
Identität finden. Lëtzebuergesch, das zur deutschen Sprachfamilie zählt aber auch stark vom 
Französischen  beeinflusst  wurde,  ist  ein  gutes  Beispiel  für  diese  kulturelle  Synthese.  In 
dieser Weise kann man Luxemburg als “pars pro toto” für ganz Europa sehen. Vielleicht aus 
diesem  Grund  war  Luxemburg  die  erste  Stadt,  die  zweimal  zur 
“Europäischen 
Kulturhauptstadt” gekürt wurde.  
 Given  the  current  environment,  I  would  also  like  to  say  a  few  words  on  the  economic 
situation and recent developments.  
As you will recall from the press conference that followed the Governing Council meeting of 
5 November  2009,  both  pillars  of  our  monetary  policy  strategy  indicate  that  inflationary 
pressures  over  the  medium  term  are  low.  Our  assessment  is  therefore  that  the  current 
stance of monetary policy, which encompasses both very low interest rates and a series of 
non-standard measures, remains appropriate. Monetary policy thus continues to support the 
availability  of  liquidity  in  the  financial  system  and  the  recovery  of  the  euro  area  economy. 
Having  said  this,  improved  conditions  in  financial  markets  imply  that  not  all  of  our  non-
standard measures will be needed to the same extent as before. 
The latest information and analyses are broadly in line with our expectations. While annual 
HICP  inflation  was  slightly  negative  in  October,  it  is  expected  to  turn  positive  again  in  the 
coming months, and to remain at moderately positive rates over the policy-relevant horizon. 
At  the  same  time,  the  latest  information  continues  to  signal  an  improvement  in  economic 
activity in the second half of this year. Although this outlook remains subject to a high degree 
of uncertainty, we expect the euro area economy to recover at a gradual pace in 2010. The 
monetary  analysis  confirms  the  assessment  of  low  inflationary  pressure  over  the  medium 
term, as money and credit growth has continued to slow down. Against this background, the 
current  rates  remain  appropriate,  and  we  therefore  decided  to  leave  the  key  ECB  interest 
rates unchanged.  
Market  expectations  for  inflation  are  in  line  with  our  assessment.  In  particular,  medium  to 
longer-term  inflation  expectations  remain  firmly  anchored  in  line  with  our  aim  of  keeping 
inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium term.  
2 
 BIS Review 146/2009
Let me make one remark on exchange rates. I have repeatedly been on record in saying that 
I appreciate the statements made by the US President, the US Secretary of the Treasury and 
the  Chairman  of  the  Federal  Reserve  that  a  strong  dollar  is  in  the  interest  of  the  United 
States  of  America.  I  agree  with  this  analysis  entirely.  I  would  add  that  I  believe  that  the 
strength  of  the  dollar  within  the  set  of  floating  currencies  is  in  the  interest  not  only  of  the 
United  States,  but  of  the  entire  international  community.  I  noted  with  great  interest  the 
remarks made yesterday by Chairman Ben Bernanke at the Economic Club of New York. He 
said:  “The  Federal  Reserve  will  continue  to  monitor  these  developments  closely.  We  are 
attentive  to  the  implications  of  changes  in  the  value  of  the  dollar  and  will  continue  to 
formulate  policy  to  guard  against  risks  to  our  dual  mandate  to  foster  both  maximum 
employment  and  price  stability.  Our  commitment  to  our  dual  objectives,  together  with  the 
underlying  strengths  of  the  US  economy,  will  help  ensure  that  the  dollar  is  strong  and  a 
source of global financial stability”. This is a very important statement by my colleague, with 
whom I have a very good relationship. We are fully aligned in this analysis.  
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 146/2009 
 3
