Sada Reddy: Medium term strategy for financial inclusion in Fiji 
Opening  speech  by  Mr  Sada  Reddy,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  at  the 
microfinance  workshop  on  “Medium  term  strategy  for  financial  inclusion  in  Fiji,  Lami, 
4-5 November 2009. 
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen. 
 Introductory remarks 
A very warm welcome to you all. I am delighted that you have kindly accepted our invitation 
to participate in this workshop. I am confident that this workshop will greatly benefit from the 
valuable experiences and knowledge that you will share with each other over the next two 
days. I wish to acknowledge the support of the Pacific Financial Inclusion Programme (PFIP) 
of the UN in co-hosting this workshop with us.  
Financial inclusion, which includes microfinance, has been acknowledged the world over as 
critical  to  lifting  the  living  standards  of  people  and  addressing  poverty.  Financial  inclusion, 
that  is,  the  availability  of  safe  savings,  appropriately  designed  loans  for  the  poor  and  low 
income  households  and  for  micro,  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises,  and  appropriate 
insurance and payments services – can help people help themselves to increase incomes, 
acquire  capital,  manage  risk  and  work  their  way  out  of  poverty.  As  such,  each  developing 
country  should  have  a  variety  of  financial  institutions  that,  together,  offer  appropriate 
products and services to all segments of the population. 
Working together – a coordinated approach 
I note that a number of you present here today have been involved in the development of 
microfinance  over  the  years.  Some  of  us,  however,  are  new  to  this  subject  of  financial 
inclusion. I hope that our combined experiences and efforts can translate into developing a 
practical and results oriented financial inclusion strategy for Fiji. This is the main objective of 
this microfinance workshop. We have to each identify our roles in developing the strategy. 
Your participation and support towards this co-ordinated approach is needed. 
I  would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  acknowledge  and  thank  the  Government,  donor 
agencies, NGOs and our banking institutions for their contributions so far in developing the 
microfinance industry, financial literacy programmes and rural banking in Fiji.  
Whilst the RBF fully supports and celebrates the many achievements of our stakeholders, we 
firmly believe that much more can be done to improve financial inclusion in our communities. 
We realise the great potential that exists which could be harnessed given the right strategic 
approach and leadership.  
Action plan 
I  am  a  firm  believer  in  action  and  achieving  set  goals  with  realistic  deadlines,  rather  than 
mere talk. I do not wish for this workshop to be another meeting where we just come, talk 
and go away. I will be very interested in the practical Action Plan that the workshop should 
produce  at  the  end  of  the  2-day  meet.  I  look  forward  to  your  usual  contribution  and 
commitment in this respect. 
Over the years, we have seen various action plans being generated at meetings held for the 
development of microfinance and SMEs. Most of these plans have remained plans and not 
BIS Review 138/2009 
 1
actioned. A good starting point therefore would be to do a stocktake to determine the extent 
of financial inclusion in the country and then determine areas that need further improvement 
and who should be responsible for doing this.  
This  should  be  followed  by  developing  strategies  for  lifting  financial  inclusion  in  Fiji  to  the 
next  level.  What  role  can  each  of  the  institutions  represented  here  play  to  realise  the 
extension of financial services to the remote areas? It is my hope that this workshop will not 
only crystallise these roles for us, but that we will action them so that we achieve measurable 
results.  
What the Reserve Bank is doing 
For  a  number  of  years  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji  has  been  advocating  the  development  of 
microfinance in Fiji and also greater participation of the financial sector in areas like financial 
literacy and access to banking for rural/remote areas of Fiji, similar to many other developing 
economies around the world.  
This year, as many of you may be well aware, the RBF has taken the challenge of promoting 
financial  inclusion  in  Fiji  and  ensuring  a  financial  system  geared  towards  supporting  this 
critical area. Our intention is to see the poor or those considered unbankable being provided 
access  to  savings  and  credit  facilities  that  will  ultimately  help  in  reducing  poverty. 
Accordingly, the aim of the workshop is to come up with clear and actionable strategies for 
promoting financial inclusion.  
The microfinance sector plays a very important role in economic development. This has been 
proven  in  both  the  developing  and  developed  countries  of  the  world.  We  have  seen  it 
necessary to pick up the momentum in this particular area of economic development. For this 
reason, the RBF has become more involved rather than just playing a promotional role. To 
express our commitment, we established a new Department at the Bank called the Financial 
Systems Development and Compliance Group. Amongst other responsibilities, the Group will 
drive  the  development  of  microfinance  and  other  financial  inclusion  initiatives  to  reach  the 
poor and vulnerable in society. This workshop is the materialisation of planning by this new 
Department  which  has  only  been  in  existence  for  over  7  months.  The  outcomes  of  this 
meeting will also be monitored by this Group. 
The RBF has announced policies whereby the banks and other financial institutions are to 
increase  their  involvement  in  microfinance.  Policy  guidelines  have  been  issued  to  them  in 
this regard.  
An inclusive financial sector 
The  idea  for  this  workshop  was  mooted  in  a  meeting  with  commercial  banks  during  the 
microfinance workshop organised by the Microfinance Pacifika in July this year. One of the 
critical  outcomes  that  I  wish  to  see  arising  from  this  workshop  is  the  strategy  on  the 
integration of commercial banks in Fiji in providing microfinance services from January next 
year.  
The  financial  system  is  a  locomotive  for  growth  and  banks  are  the  main  players  in  this 
system.  Their  importance  comes  with  responsibilities  as  well.  No  doubt,  banks  have 
contributed to the development of the country over the years. However, I would like to see 
them play a more influential and active role in addressing the unbanked population through 
financial inclusion initiatives.  
There is a moral responsibility as well for the commercial banks to develop financial services 
to suit the development needs of a country. Banking licences are not issued as a right, but 
are  a  privilege.  Therefore,  the  commercial  banks’  policies  need  to  be  aligned  to  the 
development  needs  of  a  country  in  which  they  operate.  Of  course,  we  understand  that 
2 
 BIS Review 138/2009
commercial banking is a very specialised area and risks need to be managed carefully so 
that depositors’ interests are safeguarded. 
I  therefore  strongly  believe  that  the  commercial  banks  operating  in  Fiji  CAN  play  a  more 
active  role  in  the  economic  and  social  development  of  our  country,  by  providing  banking 
services to suit the needs of our people, especially those considered to be un-commercial or 
unbankable.  This  has  been  successfully  demonstrated  by  commercial  banks  in  many 
countries in Asia, South America and Africa, where financial services are normally tailored to 
the  needs  of  the  people  and  the  country.  Banks  in  these  countries  have  modified  their 
operations to include microfinance because they realized the opportunities that existed.  
We  believe  that  commercial  banks  with  their  outreach  and  resources  have  a  unique 
opportunity,  not  only  to  contribute  to  the  development  of  our  rural  areas  and  assist  the 
marginalised in our communities, but also capitalise on this investment and make reasonable 
returns.  
Nevertheless,  I  understand  that  the  commercial  banks  will  need  to  work  out  their  own 
strategies and ensure appropriate and adequate resources are invested in the provision of 
this  service.  There  is  no  doubt  that  banks  would  need  to  undergo  certain  degree  of 
adjustments to enable them to provide microfinance services. But, it can be done. I am glad 
that  the  programme  will  have  some  discussions  on  this  important  area.  I  note  also  that 
experiences in other countries will be shared in some sessions. 
There  is  a  need  for  greater  consultation  and  collaboration  with  the  banks  to  address  the 
issues  which  will  guide  us  in  promoting  the  development  of  micro,  small  and  medium 
enterprises, rural banking and promoting financial literacy.  
We heard from various agencies and institutions during the Pacific Microfinance Week held 
in July this year, of the different types of micro insurance and financial literacy programs that 
have been developed so far. There are significant opportunities for banks to package these 
services and products and offer them alongside saving and micro credit facilities. In addition, 
new products can be developed that can be adapted to suit the needs of our unique market. 
You will be pleased to know that microfinance services offered by commercial banks can be 
a profitable business too. 
A study by the Simon Fraser University in Canada that assessed six different models used 
by commercial banks around the world for downscaling into microfinance concluded that the 
model where the bank sets up a separate service company was the highest performing 
model.  
Over  the  next  two  days,  through  the  program  sessions  and  speakers  we  will  assess  and 
strategically  review  the  needs  of  our  markets.  We  should  then  be  in  a  better  position  to 
determine the key challenges and opportunities, and then try to workout a win-win situation 
for all stakeholders. We do not believe that this is an insurmountable task.  
There is an untapped market out there that is awaiting your institutions’ innovative packaging 
and provision of appropriate financial services and products. These financial services include 
loans for business and personal use, savings and other deposit products, remittances and 
transfers, payments services and insurance.  
Financial inclusion is about CHANGE and INNOVATION. It is about opening up new product 
lines, new services and attitudes that may bring about positive changes to the marginalised 
and poor in our communities. 
Commercial banks with their international experiences, extensive retail branch network have 
the  ability  to  use  their  existing  networks,  computer  systems,  and  senior  management 
structures, institutional marketing campaigns and other expenditures to leverage-off and offer 
more financially inclusive products and services. 
What we have learnt from other countries experiences is that for commercial banks reaching 
down the market goes beyond scaling down existing products. Micro clients have different 
BIS Review 138/2009 
 3
needs, and therefore microfinance services and products need to be tailored and adapted to 
suit the local environment before it is offered to the market. Over the course of the provision 
of  these  services,  vital  constructive  learning  will  occur  on  the  part  of  the  banks  which 
enhance the efficiency of the services provided and lower costs. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen  we  can  and  need  to  start  somewhere  and  make  the  CHANGE 
necessary  to  empower  our  communities  and  providing  a  chance  to  the  otherwise 
“commercially undeserved”. This will also require a change of mindset on our part. Like all 
changes, there is always resistance. But in small island economies like ours, co-operation 
and co-ordination is vital amongst all the players in society to allow us to realize our potential 
and  improve  the  living  standards  of  our  people.  Government  agencies,  the  private  sector, 
donors and civil society organizations all have a responsibility in this regard. As stakeholders 
in the microfinance or financial inclusion segment of our society, this workshop provides you 
with the ideal opportunity to make a difference.  
Without  the  right  financial  structure  and  accessibility  to  appropriate  financial  services  our 
rural sector will not grow. As I mentioned previously, banks are the most ideal institutions that 
can assist by providing financial services to micro & small business enterprises given their 
vast resources and experience. It is our duty in the financial sector to assist the other sectors 
of our economy by making accessible the tools and the means to work in our rural areas. I 
am confident that together we can deliver. 
Furthermore,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  been  approached  by  a  number  of  telecommunication 
operators  to  offer  basic  banking  service  through  mobile  phones  at  very  affordable  prices. 
These  types  of  services  will  further  enhance  the  promotion  of  financial  inclusion  in  Fiji, 
especially in terms of mobilising the savings and easy access to remittances. In addition, this 
will  provide  increased  choice  of  financial  services  available  to  people  in  geographically 
isolated and remote areas of Fiji. 
Concluding remarks 
Let me wrap up by informing you ladies and gentlemen, that Fiji, like any other developing 
country, is currently reviewing and reforming its financial sector to make it a locomotive for 
growth and development.  
The reviews are aimed at strengthening policies to improve the regulatory environment and 
set the right platform for our economy to grow. The Reserve Bank of Fiji has in the last few 
months taken on a more active role in terms of defining a more strategic approach for various 
sectors of the economy. 
We believe that much more can be done to improve accessibility of financial services to the 
unbanked  in  our  communities.  Studies  have  shown  that  there  are  many  opportunities  for 
commercial  banks  in  banking  the  commercially  underserved.  There  are  many  success 
stories  that  have  been  documented  in  Fiji  evident  from  the  FDB’s  Small  Business  Award 
which highlight that low income markets can be served on a sustainable level. This role is not 
limited  to  banks  alone.  The  Government,  the  RBF,  civil  society  and  other  private  sector 
players also have a role to play. 
Microfinance has been proven to be an effective means of reducing poverty and empowering 
the marginalised in our societies. It can make a difference in improving housing, health and 
education  and  more  particularly  in  improving  the  status  and  empowerment  of  women  in 
social and economic activities.  
For  our  economy  to  prosper  it  is  vital  that  everyone  has  the  opportunity  to  effectively 
contribute through employment and gainful economic activities.  
We  in  Fiji  are  blessed  with  abundant  natural  resources  and  a  sound  and  well  managed 
financial system. We can all transform and lift the standards of living by working together to 
create an enabling environment for our people.  
4 
 BIS Review 138/2009
The challenge for us here today is to open ourselves to change.  
With  these  words,  I  now  declare  the  national  microfinance  workshop  open  and  wish  the 
meeting every success.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 138/2009 
 5
