Hirohide Yamaguchi: Challenges for Japanese financial institutions after 
the financial crisis 
Speech  by  Mr  Hirohide  Yamaguchi,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  Retail 
Finance Strategy Conference 2009, Tokyo, 25 November 2009. 
 Introduction  
Thank  you  for  having  me  at  the  Retail  Finance  Strategy  Conference  2009.  It  is  my  great 
honor  to  have  an  opportunity  to  speak  in  front  of  you  who  have  been  in  the  front  line  of 
business.  
Japanese financial institutions have been significantly affected by the current global financial 
crisis.  The  impact  has  spread  over  to  the  area  of  retail  banking  through  deteriorating  the 
business performance of small- and medium-sized firms and sluggish sales of mutual funds. 
I will talk today about my views on the challenges for Japanese financial institutions after the 
current crisis, and offer my thoughts on approaches to meeting the challenges. I hope my 
speech can shed new light on your thinking of retail banking strategies.  
Looking back at the global financial crisis over the past year 
I. 
It  is  more  than  a  year  since  the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers  in  the  autumn  of  2008.  Once 
turbulent  global  financial  markets  have  recently  regained  stability  mainly  due  to  ample 
liquidity provision by central banks around the world. The global financial system has also 
been gradually regaining stability, thanks to, among others, the effects of injections of public 
capital into major U.S. and European financial institutions. Meanwhile, the global economy 
deteriorated rapidly up to the spring of this year, but has been on a recovery path supported 
by  policy  responses  on  the  fiscal  and  financial  front  as  well  as  firms’  efforts  in  production 
adjustment.  
To start with, the crisis resolution is only halfway through both on the economic and financial 
fronts.  The  balance  sheets  of  financial  institutions  in  the  United  States  and  Europe  have 
been deteriorating, including loan assets, and the completion of their adjustments are likely 
to take some more time. I would say that the global financial system as a whole still retains 
vulnerability.  
Arguably, the essence of the current global financial crisis is the generation and burst of the 
credit bubble. While many reasons have been pointed out, I will point out particularly these 
three. 
First, as accommodative financial environment continued on a global scale up to the middle 
of the 2000s and price stability and high economic growth were achieved, many “excesses” 
were generated in the risk-taking activity of various economic entities.  
On the real economic activity front, for example, against a backdrop of the sustained rise in 
housing  prices,  the  household  sector  in  the  United  States  increased  borrowing  and 
significantly increased consumption. On the financial front, new types of transactions such as 
securitized products and derivatives prevailed, and leverage increased. Such “excess” in real 
economic  activity,  asset  prices  and  financial  markets  influenced  each  other  to  generate 
further  “excess.”  Once  the  credit  bubble  burst,  the  unwinding  of  the  leverage  began,  and 
liquidity in the global financial markets rapidly contracted. On the real economic activity front, 
firms were forced to curtail aggressively their production due to the pile up of inventories, and 
the global economy contracted significantly.  
BIS Review 153/2009 
 1
Second,  as  what  is  the  other  side  of  same  coin  of  the  macro  aspects  that  I  have  just 
mentioned,  the  micro  financial  institution  behavior  also  went  too  far  under  inadequate  risk 
management or overconfidence.  
Since the turn of the 2000s “the originate-to-distribute model” became common among major 
financial institutions in the United States and Europe, and it has been said that, in such a 
process, loan screening lacked substance at financial institutions that were the originators of 
loans.  Financial  institutions  that  were  supposed  to  have  transferred  credit  risk  through 
distribution  were  forced  to  repurchase  securitized  products  after  the  crisis  occurred,  and 
were  reminded  of  a  major  misconception  about  their  risk  recognition  at  the  time  of 
distribution. Even as for liquidity risk, in retrospect, it was revealed that financial institutions 
significantly underestimated the market liquidity, mainly of securitized products. Such lack of 
proper risk management and others led to financial institutions’ excessive risk-taking activity. 
However, once the unwinding of leverage began in tandem with the outbreak of a financial 
crisis, financial institutions in the United States and Europe incurred massive losses, which 
made their risk-taking stance rapidly cautious. That was typically shown in the current decline 
in lending of financial institutions in the United States and Europe.  
Third,  it  cannot  be  denied  that  somewhat  slow  responses  by  the  policy  and  supervisory 
authorities in the United States and Europe to the generation of the credit bubble preceding 
the crisis also eventually amplified the current crisis.  
One reason for that was the difficulty the policy authorities and supervisory authorities had 
faced in identifying the location and the size of risks, due to the expansion of the so-called 
shadow banking by insurance firms, monoline companies, and hedge funds. That was one of 
the factors behind the recent review of regulatory and supervisory systems overseas. On the 
monetary  policy  front,  it  can  be  pointed  out  that  central  banks  had  not  organized  their 
thoughts with respect to the containment of the credit bubble, including how a central bank 
should respond to asset price developments. Namely, while there was a standpoint to argue 
that “a central bank should not apply monetary policy to asset price developments but should 
carry  out  aggressive  monetary  easing  after  the  burst  of  a  bubble,”  there  was  another 
standpoint to argue that “considering the magnitude of the adverse impact on the economy 
following the burst of a bubble, a central bank should conduct monetary policy to avoid the 
generation of a bubble.” In short, there was no consensus among the central banks around 
the  world  on  how  to  ensure  macroprudence.  Based  on  the  current  financial  crisis,  central 
banks have commonly recognized the importance of analyzing and assessing the financial 
system as a whole by eyeing the relationship between the real economy and the financial 
system  from  a  viewpoint  of  macroprudence.  And,  how  to  cope  with  asset  prices  on  the 
monetary policy front is expected to be further discussed in the future.  
Those are the issues that I particularly deem important concerning the generation and burst 
of the current credit bubble.  
In  the  U.S.  and  European  financial  markets,  there  have  been  lively  discussions  on  the 
rebuilding of financial institutions’ business model, taking into account the experience of the 
current crisis. Many may feel it uneasy to apply directly the discussions overseas on financial 
institutions’  business  to  Japanese  financial  institutions.  Such  feeling  might  come  from  the 
significant difference in how the current crisis arose in the United States and Europe, and in 
Japan.  Namely,  for  Japanese  financial  institutions,  unlike  the  U.S.  and  European  financial 
institutions, the first-round effects associated with the turmoil in structured product markets 
have been relatively marginal while the second-round effects associated with the economic 
downturn  and  the  plunge  in  stock  prices  have  been  profound.  Now  I  will  talk  about  the 
characteristics of Japanese financial institutions and the challenges for them by also referring 
to the results of the analyses made in the Bank of Japan’s biannual Financial System Report. 
2 
 BIS Review 153/2009
II. 
The present state of Japanese financial institution management  
Characteristics of Japanese financial institutions’ management 
Japanese financial institutions and financial institutions in the United States and Europe are 
the  same  in  terms  of  exerting  the  important  financial  intermediation  function,  but  quite 
different in terms of business model and risk-taking stance.  
First, in Japan, deposits are dominant in the financial assets of the household sector, and at 
Japanese  financial  institutions,  both  the  major  banks  and  the  regional  banks,  traditional 
commercial banking that focuses on deposit-taking and lending still carries much weight.  
As previously mentioned, financial institutions in the United States and Europe have recently 
expanded  the  originate-to-distribute  model,  and,  in  terms  of  profit,  have  been  increasingly 
relying on the fee business and the trading business. Japanese financial institutions, mainly 
the  major  banks,  have  been  strengthening  investment  banking  and  asset  management 
businesses. However, deposit preference in the household sector has been deeply rooted, 
and  the  pattern  that  financial  institutions  using  their  deposits  as  a  source  of  loans  and 
investments, mainly in government bonds, has not changed much. As a result, while the ratio 
of borrowing from financial institutions to firms’ aggregate funding except for stocks is about 
20 percent in the United States, that ratio reaches 50 percent in Japan. Also from that point, 
you can see that the flow of funds through deposits and lending in Japan is still dominant.  
Second,  in  terms  of  transaction  relationship  between  financial  institutions  and  customers, 
while  financial  institutions  are  gradually  shifting  to  focus  on  the  profitability  of  individual 
transactions, the stance of building a long-term stable business relationship based on overall 
profitability appears to persist.  
Such  focus  on  the  long-term  transaction  relationship  is  by  no  means  unique  to  Japanese 
financial  institutions,  and  is  also  observed  in  U.S.  regional  banks.  However,  in  the  United 
States,  such  business  relationship  with  customers  seems  to  have  been  changing  with  the 
expansion  of  securitized  markets.  In  addition,  in  the  area  of  small  firm  lending,  small 
business  loans  that  simplify  the  screening  process  have  increased  mainly  in  major  U.S. 
banks. That can also be considered as an expansion of lending business that is not based on 
the long-term customer relationship.  
Also in Japan, the long-term relationship between financial institutions and customers once 
called  a  main-bank  system  has  been  gradually  waning  and  transactions  that  attach 
importance to individual profitability have been emphasized. Small business loans were also 
once actively used in Japan. Financial institutions have come to provide fine-tuned services 
to depositors according to their outstanding amount of deposits and the frequency of the use 
of services, and have not necessarily consider their profitability in the context of long-term 
transaction relationship. However, such changes in the transaction relationship proceed only 
gradually and it appears that the financial institutions’ basic stance of pursuing the long-term 
stable transaction relationship with customers has not changed substantially. For example, 
the  practice  of  cross-shareholdings  between  financial  institutions  and  large  firms  still 
remains,  albeit  declining  in  size.  It  seems  that  the  regional  financial  institutions  have  also 
been focusing on the long-term transaction relationship with local firms as in the past.  
Third, in terms of risk-taking, Japanese financial institutions generally appear to have been 
maintaining a cautious stance.  
Behind that was a powerful effect of Japanese financial institutions’ experience of incurring 
massive  losses  in  the  aftermath  of  the  bursting  of  the  bubble  in  the  1990s.  One  of  the 
lessons learned from the bubble and its burst was the size of risk of concentrating credit on 
specific  industries  or  firms.  While  it  was  difficult  for  some  financial  institutions  to  pursue 
active  risk-taking  until  they  completed  their  repayment  of  public  funds,  I  believe  that 
Japanese  financial  institutions  as  a  whole  generally  appear  to  have  been  maintaining  a 
cautious risk-taking stance based on the experience I have just mentioned.  
BIS Review 153/2009 
 3
Effects of the financial crisis and challenges for Japanese financial institutions  
As seen above, Japanese financial institutions faced the current global financial crisis without 
being able to change substantially the existing management characteristics. As a result, the 
first-round  effects  of  the  crisis,  namely  the  losses  stemming  from  investments  in  U.S. 
securitized  products  and  originate-to-distribute-type  operations  in  the  U.S.  and  European 
financial markets, has remained relatively limited as mentioned before.  
The  second-round  effects  brought  about  by  the  current  financial  crisis,  namely,  the  losses 
stemming  from  the  economic  downturn  and  the  plunge  in  stock  prices  have  by  no  means 
been limited. Net income of Japanese financial institutions in fiscal 2008 made an about-turn 
to mark net losses of about two trillion yen from net profits of about two trillion yen in fiscal 
2007, due mainly to the increase in credit costs and losses related to stocks. In that regard, 
the  aforementioned  characteristics  of  Japanese  financial  institution  management  seem  to 
have rather worked in an adverse way to the deterioration in business performance. In other 
words, the current crisis has highlighted the basic challenges inherent in Japanese financial 
institution management. Let me elaborate those challenges.  
First, low profitability of financial institutions.  
While  Japanese  financial  institutions’  profits  recovered  significantly  after  the  middle  of  the 
2000s,  it  was  mainly  attributable  to  the  reversals  in  loan-loss  provisions,  thanks  to  the 
progress in the disposal of impaired assets and economic recovery. For example, the sum of 
net income of Japanese financial institutions for the past 20 years is in the red. While the 
sum includes significant losses stemming from the disposal of impaired assets after the burst 
of  the  bubble,  the  net  income  of  Japanese  financial  institutions  remains  quite  low  even  if 
those losses are excluded.  
The major reason for such low profits is the low interest income. Looking at the interest rate 
margins on loans (i.e., the interest rate on lending minus the interest rate on deposits), which 
is one component of interest income, for the past 20 years, the margin has been five to six 
percent on average for U.S. banks, while it has remained at slightly below two percent for 
Japanese  financial  institutions.  The  main  reason  behind  such  low  interest  rate  margins  of 
Japanese financial institutions is attributable to the fact that many financial institutions have 
basically been consistently in the interest rate competition as they compete with each other 
in the relatively homogenous commercial banking business with an aim to obtain a long-term 
stable  transaction  relationship.  In  short,  the  difference  in  business  model  by  financial 
institutions  is  hardly  observed.  According  to  the  analysis  of  the  lending  market  in  Japan, 
many financial institutions tend to enter the regions that have a large lending market, thereby 
intensifying  competition.  By  contrast,  in  the  U.S.  market,  there  is  no  significant  correlation 
between  market  size  and  market  concentration,  which  suggests  that  certain  segregation 
among financial institutions might be in place. While it is not clear why such a segregation 
was  possible,  it  is  clear  that  the  segregation  enabled  financial  institutions  to  avoid  the 
needless interest rate competition.  
Of  course  it  is  not  the  case  that  Japanese  financial  institutions  themselves  have  not  been 
doing  anything  to  cope  with  such  low  profitability.  Signs  of  expansion  in  the  investment 
banking  business,  including  M&A  business,  have  also  been  continuing  in  Japan.  Small 
business  loans  were  once  actively  promoted.  However,  since  credit  costs  increased 
significantly, many banks have recently been forced to downsize or withdraw from the small 
business loan operations. As for household asset management, the expansion of over-the-
counter  sales  of  mutual  funds  and  insurance  has  been  pursued.  Moreover,  at  the  major 
banks, the efforts to bring consumer credit companies, credit card companies, and consumer 
finance  companies  under  the  banks’  umbrella  were  temporarily  intensified.  However,  the 
profits from those affiliated companies have been sluggish, partly due to the changes in the 
environment  they  are  in.  After  all,  the  fruits  of  pursuing  new  businesses  have  not  been 
sufficient  so  far,  and,  at  present,  the  new  businesses  have  not  contributed  in  a  significant 
way to improving the profitability of financial institutions.  
4 
 BIS Review 153/2009
Second, Japanese financial institutions’ profits are subject to the fluctuations in credit costs 
and stock prices. 
In  particular,  as  operating  profits  from  the  core  business  have  been  remaining  low,  a 
significant increase in credit costs and losses on stocks might immediately bring periodical 
income  into  the  red.  In  fact,  eight  times  in  the  past  20  years,  the  sum  of  credit  costs  and 
losses  related  to  stocks  reached  a  level  more  than  that  of  operating  profits  from  the  core 
business.  
While  the  level  of  credit  costs  fairly  declined,  reflecting  the  completion  of  the  disposal  of 
impaired  assets,  it  started  to  rise  again  in  fiscal  2008  due  to  the  economic  downturn.  In 
addition,  the  outstanding  balance  of  financial  institutions’  strategic  cross-shareholding  was 
reduced almost by half during the disposal process of impaired assets in the early 2000s for 
the major banks, and remains almost unchanged since then. That suggests that the practice 
of  cross-shareholding  between  financial  institutions  and  firms  remains,  and,  at  the  same 
time, the current outstanding amount of shareholding is still a factor in inducing large swings 
in financial institution profits.  
While  the  challenges  cannot  be  met  easily,  I  expect  financial  institutions  to  consider  them 
now as a golden opportunity and step up their efforts in order also to maintain and further 
arouse the vitality of Japan’s economy.  
III. 
Approaches to meet the challenges  
Strengthening capital base consistent with risks  
Next, I will offer my views on what kind of approaches might be necessary for meeting the 
challenges.  
First,  strengthening  capital  bases  that  are  consistent  with  the  risks  held  by  financial 
institutions.  
The  review  of  the  regulatory  framework  including  the  capital  adequacy  ratio  for  financial 
institutions has been discussed globally. It is expected that an initial draft of a new regulatory 
system will be presented between the end of this year to the beginning of next year, and after 
conducting  quantitative  research  on  the  influence  of  a  new  system,  a  final  draft  will  be 
completed by the end of 2010.  
It is necessary to carefully examine how a new regulatory system would affect the financial 
system  and  real  economic  activity.  However,  it  is  critical  for  individual  financial  institutions 
themselves,  independent  of  the  discussions  on  such  a  regulatory  framework,  to  strive  to 
strengthen their capital bases that are consistent with the risks they hold.  
After all, capital is the last resort as a buffer to absorb losses. What became a catalyst for the 
global financial system to gradually regain stability after the current crisis were the efforts by 
U.S and European major financial institutions to restore their capital through receiving public 
capital  or  raising  private  funds  in  the  markets.  Concerning  Japan’s  financial  system  as  a 
whole,  macro-stress  tests  conducted  in  the  Bank’s  Financial  System  Report  showed  that 
Japanese financial institutions’ capital bases are not likely to decline substantially even in the 
situation  where  severe  future  macroeconomic  conditions  are  assumed.  However,  as 
mentioned  earlier,  in  the  case  of  Japan,  there  is  the  problem  that  banks’  profits  tend  to 
fluctuate according to economic developments, which lead to changes in capital. In addition, 
if financial institutions pursue a new business strategy to meet a variety of needs from firms 
and  households,  capital  bases  that  can  tolerate  risks  of  a  certain  degree  need  to  be 
enhanced. Both the major banks and the regional banks have recently been reinforcing their 
capital bases, which the Bank regards could lead to ensure soundness of individual financial 
institutions as well as the stability of the financial system as a whole.  
BIS Review 153/2009 
 5
Appropriate risk management  
Second, the importance of appropriate risk management.  
For a financial institution, risk management is essential in ensuring management soundness 
and  maintaining  the  smooth  financial  intermediation  function  as  well  as  a  key  to  ensuring 
profits.  In  terms  of  credit  risk  management,  Japanese  financial  institutions  have  been 
improving  their  screening  skills,  based  on  the  experience  of  the  bubble  period  during  the 
1980s, and have made fair accomplishments. However, the deterioration in firms’ business 
performance  triggered  by  the  current  financial  crisis  has  progressed  at  an  unprecedented 
pace. Taking that into account, it becomes important for financial institutions, in addition to 
improving their screening skills, to strengthen follow-up management, and further strive for 
supporting corporate rehabilitation. Moreover, the finely-tuned setting of lending interest rates 
according to credit risks continues to be an important challenge.  
In  terms  of  market  risk  management  associated  with  stockholdings,  the  size  of  strategic 
cross-shareholding  will be  basically  left  to  firms’  and  banks’  business  strategies.  However, 
the current market risk associated with stockholdings of Japanese financial institutions as a 
whole remains to be high relative to capital bases, and a steady reduction in the amount of 
that risk is no doubt a critical challenge for financial institution management as well as for the 
stability of Japan’s financial system.  
Building a business model to strengthen profit base – focusing on retail banking  
Third, building a business model to strengthen the profit base. While I will focus on the topic 
of  today’s  speech,  retail  banking,  reinforcement  in  the  area  of  wholesale  banking  is  also 
essential for strengthening the profit base. Retail banking could provide higher value-added 
services by managing it in an integrated way with wholesale banking. For the major banks, 
how  to  formulate  coordination  between  wholesale  and  retail  banking  would  be  one  of  the 
keys to rebuilding their business model after all.  
Operations related to deposits, payment and settlement, and asset management  
(1) 
To  that  end,  first  I  will  take  up  the  role  of  operations  related  to  deposits,  payment  and 
settlement, and asset management.  
After the current financial crisis, a phenomenon to be seen as “back to basics” of financial 
operations  has  been  occurring  in  the  United  States  and  Europe.  Proprietary  trading  of 
complex  products,  such  as  securitized  products  and  derivatives,  has  complicated  the  risk 
profiles  of  financial  institutions  and  made  risks  difficult  to  manage.  Based  on  such 
recognition, a move to return to the traditional business based on customer transactions has 
been  emerging.  The  move  includes  a  re-evaluation  of  traditional  businesses  related  to 
deposits and payment and settlement while taking into account a viewpoint of improving the 
management  of  liquidity  risk.  Those  businesses  are,  so  to  speak,  the  areas  Japanese 
financial institutions have been good at. 
One question for financial institution management in Japan is whether the costs associated 
with  maintaining  deposit  bases  are  commensurate  with  the  profits.  Retail  banking  is 
associated with a variety of unique factors that lead to an increase in costs, including ATM 
that operates 24 hours. Meanwhile, to charge fees for the current deposits whose balance 
dropped  below  the  required  minimum  balance  is  not  gaining  customers’  understanding. 
While how to balance the costs and profits is an important management judgment, it would 
be  absolutely  necessary  for  financial  institutions  to  avoid  the  possibility  of  running  below 
break-even.  As  financial  institutions  are  expected  to  provide  fine-tuned  services  to 
households  reflecting  their  outstanding  balance  of  deposits  and  the  degree  of  use  of 
services, it would be necessary to check the balance between the quality of services and the 
cost sharing.  
6 
 BIS Review 153/2009
In  addition,  if  one  assumes  a  situation  in  which  households’  asset  accumulation  further 
progresses  and  their  asset  management  diversifies,  it  would  be  essential  to  enhance  the 
services to support households’ asset management. Such services are currently provided in 
the form of over-the-counter sales of mutual funds and insurance, and asset management 
services.  By  properly  gauging  the  needs  of  customers  and  enhancing  the  provision  of 
services, I believe it important that the fee business steadily takes root.  
Personal loans  
(2) 
Second, the role of personal loans. In Japan, housing loans have overwhelming weight and 
accounts for about 20 percent of the financial institutions’ total lending.  
Housing loans in Japan have been increasing steadily even under the current financial crisis. 
The problem is its profitability. According to the Bank’s analysis, the profitability of Japanese 
financial institutions’ housing loans has been consistently declining recently. For example, if 
the profitability of housing loans during the life of a loan that was lent in fiscal 2003 and fiscal 
2007 is compared on a present value basis, it will decline by about six percentage points. If 
the  default  rates  rise  significantly  in  the  future,  it  cannot  be  denied  that  banks’  profits  will 
plunge. The profitability of housing loans also warrants careful monitoring.  
In addition, consumer loans such as card loans and car loans are an area where potential 
needs  exist  over  time.  With  a  view  to  its  potential,  the  major  banks  have  been  increasing 
their capital subscription to consumer credit, credit card, and consumer finance companies. 
As explained earlier, those affiliated companies have not contributed to increasing the profits 
of financial institutions, while the future developments in the area of consumer loans warrant 
attention.  
Lending to small- and medium-sized firms, and provision of risk money  
(3) 
Third, fund provision to small- and medium-sized firms.  
Firms’ funding conditions rapidly deteriorated from the autumn of 2008 to the beginning of 
2009,  and  have  been  recently  improving,  partly  due  to  the  recovery  of  CP  and  corporate 
bond markets. Many small and medium-sized firms still view their funding conditions as tight, 
and  the  Bank  considers  that  the  smooth  fund  provision  to  small  and  medium-sized  firms 
continues to be an important challenge for corporate finance in Japan.  
Looking at the future of Japan’s economy, how to provide risk money to small- and medium-
sized firms with high technology would be a challenge for the financial system. In that case, it 
becomes important to apply part of households’ ample financial assets to risk money.  
In  Japan,  while  the  importance  of  venture  capital  has  repeatedly  been  argued,  it  has  not 
grown  in  a  significant  manner  so  far.  Providing  risk  money  smoothly  to  firms  that  have  a 
possibility of leading Japan’s future economic growth is one important challenge in the area 
of  retail  banking.  The  Bank  will  keep  monitoring  with  strong  interest  what  type  of  financial 
institution will play a role of intermediation through what type of channel.  
Concluding remarks  
The current financial crisis has posed various challenges to the Bank of Japan.  
One  of  them  is,  from  a  macroprudential  perspective  and  taking  into  account  the 
interconnectedness  between  the  real  economy  and  the  financial  system,  to  analyze  and 
assess  the  risk  of  the  financial  system  as  a  whole.  The  Bank  of  Japan  has  been  tackling 
such challenge through Financial System Report and others, and intends to further enhance 
its efforts as well as to continue to strive to properly gauge and assess the risk inherent in the 
financial system.  
BIS Review 153/2009 
 7
On that basis, the Bank considers that how to utilize such assessment in monetary policy or 
to  utilize  in  further  strengthening  of  financial  institutions’  risk  management  through  on-site 
examination,  off-site  monitoring,  and  the  activities  of  the  Center  for  Advanced  Financial 
Technology, would be our next challenge.  
Amid  changing  global  economic  and  financial  conditions  after  the  financial  crisis,  Japan’s 
economy  is  also  faced  with  a  difficult  situation  from  a  longer  perspective.  For  Japan’s 
economy’s  long-term  growth,  it  is  essential  to  raise  the  productivity  of  the  economy  as  a 
whole. To contemplate what kind of reform in the industrial structure is required and how that 
can be supported on the financial system front, would also be a challenge for the Bank of 
Japan. By sharing wisdom with you, the Bank will make the utmost contribution as a central 
bank.  
Thank you. 
8 
 BIS Review 153/2009
