Jürgen Stark: Financial stability – the role of central banks. A new task? 
A new strategy? New tools? 
Speech by Mr Jürgen Stark, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at  the  Frankfurt  12th  Euro  Finance  Week,  Session  on  “Restructuring  the  Global  Financial 
Architecture – The Road Ahead”, Frankfurt am Main, Tuesday, 17 November 2009. 
 Introduction 
It is a great pleasure for me to participate in the 12th Euro Finance Week conference which 
brings together such well-known experts in banking and finance. 
The subject of my talk, “Financial stability – The role of central banks. A new task? A new 
strategy? New tools?”, will not have come as a surprise. But I should perhaps warn you that 
you should not be surprised either, if my answers to these questions sound rather sober to 
you. 
The  severity  of  the  economic  crisis  demonstrates  the  need  to  profoundly  improve  the 
functioning  of  the  global  financial  system.  Central  banks  have  an  important  role  to  play  in 
making this process a success. Public expectations appear to be running high on how central 
banks will cope with what has come to be perceived as a whole range of new tasks. 
in  economic  and 
favourable  developments 
Where do we stand? 
Recent economic and financial information is encouraging. The free fall in economic activity 
has stopped and there is hope that the global recession has bottomed out. The recovery of 
global  trade,  the  rebuilding  of  inventories  and  the  positive  impact  of  policy  stimulus  and 
liquidity  support  measures  are,  at  the  moment,  the  main  drivers  of  economic  activity. 
Moreover, money market tensions have eased, government and corporate bond spreads are 
declining, and stock market volatility has fallen. Yet, even if confidence is slowly returning, 
uncertainty remains high, and economic activity and employment are likely to remain volatile 
for a while. 
Are 
financial  conditions  genuine 
these 
improvements,  or  are  they  due  only  to  supportive  fiscal  and  monetary  policies?  Is  the 
economy on a path of sustainable recovery? Finding answers to these questions will demand 
a very close and ongoing monitoring of all economic and financial market developments over 
the period ahead. 
There  are  still  a  number  of  uncertainties  involved,  and  these  uncertainties  will  not  simply 
resolve themselves over time. The answers largely hinge on the success of the measures 
taken  in  response  to  the  crisis,  and  on  the  need  for  their  being  phased  out  in  a  timely 
manner.  The  response  to  the  crisis  should  not  sow  the  seeds  for  new  imbalances.  After 
extended discussions, we are moving closer to phasing out our liquidity measures, as not all 
of them will be needed to the same extent as in the past.  
Meeting the following challenges will be crucial: 
• 
implementing  medium-term-oriented  macro  policies  as  a 
formulating  and 
precondition for sustained and more balanced global growth; 
intensifying efforts to undertake structural reforms; 
correctly timing and implementing exit policies so as to ensure fiscal sustainability 
and maintain price stability; and 
 BIS Review 146/2009 
 1
 strengthening  the  financial  system  and  the  global  financial  architecture  so  as  to 
safeguard financial stability. 
How can we ensure financial stability in the future? 
The  most  recent  discussions on  financial stability  have  focused  on  regulation  and  the  role 
central  banks  should  play  therein.  Unfortunately,  the  change  of  market  participants’ 
behaviour is not on top of the agenda.  
As  the  crisis  is  the  result  of  many  failings,  let  me  recall  the  various  lines  of  defence  that 
should be in place in order to secure financial stability. 
The first line of defence is that market participants must be liable for their actions. They have 
to bear in mind the long-term risk that their actions might impose on financial institutions, and 
on  the  financial  system  as  a  whole.  Economic  and  financial  incentives  have  to  be  aligned 
with this simple principle.  
As  yet,  I  have,  however,  not  seen  any  significant  change  in  the  behaviour  of  market 
participants.  
The second line of defence rests on the transparency of the financial system, including its 
institutions,  products  and  markets.  It  rests  on  the  implementation  of  coherent  international 
supervisory  and  regulatory  standards.  This  requires  an  overhaul  of  supervision  and 
regulation at both the macro and the micro-prudential level. 
The third line of defence rests on safeguarding liquidity conditions for markets and solvent 
institutions. 
The fourth line of defence involves governments applying clear and harmonised procedures 
to resolve matters when insolvencies of systemically important financial institutions occur. 
How is the global financial architecture changing? 
On the institutional side, we are seeing many encouraging developments, both globally and 
across  Europe.  In  fact,  some  far-reaching  changes  in  the  global  financial  architecture  are 
unfolding. All main central banks in the world are actively involved. 
The Heads of State or Governments have decided that the G20 would now be the premier 
international  forum  for  international  economic  cooperation.  At  the  recent  summits  in 
Washington,  D.C.,  London  and  Pittsburgh,  five  areas  were  identified  for  joint  action  to 
improve global regulation and oversight, including: 
• 
• 
the strengthening of transparency and accountability; 
the  establishment  of  a  sound  regulatory  framework  and,  in  particular,  the 
enhancement of Basel II; 
the promotion of integrity in financial markets; 
the reinforcement of international cooperation; and 
the  reform  of  international  financial  institutions,  such  as  the  IMF  whose  tools, 
funding, governance structure and mandate have all been upgraded. 
 Initiatives  to  safeguard  financial  stability  are  being  coordinated  at  the  global  level  by  the 
Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB).  Central  banks  like  the  ECB  are  actively  involved  in  this 
dialogue. But there are also important new initiatives in the area of both macro and micro-
prudential supervision at the level of the European Union. 
Macro-prudential  supervision  in  the  EU  is  to  be  entrusted  to  the  European  Systemic  Risk 
Board (ESRB). The ECB will provide analytical and logistical support to the ESRB. The main 
2 
 BIS Review 146/2009
task of the ESRB will be to identify, monitor and assess potential risks to financial stability in 
the EU that arise from the macroeconomic environment, as well as from developments within 
the financial system itself. If any risk appears to be significant, the ESRB would issue risk 
warnings and make recommendations. The ESRB will, however, not have regulatory powers, 
nor will it have any operational tools at its disposal. 
At  the  micro-prudential  level,  the  European  System  of  Financial  Supervisors  is  to  be 
established.  It  will  consist  of  three  European  Supervisory  Authorities  to  deal  with  banking, 
securities  and  insurance  respectively.  It  will  promote  supervisory  convergence  and 
coordination at the EU level. The same objective is being pursued through the establishment 
of groups of supervisors for large international financial corporations. 
How will the ECB contribute to safeguarding financial stability? 
The best contribution central banks can make to ensure financial stability is to maintain price 
stability.  Price  stability  is  a  precondition  for  financial  stability.  At  the  same  time,  financial 
stability,  by  ensuring  an  orderly  functioning  of  the  transmission  mechanism  of  monetary 
policy, helps a central bank in fostering price stability. Hence, from a longer-term perspective, 
financial stability and price stability are mutually reinforcing policy objectives. 
At  shorter  horizons,  financial  stability  and  price  stability  may  not  always  go  hand  in  hand. 
Developments in the run-up to the crisis have shown that low and stable inflation rates may 
well be consistent with the build-up of financial imbalances which, in turn, can create serious 
risks to price stability. There are, however, safeguards that a central bank can build into its 
policy framework. 
One of the lessons central bankers can learn from the crisis is that a monetary policy with a 
pre-specified, fixed-term policy horizon runs the risk of having too short-sighted a perspective 
of  the  economy.  We  have  always  argued  that  our  monetary  policy  strategy  provides  for  a 
safeguard against such short-termism. 
We have defined price stability as an objective that is to be maintained over a medium-term 
horizon.  This  medium-term  orientation  is  underpinned  by  our  monetary  analysis.  A  key 
aspect  of  monetary  analysis  is  the  identification  of  low-frequency  trends  in  inflation,  as 
determined  by  monetary  developments.  Financial  imbalances  that  lead  to  excess  credit 
growth, high leverage, loose credit standards, booming asset prices and an under-pricing of 
risk  create  the  conditions  for  abrupt  market  corrections,  which  ultimately  endanger  the 
maintenance of price stability. Analysing developments in credit, the counterpart to money on 
monetary financial institutions’ balance sheets, is useful in identifying such imbalances. 
In  situations  of  excessive  money  and  credit  growth,  monetary  policy  needs  to  be  more 
restrictive  than  warranted  on  the  basis  of  short-term  inflationary  trends.  While  such  a 
“leaning-against-the-wind” approach would depress short-term inflation, it would be effective 
in maintaining price stability over the medium to long term. It would attenuate further rises in 
asset  prices  and  credit  growth  and  thereby  forestall  subsequent  adverse  effects  on  price 
stability once a correction takes place. 
The  Governing  Council  had  already  agreed  in  the  spring  of  2007  –  i.e.  before  the  crisis 
started – to enhance and broaden the monetary analysis along four main avenues:  
1. 
improving and broadening money demand models to detect any possible build-up of 
financial imbalances;  
developing money-based indicators of risks to price stability;  
incorporating  money  and  credit  in  structural  general  equilibrium  models  to  signal 
possible financial vulnerabilities; and 
further  deepening  the  framework  for  cross-checking  between  the  economic  and 
monetary analysis (the two pillars of the ECB’s monetary policy strategy). 
2. 
3. 
4. 
BIS Review 146/2009 
 3
Bearing  these  considerations  in  mind,  it  is  rather  straightforward  to  answer  the  questions 
posed by the organisers of this conference. 
First question: Will we have a new or broadened mandate? 
The primary objective of the ECB is the maintenance of price stability. This mandate, which 
has  been  given  to  us  in  the  Treaty,  will  remain  unchanged.  The  Treaty  also  clarifies  that 
there  is  no  trade-off  between  this  objective  and  the  support  that  the  ECB  can  lend  to  the 
general objectives of the Community. 
The  assignment  to  the  ECB  of  specific  tasks  concerning  the  functioning  of  the  ESRB  is 
welcome, but does not constitute an additional objective for monetary policy. Nor does the 
creation of the ESRB change the clear allocation of responsibilities enshrined in the Treaty. 
The integrity of the overall macroeconomic analysis conducted within the European System 
of Central Banks (ESCB) will remain untouched. 
The  ESRB  and  its  members  will  be  provided  with  a  high  degree  of  independence  from 
political influence. In this regard, the ECB’s activities in supporting the ESRB will not affect 
the ECB’s institutional, functional and financial independence. Nor will it affect the ESCB’s 
performance of its tasks under the Treaty and the Statute of the ESCB and of the ECB. 
From  the  perspective  of  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy,  the  envisaged  establishment  of  the 
ESRB will have both potential benefits and risks. The fact that the ECB will be able, through 
its analytical and statistical infrastructure, to contribute to the pursuit of financial stability in 
the EU is a great opportunity. In turn, the risk analysis of the ESRB can provide the ECB with 
useful  additional  information  for  the  fulfilment  of  the  latter’s  mandate  to  maintain  price 
stability. 
Second question: Do we need a new strategy? 
Our strategy has proven to be sufficiently comprehensive and robust. What we have seen in 
the run-up to the crisis, and also during the crisis, is that the monetary analysis provides a 
channel through which elements pertaining to financial stability can be taken into account. 
Our  strategy  provides  us  with  a  framework  to  ensure  that  potential  imbalances  in  credit 
developments are not neglected. 
Third question: Do we need new tools? 
According to our mandate, our primary objective is to maintain price stability. The tool at our 
disposal  for  achieving  this  is  sufficient:  setting  short-term  interest  rates.  As  the  ECB’s 
mandate remains unchanged, there is no need for any additional tools. 
What  we  need  for  macro-prudential  assessment  instead  is  a  further  development  of  the 
available analytical framework. Some of the elements we already use to assess threats to 
price  stability  are  also  relevant  for  the  assessment  of  threats  to  financial  stability.  The 
monetary analysis is a case in point. 
The  analytical  frameworks  used  for  monetary  policy  and  financial  stability  purposes  have, 
however, thus far reached very different stages of “maturity”. Compared with price stability, 
financial  stability  has  remained  a  rather  elusive  concept.  In  supervision  –  not  least  at  the 
cross-border  level  –  the  allocation  of  responsibilities,  democratic  legitimacy  and  the 
appropriate design of incentive structures have remained debatable issues. The framework 
for macro-prudential analysis still needs to be “mapped out” and tested in full. 
4 
 BIS Review 146/2009
Some final remarks 
Let me conclude. 
Expectations are running high on how central banks will cope with what some anticipate will 
be a whole range of new responsibilities. 
Hence, the questions posed in the title of my talk. As we need to be clear about what we can 
and what we cannot do, my answers to these questions are rather sober. We do not have a 
new mandate. We do not need a new strategy. We do not need a new operational tool. Most 
importantly, our commitment to maintaining price stability remains unchanged, especially in 
today’s challenging environment. 
The costs of the crisis are staggering. Our current efforts will affect the future magnitude and 
duration  of  its  legacy  costs.  The  challenges  could  not  be  more  demanding.  We  have  to 
remove  incentives  for  moral  hazard  and  ensure  that  financial  market  participants  are 
accountable for their decisions. We must not add new incentives for moral hazard by creating 
an  “emergency  fund”  for  banks,  financed  or  co-financed  by  taxpayers’  money.  Now  is  the 
time to act; to ensure that financial institutions can never again hold hostage the economic 
well-being of people who had no part in those institutions’ irresponsible business decisions. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 146/2009 
 5
