European Central Bank: Press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank 
and Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 
5 November 2009. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  our 
press  conference  today.  We  will  now  report  on  the  outcome  of  today’s  meeting  of  the 
Governing Council, which was also attended by Commissioner Almunia. 
On the basis of its regular economic and monetary analyses, the Governing Council decided 
to leave the key ECB interest rates unchanged. The current rates remain appropriate. The 
incoming  information  and  analyses  that  have  become  available  since  our  meeting  in  early 
October have confirmed our expectations. While annual HICP inflation was -0.1% in October, 
according  to  Eurostat’s  flash  estimate,  it  is  expected  to  turn  positive  again  in  the  coming 
months and to remain  at moderately positive rates over the policy-relevant horizon. At the 
same time, the latest information continues to signal an improvement in economic activity in 
the second half of this year. The Governing Council expects the euro area economy in 2010 
to  recover  at  a  gradual  pace,  recognising  that  the  outlook  remains  subject  to  high 
uncertainty. Medium to longer-term inflation expectations remain firmly anchored in line with 
the  Governing  Council’s  aim  of  keeping  inflation  rates  below,  but  close  to,  2%  over  the 
medium  term.  The  outcome  of  the  monetary  analysis  confirms  the  assessment  of  low 
inflationary pressure over the medium term, as money and credit growth continues to slow 
down. Against this background, we expect price stability to be maintained over the medium 
term, thereby supporting the purchasing power of euro area households. 
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
Available data and survey-based indicators continue to signal an improvement in economic 
activity  in  the  second  half  of  this  year.  In  particular,  the  euro  area  should  benefit  from  the 
inventory  cycle  and  a  recovery  in  exports,  as  well  as  from  the  significant  macroeconomic 
stimulus  under  way  and  the  measures  adopted  to  restore  the  functioning  of  the  financial 
system. Taking into account all available information, in the second half of this year, quarterly 
real GDP growth rates could be back in positive territory. However, uncertainty remains high 
as  a  number  of  the  supporting  factors  are  of  a  temporary  nature.  Looking  through  the 
volatility of incoming data, the euro area economy is expected to recover at a gradual pace in 
2010, as it is likely to be affected over the medium term by the process of ongoing balance 
sheet  adjustment  in  the  financial  and  the  non-financial  sector,  both  inside  and  outside  the 
euro area.  
In the view of the Governing Council, the risks to this outlook remain broadly balanced. On 
the  upside,  there  may  be  stronger  than  anticipated  effects  stemming  from  the  extensive 
macroeconomic stimulus being provided and from other policy measures taken. Confidence 
may  also  improve  more  quickly,  the  labour  market  deterioration  may  be  less  marked  than 
previously expected and foreign demand may prove to be stronger than projected. On the 
downside, concerns remain relating to a stronger or more protracted negative feedback loop 
between  the  real  economy  and  the  financial  sector,  renewed  increases  in  oil  and  other 
commodity  prices,  the  intensification  of  protectionist  pressures  and  the  possibility  of  a 
disorderly correction of global imbalances. 
With  regard  to  price  developments,  annual  HICP  inflation  stood  at  -0.1%  in  October, 
according  to  Eurostat’s  flash  estimate,  compared  with  -0.3%  in  September.  The  current 
negative inflation rates are in line with previous expectations and reflect mainly movements 
in global commodity prices over the last year. In the coming months, annual inflation rates 
are projected to turn positive again, also relating to base effects. Thereafter, over the policy-
BIS Review 136/2009 
 1
relevant  horizon,  inflation  is  expected  to  remain  positive,  with  overall  price  and  cost 
developments  staying  subdued  reflecting  ongoing  sluggish  demand  in  the  euro  area  and 
elsewhere. In this context, it is important to re-emphasise that inflation expectations over the 
medium  to  longer  term  remain  firmly  anchored  in  line  with  the  Governing  Council’s  aim  of 
keeping inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium term.  
Risks to this outlook remain broadly balanced. They relate, in particular, to the outlook for 
economic  activity  and  to  the  evolution  of  commodity  prices.  Furthermore,  increases  in 
indirect taxation and administered prices may be stronger than currently expected owing to 
the need for fiscal consolidation in the coming years. 
Turning to the monetary analysis, the annual growth rates of M3 and loans to the private 
sector  declined  further  in  September,  to  1.8%  and  -0.3%  respectively.  These  concurrent 
declines support the assessment of a moderate underlying pace of monetary expansion and 
low inflationary pressures over the medium term. 
In the next few months, the annual growth rates of monetary aggregates will most likely be 
affected  downwards  by  base  effects  that  are  associated  with  the  intensification  of  the 
financial  turmoil  one  year  ago.  More  fundamentally,  however,  the  growth  of  M1  and  M3 
continues  to  reflect  the  current  constellation  of  interest  rates.  While  the  narrow  spread 
between the rates on different short-term deposits fosters shifts in the allocation of funds to 
the most liquid assets contained in M1, the steep slope of the yield curve also encourages 
such shifts from M3 to longer-term deposits and securities outside M3. 
The  annual  growth  rate  of  bank  loans  to  the  non-financial  private  sector  turned  slightly 
negative  in  September,  with  annual  loan  growth  to  both  non-financial  corporations  and 
households  declining  further  and  being  negative.  At  the  same  time,  the  monthly  flows  of 
loans  to  households  remained  positive  and  even  increased,  while  those  of  loans  to  non-
financial  corporations  were  negative.  In  the  case  of  households,  the  latest  data  provide 
further confirmation of a levelling-off at low rates. In the case of non-financial corporations, 
the subdued levels of production and trade, as well as the ongoing uncertainty surrounding 
the  business  outlook,  continue  to  dampen  firms’  demand  for  bank  financing,  a  tendency 
which is likely to prevail in the coming months. In this respect, it is worthwhile to note that the 
growth of loans to enterprises typically only picks up with some lag compared with the cycle 
in  economic  activity.  At  the  same  time,  the  ongoing  improvement  in  financing  conditions 
should support the demand for credit in the period ahead. Against the background of highly 
demanding challenges, banks should take appropriate measures to strengthen further their 
capital bases and, where necessary, take full advantage of government measures to support 
the financial sector, particularly as regards recapitalisation. 
To sum up, the current rates remain appropriate. The incoming information and analyses that 
have become available since our meeting in early October have confirmed our expectations. 
While annual HICP inflation was -0.1% in October, according to Eurostat’s flash estimate, it 
is expected to turn positive again in the coming months and to remain at moderately positive 
rates over the policy-relevant horizon. At the same time, the latest information continues to 
signal an improvement in economic activity in the second half of this year. The Governing 
Council expects the euro area economy in 2010 to recover at a gradual pace, recognising 
that  the  outlook  remains  subject  to  high  uncertainty.  Medium  to  longer-term  inflation 
expectations  remain  firmly  anchored  in  line  with  the  Governing  Council’s  aim  of  keeping 
inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. Cross-checking the outcome 
of the economic analysis with that of the monetary analysis confirms the assessment of low 
inflationary pressure over the medium term, as money and credit growth continues to slow 
down. Against this background, we expect price stability to be maintained over the medium 
term, thereby supporting the purchasing power of euro area households.  
As the transmission of monetary policy works with lags, we expect that our policy action will 
progressively  feed  through  to  the  economy.  Hence,  with  all  the  measures  we  have  taken, 
monetary policy has been supporting the availability of liquidity and the recovery of the euro 
2 
 BIS Review 136/2009
area economy. Looking ahead, and taking into account the improved conditions in financial 
markets,  not  all  our  liquidity  measures  will  be  needed  to  the  same  extent  as  in  the  past. 
Accordingly, the Governing Council will make sure that the extraordinary liquidity measures 
taken  are  phased  out  in  a  timely  and  gradual  fashion  and  that  the  liquidity  provided  is 
absorbed in order to counter effectively any threat to price stability over the medium to longer 
term. By so doing, the Governing Council will continue to ensure a firm anchoring of medium-
term inflation expectations. Such anchoring is indispensable to supporting sustainable growth 
and  employment  and  contributing  to  financial  stability.  Accordingly,  we  will  continue  to 
monitor very closely all developments over the period ahead. 
As  regards fiscal  policies,  many  euro  area  governments  are  faced  with  high  and  sharply 
rising  fiscal  imbalances.  If  not  addressed  by  a  clear  and  credible  exit  strategy,  this  could 
seriously risk undermining public confidence in the sustainability of public finances and the 
economic  recovery.  The  very  large  government  borrowing  requirements  carry  the  risk  of 
triggering rapid changes in market sentiment, leading to less favourable medium and long-
term interest rates. This in turn would dampen private investment and thereby weaken the 
foundations for a return to sustained growth. Moreover, high public deficits and debts may 
complicate the task of the single monetary policy to maintain price stability. The Governing 
Council therefore calls upon governments to communicate and implement in a timely fashion 
ambitious fiscal exit and consolidation strategies based on realistic growth assumptions, with 
a strong focus on expenditure reforms. Tax cuts should only be considered over the medium 
term, when countries have regained sufficient room for budgetary manoeuvre. In this regard, 
the recent ECOFIN Council conclusions, which call for consolidation to start in 2011 at the 
latest and to go well beyond the structural benchmark of 0.5% of GDP per annum, represent 
the  minimum  requirement  for  all  euro  area  countries.  The  success  of  fiscal  adjustment 
strategies will also depend crucially on the transparency of the budgetary procedures and the 
reliability and completeness of government finance statistics. This is an area in which quick 
and decisive progress is indispensable for the countries concerned and for the euro area as 
a whole.  
Turning to structural reforms, in all countries more efforts are crucial to support sustainable 
growth  and  employment  as  it  is  likely  that  the  financial  crisis  has  affected  the  productive 
capacity  of  our  economies.  Moderate  wage-setting,  sufficient  labour  market  flexibility  and 
effective  incentives  to  work  are  required  in  order  to  avoid  significantly  higher  structural 
unemployment over the coming years. Policies that enhance competition and innovation are 
also urgently needed to speed up restructuring and investment and to create new business 
opportunities.  An  appropriate  restructuring  of  the  banking  sector  should  also  play  an 
important role. Sound balance sheets, effective risk management, and transparent as well as 
robust business models are key to strengthening banks’ resilience to shocks, thereby laying 
the foundations for sustainable economic growth and financial stability. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS Review 136/2009 
 3
