Jens Thomsen: Government bond markets in 2009 
Speech by Mr Jens Thomsen, Member of the Board of Governors of the National Bank of 
Denmark and Chairman of the Economic and Financial Committee, Sub-Committee on EU 
Government  Bonds  and  Bills  Markets,1  at  the  European  Government  Bond  Summit, 
Brussels, 5 November 2009.  
 Introduction  
1.  
I  am  delighted  to  be  here  tonight  to  offer  my  view  on  the  development  in  the  financial 
markets.  A  little  more  than  a  year  ago  the  financial  markets  were  frozen  and  there  was  a 
well-founded concern regarding the financial and economic outlook. 2009 has indeed proven 
to be challenging in many ways.  
In the period after Lehman Brothers collapse the international financial crisis escalated. As a 
consequence the spread between uncollateralised and collateralised money-market interest 
rates tripled, cf. Chart 1. Most countries launched extensive rescue packages to mitigate the 
crisis. The interventions stopped the free fall of the financial system.  
 Against  the  backdrop  of  weaker  economic  outlook  governments  introduced  fiscal  stimulus 
and  monetary  policies  have  been  relaxed  substantially.  Central  banks  have  reduced  the 
policy  interest  rate  sharply  and  provided  extensive  liquidity  to  banks  and  resorted  to 
unconventional tools to ease monetary policy, which has supported financial stability. 
                                                 
1  The mandate of the sub-committee is to aim at promoting further the integration and better functioning of EU 
government bonds and bills markets thereby impacting positively on the financial markets as a whole. 
BIS Review 159/2009 
 1
Government finances  
2.  
The global economic prospects were gloomy at the beginning of the year and the financial 
crisis  has  had  greater  real  economic  repercussions  than  expected,  which  triggered  the 
adoption of large stimulus packages worldwide. As a result of lower government revenue and 
rapidly  rising  expenses,  public  finances  have  deteriorated.  In  the  course  of  2009  most 
countries have revised their forecast of government deficits to record highs and government 
finances are expected to be under extensive pressure in the coming years. Government debt 
issuance  in  the  euro  zone  is  expected  to  be  around  925  billion  euro  in  2009,  which  is  an 
increase of around 30 per cent. In 2010, issuance is expected to be even higher.  
At the same time the role of DMOs has changed as a result of the financial crisis. The special 
status of government securities as risk-free assets has been highlighted, and DMOs played a 
key role in connection with the financing of rescue packages.  
3. 
Government bond markets  
Primary markets  
The primary markets have worked reasonably well in light of the severity of the financial and 
economic crisis. The uncertainty in the financial markets, coupled with risk aversion among 
investors,  led  to  rising  demand  for  risk-free  assets,  including  government  bonds.  Even  so, 
the greater supply of government bonds has in periods caused investors to be more selective 
and  some  DMOs  have  found  it  difficult  to  obtain  sufficient  demand  at  auctions  and  when 
issuing  syndicated  loans.  Especially  in  the  latter  part  of  2008  and  the  beginning  of  2009, 
DMOs paid a concession premium in order to attract investors.  
In  addition,  yield  spreads  to  Germany  widened  considerably  in  a  number  of  European 
countries,  cf.  Chart  2.  This  reflected  a  flight-to-quality,  as  the  German  bond  market  is 
considered to be the most liquid in Europe. In addition, investors attributed higher credit risk 
premiums due to increasing concerns about fiscal sustainability in view of the rapidly growing 
budget.  Since  mid-2009  the  primary  markets  have  improved.  DMOs  no  longer  pay 
concession premiums and yield spreads between European countries have narrowed. The 
market  has  been  able  to  absorb  the  considerable  higher  volume  of  government  debt 
issuance better than expected.  
2 
 BIS Review 159/2009
 Issuance strategies  
The challenging issuance climate and uncertainty about future borrowing requirements have 
prompted  several  DMOs  to  pursue  more  flexible  issuance  strategies.  This  has  included 
issuance  in  government  securities  outside  key  on-the-run  issues,  and  use  of  various  loan 
programmes,  including  CP  and  EMTN  programmes.  DMOs  have  also  introduced  new 
issuance  techniques  to  secure  successful  auctions.  At  the  same  time,  DMOs  have  an 
increased focus on investor relations in order to avoid that investors disregard an issuer on 
the basis of incomplete information.  
The improvement of the financial markets and lower uncertainty concerning issuance needs 
has  meant  that  DMOs  to  a  larger  degree  are  returning  to  a  more  predictable  issuance 
strategy.  
Roll-over risk and competition from government guaranteed bonds  
In  the  beginning  of  the  year  government  deficits  and  financial  rescue  packages  were 
primarily funded by issuing short-term papers such as T-bills and commercial papers. This 
raised  concern  about  roll-over  risk,  especially  in  the  light  of  expected  high  government 
deficits  in  the  years  to  come.  The  concern  of  roll-over  risk  eased  during  the  year  as  the 
gradual  improvement  of  the  government  bond  market  enabled  DMOs  to  lengthen  the 
maturity profile of their issuance.  
So far debt managers have by and large covered the required record issuance need for 2009 
at reasonable costs. The concern in the beginning of the year regarding possible competition 
from government guaranteed bonds has proven to be less of an issue than expected. This 
can primarily be attributed to the fact that the high liquidity of government securities has a 
value for investors. Less liquid issuances of local governments or state agencies have to a 
higher degree suffered from private sector issuers with a government guarantee.  
BIS Review 159/2009 
 3
In  2010,  the  government  bond  market  may  see  increasing competition  from  other  sectors, 
including covered bonds and corporate bonds, if the financial market continues to improve 
and  investors  gain  risk  appetite.  This  would  be  a  positive  sign  of  health  in  the  financial 
system  but  also  raise  a  concern  about  the  government  bond  market  in  view  of  the  record 
issuance requirements.  
Secondary markets  
The secondary  market has been more permanently hit by  the crisis than primary  markets. 
After the shock in September 2008, liquidity in the secondary market dried up, resulting in a 
significant widening of bid-ask spreads and a dramatic reduction of volumes, cf. Chart 3. The 
situation  has  improved  in  2009  with  a  narrowing  of  bid-ask  spreads,  but  the  secondary 
markets have still not normalised. It is important to restore transparency and confidence in 
the government bond market. Some countries are successfully bringing more competition in 
the  secondary  market  by  implementing  market  making  obligations  based  on  relative 
performance  among  primary  dealers  instead  of  fixed  maximum  spreads  and  minimum 
volumes. 
 Future challenges  
Over the summer, the financial markets have been characterised by stronger confidence in 
real  economic  developments,  and  the  extensive  political  measures  have  contributed  to 
increasing the risk appetite of investors. Spreads in the money market have come down from 
a high of several hundred basis points to a level below pre-Lehman. Similarly, the spreads 
between European issuers have narrowed considerably. These factors indicate a significant 
improvement in financial conditions since the historical low in October 2008. The panic mood 
has  ceased,  but  the  enhanced  market  stability  is  to  a  high  degree  the  result  of  continued 
public  support  measures.  Market  conditions  have  still  not  normalised  and  the  estimated 
4 
 BIS Review 159/2009
government  issuance  need  for  2010  is  record  high  in  many  countries  due  to  high 
redemptions and large budget deficits, cf. Chart 4. 
Compared  to  one  year  ago,  debt  managers  and  banks  are  however  less  nervous.  The 
financial  markets  have  improved  and  in  light  of  the  expectations  of  the  future  government 
funding  requirements  turnover  in  the  primary  and  secondary  market  should  increase.  Both 
debt managers and bankers have a mutual interest in restoring confidence in the market. 
 BIS Review 159/2009 
 5
