Andrew Bailey: The UK bank resolution regime 
Speech by Mr Andrew Bailey, Executive Director for Banking Services and Chief Cashier of 
the  Bank  of  England,  at  The  Institute  of  Chartered  Accountants  in  England  and  Wales 
(ICAEW) Financial Services Faculty breakfast, London, 26 November 2009. 
I am grateful to Peter Brierley, Victoria Cleland, Iain De Weymarn, Geoff Davies, Tony Foster, Andrew Hauser, 
Orla May and Paul Tucker for their comments and assistance. 
 The UK bank resolution regime 
Thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  speak  this  morning.  One  of  the  characteristics  of  bank 
resolutions, to which I will return later, is that they have to be done quickly to a fixed deadline 
and  involve  working  through  the  night.  They  also  require  extensive  involvement  by 
accountants  and  lawyers,  so,  I  have  had  some  experience  with  spending  nights  and  early 
mornings with accountants. The only, but important difference, is that I don’t get to choose 
when to spend my early mornings on resolutions, whereas you did choose to listen to me 
early this morning, for which I am very grateful.  
Some history 
The 2009 Banking Act, passed in February, created the new bank resolution regime in the 
UK. In its first nine months it has been used once, at the end of March for the Dunfermline 
Building Society. There is a long history of involvement by the Bank of England in dealing 
with the problems of banks in the UK in order to underpin the stability of the financial system, 
much  longer  than  the  history  of  banking  supervision.  The  history  of  the  Bank  in  the 
nineteenth  century  features  quite  a  few  such  interventions.  More  recently,  although  none 
came  amid  conditions  comparable  to  those  which  occurred  last  autumn,  the  Bank  was 
extensively involved in resolving problems in the secondary banking crisis of the 1970s, in 
Johnson Matthey Bankers in the 1980s, and then in the early 90s with a number of smaller 
banks. My own first involvement with resolving banks came at that time, with the resolution of 
National Mortgage Bank.  
We now face a much bigger challenge in terms of building a more robust financial system. 
There are three parts to this task: regulation, structure and resolution. Today, I am going to 
talk about the last of these. In the past, our resolution toolkit was limited. We could use the 
Bank  of  England’s  own  financial  resources,  as  we  did  with  Johnson  Matthey  Bankers  and 
National  Mortgage  Bank.  Or,  we  could  determine  that  it  was  not  necessary  to  provide 
financial support on grounds of a threat to the financial system, but nonetheless that it would 
be helpful to facilitate the orderly winding-up of an institution by undertaking what I would call 
“mopping up activities” of a type which only a central bank can typically undertake because it 
provides a safe house and neutral party. This was the case with Barings, in which I was also 
heavily involved. 
There is therefore nothing new about bank resolution. 
Why have a resolution regime for banks? 
Why do we need a special resolution regime for banks? The first reason is that at the point 
when  actions  have  to  be  taken  to  deal  with  a  bank  in  difficulty,  there  will  inevitably  be  a 
considerable amount of uncertainty about how bad that bank’s problems are. This is because 
the scale of the problem will depend on how the future unfolds. But we will know at that point 
that if the authorities don’t act, the problems of the institution will quickly get much worse, 
and a deposit run may well ensue. The second reason for a special resolution regime is that 
the process of resolution itself must not add to the uncertainty and loss of confidence. Put 
BIS Review 157/2009 
 1
simply,  it  has  to  be  fast  and  decisive.  Most  bank  resolutions  happen  over  weekends.  My 
overwhelming  guiding  principle  is  that  by  no  later  than  first  thing  on  Monday  morning  we 
must be able to tell depositors that their money is safe and its new home is …… There is a 
simple test of this – the answer to the depositor’s question “Is my money safe?” must be yes 
– no hesitation or qualification can be added. 
Normal corporate insolvency procedures are therefore inadequate for banks for a number of 
reasons. First, because they can only be initiated at the point of insolvency, whereas a loss 
of  confidence  in  a  bank  by  its  depositors  will  often  precede  that  point.  Second,  normal 
insolvency  procedures  are  not  well  suited  to  ensuring  continuity  of  key  banking  functions, 
particularly access of depositors to their funds, but also the provision of credit. Third, a bank 
failure  may  involve  substantial  negative  spill  over  and  externalities  –  for  instance  to  other 
banks via their inter-connectedness. But in normal insolvency procedures these externalities 
would  not  be  taken  into  account  when  determining  what  to  do  in  insolvency.  Fourth, 
depositors  play  a  special  role  as  creditors  of  a  bank.  Unlike  the  creditors  of  a  typical 
company, they are very numerous in number, most are not professional market participants, 
and their claims in the bank are in the form of money. 
The recent experience in the UK 
These  are  therefore  strong  reasons  for  treating  the  resolution  of  banks  differently.  But  we 
didn’t start in this position at the onset of the financial crisis in 2007. At the time of the start of 
Northern Rock’s problems, the UK did not have a special resolution regime; rather, we were 
relying on the tools of the past. Northern Rock was a good example of a bank that had a 
liquidity problem, caused by the closure of its major funding market, for residential mortgage 
backed securities, and had a heightened probability of experiencing a solvency problem in 
the future. In my view, if we were faced with the same problem today now that we have a 
special resolution regime for banks, there is little doubt that Northern Rock could have failed 
in an orderly way under the resolution regime. But this wasn’t possible in September 2007. 
And given the number and size of depositors, Northern Rock could not be allowed to fail in a 
way  that  would  have  jeopardised  the  funds  of  those  depositors.  It  was  therefore  a  stark 
illustration of the need for a resolution regime. 
In  February  last  year  emergency  legislation  was  introduced  in  the  form  of  the  Banking 
Special  Provisions  Act,  or  BSPA,  which  created  a  temporary  resolution  regime,  temporary 
insofar  as  the  BSPA  had  a  one  year  sunset  clause.  The  BSPA,  which  facilitated  taking 
Northern  Rock  into  temporary  public  ownership,  also  contained  broad  powers  for  the 
Treasury,  as  the  lead  authority  in  that  regime,  to  protect  financial  stability  and  the  public 
interest by statutory transfers of the property of UK banks. The Treasury was also able to 
override or modify contractual property rights in order to give itself more room for manoeuvre. 
Creating this regime turned out to have been prescient, because in September of last year it 
was  used  to  resolve  Bradford  and  Bingley  by  transferring  part  of  its  business,  namely 
Bradford  and  Bingley’s  deposit  taking  activities,  to  Santander,  leaving  the  rest  in  public 
ownership. The BSPA therefore enabled a new home to be found for the deposits over the 
course of a weekend. It also included an important mechanism to ensure business continuity, 
whereby a bank could be broken up over a weekend and this would not cause chaos in the 
bank’s  operations  because  a  clear  agreement  was  reached  over  the  weekend  for  the 
continuing  supply  of  services  by  the  rump  to  Santander  in  order  to  make  sure  that  it  was 
business as usual on Monday morning for the transferred business. 
The new regime 
The BSPA contained broad powers, on the basis that it was temporary. Thus in February this 
year the new Banking Act came into force and created a permanent and more wide ranging 
special resolution regime or SRR for deposit takers incorporated in the UK. It is therefore a 
big and very welcome step forward. 
2 
 BIS Review 157/2009
The  SRR  has  five  objectives:  to  maintain  financial  stability;  to  protect  confidence  in  the 
banking sector; to protect depositors in banks; to protect public funds; and to avoid interfering 
with property rights in contravention of the European Convention on Human Rights. These 
five  objectives  are  not  ranked  in  order  of  importance;  rather,  in  each  resolution  case,  a 
judgment  needs  to  be  made  on  how  to  balance  these  objectives  taking  into  account  the 
particular circumstances of the case. 
The SRR provides a number of tools to deal with a bank. The first test that must be applied is 
to assess whether the public interest objectives could be met by implementing a rapid payout 
of insured deposits, or any other definition of deposits which the authorities wish to protect 
via a top-up extension of the deposit insurance scheme. The remainder of the bank would 
then be put through something known as the bank insolvency procedure. The test of whether 
this  procedure  could  be  used  depends  in  large  part  on  how  long  depositors  would  face 
without  access  to  their  funds.  At  the  moment  I  think  few  banks  could  meet  an  acceptable 
timetable for payout. Moreover, for bigger banks this would always be too disruptive as an 
approach.  Work  is  underway  to  facilitate  rapid  payout  of  depositors  under  the  Financial 
Services Compensation Scheme and I hope that in the next year, banks will be able to meet 
the objective that they have been given by the FSA to be able to make payouts to depositors 
within seven days. This is not a trivial task as I readily recognise, and achieving it would not 
mean  that  this  approach  would  always  be  chosen  in  a  resolution.  That  depends  on  the 
situation at the time. 
If  the  failure  of  a  bank  is  determined  to  have  wider  systemic  consequences  that  could 
undermine financial stability, confidence in the banking system or depositor protection, then 
the SRR provides a range of other tools to be used. It is possible to direct part or all of a 
failing  bank’s  business  to  a  private  sector  purchaser  after  a  sale  process  has  been 
undertaken. Second, it is possible for the Bank of England to take control of part or all of a 
bank’s business through a bridge bank controlled and owned by the Bank. A special bank 
administration procedure can be used in combination with a partial property transfer or bridge 
bank.  This  administration  procedure  is  broadly  the  same  as  a  conventional  administration 
save  for  the  very  important  difference  that  the  administrator  has  a  statutory  objective  to 
support  the  transferred  business  with  any  infrastructure  left  in  the  insolvent  rump.  Finally, 
under the SRR provisions, it is possible to take a bank into temporary public ownership. For 
this  approach,  the  Treasury  would  be  in  the  lead,  and  there  is  a  higher  test  of  systemic 
importance  to  be  passed  (there  must  be  a  serious  threat  to  financial  stability)  for  this 
approach to be used. 
As I have indicated, the SRR contains important roles for all of the authorities. The FSA is 
responsible for triggering the SRR by determining, broadly, that a bank no longer meets its 
threshold conditions for authorisation, and there is no reasonable prospect of it taking actions 
to  correct  the  situation  within  an  acceptable  timeframe.  The  FSA  is  also  responsible  for 
approving the transfer of business to another institution that it authorises. 
The  Bank  of  England  is  responsible  for  operation  of  the  SRR  (with  the  exception  of 
Temporary Public Ownership, where the Treasury is responsible). The Bank will consult the 
FSA  and  Treasury  before  selecting  the  SRR  tool  to  be  used,  and  we  need  to  obtain  the 
agreement of the Treasury to the implications of the chosen tool for the use of public funds. 
Also, the Bank can make recommendations to the FSA when it feels that the SRR should be 
triggered, though as I have said, the decision is for the FSA. 
Finally the Financial Services Compensation Scheme (FSCS) plays an important role in the 
resolution process. This would be very obvious if an actual payout of depositors was chosen 
and the FSCS would work very closely with the administrator. They also have a prior role in 
assessing  whether  payout  is  feasible  in  a  reasonable  time.  But  the  FSCS  can  also  be 
requested to contribute to the cost of other forms of resolution up to the net amount it would 
have  failed  to  recover  in  insolvency  if  there  was  an  actual  payout.  This  approach  can  be 
used, for example, where there has been a transfer of deposits – and the FSCS can provide 
BIS Review 157/2009 
 3
a suitable deposit to contribute to the immediate cost to the authorities. The FSCS does not 
however operate a pre-funded scheme in which money is available on call to provide such a 
substitute deposit. It may therefore have to borrow from the Treasury in order to contribute to 
the immediate cost of the resolution (as in Bradford & Bingley), with the FSCS contribution 
ultimately  amounting  to  the  cost  of  any  eventual  shortfall  in  recoveries.  The  FSCS  is 
therefore an important part of the overall resolution landscape, and I will come back at the 
end of my remarks to consider how these arrangements might develop. 
It is important to ensure that a regime like the SRR contains appropriate protections. At the 
heart of it is the ability given to the Bank to alter the treatment of property rights from the 
base of normal insolvency law. When the Act was being drafted, the lawyers talked a great 
deal about avoiding “Henry VIII” powers. I thought that this might have something to do with 
having the power to chop off heads. But that was not the case; rather, it derives from Henry’s 
dissolution  and  seizure  of  the  monasteries,  which  was  an  extreme  case  of  intervention  in 
property rights. The Bank of England’s Special Resolution Unit takes on a more temporal role 
in its treatment of property rights, and one – you will be pleased to hear – that is shaped by 
secondary legislation to provide safeguards and a Code of Practice. I think we can be quite 
confident that Henry VIII saw no need for a code of practice. 
The safeguards in our regime were drawn up in consultation with practitioners. They can be 
divided into two categories: restrictions on the use of the SRR powers; and mechanisms for 
payment of compensation where property rights are unreasonably affected by the use of the 
special resolution powers. In the case of the restrictions, there is protection for netting and 
set-off  arrangements,  secured  obligations  and  capital  market  instruments  such  as  covered 
bonds and securitisations, to ensure that they are not disrupted by the transfer powers. This 
is an important part of the regime, and I want to emphasise that it is not in the interests of the 
authorities to disrupt instruments and markets that are of course of great importance to other 
banks. It would just be counterproductive to take that sort of action. 
In  the  case  of  compensation,  the  framework  established  by  the  Act  ensures  that  the 
proceeds of the sale of a bank’s business are returned to the failed bank’s creditors and, if 
any  surplus  remains,  to  the  shareholders,  after  meeting  the  claims  of  creditors  in  priority 
order.  Moreover,  creditors  left  behind  in  an  insolvent  entity  –  typically  the  rump  of  the 
business after other parts are transferred – are entitled to receive compensation to the extent 
that  an  independent  valuer  determines  that  they  have  received  less  than  they  would  have 
done  if  the  bank  had  gone  into  insolvency  without  the  SRR  being  used.  This  is  the  “No 
creditor worse off” safeguard. 
The  Code  of  Practice  provides  guidance  on  a  number  of  areas,  including  how  the  SRR 
objectives  are  to  be  achieved,  factors  guiding  the  choice  between  different  tools,  how  to 
determine that it is not reasonably likely that action can be taken by or in respect of a bank to 
bring it into compliance with the FSA’s threshold conditions – ie how to determine that the 
SRR  should  be  triggered,  how  to  determine  the  basis  for  calculating  compensation  where 
applicable, and the principles by which the Bank of England should run a bridge bank. 
Beyond all of these provisions, the Banking Liaison Panel, whose members include industry 
bodies,  lawyers  and  insolvency  practitioners,  in  addition  to  HMT,  the  Bank  and  FSA  is 
responsible for providing advice on the wider effects of the resolution regime. 
The resolution of the Dunfermline Building Society 
The  first,  and  so  far  only,  use  of  the  resolution  regime  was  for  the  Dunfermline  Building 
Society at the end of March. Our tally of one is in sharp contrast to the US, where to date this 
year the FDIC has carried out 124 resolutions of failing banks. The US does, of course, have 
a much less concentrated banking industry. 
Dunfermline  was,  almost  needless  to  say,  a  very  instructive  first  case  to  handle.  We 
achieved  the  key  objective  of  a  weekend  transfer  of  depositors,  branches  and  the  head 
4 
 BIS Review 157/2009
office,  on  this  occasion  to  Nationwide  Building  Society.  We  also  managed  to  transfer  the 
prime  mortgage  assets  over  the  weekend,  also  to  Nationwide.  This  was  an  achievement, 
because  necessarily  the  due  diligence  process  is  more  complex  for  assets  than  deposit 
liabilities.  The  worse  quality  assets  –  mainly  commercial  property  loans  and  bought-in 
mortgages  –  were  placed  into  a  building  society  special  administration  procedure  (the 
building society version of a BAP). But the social housing loan book (for which Dunfermline 
was the second largest provider in Scotland) and some associated deposits were taken into 
a  bridge  bank  owned  and  run  by  the  Bank  of  England.  We  ran  the  bridge  bank  for  three 
months while a sale process took place. 
Dunfermline was therefore a case where we managed to use three of our tools in one go – 
the  transfer  powers,  BAP  and  a  bridge  bank.  To  give  you  an  idea  of  the  pressure  under 
which  resolutions  are  done,  the  Dunfermline  weekend  involved  an  M&A  process,  the 
completion  of  around  50  legal  agreements  including  a  three-way  transitional  services 
agreement, setting up a new bridge bank, and putting in place communications to depositors 
and  other  stakeholders  in  order  to  ensure  that  branches  and  call  centres  etc  opened  for 
business as usual on Monday morning. And, there is a very human dimension to all of this. 
My  own  colleagues,  our  advisors  and  our  colleagues  in  the  other  authorities have  to  work 
under great stress to get a successful resolution in place. But we also have to remember that 
we  need  to  work  with  the  staff  of  the  bank,  to  help  them  to  deal  with  the  shock  of  the 
resolution taking place, usually following a very difficult period in which the bank has been 
under great stress, and through all of that ensure that the doors open on Monday morning. I 
am lucky to have very talented colleagues in the Bank and the other authorities and advisors 
who don’t mind the stress and the risk, or at least that’s what they tell me. 
Issues arising 
The resolution of Dunfermline was in my opinion a success: on Monday morning depositors 
knew  their  money  was  safe.  But  it  illustrated  well  the  difficulties  of  resolving  banks. 
Resolution is after all invasive surgery on a bank. I want therefore to highlight a number of 
areas where in my view more work is needed to hone our regime further. 
The first concerns funding of the FSCS. In my view we should be doing everything we can to 
minimise the reliance of the industry on public money, this is just not an acceptable state of 
affairs. One thing that can be done over the coming years, but gradually, is to pre-fund the 
FSCS with industry contributions. This would reduce the need for the FSCS to borrow from 
government and would provide a larger bulwark before the use of public money has to be 
contemplated.  It  is  welcome  that  the  Government  supports  pre-funding.  There  is  a  further 
issue of whether and how this pre-funding should be calculated, and in particular whether it 
should be done on a basis which takes into account the riskiness of each bank and thus the 
probability of causing a call on the FSCS. Since the FSCS is an insurance scheme, there is 
clearly a case for calculating the premium on a basis that reflects risk. But a lot more thinking 
is needed before we can be sure that this can be done in an appropriate way. 
The second area in which we need to work to ensure that the resolution regime is as good as 
we can get it concerns the whole area of safeguards. There is a natural tension between the 
desire for precision in defining the protection of property rights at a very detailed level and 
the need for flexibility in a regime that has to be able to react to the situations that come our 
way. We don’t get to choose the problems we face. I recognise that tension. I don’t have a 
radical  plan  for  changing  the  current  regime,  but  I  recognise  that  we  have  to  keep  a  very 
careful eye on striking the right balance between having the discretion to deal with problems 
and ensuring that banks and markets know as much as they can about what we would, and 
would not, do in a resolution. This is why the Code and the Liaison Panel are important parts 
of the machinery. 
The third area in which more work is needed concerns information and advance planning. In 
recent years the Bank has been forcefully arguing the importance of information gathering to 
BIS Review 157/2009 
 5
the government and FSA. In my experience resolution work is like icebergs – I don’t mean 
that in the sense that banks are about to hit them. It is like icebergs in the sense that a vast 
amount of the work done is beneath the surface, hidden from view. Because resolution is an 
invasive  form  of  surgery,  it  requires  a  very  large  amount  of  information  to  be  carried  out 
safely.  Moreover,  the  planning  work  has  to  be  done  quietly,  out  of  sight  in  order  to  avoid 
fuelling the failure of the bank, and it needs to start well in advance of the actual resolution 
weekend. As the authority responsible for resolution operations, the Bank of England faces a 
tension. In the ideal world, we want to work closely with the management of the bank to plan 
a resolution, at a time when it remains a contingency option that management naturally wish 
to avoid. But we also have to avoid the sense that a bank is receiving the attention of the 
undertakers. A very important development here will be the production and maintenance of 
resolution plans, as part of the overall recovery and resolution plans, or living wills. I spoke 
on this subject last week, and the text is available on the Bank of England website, so I am 
not  going  to  labour  the  point  today.  But  the  general  principle  is  that  resolution  is  a  very 
information hungry activity. To give an example, the FDIC in the US has recently adopted a 
rule  requiring  deposit  takers  to  provide  detailed  information  on  their  derivatives  positions 
within  a  60-day  period  after  being  notified  by  the  Authorities  to  do  so.  The  rule  was  only 
introduced earlier this year but it will be worth considering a similar approach in the UK. 
Finally, there is a large missing piece to what I have said about the resolution regime, namely 
how it would deal with banks that operate with branches or subsidiaries in other countries, 
and  likewise  how  foreign  banks  operating  in  the  UK  would  be  sorted  out.  There  is  now  a 
great deal of attention on this issue, in the G20, in the EU and via the FSB working group on 
cross-border crisis management chaired by Paul Tucker, and rightly so. I think it is fair to say 
that the regimes in the US, Canada, Japan and the UK come closest at present to meeting a 
kite-mark standard, but more needs to be done in continental Europe. I therefore support the 
recent  European  Commission  consultation  calling  for  EU  countries  to  adopt  resolution 
regimes. Also, I think that we are much more likely to make progress in this field by agreeing 
on how national regimes can fit together to deal with international banks, rather than trying to 
devise  an  international  resolution  regime.  The  key  issue  then  is  burden-sharing,  and  that 
together  the  national  regimes  provide  for  equitable  treatment  of  creditors  whatever  their 
domicile. A robust set of resolution regimes should not allow for bias in favour of domestic 
creditors. The UK, I should stress, is not one of those countries, but we are keen to work to 
produce a framework of resolution regimes that allows bias in favour of domestic creditors to 
end. 
Thank  you  for  listening  to  an  account  of  the  UK  resolution  regime.  It  is  an  important 
development as part of making our banks more robust to failure. It sits alongside enhanced 
regulation and supervision, and whatever structural changes may take place in the industry. 
But it remains work in progress, and in an important respect always will be because it needs 
to be ready to respond to threats that will evolve as well. And, finally, I should tell you my 
motto  as  head  of  the  resolution  unit,  namely  that  I  am  happiest  when  we  don’t  need  to 
perform a resolution. 
6 
 BIS Review 157/2009
