Joachim Nagel: The Bundesbank perspective on the Pfandbrief market 
Speech by Dr Joachim Nagel, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank, 
at the Tokyo Pfandbrief Investor Seminar 2011, Tokyo, 26 January 2011. 
 Welcome 
1. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
First of all, I would like to thank the Association of German Pfandbrief Banks for giving me 
the opportunity to present the Bundesbank perspective on the Pfandbrief market to you. The 
motto of this event, “The Pfandbrief 2011 – return on investment in volatile times”, suggests 
what is going on in financial markets. From my point of view as a central banker it is too early 
to give the all-clear, but nevertheless measures were set in motion to overcome the financial 
crisis. 
When  the  US  subprime  crisis  disrupted  the  global  capital  markets  in  2007,  the  European 
securitisation  markets  were  also  affected.  That  is  why  the  Pfandbrief  and  other  covered 
bonds  played  a  central  role  in  European  monetary  policy,  not  only  as  collateral  but  also 
during the covered bond purchasing programme. But first of all, I will comment briefly on the 
special role of the Pfandbrief on the European covered bond market. 
Pfandbrief in comparison with European covered bond products 
2. 
European  covered  bonds  are  very  heterogeneous.  The  reasons  for  this  are  different  legal 
systems and different market standards or traditions in certain financing segments. 
Though there is a trend towards separate covered bond laws in most European countries, 
there  are  significant  differences  in  terms  of  scope.  The  German  Pfandbrief  Act  has  the 
broadest scope and it is the strictest in many areas. For example, there are no derivatives in 
the  underlying  and  the  loan-to-value  rules  are  the  most  conservative.  Its  simplicity  and 
transparency make the Pfandbrief the benchmark for European covered bonds. 
The  cover  pool  of  a  Pfandbrief  is  of  extraordinary  quality,  since  structured  products  are 
excluded  and  cover  assets  are  separated  in  the  so-called “cover  pool  register”.  The  cover 
assets contained in this pool serve first to satisfy the Pfandbrief creditors, and in the event of 
a Pfandbrief bank’s insolvency do not participate in the insolvency proceedings. In order to 
engage in Pfandbrief business, a specific licence is required demanding that issuers provide 
evidence of their intention to conduct Pfandbrief business on a regular and sustained basis. 
The benchmark role also results from the high liquidity of the Pfandbrief asset class. 
There  has  been  no  case  of  default  so  far.  To  continue  this  success,  lawmakers  are 
permanently working to improve the Pfandbrief Act. The latest improvements were adopted 
in 2009 and 2010. 
At  this  point,  I  would  like  to  make  a  brief  comment  on  Basel  III.  The  negotiations  were 
finalized some months ago and the general outcome is an increase in equity requirements 
and  new  buffers  to  withstand  future  periods  of  stress.  Therefore,  Pfandbrief  issuers  fear 
massive threat to their business activities. The Commission plans to present draft legislation 
on the implementation of Basel III before the summer. 
Covered bonds as collateral for Eurosystem refinancing operations 
3. 
I would now like to elaborate on the role of the Pfandbrief in European monetary policy. All 
Eurosystem credit operations have to be based on adequate collateral. The Pfandbrief and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
UCITS1-compliant covered bonds enjoy a privileged status within the Eurosystem collateral 
framework.  In  contrast  to  uncovered  bank  bonds  or  ABS,  for  example,  the  issuer  of  a 
Pfandbrief can use self-issued assets as collateral. This is of great importance, especially for 
Bundesbank counterparties. 
On  1  January  2011,  a  new  haircut  schedule  entered  into  force.  It  contains  the  valuation 
haircuts  applied  to  eligible  marketable  assets.  Covered  bonds  keep  their  privileged  status 
within the Eurosystem Collateral Framework. Jumbo covered bonds are part of Category II 
and a non-Jumbo Pfandbrief is part of Category III. One innovation is that structured covered 
bonds  and  Spanish  multi-Cédulas  were  switched  from  Category  IV  to  Category  III. 
Furthermore, there is a new 5% add-on valuation haircut in the case of theoretical valuation 
applicable to all bank bonds, which is to say to the Pfandbrief as well. The haircut ranges 
from 1% to 38% depending on the credit quality. 
As regards the composition of collateral put forward in the whole Eurosystem, the average 
share accounted for by covered bonds rose to 13% at the end of 2009. Thus, it was possible 
to  halt the downward  trend  of  recent  years.  One  explanation  could  be  that covered  bonds 
became  more  important  during  the  financial  crisis  due  to  their  “own-use-ability”.  Data  for 
2010 will not be available until after the 2010 annual report is published. 
Breaking down the collateral pool of German institutions for 2009, the Pfandbrief and other 
covered bonds take a larger share than within the whole Eurosystem. More recent data have 
not been published yet.  
Eurosystem’s covered bond purchase programme 
4. 
Besides the collateral framework, covered bonds were also part of the first “non-standard” 
measure  of  the  Eurosystem  during  the  financial  crisis.  The  covered  bond  purchase 
programme (CBPP) was announced on 7 May 2009 in order to stimulate activity in the euro-
area covered bond market. Last year, on 30 June precisely, the CBPP was completed, and it 
proved to be an effective policy instrument: it contributed to a decline in money market rates, 
encouraged banks to maintain and expand their lending to clients, helped to improve market 
liquidity in one of the most important segments of the private debt security market and eased 
funding conditions for banks and enterprises. 
In total, 422 different bonds were purchased: 27% in the primary market and the remaining 
73%  in  the  secondary  market.  The  Eurosystem  mainly  purchased  covered  bonds  with 
maturities of three to seven years, and it intends to hold the purchased covered bonds until 
maturity. 
In terms of developments in the secondary market, the reaction of most European covered 
bond  markets  to  the  announcement  of  the  CBPP  was  noticeable,  and  appears  to  have 
initiated  a  declining  trend  in  covered  bond  yield  spreads.  This  trend  increased  when  the 
programme was launched, and ultimately, pre-Lehman levels were reached.  
In the wake of the European debt crisis, market participants began to differentiate strongly 
between the issuers’ countries of origin. In those countries where government bonds suffered 
the most, covered bonds also came under pressure. While bonds from core countries – such 
as the German Pfandbrief or French Obligations Foncières – remained relatively expensive, 
risk  premia  for  peripheral  bonds  rose  steeply.  Overall,  the  results  of  a  current  analysis 
suggest  that  the  CBPP  had  a  noticeable  impact  on  euro-area  covered  bond  secondary 
markets. While the German Pfandbrief market had already started recovering by early 2009, 
                                                 
1  UCITS = Undertakings for Collective Investments in Transferable Securities. The UCITS Directive in general is 
an  investment  guideline  for  insurance,  investment  funds  etc  limiting  the  share  of  assets  one  investor  can 
invest in with one issuer. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the  announcement  of  the  CBPP  seems  to  have  provided  an  important  stimulus  to  the 
recovery of other covered bond markets. 
Since the primary market of European covered bonds had almost come to a halt, the aim of 
the CBPP has also been to support a revitalisation of the covered bond market. And indeed, 
issuance  volumes  and  total  outstanding  amounts  of  covered  bonds  increased  significantly 
shortly  after  the  CBPP  was  announced.  Even  so,  this  development  is  not  necessarily  the 
result of the programme, as other factors could have played a significant role. In particular, it 
is important to recall in this context that market conditions generally improved in 2009. On 
the other hand, it is also possible that, while the CBPP may have had a positive effect on the 
outstanding  amounts  of  covered  bonds,  the  programme  had  no  effect  on  the  outstanding 
amounts of bank bonds – both covered and uncovered. In this case, uncovered bank bonds 
would have been substituted by covered bank bonds. To sum up, the primary covered bond 
market has recovered well, as is also indicated by the very good performance of emissions 
during the first weeks of this year. 
There  is  another  trend  I  would  like  to  mention.  During  the  last  couple  of  months,  a  trend 
towards so-called sub-Jumbo issues – 500 million to 1 billion euro – has emerged. According 
to market participants, this trend will probably continue and has the potential to change the 
nature of the covered bond market. 
Since the beginning of 2009 the French, Spanish and German covered bond markets have 
experienced  most  issues.  In  several  European  countries,  German-style  covered  bond 
markets  have  been  created.  Since  the  announcement  of  the  CBPP,  new  issuers  have 
entered the European covered bond market in various euro-area countries. Some national 
markets – the Italian for example – have seen a significant increase in the number of issuers 
and outstanding amounts. The broader distribution across various new countries and issuers 
will probably boost and further reinvigorate the covered bond once the financial crisis is over. 
Covered bonds securities lending 
5. 
Since  March  2010,  the  Eurosystem  has  lent  covered  bonds  held  in  its  CBPP  portfolio, 
responding to demand from Eurosystem counterparties who wished to borrow such covered 
bonds against eligible collateral. Beyond that, the Bundesbank Executive Board decided to 
make not only its CBPP but also other own portfolio holdings of covered bonds available for 
the  so-called  Automated  Securities  Lending  Programme  by  Clearstream.  The  securities 
lending  activity  should  help  to  support  market  liquidity,  particularly  in  situations  in  which 
market  making  has  been  discontinued  or  dealers’  limits  for  covered  bond  holdings  have 
become tighter. This lending activity will continue. 
Outlook 
6. 
The  Pfandbrief  is  undoubtedly  a  winner  of  the  financial  crisis.  The  voluntary  transparency 
initiative  of  the  Association  of  German  Pfandbrief  Banks  has  also  contributed  to  this.  This 
initiative  could  be  a  model  for  other  asset  classes  –  for  example  ABS  –  to  increase 
transparency and to regain investors’ confidence. Though issuers have to cope with higher 
competition  for  the  favour  of  investors,  from  the  perspective  of  the  Bundesbank  the 
Pfandbrief is well positioned for the future. 
Thank you very much. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
