Jean-Claude Trichet: Intellectual challenges to financial stability analysis 
in the era of macroprudential oversight 
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, for the panel 
discussion  on  “Global  imbalances  and  financial  stability”  at  the  Eurofi  G20  High  Level 
Seminar, Paris, 18 February 2011. 
Comments on the article published in the Banque de France Financial Stability Review Nr. 15, February 2011. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
 To focus the Banque de France Financial Stability Review on “Global imbalances 
and financial stability” is extremely timely. After some partial reduction induced by 
the crisis global imbalances have started to widen again. This poses challenges for 
international  monetary  cooperation  and  exchange  rate  relationships.  Moreover,  a 
further  surge  in  private  capital  flows  to  emerging  economies  could  lead  to  an 
acceleration  of  reserve  accumulation  and  to  the  re-emergence  of  the  pattern  of 
imbalances  that  contributed  to  the  factors  causing  the  crisis.  The  potential 
disorderly unravelling of these imbalances remains one of the main risks to 
the European and global financial systems over the medium term. 
Therefore  we  need  to  continue  thinking  about how  we  can  make  the  international 
monetary  system  more  resilient  to  such  imbalances  and  policy  structures  more 
flexible in addressing them more effectively than the case in the past. In this regard I 
welcome  the  focus  of  the  French  G20  Presidency  on  the  process  of  mutual 
assessment of its members’ macroeconomic and structural policies.  
I decided to focus my remarks today on a related but more specific topic. My starting 
point is that we have recently entered a new era of financial stability policies, 
the era of macroprudential oversight. Both the European Union and the United 
States  of  America  have  established  new  bodies  whose  task  it  is  to  identify  early 
emerging  systemic  financial  risks  and  to  consider  policy  measures  that  could 
mitigate  them.  These  are  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  and  the  Financial 
Stability Oversight Council, respectively. 
One  pre-condition  for  matching  the  expectations  to  this  new  era  is  that  the 
competent  authorities  possess  a  comprehensive  and  reliable  analytical  apparatus 
for  identifying  systemic  risks  and  for  assessing  the  effectiveness  and  efficiency  of 
policies  that  could  contain  them.  In  my  contribution  today  I  would  like  to  highlight 
four  challenges  that  I  see  in  advancing  such  an  analytical  apparatus  and  point  in 
some directions one could go in meeting these challenges. 
The first challenge relates to the basic functioning of financial systems. Whereas 
important parts of – let me say – the “DNA” of financial systems is known, the crisis 
has shown that there remain significant difficulties (1) in grasping the benefits and 
risks  of  some  major  “mutations”,  namely  important  financial  innovations  and  new 
business  models,  and  (2)  in  predicting  how  the  overall  “body”  reacts  to  specific 
stresses.  
More  specifically,  I  would  argue  that  our  analytical  apparatus  would  still  have  to 
make  progress  in  characterising  the  role  of  non-bank  financial  intermediaries.  For 
example, the “explosion” of the industry of highly leveraged financial institutions from 
around  100  billion  US  dollars  of  capital  under  management  in  1990  to  3  trillion 
dollars  in  2007  implies  that  this  industry  is  likely  to  generally  have  important 
systemic implications, even though the present crisis was not caused by failures of 
large  hedge  funds.  Many  hedge  funds  are  highly  sophisticated,  but  this  does  not 
imply  that  in  the  aggregate  they  always  act  in  the  stabilising  contrarian  way 
perceived by some observers. Recent research about the “dot.com” bubble episode 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
2 
 The second intellectual challenge for such an analytical apparatus relates to when 
and  how  a  financial  system  migrates  from  tranquility  to  a  severe  crisis.  It 
appears  to  me  that  in  economics  we  have  some  way  to  go  in  understanding  the 
triggers,  speed  and  abruptness  of  such  migrations.  See,  for  example,  the  sudden 
eruption  of  systemic  instability  in  August  2007  and  its  dramatic  worsening  in 
September  2008,  as  reflected  in  a  new  indicator  of  systemic  stress  developed  by 
ECB staff displayed in chart 1 of my article. In physics, however, “phase transitions” 
are  the  subject  of  ample  research  since  a  long  time.  For  example,  Jean-Philippe 
Bouchaud from the Ecole Polytechnique here in Paris has shown how fundamental 
research  in  physics  on  “crackling  noise”  and  “self-organised  criticality”  can  be 
applied to transitions to financial crises. This helps, for example, to understand the 
initial persistence and subsequent abrupt breakdown of financial bubbles. While this 
type of approach closely matches a number of important empirical patterns in asset 
prices, for example, it does not assume very high levels of rationality of economic 
agents,  a  strong  tendency  towards  equilibrium  situations  or  universal  efficiency  of 
financial  markets.  This  observation  might  be  insightful,  if  we  compare  it  with  the 
standard models that are nowadays used in economics. 
The  third  challenge  concerns  how  financial  instability  interacts  with  the 
macroeconomy.  In  my  article,  in  chart  2,  I  have  illustrated  how  drastically  major 
forecasting  institutions  missed  the  start  of  the  “Great  Recession”,  the  “free  fall”  of 
economic activity in late 2008 and in 2009. A tremendous challenge is therefore to 
improve  macroeconomic  forecasting  models,  so  that  they  give  us  also  faster  and 
more accurate characterisations of such situations over the relevant policy making 
time  horizon.  Two  directions  in  which  we  probably  have  to  go  in  order  to  make 
progress  are  to  generally  integrate  more  realistic  characterisations  of  financial 
systems  in  macroeconomic  models  and  to  capture  the  relevant  nonlinearities  that 
are so typical for the unfolding of financial crises. 
Fourth and last, we need to make further progress in the regulation of systemic 
risk, as opposed to only regulating individual risks. To be fair, Basel III goes some 
way  in  this  direction.  It  generally  increases  the  quantity  and  quality  of  capital  and 
liquidity buffers. And the conservation of capital against excessive distributions will 
be  complemented  with  a  counter-cyclical  element.  Moreover,  major  international 
initiatives are under way to further reduce the probability and impact of failures of 
systemically  important  financial  institutions  (the  so-called  SIFIs),  including  the 
development of effective resolution regimes and recovery planning. One area where 
our  analytical  apparatus  supporting  macroprudential  policies  could  make  further 
progress  is  in  terms  of  the  assessment  of  early  regulatory  responses  to  credit 
bubbles. Some moderately sized Asian emerging countries, for example, have made 
some interesting experiences with the tightening of loan-to-value ratios or debt-to-
income limits when property markets started to boom. We would benefit from more 
work about the effectiveness of these instruments in large industrial countries and 
as fully counter-cyclical tools, which would mean to also relax them in downturns. 
Europe has pushed ahead with establishing the European Systemic Risk Board, 
which started to work last month. The ESRB will monitor systemic financial risks to 
the  EU,  including  the  ones  emerging  from  global  imbalances.  When  necessary,  it 
will issue risk warnings and/or policy recommendations. One of its strengths is the 
ESRB’s  broad  membership,  bringing  around  the  table  the  right  institutions  and 
expertise. In this way, all relevant issues can be tackled in a coordinated way and its 
recommendations carry due weight.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches
11. 
Let me now conclude. The agenda we have to meet in the era of macroprudential 
oversight is tall. We need to advance our analytical and policy apparatus along the 
four types of challenges I just discussed. This will require, inter alia, enriching the 
way  of  thinking  in  economics  and  finance.  New  approaches  should  be 
considered that do not necessarily rely on the notions of equilibrium and universal 
rationality  and  efficiency.  Going  beyond  the  latter  concepts  may  benefit  from 
inspiration  of  approaches  used  in  other  fields,  such  as  notably  the  natural 
sciences.  This  would  not  only  help  us  advancing  the  foundations  of  national  and 
regional  supervisory  policies  but  also  the  foundations  of  global  macroeconomic 
policy coordination. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
