Øystein Olsen: The economic outlook 
Address by Mr Øystein Olsen, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), to invited 
foreign embassy representatives, Oslo, 29 March 2011. 
The address is based on the assessments presented at Norges Bank’s press conference following the Executive 
Board’s monetary policy meeting on 16 March, Monetary Policy Report 1/11 and previous speeches. Please note 
that the text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation.  
 Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I  am  happy  to  continue  the  tradition  of  my  predecessor  by  inviting  you  to  Norges  Bank  to 
discuss economic developments in Norway.  
Economic trends 
During the past few weeks, the world’s attention has been focused on the sufferings caused 
by the earthquake in Japan, as well as escalating political unrest in Middle East countries. 
The economic impact of these events is still uncertain. Apart from these, the economic and 
financial  news  of  the  past  year  has,  on  balance,  been  positive.  The  global  recovery  has 
gained strength, even though uncertainties persist. 
A common feature of the countries that fared well through the financial crisis was that they 
had  kept  their  house  in  order.  Norway  falls  into  this  group,  although  our  abundant  natural 
resource wealth puts us in a unique and favourable position. Against this backdrop, I would 
like to comment on our experience with implementing the prevailing frameworks for monetary 
and fiscal policy.  
Today  we  can  look  back  at  ten  years  of  inflation  targeting  and  the  fiscal  rule.  Despite  the 
financial  crisis,  this  has  been  a  golden  period  for  Norway.  Economic  developments  have 
been influenced by changes in global trade patterns. Asia has replaced Europe as our main 
trading partner for many goods, and Norway has reaped significant gains from terms-of-trade 
effects. National income is almost 30 per cent higher in real terms than ten years ago. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  1
While in the 1980s the advanced economies clearly dominated the performance of the global 
economy,  the  contribution  to  global  growth  of  the  emerging  economies  during  the  last 
decade, substantially exceeded that of the advanced economies. Moreover, during the global 
crisis of 2008–2009, growth in emerging economies was sustained, while it fell sharply in the 
OECD area.  
As  growth  in  the  advanced  economies  now  remains  depressed,  emerging  economies  will 
continue to dominate the performance of the global economy. 
This tendency is reflected in developments in the global oil market, where the composition of 
crude oil consumption has shifted from advanced to emerging market economies.  
 
During the last decade, global demand for oil increased by slightly more than 12 per cent. 
Over  the  same  period,  demand  for  oil  in  OECD  countries  fell  by  nearly  5  per  cent. 
Commodity-intensive  industrialisation  and  strong  per  capita  income  growth  in  emerging 
economies are likely to reinforce the upward shift in aggregate commodity demand. 
 The Norwegian macroeconomic framework 
The  changing  structure  of  the  global  economy  helps  to  explain  the  economic  shift 
experienced  in  Norway  during  the  2000s.  Prices  for  Norwegian  exports,  such  as  oil,  gas, 
metals, minerals and fish, rose markedly, while prices for imported goods fell. In the seven 
years leading up to the financial crisis, the volume of mainland GDP expanded at an average 
annual rate of 3.4 per cent.  
Exactly ten years ago today, Norges Bank was charged with the task of setting the interest 
rate  with  a  view  to  keeping  inflation  low  and  stable.  At  the  same  time,  new  fiscal  policy 
guidelines, also known as the fiscal rule, were implemented, charting a course for petroleum 
revenue  spending.  Norway’s  sovereign  wealth  fund,  which  is  now  called  the  Government 
Pension Fund Global, was designed to prevent fluctuations in oil prices from feeding through 
to the mainland economy.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 A decade of inflation targeting 
The  inflation  target  for  monetary  policy  provides  a  sound  anchor  for  inflation  expectations. 
Over  the  past  decade,  CPI  inflation  has  varied  to  some  extent.  Underlying  inflation  has 
naturally been more stable, but has been both higher and lower than the target. If we look at 
the  ten-year  period  as  a  whole,  inflation  has  been  2  per  cent,  that  is  to  say  close  to  the 
target. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  3
Still,  over  the  past  ten  years,  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  has  been  tested.  During  this 
period,  we  have  gained  insight  into  the  functioning  of  the  Norwegian  economy  under  an 
inflation-targeting regime. Let me touch upon some of these insights.  
 At  the  beginning  of  the  decade,  we  learned  that  it  can  be  demanding  to  strike  a  balance 
between different monetary policy considerations in a small, open economy. When the key 
policy  rate  is  raised  to  restrain  a  pronounced  rise  in  domestic  cost  inflation,  it  can  have  a 
strong impact on the krone exchange rate, as observed in 2002–2003. This influences both 
the real economy and the inflation outlook. 
Midway  through  the  decade,  inflation  rapidly  declined.  China’s  entry  into  world  trade  and 
increased imports to Norway from Asia led to a persistent fall in prices for many goods. The 
combination of low inflation and strong economic growth posed a challenge to the conduct of 
monetary policy. Interest rates – both at home and abroad – were set at low levels. At the 
same time, this amplified the cyclical upturn in Norway.  
Towards  the  end  of  the  decade,  during  the  financial  crisis,  the  interest  rate  was  reduced 
sharply and to record-low levels. The decision to lower interest rates was undoubtedly not a 
difficult decision to make at the time. A persistently low interest rate, on the other hand, can 
pose a challenge to financial stability in an economy where there is a strong willingness to 
borrow and property prices are rising. 
Despite challenges met over the past decade, inflation has been fairly stable and close to the 
target, which shows that monetary policy has been effective. Compared with the 1980s, for 
example,  inflation  has  been  considerably  lower  and  growth  in  the  mainland  economy  has 
been markedly higher. There has been no conflict between low inflation and high economic 
growth, as previously claimed by economists. 
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 The guidelines and the financial crisis 
The financial crisis in 2008 put our economic policy guidelines to a severe test.  
The interest rate cuts that followed from the inflation target led to a reduction in households’ 
annual interest expenses of around NOK 40 billion, or around 4 per cent of their disposable 
income. The krone depreciated and acted as a buffer. The burden on leveraged companies 
was  eased  and  investment  projects  became  profitable  in  an  environment  of  lower  interest 
rates. Altogether, monetary policy made a substantial contribution to Norway’s resilience to 
the crisis.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  5
Well  anchored  inflation  expectations  made  monetary  policy  effective  –  the  reduction  in 
Norges  Bank’s  key  policy  rate  was  perceived  as  a  decline  in  the  real  interest  rate.  Other 
central banks experienced that there was little scope for reducing the real interest rate to a 
sufficiently low level.  
This downturn contrasts sharply with the downturn in the 1980s when the interest rate had to 
be maintained at a high level to defend the krone exchange rate. At that time, there was a 
lack  of  confidence  in  both  monetary  policy  and  fiscal  policy.  The  costs  were  substantial. 
Unemployment increased, in line with that experienced in some European countries today.  
When the financial crisis reached Norway in 2008, we were in a much better position. A long 
period of substantial petroleum revenues – and a clear savings plan – had provided us with 
considerable  leeway.  As  a  result,  fiscal  policy  could  also  be  used  effectively  during  the 
downturn.  The  guidelines  stipulate  that  the  government  budget  deficit  shall  over  time  be 
equivalent to 4 per cent of the capital in the Government Pension Fund Global, – more in bad 
times, less in good times.  
 A fall in output and employment automatically leads to reduced taxes while unemployment 
benefits  increase.  An  important  aspect  of  the  fiscal  rule  is  that  it  allows  these  effects  to 
translate  into  a  weaker  budget  balance.  These  automatic  stabilisers  generated  strong 
impulses through 2009 and 2010, amounting to more than NOK 40 billion for the two years 
as a whole.  
The increase in the Government Pension Fund Global provided, under the fiscal rule, room 
for  a  NOK  25  billion  increase  in  spending.  The  government  and  the  Storting  approved 
additional  spending,  bringing  the  overall  contribution  from  fiscal  policy  to  more  than 
NOK 100 billion, equivalent to 5.5 per cent of mainland GDP, over these two years. Few, if 
any other countries provided such strong fiscal stimulus during the crisis.  
The guidelines from 2001 provide a clear long-term framework for monetary policy and fiscal 
policy. They also provide for cyclical adjustments in economic policy – in part automatically 
and in part by discretion. In this way, the guidelines reconcile the need for a flexible approach 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
to macroeconomic management with the gains brought by a commitment to more long-term 
operational objectives.  
Lessons from the financial crisis  
Even though Norway has fared well through the financial crisis, helped by a sound economic 
policy framework, some concerns related to financial stability remain. In particular, there is 
one area in which Norway differs from other countries in a manner we perhaps do not like: 
Norwegian households are among the most heavily indebted in Europe. 
   As activity in the Norwegian economy is gathering momentum, pressures are mounting in the 
housing market. Consumer confidence has improved and house prices have risen in recent 
months. Housing starts are moving up, although from moderate levels. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
So  far,  the  low  interest  rate  level  has  not  led  to  a  pronounced  increase  in  household 
borrowing. However, the household debt burden is at a historically high level and is expected 
to increase further. 
Rising  debt  and  property  prices  are  mutually  reinforcing  phenomena.  Higher  asset  prices 
lead to higher collateral values for loans and increased borrowing opportunities for buyers. 
This increases the overall risk of the financial system.  
While monetary policy and fiscal policy have been anchored within a long-term, operational 
framework  over  the  past  ten  years,  there  has  been  no  coherent  regulatory  system  for 
financial  markets.  Requirements  are  currently  imposed  on  individual  banks,  but  without 
adequate  regard  to  overall  risk  in  the  financial  system.  The  financial  crisis  highlighted  the 
need to strengthen the current framework. 
Regulation of the financial sector must secure financial stability, but at the same time protect 
the public against losses. This is now on the agenda in Norway and in other countries.  
I would like to highlight three main aspects of the new regulations that are now underway: 
First,  the  financial  crisis  revealed  that  banks  held  insufficient  capital,  excessive  short-term 
market funding and inadequate liquidity buffers. The new Basel III framework sets out stricter 
requirements.  
Second,  the  new  framework  includes  macroprudential  tools  that  can  be  applied  when 
necessary.  Banks  may  be  subject  to  additional  capital  requirements  if  credit  growth  in  the 
wider economy is excessive.  
Third,  the  authorities  must  acquire  tools  that  enable  banks  to  be  wound  up  in  an  orderly 
manner. Owners and creditors – not taxpayers – must bear the losses. The interest rate on 
banks’ funding will then reflect the risk they take rather than an implicit government subsidy.  
The outlook  
Despite  some  concerns  regarding  financial  stability,  the  Norwegian  economy  must  be 
characterised as strong. Productivity fell somewhat through the downturn, but has picked up 
again.  Compared  to  our  neighbouring  countries,  unemployment  in  Norway  is  low,  around 
3 per cent of the labour force. In 2010 the return on our oil fund was close to 10 per cent, and 
the capital has passed 150 per cent of mainland GDP.  
8 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
 
In  the  twelve  months  since  January  2010,  oil  prices  have  risen  to  over  USD  100.  This 
development is primarily demand-driven, fuelled by strong growth in the global economy, and 
in emerging market economies in particular. More recently, oil prices have increased further 
as political unrest in North Africa and the Middle East has led to uncertainty regarding future 
oil supply.  
 
 Norwegian  manufacturing  industries  are  also  benefiting  from  high  commodity  prices. 
Increased  profitability  for  many  firms  and  rising  real  disposable  income  may  boost  the 
demand for labour. With the prospect of continued high commodity prices and falling import 
prices, Norway’s terms of trade should hold up in the period ahead.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
 This, together with a tight labour market, may fuel wage growth. Looking ahead, cost inflation 
is most likely to edge up. On the other hand, high net immigration may have a dampening 
impact on wages. 
 In 2010, the population rose by 62 000, an increase of 1.3 per cent. Low unemployment and 
a relatively high wage level have made the Norwegian labour market attractive to job seekers 
of foreign origin.  
  10 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
Going forward, continued high labour immigration is expected to result in solid growth in the 
labour  force.  At  the  same  time,  improved  terms  of  trade  will  led  to  higher  activity  in  the 
Norwegian economy. Capacity utilisation is expected to revert to a normal level in the second 
half of 2011. In the coming years, output in the mainland economy is expected to increase at 
an annual rate of 3–4 per cent. 
A strong krone and low external price impulses will continue to have a dampening impact on 
inflation, and inflation will remain below target for some time. Further ahead, higher capacity 
utilisation  and  profitability  in  the  business  sector  point  to  a  pickup  in  wage  growth.  At  the 
same time, the fall in import prices will slow.  
To conclude: Norway has weathered the financial crisis better than most countries, and the 
economic recovery in Norway is now on a firm footing. Currently, interest rates are low, with 
the key policy rate at 2 per cent.  
In the years ahead, there are prospects for fairly strong growth in the Norwegian economy, 
driven by solid income growth, rising investment and high population growth.  
 On balance, the consideration of stabilising inflation, as well as developments in output and 
employment, imply a gradual increase in the key policy rate towards a more normal level.  
Thank you for your attention. 
 
 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
