Jürgen Stark: Press briefing on new monetary and financial statistics 
Introductory remarks by Mr Jürgen Stark, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central Bank, for the presentation of four new/enhanced datasets on monetary and financial 
statistics, Frankfurt, 27 June 2011. 
 the  growing  sector  of  euro  area 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I would like to welcome you to this press briefing on monetary and financial statistics, which 
is dedicated to the presentation of two new and two extended sets of statistics. We are in an 
environment of continuous financial innovations and changes in the financial landscape. The 
ECB is determined to keep the monetary and financial statistics fit for use in that changing 
environment.  
The extended sets of statistics improve the existing balance sheet and interest rate reporting 
by  “monetary  financial  institutions”,  which  means  primarily  banks  representing  the  money-
issuing sector. These datasets are at the centre of our monetary analysis.  
The new statistics refer to detailed quarterly balance sheet information from financial vehicle 
corporations  engaged  in  securitisation,  often  called  securitisation  vehicles,  and  from 
insurance  corporations  and  pension  funds.  The  new  datasets  close  some  gaps  in  the 
harmonised  balance  sheet  reporting  of 
financial 
intermediaries outside the money issuing sector.  
These  improvements  and  new  developments  are  the  result  of  very  significant  efforts 
undertaken by statisticians at the ECB and in the national central banks of the Eurosystem. 
The work was carried out in close collaboration with policy-makers, analysts and the financial 
industry. In my view, this process brought about a proper balance between the benefits of the 
data for monetary policy and the burden of collecting it from respondents. As policy-makers, 
we need timely data, and the data must be harmonised across country borders, so that it can 
be readily aggregated at the euro area level.  
The  new  statistics  fit  in  well  with  the  much  used  term  “lessons  learned  from  the  financial 
crisis”. At the same time, the new developments are the outcome of a process that has been 
pursued pro-actively and with a longer-term view, rather than re-actively and with a focus on 
the recent crisis. Indeed, the development process started before the financial turmoil that 
escalated  into  a  genuine  crisis.  The  process  involved  the  euro  area  as  well  as  other  EU 
countries.  It  was  motivated  by  the  need  to  fill  gaps  caused  by  the  ongoing  financial 
innovation and by structural changes within financial products and the financial sector. 
The analysis forming the basis for monetary policy decisions depends crucially on the quality 
and breadth of coverage of the available statistics. Not least the frequently cited deficiencies 
of the Greek statistical system (with respect to both methodological and institutional aspects) 
have  reminded  us  of  the  importance  of  reliable,  accurate  and  timely  statistics  for  the 
functioning and credibility of our whole system. 
I am pleased that the new developments in monetary and financial statistics will contribute, in 
particular, to the research agenda of the ECB’s Governing Council for enhancing monetary 
analysis. As you know, the ECB attaches a high importance to this. Last year, we published 
a  comprehensive  scientific  compendium  on  the  enhancement  of  monetary  analysis,  and  I 
presented these results at a press briefing.1 
Allow me to mention three key examples to illustrate the improvements the new data bring. 
                                                 
1   See Papademos, L.D. and Stark, J. (eds.), Enhancing Monetary Analysis, ECB, Frankfurt am Main, 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
First, the new data will shed more light into the relatively opaque shadow banking. A major 
aspect of financial innovation is linked to the securitisation of financial assets by, in particular, 
the banking sector, and to the financial vehicles created outside the banking sector for this 
purpose.  The  lack  of  good  statistical  information  on  securitisation  gained  increasing 
relevance over the last decade and became particularly obvious in the financial crisis.  
In order to provide for a consistent monitoring of securitisation, the ECB has now introduced 
new quarterly balance sheet statistics that cover “financial vehicle corporations engaged in 
securitisation”. The aggregated total assets of such special-purpose vehicles in the euro area 
stood at €2.3 trillion in the first quarter of 2011. This represents about one tenth of the total 
assets of all non-bank financial intermediaries. And together with the reporting of investment 
funds established in 2009, which also includes hedge funds, the ECB statistics now cover a 
large part of the shadow banking system within the euro area. 
In  addition  to  balance  sheet  reporting  for  securitisation  vehicles,  a  consistent  monthly 
reporting  by  Monetary  and  Financial  Institutions  (MFIs)  has  also  been  developed.  This 
makes  it  possible  to  assess  how  the  securitisation  of  loans  granted  by  MFIs  can  actually 
have  an  impact  on  the  growth  rates  of  MFI  lending  to  households  and  non-financial 
corporations.  That  is  a  step  forward  for  our  monetary  analysis.  To  give  you  a  concrete 
example: taking into account the impact of securitisation, the annual growth of MFI loans to 
non-financial corporations turned positive already in October 2010, some months ahead of 
what had been shown by the figures available in the previous version of the statistics. 
Second, we now have detailed quarterly data on the balance sheet of insurance corporations 
and  pension  funds.  Currently,  their  assets  account  for  about  one  third  of  all  assets  of 
non-bank financial intermediaries within the euro area. That is of course already a sizeable 
figure, but in view of our ageing societies, those institutions can be expected to be of further 
increasing  significance  for  the  economy  and  the  entire  financial  system.  Already  today, 
insurance and pension fund technical reserves, which represent the claims that households 
have  vis-à-vis  life  insurance  companies  and  pension  plans  (other  than  social  insurance 
schemes),  account  for  around  30%  of  households’  total  financial  wealth.  These  new  data 
therefore are important not only for the ECB, but will be highly relevant for many other uses.  
Furthermore,  as  institutional  investors  with  a  significant  portfolio  in  securities,  insurance 
corporations and pension funds will be monitored for monetary policy and financial stability 
purposes. In view of the desirable further development of these statistics, we have started a 
close  cooperation  with  the  European  Insurance  and  Occupational  Pensions  Authority 
(EIOPA). This should help to further improve the statistics, while minimising the costs for the 
industry through the compilation of aggregated data based on supervisory returns. 
Third,  the  improved  interest  rate  statistics  allow  a  deeper  analysis  of  the  transmission 
channels of monetary policy. One specific improvement sheds more light on how the external 
financing conditions of small and medium-sized non-financial enterprises compare with those 
of  large  corporations.  This  is  particularly  relevant  for  the  euro  area,  given  its  rather  more 
bank-based funding system as compared with the more market-based funding system in the 
United States.  
For example, figures on interest rates for new loans to non-financial corporations show that 
interest rates on new loans of up to €250,000 have indeed been far higher than interest rates 
on  loans of over  €1  million.  On  average,  they  were  more  than  140  basis  points  higher  for 
small and medium-sized enterprises and 90 basis points higher for sole proprietors. This is 
important information which enhances our analysis of the financing conditions as these rates 
serve  as  a  proxy  for  loans  to  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises,  as  well  as  to  “sole 
proprietors” (e.g. doctors or architects). 
Overall, I am pleased to see that these new developments and the new datasets in the euro 
area  monetary  and  financial  statistics  keep  them  fit  for  policy  and  analysis  purposes. 
Actually, we are coping well with the current challenges. In particular, not least due to the 
specific  role  we  assign  to  money  in  our  monetary  policy  strategy,  I  see  a  self-reinforcing 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
virtuous circle in action. Enhancements in monetary and financial statistics make it possible 
to keep track of financial innovation, thereby facilitating an enhanced monetary analysis and 
thus ensuring an effective policy decision-making process. The enhanced monetary analysis 
and  its  use  in  the  policy-making  process,  in  turn,  identify  necessary  improvements  to  the 
statistics, thereby closing the circle. 
Nevertheless,  there  is  no  reason  to  be  complacent.  Important  innovations  in  the  financial 
sector will continue to occur. We thus need to invest in flexible tools and methods so as to 
further  adapt  our  statistics  and  analysis  to  changes  both  in  the  financial  sector  and  in  its 
interaction with the real economy. In this respect, a better international standardisation in the 
reporting  and  registration  of  individual  financial  products,  transactions  and  financial 
institutions  will  be  crucial.  The  ECB  is  closely  involved  in  discussions  at  the  International 
Monetary Fund (IMF) and the Financial Stability Board (FSB).  
Worldwide  convergence  and  standardisation  will  allow  a  swift  and  flexible  adaptation  of 
monetary  and  financial  statistics  to  financial  innovation  without  creating  an  unnecessary 
reporting  burden.  We  need  to  express  data  requirements  in  a  more  business-friendly  way 
and  we  should  be  open  to  automation  (e.g.  based  on  International  Financial  Reporting 
Standards  (IFRS)  or  supervisory  reports).  Another  potential  for  improvement  lies  in  the 
re-use of micro-data, such as credit registers, for statistical purposes. The processes initiated 
within  the  framework  of  the  G20  initiatives  on  data  gaps  might  also  provide  an  adequate 
forum for the very important and complex work ahead of us. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
Now, Aurel Schubert, the ECB’s Director General Statistics, will present more details on the 
four datasets and stand ready to answer your questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  5
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  7
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  9
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
