Richard W Fisher: Connecting the dots – Texas employment growth; a 
dissenting vote; and the ugly truth (with reference to P G Wodehouse) 
Remarks  by  Mr  Richard  W  Fisher,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Dallas, at the Midland Community Forum, Midland, Texas, 17 August 2011. 
 The views expressed by the author do not necessarily reflect official positions of the Federal Reserve System. 
Thank you, Kirk [Edwards]. It is great to be here in the cool climes of Midland, Texas. 
I appreciate your having walked our friends today through the operations of the Dallas Fed. 
You know as chairman of our El Paso Branch board that we operate a well-run business as 
we  provide  services  to  the  American  people  that  only  a  central  bank  can  provide,  from 
making  sure  you  have  folding  money,  to  lending  to  our  community  and  regional  banks,  to 
supervising and regulating bank and thrift holding companies so as to protect depositors. As 
president and CEO of the Dallas Fed, I am responsible for a $100 billion bank, accountable 
to  a  board  of  local  directors.  That  board  is  chaired  by  Herb  Kelleher  (you  Midlanders  will 
appreciate that Herb’s immediate past predecessors were Jim Hackett, president and CEO 
of Anadarko Petroleum, and Ray Hunt) and consists of eight other citizens of our district; I 
am  also  advised  by  the  private-sector  directors  of  the  El  Paso,  San  Antonio  and  Houston 
branches of our bank.  
I am not appointed by a president of the United States or subject to confirmation by the U.S. 
Senate. I, along with the 11 other Federal Reserve Bank presidents, operate the business of 
the Federal Reserve as efficiently as any bank in the private sector. And as Kirk mentioned, 
we make money for the U.S. taxpayer: We returned over $125 billion to the U.S. Treasury in 
2009 and 2010. You are looking at one of the few public servants that make money from its 
operations, rather than  just spending taxpayer  money. This wouldn’t be possible without a 
first-rate staff, led by my chief operating officer, Helen Holcomb, and the other senior officers 
that Kirk introduced. I love and admire these folks and too rarely get to single them out for 
public praise. So, please join me in applauding them.  
Two matters 
As Kirk has already said much of what I planned to say today about how the Fed works, I 
would like to address two non-operational matters. 
First is the record of job creation in Texas. For obvious reasons, this has become a subject of 
intense interest to the national media; my staff and I are being hounded by the national press 
corps for data and commentary. Today I will try to separate fact from fiction, with a heavy 
focus on the data.  
The  second  matter  I  wish  to  address  is  why  I  dissented  from  the  consensus  at  the  last 
meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC).  
The two would appear to be unrelated, but might well be – though not in a manner that would 
be readily apparent. I will conclude by trying to connect the two dots.  
Texas’ record of job creation 
Here is a chart that displays nonagricultural employment growth by Federal Reserve Districts 
over the past 21½ years, using the employment levels of 1990 as a base of 100 and tracing 
job creation through June.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  
To illustrate a point, I am going to separate out three districts: the Second, headquartered at 
the New York Fed and consisting of New York, southwestern Connecticut, Puerto Rico, the 
U.S. Virgin Islands and a dozen counties in New Jersey; the Eleventh, represented by the 
Dallas Fed, made up of Texas, the wooded areas of eastern Louisiana and southern New 
Mexico;  and  the  Twelfth,  or  the  San  Francisco  Fed’s  district,  which  consists  of  California, 
eight other states, the Northern Mariana Islands, American Samoa and Guam. The state of 
New  York  produces  72  percent  of  the  economic  output  of  the  Second  District;  Texas 
accounts  for  95  percent  of  the  Eleventh  District’s  output;  and  California  accounts  for 
62 percent  of  the  Twelfth  District’s  output.  One  might  consider  this  second  chart  to  be  an 
imperfect but reasonable proxy for the employment growth over the past two decades of the 
three largest states in the country. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 Like the chart for employment in all 12 of the Fed’s districts, the three districts’ employment 
levels are indexed to 100 in 1990. You will see that, at the end of June, the index stands at 
150  for  the  Eleventh  District,  125  for  the  Twelfth  and  103  for  the  Second.  Nonagricultural 
employment  growth  in  Texas  has  compounded  at  an  annual  rate  of  1.95  percent  over 
21½ years;  that  of  California  at  0.57  percent;  and  New  York’s  at  0.19  percent.  If  you  are 
interested in the output of their workers over this same period, the compound annual growth 
rate of Texas GDP is 3.6 percent; California’s is 2.59 percent; and New York’s 2.06 percent.  
Now, let’s look at job creation in Texas since June 2009, the date that the National Bureau of 
Economic Research (or NBER, the body that “officially” dates when a recession starts and 
ends) declared the recent economic recession to have ended. 
There  are  several  ways  to  calculate  Texas’  contribution  to  national  job  creation  from  June 
2009  through  the  end  of  June  2011.  One  is  to  look  at  the  number  of  jobs  created  by  all 
50 states,  including  those  that  have  lost  jobs  since  the  nation’s  anemic  recovery  began. 
Using this metric, through June of this year Texas has accounted for 49.9 percent of net new 
jobs created in the United States. 
Another  way  to  calculate  Texas’  contribution  to  job  creation  is  to  lop  off  those  states  that 
have continued losing jobs and consider only those that have positive growth in employment 
these past two years. Using this metric, Texas has accounted for 29.2 percent of job creation 
since the recession ended. 
These are the facts. You may select whichever metric you wish. Regardless, it is reasonable 
to assume Texas has accounted for a significant amount of the nation’s employment growth 
both over the past 20 years and since the recession officially ended. 
This raises the obvious question – what kind of jobs are being created in Texas? Here are 
two charts that might help you form an opinion.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  3
 The first provides a breakdown of employment growth by sector since the recession ended, 
listing each employment sector by its weight in the employment mix of Texas. The most jobs 
have  been  created  in  the  educational  and  health  services  sector,  which  accounts  for 
13.5 percent  of  Texas’  employment.  The  second-most  jobs  have  been  created  in  the 
professional  and  business  services  sector,  which  accounts  for  12.5  percent  of  the  Texas 
workforce. The mining sector, which includes support activities for both mining and oil and 
gas,  employs  2.1  percent  (yes,  two-point-one  percent)  of  Texas’  workers.  In  the  second 
chart, you will see that these jobs are not low-paying jobs. The average weekly wage in the 
education  and  health  services  sector  is  $790;  in  the  professional  and  business  services 
sector it is $1,117; and in the mining sector, the average weekly wage is $2,271. Together 
these three sectors account for 68 percent of the jobs that have been created in Texas in the 
past two years.  
I should point out that in 2010, 9.5 percent of hourly workers in Texas earned at or below the 
federal minimum wage, a share that exceeds the national average of 6 percent. California’s 
share was 2 percent and New York’s was 6.5 percent. Texas and New York do not have a 
state minimum wage that is higher than the federal minimum wage.1 At least 17 states do 
have minimum wages that are above the federal level of $7.25; California’s minimum wage, 
for example, is $8.  
The agricultural sector has a relatively high share of minimum wage workers. Approximately 
2  percent  of  Texas’  workers  are  in  the  ag  sector,  whereas  1.1  percent  of  California’s 
workforce and a mere 0.5 percent of New York’s workforce are employed in agriculture. This 
is true especially in the border area, which also has many migrant workers and where the 
level of education is relatively low. Finally, Texas has a younger workforce than the nation, 
                                                 
1  See 
“Minimum  Wage  Workers 
http://www.bls.gov/ro6/fax/minwage_tx.htm. 
in  Texas,”  Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics,  March  28,  2011, 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
further boosting the share of minimum wage earners in the state. For example, the leisure 
and hospitality sector employs a disproportionate number of young people, and the average 
weekly wage in that sector is a very low $347. 
So  those  are  the  facts.  The  Dallas  Fed  will  henceforth  be  providing  monthly  updates  on 
employment in Texas through our website at www.dallasfed.org. We hope it will be a useful 
tool for everyone ranging from columnists who write for the New York Times to the pundits 
who provide commentary for Fox News, as well as serious economists. 
FOMC decision 
Now to the second matter I wish to discuss with you today: my decision to dissent from the 
commitment of the majority of my colleagues on the FOMC in their decision to hold the base 
interest rate for interbank lending – the fed funds rate, the anchor of the yield curve – at its 
current level well into 2013. 
I  have  posited  both  within  the  FOMC  and  publicly  for  some  time  that  there  is  abundant 
liquidity available to finance economic expansion and job creation in America. The banking 
system  is  awash  with  liquidity.  It  is  a  rare  day  when  the  discount  windows  –  the  lending 
facilities of the 12 Federal Reserve banks – experience significant activity. Domestic banks 
are flush; they have on deposit at the 12 Federal Reserve banks some $1.6 trillion in excess 
reserves, earning a mere 25 basis points – a quarter of 1 percent per annum – rather than 
earning significantly higher interest rates from making loans to operating businesses. These 
excess bank reserves are waiting on the sidelines to be lent to businesses. Nondepository 
financial firms – private equity funds and the like – have substantial amounts of investable 
cash  at  their  disposal.  U.S.  corporations  are  sitting  on  an  abundance  of  cash  –  some 
estimate excess working capital on publicly traded corporations’ books exceeds $1 trillion – 
well  above  their  working  capital  needs.  Nonpublicly  held  businesses  that  are  creditworthy 
have increasing access to bank credit at historically low nominal rates.  
I have said many times that through the initiatives we took to counter the crisis of 2008–09, 
and the dramatic extension of the balance sheet that ensued, the Fed has refilled the tanks 
needed  to  fuel  economic  expansion  and  domestic  job  creation.  Though  I  questioned  the 
efficacy of the expansion of our balance sheet through the purchase of Treasury securities 
known  as  “QE2,”  I  have  come  to  expect  that  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  would 
continue to anchor the base lending rate at current levels and also maintain our abnormally 
large balance sheet, now with footings of almost $2.9 trillion, for “an extended period.” 
I do not believe it wise to commit to more than that, or to signal further accommodation, when 
the cheap and abundant liquidity we have made available is presently lying fallow, and when 
the  velocity  of  money  remains  so  subdued  as  to  be  practically  comatose.  At  the  FOMC 
meeting, the committee announced that it “currently anticipates that economic conditions … 
are  likely  to  warrant  exceptionally  low  levels  for  the  federal  funds  rate  at  least  through 
mid-2013.”  In  monetary  parlance,  that  is  language  designed  to  signal  that  we  are  on  hold 
until then.  
I voted against that commitment-cum-signal. In the press’ reporting of my dissenting vote and 
those  of  the  other  two  members  of  the  FOMC  who  voted  against  that  commitment  – 
Mr. Kocherlakota, my counterpart from the Minneapolis Fed, and Mr. Plosser, my counterpart 
from Philadelphia – there was substantial speculation as to the reasons for our dissent. I will 
let my other two colleagues speak for themselves; I can only speak for myself. Let me make 
clear why I was opposed to freezing the fed funds rate for two years.  
First, in reporting my views to the committee, I noted my concern for the fragility of the U.S. 
economy and weak job creation. It might be noted by the press here today that although I am 
constantly preoccupied with price stability – in the aviary of central bankers, I am known as a 
“hawk” on inflation – I did not voice concern for the prospect of inflationary pressures in the 
foreseeable  future.  Indeed,  the  Dallas  Fed’s  trimmed  mean  analysis  of  the  inflationary 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
developments in June indicated that the trimmed mean PCE turned in its softest reading of 
the  year.  The  trimmed  mean  analysis  we  do  at  the  Dallas  Fed  focuses  on  the  price 
movements  of  personal  consumption  expenditures.  It  is  an  analysis  that  tracks  the  price 
movements of 178 items that people actually buy, such as beer, haircuts, shoe repair, food 
and energy prices. In June, the trimmed mean came in at an annualized rate of 1.3 percent, 
versus 2.1 percent for the first five months of the year. The 12-month rate was 1.5 percent.  
My  concern  is  not  with  immediate  inflationary  pressures.  Core  producer  prices  are  still 
increasing at a higher than desirable rate. But I have suggested to my colleagues that while 
many companies have begun and will likely continue to raise prices to counter rising costs 
that derive from a range of factors – including the run-up of commodity prices in 2010 and 
increases  in  the  costs  of  production  in  China  –  weak  demand  is  beginning  to  temper  the 
ability of providers of goods and services to significantly raise prices to consumers.  
My concern is with the transmission mechanism for activating the use of the liquidity we have 
created, which remains on the sidelines of the economy. I posit that nonmonetary factors, not 
monetary policy, are retarding the willingness and ability of job creators to put to work the 
liquidity that we have provided.  
I have spoken to this many times in public. Those with the capacity to hire American workers 
–  small  businesses  as  well  as  large,  publicly  traded  or  private  –  are  immobilized.  Not 
because they lack entrepreneurial zeal or do not wish to grow; not because they can’t access 
cheap and available credit. Rather, they simply cannot budget or manage for the uncertainty 
of  fiscal  and  regulatory  policy.  In  an  environment  where  they  are  already  uncertain  of 
potential  growth  in  demand  for  their  goods  and  services  and  have  yet  to  see  a  significant 
pickup in top-line revenue, there is palpable angst surrounding the cost of doing business. 
According  to  my  business  contacts,  the  opera  buffa  of  the  debt  ceiling  negotiations 
compounded this uncertainty, leaving business decisionmakers frozen in their tracks.  
I  would  suggest  that  unless  you  were  on  another  planet,  no  consumer  with  access  to  a 
television,  radio  or  the  Internet  could  have  escaped  hearing  their  president,  senators  and 
their  congressperson  telling  them  the  sky  was  falling.  With  the  leadership  of  the  nation 
 – Republicans and Democrats alike – and every talking head in the media making clear hour 
after hour, day after day in the run-up to Aug. 2 that a financial disaster was lurking around 
the corner, it does not take much imagination to envision consumers deciding to forego or 
delay some discretionary expenditure they had planned. Instead, they might well be inclined 
to  hunker  down  to  weather  the  perfect  storm  they  were  being  warned  was  rapidly 
approaching. Watching the drama as it unfolded, I could imagine consumers turning to each 
other in millions of households, saying: “Honey, we need to cancel that trip we were planning 
and that gizmo or service we wanted to buy. We better save more and spend less.” Small 
wonder that, following the somewhat encouraging retail activity reported in July, the Michigan 
survey measure of consumer sentiment released just recently had a distinctly sour tone. 
Importantly, from a business operator’s perspective, nothing was clarified, except that there 
will  be  undefined  change  in  taxes,  spending  and  subsidies  and  other  fiscal  incentives  or 
disincentives. The message was simply that some combination of revenue enhancement and 
spending growth cutbacks will take place. The particulars are left to one’s imagination and 
the outcome of deliberations among 12 members of the Legislature.  
Now, put yourself in the shoes of a business operator. On the revenue side, you have yet to 
see a robust recovery in demand; growing your top-line revenue is vexing. You have been 
driving  profits  or  just  maintaining  your  margins  through  cost  reduction  and  achieving 
maximum  operating  efficiency.  You  have  money  in  your  pocket  or  a  banker  increasingly 
willing to give you credit if and when you decide to expand. But you have no idea where the 
government will be cutting back on spending, what measures will be taken on the taxation 
front  and  how  all  this  will  affect  your  cost  structure  or  customer  base.  Your  most  likely 
reaction is to cross your arms, plant your feet and say: “Show me. I am not going to hire new 
workers or build a new plant until I have been shown what will come out of this agreement.” 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Moreover, you might now say to yourself, “I understand from the Federal Reserve that I don’t 
have to worry about the cost of borrowing for another two years. Given that I don’t know how 
I  am  going  to  be  hit  by  whatever  new  initiatives  the  Congress  will  come  up  with,  but  I  do 
know  that  credit  will  remain  cheap  through  the  next  election,  what  incentive  do  I  have  to 
invest and expand now? Why shouldn’t I wait until the sky is clear?” 
Based on past behavior of fiscal policy makers, businesses understandably regard the debt 
ceiling  agreement  and  the  political  outcome  of  negotiations  between  Congress  and  the 
president with the suspicion akin to how the British humorist P.G. Wodehouse regarded his 
aunts: “It is no use telling me there are bad aunts and good aunts,” he wrote. “At the core 
they are all alike. Sooner or later, out pops the cloven hoof.”2 
It will be devilishly difficult for businesses to commit to adding significantly to their head count 
or  to  meaningful  capital  expansion  in  the  United  States  until  clarity  is  achieved  on  the 
particulars of how Congress will bend the curve of deficit and debt expansion and the “cloven 
hooves” are revealed. No amount of monetary accommodation can substitute for that needed 
clarity. In fact, it can only make it worse if business comes to suspect that the central bank is 
laying  the  groundwork  for  eventually  inflating  our  way  out  of  our  fiscal  predicament  rather 
than staying above the political fray – thus creating another tranche of uncertainty. 
In the interest of full disclosure, I should add that I was also concerned that just by tweaking 
the language the way the committee did, our action might be interpreted as encouraging the 
view that there is an FOMC so-called “Bernanke put” that would be too easily activated in 
response  to  a  reversal  in  the  financial  markets.  For  those  of  you  unfamiliar  with  the 
expression  “Bernanke  put,”  or  more  generally,  a  “central  bank  put,”  this  term  refers  to  the 
concept that a central bank will allow the stock market to rise significantly without tightening 
monetary policy, but will ease monetary policy whenever there is a stock market “correction.” 
Given  the  extent  of  the  drop  in  the  stock  market  leading  up  to  and  following  Standard  & 
Poor’s downgrade of U.S. debt, combined with the FOMC’s commitment to hold short-term 
rates  near  zero  until  mid-year  2013,  some  cynical  observers  might  interpret  such  a  policy 
action as a “Bernanke put.” My long-standing belief is that the Federal Reserve should never 
enact such asymmetric policies to protect stock market traders and investors. I believe my 
FOMC colleagues share this view.  
Connecting the dots 
Now,  how  do  you  connect  the  dots  between  Texas’  record  of  economic  growth  and  my 
dissenting vote? 
Despite the fact that Texas has severely limited social services and an education system that 
faces great challenges, people and businesses have been picking up stakes and moving to 
Texas  in  significant  numbers  over  a  prolonged  period.3  It  should  be  noted  that  in  the  last 
census,  Texas  gained  population  and  congressional  seats,  while  California’s  population 
growth and congressional representation was static and New York’s was diminished. Jobs 
have been created for American workers in Texas in several different sectors, not just in the 
oil  and  gas  and  mining  sectors.  People  have  taken  those  jobs  of  their  own  free  will,  even 
though the jobs may not measure up to the compensation levels everyone would like. And 
yet Texas, like all states, is subject to the same monetary policy as all the rest: We have the 
same interest rates and access to capital as the residents of any of the other 49 states, for 
the Federal Reserve conducts monetary policy and regulates financial institutions under its 
                                                 
2  The Code of the Woosters, by P.G. Wodehouse, New York: Doubleday, Doran, 1938. 
3  See “Texas: What Makes Us Exceptional? Where Are We Vulnerable?,” speech by Richard W. Fisher before 
the 2010 Pre-Session Legislative Conference, Dec. 2, 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
purview for the nation at large. From this, I draw the conclusion that private sector capital and 
jobs will go to where taxes and spending and regulatory policy are most conducive to growth.  
Therein lies a lesson for our fiscal policy makers as they grapple with their monumental task 
of reconfiguring fiscal policy and eliminating the prevailing uncertainty about their remedy.  
We live in a world that, through steadfast sacrifice of the American treasure and with blood 
and capable diplomacy, won the Cold War, induced the Chinese to pull back the Bamboo 
Curtain and opened up the majority of the world to once unimaginable economic opportunity. 
China,  the  rest  of  Southeast  Asia,  Eastern  Europe,  India,  most  of  Latin  America  and 
significant  swathes  of  Africa  are  eager  to  improve  the  lot  of  their  people  through  full 
participation in the global economy. In doing so, they have become serious competitors for 
capital,  including  that  plentiful  and  affordable  capital  we  at  the  Federal  Reserve  have 
created.  
In a cyberized, globalized world, those with the means to create jobs will gravitate to those 
places that provide the best prospect for a return on the investment of the abundant capital 
on business’ balance sheets or available to them in the marketplace or from eager bankers. 
Just as many people and firms within the United States have relocated to Texas from other 
states, investment will flow to countries anywhere in the world where it is most welcome.  
Our fiscal authorities must not only figure out the way to contain the nation’s runaway deficits 
and public debt accumulation, but they must do so in a manner that is competitive with others 
who seek access to our money, and do so in a manner that does not pull the rug out from 
under  the  meager  recovery  we  are  experiencing.  The  Committee  of  12  and  the  president 
have  an  awesome  task.  Essentially,  they  must  reboot  our  entire  system  of  economic 
incentives and come forward with an updated tax and spending and regulatory regime that 
incentivizes businesses to invest in the United States and create jobs for American workers 
rather  than  gravitate  to  foreign  shores.  And  they  must  do  so  in  a  manner  that  avoids 
engaging  in  a  race  to  the  bottom,  but  rather,  puts  us  back  on  the  path  to  ever  higher 
achievement of prosperity.  
The sooner they get on it, the better. Uncertainty is corrosive; it is hurting job creation and 
capital expansion when we need it most. As Margaret Thatcher would say: “Don’t dawdle. 
And don’t go wobbly on us, Congress.” Monetary policy cannot substitute for what you must 
get on with doing. Get on with your job. 
The ugly truth 
I think I have made it pretty clear today that I believe what is restraining our economy is not 
monetary  policy  but  fiscal  misfeasance  in  Washington.  We  elect  our  national  leaders  to 
safeguard  our  country.  An  integral  part  of  that  consists  of  safeguarding  the  nation’s  fiscal 
probity.  Pointing  fingers  at  the  Fed  only  diminishes  credibility  –  the  ugly  truth  is  that  the 
problem lies not with monetary policy but in the need to construct a modern, appropriate set 
of fiscal and regulatory levers and pulleys to better incentivize the private sector to channel 
money  into  productive  use  in  expanding  our  economy  and  enriching  our  people.  Only 
Congress, working together with the president, has the power to write the rules and provide 
the incentives to correct the course of the great ship we know and love as America. I hope 
you, as the voters who put them in office, will demand no less of them.  
Thank you. I will be happy to do my level best to avoid answering any questions you might 
have.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
