Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Better supervision and better banking in a post 
crisis era 
Welcoming address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 
Financial  Stability  Institute  (FSI)  –  Executive  Meeting  of  East  Asia  Pacific  Central  Banks 
(EMEAP) High Level Meeting Dinner, Kuala Lumpur, 16 January 2011. 
 It is my pleasure to welcome you to this Financial Stability Institute (FSI) EMEAP high level 
meeting for Banking Supervisors. Bank Negara Malaysia is honoured to host this event that 
brings together senior officials from the regulatory community, as well as, the leadership from 
the banking industry from the Asian region to discuss Supervision and Banking in this post 
crisis era. 
We  are  now  in  a  period  of  profound  and  fundamental  change  for  the  industry  and  for 
regulators  and  supervisors.  The  issuance  of  the  final  reform  package  by  the  Basel 
Committee in December 2010 marks the completion of a key milestone in the international 
financial  reform  process  that  began  in  the  aftermath  of  the  global  financial  crisis.  This 
process has been complex, involving multiple tracks of intense dialogue taking place, both at 
the  international  and  regional  levels.  The  journey  towards  building  a  more  resilient 
international financial system, however, is far from over.  
For  this  set  of  reforms  that  have  been  issued  by  the  Basel  Committee,  the  next  phase 
involving the implementation will be equally challenging. There is already great anticipation 
on  how  the  new  standards  would  be  phased  in,  and  its  impact  on  the  financial  sector 
landscape. Of importance, is ensuring that the implementation of the regulatory reforms does 
not impair the ongoing economic recovery process. Further, while major agreement has been 
reached  on  the  key  components  concerning  capital  and  liquidity,  a  number  of  other 
significant areas still remain largely work in progress. Against this backdrop, it is important 
that  policy  makers  and  the  financial  industry  maintain  a  continued  open  and  constructive 
dialogue  on  developments  affecting  the  industry,  in  particular,  to  avoid  any  unintended 
consequences from these reforms. 
Economic outlook 
We  are  now  entering  the  second  year  of  global  recovery.  The  rebound  in  2010  has  been 
largely led by the exceptional performance of the emerging economies, in particular, in Asia. 
Growth is expected to remain strong this year, although at a more moderate pace compared 
to 2010. Amid favourable growth prospects, Asia will however have to manage the impact of 
international developments given its high degree of economic and financial openness. The 
global  attention  is  currently  focused  on  the  fiscal  conditions  of  several  of  the  advanced 
economies,  the  progress  in  the  financial  reforms  and  on  the  monetary  and  financial 
measures being implemented in the crisis affected economies. A major challenge for most 
emerging economies in 2011 will be the management of the highly volatile capital flows. The 
strong growth in Asia has and will continue to attract this massive increase in global liquidity 
in the form of capital inflows into the region. This calls for greater vigilance on the part of the 
policymakers in the region. Several regional economies have already implemented measures 
including macro prudential measures to preserve macroeconomic and financial stability. 
Against the backdrop of continuing uncertainties, Asia is expected to continue to lead global 
growth, supported by strong macroeconomic fundamentals and sound financial systems. The 
revival  of  private  sector  economic  activity  has  been  an  important  factor  in  sustaining  the 
strong  growth  prospects  in  Asia.  On  the  domestic  front,  the  Malaysian  economy  is  set  to 
register a growth in the region of 7% for 2010. While the external sector may be affected by 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
the  slower  global  growth,  the  growth  momentum  of  domestic  demand  is  projected  to  be 
sustained in 2011, supported by the continued firm expansion in private sector activity. Most 
encouraging is that private investment is expected to strengthen and become an important 
contributor to the growth.  
Achieving financial stability objectives 
Let me now turn to the efforts to achieve greater financial stability. While there is still much 
work to be accomplished at the international level, an immediate priority ahead is to achieve 
effective and well coordinated approaches to the implementation of the announced financial 
reforms. This is important given the greater inter linkages in the global economy. While the 
outcome of the quantitative impact studies have predicted that the long term benefits of the 
measures will outweigh the short term costs arising from the adjustments, actual experiences 
are likely to vary across different jurisdictions.  
While individual jurisdictions may be confronted with specific challenges of implementation 
that  may  arise  from  differences  in  economic  and  market  structures,  there  is  also  much  in 
common, particularly among emerging economies, that can be shared among jurisdictions. 
The period of observation on some of the components of the reform package provided by the 
Basel  Committee  is  welcomed.  It  will  allow  jurisdictions  to  consider  appropriate  actions 
needed to support the effective implementation of the reforms. At the same time, there is an 
expectation that there will be a willingness by the international standard setting community to 
adjust  or  otherwise  supplement  current  prescriptions,  frameworks  or  implementation 
strategies  as  more  experience  is  gained  under  changing  market  conditions.  The  effective 
implementation would also require support for the implementation of the reforms, particularly 
in the area of capacity building, particularly in the emerging and developing world. Inclusive 
communication channels with the market and an inclusive process of global consultations will 
allow  us  to  benefit  from  the  experience  of  others  and,  more  importantly,  facilitate  more 
coordinated policy responses and thus support the orderly adjustments to the new standards. 
While the evolution of financial stability policies over the recent two years has seen clearer 
mandates being established for the regulatory authorities, the framework for financial stability 
both at the national and international levels continue to be a subject of intense discussion. 
The  focus  has  been  on  the  efficacy  of  policy  instruments  needed  to  preserve  financial 
stability,  the  structure  and  design  of  decision  making  frameworks  and  the  institutional 
arrangements and accountabilities in regard to financial stability policies. An important part of 
this is that, with the accountabilities, is the need to have broad range of instruments and the 
policy  space  and  flexibilities  to  achieve  the  specific  financial  stability  policy  objectives.  In 
addition to this, for many emerging economies, an important mandate is also to develop the 
financial system. For most Central Banks in emerging economies, this developmental role is 
integral to maintaining the orderly development of the financial system and hence financial 
stability over the longer term.  
Intensified supervision and strengthened governance  
The  global  financial  crisis  has  also  prompted  a  renewal  and  further  strengthening  of 
supervisory  approaches,  and  intensified  efforts  to  deepen  supervisory  cooperation  across 
borders. This reflects the growing significance of internationally and regionally active financial 
institutions.  Although  the  risk  based  supervisory  approach  is  already  adopted  in  many 
countries  and  provides  the  framework  for  enhanced  risk  assessments  with  more  informed 
supervisory judgments, the methods used to determine supervisory intensity may need to be 
regularly re examined given the continuous pace of financial innovation and changing market 
conditions.  
As  more  jurisdictions  move  to  adopt  more  principle  or  outcome  based  approaches  to 
regulation,  ensuring  rigorous  and  proportionate  supervision,  will  become  increasingly 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
important to ensure prudent risk taking in the financial system. While compliance will remain 
important,  the  nature  and  intensity  of  supervisory  relations  with  financial  institutions  are 
already  seeing  a  more  prominent  shift  towards  more  open  and  engaging  interactions  that 
allow both supervisors and financial institutions to develop a more complete understanding of 
risks confronting the institutions and industry as a whole. This also supports current efforts to 
strengthen  the  macro  prudential  orientation  to  risk  management,  both  at  the  system  and 
institution  level  whereby  the  assessment  of  institutional  risks  is  complemented  by 
considerations  of  macroeconomic  developments  and  collective  market  behaviors  that  can 
have a significant impact on financial stability. 
The reform measures to enhance the resilience of financial institutions and the supervisory 
capabilities  to  identify  and  assess  risks  at  the  macro  level  are  also  being  reinforced  with 
efforts  to  strengthen  the  caliber  of  the  boards  and  senior  management  of  the  financial 
institutions. In Malaysia, our commitment towards enhancing the performance of boards of 
financial institution has not only been through the issuance of supervisory guidance, but also 
with the introduction of a rigorous Education Programme for Directors that was launched in 
2008. Beginning this year, this programme is open to directors of financial institutions outside 
Malaysia. In drawing from the many lessons from the Asian financial crisis and this recent 
global  financial  crisis,  nurturing  of  a  strong  risk  culture  and  ethical  workforce  within  the 
financial industry is absolutely fundamental to our efforts to promote financial stability and the 
need for this to start with the board and management of financial institutions.  
In  the  wake  of  the  crisis,  greater  expectations  are  being  placed  on  the  board  and  senior 
management  to  have  more  effective  leadership  and  oversight  roles.  These  expectations 
have  in  certain  jurisdictions  been  translated  into  responses  that  have  included  intrusive 
approaches to appointments of directors and key personnel of financial institutions, while at 
the  international  level  it  has  resulted  in  substantial  enhancements  to  existing  international 
supervisory  standards  on  corporate  governance.  In  the  process,  we  are  seeing  renewed 
debate  and  dialogue  on  how  fundamental  precepts  of  governance  should  be  best 
operationalised  to  achieve  their  substance  over  form,  including  the  notion  of  separation 
between oversight and management, the determination of the relevant board competencies 
in  today's  environment  and  the  appropriate  role  of  the  board,  the  management  and  the 
supervisor  in  reinforcing  sound  governance  practices.  It  is  thus  important  for  a  continuous 
process of renewal of established practices to preserve the foundation for financial stability. 
Scope for greater collaboration  
In  a  world  that  is  highly  interconnected,  the  scope  for  supervisory  cooperation  and 
collaboration for the effective conduct of financial stability policies is now already expanding. 
The regional cooperation among central banks and supervisory agencies in Asia itself has 
advanced in many areas, particularly in the aftermath of the Asian Financial crisis. The focus 
of cooperation has gone beyond the traditional areas of financial stability, financial markets 
and payment and settlement systems to cover the more technical policies and the forward 
looking issues. Despite this notable progress, there remains opportunities to leverage more 
on  existing  platforms  to  address  more  recent  challenges  pertaining  to  cross  border  issues 
such as regulatory arbitrage, facilitating financial integration, and establishing a more robust 
framework for regional macro surveillance and crisis management.  
The  global  crisis  experience  also  offers  important  insights  that  could  further  deepen  our 
understanding  and  cement  cooperation  in  the  area  of  cross  border  resolution  of  problem 
institutions. The ongoing efforts in Europe to implement "living wills" would be of significant 
interest to this region, from the perspective of their construction as well as implementation. 
While these approaches are still untested, this exercise will make an important contribution to 
deepen our understanding on the relevance of business models and the different regulatory 
structures and legal systems that have an important bearing on the operations of significant 
institutions with cross border operations.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Moving forward, more experience is still to be gained in regard to effective financial stability 
communication  strategy,  an  element  that  has  not  received  much  attention  until  the  recent 
crisis.  Credible  financial  stability  communication  strategies,  particularly  during  periods  of 
heightened  uncertainties  will  require  appropriate  timing  and  delivery  as  well  as  effective 
coordination among relevant agencies. The effective coordination of announcements on the 
blanket  government  guarantee  and  liquidity  measures  in  Malaysia,  Singapore  and  Hong 
Kong during the recent crisis for instance, had helped sustained the overall confidence in our 
financial markets. Similarly, there are also lessons to be learned in regard to the experience 
in the communication of supervisory stress test results in Europe and the United States.  
Conclusion  
Given  the  dynamics  of  the  financial  markets  today,  more  effective  engagements  between 
policy  makers  and  the  industry,  both  within  and  across  borders  have  never  been  more 
important so as to bring about a greater awareness of key financial stability issues, to further 
sharpen supervisory and management judgements and to promote greater collaboration on 
multiple  fronts.  Enhanced  prospects  for  greater  global  financial  stability  depend  on  a 
sustained commitment to these priorities. Ultimately, the goal is to strengthen our collective 
ability to anticipate and respond effectively to developments that affect financial stability, not 
just in these present challenging times, but through what will likely be an extended period of 
global adjustments going forward. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
