Heng Swee Keat: How the Monetary Authority of Singapore had 
responded to the crisis and its challenges ahead 
Acceptance speech by Mr Heng Swee Keat, Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of 
Singapore,  on  receiving  The  Banker’s  “Central  Bank  Governor  of  the  Year  in  Asia-Pacific” 
Award, Singapore, 11 February 2011. 
 I am deeply honoured  and humbled to receive the “Central Bank Governor of the 
On receiving the award and paying tribute to MAS’ staff 
1. 
Year in Asia-Pacific” Award by The Banker. 
2. 
This  award  is  a  tribute  to  the  collective  contribution  of  the  staff  of  the  Monetary 
Authority  of  Singapore  (MAS)  who  had  worked  hard  to  ensure  that  our  monetary  policy 
stance was appropriate for the economy during the downturn and the eventual recovery; and 
to  foster  a  sound  and  progressive  financial  system,  which  overall  stood  well  under  stress 
during the global financial crisis. Several of our key management team members are here: 
Edward  Robinson,  Andrew  Khoo  and  Ng  Nam  Sin.  This  is  also  a  testament  to  the 
collaborative  efforts  with  the  industry  to  build  a  resilient  financial  sector.  I  thank  members 
present here for the roundtable, and in particular Mr J Y Pillay, who as former MD of MAS, 
laid a strong foundation of sound central banking and regulation. 
How MAS had responded to the crisis 
3. 
As  a  small  and  open  economy  with  strong  linkages  with  the  rest  of  the  world, 
Singapore was severely affected by the financial crisis through a sharp falloff in global trade. 
We experienced four consecutive quarters of sequential contraction with a cumulative output 
loss of 9% – our deepest recession since independence. Conversely, with the subsequent 
recovery in the global economy, Singapore’s GDP rose sharply and now exceeds the level 
before the crisis. Last year, the economy grew by an estimated 14.7%. 
4. 
Over the course of the crisis in 2008/2009, MAS’ monetary policy responses were 
deliberately  graduated,  underpinned  by  the  objective  of  promoting  price  stability  in  the 
medium term. We did not react to every single development in the economy or the financial 
markets as this would have introduced unnecessary volatility and uncertainty. Following the 
significant deterioration in external demand in late 2008, MAS eased policy in October 2008 
and  April  2009  to  provide  support  to  the  domestic  economy.  In  early  2010,  taking  into 
account the strong recovery path of the economy and rising domestic cost pressures amidst 
high rates of resource utilisation, MAS shifted to a modest and gradual appreciation of the 
S$NEER  policy  band.  Subsequently,  MAS  tightened  policy  further  in  October  2010  by 
increasing slightly the slope of the policy band. 
5. 
Singapore’s  financial  system  experienced  some  initial  strains  but  otherwise  has 
proven resilient during the crisis. Banks and insurers maintained robust capital and liquidity 
buffers, and balance sheets were relatively strong. Their prudent risk management allowed 
them to weather the crisis well. MAS has also remained vigilant through the crisis, with my 
colleagues working hard to ensure that our regulatory and supervisory efforts remain robust. 
Challenges ahead 
To  maintain  sustained  growth,  sound  economic  management,  with  an  appropriate 
6. 
mix  of  mix  of  policies,  is  essential.  Sound  monetary  policy,  together  with  the  appropriate 
fiscal policy, contributes to macro-economic stability. However, it is structural policies that we 
must turn to, if we are to successfully meet the challenges brought about by demographic 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
changes, technological advancements and globalisation. Macroeconomic or financial policies 
cannot work in isolation, and indeed, an over-reliance on any specific policy instrument can 
create unintended consequences. The robust recovery in the Singapore economy reflects in 
part the judicious mix of policies that the government has pursued. 
7. 
This year, the Singapore economy is expected to expand at a more moderate pace 
of  4–6%,  driven  by  the  services  sector  which  is  expected  to  benefit  from  robust  regional 
demand. The IMF projects that the global economy will expand by 4.4%. Nevertheless, the 
road ahead remains challenging. 
8. 
First, the pace of recovery varies across economies. Many advanced economies are 
weighed  down  by  the  protracted  process  of  restructuring  of  financial  systems  and  fiscal 
consolidation.  In  comparison,  Asian  and  most  emerging  economies,  including  Singapore, 
have bounced back decisively, and are now facing rising inflationary pressures because of 
tight factor markets and higher global commodity prices. The growth differential and the very 
accommodative  monetary  conditions  in  the  advanced  economies  have  also  resulted  in  a 
strong  surge  in  capital  flows  into  Asia.  However,  in  more  recent  weeks,  the  more  positive 
data in the US has resulted in some flow-back to the US markets. This more variegated and 
dynamic  landscape  means  financial  markets  are  likely  to  remain  volatile  in  the  months 
ahead. We need to be prepared to manage this volatility. 
9. 
Second,  policymakers  not  only  have  to  grapple  with  the  aftermath  of  the  financial 
crisis,  but  also  the  medium  term  structural  challenges  facing  their  countries.  There  are 
significant  differences  in  the  pattern  of  saving  and  investment  across  economies.  Many  of 
these reflect structural factors such as demographics, as well as the particular path of growth 
and development. To sustain global growth, some changes in the global saving-investment 
pattern  will  be  necessary.  This  cannot  happen  overnight.  Instead,  we  need  sustained  and 
coordinated policy action across all the major economies. The IMF and global bodies like the 
G20 will have to continue to focus and provide direction on these structural issues. 
10. 
Third, the financial crisis shows how critical the nexus is between the health of the 
financial system and the health of the economy. Global regulatory reforms are necessary to 
address many of the weaknesses uncovered during the crisis. Yet, we have to tread a fine 
balance  to  build  not  just  have  a  resilient  global  financial  system,  but  also  one  that  can 
support sustainable economic growth. Given the varying pace of economic recovery and the 
different  phases  of  economic  transition,  regulations  need  to  be  appropriate  to  local 
circumstances, while preventing regulatory arbitrage. Globally coordinated efforts and strong 
international cooperation in some areas, as well as local efforts that are context-specific will 
both be needed to achieve the desired regulatory outcomes. 
11. 
In  short,  there  are  many  challenges  ahead  in navigating  the  global  economic  and 
financial landscape. Singapore, as a small, open economy, will be subject to many of these 
challenges. We will have to remain vigilant and nimble. I hope that we will continue to make 
our small contribution to the global discussion on these challenges. We will play our part in 
strengthening  the  global  financial  infrastructure  to  facilitate  the  efficient  channelling  of 
savings for sustainable development in the region and beyond. 
12. 
colleagues. I also thank members of the industry for working together with MAS. 
I would like to thank The Banker for this award which I accept on behalf of my MAS 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
