Paul Fisher: The state of the financial markets 
Speech  by  Mr  Paul  Fisher,  Executive  Director  for  Markets  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at  the 
Institutional Investor Institute, Bedfordshire, 29 June 2011. 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches. 
 I would like to thank Ronnie Driver, Andrew Harley, Tanveer Hussain, Ben Wensley, Richard Windram and Chris 
Young for their help in preparing this speech. 
Any  views  expressed  are  solely  those  of  Paul  Fisher  and  should  not  be  ascribed  to  the  MPC  or  FPC  unless 
explicitly stated as such. 
The Bank of England has two core purposes. The first is maintaining monetary stability. That 
means achieving stable prices as defined by the Government and ensuring confidence in the 
currency. The second is contributing to financial stability. That entails identifying, monitoring, 
and taking action to remove or reduce systemic risks with a view to protecting and enhancing 
the resilience of the UK financial system. The interim Financial Policy Committee (FPC) was 
set up by the Government earlier this year to help meet this objective.1 It has now had its first 
round  of  meetings  and  a  record  of  its  first  policy  meeting  and  the  associated  Financial 
Stability Report were published just last week.2 
To help meet these objectives, the Bank runs a Market Intelligence (MI) programme, which 
involves  frequent  meetings  and  conversations  between  Bank  staff  and  a  wide  range  of 
external  market  contacts  to  gather  and  analyse  information  from  market  participants.  The 
Bank is uniquely positioned to run such a programme, given its public policy objectives, its 
own  sterling  and  foreign  currency  operations,  and  its  location  within  one  of  the  world’s 
foremost international financial centres. Up to 70 Bank staff, the vast majority of whom have 
other, 
their  day-to-day 
responsibilities. Personally, I estimate that, over the past 6 months, I have been involved on 
average in two meetings with market contacts every working day. Our external contact base 
is very extensive,3 internationally diverse,4 and covers a wide range of markets, from vanilla 
instruments such as gilts and equities through to all manner of derivatives.  
This  MI  programme  makes  a  crucial  contribution  to  meeting  the  Bank’s  core  purposes  by 
(partially) making up for missing data (at least qualitatively and occasionally quantitatively) 
and  helping  us  to  understand  better  the  behavioural  patterns  that  underlie  movements  in 
financial variables. On the monetary policy side, for example, it can shed light on the drivers 
of  commodity  prices  and  changes  in  market-based  measures  of  inflation  expectations.  On 
the financial stability side, the significant complexities in the financial system, the lack of data 
and  the  constantly  and  rapidly  evolving  nature  of  financial  markets  mean  that  MI  is 
particularly  useful  in  helping  us  spot  the  emergence  of  stress  and  new  developments  and 
risks  that  might  introduce  potential  vulnerabilities  and  fault  lines  in  parts  of  the  financial 
system.  
full-time  operational  duties,  help 
to  collect  MI  as  part  of 
                                                 
1  For more details, see the Government’s consultation document “A new approach to financial regulation: building a 
stronger system”, available at http://www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/d/consult_newfinancial_regulation170211.pdf. The interim 
FPC’s terms of reference can be found at http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/financialstability/fpc/termsofreference.pdf. 
2  Both documents are available at http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/financialstability/fpc/meetings/index.htm 
3 
Including,  for  example,  the  major  commercial  and  investment  banks,  major  wholesale  dealers,  second-tier 
banks,  brokers,  platform  providers,  corporate  treasurers,  asset  managers,  pension  funds,  insurance 
companies, hedge funds, private equity funds and many more risk managers, speculators, hedgers and end 
investors. 
4  We meet contacts in all the major financial sectors, including London, New York, Boston and the Far East. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Today,  I  want  to  use  the  insights  gained  from  our  market  intelligence  work,  together  with 
market data, to provide an overall assessment of the state of financial markets, including the 
extent to which they have recovered since the depths of the financial crisis, the impact of a 
renewed reach for yield on financial innovation, and the impact of the regulatory agenda on 
market functioning. 
The evolution of financial markets during the crisis 
To set the scene, it is instructive to look at the general pattern in markets over the past few 
years. Chart 1 uses a “heat-map” to summarise data on issuance and spreads in primary 
and secondary markets for selected bonds and asset-backed securities (ABS), compared to 
their  historical  averages.  The  widespread  panic  and  financial  market  seizure  of  2008  is 
clearly  visible  in  the  concentration  of  red  and  grey  segments.  The  latter  represent  those 
periods in which there was no primary issuance or spread data because the markets were 
effectively closed. 
Market functioning “heat map” based on issuance and spreads data(a) 
Chart 1 
Sources:  Bank  of  America  Merrill  Lynch  Global  Research,  Bloomberg,  Dealogic,  JPMorgan 
Chase & Co. and Bank calculations. 
(a) Shading is based on a score that reflects, for unguaranteed debt, both issuance (relative to 
GDP)  and  spreads  in  primary  markets  and  secondary  markets,  expressed  as  a  number  of 
standard deviations from average, using as much data as was available from January 1998. 
Updated to end-May 2011; recent months use 2011 Q1 GDP. 
(b) Insufficient data for UK CMBS secondary markets. 
 Since the nadir in late 2008, most markets have been on a course of gradual healing. The 
heat  map  shows  how  issuance  and  spreads  in  these  particular  markets  have  recovered. 
Advanced  economy  corporate  bond  spreads  have  fallen  back  sharply  since  their  peaks 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
(Chart 2). Measures of volatility and bid-offer spreads across a range of asset classes have 
also fallen back since the height of the disruption (Charts 3 and 4). And most international 
equity indices have picked up markedly since their troughs (Chart 5). 
Chart 2  
Advanced economy corporate bond 
spreads(a)
Chart 3  
Implied volatilities 
in selected markets(a)(b) 
Basis Points
2500
Investment grade 
corporates (LHS)
Non-investment grade 
corporates (RHS)
Basis Points
1000
900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
2000
1500
1000
500
0
Sources: Bank of America/Merrill Lynch. 
(a)  Option-adjusted  spreads  over  government 
bond yields. 
 British 
Bloomberg, 
Sources: 
Bankers’ 
Association,  Chicago  Mercantile  Exchange, 
Euronext.liffe, JPMorgan Chase & Co. and  Bank 
calculations. 
(a) Three-month option-implied volatilities. 
(b) Data to close of business on 14 June 2011. 
(c) WTI crude oil. 
(d)  Average  of  FTSE  100,  S&P  500  and  Euro 
Stoxx 50. 
(e) Average of five-year on-the-run iTraxx Europe 
main and CDX North America investment-grade. 
(f)  Average  of  USD/EUR,  EUR/GBP  and 
USD/GBP. 
(g)  Average  of  three-month  short  sterling,  euro-
dollar and Euribor. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Chart 4 
Bid-ask spreads 
on selected assets(a)(b)(c) 
Chart 5 
International equity prices(a) 
Indices: 2 January 2007 = 100
120
110
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
Euro Stoxx
FTSE All-share
S&P 500
TOPIX
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
Sources:  Bloomberg,  Thomson  Reuters  Datastream 
and Bank calculations. 
(a) Denominated in units of local currency. 
Corporate bonds
Government bonds
(d)
Equities
Commodities
Currencies
Interest rate swaps
Indices: January 2005 = 100
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
Sources:  Bloomberg,  UBS  Delta  and  Bank 
calculations. 
(a)  Monthly  moving  averages  of  daily  bid-ask 
spreads. 
(b) iBoxx € Corporates for corporate bonds; S&P 500 
for  equities;  iBoxx  €  Sovereigns  for  government 
bonds;  sterling/dollar  exchange  rate  for  currencies; 
gold price for commodities; and euro five-year swaps 
for interest rate swaps. 
(c) Data to close of business on 10 June 2011. 
(d)  End  of  day  bid-ask  spread  until  1  May  2011, 
average intra-day bid-ask spread thereafter. 
This recovery in markets has been neither uniform nor smooth. For example, a number of 
markets were severely disrupted by concerns about the debt sustainability in Greece, Ireland 
and  Portugal  in  mid  2010,  and  once  again  during  2011  (Charts  6  and  7  show  these 
countries’  bond  spreads  to  German  Bunds  and  sovereign  CDS  premia).  And  a  number  of 
private  sector  markets,  such  as  the  “own  label”  US  residential  mortgage-backed  securities 
(RMBS)  market  and  the  UK  commercial  mortgage-backed  securities  (CMBS)  market  have 
seen  very  little,  if  any,  primary  issuance  since  the  crisis.5  In  part  that  reflects  continued 
weakness in commercial real estate and (to a lesser extent) residential housing markets. But 
it is also likely to reflect the combination of a large existing stock of ABS and a diminished 
investor  base  as  many  of  the  funding  mechanisms  have  been  swept  away.  These  factors 
have slowed the recovery in primary issuance, and suggest that ABS markets are likely to be 
much smaller in future. Indeed some markets that were at the epicentre of the crisis, such as 
those for structured collateralised debt obligations (CDOs), may be permanently gone.  
                                                 
5  Just in the past couple of weeks we have seen the first European CMBS to be issued since August 2007. In 
the United Kingdom, some corporates have issued long-dated fixed-rate bonds secured on real estate as part 
of  sale  and  leaseback  transactions.  Market  participants,  however,  tend  to  regard  these  transactions  as 
corporate debt, rather than CMBS. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 6 
10-year sovereign bond yield spreads 
to German Bunds 
Chart 7 
Selected European 
sovereign CDS premia 
Basis points
1400
Basis points
Basis points
Portugal
Ireland
Spain
Italy
Greece
United Kingdom
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
Jan. Mar. May.
Sep.
Nov.
Jan. Mar. May.
2011
Sources: Bloomberg and Bank calculations. 
Jul.
2010
Ireland
Italy
Portugal
Spain
UK
Greece (LHS)
2000
1800
1600
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
Jan. Apr. Jul. Oct. Jan. Apr. Jul. Oct. Jan. Apr.
2009
2011
2010
Source: Thomson Reuters DataStream 
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
 Chart 8 
Major UK banks’ unguaranteed term 
issuance in public markets(a) 
Chart 9 
Aggregate SLS repayment profiles  
 
Sources:  Bank  of  England,  Dealogic  and  Bank 
calculations. 
(a) 2011 Q2 is up to and including 15 June 2011. Term 
issuance 
to  securities  with  original 
contractual  maturity  or  earliest  call  date  of  at  least 
18 months.  This  excludes  debt  issued  under  HM 
Treasury’s Credit Guarantee Scheme. 
(b)  It  includes  subordinated  lower  Tier  2  and  Tier  3 
capital instruments with debt features. 
refers  here 
 Despite a number of shocks along the way, markets have been increasing in their resilience 
over the past two years. For example, UK banks have been able to continue to issue debt in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
both public and private markets during 2011, in spite of renewed sovereign debt concerns, 
the natural disasters in Japan and civil unrest in the Middle East and North Africa.6 Moreover, 
that issuance has been spread across an increasingly diverse range of instruments including, 
more recently, UK RMBS (Chart 8). This has helped the UK banks alleviate concerns about 
the  “funding  cliff”  of  official  sector  refinancing  at  the  end  of  2011.  For  example,  it  has 
facilitated the remarkable pre-emptive reduction in the amount outstanding under the Bank’s 
Special Liquidity Scheme (SLS), from around £90bn at end-February to just £37bn at the end 
of May (Chart 9). 
Chart 10 
Credit Default Swap premia(a)(b) 
 
Sources:  Bloomberg,  Markit  Group  Limited  and  Bank 
calculations. 
(a) Five-year senior CDS premia. Data are presented as 
fifteen-day end-period moving averages.  
(b) Chart shows data for a subset of the major UK banks 
peer group – Barclays, HSBC, LBG and RBS.  
(c) December 2010 Financial Stability Report.  
(d) Average of the CDS premia of companies that were 
part  of  the  iTraxx  European  non-financial  corporates 
index  (series  10)  at  the  beginning  of  the  time  series  in 
this chart. 
But this is no time for complacency. UK bank funding costs, as proxied by their CDS premia, 
remain  elevated  –  both  relative  to  their  historical  average,  and  relative  to  European 
non-financial corporations’ CDS premia (Chart 10). And there remain significant risks going 
forward.  Sovereign  strains,  and  their  potential  impact  on  the  European  banking  sector  in 
particular, represent the most immediate and material threat to markets generally and to UK 
financial stability. As a result, the interim FPC have recommended that the major UK banks 
provide improved and more comprehensive disclosure of their sovereign and banking sector 
exposures. There is also event risk associated with the forthcoming publication of the EBA 
stress test results, if the results are markedly different from market expectations. 
                                                 
6  Market  intelligence  suggests  that  the  major  UK  banks  have  raised  around  £25bn  in  private  markets  in  the 
year-to-date 2011. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The search for yield/assets 
The  significant  recovery  in  many  global  financial  markets  reflects,  in  part,  the  actions  of 
policymakers around the world. In the United Kingdom, the Bank of England responded to 
the collapse in economic activity and the risk of deflation by cutting official interest rates and 
embarking  on  a  programme  of  asset  purchases  financed  by  the  creation  of  central  bank 
reserves (known as Quantitative Easing). It also separately sought to stimulate markets for 
corporate debt and commercial paper, and put in place a Special Liquidity Scheme for banks 
to swap their illiquid collateral for highly liquid T-bills. Other central banks took a variety of 
similar actions. For example, the Federal Reserve began purchasing a range of private and 
public  sector  securities  in  large  scale.  And  in  Europe,  the  ECB  responded  by  offering  its 
counterparty banks unlimited refinancing operations at maturities of up to 12 months.  
Despite  these  differences  in  policy,  one  end  result  was  common  –  they  led  to  a  massive 
expansion of central bank balance sheets (Chart 11) and  a significant injection of liquidity 
into  the  global  financial  system.  That  in  turn  pushed  down  yields  on  “safe”  assets, 
encouraging portfolio rebalancing (one of the key channels through which asset purchases 
work) and a “reach for yield”.7  
More recently contacts, especially those in the United States, have reported that the reach 
for yield has been exacerbated by a perceived reduction in the universe of acceptable assets 
for  real  money  investors.8  For  example  major  corporates,  especially  those  in  the  United 
States,  are  reported  to  be  relatively  cash  rich.  Flow  of  funds  data  suggest  that  the  US 
corporate sector is holding around $1trn – or 7% of total corporate sector financial assets – in 
cash.  That  has  led  to  a  reduction  in  US  investment  grade  net  bond  issuance  and  an 
associated  shortage  of  high-quality  corporate  assets,  at  a  time  when  relative  demand  for 
those  assets  is  strong.  And  there  has  also  been  a  reduction  in  US  T-bill  issuance,  amid 
ongoing concerns about the extension of the US government’s debt ceiling. Similarly, serious 
concerns about the creditworthiness of a number of euro-area sovereign issuers have led to 
a reduction in the quantum of euro-denominated assets perceived to be “safe”, with some US 
money funds reducing their exposures to European banking sectors. And a number of other 
structured and synthetic assets, which had been rated AAA prior to the crisis, have recently 
been shown to be unworthy of that accolade. 
                                                 
7  As  described  by  Janet  Yellen  in  her  recent  speech  “Assessing  potential  financial  imbalances  in  an  era  of 
accommodative monetary policy”. 
8  For an interesting academic exposition of this “macroeconomic shortage of assets”, see Caballero, R, “A Caricature 
(Model) of the World Economy”, available at http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1724897 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Chart 11  
Chart 12 
Central bank balance sheets 
US, UK and Euro area GDP 
£ billions
Local currency billions
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
Fed (right-hand scale)
ECB (right-hand scale)
BoE (left-hand scale)
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
Sources: Bloomberg and Bank of England. 
Indices: 2008 Q1 = 100
102
100
98
96
94
92
90
88
86
84
United Kingdom
Euro area
United States
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
Sources:  ONS,  Eurostat  and  Bureau  of  economic 
analysis. 
 It is still early days, but the combination of portfolio rebalancing and this reported shortage of 
specific  high-quality  assets  might  have  wider  implications  for  financial  stability  if  it 
encourages  investors  to  look  for  additional  yield  by  moving  into  more  illiquid  products  (by 
investing in new asset classes or in derivatives of more liquid underlying instruments) or into 
more  complex  products  (which  they  might  not  fully  understand,  and  which  might  not  be 
appropriately priced for correlation, optionality or underlying credit risk). Market intelligence is 
crucial  here,  in  that  it  can  provide  us  with  near  real-time  information  about  whether  and 
where these risks might be building (or eventually crystallising).  
So  far,  there  is  little  evidence  of  excessive  risk-taking  on  a  generalised  basis  across  the 
financial  system.  But  the  intelligence  we  have  gathered  during  2011,  notwithstanding  the 
recent pull-back in June, has flagged a number of pockets of increasing risk appetite and a 
few  specific  markets  which  have  been  showing  signs  of  excess.  That  tendency  seems  to 
have  been  most  prevalent  in  the  United  States,  where  the  financial  and  real  economy 
recoveries appear somewhat more established than in the UK and the euro area (Chart 12). 
But during recent discussions, some market participants have noted that this tendency has 
begun to spread to Europe as well. 
One example comes from the high-yield corporate bond markets, where demand has been 
very strong and where issuance, which reached record levels in 2010, has continued apace 
in  2011  (Chart  13).  That  is  likely  to  reflect  the  generalised  disintermediation  of  stricken 
banking  systems  –  for  those  that  are  able  to  tap  capital  markets,  bond  issuance  poses  a 
useful alternative to bank lending. Moreover the extent of high-yield issuance may reflect the 
fact that it is smaller businesses, which are likely to be sub-investment grade, who are finding 
it hardest to secure affordable bank finance.9 Given oligopolistic banking systems like those 
in the UK, a deeper and more liquid capital market might help improve the supply of credit to 
UK businesses. Indeed, recent MI has suggested that there has been some direct lending 
                                                 
9  And  although  the  aggregate  US  corporate  sector  cash  position  is  strong,  it  is  likely  to  mask  significant 
heterogeneity  in  the  distribution  of  firms,  with  a  disproportionate  share  of  the  cash  held  by  the  largest 
investment grade businesses. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
activity to mid-sized corporates in the UK by non-bank institutions such as dedicated loan, 
private equity and pension funds (although the absolute amounts are still very small).  
Chart 13 
Issuance of sub-investment grade 
corporate debt by region(a)(b) 
Chart 14  
Corporate bond valuation measure(a)(b) 
Sources: Dealogic and Bank calculations.  
(a) Emerging economies includes Africa, Caribbean, 
Indian  subcontinent,  Latin  America,  Middle  East, 
North  Asia  and  South  East  Asia.  “Other”  includes 
Australasia  and  Japan.  Includes  issuance  in  all 
currencies. 
(b) 2011 data are to 3 June 2011 
 Sources:  Bank  of  America  Merrill  Lynch, 
Bloomberg,  Thomson  Reuters  Datastream  and 
Bank calculations. 
numbers 
(a)  Shows  the  difference  between  actual  and 
estimated  equilibrium  spreads  as  a  percentage. 
Positive 
overvaluation, 
represent 
negative numbers undervaluation. 
(b)  Equilibrium  corporate  bond  spreads  are 
defined  as  the  total  estimated  credit  component 
plus  a  five-year  rolling  average  of  the  illiquidity 
premia. Full details of the approach used for the 
decomposition of corporate bond spreads can be 
found in Churm, R and Panigirtzoglou, N (2005), 
“Decomposing  credit  spreads”,  Bank  of  England 
Working Paper no. 253. 
The  Bank’s  model-based  estimates  suggest  that  US  high-yield  and  investment  grade 
corporate debt currently reflect historically low risk premia, and so may be vulnerable to a 
correction (Chart 14). Moreover although much of the recent issuance reflects refinancing of 
existing  bonds  or  loans  (with  companies  seeking  to  lock  in  low  interest  rates  and  extend 
maturities) and M&A activity, there have also been growing reports of US issuance to finance 
“dividend  recapitalisations”  (where  debt  is  issued  to  pay  special  dividends).  Issuance  of 
covenant-lite leveraged loans (which include fewer of the usual protective covenants for the 
benefit  of  the  lending  party)  was  $34bn  in  the  first  five  months  of  2011,  compared  with 
$8bn in the whole of 2010. And US contacts have reported renewed issuance of bonds with 
Payment-in-Kind  (PIK)  toggles  (where  issuers  have  the  option  of  deferring  cash  interest 
payments,  choosing  instead  to  roll  interest  payments  into  additional  debt  securities). 
Although  the  incidence  of  these  sorts  of  deals  remains  significantly  below  that  associated 
with  the  pre-crisis  exuberance,  these  examples  might  be  indicative  of  the  reach  for 
yield/assets encouraging investors to chase returns via higher risk assets.  
Despite the low-yield environment, market contacts have been telling us that some investors’ 
expectations of returns were little changed by the crisis, reflecting a combination of investor 
inertia and the need to earn sufficient returns to cover their liabilities. But we also hear that 
investment  horizons  are  often  shorter  and  tolerance  of  volatility  and  desire  for  leverage  is 
lower.  Something  clearly  has  to  give  here  –  investors  know  –  and  must  remember  –  that 
there is no such thing as a free lunch, and that additional return involves additional risk. The 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
macro-prudential  concern  is  that  the  reach  for  yield  encourages  financial  innovation  and 
growth  in  some  parts  of  the  financial  system  where  the  risks  are  not  well  understood,10 
especially  if  it  leads  to  greater  interconnectedness  within  the  banking  system.  This  is  one 
area which is likely to warrant further attention and analysis by the FPC in due course. 
Financial innovation and the emergence/growth of new products  
The  financial  industry  is  characterised  by  its  tendency  to  innovate,  continuously  designing 
and offering new financial products to its customers. In my view, financial innovation should 
be seen as a “good thing” in normal circumstances. It can lead to a more efficient allocation 
of capital and a reduction in the costs of financial intermediation, both of which should help 
sustain real economic growth. For example, the rapid growth of electronic trade execution in 
the foreign exchange market has increased the speed and ease with which trades can be 
conducted.  That  should  ultimately  make  international  trade  cheaper,  bringing  with  it  the 
associated  benefits.  Improvements  in  technology  can,  by  facilitating  wider  market  access, 
also  lead  to  improved  price  discovery  and  market  liquidity.  Moreover,  innovation  can  help 
issuers  align  the  risk  characteristics  of  new  products  more  closely  to  those  that  investors 
demand. In principle, that should promote greater and more efficient sharing and spreading 
of  risk  across  the  financial  system.  In  essence,  the  recession  which  followed  the  financial 
crisis  demonstrated  how  much  the  real  economy  depends  on  an  efficient,  functioning 
financial system. 
Financial  innovation  is  a  continuous  process,  and  there  are  many  examples  of  either  new 
products  or  rapid  growth  in  fashionable  markets  during  the  past  few  years.  For  example 
during  2010,  there  were  significant  developments  in  bank  funding  instruments  such  as 
putable  CDs  and  evergreen  repos.11  These  products  offer  higher  returns  to  investors 
compared with more conventional instruments, and also improve banks’ ability to meet new 
regulatory rules. There has also been an increase in the prevalence of long-term collateral 
upgrade  trades  where,  for  example,  a  real  money  investor  lends  a  bank  gilts  against  less 
liquid  but  higher  yielding  assets.  Those  repo  transactions  help  the  real  money  investor 
achieve  a  higher  return,  while  banks  build  up  their  liquid  asset  buffers  and  fund  their  less 
liquid collateral. In that regard, these repo transactions look quite similar to a private sector 
version  of  the  SLS.  Where  appropriate,  such  transactions can  both  improve  the  returns  to 
pension funds and support lending to the real economy. Of course, the authorities need to 
monitor the extent to which these transactions strengthen the links between the banking and 
insurance sectors. And it is vital that the insurers fully understand the counterparty credit risk 
they  are  running,  the  quality  of  the  collateral  they  are  taking  and  how  to  manage  the 
collateral in the event of default. 
The more recent developments in markets for Exchange Traded Funds (ETFs) are another 
example  of  financial  innovation  and  growth  in  a  previously  small  market.  ETFs  are  in 
principle a “good” financial innovation – for example, they offer retail investors a cheaper way 
of getting exposure to the underlying asset (by cutting out the fund manager) and provide a 
very liquid asset. Nonetheless, the rapid growth in ETF assets under management – which 
have  increased  seven-fold  since  2003  (Chart  15)  –  merit  attention,  given  it  has  been 
characterised  by  increasing  complexity,  opacity  and  interconnectedness,  and  as  some 
practices, if left unchecked, could grow to pose risks to the stability of the financial system.12  
                                                 
10  That could come about not only through the low yields on safe assets, but also through an increase in the 
correlation  amongst  safe  assets,  which  might  prompt  reserves  managers  to  seek  new  diversification 
opportunities, some of which might be met through financial engineering. 
11  These products are discussed in more detail in the box on pages 168–169 of the 2010 Q3 Quarterly Bulletin. 
12  The Bank first discussed ETFs in a box on pages 40–41 of the June 2010 Financial Stability Report. Since then, 
ETFs have been the recent focus of much international attention, including at the BIS, the FSB and the IMF (see 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 15  
Global ETF assets under management 
US$ billion
1600
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
1999
2001
2003
2005
2007
2009 2011(a)
 Source: Blackrock Global ETF Research and 
Implementations Strategy Team. 
(a) Data to end-May 2011 
Take  for  example  synthetic  ETFs  provided  by  asset  management  arms  of  banks.  These 
ETFs  replicate  an  index  return  using  derivatives  but  without  necessarily  physically 
purchasing the underlying assets. Synthetic ETF providers (typically banks) might have an 
incentive to collateralise the total return swap with illiquid collateral that is expensive to fund 
elsewhere in the market. If the swap counterparty defaults on its leg of the transaction, the 
ETF (and hence the end investor) would be left holding this collateral, which might have very 
different liquidity and credit characteristics to the securities it originally planned to invest in. In 
particular, if the investor unwittingly takes on collateral whose value is highly correlated with 
the ETF provider (i.e. if there is so-called wrong way risk), then the collateral is likely to have 
relatively little value in the event of default. Some of these issues are discussed in the June 
Financial Stability Report. 
The examples I have cited above involve fundamentally good financial products which should 
improve economic efficiency and hence the welfare of society as a whole. But the growth of 
the more opaque version of these products marks them out, and unmonitored excess could 
compromise  these  markets  in  the  future.  Recent  history  is  rife  with  examples  of  where 
over-exuberance  has  led  to  opacity,  severe  market  difficulties  and  financial  instability 
(e.g. the rise of CDO2 in the securitisation markets). In such cases, the costs of collapse can 
easily  outweigh  the  previous  benefits.  It  is  important  that  the  authorities  monitor  the  ETF 
industry and make sure that market participants understand the risks they may be running. It 
is for that reason that the interim FPC advised the FSA last week that its bank supervisors 
should monitor closely the risks associated with opaque funding structures, such as collateral 
swaps or similar transactions employed by ETFs. 
                                                                                                                                                      
http://www.bis.org/publ/work343.pdf,  http://www.financialstabilityboard.org/publications/r_110412b.pdf  and  the 
IMF’s  Global  Financial  Stability  Report  (http://www.imf.org/External/Pubs/FT/fmu/eng/2011/02/pdf/0611.pdf) 
respectively).  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
Regulatory responses  
The  financial  crisis  exposed  a  need  to  not  just  strengthen  but  to  completely  re-design 
aspects of financial regulation, to try to find a solution to “too big to fail” problem and hence 
minimise the chances of something similar happening again (if financial institutions could fail 
without  large  spillovers  then  much  other  regulation  might  be  unnecessary).  The  resulting 
regulatory  agenda  is  formidable  –  including  agreeing  the  detailed  rules  supporting  Dodd 
Frank in the US; EMIR and Solvency II in Europe; the new Basel rules on capital and liquidity 
including the SIFI surcharge internationally; the final outcome of the ICB in the UK; various 
FSB  initiatives  and  many  more  besides.  I  do  not  intend  today  to  discuss  the  merits  of  the 
various ongoing regulatory initiatives. Rather I want to briefly comment objectively on their 
impact on the state of financial markets.  
It is clear that many individual regulatory initiatives are not yet parameterised or sufficiently 
detailed  for  market  participants  to  anticipate  their  effects  fully.  And  the  extent  to  which 
regulations  might  eventually  differ  across  geographical  and  legal  jurisdictions  is  also  still 
unclear.  There  is  no  implied  criticism  here  –  re-designing  the  regulatory  frameworks  for, 
among others, banks, insurance companies and rating agencies, takes time, and a lasting, 
well-planned  robust  set  of  regulations  that  will  stand  for  many  years  to  come  is  surely 
preferable  to  a  hastily-agreed  but  inadequate  framework.  The  authorities  nationally  and 
internationally are pushing the agenda hard to come up with the right decisions as quickly as 
possible.  
The  progress  of  the  regulatory  agenda  has,  however,  created  additional  uncertainty  in 
financial  markets  which  is  reflected  in  investor  behaviour  and  in  some  market  prices.  For 
example,  market  intelligence  suggests  that  it  is  one  of  the  factors  contributing  to  the 
continued  elevated  funding  costs  for  many  banks.  In  due  course,  the  various  regulatory 
initiatives will produce detailed rules. As that happens one can expect a variety of reactions. 
On  one  level,  there  is  likely  to  be  some  shift  of  activity  between  markets  and  business 
models as participants evaluate where the new rules establish new incentives. Beyond that, 
there might well be some general improvement in market functioning, reflecting the reduction 
in regulatory uncertainty and the more resilient financial system that the regulatory agenda is 
designed to deliver. At the moment, market intelligence suggests that market participants are 
focussed  on  the  elevated  uncertainty  and  have  not  yet  anticipated  the  benefits  of,  for 
example, a safer banking system.  
Conclusion 
Financial markets have come a long way since the epicentre of the crisis in 2008, with many 
markets that were significantly impaired in the crisis now functioning well. That progress is 
encouraging  in  terms  of  financial  stability  and  support  for  the  real  economy,  but  further 
healing is still required. Looking ahead, there are some clear obstacles to that process. The 
sovereign debt crisis, currently focussed on the euro area, is one. And the general recovery 
in the macroeconomic outlook is another. There will also be a lot of uncertainty embedded in 
markets until final details are available on the majority of the regulatory agenda. That agenda 
must  be  allowed  to  take  sufficient  time  to  get  the  right  answers,  but  as  these  become 
available we should expect to see further improvements in market functioning. Meanwhile, 
the authorities will need to pay particular attention to the next rounds of financial innovation, 
especially given the prolonged low interest rate environment. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
