Christine M Cumming: Macro overview of the United States 
Remarks by Ms Christine M Cumming, First Vice President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York, at the European Economics and Financial Centre, London, 15 February 2011. 
 It is a great pleasure to be here to speak to you today about recent developments in the U.S. 
economy.  I’d  like  to  thank  Professor  Hannah  Scobie  and  the  European  Economics  and 
Financial  Centre  for  organizing  the  seminar  in  this  beautiful  historic  setting,  and  thank  the 
Member  of  Parliament,  Geoffrey  Clifton-Brown,  for  presiding  over  and  sponsoring  this 
meeting. The views I will express are my own and do not necessarily reflect the views of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System.  
I have organized my talk into six observations about the U.S. economy. 
First, in considering the nature of the recovery from the financial crisis and recession, which 
many call the “Great Recession,” it is important to take note of the severity of the downturn 
from  which  we  are  recovering.  Even  though  the  United  States  has  experienced  six 
consecutive  quarters  of  positive  growth  of  real  gross  domestic  product  (GDP)  since  the 
official end of the Great Recession, the level of output remains well below the business cycle 
peak. The economic history of such combined financial crisis and recession experiences is 
that recovery is often slow and protracted; this one seems no different. 
 
Hours  worked,  closely  tied  to  overall  economic  activity,  and  personal  income 
excluding  transfers  (Charts  4–5)  illustrate  both  the  depth  of  the  economic  decline 
and the highly unusual nature of the recovery so far compared with all others in the 
post-World War II period. 
The unemployment rate has declined, but to a large extent this reflects the decline 
of the labor force participation rate (Chart 6). Ranges of estimates of unemployment 
including discouraged workers run as high as the high teens. 
Had  the  participation  rate  remained  at  its  business  cycle  peak  level,  the 
unemployment rate would be about 10.5 percent. 
Core inflation (excluding energy and food prices) has declined to a very low level, 
well  below  the  range  of  1  percent  to  2  percent  that  market  participants  have 
associated  with  the  Fed’s  desired,  “mandate  consistent”  range.  Low  rates  of  core 
inflation  are  of  concern  because  economic  research  suggests  that  this  is  an 
important indicator of long-term trend headline inflation (Chart 7). 
Economic history also suggests that recoveries from financial crisis and recession 
are fragile. Indeed, one disappointment in 2010 was that an initially strong recovery 
weakened  considerably  in  the  second  quarter,  in  part  due  to  renewed  concerns 
about  financial  fragility  in  the  wake  of  the  sovereign  debt  concerns  in  parts  of 
Europe.  The  recovery  remained  restrained,  eventually  prompting  the  Federal 
Reserve in November to embark on a second round of large-scale asset purchases, 
often called quantitative easing. 
    Second, a wide array of recent indicators suggest that the U.S. economy entered 2011 with 
substantial forward momentum.  
 
Real  personal  consumption  expenditure  (PCE)  grew  4.4  percent  (AR)  in  2010Q4, 
led by spending on durable goods (Chart 9). 
The  one-year,  2  percentage  point  payroll  tax  cut,  part  of  the  December  2010  tax 
package extending the Bush-era tax cuts, is likely to give a significant boost to real 
PCE over the first half of 2011, perhaps as much as $120 billion. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
    Real exports have grown rapidly of late; growth has been strong among much of the 
emerging market world, and growth prospects among our major trading partners is 
promising (Chart 10). 
Growth of business investment in equipment and software has been well maintained 
and  is  likely  to  get  an  added  boost  in  2011  from  the  “full  expensing”  provision 
enacted  late  last  year  as  part  of  the  tax  package.  This  and  the  export  strength  is 
reflected in high levels of orders and shipments of capital goods (Chart 11). 
Business  investment  in  nonresidential  structures,  such  as  office  buildings  and 
hotels,  hard  hit  by  the  recession,  is  still  declining  but  at  a  much  reduced  rate 
(Chart 12). 
Business  inventories  are  in  good  balance  with  sales,  after  a  very  pronounced 
inventory  cycle  (Chart  13).  Reflecting  these  developments,  measures  of  business 
activity in both manufacturing and nonmanufacturing have reached substantial highs 
and measures of consumer confidence have stabilized (Charts 14–15). 
Third, substantial progress has been made on the large adjustment of financial positions in 
the household and financial institution sectors necessary after the substantial leveraging of 
households  and  financial  institutions  that  occurred  in  the  run-up  to  the  financial  crisis. 
Confidence  is  increasing  that  conditions  are  now  in  place  to  support  sustained  above-
potential growth, when it occurs.  
 
interest  rates  and 
improved.  After  equity  prices, 
Aided by the second installment of Large-Scale Asset Purchases (LSAPs), financial 
conditions  have 
inflation 
expectations fell with the apparent slowing of the economic recovery in the summer, 
they began to move up again shortly after Chairman Bernanke’s speech laying out 
potential  responses  to  the  slowdown  in  late  August  in  Jackson  Hole,  Wyoming 
(Charts 17–20). 
The  personal  saving  rate  has  risen  to  a  level  that  is  consistent  with  the  historical 
relationship  between  that  rate  and  household  net  worth  relative  to  disposable 
income,  reflecting  the  very  large  drop  in  household  net  worth  from  the  combined 
impact of financial crisis and severe housing downturn (Charts 21–22). 
The household financial obligation ratio has declined to the level that prevailed in the 
mid 1990s, reflecting a combination of debt repayment, debt charge-offs and lower 
interest rates (Chart 23). Households in all credit-quality quintiles are continuing to 
reduce their overall debt (Chart 24). 
Banks  tightened  lending  standards  during  the  financial  crisis  and  recession.  Bank 
lending standards, while tight in level terms, have begun to ease (Chart 25). 
Commercial and industrial (business) loans on bank balance sheets and consumer 
credit (nonmortgage) have begun to expand (Chart 26). 
    Fourth,  the  U.S.  economy  still  faces  painful  structural  adjustments  in  the  housing  and 
government sectors that pose significant downside risks. 
 
The  excess  inventory  of  vacant  homes,  particularly  single-family  units,  remains 
substantial  (Chart  28).  As  a  result,  the  number  of  housing  starts  has  fallen  to 
essentially  frictional  (replacement)  levels  and  remain  there  (Chart  29).  A  large 
pipeline of loans in foreclosure and loans seriously delinquent still exists (Chart 31). 
The  ratio  of  foreclosures  to  delinquencies  over  90  days  has  fallen  substantially, 
under the combined impacts of efforts to work out loan modifications with borrowers, 
decisions by lenders to slow foreclosures to avoid the deleterious impact of property 
vacancy,  and  the  sheer  volume  of  foreclosures  relative  to  the  legal  and  financial 
infrastructure designed to handle them. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   Home prices have come under renewed downward pressure, a concern because of 
its  impact  on  household  net  worth  and  spending  (Chart  30).  Some  signs  that  the 
market for distressed housing (short sales and foreclosures) is separating from the 
main housing market may be a positive indication that market forces are starting to 
work  through  the  housing  oversupply  in  a  process  similar  to  that  usually  seen  for 
distressed real and financial assets. 
State and local governments have been cutting employment and will likely continue 
to do so over the year ahead (Chart 32). The federal fiscal stimulus sustained state 
and  local  governments  through  the  severe  revenue  drops  triggered  by  the 
recession. With the ebbing of the fiscal stimulus program, many state governments 
are taking actions to make long-term structural reductions in spending. 
Federal fiscal policy is widely acknowledged to be on an unsustainable path for the 
long  term  and  must  be  addressed  (Chart  33).  For  example,  the  expiration  of  the 
Bush-era income tax cuts and legislated cuts in Medicaid, if they went into effect, 
would  stabilize  the  debt  to  GDP  ratio  at  around  80  percent;  if,  however,  their 
effective date continued to be deferred, the debt to GDP ratio could move toward 
100 percent fairly rapidly. The proposed budget delivered by the U.S. Administration 
on February 14 begins the process of adjusting the fiscal trajectory. 
 Fifth,  the  challenge  for  monetary  policy  has  been  to  provide  stimulus  and  support  in  the 
wake of the combined financial crisis and recession. As noted at the outset, economic history 
suggests that such a combined financial and economic shock can drive the economy down 
very  deeply.  Strong,  forceful  policy  –  both  monetary  and  fiscal  –  is  necessary  to  stem  the 
contractionary forces in the economy. The Federal Reserve responded by lowering interest 
rates to near zero, to provide substantial liquidity support to the economy and to conduct the 
first large-scale asset purchase program, more than doubling the Federal Reserve’s balance 
sheet.  History  also  suggests  that  the  recovery  from  a  combined  financial  and  economic 
shock can be fragile. The Federal Reserve responded to the slowing of the recovery in mid-
year  2010  by  beginning  a  second  round  of  large-scale  asset  purchase  programs.  Those 
purchases are resulting in a rough tripling of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet (Chart 42). 
U.S. economic conditions are currently quite far away from levels consistent with the 
 
Federal Reserve’s dual mandate of the pursuit of the highest level of employment 
consistent  with  price  stability.  I’ve  discussed  the  high  unemployment  and  unused 
productive capacity in the United States. Let’s turn to inflation. 
While trend inflation is quite low at the moment, we see it likely to be near the low 
point  of  this  cycle.  The  rate  of  inflation  for  nonenergy  services  is  beginning  to 
increase, led by faster increases in apartment rents (Chart 36). A firming of demand 
along with a decline of the exchange value of the dollar should begin to put upward 
pressure on nonfood, nonenergy goods prices. 
However, underlying inflation fundamentals suggest relatively low trend inflation for 
some time: 
 
A  substantial  amount  of  slack  in  the  economy,  reflected  in  the  sharp 
deceleration  of  core  services  prices  –  and  the  United  States  is  a  services 
economy (Chart 35). 
Relatively  wide  profit  margins,  so  that  firms  facing  very  competitive  output 
markets  are  able  to  absorb  changes  in  energy  and  commodity  prices. 
Moreover, unit labor costs are still falling (Chart 37). 
Inflation expectations remain well anchored (Chart 38). 
 
Rising  commodity  prices  are  an  indicator  of  strengthening  demand  around  the 
globe. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  Higher energy prices likely to boost overall inflation in the near term. Whether 
energy  and  commodity  prices  raise  inflationary  levels  for  the  medium  term 
depends on the persistence of the commodity price rises. 
Because commodity price changes have shown less persistence over the last 
20  or  more  years,  economists  have  seen  little  evidence  of  pass-through  of 
higher  commodity  prices  into  underlying  inflation  (Chart  39).  In  the  past, 
sustained rising prices for energy and commodities have been tempered over 
time by business and household adopting more energy-efficient practices, as 
well as investment in and adoption of substitute sources. 
Sixth, what does the market expect the Federal Reserve to do in the near-term? The last 
statement of the Federal Open Market Committee said:  
 
trends,  and  stable 
The  Committee…continues  to  anticipate  that  economic  conditions,  including  low 
rates  of  resource  utilization,  subdued 
inflation 
expectations, are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate 
for an extended period. 
Current market expectations, inferred from the federal funds (overnight interest rate) 
futures curve, are that: 
 
 
The Fed will purchase the full $600 billion of Treasury securities by mid 2011. 
The Fed will begin to raise the federal funds rate in the second half of 2011 
(Chart 41). 
inflation 
The  Committee  has  stressed  that  policy  is  conditional  on  the  performance  of  the 
economy.  As  the  fed  funds  chart  shows,  market  expectations  for  monetary  policy 
are  very  sensitive  to  changes  in  the  economic  setting  –  consider  the  shifts  in  the 
shape of the federal funds over time. 
  Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   5
 6 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   7
  8 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   9
 10 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   11
 12 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  23 
 13
   14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   15
  16 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   17
 18 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   19
   20 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   21
