Thomas J Jordan: Financial Stability Report – potential risks and actions 
Introductory remarks by Mr Thomas J Jordan, Vice Chairman of the Governing Board of the 
Swiss National Bank, at the half-yearly media news conference, Berne, 16 June 2011. 
 In my introductory remarks today, I would like to present the most important points from our 
recently published Financial Stability Report, in which we consider potential risks to financial 
stability and identify where action may be needed. 
General economic and financial conditions for the Swiss banking sector improved further in 
2010.  Overall,  global  economic  growth  was  stronger  than  expected  last  year,  despite  the 
expiry  of  fiscal  stimuli.  In  Switzerland,  too,  economic  development  was  robust  and  growth 
was high in an international comparison. Against this background, the profitability and capital 
situation of both big banks improved further, and remained good for banks with a domestic 
focus. 
However,  the  economic  environment  remains  fragile,  and  a  renewed,  sharp  deterioration 
over the next twelve months cannot be ruled out. In the short term, the prevailing uncertainty 
primarily affects the two big banks, which are still exposed to considerable credit and market 
risk relative to their loss-absorbing capital. For domestically focused banks, by contrast, the 
risks are largely of a medium-term nature, and are related to potential adverse developments 
on the Swiss real estate and mortgage markets. 
In view of these risks, all Swiss banks should ensure that they have a broad and high-quality 
base of loss-absorbing capital. For the big banks, in particular, it is crucial that a sufficient 
capital  base  be  laid  down  as  soon  as  possible,  so  that  losses  can  be  fully  absorbed.  The 
SNB welcomes the fact that, in 2010, both big banks already took important first steps in this 
regard, and we would like to encourage them to keep up the pace of their capital expansion. 
The  capitalisation  of  most  domestically  focused  banks  is  good  by  historical  standards. 
However,  a  combination  of  high  interest  rate  risk  exposure  and  strong  mortgage  lending 
growth has been reported by a number of banks. In order for these banks to bear the risks in 
the medium term, it is important to ensure that their capital base is strong enough. 
I would now like to take a closer look at the situation of the two big banks, before turning my 
attention to the situation of the domestically focused banks. 
Situation of big banks 
Compared to 2009, the two Swiss big banks saw a marked improvement in their profitability 
and  capital  situation  last  year.  In  2010,  these  institutions  reported  combined  net  profits  of 
around  CHF  13  billion,  as  opposed  to  roughly  CHF  4  billion  in  2009.  This  positive 
development was driven by UBS, whose situation improved further over the course of last 
year. In addition, both UBS and Credit Suisse continued to increase their regulatory capital 
ratios  (ratio  of  Tier  1  capital  to  risk-weighted  assets),  which  were  already  very  high  by 
international standards. Moreover, their financial strength ratings also improved. According to 
rating  agency  assessments, 
improved 
significantly last year. 
However, two aspects should be borne in mind when assessing the big banks’ situation: 
First, their exposure to credit and market risk relative to their capital remains considerable. 
Although credit quality abroad has improved slightly, it still remains at historically low levels, 
particularly in the US and Europe. In view of this, lower-than-expected economic growth or a 
deepening of the debt crisis in Europe could potentially lead to a further deterioration in the 
creditworthiness of individual countries. Yet, the big banks’ exposures to sovereign debt in 
financial  soundness 
the  big  banks’ 
intrinsic 
BIS central bankers’  speeches 
 1
peripheral euro area countries are only moderate. Should the debt problems in the already 
vulnerable international banking system or in other sovereigns become amplified, however, 
these banks could face considerable losses.  
Second,  the  big  banks’  economic  capital  situation  is  less  comfortable  than  their  very  high 
regulatory  capital  ratios  under  Basel  II  might  suggest.  A  considerable  portion  of  both 
institutions’ regulatory capital is made up of capital components that proved to be not fully 
loss-absorbing  during  the  recent  crisis.  These  include,  for  instance,  deferred  tax  assets, 
which  are  only  realised  if  a  bank  is  profitable,  or  certain  hybrid  Tier  1  capital  instruments, 
which  only  become  loss-absorbing  in  the  event  of  bankruptcy.  Thus,  such  capital 
components will no longer be recognised under Basel III and will be phased out by 2019. The 
transition period granted to banks gives them sufficient time to meet the new requirements. 
However,  in  view  of  the  risk  exposures  and  the  prevailing  uncertainties  in  the  economic 
environment,  it  is  crucial  that  the  big  banks  build  up  a  sufficient  base  of  loss-absorbing 
capital as swiftly as possible during this transition period. 
After adjusting for the not fully loss-absorbing components, the big banks’ remaining capital 
buffers are still thin in light of the aforementioned risks. Despite some improvement, leverage 
for  both  UBS  and  Credit  Suisse  is  still  high  by  international  standards.  Taking  only  fully 
loss-absorbing capital into account, the average capital ratio of both big banks amounted to 
less than 2% of total assets. 
Against this background, both big banks have already made major strides towards expanding 
their  loss-absorbing  capital  base.  To  this  end,  Credit  Suisse  issued  contingent  convertible 
bonds  (CoCos),  while  UBS  retained  its  earnings.  These  important  first  steps  have  already 
significantly  strengthened  the  big  banks’  loss-absorbing  capital  base.  They  also  show  that 
the big banks should be in a good position to build up the necessary, additional capital buffer.  
Situation of domestically focused banks 
Allow me now to discuss the situation of banks with a domestic focus. 
The  capitalisation  of  domestically  focused  banks  was  almost  unchanged  in  comparison  to 
2009.  The  short  but  sharp  recession  in  Switzerland  in  2009  did  not  have  any  noticeable 
impact last year either. Write-downs and provisions were at a historical low. In a long-term 
comparison,  profits  remained  at  a  high  level  overall.  Likewise,  the  capitalisation  of 
domestically  focused  banks  hardly  changed  in  2010  and  remains  good  in  relation  to  both 
risk-weighted assets and total assets. 
However,  the  fact  that  capitalisation  is  high  overall  does  not  take  into  account  that  the 
regulatory capital requirements do not fully capture certain risks. For example, the interest 
rate risk and credit risk associated with potentially adverse developments in the real estate 
and mortgage markets are not taken into account, or only partially accounted for. Yet these 
risks are especially pronounced in the current environment. 
On the one hand, interest rate risk for all domestically focused banks continues to remain at 
a historically high level. Since there is a maturity mismatch between assets and liabilities, a 
rise in interest rates would result in losses for the banks. The overall high level of interest 
rate risk is driven by Raiffeisen and cantonal banks.  
On the other hand, credit risk at domestically focused banks continued to increase. This is 
because the mortgage lending volume, which is closely linked to developments in the real 
estate market, continued to grow.  
The  situation  in  the  Swiss  real  estate  market  has  deteriorated  slightly  since  last  year’s 
Financial Stability Report was published. Even though they varied widely, most real estate 
price indices suggest that prices also rose substantially in 2010. There is still no indication of 
a general overvaluation based on the current price level, yet several indicators suggest that 
overheating is already becoming apparent in the owner-occupied apartment and apartment 
2 
 BIS central bankers’  speeches
building  segments.  There  are  also  considerable  regional  differences,  although  there  are 
signs  that,  already  now,  real  estate  prices  in  some  regions  are  no  longer  justified  by 
fundamentals. 
Should real estate prices continue to rise at the current pace and move away from the level 
justified  by  fundamentals,  a  significant  price  correction  is  more  likely  in  the  medium  term. 
Such a price correction, together with a significant rise in mortgage loan defaults, would pose 
a threat to financial stability. 
Overall,  however,  there  is  some  uncertainty  about  banks’  risk  exposure.  Given  this 
uncertainty and signs of potentially adverse developments in the real estate and mortgage 
markets, there is a need for action in many respects. 
Therefore,  the  SNB  and  FINMA  have  already  taken  the  first  steps  and  intensified  their 
monitoring  of  the  mortgage  market.  For  this  purpose,  at  the  beginning  of  2011,  the  SNB 
launched a comprehensive quarterly survey of banks. In this survey, detailed information is 
collected  on  key  risk  indicators  such  as  loan-to-value  ratios  and  affordability  criteria  in  the 
granting of mortgage loans. The survey results, which are expected from the autumn of this 
year, should contribute to a better analysis of the vulnerability of the Swiss banking sector 
and close existing gaps in data.  
Moreover, a detailed analysis should be made as to what extent banks with a combination of 
high  interest  rate  risk  exposure  and  high  mortgage  lending  growth  are  able  to  bear  those 
risks. This is mainly a microprudential task, which is performed by FINMA.  
Furthermore,  a  revision  of  the  self-regulation  guidelines  for  mortgage-backed  loans  by  the 
Swiss  Bankers  Association  might  make  a  substantial  contribution  to  preventing  the 
development of significant imbalances in the real estate and mortgage markets. It might be 
worth considering the inclusion of quantitative “best practice” standards as a complement to 
the qualitative guidelines.  
Ideally, microprudential supervision and self-regulation will prevent the build-up of systemic 
risk. Should the growth momentum currently being observed in mortgage lending and real 
estate prices continue, or even accelerate, further measures would have to be considered. 
Such  measures  should  be  countercyclical,  thereby  making  a  preventive  contribution  to 
financial stability.  
At best, the SNB’s monetary policy can only make a minor contribution to financial stability in 
this  respect.  First,  monetary  policy’s  primary  objective  is  to  ensure  price  stability.  Second, 
monetary policy always affects the economy as a whole. Thus, its effect cannot be directed 
only at specific areas of the economy.  
However,  additional  macroprudential  tools,  which  would  be  much  better  suited  to  targeted 
intervention are currently not at the disposal of the Swiss authorities. In the recent past, both 
the SNB1 and the International Monetary Fund (IMF)2 have emphasised that there is a need 
for  action  in  this  area.  For  this  reason,  the  SNB  welcomes  the  Federal  Department  of 
Finance’s  decision  to  set  up  a  commission  of  experts  to  draw  up  proposals  on 
macroprudential oversight and to determine the associated institutional responsibilities. 
                                                 
1  SNB’s comment on the recommendations made by the business audit commission of the National Council and 
the Council of States. 
IMF Country Report No. 11/115 within the framework of the Article IV Consultation of May 2011. 
2 
BIS central bankers’  speeches 
 3
