Mario Draghi: Overview of economic and financial developments in Italy  
Concluding remarks by Mr Mario Draghi, Governor of the Bank of Italy and Chairman of the 
Financial  Stability  Board,  at  the  Ordinary  Meeting  of  Shareholders  2010  –  117th  Financial 
Year, Bank of Italy, Rome, 31 May 2011. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,  
When I first took the floor before this annual meeting on 31 May 2006, I said that I felt that 
one of my duties was to lead the Bank of Italy towards change, in all its vast field of action, 
“contributing  substantively  to  the  formulation  and  implementation  of  monetary  policy  in  the 
euro  area;  expanding  and  strengthening  banking  supervision  while  adapting  it  to  the  new 
international  rules;  making  the  Bank  once  again  the  trusted,  independent  advisor  to 
Parliament, the Government and the general public”.  
The  Bank  responded.  It  answered  the  call  thanks  to  its  wealth  of  skills;  thanks  to  its 
independence.  
In these last five years we have changed the structure, organization and work procedures of 
the Bank.  
The number of branches has passed from 97 to 58. We now have a more efficient network, 
better able to respond to the needs of the local communities.  
The Italian Foreign Exchange Office (UIC) has been closed. The Financial Intelligence Unit 
has  been  instituted  with  the  task  of  preventing  and  combating  money  laundering  and  the 
financing of international terrorism.  
The Bank of Italy and UIC together employed almost 8,500 people in 2005; the number now 
stands at just over 7,000.  
The path of change will be pursued with determination, with a spirit of innovation. We are 
counting on everyone’s active collaboration.  
The Bank’s staff is its greatest asset. We are continuing to refine our recruitment procedures 
and  focusing  on  professional  development,  well  aware  that  our  institution’s  future  rests  on 
the knowledge and skills of the men and women who work here.  
On 18 December Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa passed away, all too soon. He joined the Bank 
of  Italy  in  1968  and  left  almost  thirty  years  later  as  Deputy  Director  General  to  serve 
successively  as  Chairman  of  Consob,  member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European 
Central Bank and Minister for the Economy and Finance. His death deprives our country of 
his gifts of intelligence and passionate civic commitment. We will be holding a conference in 
his memory here in December, a year after his decease.  
The  Bank  of  Italy  has  been  a  precious  source  of  dedicated  public  servants  for  Italy  and 
Europe. Merit and independence: these are the essential conditions for the credibility of its 
analyses  and  for  the  effectiveness  of  its  action.  These  are  values  to  be  preserved  if  the 
country is to continue to benefit from an authoritative voice with no vested interests. These 
have been the guiding principles of my mandate.  
The world after the crisis  
The  economic  policy  response  to  the  2008–09  crisis  was  rapid,  effective  and  coordinated 
internationally.  Support  from  budgetary  policies  and  the  injection  of  liquidity  to  sustain  the 
markets were unprecedented. The collapse of the international financial system was averted. 
There  are  some  lessons  to  be  drawn  from  this  crisis:  the  social  safety  net,  which  held,  is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
essential;  bank  failures  must  be  managed;  international  cooperation,  indispensable  during 
the emergency, remains so when reconstructing the system.  
In 2010 the global economy returned to growth at a rate of almost 5 per cent. In the emerging 
countries huge numbers of people are leaving poverty behind, even though this process is 
being held back by rising food prices. Overall the financial system is gradually recovering.  
But  the  legacy  of  the  recession  is  a  heavy  one.  The  most  advanced  economies,  with  the 
exception of Germany, are struggling to return to the previous rates of growth; the recovery is 
still too weak to reduce unemployment. In the emerging countries, with growth rates close to 
10  per  cent  in  some  cases,  signs  of  inflation  are  beginning  to  appear;  in  several  of  these 
countries inflows of capital have reached the high levels prevailing before the crisis.  
The economic policies energetically applied in the advanced countries to counter the worst 
effects  of  the  crisis  have  reached  their  limits.  The  public  debt  of  these  countries,  equal  to 
73 per cent of GDP in 2007, will exceed 100 per cent this year. The risk premiums on public 
debt  are  growing  everywhere,  dramatically  so  in  the  economies  where  the  public  finances 
have  deteriorated  the  most.  In  the  euro  area,  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  of  three  
countries – which together account for 6 per cent of the area’s GDP – can potentially have 
significant systemic effects.  
Public finances must be brought under control. A prolonged expansionary policy undermines 
the  sustainability  of  the  debt  and  damages  economic  growth.  In  Europe  a  start  has  been 
made on adjustment. This could not be postponed, despite the weakness of the recovery.  
The  emerging  economies’  prompt  return 
to  growth,  adverse  climatic  events  and 
socio-political upheaval in the Mediterranean and Middle East have pushed up the prices of 
energy sources and food, by more than 30 per cent in the last six months.  
The risk of inflation is rising. There is now a greater need to proceed with monetary policy 
normalization so as to prevent expectations of higher inflation from becoming entrenched.  
External current account imbalances between large debtor and creditor countries, one of the 
factors underlying the crisis, have begun to increase again. Differences in the propensity to 
save and in the composition of domestic demand are the main causes, together with rigid 
exchange-rate policies.  
Today  the  Group  of  Twenty  is  committed  to  a  global  economic  policy  promoting  strong, 
sustainable and balanced growth.  
However, the imbalances in international payments are set to last and they must be funded. 
It  is  therefore  crucial  that  the  financial  system  is  solid.  The  reform  of  the  rules  remains  a 
priority on the international agenda. It must be completed.  
taken.  Thanks 
to  unprecedented 
The reform of finance  
Important  steps  have  already  been 
international 
cooperation, the measures adopted will make the financial system much more resilient. All 
the  leading  countries  have  revised  their  systems  of  regulation  and  supervision  in  three 
directions:  to  reduce  the  risks  for  stability,  increase  cooperation  among  authorities,  and 
broaden the scope of the rules.  
Basel III has established higher requirements for banks’ capital and raised its quality. It has 
placed restrictions on financial leverage and introduced new liquidity rules.  
We  have  eliminated  many  of  the  perverse  incentives  that  encouraged  the  assumption  of 
excessive  risks  in  securitizations,  by  revising  the  role  of  rating  agencies  and  reviewing 
accounting standards and prudential rules.  
Transparency and the reduction of systemic risk are guiding the reform of over-the-counter 
derivatives:  the  standardization  of  contracts,  centralized  clearing,  more  demanding  capital 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
requirements, and the obligation to provide information to trade repositories are the pillars of 
the new system.  
The reform has not yet been completed, however: it is necessary to tackle and reduce the 
moral hazard associated with systemically important financial institutions; it is necessary to 
increase the transparency and reduce the risks generated by the shadow banking system, a 
grey area between the regulated and the unregulated sectors.  
Either because they received public support at the height of the crisis to prevent failures with 
devastating consequences or because governments provided them with more or less explicit 
guarantees,  it  is  widely  believed  that  the  largest  banks  cannot  fail.  This  leads  to  serious 
competitive  distortions  but  above  all  to  the  unacceptable  idea  that  profits  are  private  and 
losses public.  
Systemically important financial institutions must be allowed to fail if necessary, in an orderly 
manner, while preserving the essential banking and payment system functions and with the 
costs  of  their  collapse  not  borne  by  the  taxpayers  but  by  the  shareholders  and  certain 
categories of creditors. Beginning with those of a global size and nature, they will also have 
to be able to absorb larger losses. Common equity remains essential to the achievement of 
this objective.  
The supervision of these institutions will have to be enhanced, made commensurate with the 
risks  they  can  create.  In  many  countries  this  will  require  a  significant  increase  in  the 
authorities’ powers and independence.  
The  Financial  Stability  Board  will  present  detailed  recommendations  at  the  G20  summit  in 
November.  
Before  the  crisis,  much  of  the  financial  leverage  and  liquidity  risk  originated  within  the 
shadow banking system. The first objective of the Financial Stability Board is to establish the 
capacity to assess the risks in this sector adequately. Rules will then be introduced for the 
activities of the shadow banking system that can generate systemic risks. In tracing the new 
perimeter of regulation, the FSB will concentrate on those currently unregulated bodies that 
engage  in  credit  intermediation  with  maturity  transformation  that  are  currently  unregulated 
and are therefore subject to liquidity risks. The extension of the perimeter should follow the 
principle that similar activities and risks must be subject to the same rules.  
It is now essential to ensure the complete implementation of the new rules, as scheduled and 
in  all  the  different  jurisdictions.  The  United  States  and  Europe  have  a  key  responsibility. 
National  interests  must  not  prevail,  otherwise  the  credibility  of  the  reform  and  financial 
stability itself will be undermined. Intermediaries cannot call for shared rules to ensure a level 
playing  field  and  at  the  same  time  seek  competitive  advantages  through  their  less  strict 
application at national level.  
The euro and Europe  
The euro-area budget deficit should be about 4.5 per cent of GDP this year, less than half 
those of the United States and Japan; at 88 per cent the public debt is lower than that of the 
United  States  and  far  below  the  Japanese  level;  the  external  current  account  is  nearly  in 
balance.  The  economic  recovery  is  gathering  strength,  with  GDP  growth  not  far  from  
2 per cent expected this year.  
The Economic and Monetary Union is nonetheless faced with the most difficult test since its 
creation.  
In  three  years  the  public  debts  of  Ireland,  Greece  and  Portugal  have  grown  in  relation  to 
GDP by 71, 37 and 25 percentage points respectively.  
The European surveillance of national budgetary policies revealed itself to be inadequate; it 
had been weakened at the initiative of the three largest countries in the middle of the last 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
in 
to 
long 
time 
the  architecture  of 
the  single  currency  concealed 
decade, precisely when it became essential. A simple accounting exercise shows that if the 
rules of the Stability and Growth Pact had always been obeyed, on the eve of the crisis the 
ratio  of  public  debt  to  GDP  would  have  been  over  10  percentage  points  lower  in  the  euro 
area  and  30  points  lower  in  Greece.  Even  assuming  that  the  worsening  of  budget  deficits 
during the crisis was inevitable, at the end of last year no country’s debt would have been 
more than 100 per cent of GDP.  
For  a 
the  differences  between  member 
countries’ underlying  conditions  and  economic  policies  and  the  absence  of  really  binding 
common rules. For a long time risk premiums did not reveal the truth.  
The  global  crisis  has  accentuated  the  perception  of  risk  by  some  investors  and  disclosed 
weaknesses 
the  Union.  The  yield  spreads  on  member 
countries’ securities have widened; the process was sometimes so sudden that some market 
segments risked paralysis.  
National  governments  and  European  authorities  responded 
the  emergency  with 
exceptional measures, so as to limit the risk of contagion and safeguard the area’s financial 
stability. In cooperation with the International Monetary Fund, loans were granted, conditional 
on rigorous adjustment plans that the countries in difficulty have undertaken to comply with.  
There  are  no  shortcuts  available.  The  response  to  the  debt  crisis  is  first  and  foremost  in 
national  policies,  in  the  complete  implementation  of  the  adjustment  plans  that  have  been 
agreed. Solidarity among the member countries of the Union must be matched by a sense of 
responsibility and compliance with the rules. The financial support of euro-area governments 
allows countries to proceed with adjustments sheltered from market volatility. It is not a fiscal 
transfer between countries and is subject to stringent conditions.  
The return to financial health is possible. In the last few months I have frequently recalled 
Italy’s experience at the beginning of the 1990s, when the country was faced with a major 
crisis  of  confidence  in  the  sustainability  of  the  public  debt.  Every  year,  we  had  to  place 
securities on the market worth, in real terms, ten times Greece’s current annual borrowing 
requirement  and  twice  its  value  in  relation  to  GDP.  Italy  overcame  this  crisis  without  any 
assistance  from  abroad,  thanks  to  an  ambitious  budgetary  consolidation  plan,  important 
structural  reforms,  and  a  programme  of  privatizations  amounting  to  around  10  per  cent  of 
GDP.  
Beyond the emergency, some important steps have already been taken to tackle the known 
but long neglected underlying weaknesses of the European architecture.  
The  proposals  of  the  EU  Commission  and  Council  reinforce  surveillance  over  budgetary 
policies. They can be made more ambitious by making procedures more automatic so as to 
shield them from the arbitrary nature of political negotiations. The European Parliament can 
have an important influence in this regard.  
As  was  hoped,  rules  similar  to  those  governing  national  budgets  will  be  extended  to  the 
surveillance  of  situations  of  macroeconomic  imbalance,  with  special  consideration  for  the 
state of member countries’ external accounts.  
A commitment to reinforce the competitiveness and convergence of the national economies 
has been undertaken with the Euro Plus Pact, which nevertheless needs to be made more 
binding.  
The  new  European  supervisory  authorities  began  operating  at  the  start  of  the  year.  The 
European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB)  is  laying  the  foundations  of  the  system  to  prevent 
and, where necessary, manage situations that are critical for financial stability. The European 
Banking Authority (EBA) will consolidate supervisory rules and practices, which are currently 
fragmented at national level.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Monetary policy  
The  Eurosystem  has  played  a  crucial  role  in  countering  the  effects  of  the  crisis.  The 
credibility it has gained over the years has enabled it to keep inflation expectations steady 
and to act with the speed and flexibility demanded by extraordinary circumstances.  
Thanks to measures designed to ensure the supply of liquidity to the markets, the European 
Central  Bank  has  avoided  the  collapse  of  the  financial  system.  It  has  rapidly  reduced  the 
policy  rate  to  1  per  cent,  the  lowest  level  ever  reached  by  official  rates  in  the  euro-area 
countries.  
Since the end of last year, the large rises in raw material prices have pushed the inflation 
rate  to  over  2  per  cent.  The  ECB  Governing  Council  has  re-asserted  its  determination  to 
prevent international price trends from provoking, apart from the inevitable short-term effects, 
a deterioration in inflation expectations. At its meeting in early April the Council raised official 
rates  by  25  basis  points.  Even  with 
this  measure,  monetary  conditions  remain 
accommodating.  
The grave repercussions of the sovereign debt crisis for the functioning of the financial sector 
have necessitated exceptional measures, as at the height of the financial crisis in 2008 and 
2009. Extraordinary measures to refinance the banking system that had been discontinued 
earlier have been revived; a programme of purchases of sovereign debt securities issued in 
the euro area (the Securities Market Programme) has been launched.  
These  measures  are  by  nature  temporary  and  designed  to  safeguard  the  mechanism  by 
which  monetary  policy  impulses  are  transmitted  to  the  economy;  in  the  case  of  the  SMP, 
moreover,  they  are  for  a  limited  amount  and  the  effects  on  the  monetary  base  are  fully 
sterilized.  
The  ECB  has  the  task  of  ensuring  price  stability  in  the  medium  term;  monetary  stability 
represents  its  fundamental  contribution  to  growth.  Future  monetary  policy  decisions  will 
always be guided by this primary objective.  
Neither  the  existence  of  sovereign  risks  nor  some  banks’  abnormal  dependence  on  ECB 
financing can divert it from this objective.  
It falls to the national governments to speed up the consolidation of their public finances and 
implement  structural  reforms  that  will  raise  the  potential  growth  rate  of  their  economies.  It 
falls to the financial intermediaries to continue resolutely towards restoring healthy balance 
sheets and strengthening their capital base.  
The Italian economy  
Italy’s  budget  deficit,  which  this  year  is  close  to  4  per  cent  of  GDP,  is  smaller  than  the 
euro-area average. According to official forecasts it will be brought below 3 per cent in 2012. 
The debt, however, is approaching 120 per cent of GDP.  
The objective of achieving budget balance in 2014 is appropriate, as is the plan to bring the 
definition of the budget adjustment package for 2013–14 forward to this June.  
Thanks  to  the  social  security  reforms  introduced  in  the  middle  of  the  1990s,  to  a  banking 
system  that  has  not  needed  government  bail-outs,  and  to  prudent  management  of 
expenditure during the crisis, the effort we are required to make is less than for many other 
advanced countries.  
Without  sacrificing  capital  expenditure  more  than  the  current  planning  scenario  already 
envisages  and  without  increasing  revenue,  primary  current  expenditure  must  be  further 
reduced, by more than 5 per cent in real terms in the period 2012–14, returning to the same 
level, in relation to GDP, as at the beginning of the last decade.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
It would be inadvisable to seek a permanent and credible reduction of expenditure by cutting 
items uniformly across the board: this would make it impossible to allocate resources where 
they are most needed; it would be difficult to sustain over the medium term; it would penalize 
the more virtuous government departments. A budget of this kind would weigh on the already 
weak  economic  recovery,  subtracting  about  2  percentage  points  of  GDP  over  the  three 
years.  
What is needed, instead, is a skilfully designed package, based on a thorough analysis, item 
by item, of the accounts of the public-sector agencies, allocating funds according to today’s 
objectives regardless of past expenditure; refining the indicators of efficiency for the various 
public  service  centres  (offices,  schools,  hospitals,  courts)  so  as  to  introduce  widespread 
improvements in the organization and functioning of the units; maintaining the drive to make 
the  public  administration  more  efficient;  and  channelling  a  part  of  the  resulting  savings 
towards investment in infrastructure.  
Substantial reductions should be made in the high rates of taxation of labour and corporate 
income,  offsetting  the  loss  of  revenue  by  making  further  progress  against  tax  evasion, 
beyond the truly appreciable amounts the authorities have recently recovered.  
Timely,  structural  budget  measures  that  are  credible  in  the  eyes  of  international  investors 
and  designed  to  foster  growth  could,  among  other  things  by  significantly  reducing  the  risk 
premiums weighing on Italian interest rates, greatly limit the adverse effects on the economy.  
Fiscal federalism can help by making all levels of government accountable, imposing strict 
budget  constraints  and  involving  citizens  more  closely  in  public  affairs.  There  are  two 
essential  conditions  for this:  offsetting  the  new  local  taxes with  cuts  in  central  government 
taxes, not summing them; and providing for strict monitoring to ensure legal conduct on the 
part of the bodies accountable, under decentralization, for spending.  
Growth  
Since the start of the recovery, two summers ago, the Italian economy has recouped only 
2 of the 7 percentage points of output lost in the recession. In the first quarter of this year its 
growth rate was barely positive.  
In the course of the past ten years, Italy’s gross domestic product has increased by less than 
3 per cent; that of France, with about the same population, by 12 per cent. The gap perfectly 
reflects the difference in hourly productivity – stationary in Italy, up by 9 per cent in France. 
Italy’s disappointing result applies to the country as a whole, North and South alike.  
If  productivity  stagnates,  our  economy  cannot  grow.  The  productive  economy  loses 
competitiveness; widening deficits appear in the current account of the balance of payments. 
Foreign direct investment dries up. In the course of a decade, Italy received foreign direct 
investment inflows equal to 11 per cent of GDP, compared with 27 per cent in France.  
Wage growth is modest in Italy, as it cannot diverge too sharply from productivity growth: this 
has repercussions on domestic demand. The real earnings of employees in Italy have been 
virtually stationary over the past decade, compared with a gain of 9 per cent in France; real 
household consumption, which has risen by 18 per cent in France, has grown by less than 
5 per cent in Italy and only by eroding the propensity to save.  
Productivity in Italy is stagnating because the system has not yet adapted sufficiently to the 
new technologies, or to globalization. Understanding the reasons for this has been the aim of 
much of the research conducted by the Bank of Italy in recent years. I have reported on it 
several times, most notably in these annual remarks. Our analyses point the finger at Italy’s 
productive structure, which is more fragmented and static than in other economies; and at 
government policies that fail to encourage, and often hamper, its development.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The problem of the inefficiency of civil justice has to be tackled at the root. Ordinary lower 
 
court cases are now estimated to last more than 1,000 days, putting Italy in 157th
place out 
of the 183 countries covered in the World Bank’s rankings. The consequent uncertainty is a 
major factor of friction in the economy as  well as the source of injustice. According to our 
estimates,  the  shortcomings  of  the  civil  justice  system  in  Italy  could  subtract  up  to  one 
percentage point a year from GDP growth.  
We must proceed with the reform of the education system, on which a start has been made, 
in  order  to  raise  our  levels  of  academic  achievement,  which  are  among  the  lowest  in  the 
Western world even with equal expenditure per student. The disparities within Italy remain 
unacceptably wide, between North and South and between different schools within the same 
area,  even  at  the  level  of  compulsory  education.  At  the  university  level,  more  competition 
between institutions is desirable in order to establish centres of excellence that can compete 
in the world arena. The number of university graduates is still low by international standards. 
According to OECD estimates, the gap between the Italian education system and global best 
practices could depress the rate of GDP growth by as much as one percentage point in the 
long run.  
Competition, which is well rooted in a good part of industry, is making very slow headway in 
services,  especially  public  utilities.  What  is  wanted  is  not  unrestrained  privatization  but  a 
system of regulated competition in which the customer, the citizen, is better protected. The 
challenge  of  growth  cannot  be  left  solely  to  the  enterprises  and  workers  that  are  directly 
exposed  to  international  competition,  while  positional  rents  and  monopoly  advantages  in 
other sectors depress employment and undermine the country’s overall competitiveness.  
Italy  lags  behind  the  other  main  European  countries  in  its  endowment  of  infrastructure, 
despite having had a higher ratio of public infrastructural spending to GDP from the 1980s 
until  2008.  Under  the  Government’s  programmes  the  ratio  is  set  to  fall  to  1.6  per  cent  in 
2012, down from 2.5 per cent in 2009; on average in the euro area, the planned expenditure 
for 2012 is 2.2 per cent of GDP, down from 2.8 per cent in 2009. Uncertainty in planning, 
deficiencies in project evaluation and public works selection, fragmentation and overlapping 
of  powers,  and  inadequate  rules  on  contract  awards  and  project  controls  result  in  public 
works that are less useful and more costly than elsewhere.  
The  execution  time  for  projects  financed  by  the  European  Regional  Development  Fund  is 
nearly  twice  as  long  as  scheduled  in  Italy,  compared  with  average  overruns  of  just  one 
quarter in the rest of Europe, and cost overruns are 40 per cent as against 20 per cent. In 
high-speed  rail  projects  and  for  motorways,  the  average  cost  per  kilometre  and  the 
realization time are greater than in France and Spain to an extent only partially justified by 
the different topographical conditions.  
It is essential to restore efficiency in expenditure, in order among other things to make the 
most of project financing and Community resources, which do not burden the Italian public 
finances.  
To date, only about 60 per cent of the motorway network enlargements provided for in the 
1997 agreement between the National Road Agency and the main motorway concessionary 
have been completed, and under 30 per cent of those decided in 2004, while the latest plan, 
that  of  2008,  is  still  under  study.  The  works  to  be  realized  are  worth  €15  billion.  Only 
15 per cent of the Community structural funds at our disposal has been spent; the unspent 
portion  amounts  to  €23  billion,  to  be  associated  with  the  required  national  cofinancing. 
Speeding these projects up would have a considerable impact on economic activity.  
The spread of part-time and fixed-term employment contracts in the past fifteen years has 
helped to raise the employment rate, but at the cost of creating a pronounced dualism within 
the labour market: on the one hand the better-protected workers with permanent jobs and on 
the other a vast area of precarious employment, especially among young people, with little 
protection  and  low  earnings.  A  more  balanced  approach  to  labour  market  flexibility,  which 
today depends almost entirely on entry mode, would let young people set their sights higher. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
It would spur firms to invest more in the training of human resources, to integrate them into 
the production process and to offer them better career prospects.  
The  industrial  relations  system  must  foster  the  modernization  and  competitiveness  of  the 
productive economy, in the interests of both sides.  
Steps  have  been  taken  to  strengthen  the  role  of  company-level  bargaining,  but  the 
predominance  of  industry-wide  bargaining  and  the  lack  of  definite  rules  governing  trade 
union representation still limit the possibility of workers’ entering into commitments vis-à-vis 
their firms and weaken their ability to affect their own wages and job security.  
Women’s low labour market participation is a crucial weakness of the Italian economy, and 
one  on  which  we  are  now  concentrating  our  research  effort.  Today,  60  per  cent  of  Italy’s 
university graduates are women. They earn their degrees faster and with a better academic 
performance  than  their  male  fellow-students;  and  they  are  less  and  less  restricted  to  the 
traditional women’s disciplines in the humanities. Yet the employment rate for women is still 
no more than 46 per cent, 20 points less than for men. It is lower than in practically every 
other European country, especially in the higher positions and among women with children. 
Holding education and experience constant, women’s earnings are 10 per cent lower than 
men’s. Women still devote a great deal more time to home and family in Italy than in other 
countries. Greater availability of services would help, as would the organization of work to 
facilitate the reconciliation of family and job commitments and an attenuation of the implicit 
tax disincentives for women’s work.  
The social safety net must guarantee adequate income support to anyone who loses a job 
and is actively seeking another. The fate of those working for firms that can no longer survive 
in the marketplace must be made less dramatic, in order not to impede the natural turnover 
of enterprises.  
Enterprise and finance  
Italy’s entrepreneurs and workers have the skills and the energy to lift the pace of growth. In 
spite  of  crisis  and  recession,  our  business  surveys  of  recent  years  have  revealed  great 
vitality in many enterprises.  
But those skills and those energies are fragmented.  
Italian firms, on average, are 40 per cent smaller than their euro-area counterparts. The top 
50 European corporations by sales include 15 German and 11 French but just 4 Italian firms. 
Italy’s industrial structure seems static; rarely do firms grow and  move up to the  next size 
class.  
In  the  early  1960s,  plants  with  over  100  workers  employed  43  per  cent  of  Italy’s 
manufacturing workers, as against over 60 per cent in France and Germany. Since then the 
employment share of large plants has declined much more sharply in Italy than in France or 
Germany, to under 30 per cent.  
Italian 
The 
competitiveness, is no longer enough today. We need more medium-sized and large firms 
that  can  move  rapidly  and  effectively  into  international  markets  and  exploit  the  efficiency 
gains offered by technological innovation.  
When  one  of  our  firms  has  a  chance  to  expand,  it  may  be  deterred  not  only  by  a  fiscal, 
regulatory and administrative framework still perceived as uncertain and costly but also by 
corporate structures that are often kept impermeable to outsiders. Widespread family control 
of  businesses  is  not  a  specifically  Italian  phenomenon;  what  is,  is  the  restriction  of 
management to the family circle. Sixty per cent of all Italian manufacturing firms with ten or 
family  controlled  and  managed,  compared  with  
more  workers  are  exclusively 
the  past  helped 
typical  of  small 
firms,  which 
to  sustain 
flexibility 
in 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
under  30 per cent  in  Germany  and  France.  These  firms  have  less  propensity  to  innovate, 
engage less in research and development, and rarely penetrate emerging markets.  
The average Italian firm has less equity capital than its counterparts in the other advanced 
countries.  There  is  little  diversification  of  sources  of  funding  –  consisting  largely  in  
bank credit – and the incidence of short-term debt is high.  
To encourage recourse to equity capital, as part of a comprehensive redistribution of public 
revenue  and  expenditure  the  taxation  of  the  share  of  profit  corresponding  to  the 
remuneration of equity should be reduced. Including the regional tax on productive activity, 
the statutory tax rate on company income in Italy is nearly six percentage points above the 
euro-area average.  
Banks and banking supervision  
Banks  have  stepped  up  their  lending  to  firms  markedly,  in  response  to  the  recovery  in 
demand for working capital: the increase amounted to 5.2 per cent on an annualized basis in 
the  three  months  ended  in  April;  the  rate  of  growth  in  the  twelve  months  to  April  was 
4.4 per cent, the highest among the main countries of the euro area.  
The  ratio  of  new  bad  debts  to  outstanding  loans  remained  high  in  2010,  at  1.9  per  cent, 
though far below the figure recorded after the recession of the early 1990s. The data for the 
first few months of this year signal improvement.  
Many  intermediaries  have  supported  customers  by  granting  debt  restructurings  or  loan 
repayment  moratoria.  Such  measures,  which  rarely  provide  for  capital  increases  or  new 
business plans, must be targeted at firms actually capable of overcoming the crisis and not 
be merely a way for banks to put off booking losses.  
Small  banks  have  provided  support  to  the  economy,  including  during  the  recession.  They 
have  expanded  their  business  both  outside  their  territory  and  with  large  customers.  They 
must  now  make  their  governance  arrangements,  organizational  structures  and  credit  risk 
control systems adequate to their larger shares of intermediation.  
The cost and availability of the funds that banks can raise on the markets have been affected 
by the pressures on sovereign debts. Our leading banks have nearly completed their funding 
programmes for this year, albeit at higher costs and with 40 per cent in the form of covered 
bond issues.  
A third of the bank bonds now outstanding will mature by the end of 2012; this is a significant 
share but similar to that of the main European banks. Compared with the intermediaries of 
other countries, which rely more heavily on wholesale funding, our banking system benefits 
from a broad base of retail funding, which is relatively less sensitive to the volatility of the 
markets.  
Italian  banks’  liquidity  position,  monitored  constantly  by  the  Bank  of  Italy,  has  remained 
balanced as a whole. Their holdings of assets eligible as collateral in Eurosystem refinancing 
operations  are  substantial;  recourse  to  such  operations  is  more  limited  than  that  of  other 
euro-area banking systems.  
Since  last  year  the  Bank  of  Italy  has  asked  banks  to  strengthen  their  capital  bases. 
Shareholders, banking foundations and investors have responded readily.  
Between October 2010 and April of this year capital increases totalling more than €11 billion 
were  launched.  The  majority  of  these  operations  will  be  completed  by  the  autumn.  They 
make it possible to approach the objective set by Basel III for 2019.  
It  is  commonly  thought  that  an  increase  in  banks’  equity  translates  into  higher  costs  for 
customers and ends up braking the growth of the economy. However,  quantitative studies 
show  that  a  stronger  capital  base  for  banks  has  a  positive  net  effect  on  the  economy:  it 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
increases  the  system’s  ability  to  withstand  adverse  shocks  and  reduces  the  likelihood  of 
crises; for individual intermediaries, it reduces the risk premium on fund-raising and the cost 
of equity capital itself.  
A recovery in earnings makes it possible to increase capital internally. In 2010 the five largest 
Italian  banking  groups’  return  on  equity  was  again  about  4  per  cent,  compared  with  an 
average  of  7.8  per  cent  for  twelve  large  European  intermediaries.  Sluggish  asset  growth, 
higher funding costs and low credit quality were the main factors.  
The  gains  in  operating  efficiency  achieved  before  the  crisis  must  not  be  lost.  The 
rationalization of distribution networks must continue.  
Good governance encourages investors to supply capital.  
Cooperative banks listed on the stock exchange need more effective controls on the activity 
of  directors,  greater  participation  of  the  shareholders  in  the  annual  meeting,  including  by 
means  of  proxies.  As  I  have  had  occasion  to  remark  in  the  past,  a  legislative  measure  is 
necessary;  amendments  to  bylaws,  which  we  have  nonetheless  called  for,  cannot  be  the 
definitive solution.  
The quality of the banking foundations’ governance and internal control arrangements, the 
safeguards  to  preserve  their  independence  and  prevent  conflicts  of  interest,  and  the 
efficiency and transparency of their financial operations are crucial in order to reconcile their 
holding bank equity with banks’ operating autonomy.  
In  our  country  there  was  no  banking  crisis.  However,  the  recession,  by  aggravating  weak 
situations  that  already  existed,  has  produced  a  rise  in  the  number  of  provisional 
management,  special  administration  and  liquidation  procedures.  In  line  with  international 
guidelines,  we  now  have  to  revise  the  framework  of  rules  in  two  ways:  expanding  the 
spectrum of crisis resolution measures; and giving the Bank of Italy, as supervisory authority, 
the  power  to  remove  corporate  officers  responsible  for  conduct  harmful  to  the  sound  and 
prudent management of a bank.  
Suitable  rules  alone  are  not  enough  to  ensure  good  supervision:  without  strong  operating 
practices, without stringent and efficacious action, crises will not be averted. This has been 
made abundantly clear by the dramatic recent experiences.  
With  the  Bank  of  Italy’s  supervisory  role,  our  country  has  been  able  to  count  on  a  solid 
tradition.  
We have strengthened the most valid aspects of that tradition: the principles of a rigorous 
supervisory  approach  that  was  never  converted  to  the  “light  touch”;  supervision  ready  to 
persuade  if  possible,  to  prescribe  if  necessary,  within  the  limits  of  law,  performed  by 
well-prepared and upright public servants.  
On-site supervision is now more closely targeted and more selective, with better use made of 
our resources. Targeted inspections and thematic inspections, which enable us to assess the 
same  risk  profile  for  multiple  intermediaries,  have  taken  their  place  alongside  the 
all-encompassing inspections carried out at long intervals.  
We have forcefully safeguarded the principles of transparency and begun an open dialogue 
with the banking industry and the public, making good use of consultations on our measures.  
We are acting to strengthen the protection of banks’ customers, at one and the same time a 
civil  value  and  an  essential  component  of  confidence  in  the  banking  system,  failing  which 
there can be no lasting stability.  
In  this  delicate  phase  in  which  the  system  is  called  upon  to  implement  new,  stricter 
international rules, the Bank of Italy is acting on two fronts: on the one hand, we are working 
in international fora to see that the rules take the specific characteristics of Italian banks into 
due account; on the other, we have worked closely with our banks to ensure that they fully 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
conform  with  the  evolving  rules,  especially  the  definition  of  capital  components,  and 
accordingly are able to stand up well under international examination.  
The  results  of  this  action  up  to  now  have  been  encouraging.  It  is  in  the  interest  of  all  to 
preserve them.  
 to 
the  power 
the  political  system  –  which  alone  has 
The Governor’s annual concluding remarks have always represented an occasion for voicing 
assessments. This time they also provide the chance to look back over these five years.  
My constant theme has been the problem of our country’s economic growth. It is not a new 
problem, but I do claim for the Bank of Italy the credit for having made it the top economic 
policy  priority.  What  kind  of  country  will  we  leave  to  our  children?  Many  times  we  have 
pointed to objectives, suggested lines of action, indicated areas for intervention. Five years 
on, seeing how little of all this has been translated into reality, the “useless sermons” of a far 
more illustrious predecessor of mine come to mind.  
Why  doesn’t 
translate  
analysis into law – take to heart Cavour’s dictum that “reforms, when enacted in time, do not 
weaken authority but reinforce it”?  
Thanks to hard work, ingenuity and sacrifice, in the 150 years of its history as a nation Italy 
has made enormous progress in the material conditions of life. We have experienced periods 
of  booming  growth.  During  the  first  fifteen  years  of  the  twentieth  century  per  capita  gross 
domestic product increased by 30 per cent. In the fifteen years following the Second World 
War,  it  rose  by  140  per  cent.  In  each  of  these  historical  periods  Italy  demonstrated  a 
fundamental unity of purpose: in its capacity to withstand the trials of the First World War and 
in  the  civic  and  moral  mobilization  that,  notwithstanding  the  heterogeneous  political  forces 
involved, resulted in our Republican Constitution.  
In other periods in our history, progress and growth were hampered by divisions, factional 
strife, a weakening of trust between the citizens and the State. Many disparities, above all 
that between North and South, have been overcome only in part. Diversity has been one of 
Italy’s  historical  characteristics,  more  than  in  other  countries.  Not  infrequently,  instead  of 
being a source of enrichment the differences have been transmuted into mutual vetoes, the 
blockage of development.  
Our  condition  today  is  better  in  many  respects.  In  large  part,  age-old  conflicts  have  been 
superseded. The progress towards ever more advanced forms of integration in Europe and a 
new,  shared  diagnosis  of  the  problems  afflicting  the  economy  in  Italy  offer  good  starting 
points. We must achieve unity of purpose on the fundamental lines of action. What unites us 
is more powerful than what divides us.  
Today, first of all the public budget must restored to its proper role as a factor of stability and 
an  engine  of  economic  growth,  bringing  it  into  balance  without  delay,  revising  the 
composition  of  spending  to  favour  growth,  and  easing  the  heavy  tax  burden  on  so  many 
honest workers and entrepreneurs.  
Economic  growth  does  not  stem  solely  from  economic  factors.  It  depends  on  public 
institutions, on citizens’ faith in them, on shared hopes and values. It is these same factors 
that determine the progress of a nation. To cite Cavour again: “A nation’s political resurgence 
can  never  be  divorced  from  its  economic  resurgence.  …  Civic  virtues,  wise  laws  affording 
equal  protection  to  each  and  every  right,  sound  political  arrangements,  essential  to  the 
betterment  of a nation’s moral condition – these are also the prime cause of its economic 
progress.” The intertwined vested interests oppressing the country in so many ways must be 
eliminated.  This  is  an  essential  condition  for  joining  solidarity  with  merit,  equity  with 
competition, for renewing the country’s prospects for growth.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
In March 2006, in my very first public speech as Governor of the Bank of Italy, I noted that 
the Italian economy appeared to be weighed down, but that its structural lags were not to be 
taken as signs of inevitable decline. They could be faced and matters clearly explained to the 
public, even when the solutions ran counter to the short-term interests of some segments of 
society.  A  few  weeks  later  I  opened  my  address  to  you  in  this  forum  with  the  words 
“Returning to growth”. It is with these same words that I would like to close these concluding 
remarks.  
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
