Jean-Pierre Landau: The role of central banks – lessons 
Remarks  by  Mr  Jean-Pierre  Landau,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France,  at  the 
VIth International  Symposium  of  the  Banque  de  France  on  “Which  regulation  for  global 
imbalances?”, Paris, 4 March 2011. 
 I am going to talk about the relationship between monetary policy and financial stability. This 
topic  is  abundantly  debated.  I  will  take,  however,  a  modest  approach  and  deal  only  with 
some  operational  aspects.  These  are,  nevertheless,  crucial  since  the  essence  of  modern 
Central Banks is their operational independence. It is therefore relevant to ask how it might 
be affected or impacted by the search for greater financial stability. 
The  starting  point  is  that  financial  frictions  matter.  They  matter  both  for  financial  stability, 
which  is  obvious,  and  for  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy,  a  point  which  should  have 
been  obvious  but  was  somehow  forgotten.  Prior  to  the  crisis,  most  of  our  macro  models 
tended  to  represent  the  transmission  mechanisms  through  a  simple,  immaculate,  inter-
temporal  substitution  effect  whereby  changes  in  policy  rates  would  induce  expenditures 
shifting across time. Money and financial institutions play almost no role in that mechanism, 
as credit was implicitly supposed to respond only to interest rate movements.  
What  do  the  words  “financial  frictions”  exactly  mean?  I  will  interpret  those  terms  as 
encompassing  the  conjunction  of  maturity  transformation  and  leverage  which  drives  the 
expansion or contraction of financial institutions’ balance sheets, thus the overall equilibrium 
in credit markets, including securitized markets. 
Those dynamics obviously have a direct impact on financial stability. Financial fragility comes 
out  of  excessive  leverage  and  maturity  transformation,  fueling  asset  price  increases.  And, 
conversely,  liquidity  shocks  and  deleveraging  are  the  symptoms  and  channels  behind 
financial crises. 
As importantly, and less recognized until recently, those dynamics also have a major impact 
on the transmission mechanism of monetary policy. The functioning of the credit channel, but 
also  the  interest  rate  channel  depend  on  financial  intermediaries  being  able  to  fund 
themselves  and  arbitrage  across  different  market  segments,  instruments  and  maturities. 
Dysfunctional  credit  markets  were  a  major  reason  why  Central  Banks  embarked  into 
exceptional liquidity provision, credit easing and asset purchases. 
One  important  point,  here,  is  that  the  same  dynamics  affect  both  financial  stability,  on  the 
one hand, and monetary transmission channels, on the other. Now, presumably, any macro 
prudential  policy  would  try  and  influence  the  evolution  of  maturity  transformation  and 
leverage.  By  doing  so,  however,  it  would  also  have  a  monetary  impact.  And,  conversely, 
changing  the  monetary  stance,  by  moving  policy  rates,  also  may  have  an  influence  on 
financial stability. 
The  relative  strength  of  those influences  is  not  empirically  known.  Those  of  us  who  would 
use  monetary  policy  with  a  financial  stability  objective  implicitly  assume  that  leverage  and 
maturity transformation are very sensitive to interest rates. I am not sure this is true. At the 
very least, during the crisis, we have seen deleveraging proceeding at an accelerated pace, 
although interest rates have been brought down – and this is the reason why there has been 
a  zero  lower  bound  problem.  I  suspect  that,  symmetrically,  interest  rate  hikes  would  have 
been powerless to stop the incredible build up in leverage prior to the crisis.  
This  is  the  very  reason  why  we  need  additional  –  macro  prudential  –  tools  to  deal  with 
financial instability. But this analysis also shows that macro prudential and monetary tools are 
not independent. So we have to give up the ideal vision of a world where two objectives – 
price and financial stability – would be pursued with two independent set of instruments. The 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
reality  is  somehow  messier  and  this  has  important  consequences.  Operating  two  different 
policies with two sets of interacting instruments is definitely a challenge. Once we move away 
from the pure “Tinbergen” world, preserving the operational independence of monetary policy 
may require particular attention. 
Add to this that mandates and accountability regimes are very different for price and financial 
stability. Central Banks are independent, but macro prudential authorities are not. In all major 
jurisdictions,  Governments,  and  Parliaments,  are  deeply  involved  in  the  organization  and 
management  of  macro  prudential  supervision.  Likewise,  while  price  stability  mandates  are 
precisely defined and often quantified, financial stability mandates are specified in very broad 
terms.  There  are  good  reasons  for  this  situation.  In  devising  and  implementing  macro 
supervision, authorities are facing delicate trade-offs between efficiency and stability in the 
financial  system.  Deep  social  choices  are  involved,  which,  arguably,  can  differ  across 
countries and periods of time. Also, as recent experience has shown, financial stability may 
ultimately involve fiscal commitments. 
Finally, and most importantly in my view, we lack the analytical framework upon which both a 
financial  stability  mandate  and  operational  independence  could  be  validly  and  legitimately 
anchored. Central Bank independence has closely followed theoretical breakthroughs, in the 
1970s, in our understanding of inflation dynamics. It was made possible because societies 
reached  a  common  –  and  easily  communicable  –  agreement  on  the  lack  of  trade-offs 
involved, on the long run, between inflation and growth. That robust, and commonly shared 
analytical  background  on  what  monetary  policy  could  –  and  could  not  –  achieve  was 
essential in establishing the primacy of price stability and the legitimacy of independence in 
monetary  policy  making.  We  are  very  far  away  from  such  a  theoretical  agreement  on  the 
causes  of  financial  instability,  on  the  real  trade-offs  between  efficiency  and  stability  in 
finance, on the role of innovation and, finally, on the origins and detection of asset and credit 
bubbles. It would therefore be illusory, and dangerous, to expect that a precise mandate for 
financial stability could be defined, let alone quantified, in a foreseeable future.  
The  situation  is  therefore  somehow  confusing  and  this  raises  important  challenges  for  the 
future.  At  the  risk  of  oversimplifying,  Central  Banks  associated  with  –  or  responsible  for  – 
financial stability may find themselves with:  
 
 
two separate missions: price and financial stability 
two  different  accountability  regimes:  full  independence  for  monetary  policy; 
coordination or subordination mode for financial stability 
two  interacting  sets  of  instruments:  interest  rates  and  macro  prudential  tools  (a 
situation made even more complicated when unconventional monetary policies are 
implemented) 
 The potential for confusion is real. It is not difficult to imagine situations where actions that 
Central Banks take on pure monetary policy grounds are nevertheless contested in the name 
of financial stability. To some extent, this has always been a possibility. The difference, now, 
is  that  institutional  frameworks  exist  through  which  –  implicit  or  explicit  –  challenges  to 
Central Banks operational independence can materialize.  
It might be tempting to conclude, then, that Central Banks should stay away from financial 
stability  and  concentrate  exclusively  on  ensuring  price  stability.  This,  unfortunately,  is 
impossible, if only for reasons that Charles Goodhart has well explained in a previous paper: 
ultimately, Central Banking is about providing liquidity and liquidity provision is an essential 
and central component of financial stability.  
What can we conclude?  
 
First,  central  banking  is  not  only  about  monetary  policy  but  also  involves  an 
essential  component  of  financial  stability.  This  seems  to  me  a  broad  consensus 
coming out of the crisis. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Second, monetary policy is about setting interest rates, but also involves observing 
and  analyzing  leverage  and  liquidity.  Monetary  aggregates  as  well  as  the  volume 
and  modalities  of  maturity  transformation  reveal  very  useful  information  on  the 
transmission  mechanism.  This  is  actually  the  conventional  wisdom  within  the 
Eurosystem, through the use of the second pillar. Although less acceptable outside 
the euro area, I conjecture that the lessons of the crisis will trigger some rethinking 
here and there. 
Finally, the debate on whether monetary policy should also aim at financial stability 
must give more consideration to the awkward interaction between instruments and 
the  diversity  of  accountability  regimes.  Both  create  the  potential  for  additional 
confusion about the ultimate objectives of each policy. It seems to me that most of 
the discussions are conducted under the implicit assumption that price stability will 
be as easy to maintain in the next decade as it was in the past. So, there would not 
be much to lose in “diverting” some of the power and credibility of monetary policy to 
seeking  financial  stability.  It  is  very  clear  that  this  assumption  is  severely  tested, 
perhaps sooner than we thought. It will be important, in this environment, to maintain 
clarity of purpose and robustness in institutional arrangements in order to limit the 
risk of weakening the benefits of Central Bank independence, which were so hardly 
won over the last decades.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
