Masaaki Shirakawa: Recent developments in Japan’s economy and the 
conduct of monetary policy 
Statement by Mr Masaaki Shirakawa, Governor of the Bank of Japan, concerning the Bank’s 
Semiannual Report on Currency and Monetary Control, before the Committee on Financial 
Affairs, House of Councillors, Tokyo, 9 August 2011. 
 Introduction 
The Bank of Japan submitted to the Diet its Semiannual Report on Currency and Monetary 
Control for the second half of fiscal 2010 in June 2011. I am pleased to have this opportunity 
to talk about recent developments in Japan’s economy and present an overall review of the 
Bank’s conduct of monetary policy. 
Economic and financial developments in Japan 
I. 
I will first explain economic and financial developments in Japan. 
Japan’s economic activity has been picking up steadily as the supply-side constraints caused 
by  the  earthquake  disaster  have  eased  due  to  efforts  from  concerned  parties.  As  for  the 
outlook, Japan’s economy is expected to return to a moderate recovery path with production 
regaining  traction,  backed  by  an  increase  in  exports  and  a  rise  in  demand  for  restoring 
capital stock. 
However,  the  Bank  recognizes  that  the  economic  outlook  entails  considerable  uncertainty 
and judges that recent developments call for closer attention to downside risks. In the United 
States, concern over fiscal consolidation has not dissipated in financial markets even though 
the debt ceiling problem has settled for the present, and views on the economic outlook have 
become  more  cautious.  The  sovereign  debt  problem  in  peripheral  European  countries  still 
warrants  attention  and  emerging  economies  face  the  challenge  of  achieving  price  stability 
and economic growth at the same time. As such, the prospect of overseas economies entails 
a  high  degree  of  uncertainty.  There  is  a  possibility  that  these  developments  in  overseas 
economies and the ensuing fluctuations in the foreign exchange and financial markets will 
have  adverse  effects  on  business  sentiment,  and  consequently  on  economic  activity  in 
Japan. 
On the price front, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI has been slightly positive. 
The Bank recognizes that the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI is likely to be revised 
downward with the base-year change scheduled this month. Taking the scheduled revision 
also into consideration, it appears that it will still take some time to achieve price stability. 
Meanwhile,  the  finance  ministers  and  central  bank  governors  of  the  G-7  made  clear 
yesterday  that,  in  response  to  the  recent  strains  on  global  financial  markets,  they  would 
remain in close contact and cooperate as appropriate, ready to take action to ensure stability 
and liquidity in financial markets. 
Conduct of monetary policy 
II. 
Next, let me explain the Bank’s conduct of monetary policy. 
First,  the  Bank  has  been  pursuing  powerful  monetary  easing  through  comprehensive 
monetary  easing.  Under  the  comprehensive  monetary  easing  framework,  the  Bank 
encourages  a  decline  in  longer-term  market  interest  rates  and  a  reduction  in  various  risk 
premiums  through  the  Asset  Purchase  Program.  At  the  Monetary  Policy  Meeting  held  last 
week,  the  Bank,  with  a  view  to  responding  to  the  downside  risks  to  the  economy  that  I 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
described earlier, decided to increase the total size of the Program by about 10 trillion yen, to 
about 50 trillion yen. 
Second, the Bank has been making efforts to ensure financial market stability.  
Third, in order to meet the biggest challenge for Japan’s economy, which is the strengthening 
of  the  foundations  for  economic  growth,  the  Bank  has  been  providing  funds  to  private 
financial institutions that make lending and investment consistent with the policy goal. The 
funds are provided against collateral such as government securities, at a very low interest 
rate. With a view to making this framework more effective, in June 2011 the Bank decided to 
establish  a  500  billion  yen  new  line  of  credit,  through  which  it  extends  loans  to  financial 
institutions for their equity investments and the so-called asset-based lending (ABL). 
The  Bank  recognizes  that  Japan’s  economy  faces  the  critical  challenge  of  overcoming 
deflation and returning to a sustainable growth path with price stability. Based on such strong 
recognition,  the  Bank  will  continue  to  consistently  make  contributions  as  the  central  bank 
through the three-pronged approach that I have explained. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
