Durmuş Yilmaz: Managing liquidity in the Islamic financial services 
industry 
Speech by Mr Durmuş Yilmaz, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, at 
the conference on “Managing liquidity in the Islamic financial services industry”, organised by 
the Islamic Financial Services Board (IFSB), Istanbul, 6 April 2011. 
 Distinguished Participants, Esteemed Guests and Valued Members of the Press,  
Welcome to the Conference on Managing Liquidity in the Islamic Financial Services Industry 
organized by Islamic Financial Services Board (IFSB). As the Central Bank of Turkey, we are 
very pleased to host this special event. I would like to extend my appreciation to the IFSB for 
organizing this timely conference in this beautiful city. I believe that this conference will be a 
productive platform for fruitful discussions on Islamic liquidity management practices.  
In  this  opening  speech,  I  will  share  my  thoughts  regarding  managing  liquidity  in  Islamic 
finance and the challenges ahead.  
Distinguished Participants,  
As you all know, unconventional polices and extraordinary measures have been put in place 
by  central  banks  and  fiscal  authorities  during  and  after  the  financial  crisis.  As  liquidity 
concerns played a major role in the deepening of the crisis, intense discussions on a new 
structure  in  global  liquidity  management  have  dominated  the  global  arena.  In  this  context, 
liquidity  management  issues  in  the  Islamic  Financial  Services  deserve  a  special  attention. 
Successful  implementation  of  a  solid  liquidity  management  system  can  be  the  key  for 
sustaining the rapid growth of the industry.  
The basic principle of Islamic banking is the sharing of profit and loss and the prohibition of 
usury. Simply put, interest is prohibited, but profit sharing is not.  
The distinctive elements of Islamic finance could be listed as:  
 
 
 
 
Although their interest-free business model makes participation banks more stable compared 
to  conventional  banks  by  protecting  them  from  interest  rate  risk,  it  actually  makes  their 
liquidity risk management more difficult. Liquidity risk is directly related to the ability of a bank 
to  maintain  sufficient  funds  to  meet  its  commitments,  which  may,  in  turn,  be  related  to  its 
ability to attract deposits or sell its assets. As institutions engaged in many kinds of banking 
activities, Islamic banks also have to meet their liquidity needs and obligations to ensure the 
smooth  running  of  their  business.  However,  the  very  nature  of  these  banks  with  their 
objective of avoiding interest in any form makes it difficult and costly for them to meet their 
liquidity needs due to conventional mechanisms of liquidity management.  
As a new and improving banking model, Islamic banking has some shortages in comparison 
with  their  conventional  counterparts.  In  the  conventional  banking  system  with  a  well-
developed  interbank  money  market,  a  variety  of  instruments  are  available  for  the  banks. 
Access to interbank money markets for short-term borrowings gives considerable flexibility to 
banks  to  adjust  their  short-term  cash  flows.  Existence  of  secondary  markets  for  financial 
instruments is also an important source of liquidity. However, this conventional mechanism of 
liquidity  management  including  interbank  market,  secondary  market  financial  instruments 
Its ethical element (the prohibition of usury and exploitation of the borrower),  
The preference for trading in real assets (rather than synthetic products),  
Partnership between the investor and investee,  
and its governance structure (requiring a Shariah council).  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
and facilities from the central bank as the lender of last resort are all based on interest and 
therefore, not acceptable for Islamic financial institutions.  
In addition to the challenges regarding the liquidity management, there are also supervisory 
and regulatory issues to be considered. In order to resolve the differences in country level 
regulations  regarding  appropriate  Shari’ah-compliant  instruments,  working  on  globally 
accepted  liquidity  management  regulations  and  infrastructure  could  be  a  viable  option. 
Establishment  of  a  carefully  designed  and  structured  Global  Shariah  Supervisory  Board 
could be a step in the right direction.  
In  this  context,  we  also  appreciate  the  excellent  and  productive  work  of  Bank  Negara 
Malaysia, the Gulf central banks and other parties. As a major effort, the International Islamic 
Liquidity Management Corporation (IILM) has been established to assist institutions offering 
Islamic financial services in addressing their liquidity management issues in an efficient and 
effective  manner.  This  institution  addresses  one  of  the  fundamental  problems  of  Islamic 
financial institutions: the provision of adequate liquidity in times of stress. Once there is an 
international lender-of-last-resort facility (to complement and not to replace existing national 
facilities),  the  provision  of  Islamic  financial  services  will  be  carried  out  with  an  increased 
confidence.  
The IILM is expected to issue high quality, liquid, tradable and low risk Shari’ah-compliant 
financial instruments at both the national level and across borders to enhance the soundness 
and stability of the Islamic financial markets. The instruments of the IILM will be utilized in 
liquidity  management  as  eligible  collateral  for  interbank  transactions  and  central  bank 
financing,  or  through  trading  of  IILM  instruments  (either  within  the  same  country  or  cross-
border)  in  the  secondary  market.  As  the  IILM  is  intended  to  facilitate  cross-border  liquidity 
management,  its  instruments  shall  be  denominated  in  major  reserve  currencies.  This  is  to 
ensure  access  to  a  large  pool  of  global  investors  and  broaden  the  range  of  its  holders, 
thereby enhancing the prospects for active secondary market.  
There is not an available mechanism through which the Central Bank of Turkey can provide 
liquidity to the interest-free banking sector, or the so-called participation banks. However, the 
Central  Bank  of  Turkey  has  become  a  founding  member  of  the  IILM  and  contributed 
10 million USD to its equity.  
As  additional  efforts  by  the  institutions  in  Turkey  to  facilitate  participation  banks’  liquidity 
management, the Undersecretariat of Treasury has started the issuance of Revenue Indexed 
Bonds,  which  are  purchased  by  the  participation  banks.  As  it  is  known,  another  kind  of 
interest-free security, which could be useful for participation banks especially in their liquidity 
management,  is  a  specially  designed  financial  certificate,  called  “Sukuk”.  There  is  a 
regulation  of  the  Capital  Markets  Board  of  Turkey  dated  1  April  2010  that  permits  the 
issuance of rent certificate, which are very similar to asset-backed securities.  
We  believe  that  such  interest-free  securities,  which  could  also  be  traded  in  secondary 
markets,  is  very  beneficial  for  the  participation  banks  in  their  liquidity  management 
operations.  
Distinguished Participants,  
The vital issue of liquidity management has the potential to reshape the future trends in the 
monetary  policy  framework.  The  path  to  resolution  involves  not  only  revisiting  economic 
policies, but also economic and institutional infrastructure that surrounds them. In this sense, 
the  Islamic  finance  has  a  good  way  to  go  in  order  to  maintain  well-structured  liquidity 
management system. I hope that this conference will lead to new ideas that help authorities 
in their efforts to design a solid Islamic liquidity management structure.  
Thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
