Christian Noyer: There will be no break-up of the euro area – interview in 
Sud Ouest 
Interview  with  Mr  Christian  Noyer,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France  and  Chairman  of  the 
Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  in  Sud  Ouest,  Bordeaux, 
conducted by Mr Bernard Broustet on 17 January 2011. 
 Sud Ouest: How is our economy faring? 
Christian  Noyer:  The  economy  is  picking  up.  The  third  quarter  of  2010  was  slightly 
disappointing,  but  the  fourth  was  better,  with  estimated  growth  of  0.6%.  This  trend  is 
expected  to  continue  in  early  2011,  even  though  a  number  of  factors  call  for  caution:  the 
automobile sector could slow down due to the phasing out of the scrappage scheme, and the 
fiscal  retrenchment  measures  implemented  in  some  European  countries  may  weigh  on 
demand. But, all in all, growth is there. 
Sud Ouest: Will household consumption, which is the main driver of growth in France, 
be impacted by higher inflation? 
Christian Noyer: The surge in inflation that we are now observing at the start of year can be 
ascribed to higher energy and commodity prices. Current price levels appear particularly high 
when  compared  to  the  exceptionally  low  levels  seen  at  end-2009.  This  difference  will  no 
doubt become less marked in the coming months. Given the unemployment rate and the still 
low capacity utilisation rate, I think that it is unlikely that the rise in commodity prices could 
result  in  second  round  effects  in  our  economy.  Nonetheless,  higher  prices  are  temporarily 
weighing on household purchasing power and we must remain vigilant. 
Sud Ouest: Might the speculative attacks on the some countries’ sovereign debt and 
concerns over the euro’s future dampen consumption and investment? 
Christian Noyer: No, there are no grounds for concern. Europe has shown over the past few 
months that it is capable of rallying together and providing effective and innovative solutions 
for countries that fall prey to speculative forces. 
Sud Ouest: But it is evident that this is not enough to deter investors from attacking 
the sovereign debts of some countries… 
Christian Noyer: At present, these attacks are centred on the countries of Southern Europe. 
Markets tend to tar with the same brush all the countries perceived as the most fragile in the 
euro area, whereas their situations differ considerably. The sovereign debt dynamics of some 
non-European G7 countries are more worrying that those of many euro area countries. 
Sud Ouest: Aren’t speculators betting on a break-up of the euro area? 
Christian  Noyer:  By  definition,  this  scenario  is  totally  ruled  out:  no  country  is  willing  to 
consider this option since it would have an astronomic cost for all euro area countries, the 
strong and the weak alike. 
Sud Ouest: Won’t the fiscal austerity measures imposed on euro area countries that 
have benefited from EU-IMF loans have exorbitant social costs? 
Christian Noyer: They may be hard to bear. But it would be unrealistic to think that growth 
and purchasing power can be lastingly sustained if public deficits continue to rise. 
Sud Ouest: France has taken over the presidency of the G-20 group of leading nations. 
And, on this occasion, Nicolas Sarkozy would like to pave the way towards a reform of 
the international monetary system that would reduce the dollar's role. Do you see this 
as a possibility? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Christian Noyer: The aim is not to reduce the role of the dollar. Even though it has already 
partially lost its sole reserve currency status, the dollar will continue to play a major role in 
trade. France is approaching this presidency with an open mind, but there is no doubt that 
the international monetary system is no longer suited to today's world. Designed in the 1940s 
and reformed in the 1970s, this system bears the hallmark of an era when international trade 
played a much smaller role, and when emerging countries such as China, India and Brazil 
were much less significant players in the global economy. This new configuration must be 
taken into account. Today, we must hold discussions and debates, measure the magnitude 
of capital flows that could have very destabilising effects on some countries and strive in a 
united manner to correct the major imbalances that are dampening world growth. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
