Xolile P Guma: South Africa’s Financial Stability Review – key issues in 
March 2011 
Introductory  remarks  by  Dr  Xolile  P  Guma,  Senior  Deputy  Governor  of  the  South  African 
Reserve Bank, at the launch of the March 2011 Financial Stability Review, Pretoria, 20 April 
2011. 
 Members of the press, other guests and colleagues 
On behalf of the South African Reserve Bank, I would like to welcome you to the release of 
the  March  2011  edition  of  the  Financial  Stability  Review;  the  fifteenth  publication  in  this 
series. 
The  Bank  knows  that  it  is  not  the  sole  custodian  of  financial-system  stability.  Financial 
stability is a responsibility that it shares with other role-players and it is well placed to take a 
leading role. To pursue the maintenance of financially stable conditions and contain systemic 
risk, the Bank continually assesses the stability and efficiency of the key components of the 
financial  system  and  formulates  and  reviews  policies  for  intervention  and  crisis  resolution. 
The assessment largely takes the form of the Financial Stability Review. 
I  turn  now  to  the  Financial  Stability  Review  and  highlight  some  of  the  key  issues  that  the 
March  2011  edition  addresses.  First,  the  Review  indicates  that  during  the  second  half  of 
2010  global  macrofinancial  conditions  improved  broadly,  although  pockets  of  vulnerability 
and risk remain and significant policy challenges still need to be addressed. Global economic 
activity moderated somewhat as the brisk recovery phase following the global financial crisis 
turned into a slower and, hopefully, more sustainable recovery. The multi-speed nature of the 
recovery  continues  with  subdued  economic  growth  and  high  unemployment  in  advanced 
economies,  and  buoyant  economic  activity  and  rising  inflationary  pressures  in  many 
emerging market economies. 
The  financial  risks  in  advanced  economies  that  might  impact  on  the  stability  of  the  South 
African financial system, and which are discussed comprehensively in the Financial Stability 
Review, are 
 
 
 
vulnerabilities in the euro area; 
banking-sector vulnerabilities; 
negative  sentiment  and  declining  prices  in  real-estate  markets  in  a  number  of 
advanced economies; and 
a  broadening  of  the  concept  of  global  imbalances  as  trade,  fiscal  and  investment 
imbalances have increased. 
 Emerging  market  economies  as  a  group  remained  important  drivers  of  global  economic 
growth in the second half of 2010 with countries in developing Asia recording the most rapid 
growth  among  all  of  these  countries.  Emerging  market  economies  are,  however,  also 
exposed to lingering downside risks in the form of rising inflationary pressures, the possibility 
of  sudden  reversals  of  capital  inflows  and  sharp  increases  in  the  level  and  volatility  of 
commodity prices. In many sub-Saharan African countries economic growth has returned to 
pre-crisis  levels,  but  growth  prospects  will  depend  on  a  sustainable  recovery  in  the  global 
economy.  Recent  political  instability  in  the  Middle  East  and  North  Africa  region,  and  the 
resulting rise in oil prices, coupled with rising food prices, pose significant challenges to the 
economic outlook in the sub-Saharan Africa region. 
Various  groupings  of  financial  authorities  and  international  standard  setters,  including  the 
Group  of  Twenty  Forum,  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  and  the  Financial 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Stability  Board  are  actively  contributing  to  initiatives  to  create  a  stronger  international 
regulatory  framework.  At  the  same  time,  countries  have  responded  by  reforming  national 
regulatory  systems.  The  roles  and  responsibilities  of  central  banks  in  regulating  and 
supervising financial systems have been extended in some jurisdictions. Principles are being 
developed  to  deal  with  the  “too-big-to-fail”  moral  hazard  problems  and  to  increase  the 
capacity  to  absorb  losses  of  systemically  important  financial  institutions.  In  addition, 
regulatory  gaps  are  increasingly  being  closed  in  various  jurisdictions  by  extending  the 
regulatory perimeter to include hedge funds, private equity funds and rating agencies, and 
more transparency and accountability in the derivatives market are envisaged. It is trusted 
that these initiatives will contribute to a more stable global financial system. 
In South Africa, despite positive signs of economic recovery, high levels of unemployment 
continued to place a damper on activity in the domestic financial system. Nevertheless, the 
banking and insurance sectors maintained high-quality capital and liquidity buffers well above 
the minimum prudential requirements, and remained profitable. Gross loans and advances 
increased in December 2010 compared to a year ago, albeit at a moderate pace. The rising 
trend in the growth rate of impaired advances seems to have peaked and indications are that 
it may start to decline in the near future. 
The high levels of capital inflows that featured in many emerging economies in 2010 and that 
created  significant  policy  challenges  for  South  Africa,  reversed  somewhat  in  the  fourth 
quarter of 2010. This trend continued into 2011 as non-residents became net sellers of local 
currency bonds and equities. The way forward will depend largely on the future recovery of 
the global economy and the unfolding events in Europe. Recent tensions in the Middle East 
and North Africa countries, the substantial impact on oil prices, and developments in Japan, 
together  with  increased  prospects  of  further  monetary  policy  tightening  in  advanced 
economies, will be developments of which to take note. 
Although household debt to disposable income remained at elevated levels and the profile of 
credit-active  consumers  worsened  somewhat  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  2010,  the  improved 
outlook for economic growth in 2011 could boost the confidence level of consumers in South 
Africa. In the corporate sector, the increase in profitability, as reflected by the gross operating 
surplus,  and  the  increase  in  the  annual  growth  rate  of  credit  extended  to  the  sector,  are 
possible indications of a recovery in business confidence. In the property market, property 
price  indicators  have  been  declining  over  the  past  year,  despite  lower  interest  rates  and 
rising  real  income.  Job  losses,  which  negatively  affect  consumers’  ability  to  take  up  new 
credit,  might  have  had  an  impact  on  prospective  homeowners’  ability  to  purchase  a 
residence.  
Recent  developments  enhancing  the  robustness  of  the  financial  regulatory  environment  in 
South Africa include reviewing the prudential framework for foreign investment by private and 
public  pension  funds,  reviewing  the  framework  for  cross-border  direct  investment  in  South 
Africa,  the  release  of  the  final  draft  of  amendments  to  regulation 28  of  the  Pension  Funds 
Act,  and  reviewing  the Securities  Services  Act as  part  of  a  process  to consolidate several 
financial services acts. 
I  have  briefly  highlighted  the  key  issues  raised  in  the  Financial  Stability  Review.  More 
detailed analyses are available in the publication itself, and will be highlighted by the authors’ 
presentations.  I  trust  that  you  will  find  these  interesting,  stimulating  and  relevant  to  the 
current environment and invite you to provide comment as part of the important process of 
ongoing debate on financial stability. 
Thank you 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
