Barbro  Wickman-Parak:  Many  dimensions  to  well-balanced  monetary 
policy 
Speech  by  Ms  Barbro  Wickman-Parak,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at 
Swedbank, Stockholm, 26 January 2011. 
 Today,  I  will  give  an  account  of  my  stance  at  the  latest  monetary  policy  meeting  in 
December. This will be a rather brief account, however, because I also want to find time to 
take up several important but difficult-to-assess factors in the recent monetary policy debate. 
For example, I would like to discuss different measures of monetary policy expectations and 
the risks that the development of household indebtedness and housing prices may entail in 
the long term. I will also say a few words about the concept of well-balanced monetary policy, 
and then conclude with some reflections on monetary policy decision-making.  
What  I  wish  to  illustrate  is  that  no  matter  how  well-prepared  the  material  we  base  our 
decisions on, we are nevertheless confronted with important deliberations that are difficult to 
assess  and  which  we  must  take  a  stand  on.  All  aspects  must  be  discussed  from  several 
different perspectives. I believe that this kind of all-round discussion leads to better monetary 
policy decisions. And it is only natural that this can mean we do not always agree on the repo 
rate decisions. Monetary policy is not an automatic reading exercise; our assessments are 
necessary parts of the decision-making process.  
Strong growth creates a need to gradually raise the repo rate 
Most analysts agree that the Swedish economy is growing strongly and at a surprising rate. 
Production volumes, for example, are now largely back to pre-crisis levels. This is roughly 
one year earlier than we predicted in autumn 2009. 
All  of  the  members  of  the  Riksbank’s  Executive  Board  make  the  same  assessment  of  the 
strength of the economic upturn in Sweden. However, opinions differ when it comes to the 
repo  rate.  In  December,  the  assessment  of  the  majority  of  the  members  of  the  Executive 
Board, including myself, was that there was a need to increase the repo rate to 1.25 per cent, 
and then to continue gradually raising the rate more or less in line with the repo-rate path 
published in October.  
My monetary policy stance at the latest meeting was based on my desire to take into account 
the potential imbalances that could be discerned towards the end of, or beyond, the forecast 
horizon. In the current situation, a well-balanced monetary policy entails weighing short-term 
imbalances  against  long-term  imbalances.  One  the  one  hand,  we  could  see  in  December 
that resource utilisation was still low and we assessed that underlying inflationary pressures 
would  remain  low  for  a  further  period,  which  justified  continuing  with  an  expansionary 
monetary policy. On the other hand, there were already signs that the opposite picture, with 
strained  resource  utilization  and  a  risk  of  excessively  high  inflation,  would  emerge  in  the 
slightly  longer  term.  This  situation  called  for  a normalisation  of  monetary  policy.  I  believed 
that  the  repo-rate  path  presented  by  the  Riksbank  in  December  reflected  such  a  balance 
rather well, which is why I chose to support it. It reduces the risk that we will be forced to 
make more drastic increases in the future. The repo rate path also means that households 
can gradually adjust to higher interest rates and it is reasonable that their borrowing will slow 
down. This should in turn reduce the risk of having to make painful corrections of financial 
imbalances further ahead.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
It is difficult to identify monetary policy expectations 
The fact that monetary policy expectations, as reflected in forward rates in the slightly longer 
term, are lower than the Riksbank’s repo rate path has been discussed a great deal outside 
the Riksbank, but also within the Executive Board. During the drafting of the latest repo-rate 
decision  and  at  the  monetary  policy  meeting,  we  discussed  pricing  on  the  market  and  the 
problems it entails for drawing far-reaching conclusions about monetary policy expectations 
for Sweden and abroad.  
Put simply, a market rate can be seen as the sum of expectations of the future interest rate 
plus a risk premium.1 It is easiest to understand the role of market expectations if you take 
the so-called expectations hypothesis as your starting point; this says that a long interest rate 
is equal to the expected average short interest rate level during the period of maturity. The 
Riksbank  can  therefore  by  means  of  its  monetary  policy  decisions,  and  in  particular  by 
publishing its repo-rate forecasts, influence market expectations and thus the interest rates 
offered to households and companies.  
In practice, however, the expectations hypothesis hardly holds water and this is due to the 
risk premiums that reflect all the other factors also affecting interest rates. There is a notion 
that  average  risk  premiums  should  be  positive  and  increase  as  the  period  of  maturity 
increases  as  investors  want  to  be  compensated  for  the  price  risk  associated  with  holding 
long-term bonds.2 In addition, risk premiums are affected by supply and demand on the bond 
market, which can have either positive or negative effects on risk premiums. In actual fact it 
is probable that risk premiums can be positive as well as negative and that they fluctuate a 
great deal over time in a rather irregular way. This makes it difficult to adjust market rates in 
a way that excludes the effects of risk premiums and reveals expectations concerning future 
interest  rates.  Normally,  it  may  be  possible  to  come  reasonably  close  using  standard 
adjustments, but when, as in recent years, the markets are highly uneasy and uncertain at 
the  same  time  as  the  central  banks  are  actively  influencing  price  formation  using  various 
unconventional measures, it is very difficult to reliably estimate expectations. 
But is it important for us to be able to distinguish monetary policy expectations from the other 
factors  that  affect  the  interest  rate?  The  answer  is  that  it  matters  when  evaluating  the 
alternative  courses  of  action  for  monetary  policy.  I  and  my  colleagues  on  the  Executive 
Board  have,  for  example,  discussed  what  would  happen  if  the  market’s  policy  rate 
expectations were rapidly brought into line with the Riksbank’s repo-rate path. If we assume 
an immediate alignment, then the upward effect on long-term rates would depend on what 
measure  one  sees  as  being  representative  of  the  monetary  policy  expectations.  In  the 
Prospera surveys in November, expectations were higher than those reflected in the forward 
rates  but  lower  than  the  Riksbank’s  repo-rate  path.  If  we  assume  that  it  is  the  Prospera 
surveys  that  best  reflect  expectations,  rather  than  the  forward  rate  curve,  the  upward 
adjustment will thus be smaller, as will the effect on the long-term rates.  
Market expectations are thus clearly an item on the list of those factors that are difficult to 
assess and that monetary policy decision-makers must take a stance on. The assessment of 
market  expectations  was  especially  critical  earlier  in  the  autumn  when  the  variation  in 
different  measures  of  market  expectations  was  particularly  great,  with  forward  rates  at  a 
much  lower  level  than  other  measures.  When  various  indicators  of  monetary  policy 
                                                 
1  The  somewhat  simplified  term  risk  premium  is  used  throughout  instead  of  the  more  correct  term  maturity 
premium. 
2  The price gain made on a long-term bond if the short-term interest rate is lower than expected is, on the other 
hand,  somewhat  higher  than  the  price  loss  that  will  be  made  if  the  short-term  interest  rate  is  to  a 
corresponding  extent  higher  than  expected.  This  gives  rise  to  something  called  convexity  effects,  which 
indicate negative risk premiums. These convexity effects are normally limited, but will grow if uncertainty about 
the future increases. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
expectations provide such a mixed picture, it is not surprising that different analysts reach 
different conclusions.  
Figure 1 
Two-year forward interest rates and money market agents’ repo-rate  
expectations two years ahead according to Prospera  
Per cent 
Sources: Reuters EcoWin and TNS SIFO Prospera. 
Note. Forward rates have been adjusted for risk premiums and describe the expected overnight rate. 
Risk premiums include both credit risk and maturity premiums. The dates of Prospera’s surveys refer 
to the dates the surveys were carried out.  
 So, how should you go about assessing market expectations in such a situation? This is a 
difficult  question  and  I  have  no  complete  answer.  However,  this  should  not  stop  us  from 
trying to determine how to evaluate different measures of monetary policy expectations. Let 
me  begin  with  forward  rates.  Forward  rates  have  many  merits.  They  reflect  market 
expectations for many different time horizons and they can be observed continuously, which 
makes it possible to analyse how market expectations are affected by different events. Often, 
but  not  always,  they  also  provide  a  fairly  reasonable  picture  of  market  expectations. 
However,  the  problem  with  forward  rates,  as  we  have  already  seen,  is  that  they  are  also 
affected  by  a  range  of  other  factors  and  this  sometimes  means  that  they  provide  a 
misleading  picture  of  market  expectations.  The  performance  of  Swedish  two-year  forward 
rates since the early summer illustrates this, see Figure 1.  
We can see that two-year forward rates, adjusted for a risk premium3, at the beginning of the 
summer were at approximately the same level as the money market agents’ two-year repo-
rate  expectations  according  to  Prospera.  Subsequently,  however,  there  was  a  clear 
downward  trend  and  from  early  June  to  mid-September  the  two-year  forward  rate  fell  by 
approximately 80 basis points. In my opinion, a substantial downward shift in monetary policy 
                                                 
3  The forward rates in Figure 1 are adjusted using a constant risk premium of approximately 25 basis points, 
which is a rough estimate of the average size of the risk premium for this time to maturity. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
expectations in this period was hardly realistic given the fact that the Swedish economy was, 
at  the  same  time,  surprisingly  strong.  Later,  during  the  autumn,  two-year  forward  rates 
increased and were roughly half a percentage point below the expectations in the surveys.  
An interpretation that I find more likely is that the development of forward rates in Figure 1 
mainly reflects an international fall in risk premiums and, as so often in the past, it seems to 
be the development of interest rates in the United States that sets the tone. On this occasion 
it was probably the Federal Reserve’s plans to purchase additional long-term assets that had 
a downward effect on risk premiums.4 My assessment is that risk premiums have been very 
low, and perhaps even negative, a view that is supported by a number of studies.5 
I  think  the  recent  surveys  have  probably  provided  a  fairer  indicator  of  monetary  policy 
expectations than forward rates. This is not to say that conducting a survey of expectations is 
the  ideal  way  to  measure  monetary  policy  expectations.6  However,  one  advantage  of 
surveys  is  that  they  constitute  more  direct  and  more  robust  measures  of  monetary  policy 
expectations, as they are not affected by risk premiums, which have been more difficult to 
assess than usual recently. According to the Prospera survey, monetary policy expectations 
two  years  ahead  were  also  below  our  repo-rate  path  during  the  autumn.  However,  the 
Prospera survey published after our repo rate decision shows that expectations of the repo-
rate are now almost entirely in line with the Riksbank’s repo-rate path.  
However,  we  should  not  limit  ourselves  to  forward  rates  and  surveys  when  trying  to 
determine monetary policy expectations. Interest rate forecasts made by other analysts and 
model forecasts that reflect historical links are also useful indicators of expectations. These 
indicators  also  support  the  assessment  that  forward  rates  have  been  lower  than  other 
measures of market expectations over the last six months.  
I  have  wanted  to  discuss  this  theme  partly  because  it  is  current  and  relevant,  and  partly 
because  it  illustrates  how  we  must  adopt  a  stance  in  the  course  of  our  decision-making 
process even if clear and unequivocal background information is not available. As I see it, it 
is important to try to come to a decision on the basis of many different sources of information. 
Forward rates are an important source but we need to better understand risk premiums and 
their variations over time.  
Monetary policy expectations and the krona exchange rate 
The debate on the role of market expectations in monetary policy has also to a great extent 
concerned how they affect the Swedish krona. Economic theory says that when there is an 
upward shift in monetary policy expectations in Sweden then, all else being equal, the krona 
should  strengthen  at  the  same  time  as  Swedish  interest  rates  increase  relative  to  interest 
rates  abroad.  We  should,  in  other  words,  see  a  positive  link  between  the  strength  of  the 
krona and the difference between Swedish and foreign interest rates.  
                                                 
4  There are studies showing that asset purchases by the Federal Reserve during the financial crisis put strong 
down-ward  pressure  on  risk  premiums,  see  J.  Gagnon,  M.  Raskin,  J.  Remache  and  B.  Sack,  2010.  Staff 
Report No. 441, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, “Large-Scale Asset Purchases by the Federal Reserve: 
Did They Work?” 
5  For example, risk premiums were negative in the autumn according to the method described in D.H Kim and 
J.  Wright  (2005),  ”An  arbitage-free  three-factor  term  structure  model  and  the  recent  behaviour  of  long-term 
and  distant  horizon  forward  rates,  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve,  Finance  and  Discussion 
Series, 2005–33. 
6  For a more detailed analysis of forward rates and surveys as measures of monetary policy expectations see 
Alsterlind, J. and Dillen, H, “Monetary policy expectations and forward premia”, Sveriges Riksbank Economic 
Review 2005:2. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Figure 2 
SEK/EUR exchange rate and 5-year interest rate  
differential in relation to Germany  
Per cent 
Source: Reuters EcoWin. 
 So,  what  form  does  the  link  between  the  krona  exchange  rate  and  the  interest  rate 
differential take in the data? Figure 2 shows the value of the krona relative to the euro and 
the difference between Swedish and German five-year government bond rates since 1995. If 
we only look at the past few years, the theory seems to apply rather well as the krona has 
strengthened  against  the  krona  at  the  same  time  as  the  difference  between  Swedish  and 
German  long-term  rates  has  grown.  On  the  other  hand,  the  figure  shows  that  there  have 
been several episodes with both increasing and decreasing interest rate differentials in which 
the krona has not at all reacted in accordance with this simple view.  
If we now concentrate solely on the most recent period, one may wonder why interest rate 
differentials appear to capture shifts in relative market expectations, while during the same 
period  of  time  it  was  difficult,  as  previously  pointed  out,  to  directly  interpret  interest  rate 
fluctuations  in  terms  of  market  expectations?  My  interpretation  is  that  both  Swedish  and 
German interest rates have been low because risk premiums have been under pressure and 
difficult  to  determine,  which  has  made  it  difficult  to  interpret  the  interest  rate  levels  as  an 
expression of monetary policy expectations. However, the risk premiums largely cancel each 
other out when interest rate differentials are studied and they therefore manage to indicate 
shifts in the relative monetary policy expectations rather well. This interpretation thus means 
that monetary policy expectations in Sweden have shifted upwards relative to those in the 
euro  area,  which  in  turn  reflects  the  fact  that  the  Swedish  economy  has  developed 
surprisingly strongly in comparison with the economy in the euro area.  
The link between the krona exchange rate and interest rate differentials should therefore not 
be over-interpreted. For example, the krona has strengthened more than motivated by the 
increased  in  the  interest  rate  differential.  This  could  be  because  the  krona  weakened 
dramatically  during  the  crisis  and  had  not  still  not  fully  recovered  at  the  beginning  of  the 
summer.  Since  then,  the  krona  has  continued  to  appreciate  as  the  willingness  to invest  in 
krona assets has increased.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
It is important to note that the analysis above refers to the development of the krona in the 
past and says little about how the krona will develop in the future. Interest rate differentials 
primarily influence the krona exchange rate when they change because the market agents 
revise  their  view  of  interest  rates  in  Sweden  or  abroad.  It  is  one  thing  to  note  that  such 
revisions have affected the historical development of the krona. It is quite another to forecast 
such  revisions  and  to  allow  this  to  influence  the  forecast  for  the  krona.  In  my  view,  the 
assessment  of  interest  rates  abroad  on  which  the  analysis  in  the  latest  Monetary  Policy 
Update was based was largely in line with market expectations. This means that my view of 
the  future  development  of  the  krona  in  December  was  based  on  the  assumption  that  the 
market would not significantly revise its view of interest rates abroad.  
Housing prices and household indebtedness may lead to financial imbalances 
Another important but difficult-to-assess factor that we as monetary policy decision-makers 
have to take a stance on is the rapid increase in housing prices and household indebtedness 
that we have observed for some time now. I am among those who are somewhat concerned 
about this situation. The debate on the role of housing prices in monetary policy has been 
slightly unclear. As I see it, it is not a question of steering housing prices or other asset prices 
towards a set target. Nor is it a question of trying to puncture a price bubble by means of 
drastic  repo  rate  increases.  Nor  do  we  assess  that  financial  stability  is  threatened  by  the 
build-up of household debt. This can be seen, for example, if you read our latest Financial 
Stability Report, which was published in December. 
The  question  is  that  quite  a  number  of  Swedish  households  risk  building  up  financial 
imbalances,  which,  when  corrected,  may  have  painful  consequences  for  individual 
households  and  the  Swedish  economy,  which  in  turn  may  make  it  difficult  to  attain  the 
monetary policy targets. 
Swedish housing prices have increased by an average of eight per cent per year over the 
last 15 years, see Figure 3. This can be largely explained by fundamental factors7 , but there 
is a risk that it relates to over-valuation. This is difficult stuff, and I feel humble in the face of 
the  difficulties  in  making  this  type  of  assessment.  Parallel  to  this  rise  in  prices,  household 
indebtedness has increased and is now at an all-time high. There may therefore be a risk 
that many households have taken loans on the basis of a far too optimistic assessment of the 
repo rate in the future.  
                                                 
7  See the article “Housing prices in Sweden” in the Monetary Policy Report published in October 2009. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Figure 3 
House prices and households’ financial liabilities  
Annual percentage change 
Source: Statistics Sweden. 
 I have said on several occasions that monetary policy must manage risks and that we must 
also raise our sights beyond the forecast horizon to assess the consequences that today’s 
monetary policy decision may have. 
It is not the case that I personally believe that the risks associated with household borrowing 
constitute  an  immediate  threat  to  the  economy,  or  that  housing  prices  are  dramatically 
overvalued and that a rapid downward adjustment is on the cards. But I do believe that there 
are risks further ahead if household borrowing continues to increase at a much higher rate 
than incomes for an additional extended period. And if monetary policy continues to be too 
expansionary  for  too  long,  these  risks  will  increase  even  further.  I  also  believe  that  this  is 
roughly the view of the majority of the members of the Executive Board. 
It  is  not  possible  to  exactly  determine  at  what  level  household  borrowing  will  reach  the 
“critical  point”.  As  long  as  economic  activity  is  favourable,  the  labour  market  is  improving, 
incomes  and  wealth  are  increasing  and  the  households  have  confidence  in  the  future 
everything is hunky-dory. But in a different economic situation with increasing uncertainty on 
the  labour  market  the  behaviour  of  the  households  may  change;  they  may  begin  to 
consolidate  their  balance  sheets.  This  would  reduce  their  consumption  and  reinforce  the 
downward  tendencies  in  the  economy.  The  higher  the  debt  burden  the  greater  the  risk  of 
significant consequences. If housing prices fall in such a situation, households’ assets will be 
undermined while their debts will still remain. Households would therefore want to amortise 
rather than borrow, which would dampen demand. The unwillingness to take new loans could 
persist  to  a  great  degree  even  if  the  Riksbank  tried  to  counteract  the  fall  in  demand  by 
conducting  an  expansionary  monetary  policy.  In  this  case  we  would  experience  what  is 
sometimes  referred  to  as  a  balance  sheet  recession8.  It  could  also  mean  that  the  banks 
                                                 
8  The term balance sheet recession was introduced to explain the problems that Japan struggled with during the 
1990s, see Koo, R.C., Balance Sheet Recessions: Japans Struggle with Uncharted Economics and its Global 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
would  find  it  very  difficult  to  fund  their  operations.  Once  such  a  process  has  begun  it  is 
difficult to stop it by easing monetary policy; this is shown not least by the example of the 
United States. Once you are in it then it is too late! It should therefore be avoided.  
It is perhaps unlikely that the scenario I have presented here will actually occur, but if it does 
the consequences will be extremely costly. 
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  my  assessment  is  that  our  forecasts  for  inflation  and  resource 
utilization, that is highly “conventional” monetary policy arguments, are already arguments for 
an increased repo rate. It is also reasonable to assume that gradual repo rate increases will 
help to dampen household borrowing and this will reduce the risk of having to make painful 
corrections of financial imbalances further ahead. I think this is a good thing, even though in 
my  view  repo-rate  increases  are  already  justified  for  other  reasons  and  this  is  not  a 
necessary justification.  
Unfortunately,  our  models  are  not  very  good  at  determining  the  significance  of  financial 
imbalances for fluctuations in economic activity. A lot of exciting development work remains 
to  be  done  in  this  respect.  The  fact  that  the  effects  of  financial  imbalances  on  the  macro 
economy may lie beyond the forecast horizons that we work with in monetary policy must not 
mean  that  we  ignore  them.  We  must  monitor  the  development  of  housing  prices  and 
household indebtedness carefully and to the best of our ability analyse any indications that 
threatening financial imbalances are building up and take these into account in our monetary 
policy considerations.  
What characterises a well-balanced monetary policy? 
Ultimately, a monetary policymaker is forced to take a stance on different courses of action 
for monetary policy on the basis of difficult assessments of economic trends. Are there then 
any guidelines that can be of help? And what is it really that characterises a well-balanced 
monetary  policy?  It  is  normally  a  question  of  finding  an  appropriate  balance  between 
stabilising inflation around the inflation target and stabilising the real economy. It is difficult to 
translate what can be considered a well-balanced monetary policy in any given situation into 
precise  and  practical  monetary  policy.  The  intention  behind  stabilising  inflation  is  relatively 
easy  to  understand,  but  the  significance  of  stabilising  the real  economy  is  not  so  clear.  In 
practice it is often interpreted as stabilising resource utilisation around its normal level. I think 
that  is  a  fairly  reasonable  interpretation  and  it  is  not  easy  to  argue  for  anything  entirely 
different.  
At the Riksbank we approach the concept of a well-balanced monetary policy by forecasting 
such  things  as  inflation  and  resource  utilisation  for  different  monetary  policy  actions.  After 
this we try to select the course of action associated with the best possible forecast outcome; 
in other words the forecasts where inflation is best stabilised around the inflation target and 
resource utilisation around a normal level. This may sound simple and obvious but in practice 
is not that easy.  
In  the  first  place,  the  best  measure  of  resource  utilisation  is  far  from  obvious  and  we 
Executive Board members may have slightly different opinions on this.9 We are constantly 
working to improve the measures of resource utilisation and this is important. But as I see it 
                                                                                                                                                      
Implications, Wiley 2003. Lars Nyberg discusses the balance sheet channel in more detail in the speech “After 
the crisis – new thoughts on monetary policy” published on 6 December 2010. 
9  For a more detailed discussion of how resource utilisation can be measured, see the speech “Potential GDP, 
resource utilisation and monetary policy” by Svante Öberg held on 7 October 2010, and the article “The driving 
force  behind  trends  in  the  economy  can  be  analysed  using  a  production  function”  in  the  Monetary  Policy 
Report of October 2010. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
we cannot give any single measure prime position as representing the one and only truth. It 
is wisest to continue using several different measurements as a guide.  
In the second place, situations sometimes arise where there is a conflict between stabilising 
inflation  and  normalising  resource  utilisation  and  different  decision-makers  may  make 
different  assessments.  However,  this  has  not  been  a  problem  recently  as  both  underlying 
inflationary pressures and resource utilisation have been low.  
In the third place, in my opinion economic trends beyond forecast horizons should be taken 
into account, though it is not possible to make thorough forecasts covering long periods. Let 
me briefly explain my argument. 
As I mentioned earlier, the assessments in the latest Monetary Policy Update can be said to 
paint a long-term picture in which resource utilisation is coming under pressure and there is a 
risk of high inflation, in other words the reverse of the current macro picture. However, up to 
a  point  I  was  willing  to  accept  these  long-term  tendencies,  since  I  must  take  into 
consideration  the  need  to  use  expansive  monetary  policy  to  offset  the  low  inflation  and 
relatively  weak  resource  utilisation  expected  for  the  time  being.  In  the  current  situation 
monetary policy considerations mean supporting continued recovery while preventing long-
term  overheating  tendencies  from  becoming  too  strong.  If  we  entirely  disregard  the 
imbalances  in  the  longer  run,  there  is  a  risk  that  we  will  later  be  forced  to  reconsider  our 
monetary  policy,  which  in  the  prevailing  situation  could  entail  drastic  repo-rate  increases 
further ahead. 
Some concluding reflections on monetary policy decision-making 
Each monetary policy decision is preceded by a long drafting period that follows a well-set 
schedule. Models give consistency and stability to forecasting but the element of judgement 
is unavoidable. The economists on the staff contribute their judgements; we on the Executive 
Board contribute ours. In actual fact the decision-making process is quite complicated and 
everyone involved must be prepared to compromise.10 As you all know, no two economists 
think  exactly  alike.  So  the  final  product  that  emerges,  that  is  the  forecasts  for  the  real 
economy, inflation and the associated repo rate path, cannot match everyone’s assessment 
100%. You might be doubtful about some parts, or want to present a more nuanced view of 
some aspects of the analysis and so on. But in the end each and every one of us on the 
Executive  Board  must  commit  and  make  a  decision.  If  your  own  assessment  differs  very 
much in some important respect from the assessment in the decision-making material you 
can enter a reservation.  
In this speech I have highlighted some factors that are difficult to assess, such as monetary 
policy expectations and the view of a well-balanced monetary policy, which have figured in 
recent  monetary  policy  discussions.  The  conclusion  is  that  however  good  the  decision-
making  material  is,  it  can  never  be  comprehensive  or  unequivocally  interpreted.  I  have 
mentioned  previously  that  developments  in  the  financial  sector  and  the  effects  on  the  real 
economy  cannot  be  easily  captured.  I  have  also,  in  connection  with  the  discussion  on 
household  borrowing,  mentioned  how  we  can  assess  effects  in  the  longer  term.  Since  we 
cannot  make  meaningful  forecasts  for  an  unlimited  period  of  time,  we  must  restrict  the 
forecast  horizon.  But  this  is  not  set  in  stone  in  the  sense  that  it  should  prevent  us  from 
considering problems that may arise in a few years’ time.  
Moreover, there are risk scenarios that are difficult to capture in terms of forecasts. Even if 
your  ambition  is  to  base  the  monetary  policy  decision  on  what  are  termed  unbiased 
forecasts,  in  which  upside  and  downside  risks  are  balanced,  you  should  be  aware  of  the 
                                                 
10  For a description of how  decision-making data for monetary policy decisions are  prepared, see the speech 
“The monetary policy decision-making process” by Irma Rosenberg held on 13 June 2008. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
difficulties  involved.  In  practice,  however,  such  forecasts  have  difficulties  in  capturing 
everything  perfectly.  In  practice,  you  may  wish  to  guard  against  some  outcomes  that  you 
consider  to  be  particularly  harmful  and  that  should  therefore  be  avoided  at  all  costs.  For 
example,  an  unfavourable  scenario  in  which  a  burst  asset  bubble  leads  to  a  deflationary 
situation that is hard to overcome will be assigned greater importance than a high-inflation 
scenario. Experience from Japan in the 1990s illustrates this. Assessments of this type must 
be taken into account in the monetary policy decision.  
The moral of the story is that monetary policy cannot be reduced to a mechanical reading 
exercise. However well-prepared the material on which monetary policy decisions are based, 
there will always be complex and important aspects that policymakers must take a stance on. 
It is important that these aspects are discussed from several different perspectives. This is 
one  reason  why  we  have  an  Executive  Board  made  up  of  economists  with  different 
backgrounds and expertise. It is beneficial and important for us to conduct a wide-ranging 
debate on monetary policy at the Riksbank and not just externally. I believe that it leads to 
better monetary policy decisions. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
