Duvvuri Subbarao: The IMF and latest economic developments in the 
Indian Subcontinent 
Statement by Mr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, as leader of the 
Indian  Delegation 
International  Monetary  and  Financial  Committee  (IMFC), 
International Monetary Fund, Washington DC, 16 April 2011. 
Statement  on  behalf  of  Mr  Pranab  Mukherjee,  Finance  Minister  of  India  and  Member  IMFC  representing  the 
Constituency consisting of Bangladesh, Bhutan, India and Sri Lanka. 
the 
to 
 Mr. Chairman, 
1.  
There have been significant developments in the global economy since we met in 
the  fall  of  2010.  The  IMF  too  has  moved  on  several  fronts  under  its  mandate  which  has 
strengthened its position in a changing world. There are several key questions confronting us 
today: Is the recovery assured in the face of still turbulent financial conditions and upward 
pressures on commodity prices? How resilient is the international monetary system to future 
shocks? Will the ongoing reforms empower the IMF and make it more effective in anchoring 
global monetary and financial stability?  
The global economy and financial markets 
2.  
A variety of risks, including political and social turmoil in parts of the world combined 
with natural disasters, have made the global recovery vulnerable. Financial conditions have 
turned volatile and uncertain, with risks of adverse feedback loops into the global economy. 
Recurring  sovereign  debt  fears  have  affected  market  confidence.  In  the  crisis-affected 
economies,  financial  systems  are  yet  to  be  fully  repaired.  While  the  sense  of  crisis  has 
waned, new challenges have surfaced.  
3.  
The global recovery may be jeopardized by a sustained rise in oil prices. Apart from 
the  inflationary  pressures  confronting  particularly  the  emerging  and  developing  countries, 
there  is  the  danger  of  a  slowdown  in  the  global  economy  unless  oil  prices  moderate  from 
current  levels.  Furthermore,  since  the  summer  of  2010,  several  natural  calamities  and 
consequent food supply constraints have collided with the post-crisis resurgence of demand. 
World  food  prices  have  surged  considerably  due  to  concerns  about  low  future  supplies 
because  of  bad  weather  and  low  inventories,  raising  concerns  about  food  security. 
Speculative movements in commodity derivative markets are also causing volatility in prices. 
Global challenges and the role of the IMF 
4.  
The overarching problems confronting the international monetary system stem from 
weaknesses  in  detecting  and  communicating  early  warnings  of  impending  crises  and 
management  of  global  liquidity.  This  calls  for  fundamental  reform  of  the  international 
monetary system. It is also important to evolve a mechanism to address the challenges of 
stemming volatile capital flows and to strengthen multilateral adjustment mechanisms to deal 
with imbalances and sources of instability. 
IMF surveillance  
5.  
The  surveillance  function  is  critical  to  the  IMF’s  overall  mandate.  By  focusing  on 
vulnerabilities  and  detecting  the  onset  of  crises,  it  assumes  a  vital,  preemptive  role  in 
preserving  global  and  national  stability.  Effective  implementation  at  both  multilateral  and 
bilateral levels is the key to providing surveillance with incisiveness and traction. We believe 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
that  this  can  be  achieved  within  the  ambit  of  the  existing  provisions  of  the  Articles  of 
Agreement. If, however, there is a consensus that there are gaps in the legal mandate that 
hinder  effective  implementation,  an  amendment  to  the  Articles  is  the  optimal  approach. 
Ensuring  consistency  and  comprehensiveness  across  the  various  levels  of  surveillance  is 
important,  as  is  the  candour  and  evenhandedness  of  the  IMF  –  that  systemic  risks  are 
pointed  out  irrespective  of  where  they  may  originate.  We  need  to  stress  that  multilateral 
surveillance  by  the  IMF  should  not  lose  sight  of  sovereign  debt  concerns  of  developed 
countries  by  adopting  tighter  screening  criteria  for  developing  countries  that  have  actually 
seen fiscal improvement relative to the advanced economies. 
Managing capital flows  
As  the  recovery  of  emerging  and  developing  countries  has  gained  momentum, 
6.  
capital  flows  have  surged  back  to  near  pre-crisis  levels.  These  flows  have  exhibited 
considerable volatility, imparting macroeconomic instability in the event of sudden stops and 
reversals, eroding competitiveness and complicating the setting of macroeconomic policies. 
Policy  prescriptions  with  respect  to  capital  flows  should  be  even-handed.  So  far  as  lumpy 
and  volatile  flows  are  a  spillover  from  policy  choices  of  advanced  economies,  managing 
capital flows should not be treated as an exclusive problem of emerging market economies 
and the burden of adjustment should be shared. How this burden will be shared raises both 
intellectual and practical challenges.  
7.  
As regards multilateral strategies to managing capital flows, it is difficult to follow an 
approach  that  seeks  to  establish,  standardize,  prioritize  or  restrict  the  range  of  policy 
responses  of  the  member  countries  that  are  facing  large  surges  in  volatile  capital  inflows. 
Based on their experience, policymakers must have flexibility and discretion to adopt policies 
that  they  consider  appropriate  to  mitigate  risks  through  macroeconomic,  prudential  and 
capital  account  management  policies  without  a  sense  of  stigma  attached  to  particular 
instruments. Given the state of knowledge on these issues, it will be premature to consider 
amending  the  Articles  to  either  give  the  IMF  jurisdiction  over  capital  account  policies  of 
member countries or to impose an obligation on members on this count. 
The IMF’s resources 
8.  
We welcome the ratification of the April 2008 quota reforms. The next step in this 
process  should  be  the  speedy  ratification  and  implementation  of  the  2010  quota  and 
governance reforms. A comprehensive review of the quota formula should be completed by 
January 2013 to set the stage for the 15th General Review of Quotas by January 2014 which 
will  carry  forward  the  modest  progress  made  so  far  in  enhancing  the  representation  of 
dynamic emerging and developing countries in the IMF to meaningfully reflect the changing 
global economic realities. We must make our best efforts to complete the 2010 reform before 
the 2012 Annual Meetings. 
9.  
We  welcome  the  expanded  and  amended  New  Arrangements  to  Borrow  (NAB) 
which became effective from March 11, 2011. The activation of the NAB should be regarded 
as  a  bridge  between  current  expectations  and  the  availability  of  higher  quota  resources 
under  the  14th  General  Review.  Subsequently,  NAB  should  be  scaled  down  so  as  to 
preserve  the  quota-based  character  of  the  IMF  as  an  institution  that  is  accountable  to  its 
membership.  
Reserve adequacy 
10.  
In our view, the insurance that reserves provide against sudden stops in growth due 
to capital drying up far outweigh the opportunity costs. Reserve accumulation by countries is 
an important part of the global safety net, particularly when the reserve accumulation takes 
place in the context of current account deficits. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Any assessment of reserve adequacy needs to be informed by underlying country-
11.  
specific  conditions,  rigorous  analytical  and  empirical  foundations  and  judgments  based  on 
practical experience. There should be due consideration to macroeconomic and prudential 
frameworks  and  policies,  as  well  as  alternative  forms  of  contingent  financing,  country 
insurance, and overall assets and liabilities that may not be easily captured in any formula for 
reserve  adequacy.  For  emerging  economies  facing  volatile  surges  of  capital  flows, 
consideration needs to go even beyond to a broad range of scenarios relating to potential 
drains on reserves, including a sudden stop of new financing, withdrawal of foreign portfolio 
investments,  capital  flight,  and  current  account  vulnerabilities.  Further,  the  question  of 
reserve  adequacy  cannot  be  resolved  without  addressing  the  broader  issue  of  scarcity  of 
safe reserve assets.  
Currency internationalization and the role of the SDR 
12.  
In  principle,  it  is  desirable  to  develop  a  multi-currency  system  with  several 
currencies  operating  as  broad  substitutes  and  reflecting  changing  economic  weights  and 
global  realities.  In  this  context,  we  note  that  there  have  been  recent  efforts  by  the  IMF  to 
promote the use of SDR as a potential reserve asset for the evolving international monetary 
system. For the SDR to take on this significant role, several prerequisites have to be in place. 
The SDR has to be accepted as a liability of the IMF, has to be automatically acceptable as a 
medium of payment in cross-border transactions, be freely tradable and its price has to be 
determined by forces of demand and supply. As the SDR does not satisfy these conditions, it 
cannot be a reserve currency in the international payment system. In principle, one needs a 
global central bank to issue SDRs which take the characteristic of unit of global payment and 
settlement  system.  Thus,  we  see  the  move  to  multicurrency  world  as  a  gradual  evolution. 
Another dimension of this issue is to change the composition of the SDR basket. Going by 
the recent initiatives, if at all there is a move to alter the composition of the SDR basket, we 
could  consider  including  currencies  of  those  dynamically  emerging  market  economies  that 
satisfy  the  existing  inclusion  criteria:  in  particular,  a  fully  convertible  capital  account  and  a 
market determined exchange rate. 
Developments in the constituency 
13.  
I now turn to developments in my constituency. 
Bangladesh 
14.  
Bangladesh  is  steadily  moving  towards  a  higher  growth  trajectory  that  is  largely 
inclusive,  environment-friendly  and  well  supported  by  continued  high  performance  in  the 
agriculture  sector.  External  sector  viability  has  benefited  from  export  growth  estimated  at 
30 percent and the strength of inward remittances. Concerted efforts to address the shortage 
of  power  have  improved  the  investment  climate.  However,  inflation  remains  high,  with 
pressures  from  global  prices  of  fuel,  food  and  fertilizers  interacting  with  enhanced  internal 
demand.  Revenue  mobilization  has  risen  by  28  percent  till  February  2011  strengthening 
fiscal  sustainability.  The  budget  deficit  is  expected  to  remain  below  4.5  percent  of  GDP 
thereby aiding overall macroeconomic stability. As import demand picks up on the back of 
domestic demand, some strains could build on the balance of payments, although the level 
of  foreign  exchange  reserves  would  remain  sufficient  at  the  level  of  over  four  months  of 
imports.  Accordingly,  monetary  policy  is  being  tightened  with  the  exchange  rate  being 
allowed  to  depreciate  and  cushion  the  balance  of  payments.  Over  the  medium  term,  the 
progressive  removal  of  constraints  on  investment,  domestic  and  foreign,  particularly  in  the 
context of private and public sector partnerships in large infrastructure projects would enable 
Bangladesh to embark upon double digit growth with stability.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Bhutan 
15.  
Bhutan’s  growth  momentum  has  been  strong,  underpinned  by  the  prudent  and 
skillful macroeconomic management. Real GDP growth accelerated to nearly 8 per cent in 
2009–10,  helped  by  robust  growth  in  hydropower,  construction  and  services  sectors. 
However, inflation reached 9 per cent at end-2010. The current account deficit has increased 
to about 13 per cent of GDP due to strong imports in the hydropower sector, but the overall 
balance  of  payments  has  remained  in  surplus  due  to  sizeable  grants  and  loans 
disbursements.  The  reserve  position  has  improved  and  remains  comfortable.  Credit  has 
grown rapidly, mainly driven by housing and construction sectors as well as personal loans. 
Bhutan’s  financial  sector  coped  with  the  global  financial  crisis  well  and  financial  stability 
indicators are comfortable. 
India 
16.  
The  Indian  economy,  on  the  back  of  improved  agricultural  output,  strong  private 
consumption,  robust  investment,  and  a  pick-up  in  exports,  has  rebounded  strongly  with  a 
GDP growth of 8.6 per cent in 2010–11. However, inflation has emerged as a major concern. 
Headline  inflation  has  remained  firm  despite  some  moderation  in  food  inflation  as 
generalised price pressures have emerged with rising inputs costs feeding into manufactured 
products  inflation.  The  hardening  of  global  commodity  prices,  particularly  oil  prices  have 
further accelerated inflation. A sequenced withdrawal of monetary accommodation is helping 
to  contain  inflationary  pressures  and  anchor  inflationary  expectations  which  remained  at 
elevated  levels  for  a  large  part  of  2010–11,  largely  driven  by  fuel  and  food  prices.  The 
calibrated  fiscal  consolidation  that  resumed  in  2010–11  is  being  carried  forward  into  the 
medium-term,  thus  alleviating  some  pressures  on  aggregate  demand.  The  budgetary 
initiatives in 2011–12 indicate further progress towards it, while giving due importance to the 
objectives  of  removing  structural  constraints,  promoting  infrastructure  investment  and 
strengthening  the  earlier  policy  initiatives  towards  inclusive  growth.  However,  a  potential 
increase  in  the  subsidies  on  petroleum  products  and  fertilizers  as  a  result  of  high  crude 
prices could put pressure on expenditure. Managing capital flows so as to dampen potential 
threats  to  macroeconomic  and  financial  stability  is  a  continuous  challenge.  Despite  some 
tightness in money markets, financial conditions have been orderly with a pick-up in credit 
growth,  vibrant  equity  market  activity  and  a  stable  foreign  exchange  market. Medium-term 
prospects  continue  to  be  positive.  Downside  risks  emanate  mainly  from  continuing 
uncertainty  about  energy  and  commodity  prices  which  may  vitiate  the  investment  climate, 
posing  a  threat  to  the  current  growth  trajectory.  Notwithstanding  the  risks,  the  Indian 
economy is poised to sustain the growth momentum.  
Sri Lanka 
17.  
Emerging out of three decades of civil conflict and the downturn brought on by the 
global  crisis,  the  economy  of  Sri  Lanka  has  resumed  strong  growth  in  an  environment  of 
macroeconomic and financial stability. Real GDP grew by 8.0 per cent in 2010, establishing a 
higher  growth  path  underpinned  by  the  peaceful  domestic  environment,  improved  investor 
confidence,  strengthening  macroeconomic  fundamentals  and  the  gradual  recovery  of  the 
global economy. Ebbing inflation and a benign inflation outlook has enabled the continuation 
of an accommodative monetary policy stance with moderation of interest rates in all market 
segments  supporting  economic  activity.  The  recent  floods  have  caused  some  damage  to 
agricultural production which has spiked headline inflation in the past few months higher than 
expected earlier. However, core inflation declined and currently remains low at single digit 
level. An encouraging improvement in the overall fiscal situation was witnessed in 2010 with 
the  recovery  in  government  revenue  supported  by  the  expansion  of  economic  activity,  the 
containment  of  recurrent  expenditure,  as  well  as  the  addressing  of  certain  persistent 
structural  issues  in  the  tax  system.  The  budget  deficit  was  contained  within  the  target  of 
8.0 per cent of GDP in 2010, down from 9.9 per cent in 2009, and the commitment to fiscal 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
consolidation will ensure further reduction of the budget deficit to 6.8 per cent in 2011 and to 
below  5  per  cent  in  the  medium  term.  The  external  sector,  which  made  a  remarkable 
turnaround since the second quarter of 2009, has continued to improve. Both exports and 
imports  recovered  strongly,  while  increased  earnings  from  the  tourism  industry  and  higher 
inward  remittances  offset  the  widening  trade  deficit,  limiting  the  external  current  account 
deficit.  Increased  capital  and  financial  flows  resulted  in  the  balance  of  payments  (BOP) 
recording a surplus in 2010, strengthening external reserves of the country. Supported by the 
favourable macroeconomic environment and a sound regulatory and supervisory framework, 
the  financial  sector  improved  and  system  stability  strengthened  in  2010  as  reflected  in  all 
prudential indicators. Banks’ credit flows significantly recovered, profitability improved, capital 
adequacy  further  increased  above  the  threshold  and  the  ratio  of  non-performing  loans 
declined, while provisions for loan losses increased. Going forward, external shocks due to 
higher  food  and  energy  prices  in  the  global  market  pose  some  risks  to  the  balance  of 
payments and inflation outlook. 
Concluding remarks 
18.  
While the trough of the crisis definitely appears to be behind us and there are signs 
that  the  recovery  is  consolidating,  new  challenges  facing  the  global  economy  render  it 
vulnerable. We have to remain vigilant and be prepared to deal with all threats, old and new, 
as  we  repair  and  rebuild.  The  global  problems  we  are  facing  today  are  complex  and  not 
amenable to easy solutions. Many of them require significant and often painful adjustments 
at the national level, and in a world divided by nation-states, there is no natural constituency 
for  the  global  economy.  At  the  same  time,  the  global  crisis  has  shown  that  the  global 
economy  as  an  entity  is  more  important  than  ever.  Given  the  deepening  integration  of 
countries into the global economic and financial system, uncoordinated responses will lead to 
worse outcomes for everyone. We should cooperate not only to firmly exit from the crisis, but 
also to ensure that in resolving this crisis, we do not sow the seeds of the next one. The IMF 
has  to  continue  to  weave  together  the  fabric  of  international  cooperation.  This  is  in  the 
common interest of all. We must ensure that the IMF is adequately prepared for this role so 
that it remains relevant, legitimate and effective.  
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
