Shyamala Gopinath: Centrality of banks in the financial system 
Inaugural  address  by  Ms  Shyamala  Gopinath,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of 
India, at the 12th Fixed Income Money Market and Derivatives Association-Primary Dealers 
Association of India (FIMMDA-PDAI) Annual Conference, Udaipur, 8 January 2011. 
 1. 
I  am  delighted  to  be  present  here  amongst  you  all  on  the  occasion  of  the 
12th Annual  Conference  of  FIMMDA-PDAI.  These  conferences  have  over  the  years 
assumed importance in not just bringing the participants together to tally notes and network 
but to take a pause and reflect over the issues arising out of fast changing times. 
2. 
I  see  from  the  agenda  for  the  conference  that  the  focus  is on  the  emerging  post-
crisis  regulatory  landscape  for  the  financial  sector  –  Basel  III  framework  for  banks,  OTC 
derivative markets etc. There has been quite some progress internationally in repairing the 
financial  system  –  strengthening  the  regulation  of  institutions  –  banks/non-banks  –  and 
markets as well as the support framework. 
3. 
But increasingly, the central role of banks in the entire network enmeshed through 
the financial system is coming out much sharper. Even in market-based financial systems, 
which were supposed to contribute to disintermediation of the role of banks in a big way, the 
vital  support  functions  being  performed  by  banks  came  out  clearly  during  the  crisis.  The 
recent crisis was, as much as other things, about the centrality of banks as the supporting 
lifelines  of  financial  markets.  There  is  a  clear  recognition  of  the  inadequacies  of  the 
regulatory  approach  based  on  the  assumption  of  self-contained,  well  functioning  markets 
which ignored the risks these markets passed on to the banking system. 
4. 
There  is  a  rich  literature  on  comparative  benefits  of  bank-based  versus  market 
based  financial  systems.  The  bank-based  view  highlights  the  positive  role  of  banks  in 
leveraging informational advantage about the firms for capital allocation and ensuring better 
credit discipline. In contrast, the market-based view highlights the growth enhancing role of 
well-functioning markets in fostering greater innovation; enhancing greater market discipline 
and corporate governance. Market based systems were supposed to reduce the problem of 
moral hazard inherent in bank-based systems. However, it is increasingly being recognized 
that any system is essentially an interplay of dynamic interaction between banks and markets 
and right interpretation of this interplay would be critical for addressing systemic stability. 
5. 
In my address today I intend to focus on this intriguing interface between banks and 
financial markets which has undergone a fundamental shift in the recent times – banks have 
become  intricately  linked  to  financial  markets  and  hence  more  susceptible  to  strains  in 
financial markets; at the same time, functioning of markets has become intricately linked to 
banks which then emerge as the receptacle for most of risks within the financial markets. 
Banks getting linked to capital markets 
6. 
Banks’ increasing interdependence on the capital markets was largely driven by the 
gradual blurring of lines between commercial banking and investment banking in developed 
markets. Adoption of the universal banking model and the repeal of the Glass-Steagall Act in 
the US largely settled the debate at the time. The transition had a significant impact on the 
balance  sheet  profiles  of  banks  which  became  more  exposed  to  market  forces  and  the 
incentive frameworks clearly worked to favour this. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Assets 
7. 
Increased  recourse  to  “originate  and  distribute”  model  of  asset  creation  and 
increased reliance on wholesale, market funding of balance sheets were two most evident 
signs of this shifting paradigm and which also contributed significantly to the intensification of 
the global crisis. 
8. 
The “originate and distribute” model was at the heart of complex securitization and 
credit  derivative  structures  that  accentuated  the  crisis.  The  underlying  incentive  at  work 
behind the engineered supply of highly rated instruments was the regulatory framework for 
capital  adequacy.  The  instruments  of  financial  engineering  had  provided  a  simple 
mechanism to convert a portfolio of loans originated by the entity into tranched securities with 
differential  ratings.  There  seemed  to  be  an  insatiable  demand  for  highly  rated  instruments 
and  the  underlying  nature  and  risks  of  the  instruments  were  not  important  as  long  as  the 
rating  agencies  assigned  the  required  ratings.  The  ironical  feature  was  that  most  of  these 
structured  high-quality  securities  were  held  within  the  banking  system  itself  as  for  banks, 
investing  in  these  securities  was  much  more  optimal  from  the  capital  perspective  than 
holding on to the loans originated by them. It was a reverse maturity transformation in action 
on  the  asset  side  –  long  term  assets  getting  re-transformed  into  shorter  duration  market-
linked instruments. 
9. 
At a more fundamental level, the above trend was supported by the conception of 
treating financial risks as commoditised products which can be transferred and traded in the 
market. From this perspective, all that should matter is the ultimate risk exposure and not the 
nature of the underlying transaction. Originating loans was, thus, treated on par with taking 
on  credit  exposure  through  purchase  of  bonds  or  even  writing  of  credit  protection  through 
credit default swaps. The adverse incentives such an approach induced in banks’ behavior 
and its impact on the stability of the financial system are still to be fully appreciated in the 
regulatory frameworks. 
Liabilities 
10. 
On the liability side, a similar transformation was evident from reliance on low-cost, 
durable retail deposits to short term, wholesale, market linked funding. Financial institutions 
worldwide increasingly started relying on wholesale funding to supplement demand deposits 
as a source of funds, becoming, therefore, vulnerable to a sudden dry up of these sources of 
funds. The deep and liquid global inter-bank markets were supposed to have mitigated the 
requirement  and  need  for  costly  stored-liquidity.  More  than  that,  there  was  the  benefit  of 
leveraged liquidity – the repo markets provided a mechanism for banks to use/re-use liquid, 
high quality securities to raise requisite funding. 
11. 
Unregulated  repo  markets,  resembling  a  fractional  reserve  banking  model  with 
similar multiplier effect, emerged as one of the weakest points escalating the crisis. Banks’ 
were  relying  heavily  on  the  wholesale  market  funding  through  repo  markets.  During  the 
crisis, however, there were sharp contractions in available market liquidity, which have been 
explained based on the interaction between margin calls and market liquidity, the cyclicality 
of  leverage.  In  fact,  although  the  ongoing  crisis  was  initially  dubbed  the  “subprime  crisis” 
some authors have started to refer to it as the “liquidity crunch of 2007–2008” (Brunnermeier, 
2009). 
Another problem with the repo markets was that a substantial part of “good assets” 
12. 
of the banks got utilized as collateral for short term borrowings. This raises serious issues as 
far as the interest of depositors and other unsecured creditors are concerned – in times of 
crisis  the  available  assets  backing  them  would  be  greatly  reduced.  What  incentivized  this 
framework was a supposedly market-friendly provision in the US laws which gave the repo 
contracts an exemption from the bankruptcy proceedings. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Capital 
13. 
The above transformations on the asset and liability sides were extremely capital-
efficient. These made possible for banks to have a greater balance sheet size on a smaller 
capital base. More so, the very capital held by the banks became linked to market demands. 
Increasingly the Basle norms have permitted quasi-equity, subordinated debt instruments to 
be held and counted as capital for capital adequacy purposes. Such instruments, pre-crisis, 
constituted  almost  75  per  cent  of  the  total  capital  held  by  banks  in  developed  countries. 
These were essentially capital market instruments with some optionalities attached to them. 
Income composition 
14. 
The  overall  balance  sheet  transformation  was  clearly  evident  in  the  increased 
reliance on nontraditional business activities that generated fee income, trading revenue, and 
other types of noninterest income. A significant proportion of bank revenues came from such 
activities and there was a view that this diversification of income streams was healthier for 
bank profits. Consequently, there was conscious shift towards larger proprietary books and 
greater investment in “owning, investing in and sponsoring” hedge funds and private equity 
ventures. Banks were effectively working as leverage-providing conduits for hedge funds and 
like entities which ran huge positions across all markets. 
There  was  an  entire  set  of  market  microstructure  which  facilitated  the  above 
15. 
transition  –  the  rating  agencies,  accounting  standards,  legal  documentation  practices.  The 
role of rating agencies was particularly critical as they, blessed by the regulators, provided 
the  requisite  comfort  and  legitimacy  to  riskier  instruments  and  enabled  deployment  of  a 
substantial chunk of institutional funds into such securities. The accounting standards, while 
aiming at reflecting the “true and fair” picture of the balance sheets, made the balance sheets 
much more procyclical and market skewed. The legal documentation, particularly related to 
bilateral  contracts  on  the  OTC  markets,  by  reinforcing  the  collateralization  discipline,  also 
exposed  the  entities  to  contagion  effect  from  extraneous  developments.  Additional  margin 
calls and liquidation of securities kept as collaterals added to the negative feedback loop. 
16. 
The  end  result  of  the  banks’  increasing  reliance  on  capital  markets  and  capital 
market intermediaries was an explosion in the total size of financial markets. Based on the 
leverage  provided  by  bank  balance  sheets,  the  market  volumes  and  liquidity  increased 
tremendously. This trend also put the banks at the centre of the entire financial market. A 
slightest problem with these banks and the entire financial system could come unstuck – this 
is what precisely happened during the crisis. 
17. 
banks for a well-functioning capital market. 
The  next  section  deals  with  the  numerous  implicit  support  systems  provided  by 
Capital markets’ linkage with banks 
18. 
Market based financial systems were supposed to have reduced the dependence of 
the financial system on banks. However, with increased market-orientation of bank balance 
sheets,  banks  emerged  as  the  proverbial  guerilla  in  the  room.  Their  presence  was 
everywhere, implicit or explicit – as providers of liquidity and leverage, as market makers, as 
repositories of credit risk, as support for other market intermediaries – this was particularly 
true  of  non-equity  markets.  As  major  market  participants,  it  is  the  banks  which  create  and 
enhance market liquidity by virtue of their participation without which it would be difficult to 
envisage the success of markets. 
19. 
For  any  market  to  gather  huge  volumes  and  carry  out  its  function  of  enabling 
efficient price discovery, the critical factor is the presence of entities with deep pockets which 
can  act  as  market  makers  and  provide  necessary  funding  support  when  required.  Banks 
running  large  proprietary  books  with  the  backing  of  huge  balance  sheets  carry  out  this 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
function in the institutional markets. Banks remain the ultimate warehouses of liquidity and 
provide  easy  and  convenient  access  to  liquidity  in  times  of  need.  In  this  role  banks  also 
expose themselves to considerable liquidity risks in their roles as liquidity providers and as 
conduits for flow of funds in a market based system. The more developed the markets are, 
the  more  are  the  requirements  for  such  liquidity  providers.  Capital  markets  continue  to 
depend upon banks as providers of liquidity and the success of the market greatly depends 
upon the extent to which banks are able to fulfil such requirements. 
20. 
Efficient markets are based on the assumption that the participants can borrow and 
lend  unlimited  quantities  of  funds.  While  in  practice  that  is  not  completely  true,  banks  do 
provide  funds  to  various  market  participants  enabling  them  to  trade.  Such  a  facilitation  of 
leverage  helps  the  markets  in  achieving  their  optimal  efficiency.  However,  in  their  role  as 
providers  of  such  funds  to  entities  involved  in  leverage,  banks  expose  themselves  to 
significant credit risks, since any wrong decision by the leveraged participant results in a loss 
not only to him but also in potential loss to the lending bank. Banks’ lending activity and the 
concomitant credit risks are only increasing with the increase in the financial market activity, 
indicating  the  growing  reliance  of  markets  on  banks.  In  the  process  of  providing  leverage, 
banks  themselves  can  become  highly  leveraged  which  may  result  in  systemic  risk  for 
markets. 
21. 
The off-balance sheet support by banks to the SIVs emerged as one of the critical, 
unrecognised linkages which were responsible for the crisis. As it turned out, the SIVs were 
involved  in  proxy-maturity  transformation  on  behalf  of  banks.  They  were  investing  in  long-
term  asset  backed  securities  and  other  tranched  instruments  and  funding  themselves 
through  short  term  commercial  paper  market  with  banks  being  the  major  investors.  The 
implicit liquidity support provided to banks was nowhere recognized on the bank books and 
as the crisis unfolded, many such SIVs came under stress, it were the bank balance sheets 
which got directly impacted. 
It  is  now  very  evident  that  non-bank  market  participants  are  in  general  cautious 
22. 
about taking on credit risk. It is either the banks or some sovereign supported entities which, 
as credit support providers in the form of guarantees, letters of comfort etc. take on the credit 
risk. 
23. 
Even  the  CCPs,  which  guarantee  market  transactions  and  assume  counterparty 
risks through novation, ultimately depend on banks to for the settlement guarantee funds. In 
many cases, even the margins to be kept by the participants with the CCP are in the form of 
bank guarantees. Banks not only provide Line of Credit (LoC) and Securities Lines of Credit 
(SLoC) for the participants in the CCP mechanism but also expose themselves, as owners of 
CCPs,  to  residual  risks of  CCP  in  the  waterfall  structure  of  default  settlement  mechanism. 
Despite the advancements in market infrastructure leading to development of markets, the 
dependence of market on banks continue to exist. 
Many  of  the  above  issues  came  out  very  clearly  during  the  crisis  and  are  being 
What has happened post-crisis? 
24. 
sought to be addressed. 
25. 
There is now a generally accepted consensus on improving the quality of capital of 
banks  and  the  new  Basel  norms  prescribe  a  higher  portion  of  pure  equity.  There  are  also 
proposals for a new form of instruments – contingent capital – which would be nothing but a 
convertible  debt  security  that  would  automatically  convert  into  equity  as  the  institution’s 
financial  condition  weakened.  This  mandatory  conversion  feature  means  that  the  debt 
security would not default and thus bankruptcy would be avoided. In essence, a pre-planned 
contract  replaces  the  bankruptcy  process  and  gives  greater  certainty.  The  key  criticism 
against this proposal, apart from the interest among the investor community, is that it does 
not address the adverse incentive of risk taking on part of shareholders. There is also need 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
to  ensure  that  the  equity  holders  bear  the  loss  and  the  hierarchy  of  subordination  is 
maintained. 
26. 
The new Basel norms for trading book, finalised in July 2009, attempted to improve 
the  management  of  risks  in  bank  trading  books,  as  well  as  enhance  the  treatment  of  risk 
concentrations,  off-balance-sheet  exposures  and  securitisations.  Central  to  the  proposals 
was the introduction of an Incremental Capital Charge (IRC) for trading book risks, which will 
supplement  the  existing  value-at-risk  modelling  framework  and  introduction  of  a  stressed 
VAR  requirement,  using  historical  data  from  a  one-year  period  of  significant  losses. 
Securitisation exposures have been made subject to a much stringent banking book charge 
based  on  credit  ratings,  and  the  specific  risk  capital  changes  for  securitisation  and 
re-securitisation have been enhanced. 
In the US, the comprehensive Dodd-Frank Act has been enacted which addresses, 
27. 
among others, the issue of separation of proprietary trading from banks – the Volcker rule. 
The Act contains a diluted version of the original Volcker proposal, which will restrict banks’ 
proprietary  trading1,  impose  additional  capital  requirements  on  shadow  banks  engaged  in 
proprietary trading, and restrict banks’ ownership stakes in hedge funds and private equity 
funds. Banks are allowed to own or sponsor hedge funds and private equity funds and even 
to  invest  in  them  as  long  as  their  holdings  didn’t  account  for  more  than  3  percent  of  the 
bank’s capital or 3 percent of the fund’s capital. 
28. 
There have been concerted attempts at addressing the adverse incentives available 
to senior, secured creditors of banks. It is being accepted, much to the chargin of markets, 
that  investments  in  market-based  instruments  such  as  bonds  do  not  imply  complete 
protection in default cases. “Bail-in” provisions, which would require the senior bondholders 
to  write-down  the  value  of  their  investments  albeit  after  the  equity  holders  have  taken  the 
losses, are being discussed as viable options. 
29. 
In  regard  to  addressing  concentration  of  risk  in  the  CCPs,  work  presently  being 
undertaken  by  FSB  and  BCBS  include  proposals  for  capital  requirement  on  banks  for 
contribution to default guarantee funds maintained by CCPs based on the amount of initial 
margin posted with the clearing house and its own financial resources. It is being argued that 
capital  benefit  to  market  participants  should  be  provided  only  for  the  transactions  settled 
through those CCPs which are fully compliant with the principles enunciated by CPSS and 
IOSCO. The exposure to non-compliant CCPs would attract higher capital charge. 
Indian context 
30. 
In  India,  the  bank  balance  sheets  are  relatively  less  aligned  with  capital  market  – 
both on the asset side as well as liability side. Capital in the form of subordinated debt and 
other non-equity instruments constitutes only around 38 per cent of total capital. Issuance of 
such instruments is restricted by the limit on non-equity elements of regulatory capital. The 
investments in such instruments by other banks and FIs is constrained by aggregate limit on 
cross holdings between banks and FIs (10% of investing bank’s/FI’s total capital). This limit is 
aimed  at  reducing  the  interconnectedness  among  the  financial  institutions.  It  also  ensures 
that  the  capital  in  the  banking  system  comes  primarily  from  outside  the  banking  system. 
Even though preference shares have been added to the list of eligible capital instruments, 
there have hardly been any issuances in the market. 
                                                 
1   Proprietary trading is broadly defined as engaging as a principal for the trading account of the banking entity 
or nonbank financial company supervised by the Board in any transaction to purchase or sell, or otherwise 
acquire or dispose of, any security, any derivative, any contract of sale of a commodity for future delivery, any 
option  on  any  such  security,  derivative,  or  contract,  or  any  other  security  or  financial  instrument  that  the 
appropriate Federal banking agencies, the [SEC], and the [CFTC] may…determine 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
(ii) 
On  the  asset  side,  fundamental  guiding  principles,  as  far  as  banks’  investment 
There  are  prudential  limits  on  banks’  reliance  on  short-term  funding  markets.  The 
31. 
overnight unsecured market for funds is restricted only to banks and primary dealers (PD) 
and for these too there are limits on both lending as well as borrowing. Inter-bank liabilities in 
all forms for any bank have to be within 200 percent of its networth. There are collateralised 
segments  such  as  market  repo  and  CBLO  but  access  to  these  is  contingent  on  the 
availability of securities, which is floored by the SLR requirements, currently 24 percent. 
32. 
activities is concerned, have been:  
(i) 
Nature of different credit exposures is different and all exposures cannot be treated 
on par. The regulatory prescriptions have not recognised the concept of “risk as a 
fungible  commodity”  and  the  fundamental  distinction  between  banks  taking  credit 
exposure through giving loans and investing in bonds has not been lost. There are 
stipulations  capping  banks’  investments  in  corporate  bonds,  particularly  unrated 
bonds which are nothing but proxy-loans. Recently, a limited relaxation from these 
norms has been permitted in the case of bonds issued by companies engaged in 
infrastructure development.  
Underlying intent and spirit of a particular transaction is more relevant than the form. 
Illustratively,  the  legal  framework  in  India  recognises  repo  transactions  as  lending 
and borrowing and RBI has issued accounting guidelines to reflect the substance of 
these transactions.  
Contamination risks arising from off-balance sheet activities need to be contained. 
The off-balance sheet activities of Indian banks consist mainly of sponsoring of MFs 
and  venture  capital  funds.  There  are  reputational  concerns  regarding  banks’ 
excessive involvement in mutual and venture capital funds. Such concerns mainly 
emanate  from  the  use  of  bank’s  name  by  all  the  entities  sponsored  by  it.  Such 
association  extends  the  perimeter  of  the  parent  bank’s  support  to  the  sponsored 
entities much beyond the obligations defined by the share holding or voting power. 
While such concerns can be mitigated to some extent by holding additional capital 
using  some  sort  of  proxy,  the  effective  containment  of  such  risks  rests  only  in 
limiting such activities. 
33. 
I must however admit that it is impossible to have a straightjacket framework and in 
the recent past, there have been many instances which have tested the scope and nature of 
banks’ involvement with market-based systems. 
• 
(iii) 
Corporate  bond  market:  The  interplay  between  bank  based  and  market  based 
models has been very prominent in the case of corporate finance. Traditionally, the 
financing  needs  of  the  corporates  were  met  by  banks  in  the  form  of  loans,  cash 
credits etc. With the development of financial markets, it was generally believed that 
migrating to market based model and the resultant disintermediation would enable 
higher  allocative  efficiency  of  capital  and  enlarge  the  base  of  lenders.  But 
international  experience  largely  shows  that  while  all  most  all  developed  markets 
have corporate bond markets, relatively few are regarded as large or active. In India 
too,  inspite  of  persistent  policy  focus,  this  is  one  area  where  the  outcomes  have 
been less than satisfactory. The intractable issues pertain to the structural elements 
relating to the lack of appetite for credit risk among non-bank institutional investors. 
The  issuances  have  therefore  been  largely  restricted  to  financial  institutions  and 
public sector entities. 
A case has been sought to be built in favour of allowing banks to guarantee bonds. 
While this may increase attractiveness in the short run but the underlying objective 
of de-risking the bank balance sheets will not be met. Further, this would hamper 
with  the  process  of  true  price  discovery  for  credit  risk  in  the  market  through 
corporate bonds. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches
 6 
        the 
The  critical  need  for  an  explicit  bank  support  even  a  partial  credit  enhancement 
came  out  during  our  interactions  with  market  participants  on  issues  plaguing 
corporate bond market – surprisingly nobody referred to CDS as being an answer.  
Securitisation:  Much  of  the  adverse  incentives  related  to  “originate  and  distribute” 
model  were  addressed  in  the  2006  guidelines  which  primarily  reinforced  the  true 
sale  characteristic  of 
transaction  and  disallowed  booking  of  profit  on 
securitisation upfront. However, much of the securitisation market has since moved 
to  single  loan  securitisations.  While  there  is  nothing  inherently  wrong  in  such 
transactions, these securitisations may not be sustainable as these are confined to 
particular  class  of  loans  and  dependant  on  a  particular  class  of  investors,  and 
hence,  do  not  benefit  from  any  diversification  of  risk.  Another  trend  is  the  direct 
assignment  of  loans  to  the  investors  without  any  securitisation.  Such  transactions 
are similar to securitisation in substance and there should not be any difference in 
the application of the prudential norms. 
RBI is in the process of finalisation of the guidelines which, apart from aligning the 
prudential  norms  for  securitisation  and  direct  sales,  also  include  guidance  on 
minimum  retention  requirement  (MRR)  and  minimum  holding  period  (MHP).  A 
critical issue in this context relates to the impact on shot-tenor loans – some market 
participants feel that the proposal to have MHP of 9 months would practically take 
the  short  term  loans  out  of  the  purview  of  securitisation.  However,  encouraging 
securitisation of short-term loans may only accentuate the adverse incentives that 
are sought to be addressed.  
Issuance of Irrevocable Payment Commitments by banks to stock exchanges: The 
issue  of  banks  undertaking  custodian  services  issuing  Irrevocable  Payment 
Commitment to exchanges on behalf of Mutual Funds/FIIs has been engaging our 
attention  for  some  time.  These  IPCs  were  in  the  nature  of  non-fund  based  credit 
facility  but  were  not  being  included  for  computation  of  Capital  Market  Exposure 
(CME).  
After giving multiple extensions to banks in this regard, it was recently decided that 
the potential risk on T+1 would be reckoned at 50% of the settlement amount. Also 
this amount would be reckoned as CME at the end of T+1 if margin payment / early 
pay  in  does  not  come  in.  IPC  would  also  be  reckoned  for  the  purpose  of  capital 
adequacy.  
Issue of structured forex derivatives by banks: In view of the huge losses booked by 
many  corporate  on  structured  forex  derivatives  sold  by  banks,  it  was  decided  to 
revisit the regulatory stipulations in this regard. Initially it was proposed that no cost-
reduction  structures  would  be  permitted.  However,  we  received  a 
lot  of 
representations  from  the  corporate  sector  about  the  usefulness  of  some  of  these 
structures  in  risk  management.  After  detailed,  protracted  consultations  with  all 
stakeholders,  it  has  recently  been  decided  to  permit  certain  un-leveraged,  non-
exotic structures only for large corporates with minimum net worth of Rs 100 crores 
and  following  accounting  and  disclosure  norms  as  stipulated  under  AS  30  and 
AS 32.  
Introduction  of  CDS:  The  overarching  argument  for  introduction  of  CDS  is  that  it 
enables stripping and trading of credit risk and it eventually helps in diversifying the 
credit risk inherent in banks’ balance sheets. While ideally it would make sense to 
start with an enlarged pool of protection sellers, the regulators concerned may not 
be  comfortable  in  allowing  their  regulated  entities  to  write credit  protection.  So,  to 
begin  with,  the  only  natural  protection  sellers  and  effective  market  makers  may 
again be banks and NBFCs. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
 In spite of the basic economic rationale behind CDS, it has been subject to many 
criticisms  internationally,  in  particular  the  adversarial  incentives  it  provides  to  the 
protection  sellers  vis-a-vis  the  underlying  entity  on  whom  the  CDS  is  written.  Our 
endeavour is to facilitate introduction of CDS while trying to address the concerns. 
Only covered CDS buying is envisaged and loans have been kept out of the eligible 
underlying  obligations.  Restructuring  is  not  envisaged  as  a  recognised  “credit 
event”. It would be critical for the real sector to see the value in this product while 
being  cognizant  of  the  dynamics  of  the  product  and  its  potential  impact  on  the 
corporates whose bonds would be the underlying credit.  
Conclusion 
34. 
It  is  clearly  evident  that  the  migration  to  a  market  based  model,  from  the 
conventional  bank  based  model  where  banks  used  to  play  a  very  critical  role  in 
intermediation, has not diminished the importance of banks in the financial system. In fact, 
with higher growth in the financial markets, the responsibilities cast on the banks are on the 
increase. Therefore, it would be a fallacy to assume that with the migration to a market based 
model, banks’ role in the financial system and therefore, the need for regulatory focus is less 
than critical. Rather, I would say, the regulatory challenges have grown manifold due to this 
new evolving relation between banks and financial markets. 
35. 
It  will  be  imperative  for  any  regulatory  framework  to  recognise  this  close  inter-
linkage  and  frame  the  regulations  accordingly.  The  critical  focus  area,  as  part  of  the 
emerging macro-prudential and systemic risk frameworks, would have to be identification of 
where the risks lie. 
36. 
addressed in the Indian context going forward: 
a. 
Let  me  conclude  by  underlining  some  of  the  broad  issues  that  would  need  to  be 
How  to  strengthen  capital  requirements  for  market  risk  when  most  banks  are  on 
Standardised Approach? The Basel III regulatory initiatives under Market Risk are 
largely focussed on the Internal Model based approach. Banks in India are currently 
on the standardised approach and in any case, most of the banks would continue to 
remain under the standardised approach. There is, therefore, a need to address the 
upgradation of the standardised approaches also. We are considering calibrating the 
capital  requirement  under  standardised  approaches  with  the  available  data  for 
market risk. 
How  to  strike  a  balance  in  regard  to  fee-based  revenue  streams  of  banks?  While 
non-interest income does offer diversification benefits, it may not necessarily be less 
risky  than  conventional  loans.  Apart  from  the  financial  risks,  there  are  significant 
reputational  risks,  particularly  when  banks  engage  in  distribution  of  third  party 
products. There cannot be rule-based prescriptions in this regard. But it would be 
imperative for the bank Boards to  closely understand the underlying risks, assess 
whether returns are commensurate with the risks and monitor such businesses of 
banks.  For  the  market  discipline  to  work,  increased,  granular  disclosures  of  fee 
based income may have to be looked into.  
How  to  address  conflicts  of  interest  in  banks’  lending  relationships  and  capital 
market  activities?  Can  the  Chinese  walls  be  really  effective  in  ensuring  real 
separation of these activities within a bank? This issue is also relevant in respect of 
banks’ being allowed to trade on exchanges for clients.  
How  to  strengthen  the  rating  regime?  The  rating  requirements  in  India  are 
essentially  driven  by  regulatory  policies  applicable  to  exposures  of  the  regulated 
entities  to  various  asset  classes.  It  would  therefore  be  imperative  that  the  rating 
methodology employed for such activities is looked into by the regulator concerned. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  e. 
The  rating  agencies  are  supposed  to  adopt  a  through  the  cycle  approach  while 
assigning ratings. The regulators will need to modulate the risk weights applicable to 
the external ratings dynamically as per their assessment of systemic risk. 
Towards  strengthening  the  framework  for  CRAs,  the  system  needs  to  shift  away 
from  issue-rating  to  issuer  rating  –  the  rating  assigned  to  a  particular  instrument 
cannot be taken as reflective of the credit risk of the issuing entity.  
How to address excessive collateralisation of balance sheets? In view of the SLR 
requirement, such collateralisation may not, as yet, be posing serious risks to bank 
balance  sheets  in  India.  However,  significant  reliance  of  market  entities  on 
collateralised overnight funding market (CBLO/market repo) and increasing use of 
collateralisation  for  OTC  derivatives  may  still  put  strain  on  banks,  particularly  in 
times of systemic crisis. This aspect may have to be considered in framing leverage 
requirements for banks. 
How to increase the appetite for credit risk among non-bank institutional investors? 
This  would  be  a  big  challenge  for  the  development  of  credit  markets.  At  the 
structural  level,  two  things  would  be  critical  here:  an  efficient  legal  framework  to 
enforce security and a sound bankruptcy regime. 
Lastly,  how  to  encourage  true  market  development  without  the  support  of  banks? 
This  can  be  a  challenging  task  in  a  financial  system  still  dependent  on  banks  for 
financial  intermediation.  It  is  really  a  chicken  and  egg  situation  –  without  banks 
support,  markets  may  not  develop  but  once  having  allowed  banks  to  provide 
support, it becomes impossible to withdraw it. Perhaps a middle ground many have 
to be explored. 
37. 
I  hope  some  of  these  issues  will  get  deliberated  during  the  course  of  this 
conference.  These  are  broader  policy  issues  which  need  to  be  debated  and  discussed 
among all stakeholders. 
g. 
f. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
