Agathe Côté: Household finances and economic growth 
Remarks by Ms Agathe Côté, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, at the Canadian Club 
of Kingston, Kingston, Ontario, 10 January 2011. 
 Introduction 
Good  afternoon  and  Happy  New  Year.  Thank  you  for  your  invitation  to  speak  to  the 
Canadian Club. This is my first public speech as a Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, 
and I am delighted to be delivering it in the historic city of Kingston. In my remarks I will focus 
on the state of the Canadian economy, with an emphasis on household finances.  
Why does household financial health matter to the Bank of Canada? It matters because how 
Canadians spend and how much they spend affect both the conduct of monetary policy and 
the  stability  of  the  financial  system.  Sound  household  finances  are  vitally  important  for  a 
balanced economy. 
Collectively, households play a significant role in the functioning of the economy. Household 
spending accounts for about 60 per cent of aggregate demand in Canada, and was critical in 
lifting  the  Canadian  economy  out  of  the  recession.  At  the  same  time,  however,  Canadian 
household finances have become increasingly stretched.  
Today, I will touch briefly on growing household indebtedness and the risks that it poses to 
Canada’s  financial  stability,  but  my  comments  will  centre  mainly  on  the  macroeconomic 
outlook  and  the  linkages  between  household  finances  and  spending.  I  will  start  with  an 
overview of current economic conditions and how the economy evolved during the financial 
crisis.  
Recovering from the great recession 
In mid-2009, the world economy began to emerge from the most severe financial crisis since 
the  Great  Depression.  In  Canada,  the  recession  lasted  for  three  quarters,  from  the  latter 
months of 2008 to mid-2009. Our exports fell dramatically in response to a steep drop in U.S. 
demand. Firms cut back on employment; some 417,000 jobs were lost. In response to the 
weaker labour market, declines in net worth and increased uncertainty, household spending 
also  fell.  Government  spending  was  the  only  consistent  source  of  growth  throughout  this 
period.  
Despite these challenges, Canada’s recovery has been stronger than that of our G-7 peers. 
By mid-2010, Canadian output had returned to its pre-recession level and all of the jobs that 
had been lost were regained. Since then, almost 46,000 positions have been added.  
Canada entered the recession with critically important advantages. Our public debt burden 
was the lowest of the G-7 countries. Our monetary policy was highly credible. Our financial 
institutions  were  in  good  health,  owing  to  the  quality  of  public  supervision  and  private  risk 
management. Corporate balance sheets were robust. Finally, Canadian household finances 
were  not  as  stretched  as  they  were  in  some  other  advanced  countries.  Relative  to  the 
situation in the United States, in particular, the personal savings rate in Canada was higher 
and household debt was lower.  
These favourable conditions meant that the Bank of Canada could respond aggressively with 
substantial monetary easing, while keeping inflation expectations well anchored. They also 
allowed  governments  to  roll  out  extraordinary  fiscal  stimulus,  while  maintaining  fiscal 
sustainability.  The  fact  that  our  banking  system  was  well  capitalized  meant  that  Canadian 
banks did not face the same pressures to deleverage, and were able to maintain the supply 
of credit, although they did tighten the terms and conditions of lending to businesses.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Because the financial system in Canada was functioning well, the cuts in the policy rate were 
transmitted  to  other  interest  rates  in  the  economy,  and  effective  borrowing  costs  for  both 
households  and  businesses  declined  to  exceptionally  low  levels.  This  helped  cushion  the 
downturn  and  fuel  the  recovery  in  household  spending,  with  the  result  that  consumption 
surpassed its pre-recession level as early as the third quarter of 2009. In contrast, business 
investment was unusually weak during the recession, and its recovery has been subdued.  
In the United States, the situation was, and still is, much worse. Of course, the United States 
was the epicentre of the financial crisis. The recovery in the labour market there has been 
weak,  restraining  the  growth  in  labour  income.  Household  balance  sheets  remain  under 
pressure  from  elevated  debt  levels  and  the  dramatic  collapse  in  home  prices.  Hence,  the 
level  of  consumer  expenditures  has  just  recently  reached  its  pre-recession  peak  and, 
following a sharp contraction, the housing market has yet to rebound. Overall, the pace of 
recovery  in  U.S.  private  domestic  demand  has  been  slow.  Since  the  United  States  is 
Canada’s largest trading partner, our exports have also been slow to recover. Weak external 
demand, combined with the deterioration in Canadian competitiveness in recent years, has 
led to sharp contractions in Canada’s trade balance and a return to current account deficits. 
Thus, despite the advantages I noted a moment ago, Canada’s recovery has been relatively 
modest  in  comparison  with  previous  cycles,  and  has  relied  heavily  on  household  and 
government spending.  
Going  forward,  the  Bank  expects  that  the  composition  of  demand  will  shift  away  from 
government  and  household  spending  toward  business  investment  and  net  exports.  In  that 
regard, the surge in business investment that began last year is an encouraging start. The 
strength  in  net  exports  will  be  sensitive  to  currency  movements,  the  expected  recovery  in 
productivity growth, and the prospects for external demand.  
Household finances and spending 
From  the  outlook  for  the  overall  Canadian  economy,  let  me  now  narrow  my  focus  to  the 
household sector and, in particular, to the links between household spending and household 
finances.  
As  I  mentioned  at  the  outset,  the  resilience  in  household  spending  helped  propel  the 
economy out of the recession. A number of factors contributed to the rebound in consumer 
expenditures  and  housing  investment,  including  the  recovery  in  employment  and  labour 
income,  the  improvement  in  consumer  confidence,  and  temporary  fiscal  measures,  most 
notably the tax credit on home renovations.  
Equally  important,  consumers  took  advantage  of  low  borrowing  costs  and,  in  doing  so, 
pushed household debt levels to record highs. Since the trough of the recession, household 
credit has grown about twice as fast as personal disposable income. By the third quarter of 
2010, the debt of Canadian households had reached 148 per cent of disposable income.  
In addition to low interest rates, rising house prices and home-equity extractions have played 
a role in the growth of credit in recent years and, therefore, have helped to boost household 
spending. Why is this? The main channel through which increases in house prices can raise 
household  spending  is  called  the  financial-accelerator  effect.  When  the  value  of  a  house 
rises, the owner can borrow against the increased equity through a home equity line of credit, 
a  home  equity  loan  or  by  simply  increasing  the  size  of  the  mortgage  (an  option  for 
homeowners  when  they  renew  their  mortgage,  provided  they  have  sufficient  equity).  The 
funds  can  be  used  to  finance  home  renovations,  a  second  house,  or  other  goods  and 
services.  Such  expenditures  can  accelerate  the  increase  in  house  prices,  reinforcing  the 
growth  in  collateral  values  and  access  to  additional  borrowing,  thus  leading  to  a  rise  in 
household spending. Of course, this accelerator effect can also work in reverse: a decrease 
in  house  prices  tends  to  reduce  household  borrowing  capacity,  and  amplify  the  decline  in 
spending.  
2 
 Research  conducted  at  the  Bank  of  Canada  and  elsewhere  suggests  that  the  financial-
accelerator effect  is  economically  significant.1 This  finding  is  also  consistent  with reduced-
form evidence of a correlation between consumer spending and housing wealth.2  
In  the  last  decade,  lending  based  on  housing  collateral  has  risen  as  a  share  of  total 
Canadian household credit. According to Bank of Canada calculations, the volume of home-
equity lines of credit and loans has risen by as much as 170 per cent–or almost twice as fast 
as mortgage debt–and now accounts for 12 per cent of the overall stock of household debt. 
Since  these  secured  loans  are  offered  at  a  lower  interest  rate  than  unsecured  loans, 
consumers  have  used  part  of  the  funds  to  pay  down  other  debts.  Microdata  suggest  that 
roughly one-third of the loans are used to that effect, while about 20 per cent are used to 
invest in financial assets. The remaining half is spent on current consumption and renovating 
or purchasing another property. Over time, there has been a marked increase in the share of 
home-equity-backed  debt  held  by  older  households,  an  outcome  that  may  not  be  too 
surprising  since  older  households  have  generally  owned  their  houses  longer  and  have 
significant equity in them.3  
The overall conclusion based on the microdata and the research is that lower interest rates 
for secured lending and increased access to credit as house prices rose have helped fuel net 
increases in credit and have supported household spending in Canada in recent years.  
Going  forward,  house  price  gains  are  unlikely  to  provide  the  same  support  to  household 
wealth as they have in recent years. This, combined with the fact that the level of household 
debt  has  reached  a  record  high,  leads  us  to  expect  that  the  growth  of  household 
expenditures will slow to a pace closer to that of income.  
There are risks, on both the upside and the downside, to the outlook for Canadian household 
spending. On the upside, household spending could be stronger than expected if growth in 
incomes were to rebound more rapidly than the Bank projects, or if borrowing continues to 
exceed  income  growth.  In  our  projection,  we  expect  slow  growth  in  personal  disposable 
income  owing  to  the  withdrawal  of  fiscal  stimulus,  announced  compensation  restraints  by 
governments and a slow recovery in average hours worked.  
On the downside, if there were a sudden weakening in the Canadian housing sector, it could 
have sizable spillover effects on other areas of the economy, such as consumption, given the 
high debt loads of some Canadian households. While residential investment declined in the 
second  half  of  2010,  it  still  remains  near  historically  high  levels.  The  Bank  expects  some 
further  weakening  into  2011,  reflecting  subdued  income  growth  and  declining  affordability, 
but not a major correction.  
                                                 
1   See  M.  Iacoviello,  “House  Prices,  Borrowing  Constraints  and  Monetary  Policy  in  the  Business  Cycle”  The 
American Economic Review 95, No. 3 (2005): 739–64. See also: M.B. Roi and R. Mendes, “House Prices, 
Residential  Mortgage  Credit  and  Monetary  Policy,”  Bank  of  Canada,  December  2004  (Available  at: 
http://www.bankofcanada.ca/en/conference_papers/housing_macroeconomy/roi.pdf);  and  J.  Campbell  and 
J. F.  Cocco,  “How  Do  House  Prices  Affect  Consumption?  Evidence  from  Micro  Data,”  (Harvard  Institute  of 
Economic Research Working Papers No. 2045, 2004) 
2   See  L.  Pichette,  “Are  Wealth  Effects  Important  for  Canada?”  Bank  of  Canada  Review  (Ottawa,  Bank  of 
Canada, Spring 2004). Available at: http://www.bankofcanada.ca/en/review/spring04/r04-2-ec.html 
3   Part of the increase may also reflect the general aging of the population. Microdata indicate that from 1999 to 
2009,  the  share  of  home  equity  lines  of  credit  (HELOCs)  held  by  households  in  the  50-plus  age  group 
increased from 33 per cent to 54 per cent. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Household finances and financial stability 
Household  finances  also  have  important  implications  for  financial  stability.  While  the  rapid 
expansion of household credit during the recession and the early stages of the recovery is in 
part a testament to the resilience of Canada’s financial system, it is also a source of risk. As 
discussed in the Bank’s most recent Financial System Review, the proportion of households 
with stretched financial positions that leave them vulnerable to an adverse shock has grown 
significantly in recent years. 
At an aggregate level, the risk is that a shock to economic conditions could be transmitted to 
the  broader  financial  system  through  a  weakening  in  the  credit  quality  of  loans  to 
households. This could prompt a tightening of credit conditions and, in turn, set off a mutually 
reinforcing deterioration of real activity and financial stability.  
There  are  welcome  signs  of  moderation  in  the  pace  of  debt  accumulation,  but  credit 
continues  to  grow  faster  than  income.  Without  a  significant  change  in  behaviour,  the 
proportion of households that would be susceptible to serious financial stress from negative 
income or wealth shocks will continue to grow.  
To  better  assess  the  risks  associated  with  growing  household  indebtedness,  the  Bank 
regularly undertakes stress tests. In the December Financial System Review, we conducted 
a partial stress-testing simulation to estimate the impact on household balance sheets of a 
hypothetical 3-percentage-point increase in the unemployment rate. The results suggest that 
the  associated  rise  in  financial  stress  among  households  would  double  the  proportion  of 
loans that are in arrears three months or more. 
Even without adverse shocks, household debt-service ratios would be expected to increase 
when borrowing costs return to more normal levels. It is the responsibility of households to 
ensure that, in the future, they are able to service the debts they take on today. Similarly, 
financial  institutions  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  their  clients  do  not  take  on 
unmanageable debt loads.  
Policy implications 
In response to the global financial crisis and the recession, the Bank of Canada lowered the 
target interest rate rapidly over the course of 2008 and early 2009 to its lowest possible level, 
and  provided  exceptional  guidance  on  the  future  path  of  rates  through  its  conditional 
commitment.  These  measures  delivered  considerable  stimulus  to  the  economy  during  a 
period  of  very  weak  economic  conditions.  Since  last  spring,  with  improvements  in  the 
economy, the Bank has removed the conditional commitment, and raised the overnight rate 
from  ¼  of  one  per  cent  to  1  per  cent.  This  still  leaves  considerable  monetary  stimulus  in 
place, consistent with achieving the 2 per cent inflation target in an environment of significant 
excess supply.  
Some have asked if increasing interest rates poses such a threat to households, why raise 
them? Yet others have asked if household debt is such a concern, why not raise rates and 
discourage borrowing?  
The cornerstone of the Bank’s monetary policy is its inflation-control agreement, the goal of 
which  is  to  keep  inflation  near  2  per  cent.  In  setting  interest  rates  to  achieve  the  inflation 
target,  developments  in  household  finances  need  to  be  weighed  along  with  all  the  other 
factors influencing economic activity and inflation. Canadian monetary policy is set for overall 
macroeconomic conditions in Canada.  
4 
 The Bank recognizes that low interest rates, while necessary to achieve our inflation target, 
create their own risks.4 Prudence on the part of individuals and financial institutions is the 
first  line  of  defence  against  these  risks.  Supervision  of  financial  institutions  can  also  be 
effective  in  limiting  excessive  concentration  of  risk.  The  development  and  use  of  selected 
macroprudential tools constitute another line of defence.  
In  the  housing  market,  the  federal  government  has  already  taken  important  measures  to 
address household leverage. These include a more stringent qualifying test that requires all 
borrowers to meet the standards for a 5-year fixed-rate mortgage as well as a reduction in 
the  maximum  loan-to-value  ratio  of  refinanced  mortgages  and  a  higher  minimum  down 
payment on properties not occupied by the owner. In addition, the Bank of Canada’s interest 
rate increases reminded households of the interest rate risks they face. These measures are 
beginning to have an impact.  
As part of our research for the renewal later this year of our inflation-control agreement with 
the Government of Canada, the Bank is examining whether there may be cases in the future 
where monetary policy should play a supporting role to these other lines of defence by taking 
pre-emptive actions against building financial imbalances.5 
Conclusion 
Sound household finances are a key element of a balanced economy. They are essential to 
keep  household  spending  and  overall  economic  growth  on  a  sustainable  track  and  to 
maintain  the  stability  of  our  financial  system.  This  is  why  the  Bank  is  closely  watching 
developments in this area.  
I hope my comments have provided some additional insight into the Bank’s economic outlook 
and the determinants of household spending and offer you some guidance about the risks. 
The clearer our understanding of the nature of the risks we face, the better able we will be to 
make informed decisions to address them. Thank you.  
 
                                                
4   See  M.  Carney,  “Living  with  Low  for  Long”  (speech  delivered  to  the  Economic  Club  of  Canada,  Toronto, 
13 December 2010). Available at: http://www.bankofcanada.ca/en/speeches/2010/sp131210.html. 
5   See  M.  Carney,  “Some  Considerations  on  Using  Monetary  Policy  to  Stabilize  Economic  Activity”  (speech 
delivered at a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 
22  August  2009).  Available  at:  http://www.bankofcanada.ca/en/speeches/2009/sp220809.html.  See  also: 
J. Boivin, T. Lane and C. Meh, “Should Monetary Policy Be Used to Counteract Financial Imbalances?” Bank 
of 
at: 
http://www.bankofcanada.ca/en/review/summer10/boivin_summer10.pdf. 
Available 
Canada, 
Summer 
(Ottawa, 
Canada 
Review 
2010). 
Bank 
of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
