Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview with Helsingin Sanomat and Kauppalehti 
Interview with Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, conducted 
on  20  April  2011  by  Mr  Jorma  Pöysä  (Kauppalehti)  and  Mr  Juhana  Rossi  (Helsingin 
Sanomat), published on 26 April 2011. 
 Question:  As  you  may  know,  a  populist  and  euro-hostile  party  called  True  Finns  won  the 
general  election  in  Finland  last  weekend,  obtaining  almost  one-fifth  of  the  votes.  Are  you 
worried that this anti-euro sentiment will grow in other euro area countries? Could it dampen 
the willingness of triple A countries to accept new rescue arrangements and therefore slow 
the gradual recovery from the recession and the debt/banking crisis? 
As  a  central  bank  we  issue  a  currency  for  absolutely  all  political  sensitivities.  We  are  the 
guardian of a public good – a credible and stable currency – and that public good is for the 
service of all our fellow citizens. We are, by construction, a multi-partisan and multinational 
institution.  I  will  not  comment  on  the  functioning  of  our  democracies.  We  fully  respect  the 
functioning of our democracies in which we have the fortune to live in Europe. 
Question:  But  what  is  the  atmosphere  in  Europe?  Do  you  think  there  are  worrying 
phenomena? 
In a democracy all opinions are expressed. I have observed that there was always a very 
strong  European  drive  in  Finland,  and  I  am  very  happy  with  that.  As  I  said,  the  euro  was 
created  on  the  basis  of  a  multi-partisan  and  multinational  vision  to  deepen  European 
construction and to reinforce solidarity between Europeans. Taking into account the historical 
challenge, which Finland perhaps knows better than other European countries over the last 
60 years, it seems to me that all the reasons why the “founding fathers” had this vision of 
European unity are still there and they are even stronger now. When we look at the changes 
all over the world, the extraordinary growth of the emerging economies, such as India, China, 
Brazil, Mexico, Russia, and the remarkable development of Latin America and Africa, we see 
that European unity is more important than ever. 
Question: The level of the ECB’s refinancing rate is still unusually low. Also the non-standard 
measures  are  in  use,  and  banks  have  access  to  ample  liquidity.  At  the  same  time  global 
price pressures in energy and food are elevated, and headline inflation exceeds the ECB’s 
definition of price stability. With this frame of reference, is the Governing Council engaged in 
very close monitoring of price developments in the euro zone? 
As I said after the Governing Council’s last decision, we judged it necessary to increase rates 
by 0.25 percentage point in order to deliver price stability in the medium term. For us it is 
extremely important to prevent second-round effects after the “hump” in the headline inflation 
rate. Some price-setters and social partners might be tempted to view this hump not only as 
a  transitory  phenomenon,  due  to  a  shock  in  the  price  of  energy  and  commodities,  but  as 
something more permanent. Such a perception is not acceptable for the ECB’s Governing 
Council, which is responsible for price stability in the medium term. That is the reason why 
we increased rates. 
We are proud of the fact that during the first 12 years of the euro we have delivered price 
stability, in line with our definition, namely “below 2%, but close to, 2%”. To be precise, we 
have delivered an average yearly price increase to our 331 million fellow citizens of 1.97%. 
And it is extremely important to continue solidly anchoring inflation expectations in a period 
which is marked by uncertainties and turbulences. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Question:  Do  you  see  second-round  effects  caused  or  any  signs  of  second-round  effects 
anywhere in the euro area? 
We have risks of second-round effects here and there. We have to be very alert that they do 
not materialise. 
At the moment I do not see any significant materialising of second-round effects and I do not 
see un-anchoring of inflation expectations. But this is no time for complacency. We have to 
be permanently alert to avoid the materialisation of such risks. 
Question:  To  what  extent  is  the  ECB’s  freedom  of  action  limited  by  the  poor  condition  of 
some of the euro zone banks? 
We have to deliver price stability to the whole of the euro area – which means 17 countries 
and 331 million people – just like the Federal Reserve has to deliver a single monetary policy 
to all the states of the United States of America, and not one policy for particular states that 
are growing rapidly and another one for states that are in difficulties. Our mandate is very 
clear, and it addresses the euro area as a whole. 
From  the  very  beginning  of  the  financial  turmoil  we  set  up  a  strict  separation  principle 
between our standard measures, namely the interest rate decisions, which are designed to 
deliver price stability, and the non-standard measures, which are designed to help restore a 
better transmission of our monetary policy, taking into account the abnormal functioning of 
some markets. 
Question: How is the ECB’s room for manoeuvre influenced by the poor condition of public 
finances in euro zone countries, and especially in the countries with acute crisis? 
As I said, we are not compromising on our primary goal of maintaining price stability, and our 
interest  rate  decisions  are  designed  to  fulfil  that  aim.  Any  other  approach  would  be 
unthinkable. And one should never forget that price stability is a precondition for sustainable 
growth and job creation.  
Question: There are some heavily indebted nations within the euro area, most prominently 
Greece.  Yesterday  (Tuesday,  19  April)  the  news  agency  Reuters  reported  that  Clemens 
Fuest,  who  chairs  the  German  Finance  Ministry’s  Technical  Advisory  Committee,  said 
Greece’s extremely weak balance sheet meant a restructuring of the Greek sovereign debt 
was inevitable. He said that: “One must recognise the realities – I am expecting a haircut”. 
Do you agree with Mr Fuest and other prominent economists and policy-makers who have 
expressed similar views? 
There is an important adjustment plan which has been adopted by the Greek government to 
reform  its  fiscal  and  structural  policies.  This  plan  has  been  approved  by  the  IMF,  by  the 
international community and by the European Commission in liaison with the ECB. This plan 
is being applied.  
Question: How worried should we be about credit rating agency S&P’s negative outlook for 
the AAA rating of US debt? Is there a rising risk of higher long-term interest rates worldwide? 
The  ECB  has  always  thought  and  said  that  it  was  important  for  all  advanced  economies, 
without exception, in Europe and the rest of the world, to be very keen on the sustainability of 
their long-term fiscal policies. It is extremely important that the authority of the signatures of 
the advanced economies is unchallengeable. I personally have full trust in the United States 
for preserving its creditworthiness and the authority of its signature.  
Question:  The  ECB  has  postponed  its  exit  from  the  non-standard  measures  on  several 
occasions. Can the non-standard measures de facto co-exist with any level of interest rates? 
Yes, indeed, the “separation principle” that we apply permits us always to have the right level 
of  interest  rates,  even  when  markets  are  still  not  functioning  perfectly.  As  I  said,  we  set 
interest rates at the right level to deliver price stability. This is independent from the decisions 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
we  take  regarding  the  non-standard  measures,  which  have  to  be  commensurate  with  the 
situation in the markets and the need for a proper transmission of monetary policy. 
You have seen an example this spring. Following the March meeting of the ECB’s Governing 
Council  we  pre-announced  that  there  was  a  possibility  that  the  Governing  Council  would 
increase  interest  rates.  That  was  of  course  a  very  important  message  that  the  Governing 
Council was sending as regards the “standard measures”. 
At  the  same  time  we  decided  to  maintain  the  “non-standard  measures”  for  the  second 
quarter of this year, particularly the policy of full allotment and a fixed rate for the supply of 
liquidity with a duration of three months.  
Non-standard measures are temporary by nature. I do not imagine that we would have them 
permanently, because that would be relevant only in a permanent situation of dysfunctional 
markets, which is of course not our working assumption. 
Question: The ECB began purchasing government bonds from the secondary market (i.e. the 
Securities  Markets  Programme  or  SMP)  in  May  2010.  Is  there  a  limit  to  the  size  of  this 
programme? 
This is one of the non-standard measures we have taken. I have nothing further to add to 
what I have already said on that. 
Question: When will this programme be terminated? 
I have nothing to add. 
Question:  The  yields  on  the  stressed  euro  area  government  debt  securities  in  some 
maturities are now much higher than on several occasions in the past during the SMP. Yet 
the  ECB  has  not  particularly  actively  purchased  securities  from  the  markets  during  recent 
weeks and months. Why? 
We take the decisions that we consider appropriate in the circumstances. 
Question: Do you consider the outgoing president of the Deutsche Bundesbank, Axel Weber, 
a constructive and discrete member of the Governing Council of the ECB? 
Axel Weber has been an important member of the Governing Council and his contribution 
has been appreciated during the entire period of his membership of the Governing Council. 
Question: In a recent interview in the Der Spiegel magazine Mr Weber made the following 
statement: “There are minutes of meetings of the American Federal Reserve Bank and the 
Bank of England in which divergent opinions are documented. I think that’s exemplary. I had 
already  told  my  colleagues  ahead  of  time  that  we  weren’t  with  a  routine  decision,  but  an 
important  change  in  direction,  and  that  I  could  not  keep  my  opinion  to  myself  on  such  a 
fundamental  issue.”  Was  Mr  Weber  correct  when  called  the  launching  of  the  SMP  an 
“important change in direction” for the ECB? 
We  are,  in  the  European  framework,  in  a  unique  situation.  We  have  a  single  currency,  a 
single  monetary  policy  and  a  single  system  of  central  banks  for  the  euro  area,  the 
“Eurosystem”, comprising the euro area national central banks and the ECB. We issue the 
single currency for 17 sovereign nations and for 331 million fellow citizens. That explains why 
we  have  features  ourselves  that  are  not  the  same  as  in  a  fully-fledged  federation.  In 
particular it explains why we have a principle of speaking with one voice. 
Question: Why could the majority of the Governing Council accept the decision to launch the 
SMP, but not Mr Weber? What is your explanation for this divergence of opinions? 
I have no comment. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Question:  How  do  you  explain  the  SMP  to  ordinary  citizens  who  fear  that  the  ECB  is 
engaged in the monetisation of debt and creation of inflation?  
As  you  know,  securities  are  purchased  by  the  Eurosystem  in  the  secondary  market,  after 
they have been issued and found a first buyer. And we always withdraw all the liquidity which 
has been injected with the SMP, so that we do not practise quantitative easing, which has 
been used in other economies. The SMP is one of the non-standard measures, which are 
transitory, we deemed necessary in view of the abnormal situation in markets, to help restore 
a  normal  transmission  of  monetary  policy.  Another  example  of  important  non-standard 
measures  was  the  full  allotment  at  a  fixed  interest  rate  for  liquidity  with  a  duration  of  six 
months, even up to a full year. This programme of liquidity provision with exceptionally long 
maturities has been phased out. We also had a programme in which we purchased covered 
bonds. That has also expired.  
Question: In your opinion, should an ordinary euro area citizen take a fixed-rate mortgage or 
a variable rate mortgage? By a variable rate mortgage I mean a bank loan with one of the 
EURIBORs as its reference rate. 
[Laughter] Do not count on me to take the job of the investment advisors. I would only say to 
my fellow citizens that they can rely on us to be an anchor of stability at the level of the entire 
euro area. Since the euro was set up we have had challenges within Europe and challenges 
coming from the outside. Citizens can count on us to deliver price stability in the future as we 
have done over the past 12 years. This is important in terms of confidence, and confidence is 
the most precious ingredient for consolidating the economic recovery.  
Question:  Stable  and  predictable  inflation  is  one  important  issue  when  companies  make 
investment decisions. Recently there has been prominent volatility in headline inflation rates. 
What  is  your  message  to  entrepreneurs:  how  they  can  trust  you  to  deliver  what  you  have 
promised?  
We delivered price stability over the first 12 years of the euro. The performance was better 
than what had been achieved in the countries of the euro area over any 12-year period since 
World War II. That is a remarkable record of price stability. These are deeds, not only words 
or promises. It is something we have done in the past. In a number of cases, decisions we 
took were criticised out of short-term considerations. We had the medium and long term in 
mind. All observers can look at our track record. Inflation expectations are well-anchored for 
the next five and ten years, based on our credibility. But this is no time for complacency. And 
this is why we took our last decision on interest rates.  
Question: There is a relatively large number of medium-sized saw mills in Finland which are 
dependent on the export markets. When the euro is strong, they soon lose market share to 
their Swedish and Russian competitors. This makes them lose money and forces them to put 
their staff on furlough. What would be your advice to these entrepreneurs? 
I would tell them that we have been living in a universe of floating exchange rates between 
the major currencies for the last 40 years. As regards the relationship between the euro and 
the  US  dollar,  I  will  stress  the  statements  made  by  the  United  States  Secretary  of  the 
Treasury and the Chairman of the Federal Reserve: that a strong dollar vis-à-vis other major 
floating currencies is in the interest of the United States. I entirely share this view. I will also 
say to all economies in the euro area – and not only to Finland – that keeping a lid on costs, 
in particular by increasing productivity as much as possible, is essential to be competitive.  
Question: The ECB decided recently to suspend the application of the minimum credit rating 
threshold  in  the  collateral  for  the  debt  instruments  issued  or  guaranteed  by  the  Irish 
government  –  as  you  did  previously  with  Greece.  Why  did  you  do  this?  Can  the  same 
procedure be applied later possibly to Portuguese debt instruments? 
In  these  two  cases  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  has  taken  into  account  the 
programmes the governments in these countries have set up with the IMF – namely by the 
international  community  –  and  the  European  Commission  in  liaison  with  the  ECB.  The 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
programmes  have  been  approved  by  the  IMF  and  the  European  institutions,  and  they 
incorporate strict conditionality. We took our decision on the basis of this strict conditionality.  
Question:  Now  markets  know  that  the  ECB  will  accept  junk  bonds  as  collateral.  Likewise, 
euro area governments have one incentive less to maintain an investment grade credit rating 
because  they  now  know  that  the  ECB  will  accept  in  an  extreme  situation  their  bonds 
regardless  of  their  quality.  Did  this  softening  of  collateral  requirements  set  a  dangerous 
precedent? 
I  repeat:  the  decision  of  the  Governing  Council  was  made  on  the  basis  of  very  strong 
conditionality of the international community. No government takes lightly the fact that it has 
negotiated  a  programme  that  implies  very  strong  conditionality  with  the  international 
community and the European institutions. 
Question: Once the sovereign debt crisis has been resolved, it may well take years before 
Greece and possibility Ireland have regained solid investment grade credit ratings. How is 
the ECB planning to exit from this softening of collateral requirements? 
Again, strong conditionality and strict implementation of the adjustment programme. It is the 
sine  qua  non.  At  the  end  of  the  road  stands  the  return  to  normal  financing  with  market 
access. That is always the goal.  
Question: You have a lot of experience of central banking within the European context. You 
first led the Banque de France for ten years and now you are approaching the end of your 
eight-year term at the helm of the ECB. Based on your experiences, what skills and abilities 
are an absolute must for your successor? 
I never comment on my succession. One has to consider what a central bank is. A central 
bank is an institution that is there to be an anchor for stability and to have a sense of medium 
and long-term direction. It should not depend on an individual. Jean Monnet said: “Nothing is 
possible without individuals; but nothing is lasting without institutions.” We are an anchor for 
stability  in  Europe.  What  counts  is  the  institution  and  the  team.  I  have  had  the  fantastic 
privilege of being part of a fantastic team. I like to use the metaphor of a football team: you 
have  all  the  players  on  the  field  and  among  them  is  a  captain,  which  is  undoubtedly  an 
inspiring responsibility. What counts is to have a good team spirit, a solid institution and all 
the wisdom of collegial decision-making.  
Question: 
the  ECB  more  of  an  academic/technocrat  or  a 
diplomat/politician?  Should  the  President  of  the  ECB  be  a  career  central  banker  with 
impeccable  academic  credentials,  such  as  Athanasios  Orphanides  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Cyprus? Or should the President of the ECB have a background in high-level national and 
European  politics  and  multinational  institutions  with  extensive  personal  networks,  such  as 
Erkki Liikanen of the Bank of Finland? 
I  have  no  comment  on  the  decision  which  will  be  taken  by  the  heads  of  state  and 
government.  I  will  only  say  that,  of  course,  all  members  of  the  Governing  Council  have  a 
solid academic background. That being said, all kinds of experience can be important and 
useful. And again: what is decisive is the team spirit. 
Question: Based on your experience, is central banking more art than science?  
Central banks need formidable analytical capacities and skills. You need both state-of-the-art 
analytical  work,  as  deep  and  robust  as  possible,  and  you  need  judgement,  based  on 
experience and a solid capacity to synthesise all pertinent analyses. That is true in absolutely 
all circumstances, and particularly in times of crisis. 
Question:  Professor  Barry  Eichengreen  of  the  University  of  California,  Berkeley,  recently 
published  a  book  about 
the  book 
Prof. Eichengreen  makes  the  following  assessment  when  he  analyses  the  strengths  and 
weaknesses of the major currencies. 
the  US  dollar  entitled  Exorbitant  Privilege. 
the  President  of 
In 
Is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
“If  a  first-class  international  currency  needs  a  first-class  central  bank,  then  this,  too,  is 
something the euro possesses. The ECB has shown itself to be extraordinarily serious about 
the  maintenance  of  price  stability.  Although  it  was  roundly  criticized  for  its  exceptional 
purchases of government bonds in the spring of 2010, it continues to take its price-stability 
mandate  seriously.  It  shows  absolutely  no  inclination  to  embark  on  reckless  inflationary 
policies.” 
First of all, do you agree with this assessment? Secondly, is the perception that the ECB is 
extraordinarily serious about the maintenance of price stability something that you would like 
to see as your personal legacy as a central banker? 
I  did  not  know  that  you  would  quote  Barry  Eichengreen.  But  yes,  you  can  see  that  we 
consider price stability to be fundamental. It is our primary mandate and we are faithful to our 
primary mandate. We trust that fulfilling this primary mandate is a precondition for delivering 
sustainable growth and sustainable job creation. In the first years of the euro a great number 
of  new  jobs  were  created  in  Europe:  around  14  million.  That  is  not  to  say  that  we  are 
satisfied. We cannot be complacent in any respect and structural reforms are still necessary 
to combat unemployment. Let me add that delivering price stability is a strong request we get 
from all our fellow citizens. 
Question:  When  an  economic  historian  looks  back  at  the  economic  history  of  Europe 
30 years  from  now,  would  you,  on  a  personal  level,  like  to  see  Jean-Claude  Trichet 
remembered, both as head of the Banque de France and the ECB, as a central banker for 
whom the most important mandate was the maintenance of price stability? 
It is not for me to make a judgement. But to the extent that I was called on to pursue price 
stability as the primary mandate it goes without saying that I hope I can be remembered for 
this, together with all my colleagues of the Executive Board and the Governing Council. That 
has also indeed been the mandate of the Banque de France since 1 January 1994, when the 
Banque de France became fully independent. It is also what we are asked to do at the ECB, 
But again, it is not for me to judge. It is for external observers to make the judgement. 
Question:  Do  you  have  any  memories  of  your  visits  to  Finland  or  your  work  within  the 
Eurosystem with your Finnish colleagues? 
Already before I was President of the ECB I had a relationship with the Finnish central bank 
and Finnish society in general. I had a very good professional relationship with Sirkka [Sirkka 
Hämäläinen, a member of the Executive Board of the ECB from 1998 to 2003]. I have to say 
it is always moving to be in Finland for many reasons, including the very special situation of 
Finland  after  World  War  II.  Finland  experienced  directly  some  of  the  tensions  that 
unfortunately marked the post-war period. I was also close to Matti [Matti Vanhala, the late 
Governor of the Bank of Finland]; in meetings of the Governing Council we sat next to each 
other and often exchanged views. I also have a close relationship with Erkki [Erkki Liikanen, 
the current Governor of the Bank of Finland] for a host of reasons, including that not only do 
we speak English together but we also speak French together from time to time. He has a 
wealth  of  experience  and  vision.  In  all  my  meetings  with  Finnish  people  I  have  always 
observed that Finland has a culture of soundness and wisdom. 
Question: You visited Finland in 2007. You attended a concert in the Pori Jazz Festival and 
stayed  overnight  in  the  Villa  Mairea,  an  architectural  masterpiece  of  Alvar  Aalto.  What 
impression did you gain of Finnish nightlife and architecture? 
[Laughter]  It  was  not  nightlife,  it  was  “day”-life.  The  jazz  was  excellent  and  the  festival 
remarkable. We were lucky to have such exceptional weather and were treated to excellent 
music.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Question: Your term of office expires at the end of October. Would you like to conclude your 
career  as  a  central  banker  with  a  rate  hike in  the  October monetary  policy  meeting  of  the 
Governing Council? 
[Laughter] No comment. 
Question: You have a smart phone and a tablet computer on the table in front of you. I take it 
that you use them actively in your work. How do you find the user experience? 
I  am  absolutely  fascinated  by  the  scientific  and  technological  progress  we  are  presently 
experiencing.  I  sometimes  have  the  feeling  that  I  am  myself  in  a  science  fiction  novel, 
because  of  the  new  marvels  that  technology  displays  every  other  year.  You  see  new 
possibilities,  but  at the same  it  creates  challenges.  When you  make  jumps  in  science  and 
technology, it transforms society. If I have a message to my own sons and granddaughters, it 
is: be prepared. We all have a tendency to underestimate the pace of change in our society 
and in the globally integrated economy.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
