K C Chakrabarty: Challenges for next generation banking 
Address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Indian 
Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Coimbatore, 25 June 2011. 
 industries 
ICCI  and  captains  of 
Mr.  Krishnan,  President  of  Indian  Chamber  of  Commerce  and  Industry,  Coimbatore;  
Mr.  M.  Narendra,  Chairman  and  Managing  Director  of  Indian  Overseas  Bank;  Mr.  D.  Raj 
Kumar,  Regional  General  Manager,  The  Hindu;  Mr.  K.G.  Balakrishnan,  Past  President  of 
ICCI,  Coimbatore;  members  of 
in  Coimbatore; 
representatives  of  banks  in  Coimbatore;  members  of  the  print  and  electronic  media; 
distinguished invitees, ladies and gentlemen, 
I am very happy to speak at this “Voice of Tomorrow – Fuel to Excel”, programme which is a 
commendable initiative by ICCI, Coimbatore and the Hindu. 
At the outset we must be clear about whose voice we are talking about when we say voice of 
tomorrow. To my mind the voice tomorrow belongs to the youth and the millions of business 
entrepreneurs of the country. Not that the voice of business is not heard now. But they are by 
and large limited to lobbying through associations like ICCI. What I mean is that the collective 
voice  of  millions  of  private  enterprise  across  the  country.  It  is  this  voice  together  with  the 
voice of the youth which will mould and build the future of this country. 
The  young  demography  of  this  country  will  make  the  voice  of  the  youth  matter  the  most, 
going  forward.  And  in  a  market  based  economy,  with  further  reforms  in  critical  areas  to 
follow, the private business community will increasingly shape the face of the economy and 
also become a prominent voice in setting our vision for the future. It is in this context that 
industrial cities like Coimbatore assume importance. 
Mr. Narendra mentioned that the Indian economy is likely to register an average growth of 
above 8% in the Eleventh Five Year Plan and that the 12th Plan will see a growth of 9 to 
10%. It is my view that it is possible for India to aim at a 10% growth for the next 20 years. 
Only then growth will be truly sustainable and inclusive. Private enterprise and investment 
coupled  with  the  demographic  advantage  can  be  the  underlying  drivers  of  the  country’s 
immense growth potential, going forward. We cannot forget the fact that India’s new growth 
trajectory of the last decade coincided with a significant pick up in private investment and a 
transition to a younger demography. Both factors make us believe now that a 10 per cent 
growth can be achieved and sustained, going forward. 
At that rate, India’s share in world GDP will rise from the current level of about 2 per cent to 
10  per  cent  by  2030.  But  this  will  not  happen  by  itself.  Mere  policy  will  not  transform  into 
growth. This will happen only when all of us work hard to overcome the challenges and seize 
the opportunities offered by global and domestic developments. Let me highlight some of the 
major challenges and opportunities. 
Now, Mr. Narendra talked about the demographic dividend. India is the only country in the 
world  where  the  working  population  would  increase  for  the  next  20  years.  Young 
demography  offers  us  an  opportunity,  but  addressing  the  challenge  of  creating  adequate 
productive  employment  opportunities  will  determine  how  best  we  are  able  to  reap  the 
demographic  dividend.  Estimates  of  United  Nations  suggest  that  by  2041,  working  age 
population in India will increase by 312 million, while in China it will decline by 126 million. 
Creating gainful employment for this order of new entrants to the labour market is a daunting 
challenge but not impossible. 
Education  and  skill  development  are  the  challenges  here.  When  I  say  education,  what  I 
mean is quality education. The demographic change will generate a huge scope for quality 
education  but  the  demographic  dividend  can  be  reaped  only  if  we  can  make  quality 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
education  affordable.  I  believe  that  technology  and  innovation  can  make  such  education 
accessible and affordable by bringing down the unit cost of quality education. It is here that 
places like Coimbatore, which is both a centre of educational and entrepreneurial excellence, 
can play a leading role. 
We  must  accept  the  fact  that  the  overall  skill  base  of  India  is  rather  low  compared  to 
developed  economies.  This  may  be  difficult  to  believe,  given  the  global  recognition  our 
IT professionals  have  received  and  the  well  known  contribution  of  this  sector  to  the 
knowledge economy. I have often wondered why our talented youth can perform so well in 
Silicon Valley but fail to do so in their home country. 
With services accounting for 65 percent of the country’s GDP, one would tend to presume 
that  India’s  growth  must  be  skill  intensive.  Facts,  however,  suggest  the  opposite.  Many 
developed  countries  have  tertiary  enrolment  (i.e.  vocational  training)  levels  of  60  to 
80 per cent  in  the  age  group  of  15–29,  which  is  as  high  as  96  per  cent  for  Korea.  The 
comparable  level  for  India  is  less  than  15  per  cent.  Expenditure  on  research  and 
development (R&D) in the developed countries is in the range of 2 to 3 per cent of GDP on 
an  average,  which  is  just  0.8  per  cent  in  India.  This  probably  explains  the  gap  between 
employment and employability in our country. How to bridge this gap is the challenge for the 
voice of tomorrow. 
The  skill  gap  will  become  increasingly  costly  for  the  economy.  Way  back  in  1948,  while 
addressing  the  conference  on  All  India  Education,  Maulana  Azad  had  stressed  that  “…we 
must not for a moment forget, it is a birth right of every individual to receive at least the basic 
education without which he cannot fully discharge his duties as a citizen”. In April 2010, on 
the  occasion  of  “The  Children’s  Right  to  Free  and  Compulsory  Education  Act”  becoming 
effective, the Hon’ble Prime Minister emphasized: “...We are committed to ensuring that all 
children, irrespective of gender and social category, have access to education. An education 
that enables them to acquire skills, knowledge, values and  attitudes necessary to become 
responsible and active citizens of India”. Enhancing employability of the labour force requires 
focus on both skill development and an economic structure that could ensure that the growth 
process become more employment intensive. 
According to the national skill development policy 2009, the current capacity of the country to 
conduct skill development programmes is about 3.1 million. The target is to cover 500 million 
cumulatively by 2022. The policy recognizes that 93 per cent of the country’s workforce is in 
the unorganized sector, but contributes only 60 per cent of GDP. Strengthening the skill base 
in  this  segment  will  contribute  to  improving  productivity,  working  conditions  and  living 
standards. 
When  we  talk  of  living  standards  what  is  of  immediate  relevance  is  shelter.  The  right  to 
shelter  is  as  important  as  the  right  to  education  and  employment.  Now,  since  the  past 
decade or so there has been a tremendous demand for housing as the economy flourished 
and income levels increased significantly. The banks entering the housing finance market in 
a big way provided a major fillip to this sector. But when we talk of shelter to all we mean 
housing units which will be within the reach of the common man. To bring down the unit cost 
of housing to that level would require a great deal of technological and financial innovation. 
To deal with the challenge of gainfully absorbing the expected large number of new entrants 
to the job market, the Government has set a target of raising the share of manufacturing in 
GDP from the current level of about 16 per cent to 25 per cent by 2025. 
But  there  are  huge  challenges  here.  Power  will  be  the  major  challenge.  The  International 
Energy Agency estimates suggest that the shares of India and China in the world fossil fuel 
demand by 2030 will be 16 per cent and 38 per cent, respectively. 
Alternative clean energy and energy security will be  critical for India in the years to come, 
and this would require innovative ideas from the youth and timely investment by the private 
sector,  with  necessary  support  and  an  enabling  policy  environment  from  the  Government. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Hon’ble  President  of  India  had  emphasized  while  addressing  the  students  of  IIT,  Kanpur  in 
2010  that  “…The  next  ten  years,  declared  as  the  Decade  of  Innovation,  can  be  a  fruitful 
decade  in  India.  Qualified  and  talented  individuals  of  our  nation  have  to  find  innovative 
solutions to our myriad challenges, keeping in mind our specific conditions”. 
The voice of the youth and the private business enterprises would need to ensure food security 
along with energy security. A country with 1.2 billion population can ill afford to depend on the 
outside world for meeting its needs for energy or basic food. Adverse shocks from these two 
sources  have,  as  you  all  know,  often  led  to  high  inflation,  which  in  turn  becomes  a  risk  to 
sustainable high growth. Higher agricultural productivity and adequate investment to increase 
the supply of protein rich food items would require a new revolution, driven by new technology 
and additional investment. As the average income of the young population increases with high 
growth, demand for items like milk, meat, eggs, fruits, vegetables and pulses will increase, and 
without necessary supply augmentation, containing inflation will become a difficult challenge. 
When I say we must raise our productivity I do not compare ourselves with America or other 
countries. I am talking about inter-regional comparisons within our own country. We say one 
reason for inflation going up is people are drinking more milk. How can milk prices come down 
if do not produce more milk? Why our success in Anand experiment cannot be replicated in 
other parts of the country? Only when productivity goes up and cost comes down, can inflation 
be  curbed.  We  need  to  innovate  to  emulate  at  least  our  own  Indian  benchmarks  and  best 
practices to meet the productivity challenge. 
When  I  stress  on  the  importance  of  innovative  ideas,  I  must  also  caution  that  destructive 
innovations that led to the global financial crisis are not in the interest of anyone. The field of 
finance and banking often attracts the best from among the youth. Any misuse of the financial 
system – caused by the actions of a few smart educated individuals – could impact the life of a 
billion plus population. I need not emphasize the importance of ethics and value systems to this 
audience. India avoided a financial crisis at home in the midst of a severe global contagion. It is 
our collective responsibility to raise this ethical awareness. Trusted newspapers such as The 
Hindu can take the lead here. 
One  cannot  look  to  the  government  to  solve  every  problem.  Similarly  banks  cannot  provide 
solutions to all your needs. It is the responsibility of everybody to build the future of tomorrow. 
That includes civil society such as the Save Nilgiris Campaign which is doing good work in the 
Nilgiris. Government and banks can at best facilitate the process of economic development. 
Let me take the example of quality education and housing mentioned earlier. Recent estimates 
suggest that for every one percent increase in GDP, demand for education loan increases by 
3 per cent, and demand for housing loans increases by 5 per cent. Given the demography, as 
income increases, more and more students would aspire to get quality education, as a means 
to  a  better  future.  On  the  other  hand,  the  costs  of  private  quality  education  seem  to  be 
increasing  significantly  in  recent  years.  After  education,  once  they  get  gainful  employment, 
decent housing will be the next aspiration. While banks will have to meet the aspirations of the 
youth by ensuring access to credit at competitive price, to get quality education and shelter, the 
private sector would have to recognize that artificially created inflation driven by unreasonable 
profit  motives  in  these  two  critical  segments  would  be  a  constraint  to  our  growth  and 
development ambitions. 
This leads to me to another critical challenge to our future growth – i.e. inclusive growth. High 
growth  that  coexists  with  rising  inequality  will  become  unsustainable  at  some  point.  As 
inclusive growth is not possible without financial inclusion, the RBI’s vision is that everyone in 
the country should first have access to financial products and services, which is being achieved 
in  phased  manner.  The  rationale  behind  this  is  that  access  to  finance,  along  with  fair  and 
transparent  products/services, is a source of empowerment  and allows  people to participate 
more effectively in the economic and social process. Our dream of inclusive growth cannot be 
realized unless we properly educate and make employable the future generation of youth and 
create millions of micro-entrepreneurs across the country. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
