Andreas Dombret: Sino-German Financial Stability Forum – introductory 
statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the  Sino-German  High  Level  Workshop,  Frankfurt  am  Main, 
11 July 2011. 
 Welcome remarks, background 
1 
Dear Mr YI Gang, dear guests, it is a great pleasure to welcome you to this Sino-German 
workshop,  which  is  being  held  within  the  framework  of  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  in 
Frankfurt.  Our  goal  of  an  in-depth  exchange  of  ideas  and  experience  relating  to  financial 
stability is part of the overall project of closer cooperation between China and Germany, as 
agreed  last  summer  during  Chancellor  Angela  Merkel’s  state  visit  to  China.  This  closer 
cooperation  is  evidenced  both  by  the  first  Sino-German  intergovernmental  consultation  in 
Berlin that took place from 27 to 28 June 2011 and by this workshop.  
Both  countries  share  many  features.  One  outstanding  common  factor  is  that  China  and 
Germany occupy the top two spots on the list of leading export nations and, as countries that 
routinely run up a current account surplus, therefore sometimes hear calls to contribute to 
global “rebalancing” by strengthening domestic demand.  
The two countries also display clear differences, especially in terms of the openness, depth 
and  diversification  of  their  respective  financial  systems  and  financial  markets.  Germany  is 
part  of  a  monetary  union,  while  the  Renminbi  is  beginning  to  gain  in  importance  as  an 
international currency. This is where an exchange of views on the lessons learned during the 
current financial crisis is likely to be of particular mutual interest today.  
The  structure  of  the  workshop  programme  and  the  range  of  issues  covered  ensure  that 
specific  aspects  of  financial  stability  policy  in  China  and  Germany  will  be  given  sufficient 
space.  
In this introductory statement, I would like to focus on the following four points:  
 
 
 
 
Strengthening the international financial system  
Interactions between monetary policy and macroprudential policy  
Risks of the low-interest rate environment  
And developments in commodity prices  
Strengthening the international financial system 
2 
My first point relates to the current debate on potential recommendations and measures to 
strengthen the international monetary system during the French presidency of the G20 group 
of  countries.  As  you  know,  these  issues  are  currently  being  discussed  in  a  G20  working 
group, particularly measures to manage international capital flows and global liquidity. Public 
political statements and comments reflect clear differences between some emerging market 
economies and the advanced countries, although a greater consensus on several of these 
issues has been achieved in recent months.  
These relate, in particular, to different assessments of what is the right way to respond to the 
increasing  volume  and  volatility  of  international  capital  flows,  and  especially  attitudes  to 
capital controls. Many emerging economies point to the need for a policy mix that is tailored 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
to their country’s specific economic and financial structures in order to protect internal price 
stability and financial stability against the consequences of large capital inflows and sudden 
stops. The range of measures deployed is correspondingly broad. Some countries intervene 
on the foreign exchange markets, others resort to interest rate cuts in order to discourage 
capital  inflows,  another  group  focuses  mainly  on  macroprudential  measures  in  a  bid  to 
strengthen the ability of their domestic financial systems to absorb inflows, while yet other 
nations mainly or partly employ capital controls.  
This broad variety of national responses inevitably begs the question of whether and to what 
extent  they  are  consistent  with  global  financial  stability.  Greater  cooperation,  for  instance 
through  a  (non-binding)  framework  or  guidelines  both  at  the  national  and  the  global  level, 
might  be  a  more  effective  way  of  safeguarding  financial  stability.  Moreover,  it  has  to  be 
further clarified whether an incorporation of Capital Flow Management into the surveillance 
mandate  of  the  International  Monetary  Fund  could  contribute  to  better  outcomes  on  the 
global level. As Jaques De Larosière recently highlighted: An international monetary system 
worthy  of  the  name  should  ensure  that  national  interests  and  measures  lead  to  globally 
stable solutions. In my view, this is much the same way that, in a market economy, the sum 
of individual decisions should add up to a rational macroeconomic whole. 
It is well known that Germany is a firm proponent of a free movement of capital. This position 
is  not  anchored  in  its  general  belief  in  a  market  economy  but  also  reflects  its  own  past 
experience with capital controls. As an export nation, Germany was particularly interested in 
rapidly achieving full convertibility of its own currency. It has completely liberalised its capital 
exports  back  in  the  early  1960s.  However,  it  proved  impossible  to  sustainably  liberalise 
capital imports in the same way. Operating within a fixed exchange rate regime, Germany on 
several  occasions  imposed  temporary  restrictions  on  capital  imports  in  response  to  large 
speculative capital inflows during the 1960s and early 1970s. This measures aim of assuring 
the  effectiveness  of  the  Bundesbank’s  monetary  policy  with  its  primary  objective  of 
safeguarding domestic price stability. 
Several  emerging  market  economies  are  currently  in  a  comparable  situation  to  that  of 
Germany in the 1960s and early 1970s, in particular in terms of the state of development of 
their financial markets. However, looking back at these events objectively in the mid-1980s, 
the Bundesbank concluded that capital controls had proved ineffective, even as a temporary 
shield for monetary policy. In the long term, the parallel opening up of product markets and 
financial markets has proved to be an enduring model of success in Germany. 
Monetary policy and macroprudential policy 
3 
The  second  issue  that  I  would  briefly  like  to  highlight  here  is  the  interaction  between 
monetary policy and macroprudential policy, which is sure to be discussed in greater depth 
during  the  workshop.  The  international  debate  to  date  has  indicated  agreement  that 
monetary policy must always be focused primarily on the objective of price stability. There is 
much  less  of  a  consensus  on  what  role  monetary  policy  can  effectively  play  to  prevent 
financial  crises,  and  whether  and  to  what  extent  it  can  intervene  early  to  help  combat  the 
emergence of financial market distortions and asset price bubbles – the “lean versus clean 
debate” is just one aspect of this issue.  
What is clear, meanwhile, is that the financial crisis has significantly increased the overlap 
between  monetary  policy,  prudential 
supervision  and  macroprudential  policy. 
Macroprudential policy has to play a key role in dampening the procyclicality of the financial 
system. But its toolbox includes instruments that have an immediate impact on the monetary 
policy transmission channel, eg the credit channel. This interaction between monetary policy 
and macroprudential policy will be one of the most important areas for research over the next 
few  years.  The  overriding  aim  must  be  to  achieve  sustainable  and  practicable  results  that 
can quickly and effectively underpin monetary policy. This fast implementation would enable 
it to pursue a steady monetary policy course geared to anchoring inflation expectations. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Macroprudential  policy  requires  its  own  instruments  and  must  be  clearly  delineated  from 
microprudential policy. Under the German government’s ten-point plan, the Bundesbank has 
a key role to play in macroprudential policy. This role is to be steadily expanded in order to 
strengthen  the  Bundesbank’s  ability  to  act  in  this  field.  It  must  be  “permanently  able  to 
identify  systemic  risks  on  the  financial  markets”.  The  Bundesbank  is  currently  considering 
how best it can effectively implement this mandate both materially and organisationally.  
Risks of a low-interest rate environment 
4 
Third, I would like to mention an issue to which the Bundesbank devoted a whole chapter in 
its  most  recent  Financial  Stability  Review:  the  risks  to  financial  stability  associated  with  a 
low-interest  rate  environment.  Recent  empirical  studies  show  that  low  interest  rates 
encourage  excessive  risk-taking.  This  aspect  not  only  represents  a  new  and  effective 
transmission  channel  for  monetary  policy,  but  is  also  highly  relevant  for  financial  stability 
policy. This also applies to the international bond markets which – as seen in similar earlier 
phases  –  are  strongly  boosted  by  currency  carry  trades  and  leveraging,  but  then  prove 
extremely  sensitive  and  fragile  when  the  interest  rate  trend  reverses,  as  witnessed  in  the 
bond market turmoil of 1994 and thereafter. Back then, an unexpectedly small Fed rate hike 
was seen as a trigger of the bond market turmoil.  
The  recent  financial  crisis  has  added  an  important  new  element:  the  structure  of  the 
international  bond  markets  has  shifted  considerably  in  recent  years,  partly  in  response  to 
financial market crises. For example, the Fed is now the largest investor on the US Treasury 
market, ahead of China and Japan. Low interest rates and the risk channel not only point to 
the need for an early exit from non-standard monetary policy measures – even if no risks to 
price  stability  are  on  the  horizon.  The  current  monetary  environment  in  some  advanced 
economies also point to the vital importance, in view of the aforementioned risks, of carefully 
and skilfully communicating the monetary policy exit strategy. 
Greater amplitudes of commodity price trends 
5 
Low interest rates and plentiful global liquidity are frequently cited as causes of the growing 
amplitudes of commodity prices – and this is the fourth aspect that I would like to touch upon. 
Global investors – some commentators say – are driving up commodity prices in their quest 
to maximise yield and diversify their portfolios through speculative investment. The issue of 
“commodity price trends”, which is also on the G20’s agenda during the French presidency, 
should – in my view – be given high priority for two important reasons. First, it directly affects 
the poorest sections of the world’s population. And second, it has a direct and much larger 
impact  on  price  stability  than  asset  prices.  This  is  particularly  true  in  the  emerging  market 
economies, in  which  commodities  have  a  large  weight  in  price  indices and  therefore  force 
monetary  policymakers  to  raise  interest  rates  more  quickly,  thereby  attracting  more 
short-term capital inflows.  
That  makes  it  all  the  more  important  to  analyse  the  commodity  markets  and  derive  the 
corresponding  policy  recommendations  in  a  non-dogmatic  and  systematic  fashion.  First  of 
all, it should be noted that real supply and demand factors have, for several years, shown a 
co-movement  towards  making  commodities  scarcer  and  pushing  up  commodity  prices. 
Moreover,  trade  restrictions  in  several  commodity-exporting  countries  and  subsidies  are 
impairing the effectiveness of the price mechanism on the commodity markets. The empirical 
studies published to date leave a key question unanswered, however, namely the extent to 
which speculative investment in the commodity markets amplify price cycles. Nonetheless, 
there is growing evidence that financial investments do indeed amplify price cycles and at 
least sometimes help ensure that price trends, despite the underlying parallelism, are being 
determined more by the futures than the spot markets. With this in mind, the Bundesbank 
broadly  supports  proposals  aimed  at  significantly  improving  the  data  on,  as  well  as  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
the  commodities  markets  and  market 
transparency  and  efficiency  of,  the  markets  and  a  more  intensive  monitoring.  In  addition, 
supervision  of 
infrastructure  might  be  
strengthened – as market participants have occasionally suggested themselves.  
Ladies and gentlemen, even this short overview shows what a long way we have to go to 
achieve  financial  stability.  Developing  a  viable  monetary  policy  operational  strategy  has 
taken  several  decades;  we  will  not  have  that  much  time  to  come  up  with  a  sustainable 
macroprudential strategy. Nonetheless, expectations should be anchored at a realistic level; 
the  crucial  requirement  is  to  make  sustainable  and  lasting  progress.  The  exchange  of 
experience between countries is an important element in this process.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
