Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: European democracies and decision-making in 
times of crisis 
Speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, at the Hellenic Foundation for European and Foreign Policy, 8th European Seminar 
2001, Adjusting to the Crisis Policy Choices and Politics in Europe, Poros, 8 July 2011. 
 Thank you very much for inviting me to address this conference in Poros.  
I would like to speak about a very topical theme: the capacity of democracies to take difficult 
and pressing decisions in critical times. The sovereign debt crisis has brought this issue to 
the fore in both creditor and debtor countries in Europe. Recent experience has shown that 
tough  decisions  are  often  taken  only  on  the  brink  of  the  abyss,  when  the  fateful 
consequences of not taking such decisions become all too evident to governments and to 
those they govern. This creates at least five highly undesirable outcomes, in particular within 
the European context.  
First,  it  increases  uncertainty  in  financial  markets  about  the  course  that  will  ultimately  be 
followed.  This  explains  why  spreads  have  systematically  increased  when  decisions  were 
postponed, even when clear deadlines were set. 
Second, the longer a decision is delayed, the more unpalatable it ultimately becomes, as the 
action  required  to  calm  the  markets  and  to  restore  stability  has  to  be  even  stronger.  This 
applies not only to the measures which are needed to correct the budgetary imbalance but 
also to the size of the financial package required to support the country which no longer has 
market access. An example: if Greece, and the Eurogroup, had not waited until May 2010 to 
address  the  crisis  but  had  done  so  several  months  earlier,  the  fiscal  adjustment  would 
probably have been milder, market access would not have been so impaired and the size of 
the financial support by the other countries would have been smaller.  
Third, by putting off difficult decisions until the very last moment, interim or partial solutions 
tend to be adopted, instead of more lasting ones. Crises then drag out as one quick fix gives 
way to another without the underlying weakness being addressed. An example: last year’s 
less-than-stringent  stress  tests  in  certain  euro  area  countries  failed  to  take  account  of 
concerns about the robustness of the financial sector, so the exercise is being repeated this 
year.  
Fourth, as the sequence of quick fixes proves to be ineffective in getting to the root of the 
problem,  reform  fatigue  starts  to  spread  and  people  become  less  willing  to  accept 
increasingly  unpalatable  measures.  The  result  is  a  blurring  of  the  difference  between  the 
negative but short-term impact of the necessary adjustment on the one hand and the disaster 
which  would  result  from  inaction  on  the  other. This  in  turn  increases  the  risk  of  taking  the 
wrong  –  irrational  –  decision.  The  narrow  vote  in  favour  of  the  adjustment  programme  in 
Greece  at  the  end  of  June  2011,  amid  widespread  protests  and  with  strong  opposition  in 
parliament, illustrates this risk. 
Fifth, if people do not realise how close they are to the abyss, and thus do not support the 
adoption of the unpalatable decisions, policy-makers have to make them aware of the risks 
by  appealing  directly  to  them,  which  may  in  turn  frighten  and  unsettle  the  markets.  For 
example, in May 2010 the claim that the euro was at risk, which was made in countries like 
Germany to justify the creation of the European Financial Stability Facility, added to market 
turbulence and may, over time, cause citizens to lose confidence in their currency.  
These outcomes are mutually reinforcing and can lead to a perverse spiral. In the European 
context,  this  applies  not  only  to  the  countries  in  distress,  which  have  to  implement  tough 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
adjustment  programmes,  but  also  to  the  countries  which  are  expected  to  provide  financial 
support conditional on the implementation of the programmes.  
These  collective  action  dilemmas  in  decision-making  do  not  apply  solely  to  European 
democracies.  The  current  debate  about  the  debt  ceiling  in  the  US,  with  some  politicians 
openly  speculating  about  a  technical  default,  is  a  clear  example  of  democratic  decision-
makers avoiding tough decisions until they are pressured to make them. Similarly, Lehman 
Brothers’  failure  in  September  2008  showed  that  waiting  for  too  long  on  the  brink  of  the 
abyss  does  not  necessarily  lead  to  the  right  decision.  It  showed,  too,  that  the  costs  of  a 
disaster  are  much  higher  than  those  arising  from  unpalatable  decisions  taken  at  an  early 
stage. 
What  makes  the  difference  between  the  euro  area  and  other  cases  is  that  failure  to  take 
prompt  action  in  the  latter  is  considered  to  be  a  policy  mistake,  even  if  it  has  dire 
consequences, but it does not call into question the whole institutional and political set-up. 
When  Lehman  Brothers  collapsed  and  the  US  Congress  initially  voted  down  the  TARP  in 
September 2008, the dollar was not considered to be at risk. In Europe though, a crisis is 
sometimes considered by outside observers as putting the euro, and the Union itself, at risk 
of disintegration. Academics and other experts deliberate on whether the euro area is viable 
and how it can be rescued. Closet eurosceptics suddenly reappear, dusting off their I-told-
you-so commentaries. And politicians feel compelled to restate their faith in and commitment 
to the euro and the Union.  
The  issue  is  all  the  more  surprising  given  that,  overall,  the  euro  area  is  progressively 
recovering  from  the  2008–09  recession,  with  some  countries  performing  strongly.  The 
average budget and deficit in the euro area is substantially lower than in other parts of the 
world. Its labour market has proved more resilient and industry more competitive. The three 
countries in distress under the IMF/EU adjustment programmes account for about 6% of euro 
area  GDP.  Furthermore,  we  should  not  forget  that  we  have  experienced  the  biggest 
economic and financial crisis since the Second World War. 
The euro is a construct without precedent and was hit by the crisis before reaching the age of 
ten. Had it been perfect from the start, from conception to launch, and capable of facing up to 
all possible challenges and crises, the single currency would have been a miracle. The crisis 
has  shown  that  the  euro  is  an  incomplete  construct  and  needs  to  be  completed.  This 
incompleteness  has  compounded  the  difficulties  that  our  democracies  face  in  taking 
unpalatable  decisions  in  difficult  times,  and  thus  it  increases  the  risk  of  postponing  those 
decisions for too long. 
For  the  euro  to  grow  stronger  as  a  result  of  this  crisis,  we  need  to  understand  its 
shortcomings and address them. More importantly, we should not delude ourselves that the 
euro  can  be  strengthened  just  by  copying  other  models.  For  instance,  we  often  hear  that 
unless the euro is backed by a fiscal union, as in the US, it cannot survive. Reasoning by 
analogy is not only wrong in this specific case, it is impractical and politically unrealistic. But 
this should not discourage us from looking at long-term solutions, even if they require Treaty 
changes.  
While considering such solutions, let me raise a few issues which, in my view, have not been 
fully  addressed  in  the  recent  debates  and  which  should  help  us  to  better  understand  the 
challenges  ahead.  My  main  thesis  is  that  monetary  union  entails  in  itself  a  much  greater 
degree  of  political  union  than  many  commentators,  politicians,  academics  and  even  the 
public ever thought. This is due to the fact that, in a monetary union, decisions taken in some 
parts affect other parts, in a very direct and sometimes dramatic way. Even more importantly, 
in  a  monetary  union,  some  specific  national  problems  can  only  be  dealt  with  through 
decisions  taken  jointly,  with  a  euro  area  perspective.  In  concrete  terms,  the  problems 
currently  affecting  Greece,  which  accounts  for  2%  of  euro  area  GDP,  are  influencing  the 
whole of the area and need to be resolved through tough decisions, not only in Athens but 
also in Brussels.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The  fact  is,  the  people  of  the  different  Member  States  have  not  fully  understood  that  we 
already have a political union. Furthermore, the institutional framework does not provide  a 
decision-making process that is fully compatible with such a political union. Let me elaborate. 
A  starting  point  is  the  limited  awareness  of  the  euro’s  political  dimension.  That  dimension 
results  from  the  interconnectedness  of  the  financial  markets  and  the  transmission  of  real, 
monetary  and  financial  impulses  within  the  area.  As  a  result,  governments  and  citizens 
throughout the monetary union should not only be concerned about what happens in their 
respective  countries,  but  also  in  the  other  countries,  because  the  latter  can  have  a  direct 
impact on their lives. In other words, it’s not sufficient for each member of the union to keep 
its own house in order, so that its underlying economic, financial and budgetary conditions 
are consistent with a sustainable membership of the euro area. The others have to do the 
same. There must thus be a mechanism of mutual monitoring of economic development and 
policies which ensures that all members comply with the requirements. This demands active 
participation by the different governments in the supervision of each others’ policies. This has 
however not been the case in practice.  
Governments have a mandate from their respective national electorates mainly to take policy 
decisions for their own countries. There is limited awareness in the domestic political arena 
that governments are also responsible for monitoring the other members of the euro area, in 
particular in respect of the Stability and Growth Pact (SGP) and ensuring that they abide by 
it. In concrete terms, if a country records a budget deficit which is found to be excessive in 
the  sense  of  the  SGP,  it  is  certainly  that  country’s  responsibility  to  correct  it  promptly. 
However, it is also the responsibility of the other countries, within the procedures established 
under the SGP (which also foresee an initiator role for the Commission) to ensure that the 
correction is fully and vigorously implemented. In other words, if a country does not comply, it 
should  be  pressured  by  the  others.  And  if  the  others  do  not  do  this,  they  also  become 
responsible  for  such  non-compliance.  This  was  the  political  motivation  for  establishing  the 
SGP. 
EU Member States, their governments and citizens, do not seem to be fully aware of such a 
sharing of responsibility. As Mario Monti recently put it, governments are too polite to each 
other,  maybe  in  the  expectation  that  if  they  find  themselves  being  accused  of  the  same 
transgressions one day, they would then benefit from the forgiveness of the others. Such a 
“non-aggression  pact”  between  potential  offenders  tends  to  lift  the  burden  of  responsibility 
from countries and creates a form of moral hazard, which encourages indiscipline. 
The  decision  taken  by  the  ECOFIN  Council  in  November  2003  not  to  act  on  the 
Commission’s recommendations regarding excessive deficit procedures against France and 
Germany may have sown the seeds for such non-aggression pact between countries in the 
budgetary surveillance procedure. It may also have weakened the surveillance mission of the 
Commission, thus undermining the political basis of the monetary union. 
To  sum  up,  in  such  a  union,  governments  should  be  accountable  not  only  for  their  own 
policies,  but  also  for  checking  the  policies  of  the  other  members.  Voters  should  hold  their 
representatives accountable for their domestic policies and for how they act under the SGP 
in constraining the policies of the others, because these policies, especially if they are out of 
line, will affect them in turn.  
No such system of accountability has existed so far. This does not mean that it’s too late to 
start  it.  People  in  Europe  now  want  to  know  why  surveillance  was  not  sufficiently  robust 
before the crisis and why certain countries were admitted without having a sufficiently strong 
institutional  framework  that  could  prevent  a  build-up  of  excessive  debt,  public  or  private. 
These questions need to be answered if the mistakes of the past are not to be repeated. The 
attempt by  certain politicians to shift the responsibility for  monitoring and disciplining other 
countries’ policies to the financial markets betrays the spirit of the union, which is based on 
strong budgetary rules to be implemented and monitored by the member states. As we know, 
markets  often  react  late,  tend  to  over-react  and  to  be  pro-cyclical,  behave  as  a  herd  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
follow  acritically  rating  agencies.  Policy  makers  cannot  complain  about  this  behaviour  
–  occasionally  even  threaten  market  participants  with  coercive  actions  –  and  at  the  same 
time delegate to these same markets the fate of their economies. 
Another  problem  which  arises  from  the  still  essentially  domestic  nature  of  political  life  in 
Europe  is  the  lack  of  understanding  of  the  global  dimension  of  the  euro.  Discussions  on 
economic  and  financial  policies  are  conducted  in  each  country  largely  on  the  basis  of 
national information and national considerations. There are very few places where a euro-
area-wide view is held, the ECB being one of them. This may in part be due to the fact that 
the euro area has no true financial centre that all Europeans can look at to understand how 
markets affect their everyday lives. Financial integration has moved forward, but not yet to 
the point of transforming national savers into European ones.  
As  a  result,  policy-makers  tend  to  take  decisions  related  to  the  euro  area  mainly  from  a 
domestic  perspective,  taking  into  account  the  national  electorate,  national  parliament  and 
national economic conditions. Let me give a couple of examples of this, relating in particular 
to the sovereign debt crisis in Greece. 
It  has  proved  difficult  in  many  countries  outside  Greece,  especially  in  those  where  the 
economy  has  been  recovering  well  and  unemployment  falling,  to  fully  grasp  the  global 
ramifications of the crisis, the potential for contagion and thus the ultimate risks to taxpayers 
even in the creditor countries. The German parliament in May 2010 called on Jean-Claude 
Trichet  and  Dominique  Strauss-Kahn  to  explain  the  risks  associated  with  the  Greek  crisis, 
because  Berlin’s  outlook  was  different:  the  German  economy  was  recovering  well  and  no 
dangers were evident.  
Another  example  is  the  attempt  to  involve  private  creditors  in  the  financing  of  the  Greek 
adjustment  programme.  While  this  objective  is  generally  welcomed  by  some  countries’ 
taxpayers – who certainly are attracted to the idea that their money should not be used to 
bail out banks – it can under certain circumstances – in particular in the midst of a financial 
crisis – lead to outcomes which are even more costly for them. Policy makers should explain 
under which circumstances forced involvement by the bondholders would entail higher costs 
for taxpayers. This is not an easy task because it requires putting rational arguments before 
emotional  feelings.  The  main  objective  of  some  elected  politicians  seems  instead  to 
accommodate  the  instinctive  reaction  of  their  national  electorate,  even  bashing  the  central 
bank  when  it  tries  to  bring  some  rationality  in  the  discussion.  As  a  result,  sub-optimal 
decisions are taken, as the experience since mid-October 2010 has shown. 
Adding  to  this  complexity  is  the  general  tendency  of  the  national  media  to  reflect  mainly 
national views, and to overlook giving the diversity of perspectives and the broader European 
view. When difficult decisions have to be taken which involve potentially conflicting interests 
between  countries,  particularly  between  debtors  and  creditors,  the  national  media  tend  to 
adopt  extreme  positions  and  to  resort  to  stereotypical  descriptions  of the  others. We  have 
seen  examples  of  such  behaviour  in  some  Greek  and  German  newspapers.  A  more 
moderate “European” view, which tries to explain the common interest, has great difficulty in 
finding  an  audience  in  the  various  countries.  This  makes  it  even  more  difficult  for national 
politicians  to  search  for  compromise  in  the  broader  European,  and  ultimately  national, 
interest.  
National governments have to take their parliaments’ views into account, which is perfectly 
understandable.  However,  this  may  paralyse  European  decision-making,  especially  if  it  is 
based  on  inter-governmental  agreements  and  requires  unanimity.  This  is  not  the  case  for 
most decisions foreseen in the Treaty, such as those underlying the functioning of the SGP. 
However,  unanimity  was  required  for  several  decisions  which  were  taken  in  the  crisis,  in 
particular with respect to financial assistance. 
The sovereign debt crisis has shown the need for a safety net for those governments which 
lose  access  to  financial  markets  while  undertaking  an  adjustment  programme.  Such  a  net 
had to be rapidly put in place in the form of the European Financial Stability Facility, with the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
long-term  solution  being  a  modification  of  the  Treaty  and  the  creation  of  the  European 
Stability Mechanism. In all these cases, unanimity is required for all decisions, not only in the 
set-up of the scheme, but also in its modification and activation. This is a clear shortcoming. 
It would be as if the IMF had to gain the unanimous support of its Executive Board to decide 
on  each  and  every  country  programme.  No  doubt  it  would  severely  impede  and  delay 
decision-making  at  the  IMF.  It  is  surprising  that  European  countries  have  accepted  a 
majority,  or  a  qualified  majority  system,  at  the  IMF  –  in  which  paradoxically  the  US  has 
enough votes to block some decisions – but require unanimity to decide among themselves, 
within the European mechanism, thus making it very difficult to decide, especially at times of 
crises.  
When taking critical decisions that affect the stability of the euro area, the European Council 
risks becoming like the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth of several centuries ago, in which 
any member of the legislature could block any decision. We know how it ended.  
Such a system is certainly not the best way to manage a major currency area. The ECB has 
expressed its views on this in the past and hopefully some changes will be made in the light 
of experience. 
So how can we improve the institutional framework in Europe? 
In my view, we should strengthen the capacity of EU institutions to take collective decisions. 
This would require three components: first, reducing the degree of inter-governmentalism in 
decision-making  and  thus  diluting  the  unanimity  principle;  second,  strengthening  the  rules 
that constrain national decision-making; and third, establishing a more effective enforcer of 
those rules. 
I have already mentioned the weaknesses of the decision-making process when addressing 
crises.  There  are  counter-arguments  to  my  view,  which  have  been  put  forward  by 
distinguished  commentators  and  policy-makers.  However,  experience  –  the  exchange  rate 
mechanism and the debt crisis are two examples – has shown that under such a mechanism 
decisions  are  systematically  taken  too  late  and  that  the  burden  on  taxpayers  ultimately 
increases.  All  those  who  attach  importance  to  the  interests  of  taxpayers  should  reflect  on 
this.  Let  me  be  clear.  I  am  not  calling  for  a  fiscal  union  or  fiscal  transfers  to  be  decided 
through  a  majority  system.  I  am  just  warning  that  unless  decisions  concerning  the 
implementation  of  a  financial  safety  net  are  taken  more  efficiently,  i.e.  through  a 
communitarian approach based on majority decisions, as is the case at global (IMF) level, 
the risk of implicit transfers will actually increase, which may not be in the interest of most 
taxpayers.  Experience  of  over  50 years  has  shown  that  IMF  shareholders,  i.e.  taxpayers, 
have never  lost money under such a system. Why innovate? There are many other areas 
where European creativity can be better put at work! 
The second component – strengthening the rules – is already under way at EU level via the 
economic  governance  reform  package.  While  we  still  have  some  misgivings  about  the 
current  proposals  –  which  in  our  view  do  not  go  far  enough  –  progress  is  being  made.  In 
particular, the SGP should have been further streamlined to avoid drawn-out procedures and 
reducing the margins for discretion through the greater use of reverse majority voting. The 
European Parliament has in any event pushed hard in this area, but at the current juncture it 
remains to be seen how successful its efforts will eventually be. 
Much  can  be  done  also  at  national  level,  without  having  to  change  the  Treaty  or  EU 
secondary law. For instance, the introduction of debt ceilings into national legislation that are 
consistent with  stability  programmes  approved  by  the  Council  would  arrest  excessive  debt 
growth  even  before  EU  procedures  were  initiated.  Rather  like  “neighbourhood  watch” 
programmes in local communities, this would also spread policing responsibilities and involve 
national parliaments and fiscal institutions in enforcing the rules. 
Debt ceilings, however, contain an inherent “good times” bias – there is nothing to prevent 
national  governments  infringing  them  when  difficult  decisions  about  adjustment  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
consolidation have to be taken. One way to prevent this – and to ensure that decisions are in 
the collective interest – would be to make public debt issuance a union competence for euro 
area countries. Member States could transfer to a supra-national agency the right to issue 
their  debt,  up  to  levels  agreed  by  the  Council  in  the  context  of  the  yearly  approval  of  the 
stability programmes. It would no longer be possible to issue debt to cover expenditure over 
the debt limit set every year.  
Had such a system been in place, Greece would neither have been able to hide nor incur the 
higher  deficits  and  debts  in  2009  or  in  the  preceding  years.  It  would  have  been  forced  to 
adopt corrective measures at a much earlier stage. The same would have applied to other 
countries.  
This  strong constraint  –  a  genuine  “debt  brake”  –  would  force  a  country  to  make  an  early 
decision when its public debt gets too close to the agreed limit. Either it would come up with 
immediate additional consolidation, or it would have to request the support of the European 
Stability  Mechanism  to  finance  its  residual  deficit.  In  this  latter  case  consolidation  would 
happen  via  an  adjustment  programme  and  strong  conditionality.  In  both  scenarios,  the 
damaging  effects  that  deferred  decisions  have  on  the  rest  of  the  euro  area  –  as  we  have 
witnessed with every financial assistance package over the last year – would be mitigated. 
This is not a proposal for so-called Eurobonds. National treasuries would still be responsible 
for their own debt, and there would be different debt instruments from one country to another, 
but the total amount for each country would have to be approved by the Eurogroup, as is 
currently done for the yearly stability programmes, and it would be binding. There would be 
no need for explicit or implicit transfers, or tax sharing – ideas often included in Eurobond 
proposals  –  as  the  costs  of  an  excessive  fiscal  policy  would  remain  with  the  country 
concerned.  
The  third  component  in  strengthening  euro  area  decision-making  is  to  establish  a  strong 
enforcer of the rules. In this regard, the euro area faces its own “impossible trinity”: countries 
do not want to exert peer pressure; the Commission prefers to mediate than to police; and 
the IMF is only an occasional player in EU affairs. As the euro area has to have a way of 
both monitoring policies and ensuring their compatibility with monetary union, one of these 
has to give.  
This applies not only to fiscal policies but also to other policies which can cause imbalances 
within the area. 
In  my  view,  the  change  has  to  come  via  the  Commission,  in  particular  by  clarifying  its 
institutional  function  and  improving  its  independence.  The  former  could  be  achieved  by 
enhancing the role of the Economic and Monetary Affairs Commissioner in the correction or, 
ideally,  the  prevention  of  improper  budgetary  policies,  and  by  giving  him  or  her  a  strong 
mandate to rigorously enforce the rules and sanctions.  
These  proposals  for  stronger  rules  and  tougher  enforcement  naturally  raise  questions  of 
accountability.  Democracies  take  their  time  because  a  wrong  decision,  or  even  a  prudent 
decision that the public does not fully understand, will incur voter displeasure on election day. 
But  if  the  recommendations  of  a  stronger  enforcer  of  the  rules  do  not  produce  good 
outcomes, who is to hold him or her accountable? This is a very complex question which I 
cannot  fully  address  here.  One  solution  might  be  to  have  the  European  Parliament  more 
involved.  
But  ultimately  an  enforcer  of  rules  cannot  be  held  accountable  for  outcomes.  The 
responsibility  falls  on  democratically  elected  governments  to  agree  the  right  rules  ex  ante 
and give the enforcer an appropriate mandate. If outcomes are unsatisfactory, governments 
must change the rules and mandates, and explain why to the public.  
Let me conclude. Winston Churchill said: “You can always count on Americans to do the right 
thing – after they’ve tried everything else”. The last 18 months suggest that Europeans, too, 
may  do  the  right  thing,  after  trying  everything  else.  However,  in  today’s  world,  with 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
sophisticated  financial  markets,  deferring  decisions  creates  uncertainty,  entails  substantial 
costs  and may  undermine  the  political  cohesion  of  the  Union.  This  is  particularly  the  case 
when, as J.K. Galbraith observed: “Politics consists in choosing between the disastrous and 
the unpalatable”. To see disaster looming before choosing the unpalatable is a dangerous 
strategy.  
European  history  before  the  creation  of  the  EU  is  full  of  examples  of  irrational,  emotional  
–  and  sometimes  dramatic  –  decisions  which  have  actually  aggravated  a  crisis  instead  of 
resolving it. The European Union has helped to avoid any repetition of such tragic mistakes 
over the last 60 years, thanks to some visionary leaders and strong institutions. 
A further strengthening of the institutional framework is now required to help our European 
democracies take timely decisions in a global world. This in turn means that the euro area’s 
institutional model has to be adapted to the fact that monetary union is a political union. Like 
all innovations, a process of steady adjustment and refinement is needed in order to create 
the finished product. The way ahead is not necessarily to imitate other forms of political union – 
such  as  the  United  States’  fiscal  federation.  Europe’s  undertaking  has  no  precedent.  It 
demands original thinking, as much as, if not more than, that of America’s founding fathers in 
their times. It certainly also demands their courage and leadership. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
