Masaaki Shirakawa: Semiannual Report on Currency and Monetary 
Control 
Statement by Mr Masaaki Shirakawa, Governor of the Bank of Japan, concerning the Bank’s 
Semiannual Report on Currency and Monetary Control, before the Committee on Financial 
Affairs, House of Representatives, Tokyo, 13 July 2011. 
 Introduction 
The  Bank  of  Japan  submits  to  the  Diet  its  Semiannual  Report  on  Currency  and  Monetary 
Control in June and December. Most recently, the Bank submitted the report for the second 
half  of  fiscal  2010  on  June 10, 2011.  I  am  pleased  to  have  this  opportunity  to  talk  about 
recent  developments  in  Japan’s  economy  and  present  an  overall  review  of  the  Bank’s 
conduct of monetary policy. 
Economic and financial developments in Japan 
I. 
I will first explain economic and financial developments in Japan. 
Japan’s economy faced strong downward pressure, mainly on the production side, due to the 
effects  of  the  Great  East  Japan  Earthquake  that  occurred  on  March 11.  The  earthquake 
disaster  caused  damage  to  production  facilities  in  a  wide  range  of  areas  and  consequent 
constraints on the supply of parts and materials led to supply-chain disruptions. Moreover, 
serious  damage  to  power  generating  facilities  resulted  in  constraints  on  electric  power 
supply.  Production  declined  sharply  mainly  due  to  these  supply-side  constraints  and 
consequently exports fell. Domestic private demand also suffered to a considerable degree, 
affected in part by a deterioration in business and household sentiment. 
Four  months  after  the  earthquake,  Japan’s  economic  activity  is  picking  up  with  a  gradual 
easing  of  the  supply-side  constraints  caused  by  the  earthquake  disaster.  Production  has 
recently shown clear signs of picking up as the restoration of supply-chain disruptions has 
progressed  steadily  at  a  faster-than-expected  pace.  At  least  for  this  summer,  the  electric 
power shortages are apparently not constraining economic activity as significantly as initially 
concerned, due to a strengthening of supply capacity by electric power companies and firms 
and households’ efforts to conserve electricity and level out demand. In response to the pick-up 
in production, exports have started to increase. Domestic private demand has also begun to 
pick up, with some improvement in household and business sentiment. 
Meanwhile,  the  June  Tankan  (Short-Term  Economic  Survey  of  Enterprises  in  Japan), 
released  by  the  Bank  at  the  beginning  of  this  month,  showed  that  business  sentiment 
deteriorated compared with the March Tankan, which appeared to have hardly reflected the 
effects  of  the  disaster.  As  for  the  outlook,  however,  many  firms,  especially  in  the 
manufacturing sector, expected improvements.  The June Tankan also showed that private 
firms’ fixed investment was starting to pick up as evidenced by reasonably upbeat business 
fixed  investment  plans,  which  were  revised  upward  from  the  March  Tankan,  particularly  in 
the manufacturing sector. 
With  supply-side  constraints  easing  further  and  production  regaining  traction,  Japan’s 
economy  is  expected  to  return  to  a  moderate  recovery  path  from  the  second  half  of 
fiscal 2011,  backed  by  an  increase  in  exports  reflecting  the  improvement  in  overseas 
economic conditions and by a rise in demand for rebuilding. 
As  for  financial  conditions,  the  overnight  call  rate  has  remained  at  an  extremely  low  level, 
and the levels of firms’ funding costs have also continued to be low. Firms have continued to 
see financial institutions’ lending attitudes as being on an improving trend. Issuing conditions 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
for CP have continued to be favorable. In the corporate bond market, although the views of 
issuers and investors continue to diverge on the terms of issuance of electric power company 
bonds, issuing conditions have been favorable as a whole, leading to an increased variety of 
corporate bond issuers. In these circumstances, firms have retained their recovered financial 
positions on the whole, albeit with the observed weakness at some firms, mainly small ones. 
On the price front, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (excluding fresh food) marked 
0.6 percent in April and May. The rate turned positive in April for the first time in two years 
and four months since December 2008. As for the outlook, the year-on-year rate of change in 
the CPI is expected to remain slightly positive. However, the Bank recognizes that the year-
on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the  CPI  is  likely  to  be  revised  downward  with  the  base-year 
change scheduled for August 2011. 
Based  on  these  assessments,  Japan’s  economy  is  expected  to  return  to  a  sustainable 
growth path with price stability in the longer run. 
Let me turn to risks to the outlook I have mentioned. 
Regarding risks to the economic outlook, although concern over supply chains has subsided, 
the impact  of the earthquake disaster on Japan’s economy, especially through changes in 
household  sentiment,  still  requires  due  attention.  Moreover,  uncertainty  has  increased 
somewhat with regard to the longer-term outlook for electricity supply constraints beyond this 
summer.  With  regard  to  risks  to  overseas  economies,  the  effects  of  balance-sheet 
adjustments  on  the  U.S.  economy  and  the  possible  consequences  of  the  sovereign  risk 
problems in Europe continue to warrant attention. As for emerging and commodity-exporting 
economies,  although  many  economies  continue  monetary  tightening,  inflationary  pressure 
has not been reduced as they maintain strong growth. Therefore, there is a high degree of 
uncertainty about whether these economies will be able to make a soft landing by achieving 
price stability and economic growth at the same time.  
Regarding risks to the price outlook, inflation could rise more than expected if international 
commodity  prices  increase  further.  There  is  also  a  possibility  that  the  rate  of  inflation  will 
deviate  downward  from  the  Bank’s  baseline  scenario  due,  for  example,  to  a  decline  in 
medium- to long-term inflation expectations. 
Conduct of monetary policy 
II. 
Lastly, let me explain the Bank’s conduct of monetary policy. 
In order for Japan’s economy to overcome deflation and return to a sustainable growth path 
with price stability, the Bank has continued to consistently make contributions as the central 
bank through the three-pronged approach of pursuing powerful monetary easing consisting 
of comprehensive monetary easing, ensuring financial market stability, and providing support 
to strengthen the foundations for economic growth. 
With regard to pursuing powerful monetary easing, the Bank has encouraged the overnight 
call rate to remain at virtually zero, namely, around 0 to 0.1 percent. Moreover, the Bank has 
committed  itself  to  continue  the  virtually  zero  interest  rate  policy  until  it  judges  that  price 
stability is in sight. In order to further enhance monetary easing despite the limited room left 
for  a  further  decline  in  short-term  interest  rates,  the  Bank  has  implemented  measures  to 
encourage  a  decline  in  longer-term  market  interest  rates  and  a  reduction  in  various  risk 
premiums.  Specifically,  the  Bank  has  established  a  new  framework  called  the  Asset 
Purchase  Program  through  which  it  conducts  the  fixed-rate  funds-supplying  operation 
against pooled collateral and purchases various financial assets. The assets to be purchased 
range from long-term government bonds and treasury discount bills to risk assets such as 
CP,  corporate  bonds,  exchange-traded  funds  (ETFs),  and  Japan  real  estate  investment 
trusts  (J-REITs).  Immediately  after  the  earthquake,  the  Bank  increased  the  amount  of  its 
asset  purchases,  mainly  of  risk  assets,  with  a  view  to  preventing  any  deterioration  in 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
through 
these  assessments, 
the  Fund-Provisioning  Measure 
business sentiment or excessive increase in risk aversion from adversely affecting economic 
activity. As a result, the size of the Asset Purchase Program increased to about 40 trillion yen 
from the initial size of about 35 trillion yen.  
In addition to such pursuit of powerful monetary easing, the Bank has been implementing the 
Fund-Provisioning Measure to Support Strengthening the Foundations for Economic Growth. 
Even before the earthquake, Japan’s economy was faced with the challenge of a long-term 
downtrend  in  the  growth  potential.  This  has  led  to  a  protracted  demand  shortage  in  the 
economy  and  has  become  a  fundamental  cause  of  deflation.  After  the  recent  earthquake, 
meeting the challenge of strengthening the growth potential of the economy has become all 
the more important. 
Based  on 
to  Support 
Strengthening the Foundations for Economic Growth, the Bank has been providing funds to 
private  financial  institutions  that  are  making  efforts  in  terms  of  lending  and  investment  to 
increase the growth potential of Japan’s economy. The funds are provided with maturities of 
up to four years, against collateral such as government securities, at a very low interest rate. 
Moreover, at the Monetary Policy Meeting held in June, the Bank decided to establish a new 
line  of  credit  for  the  measure,  through  which  the  Bank  will  extend  loans  to  financial 
institutions  for  their  investments  and  loans  with  equity-like  features  and  loans  without 
conventional  collateral  or  guarantees.  The  latter  includes  lending  that  takes  movable 
property, such as inventories and machinery, or accounts receivables as collateral – the so-
called  asset-based  lending  (ABL).  The  Bank  expects  that  this  new  initiative  will  further 
enhance  financial  institutions’  efforts  to  strengthen  the  foundations  for  economic  growth 
through the use of a wider range of financial techniques. 
Furthermore,  after  the  earthquake,  in  order  to  maintain  the  financial  intermediation 
functioning  and  secure  smooth  funds  settlement,  the  Bank,  in  cooperation  with  private 
financial institutions, provided cash in the disaster areas and ensured the stable operation of 
Japan’s  core  payment  and  settlement  systems,  including  the  Bank  of  Japan  Financial 
Network System (BOJ-NET). With a view to ensuring stability in financial markets, the Bank 
also  provided  ample  funds  sufficient  to  meet  demand  in  the  markets  over  a  period  of 
successive days. Moreover, in April, it introduced the funds-supplying operation that provides 
financial institutions in disaster areas with a one-year loan of 1 trillion yen in total at a rate of 
0.1 percent  per  annum,  with  the  aim  of  supporting  these  institutions’  initial  efforts  to  meet 
demand for funds for restoration and rebuilding. At the same time, the Bank broadened the 
range  of  collateral  that  financial  institutions  in  disaster  areas  can  pledge  to  the  Bank  to 
borrow funds to ensure these institutions’ funding capacity.  
The  Bank  will  continue  to  carefully  examine  the  outlook  for  economic  activity  and  prices, 
including the effects of the disaster, and take appropriate policy actions as necessary. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
