Ardian Fullani: A summary analysis of domestic economic developments 
and the banking sector situation 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  regional  meeting, 
Shkodra, 20 January 2011. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The  Bank  of  Albania  considers  its  communication  with  the  public  a  key  element  to  an 
effective  communication  of  its  decision-making.  To  serve  this  purpose,  it  makes  use  of  all 
forms and types of communication. However, direct contact with the people provides us with 
a real perception and interpretation of their position and expectations and supports a more 
effective  decision-making  process.  Therefore,  I  am  pleased  to  be  again  in  your  city,  the 
centre of a region of well-known intellectual, cultural and patriotic heritage, which also gives a 
significant contribution to the country’s gross economic product.  
I would like, to start this direct communication with you with a summary analysis of domestic 
economic developments and, after that, dwell in more details on a number of concrete issues 
that affect the strength of relations between families and businesses on one side, and the 
financial  system  and  banking  sector  on  the  other.  During  2010,  the  Albanian  economy  is 
expected  to  have  recorded  a  satisfactory  growth.  For  the  third  quarter,  annual  economic 
growth is estimated at 4.9 per cent.  
The economic growth rate has been stable for the last two years, thus proving a good level of 
resistance to the effects of the international economic crisis. Other macroeconomic indicators 
have  ranged  within  acceptable  and  expected  levels.  It  is  worth  mentioning  that  this 
macroeconomic  stability  is  a  reflection  of  the  successful  combination  of  key  economic 
policies, that is to say, monetary and fiscal policies, during last year.  
More  specifically,  the  fiscal  policy  aimed  and  succeeded  to  realise  the  necessary 
consolidation  process 
that  accompanied  economic 
developments  in  2009.  Fiscal  consolidation  was  accomplished  through  better  control  over 
public expenditures and collection of revenues close to foreseen levels.  
The exchange rate for the national currency, regardless of its underpricing in 2009, less so in 
2010,  has  been  much  more  stable  than  currencies  of  other  countries  in  South  Eastern 
Europe,  which  apply  a  free  flexible  exchange  rate  policy.  A  gradual  under-pricing  of  the 
Albanian Lek is deemed to have had a positive affect on the reduction of trade and current 
account deficits through establishing a more favourable dynamic for our economy’s exports 
and imports.  
Eventually, it is fully proven that the adoption of a flexible exchange rate regime has been 
one  of  the  most  outstanding  choices  of  economic  and  financial  policies  over  the  past  two 
decades. 
Annual increase of consumption prices has been almost all the time within the parameters 
established  by  the  Bank  of  Albania,  namely  2–4  per  cent.  Under  moderate  inflationary 
pressures, the Bank of Albania has followed a facilitating monetary policy, injecting liquidity 
into the inter-bank market and lowering the key interest rate to the level of 5 per cent. For 
2011, macroeconomic indicators are expected to follow a trend similar to that of 2010. The 
Bank of Albania holds that last year’s successful harmonisation of the monetary policy with 
the fiscal policy should continue even further in 2011. Fiscal and monetary policies should 
aim  at  the  stability  of  these  indicators,  in  addition  to  supporting  economic  growth.  The 
influence of supply and demand factors over the exchange rate or the national currency is 
expected  to  be  balanced.  Inflationary  pressures  are  expected  to  be  moderate  this  year, 
although prices of imported goods are an apparent risk.  
fiscal  expansion 
following  a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The  Bank  of  Albania  will  maintain  its  monetary  policy  flexibility  to  prevent  any  undesired 
inflation development.  
Honourable participants, 
Next, I would like to dwell in more details on the banking sector situation and some issues 
that the Bank of Albania considers pivotal to the role of this sector in financial mediation and 
public relations, with a mutual benefit. In recent years, the banking sector, a driving force in 
the financial sector, has been a powerful supporter of the country’s economic growth through 
an  active  role  in  financial  mediation.  Certainly,  banking  activities  involve  risks,  but  the 
international  financial  crisis  of  the  last  three  years  proved  that  the  banking  sector  in  our 
country was stable and did not need public assistance to overcome the situation. Last year, 
the  financial  situation  of  the  banking  sector  is  assessed,  generally,  better  than  that  of  the 
preceding  year.  Regardless  of  the  growing  value  of  problematic  loans,  the  banking  sector 
marked a financial performance many times higher than that of 2009.  
Liquidity situation is clearly improved with a stable growth in deposits. For that reason, the 
need of the banking sector for liquidity by the Bank of Albania is substantially reduced.  
The  banking  sector  is  well-capitalised  thanks  to  cautiousness  in  expanding  activities  and 
increase of capital by shareholders. In spite of this good progress of the banking sector, rapid 
improvement  is  needed  in  some  areas  on  which  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  focused  its 
supervisory activity.  
First  area  relates  to  the  need  for  crediting  expansion  and  loan  quality  improvement.  Both 
elements may support each-other, if careful actions are taken.  
Crediting expansion will be better supported during 2011, due to two important developments 
namely, a substantial improvement of the liquidity situation and a falling tendency of interest 
rates for bank loans in Lek. The first signs of a more positive trend were noticed during the 
last two months of 2010, with the annual crediting pace significantly accelerated.  
On  the  other  hand,  loan  quality  remains  problematic,  although  a  gradual  improvement  is 
expected during the current year.  
I take this opportunity to reiterate our call on banks to be more active in handling problematic 
loans and their collection. Concerning loans considered not to have any hope of collection, in 
conformity  with  the  legal  and  regulatory  framework,  banks  need  to  take  actions  for  the 
execution of collateral.  
In this process, there is a need for further legal improvements in order to reduce the risk of 
banks in crediting as well as costs for the client. This process is indispensable to clean bank 
balances from investments that are burdensome and release funds that would be used for 
new credits.  
In this context, monitoring of loan quality and behaviour or difficulties that banks face in this 
process lays at the very centre of the supervisory activity. 
Second  area  concerns  the  cost  of  banking  services  for  clients.  On  this  issue,  the  Bank  of 
Albania  has  conducted  necessary  analysis,  which  led  to  the  conclusion  that  costs  for  a 
number  of  bank  products  and  services,  including  payments  and  transfers,  debit and  credit 
cards, as well as some other forms of crediting, could be lower.  
In relation to this issue, we are focused on two aspects:  
First, promoting transparency in the banking sector on its relations with the clients regarding 
these services. For this issue, we have implemented requirements for the establishment of 
methodologies  to  determine  effective  crediting  costs  and  clearly  define  contractual 
obligations  vis-à-vis  the  clients.  Banks  are  asked  to  provide  all  the  information  and 
explanations  to  the  interested  clients.  In  addition,  following  the  same  logic,  we  would  ask 
from banks to establish methodologies to define their costs for bank services, mainly related 
to payments and transfers.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Therefore,  it  will  be  easier  for  clients  to  compare  between  a  variety  of  offers  by  banking 
institutions  and,  hence,  be  able  to  make  their  choice  according  to  the  most  favourable 
alternative.  
For this to happen in the best possible way, customers themselves need to pay due attention 
and  obtain  accurate  information  on  bank  products  and  services.  When  necessary  in  this 
process, more specialised external expertise may be requested.  
Secondly, Bank of Albania aims to offer a concrete incentive in this process for commercial 
banks,  by  further  reducing  their  costs  for  the  use  of  AIPS  and  AECH,  payment  systems 
during their transactions in Lek, on their own or their clients’ behalf.  
We believe that through a more competitive policy in products pricing by the banking sector 
clients get more benefits and we may see an increase in their number and, subsequently, 
generate an increase in the revenues of the banking sector.  
Third area, in which we are focused relates to the requirements to increase accountability in 
banking  institutions  management,  asking  repeatedly  that  professionalism,  dedication  and 
accountability be transformed into a work culture for all banking institutions staff.  
For  that  matter,  we  are  continuously  reviewing  the  processes  through  which  the  banks 
realise  their  decision-making,  ensure  control  of  certain  activities  and  reporting  chain  within 
their institutions, as well as their interaction with the public.  
Internal  control  systems  define,  mostly,  the  capacity  of  an  institution  to  operate  securely. 
These  are  necessary  to  avoid  any  gap  that  may  be  abused  to  the  disadvantage  of  the 
institution.  
Hence, in its regular communication with banks, the Bank of Albania has requested that they 
undertake all necessary measures; in terms of money, human resources and technology; to 
guarantee the security of any banking [trans] action.  
Concluding, I would like to underline that the Bank of Albania shall always be at the position 
the public expects it to be, in order to satisfy, at any given time, its legal responsibilities for 
price  level  and  banking  sector  stability.  In  this  process,  state  authorities,  in  particular  the 
judiciary,  would  be  needed  to  offer  their  indispensable  cooperation  and  consider  banking 
system issues a high priority, with the knowledge that a stable economic development of the 
country depends on it. The Bank of Albania calls on all relevant factors to accelerate their 
structural reforms on property title and execution of collateral as well as undertake a number 
of other administrative and bureaucratic regulations which affect banking system costs.  
Inviting you to openly discuss on these issues, I thank you for your attention! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
