Emsley Tromp: Towards a regulatory framework for the utility sector of 
Curaçao – lessons from international experiences 
Speech by Dr Emsley Tromp, President of the Central Bank of Curaçao and Sint Maarten, on 
the  occasion  of  the  follow-up  energy  symposium  with  the  theme  “A  regulatory  framework, 
making it good for everybody”, Willemstad, 18 May 2011. 
 Ladies and gentlemen good afternoon, 
It was with a great deal of pleasure that I have accepted the invitation to address you this 
afternoon on the topic of utility regulation. Aside from the fact that this topic has been on the 
forefront  of  the  National  Agenda  for  some  times  now,  it  has  been  my  passion  since  my 
academic years. Indeed, the topic of my doctoral dissertation in 1985 was: “The Impact of 
Regulation on Electric Utility Pricing: An Econometric Test of Ramsey Pricing.”  
I  developed  and  applied  an  econometric  model  capable  of  estimating  the  extent  to  which 
prices  deviate  from  marginal  cost  pricing  in  the  electric  utility  industry.  This  allowed  me  to 
estimate the magnitude of the potential efficiency gain to be derived by moving to the optimal 
set  of  prices.  It  has  subsequently  been  extended  to  examine  the  pattern  of  inefficiency 
observed in different regulatory environments.  
Ladies and gentlemen, I have not been asked though to elaborate on my model but to review 
with  you  recent  economic  developments  and  their  implications  for  the  topic  at  hand.  I  will 
however,  expand  on  the  issue  of  utility  pricing  given  the  importance  of  prices  in  a  market 
economy to guide the allocation of resources among alternative uses to achieve economic 
efficiency.  Thus,  the  issue  of  regulation  as  a  substitute  for  market  forces  is  critical  for 
economic development and hence economic growth. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  recent  economic  developments  in  Curaçao  cannot  be  seen  in 
isolation.  Given  the  openness  and  size  of  our  economy,  our  economic  developments  are 
largely  a  reflection  of  economic  developments  in  our  main  trading  partners.  As  the  global 
economy is estimated to expand in the aftermath of the 2008 great recession, the outlook for 
growth in our region is projected to improve.  
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
While  Curaçao  fared  relatively  well  during  the  international  financial  and  economic  crisis 
owing  to  the  debt  relief  in  the  context  of  the  constitutional  arrangements,  it  did  record  a 
contraction in 2009. In 2010, economic growth is estimated to be a mere 0.2 percent. 
 Growth in 2010 can be attributed to an upturn in the wholesale & retail trade and financial 
services sector and the public sector. The expansion in the public sector was due mainly to 
more outlays on wages & salaries and goods & services. Activities in the wholesale & retail 
trade sector rose, reflecting gains in domestic and tourist spending. By contrast, decreases in 
the manufacturing, construction, and transport, storage & communication sectors mitigated 
the  upturn  in  the  wholesale  &  retail  trade  and  financial  services  sectors.  The  unfavorable 
development in manufacturing was due mainly to a drop in value added by the Isla refinery 
due  to  the  prolonged  shutdown  of  the  refinery.  Also,  activities  in  the  ship  repair  industry 
shrank. Construction investment activities also were down in 2010, but less than in 2009.  
Meanwhile, Curaçao’s real GDP is projected to reach 0.3% in 2011. The 2011 growth will be 
backed  by  domestic  demand,  owing  to  gains  in  private  demand  and  public  investment. 
However,  the  decline  in  net  foreign  demand  will  moderate  somewhat  the  increase  in 
domestic spending.  
Inflationary pressures were however led by developments in international oil and food prices. 
It  is  estimated  that  headline  inflation  will  remain  high  by  historical  standards  as  a 
consequence of commodity price increases and increases in demand by countries such as 
China and India. To insulate our economy from those effects, it is important that we put in 
place a program to look for alternative energy sources. Given the topic of this conference, I 
think it is propitious to underscore this subject. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  during  the  last  two  decades,  public  finances  in  the  Netherlands 
Antilles have been characterized by structural deficits and the consequent build up of public 
debt.  Various  attempts  to  implement  structural  adjustments  programs  to  achieve  fiscal 
consolidation derailed and led to a debt-to-GDP ratio of over 80%. To address this imbalance 
and to give the newly formed country a good starting position, the Netherlands agreed to pay 
off 70% of the outstanding public debt. As a consequence, our debt-to-GDP ratio has been 
reduced to 35%. Given the debt relief, which was coupled with budgetary rules and norms to 
ensure balanced budgets, the fiscal situation in Curaçao can be characterized as sound. The 
overall  balance  of  the  Curaçao  budget  was  a  surplus  of  NAf.323.3  million  in  2010  and  is 
estimated to record a surplus of NAf.3.2 million in 2011. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
The deficit on the current account of our balance of payments widened in 2010 compared to 
2009 due mainly to a decline in net exports of goods and services. The latter was related to 
an increase in imports combined with a decline in exports. The increase in imports can be 
ascribed to higher international average oil and food prices. Meanwhile, exports dropped, as 
a  result  of  among  other  things,  a  decline  in  re-exports  by  the  freezone  companies  to 
particularly Venezuela. Also, the fee for refining operations in Curaçao dropped significantly 
in 2010 because of the temporary shut-down of the refinery. Furthermore, oil storage fees 
received from abroad contracted as a result of a decline in oil storage activities. In contrast, 
foreign exchange revenues from the tourism industry rose.  
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
It should be noted that over the past couple of years, the deficit on the current account of the 
balance of payments has been increasing rapidly. This situation has however been masked 
recently  by  the  implementation  of  the  debt  relief  program  that  resulted  in  increased  net 
current transfers from abroad. Without the debt relief program, the situation on the current 
account would have been worse at this moment.  
Given  the  importance  of  the  utility  sector  for  the  economic  performance  of  Curaçao,  it  is 
important  that  the  price  setting  mechanism  adopted  by  the  government  provides  the 
necessary incentive structure to maximize allocative efficiency. Therefore, before elaborating 
on  the  regulatory  framework,  it  is  important  to  understand  the  importance  of  the  signaling 
function  of  prices  in  our  market  economy  as  it  applies  to  the  complexity  of  a  natural 
monopoly. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  a  major  function  of  prices  in  a  market  economy  is  to  guide  the 
allocation of resources among alternative uses to achieve economic efficiency. In general, an 
efficient outcome is one where, by reallocating the available resources, no one can be made 
better off in terms of his preferences without making someone else worse off in terms of his 
preferences. 
Under certain conditions, perfectly competitive markets throughout the economy can achieve 
an  efficient  allocation  of  resources.  Situations  however  do  exist  where  competitive  market 
forces are not likely to allocate resources efficiently. For example, if a product is produced 
under technical conditions that give rise to extensive scale economies relative to the size of 
the  market,  perfect  competition  will  not  result  in  a  socially  optimal  allocation  of  resources. 
The  natural  outcome  of  competitive  market  forces  under  these  conditions  is  a  single  firm 
dominating the market. That is, competitors are not naturally attracted to such a market and 
are incapable of survival even if the incumbent firm does not resort to predatory measures. 
This condition is referred to as a natural monopoly. In sum, extensive scale economies lead 
to market failure. This provides the “economic logic” that motivates government intervention 
in  the  marketplace  and,  in  particular,  regulation  of  prices in  the  utility industry.  In addition, 
freedom  of  entry  carries  the  risk  of  excessive  duplication  of  facilities  and  only  temporary 
competition at best, because any firm that increases its scale will have lower average costs 
than its rivals and will ultimately “price them out of the market”. The existence of one firm, left 
unregulated,  will  then  lead  to  monopoly  prices.  To  avoid  the  “twin  evils”  of  wasteful 
competition  and  market  prices  which  exceed  minimum  long-run  average  cost,  public 
regulation is often used instead of market competition. 
A  possible  flaw  in  the  economic  rationale  for  government  regulation  is  the  notion  that  a 
natural  monopoly  provides  a  logical  basis  for  monopoly  prices.  Even  though  efficiency 
considerations  dictate  that  only  one  firm  exists  in  a  natural  monopoly  industry,  the  use  of 
some  form  of  competitive  bidding  will  force  the  unregulated  firm  to  charge  a  competitive 
price.  The  co-existence  of  monopoly  power  and  monopoly  structure  is  possible  only  if  the 
costs of negotiating are differentially positive for potential rivals and if the rivals do not have 
the same access to the necessary inputs at market prices. Franchise bidding for public utility 
services, however, are likely to encounter the same problem associated with regulation. First, 
given the long run nature of the assets employed by public utilities, long run considerations 
are  important  in  franchise  bidding.  Writing  contracts  that  ensure  reasonable  performance 
over  the  contract  life  would  be  very  costly.  Second,  since  it  is  not  possible  to  incorporate 
every single detail explicitly in a contract, renegotiation over time is necessary. The necessity 
for  contract  renegotiation 
to  resemble 
conventional regulation. 
Thus,  extensive  scale  economies  relative  to  the  size  of  the  market  make  a  monopoly  the 
natural outcome of competitive market forces – a case of market failure due to economies of 
scale.  Because  of  market  failure,  the  price  system  no  longer  conveys  the  necessary 
information  to  ensure  efficiency.  Given  this  assumption,  an  unfettered  market  cannot  be 
relied upon to produce an outcome with any particular optimality properties. The alternatives 
franchise  bidding  would  come 
implies 
that 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
are  for  the government  to  either  regulate  the  industry  (public  regulation)  or  nationalize  the 
industry (public monopoly) or do nothing (laissez-faire). The usual normative prescription has 
been government regulation. Substituting a regulatory agency for the free market is premised 
in  part  on  the  belief  that  a  regulatory  agency  can,  at  a  relatively  low  cost,  determine  an 
efficient set of prices. Hence, optimal pricing is an integral part of any discussion of the role 
of government regulation. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  critical  issue  in  designing  rate  structures  is  to  establish  rate-
making criteria that will lead to an efficient outcome. If the general criterion is marginal cost 
pricing, socially efficient consumption and production decisions will result because marginal 
cost  is  the  correct  measure  of  opportunity  cost,  that  is,  the  value  of  society’s  forgone 
alternatives. Setting prices equal to marginal cost insures that, at the margin, the value of the 
resources  used  to  produce  a  given  commodity  is  the  same  as  their  value  in  the next-best 
alternative employment. However, it is not a rule to be followed absolutely and in all events. 
Marginal cost pricing, is “a principle to be followed (only to the extent that) it is compatible 
with other desirable objectives and from which deviations of greater or lesser magnitude are 
to be desired when conflicting objectives are considered”. A conflict with the strict application 
of  marginal  cost  pricing  arises  when  the  technological  assumption  of  a  well-behaved 
production  is  violated  –  for  example,  the  existence  of  economies  of  scale.  If  there  are 
economies  of  scale  throughout  the  region  of  possible  industry  outputs,  then  marginal  cost 
pricing will yield negative profits.  
Subsidizing  this  loss  from  tax  revenue  generally  will  not  help  unless  the  tax  leaves  all 
marginal  allocation  decisions  unchanged.  Even  then,  subsidies  may  distort  the  subsidized 
firm’s  behavior  leading  to  excessively  high  costs  of  production.  Because  of  the  problem 
created by economies of scale, rates must be guided by a set of principles that are broader 
than marginal cost pricing. In general, the “guiding principles” in designing a rate structure in 
the utility field are: (a) to allow utilities to meet their revenue requirement; (b) to allocate cost 
of  service  among  customers;  and  (c)  to  provide  incentives  for  efficient  consumption  and 
production. These first two principles are discussed next. 
First, revenue requirement. Ladies and gentlemen, the revenue requirement is defined as the 
total number of guilders required to cover operating expenses, to service debt, and to provide 
reasonable  contribution 
the  revenue 
requirement is usually the first step in the regulatory process of setting prices for utilities. A 
test  year  is  first  selected  in  order  to  examine  a  firm’s  existing  revenues  and  costs.  Until 
recently, the test year usually was the most recent year for which historic accounting records 
were  available.  Recent  inflation,  however,  has  forced  regulators  to  give  consumers  price 
signals that place greater weight on current cost. Use of a future test year (that is, cost and 
revenue projections) in the regulatory process is now common. Once the test year has been 
selected,  the  firm’s  operating  expenses,  annual  depreciation,  annual  taxes,  and  allowed 
profit are evaluated. The revenue requirement is determined by adding up these items. 
The  second  guiding  principle  is  cost  allocation.  Cost  allocation  refers  to  the  distribution  of 
costs  among  consumer  classes.  Utility  service  is  produced  for  different  customer  classes 
using  the  same  facilities.  As  a  result,  it  is  difficult  to  indentify  separate  marginal  costs  for 
each customer class because a large part of the costs are common or joint. However, utility 
is  produced  for  different  customer  classes  in  variable  proportions,  and  separate  marginal 
production costs can be identified as the increment to the total cost of the joint production 
process when output to one customer class is increased by one unit, holding the output of 
other customer classes fixed.  
Various  factors  influence  customer  costs,  including  voltage  differences,  distances  between 
generation  points  and  consumption  points,  and  customer-density.  Recognition  of  these 
factors  has led  to  the  development  of  cost  allocation  formulas  that  approximate  the  actual 
costs for which each customer class is responsible. In addition to being simple, the use of 
cost allocation formulas may reflect a desire to favor certain groups in terms of the prices 
for  expansion.  Determination  of 
toward 
funds 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
they have to pay. Cost allocation methods are broadly classified into two groups: (1) peak 
allocation methods and (2) energy allocation methods. 
Peak  allocations  methods  distribute  cost  responsibility  to  the  various  customer  classes  on 
the  basis  of  their  proportionate  share  in  total  demand  placed  on  the  system.  Meanwhile, 
energy allocation methods distribute costs to the various customer classes on the bases of 
the amount of energy used to serve each class. In contrast to the peak allocation method, 
this  method  takes  load  factors  into  consideration  and  therefore  benefits  low-load  factor 
customer. 
As can be seen there are various ways and methodologies to price utility services. It is not an 
easy and clear cut as sometimes one may want it to appear. This issue is further complicated 
when  one  takes  into  considerations  the  various  interest  group  that  try  to  make  the  rates 
reflect  their  own  objectives  such  as  consumers  advocate,  environmentalists  and  industry 
lobbyists.  
 
 Ladies and gentlemen, before 1984 public ownership of utility companies was justified by the 
argument  that  these  companies  were  natural  monopolies.  Governments  owned  utility 
companies because it was not possible to prevent the abuse of market power under private 
ownership, because of economies of scale, competition in these industries would result in the 
inefficient duplication of assets.  
In the mid 1980s. a changes occurred in this view. The focus became more on increasing 
efficiency in the utility companies. In addition, there was a growing realization that while a 
considerable  part  of  the  activities  carried  out  by  the  utility  companies  had  monopolistic 
characteristics, certain activities did not. The latter could in fact be provided in a competitive 
environment. Hence, the utility industry or parts of it were liberalized by allowing competition. 
In addition, the ownership of certain companies was transferred from public to private hands. 
Regulation was now aimed at facilitating the introduction of competition or “creating a level 
playing field”.  
The  privatization  of  the  UK  energy  sector  in  the  1980s  triggered  a  wave  of  privatization 
attempts  in  other  countries.  Although  many  countries  opted  to  customize  the  UK’s 
privatization  principles  to  fit  their  own  specific  circumstances,  the  common  denominator  in 
these approaches was the separation of the transmission and distribution of electricity from 
the production and retail sale thereof. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 However, the liberalization of energy markets has not always led to lower consumer prices, 
as  expected.  According  to  certain  studies,  prices  might  have  only  shifted  between  market 
segments, or even increased compared to prior to the liberalization. Some studies indicate 
that  energy  prices  dropped  after  the  liberalization  of  the  energy  market,  but  only  for 
businesses.  Private  consumers,  in  contrast,  ended  up  spending  relatively  more  on  their 
energy  bill.  In  California,  consumer  prices  rose  following  the  liberalization  of  the  energy 
market,  while  the  number  of  power  outages  increased  substantially.  According  to  some 
energy market experts, liberalization on its own does not guarantee lower consumer prices. If 
private suppliers retain the possibility to ration their production and as such cause shortages, 
they  can  influence  the  price  of  electricity  in  their  favor  anyway.  Hence,  they  retain  certain 
monopolistic powers, despite the liberalization of the market.  
These developments have slowed down the trend towards liberalization in recent years, and 
even spurred calls for the re-regulation of some liberalized energy markets including: (1) The 
prevention of market abuse in case of a monopoly and (2) The establishment and regulation 
of  structures  to  facilitate  competition  in  potentially  competitive  sectors.  Furthermore, 
independent regulatory agencies were established to execute these tasks. 
As  a  monopoly  service  provider,  Aqualectra  until  now  has  not  been  subject  to  economic 
regulation  as  there  is  not  a  body  which  has  responsibility  for  regulating  competition, 
controlling prices and protecting consumers in the water and electricity supply industry.  
In the past, the department of economic affairs used to advice the government on the tariffs 
of water and electricity. This task is now being fulfilled by the bureau of Telecommunications 
and Post (BT&P).  
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Ladies and gentlemen, I would like to turn now to the best practices that have evolved during 
the last several years. For effectively regulating the water and energy infrastructure services 
some  form  of  regulation  is  needed.  Best  practices  in  recent  years  point  at  the  creation  of 
autonomous  and  independent  institutions.  This  is  only  possible  if  there  is  a  political 
commitment  to  facilitate  this  development  as  the  regulatory  decision  making  powers  are 
transferred from the government (Minister) to an independent regulator, sourced out through 
a regulatory contract or to an expert panel. The commitment of the government should be 
shaped in a constitutional and legislative framework.   
The aim of establishing an independent regulatory board is to encourage efficient, low-cost, 
reliable  service  provision,  to  ensure  financial  viability  and  to  facilitate  new  investments. 
Furthermore, it will insulate tariff setting from political opportunism and make decisions more 
transparent and predictable.  
 
 One  of  the  constraints  of  setting  up  independent  regulatory  agencies  is  the  institutional 
capacity. It is often difficult to find a competent institution and staff. In this and next sheet, I 
will  give  an  overview  of  the  status  of  energy  policies  in  selected  Caribbean  countries.  A 
number  of  Caribbean  islands  already  have  depoliticized  the  decision  making  process  and 
instituted regulators.  
 8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
In Barbados – we often mirror ourselves against this Caribbean island – a regulatory body 
exists  since  the  middle  of  last  century.  From  1955  till  2001  the  Public  Utilities  Board  was 
responsible  for  regulation.  On  January  2nd,  2001,  the  Fair  Trading  Commission  was 
established  with  a  much  broader  mandate  than  its  predecessor.  Its  duties  include  among 
other  things:  determining  principles,  rates  and  standards  of  service  for  regulated  service 
providers; monitoring general business conduct; investigating possible breaches of the acts 
that  it  administers;  educating  and  informing  businesses  and  consumers  about  the 
requirements of these acts; and taking enforcement action when needed. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  choosing  a  regulatory  framework  for  Curaçao’s  energy  and  water 
sector is not an easy task. However, we can draw upon international best practices and the 
experiences of our neighboring Caribbean islands to help us making the right decisions. We 
must keep in mind though that best practices do not mean that we should simply apply these 
concepts to our environment. We have to adapt them to our own specific circumstances.  
Thank you for your attention.  
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
