William C Dudley: Regional economy and trends in household debt 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, at the quarterly regional economic press briefing, New York City, 
14 February 2011.  
 Good morning and welcome once again to the New York Fed’s Quarterly Regional Economic 
Press Briefing. I am pleased to have this opportunity to talk with the journalists covering our 
region – and through you, to the people in our District. This morning I will discuss national 
and regional economic conditions, with particular attention to household debt in the nation 
and especially in the Second Federal Reserve District, which covers New York; northern New 
Jersey; Fairfield County, Connecticut; Puerto Rico; and the U.S. Virgin Islands. Following my 
remarks, my colleagues will provide more detail. As always, what I have to say reflects my 
own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal 
Reserve System.  
National economic conditions 
To provide context, let me first comment on national economic conditions. Since the Great 
Recession ended in 2009, the economy has grown at a modest pace. When we last met, in 
October, the available data showed that we hit a soft patch at mid-year. The recovery had 
slowed, extending the time before employment and inflation could be expected to return to 
levels consistent with the Federal Reserve’s dual mandate. And, with the loss of economic 
momentum, downside risks had increased.  
In  order  to  foster  greater  economic  momentum,  reduce  downside  risks  and  speed  up  the 
return to more normal levels of unemployment and inflation, in early November the Federal 
Reserve  announced  its  intention  to  purchase  $600  billion  of  Treasury  securities.  These 
purchases helped to ease financial conditions, thereby stimulating economic activity. 
More  recently,  we  have  seen  signs  of  a  pick-up  in  the  pace  of  growth,  with  activity  in  the 
second  half  of  2010  turning  out  to  be  considerably  stronger  than  most  analysts  expected. 
Real  final  sales  grew  at  a  4  percent  annual  rate  over  the  second  half  of  2010,  up  from 
1 percent  over  the  first  half,  led  by  surprisingly  strong  growth  of  consumer  spending, 
continued  strong  growth  of  exports  and  slower  but  still  healthy  growth  of  business  fixed 
investment.  
Several  notable  forces  combined  to  encourage  the  resumption  of  stronger  growth.  On  the 
policy side, as I mentioned, the Federal Open Market Committee provided further stimulus 
through  purchasing  Treasury  securities.  This,  plus  the  lagged  effects  of  its  previous 
measures, helped to improve financial conditions. Also, the Board of Governors’ Senior Loan 
Officer Opinion Survey indicates that, while the absolute level of lending standards remains 
tight, banks did begin to ease standards somewhat in the second half of 2010.  
The pick-up in the economy has occurred despite renewed weakness in the housing market. 
Home prices have softened anew and construction activity remains stuck at a very low level, 
likely reflecting the continued large supply of unsold homes. We believe that it will take more 
time,  perhaps  as  much  as  another  year,  for  enough  of  these  homes  to  be  bought  that 
residential construction might begin a meaningful recovery. 
On the labor front, the most recent employment report for January 2011 is quite difficult to 
interpret. Only 36,000 nonfarm payroll jobs were added, well below expectations. Yet, we get 
a very different perspective from the unemployment rate, which fell by 0.4 percentage points 
for the second month in a row and now stands at 9.0 percent. Job growth was undoubtedly 
held down by the severe winter storms that affected many major cities, including our own. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The decline in the jobless rate was not an unmitigated positive, as a significant part of this 
decline was due to fewer people looking for work.  
Thus,  neither  the  disappointingly  slow  job  growth  nor  the  welcome  steep  drop  in 
unemployment seems to paint the full picture. The truth lies somewhere in between. Despite 
the  stronger  job  growth  that  we  expect  in  the  months  ahead,  we  will  continue  to  have  a 
substantial amount of slack in our labor markets that will take time to absorb.  
At  this  point,  while  the  soft  patch  is  over  and  the  risk  of  a  double  dip  has  subsided,  the 
economy still faces headwinds as a result of the aftermath of the financial crisis, the housing 
bust  and  the  high  level  of  unemployment  that  still  prevails.  As  banks  and  other  financial 
institutions seek to strengthen their balance sheets and avoid future credit losses, they may 
keep credit conditions tighter than normal. In addition, many consumers’ borrowing options 
may be limited by their impaired credit histories, and the recovery is not getting the strong 
boost  from  home  construction  that  most  previous  recoveries  have  benefited  from. 
Furthermore,  as  I  will  discuss  later,  households  are  still  feeling  the  financial  impact  of  lost 
wealth and jobs, which makes some cautious about spending and investing.  
The economy is healthier, but it is not yet well. In order to reduce joblessness significantly 
over the coming quarters, the economy needs to grow at a considerably faster rate than we 
have seen so far in this recovery.  
I am happy to say that we believe that conditions are in place for such higher growth in 2011 
and 2012. We entered this year with a fair amount of momentum. Business and household 
spending  has  strengthened,  presumably  reflecting  greater  confidence  in  the  economic 
outlook and progress in the repair of household balance sheets. Businesses are expanding 
their  investments  in  equipment  and  software  at  a  healthy  pace.  And,  their  spending  on 
nonresidential structures, such as office and factory space is no longer contracting as sharply 
as  it  was  a  year  ago.  Further  support  comes  from  the  agreement  by  Congress  and  the 
administration  to  postpone  some  tax  increases,  to  reduce  payroll  taxes  temporarily  and  to 
extend  unemployment  benefits.  In  addition,  our  exports  continue  to  expand,  supported  by 
strength in demand abroad, particularly in Asia.  
Higher growth, a steady reduction in spare capacity in the economy and continued stability in 
inflation expectations should also slowly begin to reverse the recent decline in core inflation. 
Inflation was quite low during the second half of 2010, but we expect that to be the low point 
of the cycle. 
In short, viewed through the lens of the Federal Reserve’s dual mandate – the pursuit of the 
highest  level  of  employment  consistent  with  price  stability  –  the  current  situation  remains 
unsatisfactory. However, we appear now to be moving in the right direction. 
Regional economic conditions (update since the October regional press briefing) 
Now, how is our region doing? Overall – in contrast to the pick-up in the nation – the regional 
economic recovery appears to have paused in the fourth quarter. More similar to the nation, 
joblessness in the region has retreated somewhat from the peaks recorded toward the end of 
2009, but remains unacceptably high.  
As  attendees  at  previous  regional  press  briefings  may  recall,  the  New  York  Fed  produces 
Indexes of Coincident Economic Indicators to help monitor the performance of the regional 
economy. 
Based on these measures, the upturn in economic activity that we saw for much of 2010 in 
both New York State and New York City has paused. To be sure, activity in both the state 
and the city is higher than a year ago, but we saw no increase over the prior quarter. This 
pause  is  particularly  evident  in  New  York  City  where  the  economic  recovery  had  been 
relatively strong. By the way, let me note that this pause occurred before mid-December, so 
it cannot be attributed to the recent spate of heavy snow storms. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
By contrast, New Jersey’s economy has seen no pick-up in activity and, in fact, activity there 
continued to decline at a modest pace through the end of 2010.  
We monitor Puerto Rico using an index produced by the Government Development Bank of 
Puerto Rico. This index shows that the recession there, which started back in 2005 – well 
before that experienced in the mainland – appears to have subsided. As of November of last 
year, activity was no longer falling, although indications of a recovery are still mixed.  
Turning to jobs, the latest data indicate that businesses in the region, on balance, were not 
expanding their workforces at the end of last year. As a result, the total number of jobs in the 
region has held steady, lagging behind the job growth rate experienced nationally. 
Much of this recent weakness in employment stems from job losses in the retail, wholesale 
and manufacturing sectors in our region. In the rest of the nation, these sectors expanded 
during  the  last  quarter.  Moreover,  our  state  and  local  governments  cut  jobs  much  more 
severely than governments did elsewhere. 
At  the  same  time,  job  gains  in  some  of  the  region’s  strongest  sectors  –  professional  and 
business  services,  finance,  education  and  health  –  were  not  large  enough  to  completely 
offset these losses. At this point, it is difficult to say whether the recent pause in job growth is 
short-lived or not. As such, we will continue to closely monitor our region’s job situation. 
Meanwhile,  unemployment  rates  have 
the 
the  region.  Given 
disappointing job numbers, it is not surprising that this change is largely due to a decline in 
labor force participation. In the fourth quarter of 2010, the labor force of both New York and 
New  Jersey  declined  by  about  0.3  percentage  points,  meaning  that  fewer  people  were 
actively  seeking  work.  December’s  unemployment  rate  in  New  York  and  New  Jersey,  at 
8.2 percent and 9.1 percent, respectively, were below the national jobless rate of 9.4 percent 
for  that  month,  though  these  rates  remain  painfully  high.  Puerto  Rico’s  15.7  percent 
unemployment rate, although down from its high of over 17 percent, still shows little evidence 
of a sustained improvement.  
ticked  down  across 
Overview of household debt during the crisis 
Now,  let  me  turn  to  this  session’s  special  topic:  household  debt.  This  topic  provides  an 
important  lens  into  economic  conditions  in  our  country  and  our  region.  How  families  are 
adjusting their saving, borrowing and spending in the aftermath the mortgage crisis and the 
Great Recession will help shape the path of the recovery.  
Here  at  the  Federal  Reserve,  we  try  to  answer  questions  such  as:  what  is  happening  to 
households’ credit, debt and delinquencies and what economic consequences will that have? 
This  monitoring  and  research  on  household  debt  and  credit  conditions  helps  us  better 
understand the connections between financial market developments, the broader economy 
and families’ well-being. We follow a variety of metrics, including lending activity, the level of 
interest  rates  and  of  interest  rate  spreads,  survey  data  on  lending  standards,  delinquency 
rates on loans, and home and other asset price changes. 
One new, key source of information on household debt and credit conditions is the New York 
Fed’s  Consumer  Credit  Panel.  As  you  heard  a  few  moments  ago,  these  data  are  now 
available for all of 2010. They come from a nationwide sample covering all households where 
at least one member has a credit report. The records tell us about five major categories of 
household debt – mortgages, home equity lines of credit, and credit card, auto and student 
loans. 
To set the stage, one can think about the recent path of household debt in three phases.  
 
During the run-up to the recession – the years leading up the crisis – households 
borrowed  a  lot  of  money.  They  took  on  higher  credit  cards  balances,  auto  loans, 
student loans and, especially, mortgages.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  As the crisis unfolded in 2008, many families’ debt burdens proved unsustainable: 
delinquencies rose dramatically and household debt began to fall sharply.  
Now,  we  appear  to  be  entering  a  process  of  gradual  convalescence,  as 
delinquencies  begin  to  subside  and  some  households  begin  to  expand  their 
borrowing again.  
The nature of the run-up to the crisis has been well-documented, so let me focus here on the 
latter two phases: the crisis and convalescence. 
During the crisis, weakness in the housing market contributed to financial strains as many 
families found that their mortgages were “underwater,” that is, their homes were now worth 
less than their mortgage balances. As a result, they had no financial buffer they could tap if 
their finances came under stress. And, as the economy weakened further, many households 
faced sharply reduced incomes as family members lost their jobs or had their work hours cut. 
So, more families found it difficult to pay their credit card bills and other debt obligations on 
time. 
As a consequence of these strains, households began the painful process of deleveraging. 
They started reducing the amount of debt they owed, relative to their income. During the run-
up to the recession, households were saving only about 2 percent of their income; now they 
are saving around 6 percent of their incomes. This increase in saving was mostly used to pay 
down their debts, but it also included adding to their savings accounts and borrowing less. Of 
course some of the reduction in debt reflects loan charge-offs of bad debts. But work done 
here with the Consumer Credit Panel shows that some consumers also became more frugal, 
rebuilding  their  net  wealth  by  paying  down  their  debts.  These  actions  enabled  families  to 
rebuild their financial reserves – precautionary funds that could be used in the event of a job 
loss or illness – to maintain their consumption and keep up with their mortgage payments. 
But to save more, it also means that they had to consume less, which dampened economic 
activity further. 
Interestingly,  student  loans  are  the  only  part  of  household  debt  that  continued  to  rise 
throughout the crisis. More families and students may have needed to rely on loans to fund 
education during the difficult times. And going to school was more attractive for some, given 
the deterioration in labor market conditions. 
Just as households began deleveraging during the crisis, banks needed to respond in light of 
the  large  loan  losses  that  they  were  taking.  As  defaults  rose,  banks  tightened  their 
underwriting  standards  and  raised  the  margins  that  they  charged  on  loans.  As  a 
consequence, they made fewer loans. This tightening of credit availability exacerbated the 
decline in real activity. It created an “adverse feedback loop” between the financial and real 
sectors of the economy that deepened the recession. 
Where are we now? 
There are several signs that we are now convalescing; this damaging dynamic – the adverse 
feedback loop – now appears to be reversing. From historical experience with financial crises 
we know that this phase is a gradual transition process – not a quick event – as households 
and banks slowly complete their painful adjustments. Once the adjustments are completed, 
households can consume more and regain their access to credit, and these developments 
help to support a more vigorous economic recovery.  
Of  course,  we  don’t  yet  know  precisely  where  we  are  in  this  adjustment  process.  For 
example, families may choose a permanently higher rate of saving in order to rebuild their 
retirement savings. What they decide to do will depend in part on their expectations for future 
income,  their  outlook  for  the  economy,  what  they  think  will  happen  to  housing  and  stock 
prices, and prospects for taxes and benefits such as social security and Medicare payments. 
However, we do know that during good times few households are likely to be delinquent on 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
their bills. And, overall, we’d expect their borrowing to grow at least modestly as the economy 
strengthens. 
The Household Debt and Credit Report released today indicates that there has been a pick-
up  in  credit  flows.  Households  increased  their  non-mortgage  debt  last  quarter,  a 
development  not  seen  since  the  fourth  quarter  of  2008.  The  number  of  credit  card 
applications increased – an indication of a pick-up in consumer demand for credit. And, the 
number  of  open  credit  card  accounts  also  increased  slightly  –  as  more  accounts  were 
opened  than  were  closed.  Of  course,  signs  of  distress  continued:  households  are  still 
reducing  their  housing-related  debt  and  delinquencies  continue  to  be  a  problem.  So,  the 
adjustments remain far from complete. 
It is encouraging that credit flows are no longer contracting because households’ renewed 
demand for credit has no doubt supported some of the recent rise in consumer spending.  
Trends in household debt in the region 
One key question we’ll address today is how this process is playing out for households in our 
region. In general, our region has fared well in comparison to the nation as a whole. 
Following the three phases of the cycle that I noted for the nation, I will consider three 
questions: 
 
 
 
How much debt did our households take on during the run-up?  
How much deleveraging has occurred throughout the region during the crisis?  
Are  we  beginning  our  convalescence  –  have  households  started  to  increase 
borrowing again, and what signs of stress remain?  
One reason that households in our region have weathered this credit cycle relatively well is 
that debt levels are lower relative to income and this debt rose more modestly in the run-up 
to recession than in the nation as a whole. Using the debt-to-income ratio to help us make 
meaningful  comparisons  across  different  geographies,  debt  levels  are  particularly  low  in 
upstate New York and New York City. Three key exceptions to this generalization are Long 
Island, Edison, New Jersey and Puerto Rico, where household debt-to-income ratios have 
risen to levels above the U.S. average.  
Since the vast majority of household debt is related to housing, it is not surprising that debt-
to-income ratios were highest and rose most in places that experienced rapid rises in home 
prices. So, for example, debt-to-income ratios are among the highest in the nation in those 
places  most  associated  with  the  housing  bubble,  such  as  California,  Florida,  Nevada  and 
Arizona.  
This  relationship  can  also  be  seen  within  our  region.  For  example,  household  debt  grew 
more slowly than nationally and has remained relatively low in upstate New York, which was 
largely bypassed by the housing boom. The key exception is New York City, where a large 
share of residents rent their homes. Overall, city residents still have relatively low levels of 
mortgage  debt,  even  though  these  debt  levels  rose  during  the  run-up  to  the  recession. 
Elsewhere  in  the  region,  debt  levels  tended  to  rise  most  in  places  where  housing  prices 
increased the most, such as Long Island and parts of New Jersey. 
During the crisis, in most parts of our region, households reduced their debts. But, because 
they had not accumulated as much during the run-up, the decline was well below the national 
average. In general, households in our region – with some exceptions that I will mention in a 
moment – have not been under as much pressure to deleverage. It’s particularly notable that 
in upstate New York, where debt levels are well below the national level, households have 
actually  continued  to  very  slowly  add  to  their  debt.  Clearly,  deleveraging  has  not  been 
particularly consequential for many upstate New York households. The deleveraging process 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
in  other  parts  of  New  York  and  New  Jersey,  while  quite  severe  by  historic  standards,  has 
proved milder than elsewhere in the nation. 
Nevertheless,  many  families  in  the  region  have  had  to  make  painful  adjustments  to  their 
spending  in  order  to  pay  down  debts.  These  families  tend  to  be  concentrated  in 
neighborhoods  where  households  took  on  more  debt  during  the  run-up  or  sustained  more 
severe income losses during the crisis. These factors contribute to delinquency rates that run 
well  above  average  in  certain  areas,  including  certain  parts  of  New  York  City  and  Long 
Island. In fact, some neighborhoods in these areas now have delinquency rates two to three 
times the national rate.  
Looking forward, we see some signs that the region is turning the corner on the credit cycle. 
After declining during the crisis, credit applications have begun to increase, suggesting that 
the demand for credit is rising. Although housing debt is still declining and delinquencies are 
still high, households in many parts of the region have sought and taken on some new debt 
in  recent  months.  In  particular,  auto  debt  has  been  rising  over  the  past  year  across  New 
York, northern New Jersey and Puerto Rico – a signal that households in the region once 
again want to increase spending on durable goods, and are willing and able to borrow to do 
so. 
Conclusion 
To sum up, although the national economy experienced a pick-up in activity during the last 
quarter  of  2010,  the  region  saw  a  pause.  The  loss  of  momentum  locally  is  disappointing 
because until the fourth quarter, much of the region was recovering somewhat faster than the 
nation.  However,  I  would  not  be  overly  discouraged  by  this.  After  all,  soft  patches  are  not 
uncommon  during  economic  recoveries.  Both  nationally  and  regionally,  unemployment 
remains stubbornly high, but many indicators suggest that conditions are in place for stronger 
growth in the coming months.  
With  respect  to  debt,  households  in  most  parts  of  the  region  are  in  better  shape  than  the 
nation as a whole. They increased their debt burdens less during the boom and thus have 
had  less  need  to  deleverage.  In  addition,  there  are  emerging  signs  both  nationally  and 
regionally  that  consumers  have  begun  to  spend  more  and  appear  willing  to  take  on  some 
new debt. This bodes well for another step forward in terms of economic momentum in the 
nation and the region. However, high delinquencies in New York City and Long Island are a 
reminder that many households remain under significant stress. 
Thank  you  for  your  kind  attention.  I  will  now  ask  Jaison  Abel  to  provide  more  details  on 
current regional economic conditions. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
