Durmuş Yilmaz: Enhancing “ShamGen” banking – Turkey, Syria, 
Lebanon, Jordan 
Speech by Mr Durmuş Yilmaz, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, at 
the conference on enhancing “ShamGen” banking – Turkey, Syria, Lebanon, Jordan, hosted 
by  the  Central  Bank  of  Turkey  and  co-organized  by  the  Al  Bank  Wal  Mustathmer  Group, 
Istanbul, 28 March 2011. 
 Distinguished Guests, 
Welcome to the international “Enhancing “ShamGen” Banking: Turkey, Syria, Lebanon, 
Jordan” conference hosted by the Central Bank of Turkey and co-organized by the Al Bank 
Wal  Mustathmer  Group.  We  are  delighted  to  host  Governors  and  Deputy  Governors  of 
Central Banks, Chairmen of Banks Associations, CEOs of banks from Syria, Lebanon and 
Jordan as well as international economists and finance specialists.  
During the two-day conference, issues towards improving banking and financial cooperation 
among  Syria,  Lebanon,  Jordan  and  Turkey  will  be  discussed  in  the  context  of  Turkey’s 
recently  developing  relations  with  her  neighbors  and  other  countries  in  the  region.  The 
conference  will  address  issues  such  as  enhancing  banking  cooperation  between  these 
countries,  Banks  Associations’  possible  contributions  to  the  process,  payment  systems, 
Islamic  banking  implementations  and  prospective  cooperation  fields,  funding  of  small  and 
medium-scale  enterprises  in  the  region  and  the  future  political  and  economic  outlook  of 
ShamGen countries.  
As we all know, the share of developing countries in the global economy has been growing 
and,  in  line  with  the  increased  importance  of  these  economies,  we  witness  significant 
changes in decision-making mechanisms worldwide. The fact that a wide range of important 
decisions on issues ranging from food and energy safety to repair and reconstruction of the 
financial  system  are  made  at  the  G-20,  of  which  Turkey  is  an  active  member,  clearly 
suggests that the global economy’s center of gravity is shifting.  
Corresponding to the ever-increasing importance of the G-20, the weight of Turkey and her 
peer developing countries in international institutions, such as the IMF, is increasing as well. 
In his statement in the late 2010, IMF Managing Director Dominique Strauss Kahn described 
the  changes  in  the  Fund’s  quotas  and  governance  “the  most  fundamental  governance 
overhaul  in  the  Fund’s  65-year  history,  and  the  biggest  ever  shift  of  influence  in  favor  of 
emerging  markets  and  developing  countries”.  Once  the  IMF’s  14th  General  Review  of 
Quotas  is  completed,  Turkey’s  share  in  the  IMF’s  total  quota  will  be  more  than  doubled 
compared to 2004.  
Their outstanding economic performance and rapidly increasing share in the global economy 
over the past decade have considerably helped developing countries to have an increasing 
voice  in  the  international  arena.  These  countries,  among  which  Turkey,  with  its  economic 
performance, stands as one of the leading countries, have weathered the recent global crisis 
with  less  damage  compared  to  developed  countries  and  exhibited  better  performance  in 
reverting  back  to  pre-crisis  production  levels  and  growth  rates.  Recently,  there  have  been 
debates  about  whether  the  developing  country  group  has  decoupled  from  developed 
countries. Although the decoupling of countries seems highly difficult in a global environment 
where all countries get increasingly interpenetrated via capital flows and financial integration, 
it is a fact that developing countries have ended up in a much better position in the recent 
global crisis in comparison to their economic performance in the past crises. It would not be 
wrong  to  assert  that  the  main  reasons  underlying  this  transformation  are  the  increased 
commercial, financial and economic relationships among developing countries, accompanied 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
by  strong  economic  and  institutional  governance  practices  formulated  in  view  of  lessons 
learnt from past crises.   
The increase in the volume of trade among developing countries has reduced the adverse 
effects  of  the  weak  course  of  external  demand  from  advanced  economies.  Therefore, 
production and employment levels in developing countries have assumed a more rapid pace 
of recovery.  
At  this  point,  by  using  Turkey’s  export  data,  I  would  like  to  exemplify  the  importance  of 
diversification of export markets driven by improving relations with countries in the region. As 
it  is  known,  the  European  Union  countries  have  the  largest  share  in  Turkey’s  exports. 
Nevertheless,  the  share  of  member  states  of  the  Organization  of  the  Islamic  Conference 
(OIC) in Turkey’s exports is rapidly growing. During the period between end-2000 and end-
2010,  while  the  share of  the  European  Union  countries  in  total  exports  of  Turkey  declined 
from 56% to 46%, that of OIC member states rose from 13% to 29%. The significant increase 
in the share of OIC member states in our exports might be, at first sight, attributed only to the 
economic slowdown in the European Union. However, related figures indicate that the share 
of OIC members in Turkey’s exports had already increased from 13% to 19% between 2000 
and  2007  before  the  start  of  the  global  financial  crisis.  Besides,  visa  exemptions  probably 
played  an  important  role  in  the  recent  improvement  in  Turkey’s  trade  with  the  region’s 
countries. 
Distinguished Guests, 
Regional collaborations have made a significant contribution to the increase in the volume of 
intra-emerging markets trade. Although tradable products can be transported to markets of 
any  distance  owing  to  advancements  in  transportation  infrastructure  and  technology 
worldwide, distance is no less important than it was previously. Due to increased competition 
among countries, factors such as distance and transportation costs continued to be among 
the leading determinants of competitiveness. Various academic studies also confirm that the 
distance elasticity of trade is on the rise. As it is known, complementary value added chains 
have  been  formed  particularly  among  Asian  countries,  and  having  benefited  from  the 
proximity  of  neighbor  countries  and  their  individual  advantages  in  different  fields,  these 
countries  have  experienced  a  high-speed  development  process 
regional 
cooperation,  where  low-costs-for-all  have  boosted  the  competitiveness  of  all  economies  in 
the region.  
The “zero-problem” policy Turkey has been trying to formulate in recent years with neighbor 
countries,  the  steps  taken  to  lift  visa  requirements,  and  above  all,  the  active  part  Turkey 
played in improving relations among the countries of the region, all pave the way for regional 
collaborations  that  are  likely  to  generate  favorable  economic  outcomes  in  future  for  all 
countries  of  the  geographical  area  we  live  in.  This  conference  that  the  Central  Bank  of 
Turkey  hosts  today  is  a  step  toward  improving  relations  among  the  banking  sectors  of 
Turkey,  Syria,  Lebanon  and  Jordan  in  the  short-term.  Nevertheless,  in  the  long-run,  it  is 
expected to contribute to efforts towards a common market surrounded by the Persian Gulf, 
the Red Sea and the Mediterranean with the participation of the region countries. 
The Banks Association of Turkey, Central Bank of Syria, The Banks Association of Lebanon 
and The Banks Association of Jordan will be signing a Regional Cooperation Agreement 
in  the  field  of  Banking  shortly.  This  agreement  aims  to  enhance  cooperation  among  the 
banking systems of these four countries and to improve communication channels between 
them. Thanks to this agreement, cross-border trade and investments among these countries 
will be supported and facilitated by this cooperation between our banks. Turkey signed free 
trade  agreements  with  Syria,  Jordan  and  Lebanon  in  2007,  2009  and  2010,  respectively. 
Moreover,  visa-exemption  agreements  were  made  between  Turkey,  Syria  and  Jordan  in 
2009 and between Turkey and Lebanon in 2010. Besides, these four countries established a 
High-Level Strategic Cooperation Council in 2010. The regional cooperation agreement to be 
through 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
signed  at  the  ShamGen  Banking  Conference  will  complement  these  agreements  and 
enhance their effectiveness.  
The  Turkish  Banking  Sector,  which  was  restructured  following  the  2001  economic  crisis, 
managed to overcome the global crisis with no apparent damage and verified its outstanding 
resilience. Turkish banks are also interested in venture opportunities in the Middle East and 
will contribute substantially to the betterment of the banking systems of the region countries. 
Moreover, I am of the opinion that also the participation banks in Turkey operating through 
the interest-free system will not only contribute to but also benefit from cooperation among 
these countries. 
Intended  as  a  long-term  formation,  the  common  market  calls  for  not  only  political  and 
economic, but also cultural cooperation. The fact that it is easier to establish commercial and 
economic  cooperation  between  closer  cultures  is  supported  by  both  history  and  academic 
studies. Therefore I believe, it is significant that this conference is organized in İstanbul, a 
city that has hosted a great diversity of cultures in the past, as well as being the European 
capital of culture in 2010. At the end of this conference, a city tour will be organized for our 
guests who would like to get to know İstanbul better. I hope that you all enjoy this beautiful 
city. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
