Axel A Weber: What imbalances after the crisis? 
Speech  by  Professor  Axel  A  Weber,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the 
International  Symposium  of  the  Banque  de  France:  Regulation  in  the  Face  of  Global 
Imbalances, Paris, 4 March 2011. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Over  the  past  several  decades,  the  economies  of  the  world  have  become  increasingly 
integrated. With the removal of barriers to the worldwide flow of ideas, services, goods and 
capital, a global economy emerged. This has brought about a large increase in welfare and 
still  harbours  huge  potential  for  further  economic  growth  and  prosperity.  During  the  past 
years, growth in the world economy has become increasingly unbalanced, however. A visible 
expression of these imbalances are divergences in current account positions. Although these 
imbalances  were  not  the  ultimate  cause  of  the  financial  crisis,  they  did  play  a  role  in  the 
build-up  of  unsustainable  structures.  This  sparked  public  debate  regarding  the  options  to 
rebalance the world economy and secure sustainable long-term growth. Let us first take a 
look at recent developments with regard to global imbalances and then discuss some policy 
options to address these imbalances. 
Global rebalancing: recent trends and perspectives 
2. 
Over the past two and a half years we have witnessed a partial correction of current account 
imbalances which was mainly driven by external adjustments in deficit countries and by lower 
surpluses  in  commodity  exporting  countries.  However,  the  IMF  forecasts  a  renewed 
divergence  of  current  account  positions.  While  the  current  account  of  the  euro  area  as  a 
whole will remain broadly in balance, future trends in global imbalances will be determined 
mainly  by  the  United  States  on  the  deficit  side  and  by  Emerging  Asia  and  oil-exporting 
countries on the surplus side. 
According  to  these  forecasts,  the  current  account  deficit  of  the  United  States  will  increase 
slightly until 2015, while the Chinese current account surplus is expected to increase more 
sharply.  The  medium-term  outlook,  however,  is  uncertain  as  the  Chinese  government  has 
outlined  a  new  plan  to  raise  domestic  demand.  Current  account  surpluses  in  oil-exporting 
countries  have  not  returned  to  pre-crisis  levels,  but  given  the  recent  hike  in  oil  prices  the 
surpluses  might  increase  faster  than  initially  expected.  To  sum  up,  current  developments 
suggest  that  global  imbalances  will  grow  again  and  remain  uncomfortably  large  over  the 
coming years, albeit at below pre-crisis levels. Thus, there is good reason to further discuss 
policy options to rebalance the world economy. 
Policy options to reduce global imbalances 
3. 
In principle, current account surpluses or deficits are not a problem in themselves. However, 
the ones we have been observing at the global level are an expression of underlying barriers 
to  sustainable  growth  and,  at  the  same  time,  add  an  element  of  instability  to  the  global 
economy.  The  US  current  account  deficit,  for  example,  has  reflected  a  general  decline  in 
saving.  Despite  an  ageing  population  and  foreseeable  increases  in  health  and  age-related 
expenditures,  public  saving  has  deteriorated.  At  the  same  time  household  savings  have 
declined due to increased borrowing against rising house values. The counterpart to the US 
current account deficits were surpluses in emerging markets such as China and some oil-
exporting countries. For the latter group of countries, the surpluses can partly be explained 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
by an increase in oil prices. Nevertheless, current account surpluses were also caused by 
exchange rate policies that some countries pursued to artificially support their export sectors. 
Given the malign nature of these persistent differences in current account positions the term 
global imbalances is indeed justified, and it is necessary to address them. However, when 
designing  relevant  measures,  it  is  imperative  not  to  underestimate  the  complexity  of  the 
problem. A country’s current account position is driven by a very diverse set of underlying 
factors from within and outside its borders. Consequently, any sensible approach to reducing 
current account imbalances should not aim at steering them directly. Instead, the objective 
should  be  to  create  circumstances  in  which  current  account  positions  are  determined  by 
efficient and unbiased market decisions. In this context, the question of which countries have 
to  act  to  correct  the  global  imbalances  can  only  be  answered  by  taking  into  account  their 
ultimate causes. 
In general, emerging economies with high current account surpluses as well as oil-exporting 
countries should remove structural distortions that limit the expansion of domestic demand. 
In countries with an undervalued currency, for example, more flexible exchange rates would 
strengthen  purchasing  power  and  thus  help  to  redirect  growth  from  exports  to  domestic 
demand. This, however, is not a panacea and should be supplemented by structural reforms. 
In  China,  for  example,  such  reforms  might  include  measures  to  improve  social  security, 
which  would  reduce  precautionary  household  saving,  strengthen  domestic  demand  and 
ultimately lead to a more balanced current account. 
Economies with persistently large current account deficits, on the other hand, should adopt 
measures to support saving. This requires a sizeable decline in domestic absorption – the 
income  levels  and  growth  rates  which  prevailed  before  the  crisis  are  no  longer  the 
appropriate benchmarks. Governments have to stabilise the public deficit, while households 
have  to  reduce  their  debt  which  had  grown  rapidly  during  the  housing  bubble.  In  addition, 
measures to strengthen export sectors, while maintaining open markets, would also help to 
reduce current account deficits. 
The  G20  recently  made  an  attempt  to  address  the  problem  of  imbalances  at  the  political 
level: in September 2009 the “Framework for strong, sustainable and balanced growth” was 
launched. This framework includes a pledge to “promote more balanced current accounts”. 
As  a  general  objective,  this  certainly  points  in  the  right  direction  and  the  framework  could 
indeed usefully support the process of restoring more balanced global growth. It is backed by 
all the major stakeholders and is driven at the highest level by the G20 leaders. Moreover, a 
Mutual  Assessment  Process  forms  part  of  the  framework.  This  process  could  provide  an 
opportunity for exerting peer pressure among members to undertake the required structural 
reforms. Regarding the design of the relevant supervisory  mechanism some progress was 
made  during  a  meeting  of  the  G20  in  mid-February.  Though  difficult  negotiations  still  lie 
ahead I am confident that they will eventually lead to viable results. 
Conclusion 
4. 
Ladies and gentlemen, there is no question that the problem of global imbalances has to be 
addressed. However, to be successful, it is essential that efforts do not focus on symptoms 
but rather are directed at the structural causes of the imbalances. To be more specific, as 
current  accounts  reflect  a  very  complex  set  of  determinants,  any  attempt  to  steer  them 
directly within more or less arbitrary limits would overburden the relevant authorities. Similar 
objections  apply  to  attempts  to  stabilise  major  exchange  rates  around  some  purported 
equilibrium  target  values.  Such  attempts  at  macroeconomic  fine-tuning  raise  public 
expectations that economic policy cannot live up to; rather, they risk creating new frictions 
that require further interventions. Instead, it is up to the national authorities to implement the 
necessary structural reforms to allow for a market-based and lasting reduction of imbalances. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
