Brian P Sack: Implementing the Federal Reserve’s asset purchase 
program 
Remarks  by  Mr  Brian  P  Sack,  Executive  Vice  President  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
New York,  at 
Interdependence  Center  Central  Banking  Series  Event, 
Philadelphia, 9 February 2011. 
the  Global 
 It is a pleasure to be back in my hometown of Philadelphia and to be invited to speak tonight 
at this event hosted by the Global Interdependence Center (GIC) and the Federal Reserve 
Bank of Philadelphia. The GIC has an impressive history of promoting public dialogue about 
monetary policy and other topics, and it is a privilege to be able to participate in that process. 
Tonight  I  will  focus  my  comments  on  the  implementation  of  the  recent  monetary  policy 
decisions of the Federal Reserve and the associated implications for its balance sheet. As 
always, the views I will express are my own and do not represent those of the Federal Open 
Market Committee (FOMC) or the Federal Reserve System.  
Unconventional policy decisions 
In the second half of 2010, the FOMC made two important policy decisions about the size 
and  composition  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s  balance  sheet.  In  August,  it  decided  to  begin 
reinvesting  the  principal  payments  from  its  holdings  of  agency  debt  and  mortgage-backed 
securities  into  longer-term  Treasury  securities,  thereby  keeping  the  amount  of  domestic 
assets  held  in  the  System  Open  Market  Account  (SOMA)  portfolio  unchanged  at  about 
$2 trillion. In November, the FOMC announced that it intended to expand the SOMA portfolio 
by purchasing an additional $600 billion of longer-term Treasury securities through the end of 
the  second  quarter  of  2011,  bringing  the  intended  level  of  domestic  securities  holdings  to 
$2.6 trillion. 
Those  decisions  were  aimed  at  providing  more  monetary  policy  stimulus  to  the  economy. 
The FOMC saw the additional stimulus as warranted because it viewed the progress toward 
its  mandated  objectives  of  full  employment  and  price  stability  as  disappointingly  slow.1  In 
effect, the Committee was using the size and composition of its balance sheet as a policy 
instrument,  given  that  it  had  already  employed  its  traditional  means  of  easing  monetary 
policy – decreasing short-term interest rates – to the fullest extent possible. Federal Reserve 
Chairman  Bernanke  has  noted  that  the  intention  of  asset  purchases  is  similar  to  that 
associated  with  changes  in  short-term  interest  rates,  in  that  they  are  meant  to  affect 
economic activity by influencing broader financial conditions.2 
But while the intention of the recent policy decisions may be similar to traditional monetary 
policy adjustments, the implementation of them is not. These policy decisions involve what 
are  presumably  some  of  the  largest  and  most  rapid  portfolio  adjustments  that  have  ever 
taken place by any single financial market participant. To put it in perspective, note that these 
recent policy decisions involve the Federal Reserve purchasing, over an eight-month period, 
more  Treasury  securities  than  the  amount  currently  held  by  the  entire  U.S.  commercial 
banking system. 
It is therefore no small task to determine how to implement these purchases in an effective 
and responsible manner. That task falls to the Open Market Trading Desk (the Desk) at the 
                                                 
1   The phrase “disappointingly slow” was used in the November FOMC statement. 
2   This point has been noted by Chairman Bernanke on several occasions. For example, see his remarks at the 
European Central Bank on November 19, 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York.  Let  me  describe  how  the  Desk  has  conducted  those 
purchases and some of the issues that we have taken into consideration during the process. 
Implementing Treasury purchase operations 
A good place to start is with the distinction between the roles of the FOMC and the Desk. 
The  FOMC  is  responsible  for  making  monetary  policy  decisions,  while  the  Desk  is 
responsible for implementing those policy actions on behalf of the FOMC. Thus, decisions 
about  the  broad  parameters  of  any  asset  purchase  program,  including  the  amount  of 
securities  to  be  purchased  and  the duration  of  those  securities,  reside with  the  FOMC,  as 
those  are  the  parameters  that  will  govern  the  overall  impact  on  financial  conditions  and, 
ultimately, on the economy. 
The  role  of  the  Desk  is  to  determine  how  best  to  carry  out  the  purchase  programs  within 
those  broad  parameters.  In  doing  so,  the  Desk  seeks  to  meet  the  policy  intentions  of  the 
FOMC, while taking into consideration two other objectives. The first objective is to obtain the 
securities  at  competitive  and  appropriate  prices  for  the  Federal  Reserve,  as  doing  so  will 
ultimately benefit the U.S. taxpayer. The second objective is to minimize any negative effects 
that the purchases might have on the functioning of financial markets. As I noted in a speech 
in  October  2010,  the  liquidity  and  efficiency  of  the  Treasury  market  provide  tremendous 
benefits  to  our  economy,  and  the  Desk  was  intent  on  designing  a  purchase  program  that 
would not diminish those benefits in any meaningful way.3 
To  achieve  these  objectives,  the  Desk  relies  on  a  system  in  which  it  purchases  securities 
through reverse auctions with a set of established counterparties called the primary dealers.4 
The securities that are eligible for each operation and an indication of the total size of the 
operation  are  announced  in  advance.5  Dealers  then  submit  offers  to  sell  those  securities, 
either for their own accounts or on behalf of their customers, over a 45-minute period on the 
morning of the operation. Those offers are assessed by the Desk based on two criteria: their 
proximity  to  market  prices  at  that  time,  and  an  internal  methodology  for  comparing  the 
relative value of the securities at the offered prices.6 This process occurs over a proprietary 
trading system called Fedtrade under the oversight of Desk staff, and the results are typically 
finalized and published within a few minutes of the close of the operation. 
With this infrastructure, the Desk has been able to purchase large volumes of securities in a 
rapid  manner,  as  required  by  the  policy  decisions  made  by  the  FOMC.  Indeed,  over  the 
period since the FOMC’s decision to expand the SOMA portfolio, the Desk has purchased 
about $300 billion of Treasury securities.7 That total includes about $220 billion of purchases 
out  of  the  intended  $600  billion  expansion  of  the  portfolio,  and  another  $80  billion  of 
purchases  associated  with  the  reinvestment  of  principal  payments  on  agency  debt  and 
mortgage-backed securities.8 In terms of the monthly pace, the purchases so far have been 
                                                 
3   See Brian Sack. 2010. “Managing the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet.” Remarks at the 2010 CFA Institute 
Fixed Income Management Conference, Newport Beach, California, October 4. 
4   The list of primary dealers. 
5   This information is included in a monthly purchase schedule published by the Desk. 
6   The methodology for comparing the relative value of the securities at the offered prices is based on a spline 
fitted through the prices of Treasury securities. 
7   These  changes  are  measured  since  the  November  schedule  published  by  the  Desk,  which  was  the  first 
schedule of operations to come out after the FOMC decision. All data on policy operations are through Friday, 
February 4, 2011. 
8   The purchases associated with these two components are combined in the monthly schedule. To arrive at the 
totals  reported  in  the  text,  we  allocate  the  purchases  so  far  this  month  proportionally  across  the  two 
components. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
running at about $105 billion per month, consisting of roughly $75 billion in new investments 
and  $30  billion  of  reinvestments.  To  meet  this  pace,  the  Desk  has  been  operating  in  the 
market on nearly every available day.9 
The operations to date have gone well. Participation by the dealers has been strong, with an 
average offer-to-cover ratio of about 3.5, and the accepted offers have been allocated across 
a  number  of  dealers  and  a  wide  range  of  securities.  Given  the  robust  participation  in  the 
operations,  the  Desk  has  received  competitive  and  appropriate  prices  for  the  securities 
obtained.10 
Moreover, our purchases do not appear to be causing significant strains on the liquidity or 
functioning  of  the  Treasury  market.  It  is  unusual  for  the  market  to  have  such  a  large, 
persistent, and one-sided participant, and we had to worry about how it would adjust to our 
presence.  However,  the  available  evidence  suggests  that  market  liquidity  is  decent  at  this 
time.  Measures  of  liquidity,  such  as  trading  volumes,  bid-ask  spreads,  or  quote  sizes, 
worsened  in  December,  but  that  pattern  appears  to  have  been  driven  by  year-end  effects 
rather than our presence in the market. These measures have recovered since the year-end, 
moving back toward the levels observed before the start of the purchases. 
In  addition,  we  do  not  see  signs  that  the  market  is  facing  unusual  scarcity  of  particular 
Treasury securities. To monitor this, we look at the number of issues trading on special in the 
repo  market  and  at  the  amount  and  composition  of  the  securities  that  the  market  borrows 
from our securities lending facility. Both measures have increased some, but we do not see 
their  current  levels  as  indicating  notable  strains.  Moreover,  it  does  not  appear  that  these 
patterns are more acute in securities for which the SOMA portfolio holds a larger proportion 
of the supply. 
Our  success  at  purchasing  such  large  volumes  of  securities  without  causing  significant 
market strains reflects some of the operational decisions that were made in the design of the 
program. One key issue was determining an appropriate speed for purchasing assets. The 
pace of purchases under the announced plan reflected a judgment by the Desk that it could 
purchase as much as $100 billion to $125 billion per month without significantly disrupting 
the  functioning  and  liquidity  of  the  Treasury  market.  So  far,  that  appears  to  be  the  case, 
given the evidence just described.11 
Another important aspect of the operations is the flexibility in terms of the securities that we 
purchase. As noted earlier, our selection of the specific offers to accept at a given operation 
depends  on  our  assessment  of  their  relative  attractiveness.  This  process  should  support 
market functioning. In particular, it allows the market to determine which securities it is willing 
to sell on the most favorable terms for us. If a particular security is scarce in the market, we 
will  presumably  not  be  shown  offers  at  attractive  terms,  and  hence  we  will  not  end  up 
removing additional supply of that security. 
                                                 
9   The  Desk  tends  to  avoid  conducting  operations  on  days  that  coincide  with  FOMC  announcements  and  on 
days that are known to have lighter liquidity conditions. 
10   The  Desk  has  begun  publishing  additional  information  from  its  operations,  including  information  about  the 
prices paid for each security, on a monthly basis. In addition, under the Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and 
Consumer  Protection  Act,  the  Federal  Reserve  will  publish  additional  information  about  its  open  market 
operations, including the individual securities purchased, the transaction prices and the counterparty, with a 
two-year lag for all transactions subsequent to the legislation. 
11   Implementing the program over an eight-month period would not be expected to significantly reduce the speed 
or magnitude of its effects on financial conditions and, ultimately, on the real economy under the view that the 
program’s effects arise from the expected stock of our holdings rather than the flow of our purchases. Under 
this  view,  financial  conditions  react  immediately  to  the  announcement  of  the  program,  bringing  forward  its 
effects on financial conditions. This view provides policymakers with some flexibility regarding the amount of 
time to implement the total amount of purchases. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
The  flexibility  of  this  procedure  can  be  seen  in  the  patterns  of  our  purchases  over  time. 
Earlier  in  the  program,  we  ended  up  purchasing  a  large  concentration  of  off-the-run 
securities, including bonds that were issued 15 to 25 years ago. Given their age, these bonds 
are generally less liquid and less valuable to market participants, and hence dealers were 
willing  to  sell  them  to  us  at  cheaper  prices  relative  to  other  securities.  At  more  recent 
operations, however, we have received a greater share of offers to sell more recently issued 
Treasury securities, including on-the-run issues, and our purchases have shifted accordingly. 
This  suggests  that  older,  off-the-run  securities  may  have  become  harder  for  dealers  to 
obtain, and that they have increasingly found it appealing to offer more recent issues, which 
are available in greater supply and are generally more liquid. Our procedure allows this shift 
to  take  place,  as  long  as  the  more  recent  issues  are  offered  to  us  on  generally  favorable 
terms. 
Overall, the Desk has endeavored to implement the FOMC’s policy decisions in a manner 
that  ensures  competitive  and  appropriate  prices  for  the  securities  obtained  and  that 
maintains  the  efficient  functioning of  financial markets.  I  believe  that  we  have  managed  to 
accomplish these objectives with our operations to date. 
Market developments during the purchase programs 
Of  course,  the  operational  objectives  discussed  above  do  not  speak  to  the  broader  policy 
objectives  of  the  asset  purchase  programs.  The  policy  decisions  made  by  the  FOMC  in 
August and November were intended to influence financial conditions in a manner that would 
support  the  economic  recovery  and  return  employment  and  inflation,  over  time,  to  levels 
consistent with the FOMC’s objectives. One way that this might occur is through a portfolio 
balance  channel.12  Under  this  view,  removing  duration  risk  from  the  market  would  tend  to 
keep  longer-term  real  interest  rates  lower  than  they  otherwise  would  be  and  would 
encourage  investors  to  move  into  other  types  of  assets,  thereby  making  broader  financial 
conditions more accommodative. 
These  intended  effects  were  apparent  in  financial  markets  from  mid-August  to  early 
November, when investors increasingly anticipated the Federal Reserve’s decision to expand 
its  balance  sheet.  Over  that  period,  longer-term  real  interest  rates  declined,  breakeven 
inflation  rates  moved  up  toward  more  normal  levels,  equity  prices  rose  notably  and  risk 
spreads on many credit instruments narrowed. This configuration of asset price movements 
is the pattern that is typically associated with additional monetary policy easing. 
Since early November, one of the notable developments in financial markets has been the 
sharp increase in longer-term interest rates. At first glance, this change may seem at odds 
with the portfolio balance channel. However, it is important to understand the factors that led 
to the increase in interest rates in the current circumstances. 
The upward movement in longer-term interest rates in large part reflects the greater optimism 
among investors about the outlook for economic growth. Investors revised up their baseline 
forecasts for the economy and reduced the perceived downside risks that they see around 
that  outlook.  This  shift  in  the  outlook  led  the  market  to  price  in  the  possibility  of  earlier 
increases in short-term interest rates and to scale back the size of asset purchases that they 
expect from the Federal Reserve. Both of those developments contributed to the significant 
rise in yields. 
In  contrast,  the  rise  in  yields  does  not  appear  to  be  driven  by  the  concerns  expressed  by 
some  that  the  asset  purchase  program  would  unleash  a  considerable  rise  in  U.S.  inflation 
and inflation expectations to levels well above those consistent with the Federal Reserve’s 
                                                 
12   The  portfolio  balance  channel  was  discussed  by  Chairman  Bernanke  in  a  speech  at  the  Jackson  Hole 
Symposium in August 2010. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
mandate.  Such  an  outcome  would  be  detrimental  to  the  economic  outlook,  leading  to 
downward  pressure  on  risky  asset  prices  and  a  substantial  weakening  in  the  value  of  the 
dollar.  However,  what  has  taken  place  in  U.S.  markets  to  date  does  not  resemble  this 
outcome. Indeed, over the period since the November FOMC meeting, longer-term inflation 
expectations have remained at levels consistent with the Federal Reserve’s mandate, risky 
asset prices have advanced and the dollar has held its ground. 
Overall,  the  broad  improvement  in  financial  conditions  since  last  summer  has  been  an 
important and encouraging development. Risky asset prices such as equities have risen at a 
rapid pace, and credit spreads and measures of credit availability have continued to ease. 
These  changes  have  been  driven  to  a  large  extent  by  the  improvement  in  the  economic 
outlook and, in turn, will help to promote the economic recovery going forward. 
The decisions taken in the second half of 2010 affecting the size of the Federal Reserve’s 
portfolio  have  provided  support  to  that  process.  To  be  sure,  economic  fundamentals  will 
ultimately  exert  the  strongest  force  on  financial  conditions,  as  can  be  seen  by  the  rise  in 
Treasury yields even as the Federal Reserve expanded its balance sheet. But the Federal 
Reserve’s  balance  sheet  actions  have  helped  to  make  broader  financial  conditions  more 
accommodative. 
Characteristics of the SOMA portfolio 
The  set  of  asset  purchase  programs  launched  by  the  Federal  Reserve,  including  those 
initiated at the peak of the financial crisis and the more recent actions, have changed some 
of the basic characteristics of the SOMA portfolio. I thought it would be useful to review those 
changes and to discuss their implications for the conduct of monetary policy. 
The  most  obvious  effect  of  the  purchase  programs  has  been  on  the  size  of  the  SOMA 
portfolio. If the intended asset purchases announced in November are completed, the size of 
the domestic portfolio will reach approximately $2.6 trillion by mid-year – considerably larger 
than  the  $1  trillion  portfolio  that  would  be  in  place  in  the  absence  of  the  asset  purchase 
programs. 
In addition, the purchase programs have affected the duration of the portfolio. The securities 
that  have  been  purchased  by  the  Desk  since November  have  had  an  average  duration  of 
about  5.5  years.  With  those  purchases  and  the  adjustments  from  the  earlier  purchase 
programs, the duration of the overall SOMA portfolio has reached about 4.5 years, which is 
somewhat higher than the typical level of between 2 and 3 years that was observed before 
the financial crisis. 
This combination of its larger size and longer duration results in a greater amount of interest 
rate  risk  embedded  in  the  SOMA  portfolio.13  Of  course,  under  the  view  that  the  asset 
purchase  programs  operate  through  a  portfolio  balance  channel,  this  is  precisely  how  the 
programs have an effect on the economy – by transferring risk away from private investors 
and onto the Fed’s books. 
The  risks  to  the  portfolio  arise  because  the  characteristics  of  the  assets  that  have  been 
purchased differ from those of the liabilities that have been created by those purchases. The 
assets held in the SOMA portfolio have fixed coupon rates that reflect longer-term interest 
rates. However, the purchases of those assets create reserves in the banking system, and 
the  Federal  Reserve  pays  interest  on  those  reserves  at  a  short-term  interest  rate  that  it 
                                                 
13   Note that the securities purchased under these programs involve no credit risk, given that they are issued by 
the  Treasury  or  are  guaranteed  by  government  sponsored  enterprises.  The  relevant  risk  for  the  SOMA 
portfolio instead has to do with movements in interest rates at different maturities. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
controls.  The  interest  paid  on  reserves  can  be  thought  of  as  the  “funding  cost”  of  the 
portfolio. 
Today, because short-term interest rates are low relative to longer-term interest rates, this 
mismatch produces a very elevated stream of net income. In particular, the SOMA portfolio 
has a weighted average coupon yield of about 3.5 percent, which, if applied to a $2.6 trillion 
portfolio,  produces  about  $90  billion  of  income  at  an  annualized  rate.14  In  contrast,  the 
annualized  funding  cost  of  the  portfolio  at  this  time  is  only  around  $4  billion.  This  cost  is 
relatively low because of the near-zero level of the interest rate paid on reserves. In addition, 
the  private  sector  holds  nearly  $1  trillion  of  currency,  which  are  liabilities  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  that  bear  no  interest.15  Thus,  the  SOMA  portfolio  should  produce  a  considerable 
amount of net income over the near term.16 
Beyond  the  near  term,  though,  the income  that  will  be  produced  by  the  SOMA  portfolio  is 
uncertain.  If  short-term  interest  rates  were  to  rise,  the  funding  cost  of  the  portfolio  would 
increase relative to the fairly steady yield earned on the assets held, reducing the amount of 
net  income  from  the  portfolio.  In  addition,  if  longer-term  yields  were  to  shift  higher,  the 
Federal Reserve could realize capital losses if it were to begin selling assets. 
However,  even  if  interest  rates  did move  up  abruptly  and  the  SOMA  portfolio  experienced 
realized  losses,  it  would  have  no  meaningful  operational  consequences  for  the  Federal 
Reserve’s ability to implement monetary policy. These losses would not impair the FOMC’s 
ability  to  control  short-term  interest  rates  by  paying  interest  on  reserves  or  by  draining 
reserves  as  needed.  Accordingly,  the  Federal  Reserve  would  continue  to  operate  in  the 
same manner that it otherwise would have in pursuing its economic mandate. 
What would be affected by unexpectedly large realized losses on the SOMA portfolio would 
be our remittances to the Treasury. All Federal Reserve earnings in excess of those needed 
to cover operating costs, pay dividends and maintain necessary capital levels are remitted to 
the U.S. Treasury on a weekly basis. Accordingly, any change to the income on the SOMA 
portfolio directly affects the amount of funds that the Federal Reserve remits to the Treasury. 
The  unusually  large  amount  of  portfolio  income  realized  of  late  has  boosted  those 
remittances considerably. If portfolio income were to decline going forward, whether toward 
more normal levels or toward unusually low levels, the amount of those remittances would 
adjust lower.17 
Ensuring our ability to remove policy accommodation 
While  the  potential  risks  around  the  SOMA  portfolio  will  not hamper  the  implementation  of 
monetary policy, the size and duration of the portfolio will have to be taken into account when 
considering the appropriate policy strategy. In that regard, it is worth noting that, even as the 
                                                 
14   The weighted average coupon rate is closer to 4 percent. However, to get to the reported income stream on 
these  assets,  we  have  to  adjust  for  the  amortization  of  any  premium  that  we  paid  at  our  operations.  I  am 
referring to this adjusted measure as the average coupon yield. 
15   Factors other than currency held also affect the amount of reserves in the financial system, as reported in the 
Federal Reserve’s H.4.1 Statistical Release. 
16   Indeed, the SOMA portfolio has already produced a large flow of income for the Federal Reserve for these 
same  reasons.  Over  2009  and  2010,  the  SOMA  portfolio  produced  $46  billion  and  $76  billion  of  interest 
income,  respectively,  while  the  interest  expense  on  reserve  balances  was  $2  billion  and  $3  billion, 
respectively, in those years. Over the preceding 10 years, the average SOMA income was about $30 billion. 
The excess income in recent years has already been remitted to the Treasury. 
17   In the most extreme case, the Federal Reserve would have to cease remittances to the Treasury for a time. Of 
course, one might also want to take into consideration the additional tax revenue to the government that could 
be generated by the more robust economic recovery supported by the asset purchase programs. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the 
that 
time 
the  FOMC  eventually  determines 
Federal Reserve has been expanding its balance sheet, it has not lost any momentum in the 
preparation of its exit tools. 
When 
to  begin  reducing  policy 
accommodation has come, the critical tool will be the ability to pay interest on reserves. As 
has been discussed on many occasions, paying interest on reserves will allow the FOMC to 
control the cost of short-term credit even with an enlarged Federal Reserve balance sheet. 
In  addition,  we  continue  to  make  considerable  progress  increasing  our  capacity  to  drain 
reserves if necessary. At this time, more than 500 depository institutions have registered for 
the  term  deposit  facility.  Those  firms,  in  aggregate,  hold  nearly  $600  billion  of  the  reserve 
balances that are currently in the financial system. We also have added 58 money market 
funds  as  counterparties  for  reverse  repurchase  agreements,  in  addition  to  the  20  primary 
dealers  that  are  our  regular  counterparties.  Those  money  funds  currently  hold  more  than 
$1.5  trillion  of  assets,  with  a  good  portion  of  those  assets  in  the  type  of  short-term 
repurchase  agreements  that  we  would  be  offering.  In  short,  we  have  already  established 
considerable capacity to drain reserves with these two tools, and we will continue to advance 
them in productive directions. 
Lastly, the FOMC could also remove policy accommodation by halting the reinvestment of 
maturing  assets  or  by  selling  securities  that  are  held  in  the  SOMA  portfolio,  as  noted  by 
Chairman Bernanke at last week’s press conference. 
Conclusions 
My  purpose  today  was  to  provide  information  on  the  manner  in  which  the  Desk  has 
conducted  the  asset  purchases  that  the  FOMC  has  decided  to  pursue  and  the  associated 
implications for financial markets and the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet. 
On the whole, I believe that the recent asset purchases by the Federal Reserve have had 
helpful effects on financial conditions and have been implemented in a manner that has been 
flexible enough to avoid any significant negative consequences for the functioning of financial 
markets.  Moreover,  while  the  programs  have  resulted  in  significant  changes  to  the 
characteristics of the SOMA portfolio, those changes will not impede the ability of the Federal 
Reserve  to  adjust  the  degree  of  policy  accommodation  when  judged  appropriate  by  the 
FOMC. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
