Glenn Stevens: The resources boom 
Remarks by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, at the Victoria 
University public conference on The Resources Boom: Understanding National and Regional 
Implications, Melbourne, 23 February 2011. 
 The  rise  in  prices  for  natural  resources  and  the  associated  planned  increase  in  Australian 
based capacity to supply key commodities is one of the largest such economic events in our 
history. The Reserve Bank has had a good deal to say about it. I will touch again today on 
the main points we have made.  
I  will  not  say  much  that  is  new.  Nor  will  I  be  seeking  to  convey  any  messages  about 
monetary  policy.  Those  matters  were  covered  in  some  depth  with  the  House  Economics 
Committee less than two weeks ago.  
I will structure my remarks around four questions.  
What do we know from previous booms?  
 
 
What do we know about this one?  
What don’t we know?  
 
Finally, how should that knowledge, and the limits to it, guide our response to the 
 
boom?  
What do we know about previous booms?  
I  am  going  to  re-use  a  chart  that  originated  in  a  research  paper  by  Jonathan  Kearns  and 
Christian  Gillitzer1,  with  some  updating.  This  was  the  basis  of  a  previous  address  last 
November2. I have noticed it being shown rather more widely of late, no doubt because of 
the striking messages it conveys.  
One  thing  we  know,  by  observing  this  time  series,  is  that  large  swings  in  prices  for 
agricultural and resource commodities, resulting in big variations in Australia’s terms of trade, 
have  been  a  recurring  feature  of  our  economic  experience  ever  since  Australia  became  a 
significant producer of such commodities.  
There have been a number of big booms. They all ended. The really high peaks were quite 
temporary – just one or two observations in this annual time series, such as in the mid 1920s 
or  the  early  1950s.  Periods  of  pretty  high  terms  of  trade  lasted  for  some  years  in  several 
instances – as shown by the five-year average – but so far they have all been followed by a 
return to trend, or even a fall well below trend.  
 
                                                
 
1  Gillitzer C and J Kearns (2005), “Long-term Patterns in Australia’s Terms of Trade”, RBA Research Discussion 
Paper No 2005–01. 
“The Challenge of Prosperity”, address to CEDA Annual Dinner, Melbourne, 29 November 2010. Available at: 
<http://www.rba.gov.au/publications/bulletin/2010/dec/pdf/bu-1210-9.pdf>. 
2 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Graph 1 
 We also know that these swings were very important for the macroeconomy. My colleague 
Ric Battellino gave a very thoroughly researched speech on this question a year ago today.3 
He looked at five major episodes, including the current one, over two centuries. Let me offer 
a reprise of his four main observations.  
First, global developments have always played a part in causing the booms. Changes to the 
availability  of  capital  or  the  emergence  of  large,  low-income  countries  with  rapid  growth 
prospects (Japan or China) have often affected the price of minerals and energy.  
Second, these booms were always expansionary for the Australian economy overall.  
Third  and  related,  previous  booms  were  usually  associated  with  a  rise  in  inflation.  The 
exception was the one in the 1890s, which occurred when the economy was experiencing 
large-scale over capacity.  
Fourth, the role of the exchange rate is crucial. The current episode stands apart from the 
previous ones because all those booms were experienced with a fixed or heavily managed 
exchange  rate.  This  severely  compromised  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  and  also 
muddied many of the price signals that the economy needed to receive.  
In short, these episodes were major externally generated shocks that proved very disruptive, 
not least because the country’s macroeconomic policy framework was not well equipped to 
handle  them.  The  high  levels  the  terms  of  trade  reached  on  some  occasions  were  not 
permanent, but they did persist long enough to have a big impact on economic outcomes.  
                                                 
3 
“Mining  Booms  and  the  Australian  Economy”,  address  to  the  Sydney  Institute,  Sydney,  23  February  2010. 
Available  at:  <http://www.rba.gov.au/publications/bulletin/2010/mar/pdf/bu-0310-10.pdf>.  The  fact  that  we 
were talking about this issue a year ago, and indeed two years earlier than that, that we are still taking about it 
now, and doubtless will be for another year at least, says something in itself. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 What do we know about this boom? 
The  main  thing  we  know  about  the  current  episode  is  that  it  looks  very  large.  It  is  being 
driven  by  a  big  increase  in  demand  for  key  Australian  export  commodities.  Global 
consumption of coal has increased by about 50 per cent over the past decade; consumption 
of iron ore has increased by 80 per cent since 2003. Back then, Australia shipped around 
half  a  million  tonnes  of  iron  ore  each  day;  now  it  is  over  a  million  tonnes  a  day.  Coal 
shipments have been running at a rate of around 300 million tonnes a year, at least until the 
recent floods. Australian capacity to export LNG is now around 20 million tonnes a year, up 
from around half that in 2004. This looks like it will increase to over 50 million tonnes within 
five years.  
The rise in demand has been driven in large part by the rapid growth of key emerging market 
economies such as China and India. Over the past decade:  
 
the average annual growth of GDP per capita has been around 5½ per cent in India 
and almost 10 per cent in China;  
the  number  of  people  living  in  cities  in  those  two  countries,  especially  China,  has 
risen by over 250 million, which implies having to expand or create cities (with the 
attendant  buildings  and  infrastructure)  to  house  the  entire  population  of  Australia 
more  than  10  times  over  or,  alternatively,  to  house  the  populations  of  France, 
Germany and Japan combined; and  
steel production has doubled in India and it has more than quintupled in China.  
 
Thus far, the demand for resources has stretched the global capacity of suppliers. Prices of 
key raw materials have consequently been driven upwards. As a result Australia’s terms of 
trade have risen sharply, to be about 65 per cent above the 20th century average level, and 
about 85 per cent above the level that would be expected had the downward trend observed 
over the 20th century continued. Even assuming the terms of trade soon peak and decline 
somewhat,  they  are  nonetheless,  over  a  five-year  period,  at  their  highest  since  at  least 
Federation  –  by  a  good  margin.  With  the  terms  of  trade  at  their  current  level,  Australia’s 
nominal GDP is about 13 per cent higher, all other things equal, than it would have been had 
the terms of trade been at their 100-year average level. Of course Australia has substantial 
foreign  ownership  in  the  resources  sector  so  a  good  proportion  of  this  income  accrues  to 
foreign  investors.  Nonetheless,  probably  about  half  of  that  additional  13  per  cent  of  GDP 
accrues to Australians one way or another.  
We also know that a large expansion in the resource sector’s capacity to supply commodities 
is  being  planned.  Already,  mining  sector  capital  investment  has  risen  from  an  average  of 
around 2 per cent of GDP over the past 25 years to about 4 per cent, which exceeds the 
peak reached in the booms of the late 1960s and early 1980s. Given the scale of possible 
additional  investment  projects  that  have  been  mooted,  resources  sector  investment  could 
rise by a further 1–2 per cent of GDP over the next couple of years. If it occurs, this will be by 
far  the  largest  such  expenditure  of  a  capital  nature  in  the  resources  sector  in  Australia’s 
modern history. Again,  a significant proportion  of the physical investment will be imported, 
but a large domestic spend is nonetheless likely.  
A further thing we know about the boom is that it is associated with a much higher level of 
the  exchange  rate  than  we  have  been  accustomed  to  seeing  for  most  of  the  time  the 
currency has been market determined, a period of more than 25 years (though, over the long 
sweep of history, the nominal exchange rate was often considerably higher than it is now). 
On  a  trade-weighted  basis,  it  is  25  per  cent  above  its  post-float  average.  The  striking 
relationship  between  the  effective  exchange  rate  adjusted  for  price  level  differentials  (the 
“real” exchange rate) and the terms of trade that is observable over quite a long period in the 
data still seems broadly to be in place.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Interest rates also have a bearing on the exchange rate. Even though most market interest 
rates are very close to medium-term averages, or even below them in some cases (e.g. the 
cash rate and the 90-day bill rate), interest differentials have recently strongly favoured the 
Australian dollar because of the persistence of extremely low rates in all of the world’s major 
financial centres. Moreover, the expectation that relatively high returns will be earned on real 
capital in Australia – in mining for example – is a powerful factor influencing capital flows.  
We  know  that  changes  in  the  real  exchange  rate  are  part  of  the  textbook  adjustment 
mechanism to shocks like changes in the terms of trade. In past episodes, where movements 
in  the  nominal  exchange  rate  were  more  limited  (or  did  not  occur  at  all),  a  range  of  other 
prices in the economy had to respond – arguably a more disruptive way of adjusting to the 
shock. On this occasion, the nominal exchange rate has responded strongly. This helps to 
offset the expansionary effect of the increase in investment, and also gives price signals to 
the  production  sector  for  labour  and  capital  to  shift  to  the  areas  of  higher  return.  In  other 
words, firms in the traded sector outside of resources are facing a period of adjustment. But 
in  the  face  of  such  a  shock  they  were  always  going  to  face  that  adjustment,  one  way  or 
another.  
What don’t we know? 
The main thing we don’t know is how long the boom will last. This matters a great deal.  
If the rise in income is only temporary, then we should not respond to it with a big rise in 
national consumption. It would be better, in such a case, to allow the income gain to flow to 
savings that would then be available to fund future consumption (including through periods of 
temporarily weak terms of trade, which undoubtedly will occur in the future). Likewise it would 
not  make  sense  for  there  to  be  a  big  increase  in  investment  in  the  sorts  of  resource 
extraction activities that could be profitable  only at temporarily very high prices. Moreover, 
the economic restructuring that would reduce the size of other sectors that would be quite 
viable at “normal” relative prices and a “normal” exchange rate – assuming there is such a 
thing – would be wasteful if significant costs are associated with that change only to find that 
further large costs are incurred to change back after the resources boom ends.  
If, on the other hand, the change is going to be quite long-lived, then national real income is 
going  to  be  permanently  higher,  and  we  can  look  forward  to  enjoying  significantly  higher 
overall  living  standards  into  the  distant  future.  In  that  world,  a  great  deal  of  structural 
economic adjustment is bound to occur. In fact it almost certainly could not really be stopped. 
It would not be sensible to try to stop it.  
We know that the peaks of previous terms of trade booms were relatively short-lived. In the 
current episode, the very high level of the terms of trade already seems to be persisting for 
longer  than  in  previous  episodes.  Is  this  telling  us  that  we  should  expect  the  boom  to 
disappear at any moment? Or is it telling us that this episode is different from the others?4  
In  favour  of  the  latter  view,  if  China  and  India  maintain,  on  average,  their  recent  rates  of 
“catch-up” to the productivity and living standards of the high-income countries, and if they 
follow roughly the same pattern of steel intensity of production as seen in the past in other 
economies,  a  strong  pace  of  increase  in  demand  for  resources  will  likely  persist  for  some 
time  yet.  On  the  other  hand,  resources  companies  in  Australia  and  beyond  are  rushing  to 
take advantage of the current increase in prices by bringing new capacity on line. Will this 
increase in supply be just sufficient to match demand? Will it be too little? Or too much? An 
additional  complicating  factor  is  that  serious  attempts  at  reducing  CO2  emissions  would 
                                                 
4 
I asked our econometricians to test the hypothesis that the observations over the past few years were drawn 
from the same process as generated the observations over the 20th century. Their answer, based on a battery 
of suitable tests for a univariate time series, was that it was too early to tell. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
probably  change  the  story  at  some  point.  The  lessons  of  history,  moreover  –  that  booms 
don’t go on indefinitely – are also too great to ignore.  
At this stage, the Reserve Bank staff are assuming that the terms of trade will fall in the latter 
part  of  the  forecast  horizon.  The  associated  assumptions  about  key  resource  prices  are 
toward the conservative end of current market forecasts, which typically assume a smaller 
fall in prices. Even under the Bank’s current assumptions, however, the terms of trade are 
still very high, by historical standards, at the end of the forecast period.  
But any forecast or assumption made in this area is subject to wide margins of uncertainty. 
We know that something very big is happening and has been for a while. We simply do not 
know whether it will continue like this, or not.  
How to respond? 
How, then, should we respond to our knowledge, and to the limits of our knowledge?  
To recap, we know that:  
 
Previous commodity price and/or mining investment booms were big events that had 
major expansionary and inflationary effects.  
Those booms all ended, generally with more  or less a total reversal of the earlier 
rise in the terms of trade, though this often took some time. On some occasions, this 
brought on a significant economic downturn.  
The current boom looks bigger than any other since Federation at least, in terms of 
the rise in the terms of trade over a period of several years.  
The  previous  episodes  occurred  without  the  benefit  of  a  flexible  exchange  rate  to 
help manage the pressures. On this occasion that particular price is adjusting, which 
should  help  to  contain  the  pressures  and  help  the  economy  to  adjust  more 
efficiently.  
   We  do  not  know  what  the  terms  of  trade  will  do  in  future.  It  would  be  rather  extreme  to 
assume  that  the  rise  of  China  and  India  is  a  short-run  flash-in-the-pan  phenomenon. 
Likewise it would be imprudent not to allow for a fairly significant fall in prices, even if only to 
still  pretty  attractive  levels,  over  several  years.5  But  the  truth  is  that  we  will  learn  only 
gradually what the detailed shape of the new environment is.  
How should we handle this uncertainty?  
A few simple messages seem to me to be important.  
First,  we  should  not  assume  that  the  recent  pace  of  national  income  growth  is  a  good 
estimate of the likely sustainable pace. We should allow a good deal of the income growth to 
flow  into  saving  in  the  near  term.  We  can  always  consume  some  of  that  income  later  if 
income stays high, but it is harder to cut back absorption that rises in anticipation of income 
gains that do not materialise.  
To  date,  that  precautionary  approach  seems  to  be  in  place.  Households  are  saving  more 
than  for  some  years  and  the  much-discussed  “consumer  caution”  has  been  in  evidence. 
Firms are consolidating balance sheets. Governments have reiterated commitments to stated 
medium-term fiscal goals.  
Second, there is going to be a non-trivial degree of structural change in the economy as a 
result of the large change in relative prices. This is already occurring, but if relative prices 
                                                 
5 
I  note  that  prices  observed  over  the  past  year  have  exceeded,  more  or  less  continually,  what  had  been 
assumed. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
stay  anywhere  near  their  current  configuration  surely  there  will  be  a good  deal more  such 
change in the future. Because we can’t confidently forecast where relative prices will settle, 
we cannot know how much such change is “optimal”. Therefore we can’t be sure that some 
of it will not need to be reversed at some point. But the optimal amount of change is unlikely 
to be none at all. So we should not look to prevent change; we should look to make it cost as 
little as possible. In general, that means preserving flexibility and supporting adaptation.  
Third, productivity is going to come back into focus, especially in sectors that are exposed to 
the  rise  in  the  exchange  rate.  Their  prices  will  be  squeezed,  and  their  costs  potentially 
pushed up by the demand of the resources sector and related industries for labour. Surely 
maintaining  viability  will  involve  achieving  significantly  bigger  improvements  to  productivity 
than we have observed in recent years.  
Fourth, if we have to face structural adjustment, it is infinitely preferable to be doing it during 
a period in which overall income is rising strongly. If nothing else, in such an environment the 
gainers can compensate the losers more easily. Many other countries face major issues of 
economic adjustment in an environment of overall weakness.  
Conclusion 
At the risk of sounding like a broken record, the rise in Australia’s terms of trade over the 
past  five  years  is  the  biggest  such event  in  a  very  long  time.  It  reflects  powerful  forces  at 
work in the global economy to which our country is more favourably exposed than most. It 
presents opportunities and challenges. With a large boost to income, we need to think about 
the balance between saving and spending, because we do not know the permanent level of 
the terms of trade. I argue for erring on the side of saving for the time being, and I think this 
is by and large what is happening so far. With a large change in relative prices, we should 
also expect to see a good deal of structural change in the economy. A careful response to 
that prospect is also needed, and no doubt your conference will examine such issues over 
the day ahead. I wish you well in your deliberations.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
