Andrew  Sentance:  Let  it  grow  –  how  monetary  policy  can  support 
sustainable economic growth 
Speech by Mr Andrew Sentance, External Member of the Monetary Policy Committee of the 
Bank  of  England,  at  the  Confederation  of  British  Industry  (CBI)  East  of  England  Annual 
Lunch, Horringer, Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk, 22 March 2011. 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches. 
 I would like to thank Tomasz Wieladek and Adrian Chiu for research assistance and I am also grateful for helpful 
comments from other colleagues. The views expressed are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the 
Bank of England or other members of the Monetary Policy Committee. 
Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. I am delighted to have the opportunity to address this 
year’s CBI East of England annual lunch. In my time as a member of the Monetary Policy 
Committee, I have particularly appreciated the opportunity to talk to businesses and business 
groups around the UK. As an economist with strong roots in the business world, I place great 
weight on the input that the MPC receives from the business community, which we get from 
a  wide  variety  of  sources  –  including  business  surveys  and  the  reports  from  the  Bank’s 
Agents.  But  there  is  no  substitute  for  visiting  individual  companies  and  meeting  business 
groups to gauge economic sentiment at the grass roots level around the country. It is a great 
strength of the MPC that regional visits are a key part of the activities of all members of the 
Committee. And in the four and a half years I have spent as a member of the Committee, I 
estimate  that  I  have  visited  around  140  individual  businesses  and  talked  to  around 
100 business groups – across England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.1 
There are two reasons why I am particularly pleased to speak at today’s lunch. First of all, 
the East of England is my home region as I live in Essex and have done so for over a quarter 
of a century now. Second, I am always delighted to speak on a CBI platform as the seven 
and a half years that I spent as a CBI economist in the late 1980s and the early 1990s was a 
very important and formative period in my career. I have a great respect for the work of the 
CBI which remains the pre-eminent business organisation in the UK.  
That period I spent working in the CBI’s Economics Department about twenty years ago was 
also a period of major economic turbulence in the UK. I joined the CBI in September 1986, 
just as the “Lawson Boom” was getting underway. And I was the CBI’s Director of Economic 
Affairs from 1989 until the end of 1993 as boom turned to bust and the UK economy went 
through the last major recession before the global financial crisis of 2008/9. We also went 
through a great deal of upheaval on the policy front – with a major surge in inflation in the 
1980s, joining the ERM in 1990 and then leaving it two years later, and also having to deal 
with a very large public sector deficit in the wake of the early 1990s recession. Perhaps when 
I was appointed to the MPC in 2006, twenty years after I joined the CBI, alarm bells should 
have been ringing in the business community. Both my periods of involvement with national 
economic policy-making have coincided with periods of major economic turbulence in the UK 
economy! Maybe you can take some comfort from the fact that my term on the MPC finishes 
at the end of May – which should usher in a calmer period for the UK economy and policy-
making if past experience is any guide! 
From  a  personal  point-of-view,  however,  this  has  been  a  fascinating  period  to  be  involved 
with UK economic policy-making. In my view, the actions taken by the MPC from the autumn 
of 2008 and through 2009 played a key role in stabilising the UK economy in the face of the 
                                                 
1   MPC  members  typically  undertake  2-day  regional  visits  which  include  around  4  in-depth  discussions  with 
individual  companies  and  3  meetings  with  groups  of  business  executives.  Since  I  joined  the  Committee  in 
October 2006, I have undertaken 35 regional visits of this sort. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
negative and destructive forces created by the global financial crisis. But now that we have 
passed  the  worst  phase  of  that  crisis,  a  reassessment  of  policy  is  needed.  I  have  been 
arguing for some time that we should be gradually removing some of the monetary stimulus 
provided in the depths of the recession by raising interest rates to reflect the improvement in 
the economy at home and abroad and to counter the rather worrying tendency of inflation to 
run significantly above the 2% target set by the government. 
In  recent  months,  however,  there  have  been  concerns  about  the  sustainability  of  the  UK 
economic recovery which might seem to weaken this case for higher interest rates. The GDP 
data for the final quarter of last year were disappointing, even allowing for the impact of the 
snow,  and  there  are  worries  about  the  impact  of  fiscal  tightening  as  it  begins  to  have  an 
impact  through  public  spending  restraint  and  higher  VAT.  There  are  also  concerns  about 
volatility  on  the  international  scene,  with  political  instability  in  the  Middle  East  and  North 
Africa  and  the  effects  of  the  earthquake  and  tsunami  on  Japan,  the  world’s  third  largest 
economy. 
In today’s speech I want to discuss the growth of the UK economy over the current recovery 
and how it should be reflected in the MPC’s decisions on monetary policy. I will aim to cover 
three topics: first, the progress of the economic recovery to date; second, the prospects for 
UK  economic  growth  looking  ahead  over  the  next  couple  of  years;  and  third,  and  most 
crucially,  the  role  of  monetary  policy  in  supporting  sustainable  economic  growth  in  the  UK 
economy over the economic cycle. 
The current recovery – progress to date 
Economic recoveries are normally uneven – particularly in their early stages – and we should 
not  be  surprised  to  see  significant  fluctuations  in  the  GDP  growth  rate  from  quarter  to 
quarter. We have seen this in previous recoveries, with the quarterly rises in GDP fluctuating 
from zero to 1.5% in the first three years of the 1980s recovery and from –0.2% to 1.4% in 
the  equivalent  period  when  the  UK  economy  was  recovering  in  the  early  1990s.2  In  this 
context, the performance of the UK economy over the recovery so far does not look unusual. 
Before the snow arrived at the end of the year, we had four quarters of economic growth in 
which the rise in GDP fluctuated from 0.3% to 1.0%. In fact, until the snow-affected fourth 
quarter, the growth of the UK economy over the first year of this recovery was stronger than 
in the equivalent period of the early 1980s and early 1990s recoveries. As Chart 1 shows, UK 
GDP  grew  by  2.5%  in  the  year  following  the  trough  of  output  in  the  third  quarter  of  2009, 
compared with 2.0% growth following the trough in the early 1980s and a rise of just 0.5% in 
GDP in 1991/92.3 Manufacturing industry has performed particularly strongly, benefiting from 
the global recovery and a competitive pound, and the recent annual growth of manufacturing 
output has been the strongest recorded since 1994. 
                                                 
2  
Initial estimates of GDP growth made in the 1980s and 1990s were even more volatile, with quarterly GDP 
changes fluctuating from  –1.8% to +2.3%  in the first three  years  of the 1980s recovery and from  –0.8% to 
+1.2% in the early phase of the 1990s recovery. 
3   Growth  was  stronger  in  the  first  year  of  sustained  recovery  in  the  second  half  of  1992  and  the  first  half  of 
1993, but this was later in the cycle (ie longer after the cyclical peak) than the other periods shown in Chart 1. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 1 – Early recoveries compared 
Annual percentage growth in the four quarters after cycle trough 
1980s (81Q1-82Q1)
1990s (91Q3-92Q3)
Current (09Q3-10Q3)
GDP
Manufacturing
Services
Source: ONS 
 5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
 However, confidence in the progress of the recovery has been affected by the most recent 
GDP  release  which  showed  a  fall  in  output  in  the  final  quarter  of  last  year.  We  know  that 
growth in December was heavily affected by the snowy weather but there are also concerns 
that the economy may have slowed for other reasons. We would have to wait until April for 
the next quarter’s GDP data, but even when this arrives it will be a very provisional estimate. 
So it makes sense to look at other data sources to gauge the pace of recovery – notably the 
employment figures and business survey information, which also have the benefit of being 
less subject to data revision. 
The employment data broadly support the view that the underlying momentum of growth has 
remained  healthy  despite  the  impact  of  December’s  weather  on  activity  levels.  Unlike  the 
early 1980s and the early 1990s, when unemployment continued to rise in the early phases 
of  the  recovery  and  the  jobless  rate  rose  to  over  10%,  we  have  seen  a  much  earlier 
turnaround in employment in this recovery. Employment picked up in the first half of last year 
and has risen by nearly 300,000 since last winter.4 More recently, jobs growth has eased off 
with falling public sector employment offsetting increases in the private sector. But the official 
Labour Force Survey unemployment rate has remained at around 8% or just below since the 
recovery  started  in  the  second  half  of  2009.  Indeed,  the  most  recent  figure  we  have  for 
unemployment – the claimant count number for February – indicates the lowest jobless total 
on that measure for almost two years. 
                                                 
4   The  total  number  in  employment  (aged  16+)  increased  by  296,000  between  the  three  months  Nov  2009–
January 2010 and Nov 2010 to Jan 2011, according to the latest labour Force Survey. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Chart 2 – Employment intentions*  
Bank of England Agents’ scores 
Manufacturing
Services
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4
2003
2000
2004
2001
2002
 
*: Employment intention scores reflect firms’ expected changes in workforce size over the 
next 6 months. 
Source: Bank of England 
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2005
-5
 Vacancy  levels  are  also  holding  up  well  and  employment  surveys  –  such  as  the  Bank  of 
England’s Agents’ survey also show a reasonably positive picture for employment intentions, 
as Chart 2 shows. 
Business  surveys  from  the  early  months  of  this  year  are  also  consistent  with  a  continuing 
economic recovery. In the manufacturing sector, all the major business surveys published in 
the  early  months  of  this  year  –  from  the  CBI,  the  British  Chambers  of  Commerce,  and 
purchasing managers – are showing record or near-record responses for output and orders, 
consistent with the strong growth reported by the official output figures. Indeed, the latest CBI 
Monthly  Trends  Enquiry  of  manufacturers,  released  today,  shows  one  of  the  strongest 
responses for expected output growth that we have seen in the past two decades. 
But  –  sadly  –  manufacturing  industry  is  now  a  small  proportion  of  the  UK  economy.  The 
overall level of economic activity in the UK is dominated by the services sector and here the 
picture is more mixed. However, a good survey barometer of the services sector is probably 
provided  by  the  purchasing  managers’  index  which  is  published  every  month.  The  latest 
survey shows that after a dip in December, services activity returned to growth in the early 
months of this year (see Chart 3). 
The  rate  of  growth  in  the  services  sector  indicated  by  recent  business  surveys  is  not  as 
strong as we saw in the period before the recession. But that should not be a surprise. The 
services  sector 
than 
manufacturing, and therefore the impact of higher VAT and other imported price rises may be 
more noticeable in the short-term. It is also worth noting that services growth was particularly 
strong from the mid-1990s to the mid-2000s, growing much faster than manufacturing and 
other  sectors  of  the  UK  economy.5  With  the  economy  rebalancing  and  the  manufacturing 
sector now performing more strongly, we should not expect services growth to return to the 
strong rate seen before the global financial crisis.  
is  more  heavily  dependent  on  domestic  consumer  demand 
                                                 
5   The output of the UK services sector rose at an annual rate of 3.8% between 1995 and 2007, compared with 
2.9% average growth across the economy as a whole over this period. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 3 – CIPS survey activity balances 
Index of activity (above 50 indicates expansion) 
Expansion
Manufacturing
Services
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
Contraction
Source: The Chartered Institute of Purchasing and Supply 
 65
60
55
50
45
40
35
30
 UK economic growth prospects  
Looking  ahead  to  this  year  and  next,  current  forecasts  for  economic  growth  are  relatively 
subdued at present. The latest CBI forecast, for example, predicts growth of 1.8% this year 
and 2.3% next year and these figures are very close to the current Consensus Forecasts of 
growth for this year and next – 1.9% in 2011 and 2.1% in 2012. Most forecasters expect the 
manufacturing sector to continue to perform strongly, supported by strong growth across the 
world economy. 
Chart 4 – UK and world economic growth 
Annual percentage change in real GDP 
UK
World (UK trade-weighted)
1989
1991
1993
1995
1997
1999
2001
2003
2005
2007
2009
2011
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
 Note: 2011 growth rate for the UK are consensus forecasts; those for the world are IMF 
forecasts. 
Source: ONS, IMF World Economic Outlook, Consensus Economics 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
While the impact of the recent Japanese earthquake and tsunami is very tragic and we are 
likely to see continued political turbulence in Middle East and North Africa, I would expect 
these developments to have only short-term effects on global growth. The economies of Asia 
and  other  emerging  markets  are  likely  to  continue  to  provide  strong  momentum  to  global 
growth,  and  the  gradual  recovery  which  is  emerging  in  the  United  States  and  continental 
Europe  should  continue  to  gather  momentum.  As  Chart  4  shows,  the  growth  of  the  UK 
economy  follows  quite  closely  the  trade-weighted  average  of  our  major  trading  partners  – 
and  the  IMF  and  other  economic  forecasters  are  projecting  the  continuation  of  relatively 
strong growth across the world economy this year and next. 
Business investment should also be a positive force for growth over the next couple of years. 
The  latest  CBI  Industrial  Trends  Survey  showed  the  strongest  investment  intentions  in 
manufacturing  industry  since  1997  and  the  Bank  of  England  Agents’  reports  also  indicate 
healthy investment intentions (see Chart 5), in both the manufacturing and services sectors. 
Many  companies  are  dusting  off  investment  plans  that  they  put  on  hold  in  2008  as  the 
economy  moved  into  recession,  and  the  latest  GDP  figures  show  a  10%  rise  in  business 
investment has already taken place over the past year. 
Chart 5 – Investment intentions* 
Bank of England Agents’ scores 
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4
-5
2011
 Manufacturing
Services
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
*: Investment intention scores reflect firms’ expected expenditure over the next 12 
months. 
Source: Bank of England 
 So  if  the  world  economy  is  growing  healthily  and  investment  is  rebounding,  why  is  UK 
economic growth expected to be so disappointing? The answer lies in the outlook for public 
and  private  consumption.  It  is  not  surprising  that  public  sector  spending  will  act  as  a 
dampener on the growth of the UK economy as the government rebalances its finances. We 
experienced  a  similar  phenomenon  in  the  mid-1990s  as  the  economy  recovered  from  the 
early  nineties  recession.  But  in  that  episode,  private  consumption  was  more  resilient, 
increasing at an annual rate of 3% a year in the five years 1993–97. Most forecasters are 
currently  much  more  downbeat  on  private  consumption,  and  a  similar  view  underpins  the 
Bank of England’s Inflation Report forecast. 
An important contributor to the weakness of private consumption – particularly this year – is 
the squeeze on household incomes from high inflation. Indeed, in money terms, household 
consumer spending rose by over 5% last year – the strongest nominal consumption growth 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
since 2000. But the squeeze from rising prices limited the real growth to less than 1%. With 
consumer price inflation remaining high, this pattern is likely to continue through this year. 
Most forecasters are assuming that there will be limited upward pressure on wages from high 
inflation  in  the  short-term,  partly  because  of  the  downward  influence  of  relatively  high 
unemployment and partly because the rise in inflation is expected to be temporary. The latest 
consensus forecast is for average earnings growth to pick up to 3% by 2012 from the current 
underlying rate of increase of 2.3%. However, Income Data Services are already reporting 
that pay settlements have moved up to 2.8% in the private sector, pushed up by a number of 
pay deals linked to the Retail Prices Index. In my judgement, there are upside risks to both 
inflation and consumption growth from a stronger rebound in wage growth as the recovery 
proceeds.  This  is  one  of  the  reasons  –  though  not  the  only  one  –  why  I  believe  that  the 
current  Inflation  Report  forecast  that  inflation  will  fall  back  to  the  2%  target  is  relatively 
optimistic. 
The  behaviour  of  wages  and  consumption  will  therefore  be  an  important  influence  on  the 
outlook for both growth and inflation over the next couple of years, and this is clearly an area 
that the Monetary Policy Committee is monitoring closely. With imported price pressures and 
VAT adding to inflation in the short-term, we should not be surprised to see a squeeze on 
real incomes and relatively subdued consumer spending in the first half of this year. But if 
wage  increases  start  to  pick  up  more  than  current  forecasts  suggest  in  response  to 
persistently  high  headline  inflation,  we  are  likely  to  see  some  combination  of  stronger 
consumption growth and higher medium term inflation. This scenario, which I see as quite 
likely, would reinforce the case for raising UK interest rates to head off inflationary pressures. 
Economic growth and UK monetary policy 
The UK’s monetary policy framework is focussed on the objective of price stability, which is 
currently defined in terms of a 2% target for CPI inflation. There are good reasons why we 
have made the achievement of price stability the centrepiece of monetary policy here in the 
UK,  and  why  many  other  countries  follow  the  same  approach.  While  monetary  policy  can 
affect  the  growth  rate  of  the  economy  in  the  short  term,  over  the  medium  to  long  term, 
economic  growth  is  driven  by  supply  side  factors  –  enterprise,  innovation,  investment  and 
skills.  Attempts  to  boost  growth  solely  by  loose  monetary  policy  policies  –  which  we 
experienced in the 1970s and the late 1980s – ended up creating greater economic instability 
and  almost  certainly  hampered  longer-term  growth  prospects.  The  best  contribution  that 
monetary  policy  can  make  to  supporting  the  underlying  forces  of  growth  is  therefore  by 
fostering a climate of stability – primarily in terms of the level of prices but also by seeking to 
promote a relatively stable demand climate and by avoiding potentially destabilising lurches 
in policy. 
As  I  have  already  noted,  the  need  to  stabilise  the  UK  economy  in  the  face  of  a  massive 
global financial shock in late 2008 and early 2009 fully justified the large cuts in Bank Rate 
and  the  injections  of  Quantitative  Easing  that  the  MPC  made  at  that  time.  But  now  the 
economy is growing again and inflation is running persistently above the 2% target, such a 
large degree of monetary stimulus is no longer appropriate and is in danger of creating more 
instability  in  growth  and  inflation,  rather  than  stabilising  the  economy  as  monetary  policy 
should.  
One justification which is frequently used for maintaining current monetary policy settings is 
the “output gap” model of the inflation process. According to this view of the world, stabilising 
growth and keeping inflation on target are two sides of the same coin. Weak growth builds up 
a margin of spare capacity which then pushes down on inflation, whereas strong growth is 
more  likely  to  be  associated  with  above  capacity  working  and  a  build-up  of  inflationary 
pressures. The UK economy appeared to conform to this model for the first decade of the 
MPC, but recently it has broken down and is no longer acting as a reliable guide to policy-
setting. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
In  a  speech  last  month,  I  set  out  the  reasons  why  this  might  be  the  case.6  First,  the 
relationship between spare capacity and inflationary pressures may be much more complex 
than the simple model suggests – particularly in the services sector which now dominates the 
UK  economy.  Second,  the  very  accommodative  policies  we  pursued  in  the  depths  of  the 
recession  allowed  companies  to  pass  through  cost  increases  and  may  have  encouraged 
companies to believe they have more pricing power than in the past. We have seen further 
evidence  of  this  today  in  the  very  strong  price  expectations  which  are  continuing  to  be 
registered by manufacturers in the CBI survey. And, third, the UK is a very open international 
economy. Global price pressures and the value of the pound appear to be having a greater 
impact on our inflation rate than the domestic margin of spare capacity. 
There  are  other  criticisms  which  can  be  made  of  the  “output  gap”  view  of  the  world. 
Measures of the “output gap” are frequently revised, partly because of GDP data revisions 
and partly because of changes in our view of where the trend or capacity level of output truly 
lies. For both these reasons, the “output gap” is notoriously difficult to measure in real time.7 
Indeed,  there  have  been  quite  significant  revisions  to  the  GDP  profile  of  the  early  1990s 
recession  from  the  initial  estimates.  And  we  have  already  seen some  revision  to the  GDP 
data through this recession and recovery – for example the rise in 2009 fourth quarter GDP 
growth has been revised up from a provisional estimate of 0.1% to 0.5% in the space of just 
twelve months. 
For all these reasons, I believe we need to be particularly wary of basing monetary policy at 
present on fine judgements about the current and future growth of the economy. The MPC’s 
remit is clearly couched in terms of keeping consumer price inflation on target and we have a 
responsibility to take action when we see the sort of significant upside deviations we have 
experienced, not just recently, but over a number of years now.  
Most of the evidence suggests that recovery is underway and it is likely to continue, even 
though  the  pace  of  growth  is  somewhat  uncertain.  There  are  upside  risks  to  the  growth 
outlook as well as downside concerns. The world economy is growing strongly and this is a 
major  factor  underlying  current  inflationary  pressures  from  global  energy  and  commodity 
prices.  And  a  stronger  response  of  wage  growth  to  current  high  headline  inflation  could 
support stronger growth of consumption than most forecasters currently expect. 
We have entered a period of UK monetary policy-making when the judgements made by the 
MPC are much less straightforward than they appeared to be before the financial crisis. The 
global  climate  is  now  more  inflationary  and  it  seems  unlikely  that  the  margin  of  spare 
capacity  in  the  UK  economy  will  prevent  current  inflationary  pressures  from  becoming 
embedded, without monetary policy being tightened. We have heard the news today that CPI 
inflation has risen again – to 4.4% – and it could easily rise above 5% later this year. Once 
businesses and individuals come to expect higher inflation – and there are increasing signs 
that they are beginning to do so – these expectations will be much harder to dislodge.  
In this environment, with inflation running very considerably above its target level and set to 
rise further, failure to take timely monetary policy action risks a more abrupt and destabilising 
rise in interest rates in the future. That is surely something which the businesses represented 
here today would not want to see. And that could be a much bigger threat to future economic 
growth than the gradual increases in interest rates which I have been arguing for since the 
middle of last year. 
                                                 
6   See Sentance (2011). 
7   This is a point repeatedly made by Orphanides. See his recent comments in Orphanides (2011), for example. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
References 
Orphanides, A. (2011) “The role of central banks – lessons from the crisis” Panel remarks at 
the VI International Symposium of the Banque de France on 4 March 2011. 
Sentance, A. (2011) “The UK’s Inflation Problem: Selling England by the Pound?” Speech at 
to the IEA State of the Economy Conference on 17 February 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
