Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview with Le Point 
English  translation  of  the  full  Interview  with  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the 
European  Central  Bank,  in  Le  Point,  conducted  by  Patrick  Bonazza  on  22  July  2011, 
published on 27 July 2011. 
 Has the euro been saved, then, after last week’s summit in Brussels?  
The euro itself, that is the currency, has never been under threat. The risk was not to the 
stability of the single currency, but rather to the financial stability of the euro area owing to 
the fiscal problems in Greece. The euro is not in question: it is solid, strong and credible. The 
euro has kept its value for over 12 years. The European Central Bank (ECB) is an anchor of 
stability and confidence, which is very important, particularly in turbulent and difficult periods.  
Yes, but aren’t the struggling countries in the euro area putting the single currency at 
risk?  
The  pressure  observed  on  sovereign  risks  is  not  solely  a  European  problem,  it  is  also  a 
global problem. The United States and Japan also have major fiscal problems, as you well 
know. The paradox is that, from a global perspective, the euro area is in a far better situation, 
with  a  consolidated  fiscal  deficit  of  around  4.5%  of  GDP  this  year,  compared  with 
approximately  10%  of  GDP  for  these  other  two  countries.  On  the  other  hand,  individual 
countries  in  Europe,  in  particular  Greece,  are  in  a  much  more  difficult  situation.  All  the 
decisions  taken  in  Brussels  by  the  Heads  of  State  or  Government  are  important  for  the 
financial stability of the euro area. 
What part did the ECB play in the decisions taken in Brussels on 21 July? 
In such circumstances, it is necessary to take a close look at the role of the central bank. We 
are responsible for ensuring that the currency, savings and purchasing power of 331 million 
citizens across 17 countries remain sound and stable. As you know, inflation hits hard on the 
poorest and most vulnerable among us. Our democracies entrusted us with this responsibility 
and  we  are  living  up  it!  Since  the  launch  of  the  euro  12  years  ago,  we  have  achieved  an 
average annual inflation rate of 1.97%, which is in line with our definition of price stability, i.e. 
below, but close to, 2%. Moreover, by being in charge of a single currency for 17 countries 
and  331  million  citizens,  the  Central  Bank  has  an  overall  view  that  enables  it  to  convey 
messages  to  those  taking  government  decisions,  knowing  of  course,  that  they  are  in  full 
control of their own decisions. 
Was your participation in the meeting between Sarkozy and Merkel on 20 July in Berlin 
planned?  
Angela Merkel and Nicolas Sarkozy invited me to join them at the Chancellery in Berlin. The 
Governing Council of the ECB advised me, in real time, that it would be useful if I accepted 
this invitation so that I could put across the views of the ECB.  
Another €109 billion for Greece, after €110 billion last year. Do you believe that Europe 
is going to be able to raise such large sums of money for a single country just like 
that?  
What matters above everything else – and it is absolutely essential – is that Greece regains 
control of its economic balances, that Greece itself implements the measures for restoring its 
budget, government accounts and competitiveness as quickly and as rigorously as possible. 
What matters is that it implements rigorous structural reforms and resolves to embark on a 
privatisation programme.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Last  year,  France  raised  €4  billion  and  after  the  summit  in  Brussels  it  is  going  to 
borrow an additional €15 billion between now and 2014 to the benefit of Greece. Are 
you sure that the French, who have their own problems, will accept this indefinitely? 
Greece  is  committed  to  doing  everything,  and  will  do  everything  –  under  the  strict 
surveillance  of  Europe,  which  is  something  we  have  always  called  for  –  to  restore 
confidence,  regain  stability  and  pay  back  its  loans  from  Europe.  The  Europeans  are  not 
subsidising Greece  to  never  see  their  money  again.  They  are  investing  in  its  recovery.  Of 
course, they need to monitor their investment closely. 
The 17 euro area countries have bought Greece some time, but that’s no guarantee 
that the country is going to accept the austerity measures being imposed on it. 
We  are  not  imposing  “austerity”  on  Greece.  Greece  itself  is  correcting  its  years  of 
mismanagement.  Throughout  the  years  in  the  run-up  to  the  crisis,  Greece  continued  to 
spend more than was coming in. Sound governance is the only way to once again achieve 
growth and job creation based on a newfound competitiveness.  
Do  you  think  that  Greece’s  membership  of  the  euro  area  is  partly  to  blame  for  its 
downfall? Despite the level of inflation in the country, Greece has been able to borrow 
at very low rates, thanks to the ECB. This gave rise to a credit bubble.  
No,  I  don’t  think  so,  because  the  euro  area  has  only  been  in  existence  for  just  under 
13 years, and prior to that, other countries, everywhere in the world, had experienced similar 
problems  to  those  that  Greece  is  experiencing  today.  Moreover,  we  are  seeing  today, 
unfortunately,  that  the  issue  of  poor  fiscal  discipline  is  arising  more  often  in  developed 
countries,  whereas  before  it  was  only  an  issue  in  developing  countries  –  in  Asia,  Latin 
America or the Near East. Greece is a symbolic example of this turnaround.  
And what is the reason for this turnaround? 
The fact is that the monitoring of economic and fiscal policies in the euro area was not as 
good as it should have been. The ECB and the Banque de France – Christian Noyer and 
myself – have always said with regard to Europe that the Stability and Growth Pact was not 
an artificial creation conveying an ultra-orthodox  view of the economy  coming from across 
the Rhine. It was a fiscal framework that was absolutely necessary for a monetary union that 
had neither a federal government nor a federal budget. On behalf of the Governing Council, I 
publicly denounced the liberties that in 2004–05 Germany, France and other major countries 
wanted  to  take,  and  indeed  took,  in  the  form  of  a  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  that  was 
weakened  both  in  letter  and  in  spirit.  We  have  constantly  called  for  closer  monitoring,  not 
only of fiscal policies, but also of indicators of competitiveness and internal imbalances.  
Today, in the light of the crisis, everyone can see that we were right. 
And that you have a better chance of being listened to… 
I sincerely hope so. 
Over the last few weeks, you have fought against the idea of asking the private sector 
(banks,  insurance  companies,  funds,  etc.)  to  incur  losses  to  help  Greece.  It  would 
seem that the Heads of State did not listen to you? 
Once  again,  we  have  always  said  publicly  that  it  is  not  the  Central  Bank  that  takes  the 
decisions, but the governments themselves. With regard to private sector involvement and 
Greece, we have had three very clear messages. First, we said that any participation had to 
be voluntary. As far as this is concerned, our advice has been followed. Second, we said that 
it was necessary to avoid a “credit event”, and at the moment, it looks as though we have 
done  so.  Lastly,  our  third  message  was  that  a  “selective  default”  should  be  avoided. 
However, in the event of such a default, governments would have to recapitalise the banks 
and  provide  credit  enhancement  for  the  collateral  accepted  by  the  ECB  for  its  refinancing 
operations. We secured this guarantee which was essential to protecting the integrity of the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
ECB in the event of a “selective default”. It was essential for the ECB, and all the Eurosystem 
central banks in order to maintain stability and confidence in Europe. The protection of the 
integrity of the central bank is non-negotiable. 
Following the summit in Brussels, the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) is to 
provide  cheaper  loans  to  programme  countries  and  will  also  be  able  to  purchase 
bonds and recapitalise struggling banks. With this, are we not getting sucked into in a 
costly and vicious circle?  
We  have  advised  governments  to  incorporate  more  leeway  and  flexibility  into  the 
EFSF  –  taking  into  account  that  we  are  experiencing  exceptional  circumstances  since  the 
onset of the worst crisis since the Second World War. A more versatile and flexible EFSF will 
be  a  more  efficient  tool  for  helping  to  ensure  the  financial  stability  of  the  euro  area  as  a 
whole.  
With regard to private sector involvement, the Heads of State have affirmed that these 
solutions would only be applied to Greece. Why the special treatment? 
The creditworthiness of a country is absolutely essential. Whether you are a household, a 
company or a country, you will be granted loans on good terms if the lender is confident that 
he  will  be  paid  back.  That’s  why  confidence  is  so  important.  The  Heads  of  State  or 
Government  wanted  to  remove  all  ambiguity,  and  in  their  own  words  they  said:  “All  other 
euro  countries  solemnly  reaffirm  their  inflexible  determination  to  honour  fully  their  own 
individual  sovereign  signature.  The  euro  area  Heads  of  State  or  Government  fully  support 
this determination, as the credibility of all their sovereign signatures is a decisive element for 
ensuring financial stability in the euro area as a whole”. I could not have put it better myself.  
Did you look into the possibility of Greece leaving the euro?  
Not for a minute did anyone consider that option.  
But what do you have to say to the many people who don’t believe that Greece will 
pull through unless its debt is drastically reduced?  
The  problem  that  Greece  has  is  that  it  needs  to  return  to  a  path  of  sound  governance  as 
quickly  as  possible,  i.e.  it  needs  to  restore  its  budget  to  health,  implement  a  rigorous 
privatisation programme and carry out essential structural reforms. The proposals from the 
private  sector  and  the  decisions  of  the  European  governments,  i.e.  lowering  interest  rates 
and extending the duration of the loans, will ease Greece’s debt service burden considerably. 
Furthermore, the outstanding debt will decrease through bond swaps and debt buybacks. But 
what  is  important  is  that  Greece  carries  out  the  adjustment  itself,  helped  by  this  very 
important decrease of the yearly service of the debt. 
After Brussels, will countries like Spain or Italy avoid the Greek contagion? 
Without exception, every country is aware that it is experiencing an exceptional crisis. For 
example,  the  Italian  government  has  just  adopted  a  fiscal  programme  that  will  reduce  its 
deficit  to  less  than  3%  from  2012.  How  many  major  developed  countries,  outside  Europe, 
can say that? Spain has started to carry out ambitious reforms, as noted at the meeting on 
21 July. The European Central Bank has called for all countries to strictly adhere to the letter 
and spirit of the Stability and Growth Pact, to strengthen competitiveness and, in particular, 
to monitor production costs and carry out the necessary structural reforms. That is the path 
to sustainable growth and job creation. 
The crisis has been enlightening. Within the euro area, those countries that have been very 
attentive  to  their  budget  and  their  competitiveness,  such  as  Germany  or  Austria,  have 
succeeded in creating jobs and reducing unemployment, even during the crisis. The same 
applies to countries outside the euro area, for example Sweden, which has had much better 
results than any other country outside the euro area. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
With each crisis, the usual suspects call for greater federalism in order to prevent the 
next crisis. This time, they want euro bonds and greater sharing of the debt burden. Is 
this a responsible and helpful response? And can we take steps towards federalism 
without asking the people for their opinion? 
As  you  know,  the  summit  in  Brussels  was  not  convened  at  all  with  the  aim  of  causing 
institutional upheaval. That said, the view that Europeans need to reflect on their long-term 
vision  of  how  they  want  European  institutions  to  evolve  is,  for  me,  a  valid  one.  The 
construction of Europe really started 60 years ago. Evidently, it has not yet been completed, 
and  it  is  also  very  clear  that  it  is  up  to  our  democracies  to  take  the  decisions  and  thus, 
ultimately, to the people of Europe to say what they want. Speaking as a European citizen, 
and not as the President of the ECB, I think that the Europeans will go on to invent in a long 
term prospective an entirely new type of confederation of sovereign states, which would not 
be a carbon copy of the United States of America. 
We were sold the euro area as an area of prosperity and stability and instead we get 
austerity. Go figure!  
Since the introduction of the single currency, the euro area has seen a growth rate per capita 
that, at around 1% a year, is comparable to that in the United States, and has created even 
more jobs: 14 million compared with 8 million in the USA. Not enough people know these 
facts and they do not receive sufficient attention. In addition, it was never claimed that the 
euro  would  do  away  with  the  need  for  good  public  finance  management;  indeed,  we  said 
precisely  the  opposite.  The  euro  area  is  redressing  its  public  finances,  just  as  the  United 
States and Japan must do, and as the United Kingdom has also started to do. Two things are 
certain. First, everywhere in the world, whenever budgets are managed carefully, the costs of 
production are controlled and the social partners act with prudence, the reward is growth and 
job  creation,  even  after  the  worse  crisis  since  1945.  Second,  the  euro  area  as  a  whole  is 
faced  with  fewer  problems  than  the  United  States  or  Japan,  but  it  must  take  tremendous 
steps to strengthen its governance.  
Is speculation the big bad wolf that will devour the euro? 
The  euro  itself  is  not  in  question.  The  euro  is  a  very  credible  currency  that  has  done  a 
remarkable job of ensuring price stability. Also, it is issued in an economic area for which the 
overall  results  are  sound  compared  with  other  ones.  As  far  as  government  or  corporate 
bonds  are  concerned,  the  financial  markets  are  complex  and  very  sophisticated.  Some 
investors have confidence (or not) and invest (or not), and others can forward buy or sell and 
speculate  up  or  down.  Market  participants  are  thus  motivated  by  varying  degrees  of 
confidence, as well as by fear and greed. When serious crises arise, such as the one that we 
have  been  in  since  2007–08,  they  expose  weaknesses  as  sure  as  x-rays  show  up  the 
skeleton inside the body. A good way of not letting speculation take hold is to identify ones 
own weaknesses upfront and to correct them. In the years that preceded the crisis, countries 
in particular, had a false sense of security. Unfortunately, this sentiment was not only shared 
by  some  Europeans,  but  also  by  the  whole  of the  international  community,  not  to mention 
many  economists.  Once  again,  the  lesson  that  we  Europeans  must  draw  from  this  is  to 
strengthen  the  governance  and  monitoring  of  economic  and  fiscal  policies.  That  does  not 
mean to say that the functioning of the financial markets does not need to be substantially 
improved. At the moment, the key word for all industrialised countries is “confidence”.  
Yes, but it is possible to speculate on whether Greece will default. 
Such a speculation would be a sure-fire way of losing money given the decisions taken last 
Thursday. And let me say again, the euro, as a currency, is sound and credible, and is not 
affected by the pressures on sovereign risks.  
Don’t the rating agencies play the speculation game? 
I think that this is an important issue for financial stability at the global level. Here we see a 
very  small  number  of  institutions  having  an  enormous  international  influence.  The  patently 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
oligopolistic way in which the rating agencies work is certainly not optimal in terms of market 
organisation.  This  configuration  is  structurally  “pro-cyclical”,  in  other  words  it  fuels  the 
creation  of  bubbles  during  cyclical  upturns  and  exacerbates  the  busts  during  cyclical 
downturns. These failings must be addressed. This is easily said, and more difficult to do… 
You will be relinquishing your duties this coming November. What does this mean for 
you? 
My  professional  life  has  been  shaped  by  both  the  pursuit  of  long-term  or  very  long-term 
strategies such as the construction of Europe and by a series of crises. When I started my 
career as a civil servant I had to deal with the first oil price shock in 1973–74, which was an 
enormous  blow  to  the  whole  of  the  industrialised  world.  Unfortunately,  because  we 
responded poorly, particularly in Europe, this shock was the start of mass unemployment. I 
have also lived through the sovereign debt crises in Latin America, Africa, the crisis in the 
Soviet  Union,  the  crises  of  the  Exchange  Rate  Mechanism  of  the  European  Monetary 
System in 1992 and 1993, and of course the Asian crisis, the bursting of the dot.com bubble 
and the ongoing crisis that started in 2007–08. The truth is, I have always been living through 
crises.  This  has  led  me  to  conclude  that,  in  a  world  that  is  undergoing  extremely  rapid 
transformation thanks to science and technology, the global spread of the market economy 
and the fantastic progress made by China and India, it is necessary to be constantly on one’s 
guard  and  in  a  state  of  alert.  I  first  elaborated  on  this  view  in  a  speech  I  gave  in  2005  at 
Jackson Hole in Wyoming, where central bankers from all around the world meet every year 
on an informal basis. Back then, I explained that one of the conditions for boosting long-term 
confidence  was  to  remain  visibly  and  constantly  in  a  state  of  alert.  The  experience  of  the 
most serious crisis since the Second World War has only strengthened this conviction. More 
than ever, the benefit that the European Central Bank brings to Europeans is to be an anchor 
of stability and confidence in a turbulent and demanding period. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
