Stefan Ingves: Flexible inflation targeting in theory and practice 
Speech by Mr Stefan Ingves, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, to the Swedish Economics, 
at the Swedish Economics Association, Stockholm, 12 May. 
 Mikael Apel, Carl Andreas Claussen and Niklas Frykström have contributed to this speech. 
It is enjoyable, inspiring and a privilege to come here and speak at the Swedish Economics 
Association.  It  is  one  of  the  few  occasions  when  I  can take  a  break  from  current  practical 
monetary  policy  and  discuss  issues  of  a  more  academic  nature.  I  intend  to  take  up  some 
issues that I have been considering “on the side” for some time now. If I were to try to coin a 
title  that  summaries  what  I  am  going  to  talk  about,  it  would  probably  be  “the  link  between 
theory and practice in monetary policy”, and more specifically where I believe the boundaries 
are  as  to  how  close  the  links can be.  I  would like  to  point  out  that  these  are  my  personal 
reflections and not official Riksbank views. 
Monetary policy’s tasks in general terms… 
According to the Sveriges Riksbank Act, the objective of monetary policy is to maintain price 
stability. The Riksbank has specified this as a target for inflation – where the annual change 
in the consumer price index (CPI) is to be 2 per cent. At the same time as monetary policy is 
aimed at attaining the inflation target, it is also supposed to “support the objectives of general 
economic  policy  for  the  purpose  of  attaining  sustainable  growth  and  a  high  level  of 
employment”. The Riksbank does this by not merely striving to stabilise inflation around the 
inflation  target,  but  also  striving  to  stabilise  the  real  economy,  that  is,  production  and 
employment.  The  Riksbank  thus  conducts  what  is  known  as  flexible  inflation  targeting. 
Flexible here means that the Riksbank does not focus solely on inflation.  
To be rather more concrete, one might say that every time we make a decision we try to find 
a forecast path for the repo rate that means monetary will be, as we say, well-balanced. This 
means  that  we  try  to  find  an  appropriate  balance  between  stabilising  inflation  around  the 
inflation target and stabilising the real economy. One way of illustrating this balance is to say 
that the deviations arising during the forecast period between, on one hand, inflation and the 
inflation target, and, on the other, the real economy and a trend, may not become too great.  
…and in theory 
It  is  common  in  the  literature  to  describe  flexible  inflation  targeting  as  the  central  bank 
minimising a loss function that is a weighted sum of a measure of the variation in inflation 
and the variation in the real economy. The loss function can be written as  
   is  the  forecast 
where  π  is  the  forecast  for  inflation,  π*  is  the  inflation  target  and 
deviation between actual resource utilisation in the economy and the long-run sustainable, or 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
“normal” level of resource utilisation.1 The first term represents the central bank’s target of 
stabilising inflation and the second its ambition to stabilise the real economy. 
The parameter λ represents the importance the central bank gives to stabilising the economy 
in relation to stabilising inflation. If λ were zero, this would mean that the central bank does 
not care at all about developments in the real economy, but merely tries to bring inflation as 
close to the target as possible. If λ is large, this means that the central bank places great 
emphasis  on  stabilising  the  real  economy  in  relation  to  stabilising  inflation.  The  term  loss 
function comes from the fact that the larger the deviation, or “gap”, the further away we are 
from where we want to be, and thereby the greater the “loss”. 
In this theoretical description the central bank’s task is described in slightly more detail than 
the general wording of “finding a suitable balance between stabilising inflation and stabilising 
the  real  economy”.  More  specifically,  it  is  a  question  of  finding  the  interest  rate  that  will 
minimise the squared forecast deviations during the forecast period between actual inflation 
and the inflation target and between actual and normal resource utilisation, where the latter 
deviation is weighted by λ – a bit of a tongue-twister to put into words. 
But it can be illustrated relatively conveniently with the aid of a figure. The figure measures 
the variation in inflation along the horizontal axel and the variation in the real economy along 
the  vertical  axel.  The  variations  are  measured  using  the  mean  squared  gap,  that  is,  the 
average  squared  deviation  across  the  forecast  horizon.  Such  mean  squared  gaps  can  be 
calculated  for  various  possible  interest  rate  paths  and  one  can  then  compare  different 
interest rate paths by marking the mean squared gap in the figure. The closer to origo, or the 
further south-west in the figure, the smaller the two mean squared gaps are, and the better 
success  the  accompanying  interest  rate  path  has  in  stabilising  inflation  and  the  real 
economy.2  
We  say  that  inflation  targeting,  or  the  interest  rate  path,  is  effective  if  it  is  not  possible  to 
reduce one of the mean squared gaps without the other gap increasing in size at the same 
time. Theoretically, we could imagine there is a very large number of effective points. These 
points form a “front” as illustrated in the figure. Where the central bank chooses to position 
itself on this front depends on how important it considers stabilising the real economy to be in 
relation to stabilising inflation, that is, which λ the central bank has.  
                                                 
1 
I have simplified somewhat. Without simplification, the loss is often written as 
“horizon”, that is, the period our forecasts cover. 
 where t, is the time when we make the forecasts, and T is the 
2   The  method  with  a  mean  squared  gap  is  presented  in  the  article  “Evaluation  of  different  monetary  policy 
alternatives” in the Monetary Policy Report, October 2009. A presentation and an analysis using this method 
were also included in Material for assessing monetary policy 2009 and Material for assessing monetary policy 
2010. For a more detailed description and references to relevant literature, see Lars E.O. Svensson’s speech 
“Assessing monetary policy”. The speech was held at Uppsala University on 13 March 2009.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Figure 1. Mean squared gap for resource utilisation and inflation, and the effective 
front.  
  The step from theory to practice is not uncomplicated 
This  theoretical  approach,  where  the  central  bank  minimises  a  squared  loss  function  with 
inflation and resource utilisation has been in the monetary policy toolbox for a long time, and 
it has been useful in developing flexible inflation targeting. It captures in an illustrative and 
relatively  simple  way  the  essence  of  inflation  targeting  and  it  has  helped  to  structure  our 
thinking. The mean squared gap analysis makes it easier for the central bank to explain why 
it chooses a particular monetary policy – what it means more specifically by a “well-balanced” 
policy. It can also provide support when assessing monetary policy.  
But however good the tool is, the step from theory to practice is not without complications. I 
intend  to  discuss  some  circumstances  that  in  various  ways  complicate  things  when  taking 
this step.  
Arguments in loss function less clear in practice than in theory 
One such circumstance is that although the variables included in the loss function – inflation 
and resource utilisation – are in theory unambiguous and well-specified, in practice it is far 
from  evident  how  they  should  be  measured.  Resource  utilisation  can  be  regarded  as  a 
summary  of  developments  in  the  real  economy  and  shows  to  what  extent  labour  and  real 
capital  are  being  used  at  a  particular  time.  It  normally  states  use  in  relation  to  the  level 
sustainable in the long run, which is often regarded as a “normal” level. One complication is 
that  it  is  not  possible  to  directly  observe  how  high  the  level  of  resource  utilisation  in  the 
economy  is,  and  nor  is  there  any  generally-accepted  view  of  this  should  be  calculated. 
Different measures can give fairly different results and it is therefore difficult to determine to 
any great degree of precision the level of resource utilisation at any given time.  
The Riksbank uses a broad approach in its analysis of resource utilisation and describes a 
number of indicators in its reports, such as measures based on surveys of companies and on 
“gaps”, for instance the GDP gap and the number of hours worked gap, where the trend or 
normal level is calculated according to some method.3 The Riksbank weighs together these 
                                                 
3   See,  for  instance,  the  article  “The  stabilisation  of  the  real  economy  and  measures  of  resource  utilisation”, 
Material for Assessing Monetary Policy 2010, Sveriges Riksbank. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
indicators and makes an overall assessment of the current level of resource utilisation. The 
assessment  is  qualitative  and  can  be  expressed  as  resource  utilisation  being  “higher  than 
normal”, “normal” or “lower than normal”. A qualitative assessment regarding how resource 
utilisation will develop during the forecast period is also provided. This can be expressed, for 
instance, as “resource utilisation will rise and be close to normal at the end of the forecast 
period”. Although we publish forecasts for different gaps in our reports, we do not make a 
quantitative  forecast  that  reflects  the  overall  assessment  of  how  resource  utilisation  will 
develop.  
One alternative would be for the Riksbank to simply decide to use one particular measure of 
resource utilisation as a starting point when setting the interest rate. But we have chosen not 
to  do  this.  For  instance,  the  difficulties  in  estimating  what  is  a  “normal  level”  for  resource 
utilisation indicate it may be risky to commit oneself to any specific method. Another reason 
is  that  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Riksbank  is  what  is  usually  known  as  an  individualistic 
committee.4  Put  simply,  this  means  that  the  members  of  the  Executive  Board  act  as 
individuals, both in the communication of monetary policy and when deciding on the interest 
rate.  They  can  thus  make  their  own  assessments  of  which  measure  or  measures  of 
developments in the real economy they consider should be the focus of monetary policy. I 
will return shortly to the consequences of our being a group that makes such decisions.  
The  second  variable  in  the  loss  function,  inflation,  is  not  as  problematic  as  it  can  be 
measured  in  a  much  better  way  than  resource  utilisation.  But  it  is  not  entirely  clear  which 
measure of inflation should be used. Although the inflation target is worded in terms of the 
CPI, when the repo rate changes a lot, as it did during the crisis, it will have a large direct 
impact  on  the  CPI  through  households’  mortgage  expenditure.  It  may  then  be  more 
appropriate to focus on an inflation measure that excludes these direct effects of interest rate 
changes. This is what the Riksbank has done recently, focussing primarily on CPIF inflation. 
However, it is largely a question of judgement which measure of inflation one should focus 
on. For instance, it is possible that one might sometimes want to disregard other components 
of the CPI, for instance, the direct effects of oil price increases. 
An illustration  
One can illustrate the complications that may arise in the actual work with the aid of the type 
of  figure  I  showed  earlier,  where  one  marks  the  average  squared  deviations,  the  mean 
squared  gaps,  during  the  forecast  period.  For  a  concrete  example  of  a  time  when  the 
differences were particularly visible, we can study the forecast from September 2008.  
In addition to the repo rate path in the main scenario, the Riksbank usually also analyses two 
alternative repo rate paths; one that is higher than the one in the main scenario and one that 
is lower. The mean squared gaps for different measures of inflation and resource utilisation 
generated by these three interest rate paths in September 2008 are shown in Figure 2.  
                                                 
4   See,  for  instance,  Blinder,  A.  S.  (2007),  “Central  Banking  by  Committee:  Why  and  How?”  European  Journal  of  Political 
Economy vol. 23, pp. 106–123. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Figure 2. Mean squared gaps September 2008 
  Source: The Riksbank 
Note: Red dots show the main scenario, blue dots show the alternative with a higher repo rate path and yellow 
dots show the alternative with a lower repo rate path. 
If  inflation  is  measured  in  terms  of  the  CPIF,  that  is,  the  CPI  excluding  direct  effects  of 
interest rates, and if resource utilisation is measured with a gap calculated on the number of 
hours  worked  in  the  economy,  one  obtains  the  three  dots  up  on  the  left-hand  side  of  the 
figure. It is clear that in this case it is the higher repo rate path that gives the least overall 
squared deviations during the forecast period – its dots are furthest to the south west, closest 
to  origo.  The  lower  repo  rate  path  gives  the  largest  deviations.  But  if  inflation  is  instead 
measured in terms of the CPI and resource utilisation is measured in terms of the GDP gap, 
the result is the opposite. Here, it is the lower repo rate that gives the overall smallest square 
deviations. Thus, the variables used to measure inflation and resource utilisation can play an 
important role regarding which repo rate path one prefers.  
It is also worth noting that the repo rate path in the main scenario does not give the smallest 
overall  mean  square  gap  in  any  of  these  cases.5  This  has  been  the  case  also  on  other 
occasions.  At  first  sight,  this  may  seem  rather  strange.  But  let  me  explain  why  it  is  not 
necessarily so – and also point out some other circumstances that can complicate the step 
from simple theories to practical policy. 
Interest rate scenarios produced in different ways 
A  slightly  technical  explanation  as  to  why  an  alternative  interest  rate  path  may  give  an 
apparently  better  outcome  than  the  repo  rate  path  in  the main  scenario  concerns  how  the 
various  scenarios  were  made.  When  we  at  the  Riksbank  make  forecasts  we  use  various 
macroeconomic  models.  For  instance,  the  Riksbank  uses  what  is  known  as  a  general 
equilibrium  model  of  the  Swedish  economy  named  RAMSES  (the  Riksbank’s  Aggregate 
Macromodel  for  Studying  the  Economy  in  Sweden).  But  the  models  always  need  to  be 
supplemented  with  personal  judgements.  These  judgements  become  particularly  important 
when unusual events and structural changes occur that alter the functioning of the economy. 
This  was  the  case  during  the  financial  crisis,  for  instance.  Figure  3  shows  the  RAMSES 
forecast  for  the  GDP  gap  and  the  Riksbank’s  forecast  in  the  Monetary  Policy  Report 
                                                 
5   However, at the time this decision was made, no alternative scenario was unambiguously better than the main 
scenario if one calculates the mean squared gap for the combination of GDP gap and CPIF. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
published in February 2009. As you can see, there is a fairly large difference between the 
forecast  generated  solely  from  a  model  and  the  published  forecast  supplemented  with 
personal judgements.  
Figure 3. Forecasts for the GDP gap Monetary Policy Report 1/2009 
Source: The Riksbank  
 The  significance  of  the  personal  judgements  becomes  even  clearer  when  we  see  the 
forecasts for the repo rate (Figure 4). According to our forecast, a much more expansionary 
monetary policy was needed during the crisis than was suggested by RAMSES.  
Figure 4. Forecasts for the repo rate Monetary Policy Report 1/2009 
Source: The Riksbank  
 Personal judgements are also necessary in normal situations; and the forecasts in the main 
scenario  published  by  the  Riksbank  in  the  Monetary  Policy  Reports  and  Updates  are 
produced  in  this  way  –  with  support  from  models  but  with  the  addition  of  considerable 
personal  judgements.  The  forecasts  gradually  emerge  during  a  rather  long  and  labour-
intensive process that spans several weeks.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The forecasts in the alternative repo rate scenarios, on the other hand, are produced in a 
different manner. Here we use the main scenario as a starting point and then make a purely 
model-based adjustment using RAMSES. No personal judgement over and above that in the 
main scenario has been made. The forecasts in the alternative repo rate scenarios are thus 
less  thoroughly  analysed  than  those  in  the  main  scenario.  If  the  alternative  repo  rate 
scenarios  were  supplemented  with  personal  judgements,  the  forecasts  and  mean  squared 
gaps would probably look different. 
The main reason for this simplified approach is that it would require too many resources to 
produce complete, detailed forecasts for several different repo rate paths. Of course, it is not 
written in stone how main forecasts and alternative scenarios should be produced, and the 
Riksbank  is  currently  reviewing  the  decision-making  process  to  see  how  it  could  be 
improved. But this is the way we have worked until now. One can thus imagine that part of 
the explanation as to why an alternative repo rate scenario may give a smaller mean squared 
gap than the main scenario could be that it is only a purely model-based adjustment of the 
main scenario. 
This raises another question: If one were also to supplement the alternative repo rate paths 
with personal judgements, would one always conclude that the main scenario would give the 
lowest  loss?  The  answer  to  this  question  should  reasonably  be  “yes,  at  least  most  of  the 
time” – there are some reservations, which I will discuss in a moment. We try to conduct the 
policy we judge to be the best or “best balanced” and if we judged that another repo rate path 
than that in the main scenario would give a better outcome, we would of course choose that 
one instead. This should be visible in the mean squared gap analysis, that is, there should 
not be alternative repo rate paths that give a dot that lies south-west of the main scenario. 
Consideration to developments beyond the forecast horizon and risks 
There  may  also  be  other  reasons  why  the  main  scenario  does  not  necessarily  provide 
smaller  mean  squared  deviations  than  an  alternative  repo  rate  scenario.  One  is  that  the 
calculations are based on forecasts that extend no further than three years ahead. But there 
may sometimes be reason to consider what might happen beyond this time horizon, even if 
this is difficult to capture in a normal quantitative forecast. This could mean that the central 
bank chooses a repo rate path that, while it does not give the lowest squared deviations over 
the  three-year  forecast  period,  is  nevertheless  judged  preferable  from  a  longer-term 
perspective. For instance, the bank may hold the policy rate higher to try to prevent a credit 
boom  that  is  feared  would  cause  problems  –  with  large  squared  deviations  –  beyond  the 
forecast horizon.  
A  closely-related  reason  is  that  the  central  bank  under  certain  circumstances  gives 
consideration to specific risks when setting interest rates. This is something I personally find 
to be one of the most important factors missing in the simple analytical framework. This could 
also be expressed as the central bank holding the policy rate at a higher level to reduce the 
risk – within or beyond the forecast horizon – that, for instance, a credit boom would continue 
too long and cause problems. The central bank might also wish to hold the policy rate at a 
higher level to reduce the risk of inflation expectations rising too high, which could also be 
problematic. The higher policy rate  could give larger deviations during the forecast period, 
but may nevertheless be preferable as it reduces the risk of a really poor outcome. 
Framework more difficult to apply with an Executive Board 
Another  circumstance  that  I  perceive  as  complicating  matters  with  regard  to  putting  the 
theoretical  approach  into  practice  is  the  fact  that  there  are  six  of  us  making  the  monetary 
policy decisions. The theory usually assumes that one single person determines the policy 
rate – despite the fact that it is now fairly rare for this to be the case in practice. The loss 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
function  I  mentioned  earlier  then  reflects  this  single  policymaker’s  view  of  how  monetary 
policy should be conducted.  
In the cases where the theory acknowledges that there may be several different monetary 
policymakers, it is often also assumed that the only thing that distinguishes them from one 
another is that they have different preferences as to how much they want to stabilise inflation 
in  relation  to  stabilising  the  real  economy  –  that  they  have  different  λ.6  Otherwise  the 
policymakers are assumed to see things in the same way: They have the same view of the 
loss function, what it should include, and they make their forecasts of inflation and resource 
utilisation  in  the  same  way,  in  the  same  “model”.  If  this  were  the  case  in  practice,  the 
monetary policymakers could quite simply vote on the various effective dots presented in the 
figure with the mean squared gaps.  
But the reality is quite different. The complications I have mentioned so far, such as how the 
variables  in  the  loss  function  should  be  measured  or  how  to  take  risk  into  account,  would 
cause problems even for a single monetary policymaker. But of course things become even 
more complicated with several different policymakers who may have differing views on these 
issues. 
Scepticism towards far-reaching parallels between theory and practice 
So  how  do  the  monetary  policymakers  view  the  relationship  between  monetary  policy 
theories  and  the  practical  implementation  of  monetary  policy?  We  can  gain  one  indication 
from a survey carried out a while back. In this, a questionnaire was sent to all of those who 
are or have been members of the Executive Board of the Riksbank since it was first created 
in 1999.7 The questions concerned, for instance, how the members view different hypotheses 
within the research into monetary policy decision-making by a committee. As far as I know, 
this is the only such survey carried out on a monetary policy committee. An equivalent study 
is now under way in Norway.  
Some of the questions concern the link between the way monetary policy is often described 
in academic research and how monetary policymakers view it with the eyes of a practitioner. 
For  instance,  the  following  question  was  included:  “Would  you  consider  –  using  your  own 
judgement or, for instance, the Riksbank’s analysis resources – stating in terms of a figure 
how  much  importance  you  would  normally  place  on  stabilising  resource  utilisation  in  the 
economy in relation to stabilising inflation (that is, stating your λ)?”  
A total of nine persons out of the twelve who responded to the survey replied that they would 
not  consider  this.  These  members  were  given  a  number  of  alternatives  to  select  as  the 
reason for their response. The explanation the members themselves considered to apply the 
best was that the idea that one can use a figure to explain the relative weight of stabilising 
inflation against that of stabilising resource utilisation in the economy is overly simple. Many 
also considered that it was meaningless to try to quantify the relative weight given to inflation 
and resource utilisation, partly because this could depend on the situation in the economy 
and  thus  vary  over  time,  and  partly  because  the  measures  of  resource  utilisation  are  so 
uncertain.  
                                                 
6  
In  the  academic  literature  one  usually  calls  a  policymaker  who  gives  a  relatively  high  priority  to  stabilising 
inflation, a small λ, conservative. A well-known theoretical result reached in the mid-1980s by Kenneth Rogoff, 
nowadays  adviser  to  the  Riksbank,  was  that  under  certain  circumstances  it  might  be  optimal  to  appoint  a 
governor  who was more “conservative” than society in general (Rogoff, K., (1985), “The Optimal Degree of 
Commitment to an Intermediate Monetary Target”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 100, pp. 1169–1189).  
7  Apel,  M.,  C.  A.  Claussen  and  P.  Lennartsdotter,  (2010),  “Picking  the  Brains  of  MPC  Members”,  Sveriges 
Riksbank Working Paper Series No. 237. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
It thus appears that there is fairly broad scepticism among the members towards drawing far-
reaching parallels between how monetary policy is described in theory and how they view it 
as practitioners. All of those who are or have been members of the Executive Board agree, I 
am sure, with the general wording that the Riksbank is to stabilise inflation around 2 per cent 
and, in addition, to stabilise the real economy. But after that I believe that the views differ 
quite  substantially  as  to  how  far  one  can  go  in  using  theory  when  conducting  practical 
monetary  policy.  The  reaction  many  people  probably  have  is  that  if  one  were  to  reduce 
monetary policy to a choice between dots on the figure I showed you, it would make it appear 
as though monetary policy had an exactness that does not actually exist. My guess is that 
this scepticism is not unique to the Executive Board of the Riksbank, but is shared by other 
countries’ monetary policy committees.  
Differences are good 
Essentially, it is positive that the members of the Executive Board have fairly different views 
on  things.  When  the  Executive  Board  was  established  in  1999  there  was  a  more  or  less 
explicit  aim  that  it  would  consist  of  people  with  different  backgrounds,  experience  and 
knowledge.  This  type  of  diversification  appears  to  be  something  that  most  countries  with 
monetary policy committees strive to attain. One reason for this is that there is a widespread 
belief  that  committees  tend  to  make  better  decisions  than  individual  policymakers,  as  a 
committee can “pool” its experiences and knowledge.8 The decision can thus be made on a 
broader and better basis. As the saying goes: “two – or rather more – heads are better than 
one”. And in order to have something to “pool”, the people on the committee should not be 
too alike. If they all are cast in the same mould and think in the same way, one might just as 
well have one single policymaker.  
If  there  are  so  many  different  wills  and  ways  of  thinking,  how  can  we  actually  manage  to 
agree on a detailed, quantified forecast and an exactly determined repo rate path? Also here 
we  can  receive  guidance  from  the  survey  I  mentioned  earlier.  One  question  in  the  survey 
was  whether  the  members  had  refrained  from  entering  a  reservation  against  one  or  more 
monetary policy decisions, despite considering that another decision than the majority view 
would have been better. Seven of the members, that is, more than half of them, replied that 
they had. The most important motivation given for this was that they said there was some 
“bargaining margin” in the repo rate decisions and that the decision reached was sufficiently 
close to what they would have advocated. In terms of the mean squared gap analysis, one 
could express this as the members actually preferring different dots, but given that the main 
scenario dot was sufficiently close to their own, they accepted the main scenario. I believe 
that this is a fairly important insight: The forecasts we present are often a compromise and 
an  approximation.  They  point  to  the  probable  and  desired  direction,  but  the  exact  figures 
should probably be taken with a pinch of salt.  
An important balancing act 
At  the  same  time,  it  is  important  to  realise  that  the  problem  that  constantly  lies  below  the 
surface is how to find an appropriate balance between what one could call diversification and 
clarity: On the one hand the central bank wants to benefit from the fact that the decisions are 
made  by  a  committee.  We  are  not supposed  to  be  cast  in  the  same mould.  There  should 
thus be a sufficient degree of freedom and scope for individual members to make their own 
analyses, draw their own conclusions and make decisions as they see fit.  
                                                 
8   For arguments in favour of this hypothesis in research, see for instance Blinder, A. S., and J. Morgan, (2005), 
“Are Two Heads Better Than One? Monetary Policy by Committee”, Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 
vol. 37, pp. 789–812. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
On  the  other  hand,  this  should  not  mean  that  monetary  policy  becomes  unclear,  that  it  is 
characterised  by  more  or  less  loose  opinions  –  and  that  it  thus  becomes  more  difficult  to 
understand and thus to assess. Ultimately, it is the confidence of the general public that is at 
risk  here;  the  legitimacy  of  monetary  policy.  This  was  strongly  emphasised  when  the 
inflation-targeting  regime  was  introduced.  The  Riksbank  then  put  considerable  energy  into 
explaining what inflation targeting was all about and this probably contributed to the relatively 
quick acceptance of this policy. Now the inflation-targeting policy is much more established, 
but there is of course still a need for clarity and structure. 
So although I have highlighted some of the problems regarding drawing parallels between 
theoretical analysis and practical monetary policy, this should not be interpreted to mean that 
I do not think that theory has a role to play. I am convinced that, used wisely, it can provide 
good support when explaining and assessing monetary policy. 
But exactly how theory can be used in the practical work, and exactly where the optimum 
balance  lies  between  diversification  and  clarity,  or  between  the  degree  of  freedom  and 
structure in an uncertain world is something that every central bank must try to ascertain. I 
can assure you that this is something we have considered at great length at the Riksbank. It 
is  also  an  important  part  of  the  work  on  reviewing  the  decision-making  process  that  I 
mentioned  earlier.  I  do  not  believe  it  is  possible  to  capture  everything  with  the  aid  of  two 
aggregates. Now and then something is likely to disappear on route.  
New challenges – the importance of managing systemic risk 
I have so far only discussed “traditional” complications in the step from theory to practice. I 
have given examples of challenges we have faced more or less continuously since inflation 
targeting  was  introduced.  But  if  we  look  ahead,  it  is  likely  that  the  picture  will  be  further 
complicated  by  the  changes  that  will  follow  in  the  wake  of  the  financial  crisis.  What  I  am 
mainly thinking about here is the increased focus on macroprudential policies. 
After the financial crisis we have learnt two main lessons. The first is that the central banks’ 
interest rate-setting must take into account financial stability to a greater degree. The second 
is that we need new regulation in the financial market that focuses on systemic risk. But the 
macroprudential  policies  may  have  effects  that  are  in  many  ways  similar  to  the  effects  of 
monetary  policy  –  particularly  if  the  tools  are  varied  over  time.  This  increased  interaction 
between monetary policy and macroprudential policies is another circumstance that means 
that the connections between the simple theoretical framework and practical monetary policy 
become twisted.  
Of  course,  it  is  not  the  case  that  monetary  policy  and  regulation  were  two  entirely 
independent  policy  areas  prior  to  the  crisis  and  that  after  the  crisis  they  will  be  fully 
integrated. But I nevertheless believe that monetary policy and regulation will come closer to 
one another in the future.  
When  I  was  here  a  year  ago,  I  spoke  at  length  on  how  monetary  policy  can  contribute  to 
maintaining  financial  stability  and  how  different  types  of  regulations  can  affect  monetary 
policy and its transmission mechanism. I will not go into this again today. Instead, I would like 
to focus on something I did not say so much about then, namely the institutional solutions 
and division of responsibility with regard to monetary policy and macroprudential policy.  
There are a number of interesting questions here: Should the responsibility be centralised to 
one  authority  or  spread  across  two  or  more  authorities?  If the  responsibility  is  spread  out, 
what  mandates  should  the  different  authorities  have,  or,  to  express  it  in  simple  theoretical 
terms, how should their loss functions look? Should they act independently of one another or 
should they coordinate their measures? 
At present, considerable effort is being put into finding answers to these questions, both in 
the academic world and on the political plane. There are no clear answers as yet, and I will 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
not  be  able  to  give  any  here.  But  I  would  nevertheless  like  to  think  aloud  on  a  specific 
question that I find particularly interesting, namely what might happen if the responsibility for 
monetary policy and for macroprudential policies are split between two authorities that do not 
coordinate their measures. 
Risk of poorer policy mix if responsibility is split? 
I  shall  use  an  example  to  illustrate  the  potential  problems.  Let  us  assume  that  the 
macroprudential  policy  is  a  time-varying  capital  requirement.9  A  financial  supervisory 
authority  controls  the  capital  requirement,  while  the  central  bank  controls  the  interest  rate. 
There  is  an  upper  and  a  lower  limit  for  the  capital  requirement,  kmax  and  kmin.  This  is 
illustrated by the two horizontal lines in Figure 5. Changes in the capital requirement affect 
developments in the economy. For example, we can imagine that a tightening will reduce the 
banks’ credit granting and thus slow down demand in the economy.  
The green line shows the level of the capital requirement the financial supervisory authority 
considers to be best for each level of the interest rate. The red line correspondingly indicates 
the  combinations  of  interest  rate  and  level  of  capital  requirement  preferred  by  the  central 
bank. The two authorities’ views of what can be considered an appropriate policy mix in a 
given  situation  thus  differ.  The  financial  supervisory  authority  is  more  concerned  over 
systemic risk than the central bank. This is expressed in that for each level of the interest 
rate  the  financial  supervisory  authority  wants  a  higher  capital  requirement  than  the  central 
bank would have set if it had control over both tools. It is likely that the differences in the 
views of what constitutes a good policy mix are greatest when the interest rate is low, so let 
the curves in the figure apply to a situation with a low interest rate. I will return to this in a 
moment.  
Figure 5. Illustration of the interplay between the central bank and the financial 
supervisory authority 
 
 
Let us assume that the interest rate and the capital requirement started off at the blue dot in 
the figure. Let us assume that demand in the economy has fallen, and that a need for more 
expansionary  policy  has  therefore  arisen  to  stabilise  the  real  economy  and  inflation.  The 
central bank then wants to cut the policy rate so that it is on the red curve.  
                                                  
9  Capital requirement here refers to the statutory capital adequacy requirement. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
But  at  this  low  interest  rate  the  financial  supervisory  authority  may  worry  that  risks  are 
beginning to build up and it will therefore raise the capital requirement. However, the higher 
capital requirement not only means that the risks decline, it also has some negative effect on 
demand in the economy. This has the consequence that the central bank wishes to cut the 
policy rate further, which in turn makes the financial supervisory authority want to raise the 
capital requirement, and so on, and so on. This leads to a “race”, which ultimately leads to 
the  capital  requirement  reaching  its  upper  limit  at  the  same  time  as  the  interest  rate  is 
extremely low.  
It is easy to imagine that this final mix of the two policy instruments is not optimal from the 
perspective of the economy as a whole. The means of control for monetary policy and risk 
have been used much more aggressively than is beneficial for the economy and also more 
aggressively than either the central bank or the financial supervisory authority would wish. Of 
course, one can discuss how realistic this particular example is. But I nevertheless believe 
that  it  illustrates  the  importance  of  formulating  the  authorities’  mandate  and  powers  of 
authority  wisely.  It  also  shows  that  monetary  policy  and  regulation  are  connected.  Each 
regulation creates a form of “shadow interest rate”. 
So how can we avoid policy “drifting away” in this unfortunate manner? One possibility is to 
try to formulate the tasks of the central bank and the financial supervisory authority so that 
they  make  a  unanimous  assessment  of  what  needs  to  be  done.  In  the  figure  this  would 
correspond to  the  green  and  red  curves  coinciding.  If  the  curves  lie  exactly  on  top  of  one 
another, there will not be any interaction that leads to the two means of control being used 
too aggressively. 
Another possibility might be to give the central bank the responsibility for both tools – it is not 
possible to give the financial supervisory authority responsibility for monetary policy. In the 
figure, the adjustment would then come to a halt after the first interest rate cut. How close 
this  is  to  the  socially  optimal  point  depends  on  how  well  the  central  bank’s  loss  function 
agrees with the socially optimal one. But it is almost certainly closer than the policy mix that 
results from the policies drifting away. 
A third possibility is that the central bank and the financial supervisory authority coordinate, 
or negotiate on the policy. It is not clear what this would result in, but it would in any case 
avoid the inferior policy mix in the alternative without any coordination.  
I  need  hardly  say  that  the  step  between  this  simple  theoretical  example  and  a  practical 
solution is fairly large. But this is actually just a further example of the complications that form 
the  main  theme  of  my  speech.  Perhaps  I  should  add  that  the  question  of  how  to  divide 
responsibility  for  the  means  of  control  is  currently  being  examined  by  the  financial  crisis 
committee appointed by the government a while ago. It will of course be interesting to see 
the committee’s conclusions.  
Conclusion 
Let me round off. I would guess that many of you here today are used to seeing monetary 
policy through an academic’s eyes. When you hear the term monetary policy you may first 
and foremost associate it with the theoretical framework – the way that monetary policy is 
often  portrayed  in  textbooks  and  scientific  articles.  Others  of  you  may  think  instead  of  the 
more conventional, day-to-day image of monetary policy given in the media, with a focus on 
the Riksbank’s interest rate changes and possible disagreement among the Executive Board. 
One  might  say  that  these  two  images  in  some  way  represent  the  start  and  finish  of  the 
monetary policy process. When an interest rate decision is to be made, the process starts in 
one way or another with the simple theoretical framework. As I noted earlier, this captures 
fairly  well  the  intuition  behind  flexible  inflation  targeting  –  that  a  well-balanced  monetary 
policy concerns finding a suitable balance between stabilising inflation and stabilising the real 
economy.  Each  of  us  involved  in  making  the  policy  rate  decision  has some  version  of  the 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
theoretical framework in our head, even if it is probably often fairly implicit. At the other end 
of the process is the media image, with concrete repo rate decisions. 
The basic question is how we can  best go from the simple theoretical analysis into actual 
policy.  There  is  a  balancing  act  to  achieve  here:  On  the  one  hand,  one  wants  to  retain 
sufficient clarity and structure in the process as given by the theoretical framework. But on 
the  other  hand,  one  does  not  want  to  provide  an  overly  simple  and  thereby  perhaps 
misleading picture of monetary policy and the deliberations that we have to make in practice.  
What  I  have  talked  about  here  today  concerns  the  link  between  theory  and  practice,  and 
more specifically why the connections between them are not so simple. The interesting but 
difficult  challenges  faced  when  going  from  theoretical  analysis  to  practical  policy  are 
something the Riksbank – and presumably also other central banks – spends a lot of time 
and  energy  managing.  These  challenges  may  not  be  so  well-known  outside  of  the  central 
bank world and I hope that I have now been able to provide some insight into them.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
