Loi Martin Bakani: Economic prospects and outlook for 2011 to 2015 
Address  by  Mr  Loi  Martin  Bakani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Papua  New  Guinea,  to  the 
Consultative Implementation and Monitoring Council (CIMC) National Development  Forum, 
Port Moresby, 24 August 2011. 
 Acknowledge dignitaries and organizers (CIMC) of the forum. 
Although the period for the topic is 2011 to 2015, allow me to confine my presentation to the 
period 2011 to 2014, which is largely the period for the construction phase of the PNG LNG 
project. 
Economic prospects: 2011 to 2014 
I. 
Papua New Guinea is currently enjoying the longest streak of economic growth in its history 
as an independent nation. 2011 will be the 10th year of economic growth as measured by the 
increase in real Gross Domestic Product (GDP). The average increase in real GDP for the 
period  from  2002  to  2010  was  5.4%.  The  driving  force  behind  the  growth  for  most  of  the 
period was the non-mineral sector. 
Projections by the Bank of Papua New Guinea indicate that economic growth in 2011 will be 
around  9.5%.  The  growth  in  economic  activity  shall  continue  all  through  the  2011  to  2014 
period. The high economic growth in 2011 is driven by the construction of the LNG project, 
and the global demand for the country’s primary exports. Even if there will be a slowdown in 
the  economic  activity  in  the  developed  economies,  high  growth  in  the  major  emerging 
markets  of  Brazil,  Russia,  India,  China  and  South  Africa  (BRICS)  should  ensure  that  the 
slowdown  in  global  activity  will  not  be  severe.  Hence,  the  international  commodity  prices 
might decline, but will still be historically high, which should benefit our agriculture, forestry 
and fisheries industries. The construction of the LNG project will benefit the sectors of the 
economy  that  supply  inputs  and  services  to  the  developer,  mainly  manufacturing,  earth 
works,  infrastructure,  building  and  construction,  transport,  communication,  commerce 
(wholesale and retail especially equipment and vehicles), personal services, accommodation 
and hotels, and local food production for the workforce. 
In addition the high international metal prices of copper and gold will result in high mineral 
export  receipts  and  taxes  to  the  Government,  which  will  allow  for  continued  high  public 
expenditure and the public sector contribution to aggregate demand, and GDP. 
Based on the above outlook it is assumed that economic growth as measured by real GDP 
will continue to be high at the 8% to 10% range, all through the period of the construction of 
the LNG project, that is, up to the end of 2014. I will refrain from projecting developments 
beyond the LNG construction stage, given the need to fully assess what the impact of the 
production and export of the gas will have on the economy. 
As can be expected, over the last five years the increase in economic growth resulted in an 
increase  in  formal  employment  averaging  6.0%  per  annum.  In  the  June  quarter  of  2011 
employment increased by 7.1%. It can be expected that this trend will continue during the 
period 2011 to 2014. 
The  increase  in  aggregate  demand  associated  with  the  increase  in  economic  growth, 
combined  with  higher  public  sector  spending  as  a  result  of  the  increase  in  tax  revenue, 
combined with higher prices of fuel and imported food items, led to an increase in the prices 
of goods and services. Annual inflation increased to 9.6% in the June quarter of 2011, up 
from  7.2%  in  the  December  quarter  of  2010.  There  is  some  tradeoff  between  economic 
growth and inflation. I want to repeat what I said in my previous presentations. In this period 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
of high economic growth, there will be increased inflationary pressures. The Bank of Papua 
New Guinea will do all it can in using all the available instruments available to it – interest 
rates, exchange rate, and trade in Central Bank Bills – to contain inflation within the single-
digit to low-two-digit range. To ensure that this objective is achieved, it will require very close 
cooperation  and  coordination  with  the  Government  in  the  management  of  fiscal  and 
monetary policies, to ensure that inflation does not spiral out of control. At the same time, it 
will ensure that its policies do not counteract the objective of economic growth, development 
and the increase in the standard of living of the majority of the population. 
Good economic management 
II. 
Let me now turn to the issue of how to secure a balanced growth at acceptable inflationary 
levels, at these very challenging times in the history of our economic development. 
I am confident that with close coordination and cooperation between the Government and the 
Central  Bank  the  macro  economy  can  be  prudently  and  responsibly  managed.  I  will  touch 
upon  the  issue  of  the  “Dutch  Disease”  phenomena  and  how  to  deal  with  it,  later  in  my 
presentation. 
The  microeconomic  aspects  are  as  important  as  the  macroeconomic  ones,  to  achieve  a 
balanced  non-inflationary  growth.  The  first  and  most  important  one  is,  to  ensure  that  the 
Government  is  not  competing  with  the  Private  Sector  for  limited  productive  resources  and 
capacities. Such competition will only result in price increases, increase in imported inputs, 
including  materials,  equipment  and  labour,  and  misallocation  of  the  limited  resources 
resulting  in  losses  to  the  nation.  Therefore,  my  recommendation  is  that  during  the  LNG 
construction  period  the  Government  should  refrain  from  undertaking  major  infrastructure 
projects. Undertaking major infrastructure projects by the Government will only compete with 
the limited resources in equipment and manpower in the areas of earth moving, building and 
construction, as well as other industries that are and will be fully utilized for the LNG project 
construction.  The  Government  should  instead  do  work  in  the  areas  of,  maintenance, 
upgrading and some instances complement work done by the developer of the LNG project. 
The Government should commence planning its infrastructure implementation and be ready 
to  implement  them,  as  and  when  the  LNG  project  scales  down  its  construction  operations 
and  the  highly  skilled  labour  trained  by  the  developer,  equipment  and  materials,  become 
available and can be utilized, for other infrastructure developments. 
During  the  construction  phase  of  the  LNG  project,  the  Government  should  concentrate  its 
efforts on areas that do not compete with the LNG developer on resources, which are the 
social sectors of education, including the up-skilling of the workforce through vocational and 
on the job training, health and law and order. It is clear that the expansion of the services in 
these areas will require investment in classrooms, aid posts, police stations and housing for 
teachers, health workers and police personnel. The recommendation is not to refrain from all 
work  in  the  area  of  building  and  construction,  but  to  limit  them  to  the  bare  minimum 
necessary  to  maintain  the  existing  infrastructure  and  complement  it  with  the  most  needed 
additions. Once the LNG project construction winds down, the opportunity to move the skilled 
labour  trained  by  it,  and  the  resources  becoming  available,  to  major  infrastructure  and 
building and construction projects should be planned. This means that the Government must 
have a clearly designed plan, including detailed implementation plans and programs for it. 
Combating “Dutch Disease” 
III. 
The second important micro level proposed initiative is to invest in the agriculture sector and 
social infrastructure. In many presentations of the problems that the development of the LNG 
project might create, the subject of the “Dutch Disease” which involves the pricing out of the 
traditional  export  sectors  is  raised.  One  of  the  most  efficient  ways  to  counteract  it  is,  by 
investing  and  developing  a  competitive  traditional  export  industry.  Papua  New  Guinea  is 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
blessed with very fertile land, abundant water resources, and available labour force, and has 
the  potential  to  develop  a  competitive,  advanced  agricultural  sector.  Given  the  world  wide 
food shortage and the steady increase in food prices, the Government should develop a plan 
of investment in the agricultural sector that will place Papua New Guinea as a food supplying 
country, not only for its own use, but for exports. This is the most efficient and effective way 
to  counteract  the  “Dutch  Disease”  risks  emanating  from  the  LNG  development  where  we 
have alternate sources of income generation with a wider base of exports. 
Given  the  projections  of  revenue  and  tax  flows during  the next  four  years  2011–2014,  the 
Government should have the resources to invest in the social sectors and the development 
of  the  agriculture  sector.  I  recommend  to  the  Government  to  set  up  a  Special  Purpose 
Account (that is budgeted for) with the Bank of Papua New Guinea in which all the excess 
revenue will be deposited, to be used for these purposes. 
Initiatives by the central bank 
IV. 
Allow me to end my presentation with two subjects at the top of my agenda as the Governor 
of the Bank of Papua New Guinea. 
The  first  is  Financial  Inclusion:  We  are  in  the  process  of  planning  and  implementing  a 
program  of  enabling  every  Papua  New  Guineans  wherever  they  live  to  have  access  to 
banking and financial services. This will include the advancement of the microfinance service 
and mobile phone banking. It will be complemented by financial awareness, literacy training 
and  education.  I  plan  that  during  my  term  as  the  Governor  the  program  will,  as  much  as 
possible; reach every citizen of this country wherever they live. 
The second is the Payment Systems: We are planning to enhance and improve the National 
and International Payment Systems, and turn them into a modern, low cost and efficient one. 
We also aim to upgrade our payment laws in the process. We are in the process of selecting 
a vendor to assist us in the development of the system. 
Conclusion 
To conclude, let me reiterate three important points. 
1. 
The  Government,  through  its  fiscal  policy,  can  redistribute  effectively  the  windfall 
revenue  gain  (through  increased  taxes  from  high  commodities  prices  and  spin-off 
business  activities)  by  investing  in  the  social  sector  and  agriculture  for  wealth 
creation, to combat Dutch Disease, and to achieve a balanced growth in the PNG 
economy; 
Government should not compete with the private sector for limited resources during 
the  construction  phase  of  the  LNG  project  by  engaging  in  large  infrastructure 
projects,  but  maintain  and  improve  existing  infrastructures,  and  plan  to  use  the 
resources when they are released after the construction phase; 
There  has  to  be  a  more  close  and  coordinated  management  of  fiscal  policy  and 
monetary policy to fight inflation so that it does not spiral out of control in this period 
of high economic growth. 
2. 
3. 
Thank you for having invited me to make this presentation at this important forum. 
I wish you all success in this forum. 
Thank you and God bless. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
 4 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches
    5
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
