Ardian Fullani: Recent economic and financial developments in Albania 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the press conference on 
the Bank of Albania’s Supervisory Council decision on monetary policy, Tirana, 23 February 
2011.  
 Today, on 23 February 2011, the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania reviewed and 
approved  the  monthly  Monetary  Policy  Report.  Based  on  a  thorough  analysis  of  Albania’s 
latest economic and monetary developments and discussions on their performance outlook, 
the  Supervisory  Council  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  decided  to  leave  the  key  interest  rate 
unchanged at 5.00%. The Supervisory Council confirmed that the actual monetary conditions 
remain  appropriate  for  meeting  the  medium-term  inflation  target  and  for  supporting  the 
domestic economic activity. 
I  would  like  to  proceed  with  a  brief  overview  of  economic  developments  and  main  issues 
discussed at today’s meeting of the Supervisory Council.  
 Recent  data  from  the  global  economy  confirm  the  positive  underlying  momentum  of  the 
economic activity in developed and developing economies. Despite the gradual withdrawal of 
fiscal and monetary stimulus, economic growth has been stable, as a result of the recovery in 
the private sector demand in developing countries.  
On the other hand, the higher demand has triggered a price increase in commodities, basic 
products  and  food  items,  thus  impacting  the  shift  of  the  inflationary  pressures  upward. 
Nevertheless,  globally,  consumer  price  inflation  remains  still  contained,  as  long  as  major 
economies  continue  to  be  characterised  by  below-potential  economic  growth.  Global 
financial  markets  are  improving,  but  they  are  still  fairly  sensitive  to  fiscal  perspectives  of 
certain  economies  and  to  tensions  in  the  Euro  area.  Additionally,  these  markets  show 
relatively little interest in South Eastern Europe countries, including Albania. 
Overall, world economic growth is expected to remain high for the upcoming period as well, 
contributing  also  to  the  triggering  of  inflationary  pressures  and  drawing  more  attention  of 
monetary authorities to macroeconomic balances. 
Domestic economic and monetary developments continued to generate an environment of 
contained inflationary pressures. Annual inflation for January 2011 was 3.3%, dropping by 
0.1 p.p. compared to December 2010. This decline of inflation in January is totally due to the 
statistical  effect  of  neutralising  the  increasing  impact  of  some  administered  prices  on 
inflation. On the other hand, food items and oil prices increased significantly, as a result of 
rising prices in world markets. These factors contributed by about 80% to the formation of the 
inflation  figure.  Increased  agricultural  products  prices  affected  mostly  the  low-income 
segments of the Albanian society. 
As  stated  above,  domestic  inflationary  pressures  are  characterised  by  short-term  supply 
shocks, while the generated inflation by domestic demand is low, as reflected in the relatively 
stable  situation  of  core  inflation.  This  performance  is  conditioned  by  the  existence  of  free 
capacities in the Albanian economy as well as contained monetary expansion and anchored 
inflationary expectations of consumers, businesses and agents in the financial market. The 
Bank of Albania deems that, in general terms, these factors will continue to be present during 
2011.  
On the other hand, the Bank of Albania, in its inflation outlook, has factored the projections 
on the situation of fuel and food items made so far by the IMF and FAO. In the absence of 
added and unpredictable supply shocks, or second round chain phenomena, inflation rate is 
expected to be in line with the Bank of Albania target. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
I would like to continue with a more detailed analysis of current and expected developments 
in  the  Albanian  economy  and  financial  markets,  also  assessing  their  implications  on  the 
expected consumer price inflation. 
Economic activity  
In  the  absence  of  direct  data  and  based  on  a  number  of  indirect  indicators,  the  Bank  of 
Albania assesses that the Albanian economy continued to grow during the fourth quarter of 
2010.  The  economic  growth  was  supported  mainly  by  the  external  demand  for  Albanian 
exports. 
However, domestic demand has shown lately signs of recovery, as evidenced by the positive 
trend  of  bank  lending,  indirect  consumption  indicators  and  improved  Economic  Sentiment 
Indicator of the Albanian businesses and consumers. 
Consumption and private investment, the two most important components of aggregate 
demand, experienced a slow progress during 2010. While disposable income of the Albanian 
consumers  is  considered  to  have  increased  in  real  terms,  high  uncertainty  and  tightened 
lending terms and conditions by the banking system deterred the domestic consumption. On 
the  other  hand,  the  Albanian  businesses  encountered  insufficient  demand  for  them  to  use 
their full capacities and higher financing costs. This situation has most affected sectors of the 
economy  such  as  construction,  which  relies  totally  on  domestic  demand  and,  at  a  lower 
extent,  other  sectors  such  as  industry,  which  generates  most  of  its  activity  from  external 
demand. Under these circumstances, investments pace was relatively lower, compared with 
previous years. The Bank of Albania considers that domestic consumption and investments 
will have a better performance during the current year.  
Conditions  for  funding  the  private  sector  demand  appear  improved,  while  risk  premia  in 
financial  markets  appear  lower.  Uncertainty  for  the  future  should  gradually  decrease. 
Additionally,  the  expected  positive  influence  of  external  demand  and  fiscal  policy  during 
2011, are expected to stimulate domestic demand. 
Correction of fiscal conduct is followed by a lower contribution to the economic growth during 
2010.  Public  expenditure  reduced  by  about  5%  year-on-year,  while  the  budget  deficit 
reduced by about 4 p.p. of the GDP. The Bank of Albania has always highlighted that fiscal 
stability is a fundamental precondition for a long-term economic growth. In this context, we 
deem that respecting objectives on budget deficit and public borrowing during 2011 will yield 
a positive contribution to the country’s economic development. Maintaining relative levels in 
budget deficit will eliminate a direct negative effect on economic growth, while relatively low 
levels of public borrowing will have an impact on the control of long-term interest rates and 
reduction of risk premia in financial markets.  
These developments were manifested during the second half of 2010 and are expected to 
stimulate domestic demand during 2011, as well. 
External sector of the economy continued to be characterised by a positive, though falling, 
contribution of foreign demand to economic growth. The correction pace of the trade deficit 
was slower in this quarter. Trade deficit reduced by 1.2% compared to two-digit correction 
rates recorded in the first half of 2010. This situation of the trade deficit is determined mainly 
by the acceleration of imports, which marked a year-on-year increase of 10.8% in the fourth 
quarter  of  2010,  recording  a  growth  for  the  third  consecutive  quarter.  On  the  other  hand, 
Albanian exports increased by 48.8% year-on-year, maintaining high rising rates.  
The Bank of Albania holds that the Albanian economy will find it difficult to maintain the same 
growing rates of exports during 2011; among other things, this projection reflects temporary 
factors that influenced on 2010 growth and is in line with the global economy situation and 
basic  statistical  effects.  Nevertheless,  external  demand  is  expected  to  generate  positive 
contribution to the economic growth during 2011, as well. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Monetary indicators, financial markets and inflation  
Performance  of  monetary 
indicators  continues 
to  generate  controlled  monetary 
inflationary  pressures  on  the  domestic  economy.  Money  supply  increased  by  12.5%  in 
December 2010, reflecting a good performance of deposits in the banking sector during the 
second half of the same year. Our assessments indicate that monetary expansion is in line 
with the private sector demand for real money. A good progress of the economic activity and 
falling  risk  premia  are  also  reflected  on  the  upsurge  of  demand  for  loans  by  the  private 
sector. Satisfactory parameters of the banking system in terms of liquidity and capitalisation 
have  enabled  additional  support  to  the  private  sector  with  bank  loans.  In  December,  the 
growth rate of loans to the private sector reached 10.6% year-on-year. In addition to private 
businesses, which were the main users of credit funding during 2010, positive signals come 
from  household  consumers,  whose  demand  for  loans  increased  during  the  last  quarter  of 
2010.  
Financial  markets  are  characterised  by  dropping  risk  premia  and  liquidity,  reflected  in  a 
further decline of yields in the primary market and interest rates in Albanian Lek deposits and 
loans. In the inter-bank market, short-term interest rates remained close to the key interest 
rate  and  showed  low  volatility.  Foreign  exchange  trading  in  the  domestic  market  was  also 
calm.  The  Albanian  Lek  continued  to  depreciate  in  annual  nominal  terms  against  foreign 
currencies, although more slowly compared to 2010. 
 Taking  into  account  the  information  summarised  above,  the  Supervisory  Council  deemed 
that  inflationary  pressures  for  the  medium-term  horizon  remain  contained.  Consumer  price 
situation is expected to be under the pressure of price increases in world markets, but, in the 
absence  of  second  round  effects,  their  impact  is  expected  to  be  transitional.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  actual  insufficient  demand  will  continue  to  condition  levels  below  the  potential 
domestic capacity utilisation, exercising downward pressures on inflation.  
Inflationary expectations continue to be anchored around the inflation target of the Bank of 
Albania.  In  the  absence  of  unexpected  shocks to  the  economy,  inflation  is  expected  to  be 
close to the Bank of Albania mid-term target. The Bank of Albania will continue to monitor the 
nature  of  these  external  shocks  and  their  impact  on  prices  in  the  domestic  context,  for  a 
timely reaction in order to eliminate stable inflationary pressures. 
After  the  discussions,  the  Supervisory  Council  concluded  that  the  monetary  conditions 
remain appropriate for meeting the medium-term inflation target and decided to leave the key 
interest rate unchanged at 5.00%. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
