Prasarn Trairatvorakul: Growth, sustainability and inclusiveness – 
Thailand’s key success factors 
Dinner talk by Dr Prasarn Trairatvorakul, Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the Japanese 
Chamber of Commerce (JCC), Bangkok, 23 March 2011. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Let me begin by extending my deepest condolence to the Japanese business community in 
Thailand on the immense losses caused by the unprecedented earthquake and tsunami in 
Japan.  Despite  the  tragic  incidents,  I  am  confident  that  the  strength  and  determination  of 
Japanese  people,  together  with  supports  from  all  around  the  world,  will  enable  Japan  to 
recover swiftly. 
For today, I would like to thank the Japanese Chamber of Commerce for inviting me to share 
with the distinguished audience my assessment of the Thai economy. I also look forward to 
hearing  your  views  and  concerns  regarding  the  economic  prospects. Needless  to  say  that 
Japan and Thailand have a long history of close economic relationship, with Japan being the 
top foreign investor in Thailand. As such, Thailand has become a production hub for several 
Japanese  industries,  including  vehicles,  electronics  and  electrical  appliances.  I  therefore 
hope  that  our  discussion  today  will  help  align  understanding  and  further  strengthen  the 
partnership between our two economies. 
For my presentation this evening, I would like to offer my assessment of the economy based 
on what I see as the three most important attributes that determine the economic progress 
for  Thailand  –  the  “key  success  factors”,  if  you  will.  First  is  that  growth  must  be 
sustainable. We don’t want three years of boom followed by three years of bust. Second, 
the country’s potential growth rate should be high enough to continuously raise the 
people’s general standard of living. And, third, growth should maximize inclusiveness. 
By  this  I  refer  to  maximizing  the  exposure  of  everyone  to  economic  development,  both  in 
terms  of  participation  in  the  development  process  and  in  the  sharing  of  its  benefits.  This 
would  lessen  the  problem  of  inequality,  and  foster  social  harmony.  That  said,  I  wish  to 
underscore that, even though growth is the most visible factor, growth alone is not sufficient 
but sustainability and inclusiveness are also crucial to ensure long-term economic success. 
Looking at economic strengths and weaknesses in the context of these three success factors 
should  provide  for  a  better  understanding  of  the  role  of  central  bank  and  policymakers  in 
advancing  the  economic  development  agenda  for  Thailand.  Indeed,  these  success  factors 
for  policymakers.  The  first 
entail 
responsibility  is  to  ensure  continued  macroeconomic  stability,  which  is  a  prerequisite  for 
economic  sustainability,  by  gearing  our  economy  towards  operating  at  the  potential  level. 
Second is to raise the people’s standard of living by expanding the potential growth rate of 
the economy. Third, to maximize inclusiveness, we have  to ensure the equal exposure to 
economic opportunities for all. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Let  me  start  with  the  first  success  factor,  namely  economic  sustainability,  which  I 
consider to be Thailand’s most important strength. After the 1997 crisis, Thailand has no 
longer experienced the current account deficit problem. Inflation averaged 2.6 percent over 
the past decade, or about half of the 5.1 percent average rate during the 1990s prior to the 
fundamental  responsibilities 
three  corresponding 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Indeed, 
Asian  Crisis1.  Meanwhile,  our  unemployment  rate  has  been  low  at  around  1  percent.  The 
banking  sector,  severely  affected  by  the  1997  crisis,  has  been  safe  and  sound,  minimally 
affected  by  the  global  financial  crisis  ten  years  later  as  a  result  of  strengthened  risk 
management  and  governance.  Despite  ongoing  net  capital  inflows  into  Thailand,  there 
appears  no  sign  of  asset  price  bubble  while  the  degrees  of  leverage  in  the  corporate  and 
household  sector  are  still  low.  Overall,  I  believe  that  the  Thai  economic  stability  has 
strengthened  continuously.  This  achievement  has  been  attributable  to  sound  fiscal  and 
monetary policy, together with appropriate and market-friendly regulations, aimed at keeping 
the economy operating close to its potential.  
Suffice it to say that the Bank of Thailand has fulfilled our responsibility to help achieve the 
economic stability. Under the inflation-targeting framework, the policy interest rate is the main 
instrument used to influence saving and spending in the economy so that demand matches 
potential  supply.  This  economic  balance  has,  in  turn,  produced  a  low  and  stable  inflation 
environment  necessary  for  the  sustainable  growth.  In  addition  to  the  interest  rate  tool,  the 
central  bank  also  has  regulatory  tools  to  prevent  undesirable  accumulation  of  financial 
imbalances. 
the  so-called  “macro-prudential  policy”  has  been  used  as  a 
complementary policy tool to the interest rate policy long before the sub-prime crisis. To give 
you  a  few  examples,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  has  imposed  a  cap  on  loan-to-value  ratio  on 
high-end  real  estate  loans  since  2003.  We  also  tightened  credit  card  and  personal  loan 
regulations  in  2004  and  2005,  respectively.  These  pre-emptive  measures  helped  reduce 
balance sheet vulnerability and ensure Thailand’s resiliency against and fast recovery after 
the  sub-prime  crisis.  Nevertheless,  despite  the  success  so  far  on  the  stability  front,  we 
cannot afford to be complacent about economic stability as shocks can occur at any time and 
in any form, thus we must remain vigilant. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Economic stability is the means to an end but not an end in itself. This is because we can 
also  have  a  stable  economy  that  grows  at  an  undesirably  low  rate,  especially  when 
productivity is sluggish. This brings me to the second success factor, namely high potential 
growth.  Thailand,  despite  its  strength  in  economic  sustainability,  has  a  moderate 
potential growth rate compared to her peers.  Over  the  past  decade,  our  GDP  grew  on 
average by 4.4 percent2 annually, and the average growth rate rises to 5.1 percent excluding 
the  sub-prime  crisis  period.  This  growth  performance  has  been  somewhat  lower  than  the 
Bank  of  Thailand’s  research  result3,  which  estimated  Thailand’s  potential  growth  at  up  to 
6.1 percent  for  the  next  decade.  Our  estimate  result  is  based  on  the  assumption  that  the 
country’s  investment  growth  over  the  next  5  years  returns  to  its  normal  trend,  which  is 
approximately 10 to 12 percent growth per year as seen during 2002–2005. But, as you are 
aware,  the  current  growth  rate  of  investment  has  been  around  9  percent,  and  this  makes 
investment promotion a very challenging and important policy agenda going forward. 
My  own  assessment  is  that  this  policy  challenge  can  be  achieved  by  strengthened  fiscal 
policy  efforts  as  public  investment  has  been  progressing  in  recent  years.  Infrastructure 
projects,  which  have  been  long  delayed  due  to  political  problems,  are  now  back  on 
track. The construction of airport rail link came to a completion last year. Two more railway 
routes  under  the  plan  of  Bangkok  Mass  Transit  System  are  presently  under  construction. 
Several other railway projects in other regions other than Mass Transit in Bangkok are also in 
                                                 
1  
Inflation rate of 2.6 percent is the average rate during 2001–2010 while 5.1 percent is the average rate during 
1990–1996. 
2   Average GDP growth rate during 2001–2010. 
3   Chuenchoksan, S. and Nakornthab, D. (2008). “Past, Present, and Prospects for Thailand’s Growth: A Labor 
Market Perspective,” Discussion paper. Bank of Thailand. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the  pipeline.  These  public  investments  are  welcomed  steps  towards  further  infrastructure 
developments, which will help lower logistic costs and boost Thailand’s productivity. 
In my view, public investment can and must do more to lower production costs and crowd in 
private  investment  over  the  medium  term.  Having  said  that,  the  physical  infrastructure 
must be complemented by human capital development, to enhance productivity and 
potential  growth.  Over  the  past  decade,  the  government  has  continuously  worked  to 
improve  the  country’s  education  and  health  care  systems.  There  have  been  extensions  in 
terms of years of compulsory education and more financial supports to increase access to 
higher  education.  Subsidized  health  care  for  the  poor  has  been  provided  with  extending 
coverage over the years. Although the public spending (as percentage of GDP) on education 
and health care in Thailand is comparable to its neighboring countries, the quality remains 
relatively low. This is evident in the cross-country comparisons of the ratio of those attending 
secondary  schools  as  well  as  the  relatively  low  life  span,  especially  compared  with  Japan 
which  has  the  longest  life  span4.  Hence,  in  moving  towards  a  higher  labor-skilled 
economy,  Thailand  needs  to  further  improve  access  as  well  as  quality  of  education 
and health care to enhance the quality of our human capital. 
Distinguished Audience, 
Apart  from  strengthening  infrastructure  investment  and  human  capital  investment,  the 
exchange rate also plays an important role in influencing Thailand’s productivity in the 
long-run  insofar  as  it  affects  efficient  resource  allocation  in  the  economy.  Given  the 
recent development of the global economy, many of you will agree that Thai baht is unlikely 
to go back to the level seen in the pre-2006 era. This structural change has two implications; 
first, uncompetitive export sectors will be the most challenged. Second, the strong baht is an 
opportunity for Thailand to increase productivity through higher imported-capital investments.  
The first implication should not be of excessive concern as long as the unemployment rate 
remains low, which is the case for Thailand. This is because the market mechanism will 
allow efficient adjustment as uncompetitive firms have to either upgrade themselves, 
or close down and free up labor resources to more competitive firms. This reallocation 
process implies that the country makes a better use of labor resources and should therefore 
yield  higher  productivity.  At  present,  Thailand’s  unemployment  rate  hovers  steadily  around 
1 percent despite strong baht appreciation in recent years. In the meantime, export growth 
has  remained  robust  with  a  swift  recovery  from  the  global  crisis.  These  developments 
possibly indicate that our export sectors have adjusted themselves well and labor resources 
are  being  allocated  more  efficiently.  In  line  with  this  view,  the  baht  appreciation  has 
somewhat  catalyzed  the  adjustment  of  Thai  economy  to  a  more  efficient  use  of  labor 
resources. 
In  fact,  Thailand  has  continued  to  face  a  shortage  of  labor  supply  and  has  to  employ 
immigrant workers from neighboring countries. This tight labor market phenomenon creates 
incentive for firms to shift factor of production from labor to capital. This shortage of labor will 
then  accentuate  my  second  implication  of  a  strong  baht,  since  the  shortage  of  labor,  in 
addition to cheaper capital goods in baht term, gives incentive for investors to make 
imported-capital  investments.  This  is  the  part  where  the  private  sector  role  is  essential, 
especially as Thailand has benefited from immense foreign direct investment in which Japan 
played the top role. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Let me now turn to the last success factor: inclusiveness, which is probably the weakest 
achievement among the three success factors so far. However, inclusiveness is something 
that has increasingly gained attention from Thai policymakers in recent years, as it was part 
                                                 
4  
IMD, 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
of  the  root  cause  of  political  unrest.  I  believe  that  inclusiveness  will  be  one  of  the 
long-term  solutions  for  Thailand  political  stability.  Yet, 
I  should  stress  that 
inclusiveness  has  a  different  concept  from  equality.  It  focuses  on  creating  equal 
opportunity  rather  than  equalizing  income.  Income  equality  ultimately  means  that  the 
reward system is independent of performance which erodes efficiency. Inclusiveness, on the 
other hand, refers to having equal opportunity which still preserves efficiency through reward 
incentive  system  while  allowing  the  rich  and  the  poor  to  have  the  same  economic 
opportunity.  As  such,  inclusiveness  refers  to  equal  access  to  public  infrastructure  such  as 
education,  fair  competition  and  equal  treatments  of  law  and  regulation  to  all.  In  this  way, 
inclusiveness will provide equal exposure to yield the benefits from economic prosperity. 
Improving inclusiveness in Thailand will be a long process but some initiatives have already 
been  put  in  place.  These  include  decentralization  of  public  spending,  better  access  to 
education,  informal  sector  debt  alleviation,  and  better  credit  access  for  low  income  group. 
While  these  initiatives  bode  well  for  inclusiveness,  the  government  must  be  careful  not  to 
excessively gear government spending towards populist policies that eventually add financial 
burden  to  the  already-tight  budget  and  sovereign  debt  in  the  future.  In  particular,  it  is 
important that the government prioritize and balance between public consumption and public 
investment  accordingly.  More  importantly,  efficient  management  with  good  governance  will 
be the key ingredients to policy success in this regard. 
For  our  part,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  has  also  put  inclusiveness  as  one  of  the  main 
agenda  in  the  Financial  Master  Plan  II,  other  than  efficiency  and  provision  of  financial 
infrastructure.  The  objective  is  to  provide  financial  access  for  all,  particularly  to  the 
underserved, in an efficient and financially viable manner without compromising financial 
stability and prudence. This is still an on-going process which we are committed to. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Before ending my talk this evening, I would like to address some of the concerns raised by 
Japanese  corporations  in  Thailand,  as  reported  in  a  survey  from  JETRO  (Japan  External 
Trade  Organization).  The  key  concerns  include  political  stability,  development  of 
customs-related system and human resource development. 
On politics, I have good faith that the upcoming election is another important step towards 
political  stability,  while  commitment  to  improving  inclusiveness  mentioned  earlier  would 
bring  a  long-term  solution  to  the  country.  As  for  the  customs  system,  Thailand  has 
continued  to  improve  the  customs  system  over  the  past  five  year  as  attested  by  the 
improvement  in  indicators  of  trade  across  borders,  which  is  a  category  in  Ease  of  Doing 
Business  assessment,  done  by  the  International  Finance  Corporation  (IFC).  Export-related 
requirements in terms of number of documents or period of procedure have been reduced or 
shortened  over  time.  These  improvements  and  further  works  will  certainly  help  promote 
efficiency in international trades. 
With regards to the issue of human resources, I see that the reliance on migrant labour to 
fill  the  current  labour  shortage  is  not  a  long-term  viable  solution  for  Thailand.  In  fact,  the 
economy, with joint efforts of private and public sectors, needs to raise labour productivity by 
upgrading production technology that uses higher skilled labour. 
Finally, let me close by stressing that the three success factors: growth, sustainability and 
inclusiveness  are  necessary  and  complementary  to  achieving  long-term  economic 
progress  for  Thailand.  For  the  central  bank’s  part,  many  of  the  issues  discussed  this 
evening are beyond the functional scope of the Bank of Thailand. Our main role is to ensure 
sustainable  growth  by  maintaining  macroeconomic  stability  through  appropriate  monetary 
policy and financial regulations. For this, I can assure you that we are fully committed to our 
role and responsibility. As for broader national economic policy agenda, public policies aimed 
at  improving  the  country’s  productivity  are  necessary,  but  they  alone  are  not  sufficient  to 
raise  Thailand’s  potential  growth  rate; your contribution from the private sector will be 
the key to the eventual success. And, I am convinced that working together to achieve our 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
common goals will strengthen our long history of economic partnership and brings economic 
prosperity to both Japan and Thailand. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
