Choongsoo Kim: The need for more advanced forms of regulatory 
surveillance and macroprudential stability policy 
Welcome  address  by  Mr  Choongsoo  Kim,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Korea,  at  the  Bank  of 
Korea  (BOK)  –  Bank  for  International  Settlements  (BIS)  Conference  on  Macroprudential 
Regulation and Policy, Seoul, 17 January 2011. 
 I bid a warm welcome today to all of you attending this conference, held jointly by the Bank of 
Korea and the BIS. Let me first single out for appreciation our keynote speakers, Governor 
Stefan  Ingves  of  the  Swedish  Riksbank  and  Professor  Hyun  Song  Shin  of  Princeton 
University. Their attendance as lecturers adds special luster to our proceedings. I anticipate 
that with their abundant experience and keen powers of discernment, these two experts will 
have  great  insights  for  us  concerning  the  new  policy  tasks  and  changes  in  role  of  central 
banks since the global financial crisis. My thanks go out in addition to Eli Remolona, Chief 
Representative of the BIS Asia and Pacific Representative Office; Christine Cumming, First 
Vice  President  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York;  Ignazio  Visco,  Deputy  Director 
General  and  Member  of  Governing  Board  of  the  Bank  of  Italy;  David  Longworth,  Former 
Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  and  to  all  of  our  other  chairs,  presenters  and 
discussants, for your efforts to make this conference a success. 
The  global  financial  crisis  has  shown  us  the  importance  of  shifting  to  a  new  paradigm  in 
macrofinancial stability framework as well as international financial order. In particular, broad 
consensus  in  the  international  community  has  developed  on  the  necessity  of  designing 
various tools, including macroprudential policies to counter the heightened mood of anxiety 
we  now  see  everywhere  concerning  systemic  risk.  This  being  the  case,  the  theme  of  our 
conference, “Macroprudential Regulation and Policy”, will be viewed with intense interest by 
central banks and regulatory authorities responsible for financial stability. I am sure that the 
invaluable  comments  and  policy  proposals  raised  during  this  week’s  conference  will  be  of 
great help to central banks and those in charge of government policy throughout the world. 
Lessons of the global financial crisis 
The global financial crisis that we are witnessing is the greatest shock to the world economy 
since  the  Great  Depression  of the 1930s,  in  terms  both  of  its intensity  and  of  its duration. 
Even now the financial markets have not fully recovered to their pre-crisis level of activity. 
Nor can we rule out the possibility of the current recovery faltering more than expected, in 
view of the prolonged crisis aftershocks such as the continuing contagion from the European 
debt  crisis.  Various  new  expressions  have  consequently  made  their  way  into  the  mass 
media, including talk of a “two-speed global recovery”, amid worries of widening of the gap in 
recovery between advanced economies and the newly emerging market economies, and of a 
so-called  “three-way  split”,  envisioning  divergent  patterns  of  economic  growth  in  the  US, 
Europe, and emerging markets including China. 
When  we  look  back  at  the  history  of  economic  crises,  we  find  that  while  they  may  have 
always  been  accompanied  by  massive  financial  and  economic  losses,  they  have  also 
sparked reforms of existing systems. And so, as suggested by the expression “don’t waste a 
crisis”,  if  we  can  learn  a  lesson  from  it  a  crisis  can  also  be  a  valuable  experience.  We 
therefore need to work our way toward practical and concrete proposals to avoid repetition of 
financial crisis based on the painful lessons we have learned from this most recent crisis. In 
this light, the conference this week will, I am sure, be a most timely and significant meeting of 
minds. 
We can, I think, draw several vital policy lessons from the recent Global Financial Crisis. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
First  and  foremost,  no  matter  how  sound  the  economy  of  a  country  is  in  terms  of 
macroeconomic fundamentals, its financial system is closely tied to the international financial 
markets in a complex interlinked web. It may therefore be suddenly hit by the rapid worldwide 
spread of a shock from accumulated financial imbalances. In particular, the web of linkages 
spun between financial institutions acts to allocate risk efficiently when the going is good, but 
in  times  of  turmoil  serves  as  a  channel  for  risk  transmission.  It  follows  that  the  risk  to  the 
financial  system  overall  is  massively  larger  than  the  simple  total  of  the  risks  of  individual 
financial institutions. It is therefore extremely important to manage risk on the basis of the 
financial  system  as  a  whole,  given  the  difficulty  of  securing  macrofinancial  stability  solely 
through the microprudential regulation of individual financial institutions. 
Secondly,  while  financial  innovation  does  indeed  promote  its  efficiency,  it  can  also  act  to 
cultivate  financial  imbalances.  Furthermore,  the  speed  of  expansion  of  an  economy’s 
financial  sector  can,  when  it  outpaces  that  of  the  real  sector,  may  destabilize  the  macro 
economy. It is therefore hard to say for sure whether apparent financial development always 
plays a beneficial role in sustainable economic growth. 
Thirdly,  price  stability  cannot  by  itself  guarantee  financial  stability.  Where  the  economy 
maintains  low  prices  and  rapid  growth  for  a  lengthy  period  of  time,  an  accumulation  of 
financial imbalances threatening financial system stability can even perhaps be overlooked.  
Last but not least, in a world economy of great mutual dependency between the financial and 
real  sectors  of  the  economy,  to  counter  global  financial  crises  we  have  no  option  but 
international cooperation. Fortunately, in the early stages of this last crisis, it proved possible 
to achieve successful international policy cooperation through the G20, the premium forum 
leading  the  international  debate  on  world  economic  stability.  Under  the  aegis  of  the  G20, 
moreover,  the  Financial  Stability  Board  and  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision 
efficiently headed up international cooperation in the sphere of financial regulation. 
that  also 
regulation, 
to  an  approach 
Macroprudential policy tasks 
In the wake of the global financial crisis, the dangers of systemic risk propagation must be 
recognized and the macroprudential soundness of the economy as a whole enhanced so as 
to  counter  them.  Prior  to  the  global  financial  crisis  there  was  insufficient  understanding  of 
financial  systemic  risk  in  countries  around  the  world,  and  we  cannot  deny  that  the 
significance  of  such  risk  was  underestimated.  Similarly,  in  seeking  to  reduce  the  severe 
damage  to  the  real  economy  arising  from  systemic  risk,  we  need  to  move  away  from  an 
emphasis  on  microprudential 
incorporates 
macroeconomic policy dimension.  
Based on the aforementioned lessons from the global financial crisis that I mentioned above, 
countries  around  the  world  are  now  involved  in  drawing  up  various  plans  for  underpinning 
sustainable  and  balanced  growth,  in  a  process  centering  around  the  G20.  And  at  the  last 
G20 Summit in Seoul, substantial outcomes were achieved in the move toward introduction 
of  macroprudential  policy-based  financial  regulation.  This  being  said,  a  large  number  of 
issues  remain  unresolved,  as  the  introduction  of  macroprudential  regulation  is  still  in  its 
infancy. 
Let  me  cite  some  examples.  How  should  financial  stability,  which  is  the  goal  of 
macroprudential policy, be defined? And again, how can we reconcile macroprudential policy 
tools  with  our  instruments  of  microprudential  regulation?  Further,  how  should  we  pursue 
financial  stability  jointly  with  monetary  policy,  which  emphasizes  price  stability,  and  what 
institutional  arrangements  must  be  put  into  place  to  facilitate  macroprudential  policy 
cooperation  with  the  supervisory  authorities?  On  these  and  other  issues,  proposals  either 
upon experience or upon concrete theoretical grounds have yet to be presented. 
Meanwhile,  correcting  the  disequilibria  in  the  global  economy  is  an  overall  imperative,  not 
just for eliminating the factors behind the current crisis but also for securing stability of the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
international financial order going forward. We should therefore step up efforts to resolve the 
global imbalances in trade and capital movements that were among the root causes of the 
global financial crisis. Although the issue of these global imbalances has repeatedly loomed 
as a problem in the past, the international community has barely undertaken joint efforts to 
reduce them.  
I  hope  that  before  long  a  consensus  will  be  reached,  under  the  aegis  of  the  G20,  on 
indicative guidelines for current account positions designed to resolve the global imbalances. 
The  existing  framework  of  global  financial  regulation  was  largely  designed  with  advanced 
countries and the banking sector in mind. And because of financial innovation and the like, 
the financial system has undergone great structural transformation with the rapid growth of 
parallel “shadow banking system” encompassing investment banks, hedge funds and special 
purpose vehicles. In keeping with the reform of the financial environment, therefore, all major 
financial  institutions  in  the  markets,  irrespective  of  their  legal  forms,  should  now  be  made 
subject to regulation. Furthermore, international consensus has also formed on the need for 
strengthening  regulation  of  systemically  important  financial  institutions  (SIFIs).  In  practice, 
however, it has not been possible yet to draw up international standards for the selection of 
SIFIs, or for the method of their regulation. Within emerging market countries, similarly, the 
need for regulation of SIFIs has now clearly emerged and very thorough discussion of this 
issue is called for. 
In addition, concrete research is required to identify how reorganization of the international 
financial  order  will  impact  the  financial  structure  and  the  financial  and  capital  markets  of 
emerging market economies. What effects the new capital and liquidity regulations decided 
on  at  the  recent  G20  Seoul  summit  will  have  on  our  the  current  interest  rate-oriented 
monetary policy must also be determined.  
New factors restricting monetary policy may also be on the horizon. I am thinking here, for 
example,  of  the  possibility  of  a  conflict  with  interest  rate  policy  arising  from  the  liquidity 
control function of a countercyclical capital buffer, which is among the macroprudential policy 
instruments now being discussed. 
Closing words 
Historically,  economic  crises  have  led  to  crises  in  the  field  of  economics  itself.  And 
economists and economic institutions by and large failed to predict the recent global financial 
crisis until it actually erupted, owing to their lack of understanding of speculation in the real 
estate market and of the behavior and competition structures of banks. And central banks 
too, can admittedly also not escape this criticism. At the same time, however, central banks’ 
role and position have risen since the crisis, given their energetic participation as lenders of 
last  resort  in  the  process  of  overcoming  it,  very  different  from  during  previous  crises. 
However,  there  is  also  a  heightened  possibility  now  of  a  weakening  of  the  central  bank’s 
monetary policy credibility, due to conflict between its policy goals of financial system stability 
and  price  stability.  In  this  context,  as  guardian  of  the  financial  system,  the  central  bank  is 
called  upon  by  society  to  bear  the  responsibility  for  macroprudential  regulation  and  policy, 
and to carry out the related tasks of analysis and examination. 
In this context, as I have previously noted, the most vital and difficult mission now confronting 
us is the efficient management of systemic risk. And for this purpose I see it necessary to 
operate more advanced forms of regulatory surveillance and macrofinancial stability policy, 
to secure a more diverse range of policy instruments for ensuring soundness, and to further 
strengthen  both  international  cooperation  and  market  discipline.  The  recent  debate  in  the 
G20 and the BIS on developing and introducing macroprudential policy instruments has now 
also been reinvigorated. Notably, with regard to newly emerging market countries, that are 
relatively  more  exposed  to  excessive  market  risk  and  foreign  currency  liquidity  risk  than 
advanced  countries,  detailed  evaluation  is  needed  of  the  influences  on  their  financial 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
systems  of  introduction  of  the  proposed  new  micro-  and  macroprudential  regulatory  tools.  
And attention must also be given to choosing the right combination of regulations that can 
bring about the largest synergy effects. 
As we have seen during the recent global financial crisis, the bankruptcy of huge financial 
conglomerates  can  potentially  weaken  the  function  of  market  competition  –  not  only  by 
heightening systemic risk, but also due to too big or connected to fail expectations and the 
consequent possibility of government bailout. The macroprudential framework should thus be 
designed from a wholistic perspective, to prevent side effects arising from possible structural 
changes in the financial market and to shore up the function of the financial system in the 
long run.  
I  look  forward  to  this  conference  hosting  constructive  and  thorough  discussions  today  and 
tomorrow on the meaning of macroprudential regulation and policy, on the tasks ahead, and 
on the role of the central bank in this regard. It will also be valuable if we can put our heads 
together  to  consider  the  impact  of  macroprudential  policy  on  the  real  economy,  and  its 
relationship with other economic policies. 
Drawing my remarks to a close, I should once again like to voice my deepest thanks to you 
all  for  setting  aside  some  of  your  valuable  time  to  be  here.  I  know  how  chockablock  the 
schedule is, but I do hope you will also have a chance, during your all too short stays here, to 
savor the beauty of the Korean culture and natural environment. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
