Richard W Fisher: Of moose and men (with no reference to Steinbeck) 
Remarks  by  Mr  Richard  W  Fisher,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  Dallas,  before  the  National  Association  for  Business  Economics,  Dallas, 
Texas, 12 September 2011. 
 The views expressed by the author do not necessarily reflect official positions of the Federal Reserve System. 
Thank you, Pat [Faubion]. Thank you all for inviting me to speak at this National Association 
for Business Economics (NABE) annual meeting. 
The  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Dallas  has  long  been  involved  with  NABE.  Our  director  of 
research  and  my  trusted  senior  policy  advisor,  Harvey  Rosenblum,  is  a  former  NABE 
president  (2001–02).  Another  of  my  policy  advisors,  Tom  Siems,  is  a  two-time  winner  of 
NABE’s Edmund A. Mennis Contributed Paper Award. And Ken Rogoff, winner of this year’s 
Adam  Smith  Award,  is  a  member  of  the  Dallas  Fed’s  Globalization  and  Monetary  Policy 
Institute advisory board.  
I benefit greatly from the insights of these talented people, as well as those of Mine Yücel 
and  Roberto  Coronado,  who  are  also  speaking  to  you  at  this  conference,  and  one  of  my 
mentors, our Dallas Fed board chairman, Herb Kelleher, who entertained you at lunch. Herb 
may  be  the  only  person  on  the  planet  who  discovered  the  formula  for  making  a  retail 
business  with  high  fixed  costs  and  intense  regulatory  oversight  not  only  fly  but  soar;  his 
insights into how the economy works in practice, as opposed to theory, are invaluable.  
I am pleased that Dick Berner, a former NABE president now at Treasury, running the Office 
of Financial Research, is here. I believe it was Dick who, during a round of golf at Jackson 
Hole [Wyo.] long ago, told me the bad joke about the fellow who suggested that a moose 
crossing sign be moved because “there is too much auto traffic where the sign is currently 
located.” 
I also see Bill Dunkelberg, another former NABE president, who has been most generous in 
sharing  with  me  and  my  staff  his  understanding  of  the  whys  and  wherefores  of  small 
business, an important input into the way we look at things at the Dallas Fed.  
There are many others here today whom I would acknowledge if time permitted, but I ask 
their forbearance so that we can get down to business. 
As  learned  economists,  you  are  fully  aware  of  the  nation’s  predicament.  Chairman  [Ben] 
Bernanke reviewed it concisely in his speech at Jackson Hole and again, just last week, in 
Minneapolis.  Knowing  that  most  of  you  read  those  speeches,  my  guess  is  that  you  are 
looking to me for two things today. The first, given that you are in Dallas and the nation is in 
the  throes  of  a  presidential  election  season  with  two  Texas  contenders  for  their  party’s 
nomination, would be the Dallas Fed’s perspective on the much-discussed Texas economy. 
Second, I’m guessing you are looking for some insight into what the Federal Open Market 
Committee (FOMC) is going to do next, insight Chairman Bernanke, as leader of our pack, 
wisely avoided imparting in his recent comments. 
The Texas economy 
On  the  Texas  front,  my  colleagues  and  I  at  the  Dallas  Fed  have  lately  been  deluged  with 
requests for data on all aspects of the Texas economy – which accounts for 95 percent of the 
Eleventh  District’s  output  and  the  economic  activity  of  some  25  million  of  the  27  million 
people 
to  our  website 
(www.dallasfed.org)  to  receive  a  factual,  nonpoliticized  brief  on  the  Texas  economy, 
including  the  job  creation  figures  that  get  bandied  about  in  debates  among  presidential 
interested,  you  can  go 
in  our  district. 
If  you  are 
living 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
aspirants. We update these numbers monthly – the data for the August employment figures 
will  be  tabulated  on  our  website  on  Sept.  19  –  and  we  will  keep  updating  them  so  that 
analysts can parse the data. 
At a minimum, I am hopeful our web postings will help you separate spin from reality and fact 
from fiction, as well as dispel some of the stereotypes of Texas.  
For example, we are blessed with abundant natural resources here, and we most definitely do 
benefit  on  net  from  high  commodity  prices;  oil  and  gas  extraction  contributes  about 
9.5 percent to state output. Yet, when jobs are tallied, the contribution of oil and gas accounts 
for only 2 percent of the Texas workforce. Indeed, if you peruse our website, you will see that 
since  the  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research  proclaimed  the  recovery’s  start  in  June 
2009,  education  and  health  services,  which  employs  13.5  percent  of  Texas’  workers,  and 
professional  and  business  services,  which  employs  another  12.5  percent,  have  gained 
173,000  jobs  during  the  recovery  –  nearly  60  percent  of  all  the  jobs  added  in  Texas.  The 
Texas workforce consists of more than just roustabouts and cowboys, though we are certainly 
proud of that heritage. Those of  you who are  here for the first time have no doubt already 
noticed this as you have wandered around Dallas and have seen nary an oil rig nor a cow. 
While  you  are  looking  at  the  research  material  on  our  site,  you  might  also  look  over  the 
Texas Manufacturing Outlook Survey, which we refer to by the acronym TMOS. Since 2004, 
TMOS has had the highest correlation of all Fed bank surveys with the Institute for Supply 
Management’s  national  manufacturing  index.  And  you  might  find  of  interest  our  monthly 
service sector and retail outlook surveys. Mine might brief you on the most recent results of 
these during your session with her this afternoon. 
Policy background 
Enough about Texas per se. I am, however, going to put up on the screen behind me a slide 
that bridges developments in the Texas economy and the nation’s economic predicament. I’ll 
use this to lead into a discussion of the issues facing policymakers as we go forward. 
This  slide  was  put  together  for  a  briefing  recently  by  Harvey  Rosenblum.  It  charts 
employment  by  Federal  Reserve  district  from  the  time  job  creation  peaked  in  each  district 
until  today.  A  quick  explanation  to  make  this  easier  on  the  eye:  The  bottom,  or  horizontal 
 2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
axis,  is  the  time  in  months  since  employment  peaked  in  each  district.  For  example,  it  has 
been roughly 54 months since employment peaked in the Atlanta district, which is depicted 
by the tan bottom line; it has been 36 months since employment peaked in the Dallas district, 
as shown in the shorter red line at the top. Observing the vertical axis, you can see that the 
only  Fed  district  that  is  recovering  to  employment  levels  enjoyed  at  the  peak  is  Dallas.  In 
point of fact, the only other states that are back to or have punched through their previous 
peak employment levels are Alaska and North Dakota, which, combined, have a population 
of 1.4 million good citizens. The other 11 Fed districts are hovering at levels approximately 
3 to 8 percent below peak employment, while the nation as a whole – the black line – is still 
5 percent below the levels that prevailed in 2008.  
Of course, in Texas we have a long tradition of outperforming the nation – a tradition matched 
only by our long-standing reputation for modesty. The 1.1 percentage-point gap we’ve seen 
between Texas and national job growth over the current recovery corresponds almost exactly 
to the long-run (40-year) historical gap between our growth rate and the nation’s. 
The  shortfall  in  jobs  at  the  national  level  is  but  one  indicator  of  the  pervasive  anguish  of 
American households since the Panic of 2008. Another sign of that anguish is that average 
real  per  capita  net  worth  in  the  United  States  has  not  regained  the  losses  incurred  in  the 
latter part of the last decade. At the end of the first quarter of 2011, average per capita net 
worth was nearly 14 percent below the peak seen four years earlier. Real income has not 
fared as badly, but per capita salary income is, nevertheless, almost 2 percent below its peak 
in the first quarter of 2008. A likely widening of income dispersion over the period, however, 
suggests  that  median  income  has  probably  fared  worse.  We  will  get  a  better  read  on  this 
when the Federal Reserve Board completes it triennial Survey of Consumer Finances early 
next year. I do not expect that survey to paint a pretty picture. 
I am most aware, as are many of you, that if history is any guide, getting back to where we 
were will be no small task. The 2008–09 recession was precipitated by a banking crisis. A 
number of you, including Ken Rogoff, have shown that downturns associated with banking 
crises tend to be the most severe, and that clawing back lost employment and output in the 
aftermath  of  a  financial  crisis  is  most  vexing.  My  colleague  Mark  Wynne,  who  directs  our 
Globalization  and  Monetary  Policy  Institute,  has  written  an  excellent  brief  on  this  for  our 
Economic Letter publication, which should be posted on our website today.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  3
This chart of output relative to precrisis trend summarizes Mark’s conclusion: Since the onset 
of the financial crisis in 2008, “performance of real GDP in the U.S. is almost exactly in line 
with what we might have expected based on the average experience of other countries that 
have gone through banking crises.”1 This chart is most definitely not a pretty sight. 
Small  wonder  that  American  consumers  –  and  the  businesses  that  hire  and  serve  them  – 
remain in a defensive crouch. The question is: How do we change the picture? How do we 
get the pistons of job creation, income growth and wealth restoration pumping again?  
This  is  the  gist  of  the  discussion  at  the  FOMC  table.  The  press  and  others  delineate  the 
viewpoints around the table on an ornithological scale, dividing us up into doves and hawks. I 
am  classified  according  to  that  delineation  as  a  hawk.  I  am  not  offended  by  this,  but,  not 
unlike the stereotyping of Texas, I consider it simplistic. We are actually birds of a feather in 
that we are simply trying to figure out the proper way to conduct monetary policy in order to 
live up to our dual mandate. Each of us does our utmost to craft monetary policy so as to 
engender restoration of full employment in the context of price stability. 
A word about price stability. At the Dallas Fed, we look at prices through a different lens than 
others.  We are  of  the strong  opinion  that  Jim  Dolmas’  trimmed  mean  analysis of  personal 
consumption expenditures (PCE) – an analytical survey of 178 items in the consumer basket 
that  we  have  tracked  in  a  constantly  updated  series  dating  to  1977  –  provides  the  best 
insight into prices impacting consumers and the likely path of prices going forward.  
The Dallas Trimmed Mean PCE recorded an annualized rate of 2.4 percent in July, up from a 
more moderate 1.4 percent in June. Looking over the six-month horizon – which averages 
out some of the month-to-month wiggles – the trimmed mean is up precisely 2 percent on an 
annualized  basis.  Over  the  same  six  months,  the  headline  PCE  index  is  up  3.1  percent, 
owing to sharp increases in the prices of gasoline and, to a lesser but not unimportant extent, 
food.  Barring  further  surges  in  those  components,  we  would  expect  the  headline  rate  to 
gravitate toward the trimmed mean rate of 2 percent over the coming months. We shall see. 
The point is that while I feel the most important role for a central banker is to maintain price 
stability – and I am always on watch, hawk-like, on the inflationary front – I share with equal 
intensity the concern of my FOMC colleagues about the employment picture and the overall 
fragility  of  our  economy.  I  am  keen  on  finding  ways  to  close  the  income  and  output  gaps 
depicted  in  these  two  slides  and  restore  economic  momentum.  I  find  the  last  employment 
report and the recent Federal Reserve Bank surveys of activity, including the Dallas Fed’s, to 
be discouraging in this regard.  
When people are frightened, they understandably look for a “fix.” Yet, my colleagues and I 
are professionally beholden to beware of short-term fixes that might contradict, or place in 
jeopardy, the long-term duty and credibility of the central bank. I am wary of adopting any 
policy that might have the unintended consequence of becoming a veterinary fix rather than 
a more salutary repairing of the ability to propagate jobs. 
It is no secret that I thought the second round of quantitative easing (QE2) ran that risk. I 
could not support it when it was proposed because I saw no analytically sound justification 
that its purported benefits would outweigh its likely costs. Similarly, at our last meeting, I felt 
that  the  benefit  of  stating  that  the  FOMC  anticipates  economic  conditions  were  likely  to 
warrant holding the base rate at “exceptionally low levels … at least through mid-2013” was 
outweighed by the risk that such an action would be viewed as a commitment. The majority 
of the FOMC felt that anchoring the fed funds rate where it is for two years  would assure 
markets  and  incent  business  activity.  I  felt  doing  so  would,  instead,  give  job-creating 
companies,  particularly  small-  and  medium-sized  businesses,  an  incentive  to  further  delay 
                                                 
1   “The  Sluggish  Recovery  from  the  Great  Recession:  Why  There  Is  No  ‘V’  Rebound  This  Time,”  by  Mark 
Wynne, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Economic Letter, vol. 6, no. 9, 2011. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
borrowing for expansion, given that they feel stymied both by anemic demand and discomfort 
with  how  they  are  taxed  and  regulated.  It  seemed  to  me  that  signaling  that  money  would 
likely remain cheap for two years or more would hardly induce those with access to credit to 
borrow to expand and add to payrolls now.  
This  discomfort  was  compounded  for  me  by  the  confusion  and  disorienting  uncertainty 
arising  from  the  debacle  of  the  debt  ceiling  negotiations  that  took  place  shortly  before  the 
FOMC meeting – an uncertainty that has yet to be resolved. Moreover, it struck me that such 
a  stance  risked  creating  a  perception  that  the  FOMC  might  be  a  little  bit  trigger-happy  in 
reacting  to  short-term  developments  in  the  securities  markets;  that  we  were  collectively 
signaling there was a readily available “Bernanke Put.”  
The  press  and  the  Street  are  currently  brimming  over  with  assumptions  about  new  fixes. 
Market  operators  are,  to  varying  degrees,  pricing  in  probabilities  of  one  or  more  of  the 
following: further expansion of our balance sheet; an “Operation Twist,” wherein we lengthen 
the duration of our portfolio so as to drive down already historically low nominal intermediate 
and longer-term rates (rates that are below 2 percent all the way through the 10-year range 
and have negative yields in real terms); reducing from 25 basis points to zero what we pay 
on excess reserves (though the banks that deposit these reserves with us reportedly aren’t 
able to identify a sufficient number of willing borrowers or believe they need a cushion to deal 
with regulatory concerns).  
The Federal Reserve has done a great deal to reverse the situation that we confronted in 
2008 and 2009. As I have said repeatedly, we have filled the gas tanks of the economy with 
affordable liquidity. What is needed now is for employers to confidently step on the pedal and 
engage  the  transmission  that  will  use  that  gas  to  move  the  great  job-creating  machine  of 
America forward.  
Sources of uncertainty 
That  confidence  is  not  lacking  because  of  U.S.  monetary  policy.  It  is,  however,  my  firm 
opinion  that  confidence  is  being  significantly  undermined  by  at  least  two  sources  of 
uncertainty.  
One  is  domestic.  It  arises  from  the  fiscal  and  regulatory  authorities.  Congress  and  the 
president must put together a program that will encourage growth in final demand as soon as 
possible by incentivizing private businesses to do what they do best to make growth in final 
demand possible: Expand investment, hire workers and go about the business of lifting the 
income and net worth of the American people. Yet, they must do so without running afoul of 
the  need  to  reverse  the  downward  spiral  of  the  nation’s  finances.  To  this  end,  I  am 
encouraged that the president and the Congress are going at it hammer and tong, searching 
to find the right balance between goosing up the economy short term and reining in the long-
term fiscal imbalances that are imperiling our nation’s future. 
The second source of uncertainty has largely emanated from the European debt crisis, which 
intensified in the spring of 2010. At that time, risk spreads jumped, and both securities prices 
and confidence retreated. This helped derail the momentum that the economy had built up in 
late 2009 and early 2010. The sovereign debt crisis has reintensified, as you are all aware, 
and risk premiums in bond and stock markets are rising once again. Another global factor 
that undermined the pace of recovery this year, of course, was the disruptive earthquake in 
Japan and the economic aftershock from this tragedy.  
It is hard for domestic monetary policy to offset such effects, both because they are external 
in nature and because it is unclear how long they will dampen the U.S. recovery. One thing is 
for  certain:  Given  the  effects  of  banking  crises  on  economic  recoveries  and  the 
interconnectedness of financial markets, it is imperative that our European partners resolve 
their banking issues if we are to sustain a prolonged economic upturn.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
financial 
This  is  not  to  say  that  the  Federal  Reserve  has  no  role  to  play.  Our  franchise  includes 
assuring  an  efficient 
transmission  mechanism.  For  example,  everyone 
acknowledges that small business is the originator of jobs and the incubator of our nation’s 
prosperity.  In  addition  to  wanting  to  see  the  whites  of  the  eyes  of  growing  final  demand, 
needing clarity on fiscal policy and wanting regulatory relief, many of the small businesses 
that Dunk [Bill Dunkelberg] represents – and others that we survey – will need better access 
to the abundant and cheap liquidity the FOMC has made possible. Small businesses turn to 
community and regional banks for credit; their credit activity does not move the needle on the 
dashboards  of  the  megabanks.  It  is  incumbent  on  the  Fed  and  other  bank  regulators  to 
reduce  the  regulatory  burdens  that  are  inhibiting  –  indeed,  overwhelming  –  community 
bankers whose business it is to lend to creditworthy small businesses. This is a supervisory 
and  regulatory  matter,  not  a  matter  of  general  monetary  policy.  My  point  is  that  the  Fed 
needs  to  examine  and  perfect  the  transmission  mechanism  under  its  purview  just  as 
intensely as it looks at monetary policy per se. 
And we must be ever-mindful that the central bank cannot carry the load alone, as Chairman 
Bernanke and others of us have often said. Indeed, there is great danger in any temptation to 
do  so.  A  recent  Economist  article  aptly  summarized  my  perspective  on  this  as  follows: 
“Above  all,  there  is  a  moral  hazard  in  central-bank  activism.  It  risks  encouraging 
governments to sit back and let others do the work that they find too difficult themselves.”2 
If I believe further accommodation or some jujitsu with the yield curve will do the trick and 
ignite sustainable  aggregate  demand,  I  will  support  it.  But  the  bar  for such  action  remains 
very high for me until the fiscal authorities do their job, just as we have done ours. And if they 
do, further monetary accommodation may not even be necessary.  
With  that,  I’ll  stop.  And  in  the  best  tradition  of  central  banking,  I’d  be  happy  to  avoid 
answering any questions you might have.  
                                                 
2   “The World Economy: Central Bankers to the Rescue?” The Economist, Aug. 13, 2011. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
