Tadao Noda: Recent economic and financial developments and the 
conduct of monetary policy  
Speech by Mr Tadao Noda, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting 
with business leaders, Kumamoto, 3 March 2011. 
  Overseas economies 
I. 
I will begin by outlining overseas economies.  
Overseas  economies  are  continuing  to  recover  from  the  downturn  following  the  global 
financial  crisis  after  the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers  in  the  autumn  of  2008.  Although  there 
have  been  inventory  adjustments  in  IT-related  goods  since  summer  2010,  this  has  not 
exerted much downward pressure on economic activity. Looking ahead, overseas economies 
are expected to continue to recover, but while emerging economies are likely to continue to 
show relatively high growth fueled by growth in domestic demand, the recovery in advanced 
economies is likely to lack strength. This divergence in growth trends has been referred to as 
the “two-speed recovery” or “two-track recovery.”  
Recovery in advanced economies lacks strength  
A. 
Let me first talk about advanced economies.  
The U.S. economy continues to recover. Led by increases in exports, corporate profits have 
been  on  a  recovery  trend,  and  business  fixed  investment  has  been  rising  moderately.  In 
particular, private consumption, the main demand component, is growing quickly at present. 
Growth  in  consumption  is  currently  outpacing  increases  in  disposable  income,  and 
household  saving  rates,  which  rose  after  the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers,  have  begun  to 
decline. These developments can be attributed in part to the rise in stock prices fueled by 
additional stimulus measures, both from the monetary and fiscal sides. The recovery trend is 
expected to continue against the background of increasing exports, especially to emerging 
economies, and the accommodative financial environment. Firms, however, remain cautious 
about  hiring  new  employees,  and  it  will  take  time  to  resolve  household  balance-sheet 
problems, which were partly responsible for the financial crisis. While the recent rise in stock 
prices  should  accelerate  the  pace  of  balance-sheet  adjustments,  the  resumption  of  the 
decline in home prices will act as a brake. As Japan’s experience after the bursting of the 
bubble economy shows, balance-sheet adjustments impede the virtuous circle of growth in 
production, income, and spending. Therefore, the pace of recovery in the U.S. economy is 
likely to remain moderate.  
Economic activity in the euro area as a whole has been recovering moderately, with some 
differences in pace by country. In particular, the German economy has been growing notably, 
with exports boosted by a weak euro. Going forward, Germany is expected to enjoy steady 
growth  led  mainly  by  buoyant  exports.  However,  due  to  the  effects  of  fiscal  austerity, 
economic growth in some peripheral countries is likely to remain sluggish as both the public 
and private sectors are mired in excessive debt.  
Continued high growth in emerging economies  
B. 
Next,  I  will  talk  about  emerging  economies.  On  the  whole,  business  fixed  investment  has 
been increasing reflecting higher capacity utilization rates, and private consumption has been 
boosted  by  the  improvement  in  the  employment  and  income  situation  resulting  from 
increased production. Since emerging economies do not face the kind of structural problems 
weighing  down  on  advanced  economies  such  as  balance-sheet  adjustments  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
deteriorating  fiscal  conditions,  the  virtuous  circle  of  growth  in  production,  income,  and 
spending  operates  normally  and  emerging  economies  are  expected  to  continue  to  show 
relatively high growth.  
China, which takes center stage among emerging economies, continues to enjoy high year-
on-year growth in excess of 9 percent. Growth in exports temporarily slowed in the middle of 
2010  due  to  the  completion  of  global  inventory  restocking  following  the  recovery  from  the 
global financial crisis. At present, however, exports have regained their upward momentum. 
As for the outlook, the Chinese economy is expected to continue to grow at a rapid pace, 
with  infrastructure-related  investment  remaining  on  an  increasing  trend,  and  private 
consumption continuing to expand due to increases in household incomes.  
Japan’s economy  
II. 
Next, I will outline the current situation of and outlook for Japan’s economy and prices.  
Economy emerging from a temporary pause  
A. 
Since  the  early  autumn  of  2010,  there  has  been  a  temporary  pause  in  Japan’s  economic 
recovery, partly due to the slowdown in overseas economies and the decline in the demand 
for some types of consumer goods following the previous sharp increase. As a result of the 
recovery in overseas economies, however, the economy seems to have been emerging from 
its temporary pause.  
Exports  have  resumed  their  upward  trend  amid  the  reacceleration  of  growth  in  overseas 
economies and the progress in inventory adjustments in IT-related goods I just mentioned. 
Specifically, real exports declined in January from the previous month, partly reflecting the 
large increase in December – the first in five months – but are showing signs of resuming 
their  uptrend.  As  for  private  consumption,  while  demand  for  some  goods  has  fallen  back 
following the sharp, last-minute increase in demand ahead of the expiration of subsidies for 
purchases  of  environmentally  friendly  cars  and  of  the  eco-point  system  for  household 
electrical  appliances,  consumption  of  other  goods  and  services  has  generally  been  firm. 
Under  these  circumstances,  production  has  been  showing  signs  of  improvement  since 
November.  
As  for  the  outlook,  exports  are  likely  to  continue  to  trend  upward  on  the  back  of  the 
improvement in overseas economies. Private  consumption is likely to pick up gradually as 
the  effects  of  the  decline  in  demand  following  the  previous  sharp  increase  gradually 
dissipate.  With  corporate  profits  showing  solid  improvements,  business  fixed  investment  is 
also likely to start picking up. Thus, led by the recovery in exports, Japan’s economy is likely 
to return to a recovery path with clear signs of a self-sustaining recovery trend.1 That being 
said, however, private consumption is likely to remain subdued given that the employment 
and income situation – although easing somewhat – remains severe. Furthermore, the pace 
of  improvement  in  business  fixed  investment  is  likely  to  remain  moderate  since it  will take 
time  until  firms’  sense  of  excessive  capital  stock  is  dispelled,  and  the  relative  share  of 
overseas investment has been increasing reflecting the widening gap between the economic 
growth potential at home and abroad.  
                                                 
1  Every April and October, the Bank releases its Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (the Outlook Report), 
and in the intervening January and July makes an interim assessment of the outlook laid out in the report. The 
Policy Board members’ forecasts for real GDP are presented as reference figures in the respective months. In 
January,  the  median  of  Policy  Board  members’  forecasts  for  GDP  growth  was  3.3  percent  for  fiscal  2010, 
1.6 percent for fiscal 2011, and 2.0 percent for fiscal 2012. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Weaker downward pressure on prices  
B. 
As for prices, the year-on-year pace of decline in the consumer price index (CPI), excluding 
fresh food and the effects of the special subsidies for high school tuition introduced in April 
2010  as  part  of  the  government’s  economic  stimulus  measures  to  reduce  the  cost  of  high 
school  education,  is  slowing  moderately  due  to  the  gradual  improvement  in  the  aggregate 
supply  and  demand  balance  in  the  economy  as  a  whole.2  Regarding  the  outlook,  this 
mechanism whereby the improvement in the aggregate supply and demand balance exerts 
upward pressure on prices is likely to continue as a trend.  
However,  it  is  also  likely  that  the  year-on-year  rate  of  growth  in  the  CPI  will  be  revised 
downward due to the base-year revision for the CPI scheduled for August 2011.3 Needless to 
say, regardless of the extent of the revision, prices themselves will remain unaffected and, in 
conducting monetary policy, such statistical artifacts need to be borne in mind.  
Upside and downside risks  
C. 
So far, I have talked about the scenario I consider to be the most likely. I will now consider 
both upside and downside risks that may impinge on the above outlook.  
Emerging economies  
1. 
First, I will look at upside and downside risks to emerging economies. The rapid growth of 
emerging  economies,  which  contrasts  sharply  with  the  weak  momentum  for  recovery  in 
advanced economies, continues to lure capital from investors seeking higher returns.4 The 
inflows  appear  to  have  been  amplified  by  the  continued  large-scale  monetary  easing  in 
advanced economies as well as the fixed or semi-fixed exchange rate regimes adopted by 
some emerging economies with the aim of keeping their currencies from appreciating. The 
further  expansion  of  emerging  economies  will  –  for  the  time  being  –  exert  large  positive 
effects  on  the  economies  of  advanced  countries,  including  Japan,  through  higher  exports. 
However, if emerging economies continue with easy monetary policies, they may fall behind 
the curve.5 This could cause their economies to overheat, and any adjustment that follows 
could result in a rapid unwinding of excesses, leading to a contraction of economic activity.  
Global commodity markets  
2. 
Next,  I  will  talk  about  the  rise  in  overall  commodity  prices.  There  is  no  doubt  that  the 
fundamental cause is a tighter supply and demand balance caused by robust demand from 
emerging  economies  and  decreasing  supply  due  to  unseasonable  weather  in  some 
                                                 
2  The year-on-year rate of change in the CPI excluding fresh food – the core CPI – has remained negative (with 
a value of minus 0.4 percent in December 2010, and minus 0.2 percent in January 2011). However, when the 
effects of the special subsidies for high school tuition introduced in April 2010 are excluded to gauge the trend 
changes in consumer prices, the year-on-year rate of change in the core CPI has turned positive, registering 
0.1 percent in December 2010 and 0.3 percent in January 2011. 
3  At present, calendar year 2005 is used as the base year for calculating the year-on-year rate of change in the 
CPI. In August, the base year will be changed to 2010 and year-on-year figures as far back as January 2011 
will be revised retroactively. 
4  At present, the pace of capital inflows to emerging economies is decelerating due to concerns about rising 
inflationary pressures in emerging economies and heightened uncertainty regarding the situation in the Middle 
East. 
5  With  regard  to  emerging  economies  with  de  facto  fixed  exchange  rate  systems,  there  appears  to  be  a 
tendency  for  monetary  tightening  to  fall  behind.  In  open  economies,  it  is  said  that  three  objectives  are  not 
attainable  simultaneously:  (1)  independent  monetary  policy;  (2)  fixed  exchange  rate  systems;  and  (3)  free 
international  movement  of  capital.  Many  advanced  countries,  including  Japan,  have  adopted  independent 
monetary policy and free movement of capital, while in principle the foreign exchange rate is determined by 
the market mechanism. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
commodity-exporting economies. In addition, the recent political unrest in North Africa and 
the Middle East, triggered by the riots in Tunisia, has been adding to the uncertainty over the 
supply  of  crude  oil,  sending  prices  sharply  higher.  Furthermore,  the  nature  of  commodity 
transactions has changed with the introduction of commodity futures trading. In the past, the 
price of each commodity moved independently of other commodities, reflecting the differing 
supply  and  demand  structures.  However,  since  around  the  mid-2000s,  advances  in  the 
infrastructure  for  commodity  futures  trading  have  led  to  the  creation  of  products  such  as 
commodity  indexes  and  exchange-traded  funds  (ETFs)  that  combine  exchange-traded 
futures on commodities and financial assets. The growing use of these products has resulted 
in  the  price movements  of  various  commodities,  as  well  as the  prices  of  commodities  and 
financial  assets  such  as  stocks,  to  be  more  closely  linked.  Against  this  background  of 
“financialization”  of  commodities,  it  cannot  be  denied  that  accommodative  monetary 
conditions  around  the  world  have  fueled  expectations  of  higher  commodity  prices  and 
accelerated the rise in global commodity prices.  
Inflationary  pressures  have  increased  in  emerging  economies  due  to  higher  food  and  raw 
material prices reflecting the rise in global commodity prices, coupled with higher utilization 
rates of production factors such as labor and facilities.6 If global commodity prices continue to 
rise beyond what is warranted by fundamentals such as the increase in demand in emerging 
economies,  resource-importing  economies  –  both  advanced  and  emerging  –  will  see  a 
decrease  in  consumption  expenditure  through  a  decline  in  real  purchasing  power.  If  the 
increases in costs cannot be passed on to prices of final products, corporate profits will be 
squeezed,  resulting  in  a  negative  impact  on  consumption  through  a  deterioration  in  the 
employment and wage environment.7  
Industrialized economies  
3. 
The third risk concerns advanced economies. As I mentioned earlier, the U.S. economy is 
burdened  with  balance-sheet  adjustments.  Dealing  with  them  will  take  time,  and  U.S. 
economic  activity  therefore  still  looks  unlikely  to  accelerate  and  remains  vulnerable  to 
downside risks. I personally have remained cautious about the outlook for the U.S. economy 
throughout.  However,  forecasts  by  private-sector  economists  have  fluctuated  greatly  since 
the  beginning  of  2010.8  The  divergent  views  regarding  the  outlook  have  probably  been 
caused  by  differing  opinions  regarding  the  time  it  will  take  to  resolve  the  balance-sheet 
problems.  
A risk common to many advanced economies is the sharp growth in public debt. When the 
market’s confidence in fiscal sustainability declines, economic activity is negatively affected 
due  to  the  adverse  feedback  loop  between  financial  and  economic  activity.  In  some 
peripheral  European  countries,  such  a  negative  feedback  loop  has  already  materialized, 
creating  persistent  tensions  in  financial  markets.  However,  this  has  not  spread  to  other 
regions so far thanks to the establishment and expansion of support mechanisms to maintain 
stability in the region such as the European Financial Stability Facility.  
                                                 
6  The  political  unrest  in  North  Africa  and  the  Middle  East  is  believed  to  have  been  triggered  by  rising  food 
prices, which meant that a growing part of the population was thrown into poverty. 
7  At the meeting of the Group of Twenty (G-20) Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors held in February 
2011,  it  was  agreed  to  create  a  new  study  group  charged  with  examining  the  impact  of  rising  global 
commodity prices on global economic and financial conditions and reporting back to the G-20. 
8  Forecasts for U.S. economic growth for both 2010 and 2011 by private-sector economists as of the beginning 
of 2010 averaged between 3.0 and 3.5 percent. In the summer of 2010, the forecasts were revised downward 
to  levels  well  below  3.0  percent,  and  were  then  revised  upward  again  toward  the  end  of  2010.  These 
fluctuations in the forecasts caused swings in the sentiment of households, firms, and financial markets, and 
led to increased volatility in economic activity. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Growth potential of the Japanese economy  
III. 
So far, I have talked about the outlook for the Japanese economy from a cyclical perspective. 
I would now like to discuss it from a longer-term perspective.  
Since 1990, following the bursting of the bubble economy, Japan’s average annual growth 
has hovered at a low level of around 1–2 percent. The sustained economic expansion from 
fiscal 2002 to 2007 was in reality supported by a global financial bubble. With the benefit of 
hindsight,  I  am  afraid  I  have  to  say  that  it  is  clear  the  self-sustaining  growth  mechanism 
during that period was not sufficiently robust.  
In the high-growth era during the 1960s and the stable growth period from 1970 to the 1980s, 
the Japanese economy was blessed externally with an international competitive environment 
that  was  beneficial  to  Japan’s  economic  model  designed  to  catch  up  with  advanced 
economies,  and  internally,  with  an  upward  trend  in  the  working-age  population.9  From  the 
1990s onward, however, international competition intensified and the working-age population 
started to decrease. As a result, growth had to be based increasingly on a “pioneering spirit,” 
that is, the ability to discover hitherto unknown demand and create new markets. Thus, the 
main reason for Japan’s decline in productivity and in the economic growth trend has been 
an inability to cope with fundamental structural changes in the world economy. How should 
Japan address these challenges?  
It is clear that the expanding global economy provides ample potential demand, particularly 
in  emerging  economies.  Though  less  obvious,  it  is  also  true  that  there  are  no  limits  to 
demand  at  home.  Statistics  show  that  there  remains  an  output  gap  in  Japan.  This  gap, 
however,  only  shows  the  size  of  the  shortage  in  demand  relative  to  the  current  supply 
capacity. Looked at from a different angle, this simply means there is a shortage of the kind 
of  supply  that  meets  the  kind  of  latent  demand  which  is  there.  Let  me  be  more  specific. 
Although the aging of society has generated wide-ranging potential demand for medical and 
nursing care as well as demand in other related areas, a regulatory framework that is rooted 
in  Japan’s  traditional  economic  system  has  hindered  potential  demand  from  materializing. 
Thus,  it  could  be  said  that  the  ability  to  “pioneer”  I  mentioned  earlier  requires  economic 
actors  capable  of  tapping  potential  demand  and  a  nation  that  provides  an  institutional 
environment encouraging the production of valuable goods and services through free market 
competition.  
With regard to overseas markets, it is important for Japan to open up and steer boldly toward 
the objective of integrating domestic and overseas markets. Needless to say, this challenge 
needs to be tackled immediately so as not to miss out on the enormous demand for goods 
and services in expanding global markets. At the same time, this greater integration with the 
global economy would allow the free movement not only of goods and services but also of 
human  resources  and  capital,  and  would  both  require  and  promote  deregulation.  While  it 
may sound a bit hyperbolic, such integration could further advance the international division 
of labor to an extent where the distinction between domestic and foreign demand becomes 
irrelevant except for statistical expedience.  
Another  pressing  issue  is  the  improvement  of  the  fiscal  balance.  Restoration  of  the  fiscal 
balance is necessary not only from the perspective of fiscal sustainability but also from the 
perspective  of  restoring  economic  growth.  The  public  debt  being  accumulated  under  the 
current  social  security  system  increases  intergenerational  differences  in  lifetime  incomes, 
and  the  growing  burden  for  future  generations  is  weighing  down  income  expectations  and 
restraining consumption by the working-age population.  
                                                 
9  Characteristic  features  of  Japan’s  economic  model  include  (1)  government  intervention  in  a  wide  range  of 
private-sector  economic  activities;  (2)  the  importance  of  long-term  business  relationships  as  exemplified  by 
cross-shareholdings,  the  main  bank  system,  and  lifetime  employment;  and  (3)  an  income  distribution 
mechanism that helps to prevent large disparities in income. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
IV. 
Conduct of monetary policy  
Policy responses by the Bank of Japan  
A. 
Next, I will explain the policy measures implemented by the Bank so far.  
Pursuing powerful monetary easing  
1. 
In  October  2010,  the  Bank  introduced  a  policy  of  “comprehensive  monetary  easing” 
consisting  of  three  measures.  First,  the  Bank  lowered  the  target  for  the  uncollateralized 
overnight call rate to around 0 to 0.1 percent and clarified that it was pursuing a virtually zero 
interest rate policy. Second, the Bank announced its commitment to maintaining the virtually 
zero interest rate policy until it judged, on the basis of the “understanding of medium- to long-
term  price  stability”  (hereafter  the  “understanding”),  that  price  stability  was  in  sight.  The 
“understanding”  is  the  inflation  rate  level  that  each  of  the  nine  Policy  Board  members 
understands  as  being  consistent  with  price  stability  over  the  medium  to  long  term.  On  the 
basis  of  a  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI,  each  Policy  Board  member’s 
“understanding”  falls  in  a  positive  range  of  2  percent  or  lower,  and  the  midpoints  of  most 
Policy  Board  members’  “understanding”  are  around  1  percent.  In  other  words,  the  Bank 
provided clarification of the time horizon of the virtually zero interest rate policy. And third, 
given  that  there  was  little  room  for  a  further  decline  in  short-term  interest  rates,  the  Bank 
established  a  program  on  its  balance  sheet  to  purchase  various  financial  assets,  such  as 
government  securities,  ETFs,  and  Japan  real  estate  investment  trusts  (J-REITs),  to 
encourage a decline in longer-term interest rates and various risk premiums.  
Developments in financial markets since the implementation of the “comprehensive monetary 
easing  policy”  reveal  that,  in  the  money  market,  interest  rates  on  term  instruments  have 
declined,  spreads  on  corporate  bonds  have  narrowed,  and  various  risk  premiums  have 
generally  been  declining,  as  seen  in  the  rise  in  prices  of  stocks  and  J-REITs.  The 
environment for corporate financing has been favorable, with issuing conditions for CP and 
corporate bonds improving, as illustrated, for example, by the decline in lending rates and the 
increased variety of corporate bond issuers. Long-term interest rates, however, have risen 
somewhat.  The  reason  is  that  although  the  Bank  continues  to  steadily  implement  the 
comprehensive monetary easing policy and remains firmly committed  to pursuing powerful 
monetary easing, it is fundamentally difficult for interest rate policy to directly influence long-
term interest rates, and the rise in overseas interest rates seems to be affecting Japanese 
long-term interest rates to some extent.10  
The  outlook  for  Japan’s  economy  I  presented  earlier  –  the  scenario  considered  to  be  the 
most likely – is based on the assumption that financial markets will fully factor in the Bank’s 
monetary  policy  measures  taken  so  far.  That  is,  I  judge  that,  under  the  Bank’s  monetary 
policy,  Japan’s  economy  will  likely  continue  to  make  steady  progress  toward  overcoming 
deflation and returning to a sustainable growth path with price stability.  
Providing support to strengthen the foundations for economic growth  
2. 
Following the implementation of the above measures, in June 2010 the Bank introduced a 
new fund-provisioning framework, the “Fund-Provisioning Measure to Support Strengthening 
the  Foundations  for  Economic  Growth.”  Given  the  decline  in  the  economic  growth  trend 
mentioned  earlier,  the  Bank  established  the  new  framework  in  order  to  play  its  part  in 
                                                 
10  Previously, it was widely thought that international bond markets were segmented, and therefore bond yields  
–  at  least  in  the  short  run  –  tended  to  follow  idiosyncratic  country  factors.  However,  analysis  by  the  Bank 
published in the February 2011 issue of the Financial Markets Report has shown that it is highly likely that 
government  bond  yields  across  countries  are  linked  as  a  result  of  common  risk  perceptions  among  global 
bond investors. Please refer to pp. 36–42 of the February 2011 issue of the report, which is available on the 
Bank's web site at http://www.boj.or.jp/en/index.htm. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
addressing  this  challenge  by  making  use  of  its  central  bank  functions.  The  framework 
provides long-term funds at a low interest rate to financial institutions in accordance with their 
efforts in terms of lending and investment toward strengthening the foundations for economic 
growth.  
The outline of the fund-provisioning measure is as follows: (1) the total amount of loans shall 
not exceed 3 trillion yen; (2) the total amount of loans to each counterparty shall not exceed 
150 billion yen; and (3) the last disbursement of new loans shall take place by June 30, 2012. 
The Bank is aware that it is not possible to raise Japan’s growth potential solely through this 
fund-provisioning measure. Rather, the aim is for the measure to act as a catalyst to bring 
about  a  shared  awareness  among  financial  institutions  and  firms  on  the  need  to  raise 
Japan’s growth potential and to make various efforts of their own accord to raise the potential 
economic growth rate and productivity. On March 7, 2011, the Bank will carry out the third 
new  loan  disbursement  under  the  fund-provisioning  measure  to  support  strengthening  the 
foundations for economic growth, and the total outstanding balance is expected to exceed 
2 trillion yen as of March 7. The number of borrower financial institutions11 has increased to 
149  as  of  the  end  of  February  2011,  and  the  breakdown  of  these  institutions  reveals  that 
loans  will  be  provided  to  various  types  of  institutions  across  wide  regions.  Individual 
investments and loans under the measure cover all of the 18 areas suggested by the Bank 
as possible investment areas, with investment in “environment and energy business” in the 
lead.  In  this  context,  what  has  particularly  caught  my  attention  is  that  a  large  number  of 
financial institutions, on participating in the Bank’s disbursement of loans, started to actively 
make a range of efforts such as establishing new dedicated funds and lending schemes for 
investments  and  loans  to  support  strengthening  the  foundations  for  economic  growth.  The 
Bank  believes  that  this  situation  suggests  that  the  Bank’s  measure  is  producing  positive 
effects as a catalyst, its intended purpose.  
Future monetary policy conduct and communication  
B. 
In order for Japan’s economy to overcome deflation and return to a sustainable growth path 
with price stability, I believe it is important for the Bank to steadily continue to carry out the 
measures I mentioned earlier. In addition, the Bank will continue to carefully examine new 
economic data and information, so that appropriate policy measures can be taken flexibly if 
the  probability  rises  of  a  significant  deterioration  in  the  outlook  for  economic  activity  and 
prices or it becomes uncertain that Japan is on the road to overcoming deflation.  
In order for these measures to be fully effective, it is vital that they are properly and widely 
understood  by  the  public.  To  this  end,  the  Bank  holds  meetings  such  as  the  present  one 
between  Policy  Board  members  and  business  leaders  and  press  conferences  by  the 
Governor  after  Monetary  Policy  Meetings,  and  promptly  publishes  the  minutes  of  the 
Monetary Policy Meetings. In addition, the Bank makes use of various other communication 
channels such as its web site as a means of providing information to the public. I think that 
these efforts do not compare unfavorably with those of other central banks. Moreover, the 
Bank is doing its utmost to further improve the quality of such forms of communication.12 For 
example, as part of such efforts, the Bank launched a renewed web site in January.13 We 
                                                 
11  This  refers  to  the  number  of  financial  institutions  that  obtained  the  Bank’s  confirmation  for  their  plans  to 
participate in the new loan disbursement. 
12  For  information  on  the  Bank's  previous  measures  to  enhance  the  transparency  of  monetary  policy,  please 
refer to “Transparency of Monetary Policy” on the Bank’s web site. 
13  As part of the renewal of the web site, the content structure was rearranged, the pages were redesigned, and 
the content was expanded, so that users can access more easily the information they need. For more details, 
please refer to “Renewal of the Bank of Japan Web Site,” released on January 14, 2011 on the Bank’s web 
site. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
would be delighted to hear your opinions and views regarding the Bank’s dissemination of 
information.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
