Joseph S Tracy: A strategy for the 2011 economic recovery 
Remarks by Mr Joseph S Tracy, Executive Vice President of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York, at Dominican College, Orangeburg, New York, 28 January 2011. 
 Good morning. It is a pleasure to be with you this morning to look back on the tremendous 
events impacting the economy over the past several years, and to assess the outlook for the 
economy going forward. Let me note that the views that I will discuss with you are my own 
and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve 
System.  
On  September  20,  2010,  the  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research  (NBER)  determined 
that the “Great Recession” officially ended in June 2009. The Great Recession did not earn 
its  moniker  due  to  its  length.  At  18  months,  the  length  of  the  Great  Recession  was  only 
slightly longer than the average of 17.5 months for the 33 recessions tracked by the NBER 
since 1857. In fact, the longest recession was 65 months and lasted from October 1873 to 
March 1879. 
The Great Recession distinguished itself from earlier recessions in terms of its severity rather 
than its length. There was a decline in real output relative to trend of $1.1 trillion or 8 percent 
(Chart 1). This contraction brought the level of real output back to its level in 2006. In most 
recessions, consumption growth slows but remains positive. In this recession, there was an 
actual decline in consumption rather than just a slowdown (Chart 2). When households need 
to cut back on their consumption, they typically do so first with durable goods – for example, 
by delaying the decision to replace a car or to trade up to a nicer house. It is no surprise then 
that auto sales dropped significantly (Chart 3). Housing starts had been declining since late 
2005, and the decline continued during the recession (Chart 4). Producers reacted quickly to 
the  sharp  decline  in  consumer  demand,  but  inventories  still  rose  sharply  relative  to  sales 
(Chart 5). 
In order to realign production to the declining level of demand, firms quickly cut their staffing 
levels, which resulted in a rapid rise in unemployment across all age groups (Chart 6). From 
the peak in December 2007 to the end of the recession, private non-farm payroll employment 
declined by 7.3 million jobs – bringing employment below its level in January 2000 (Chart 7). 
The  severity  of  the  Great  Recession  is  very  apparent  when  you  realize  that  an  entire 
decade’s worth of job growth was lost. 
Household wealth declined sharply as well during the Great Recession due to losses both in 
equity  and  real-estate  wealth.  The  household  saving  rate  increased  in  reaction  to  this 
negative shock to household wealth (Chart 8). Several factors were likely behind the higher 
saving rate. First, as already noted, households likely increased their saving rate to begin to 
rebuild their wealth. Second, given the deterioration in the labor market, households would 
also have a strong “precautionary demand” for saving to help buffer their consumption in the 
event  of  a  job  loss.  Finally,  homeowners  might  react  to  falling  house  prices  by  increasing 
their saving rate in order to rebuild the capacity to make a down payment on a future trade-
up house. In more extreme cases where house price declines have put owners in a negative 
equity position where the value of the house is now less than the balance on the mortgage, 
homeowners may increase their saving rate to have the capacity to pay off their mortgage to 
avoid a costly foreclosure. 
At  the  same  time  that  the  real  economy  was  contracting  there  was  an  on-going  crisis  in 
financial markets. The balance sheets of banks and securities firms were under severe strain 
and liquidity was drying up. A good barometer for problems in the financial sector is the price 
for credit default swap (CDS) contracts for financial firms (Chart 9). These CDS prices started 
to rise in 2007 as news of losses for subprime mortgages began to hit markets. There was a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
jump in CDS prices in March 2008 when Bear Sterns was taken over by JPMorgan Chase. 
For a brief period over the summer of 2008, CDS prices retreated. This was more evident for 
securities firms and may reflect the opening of the Primary Dealer Credit Facility (PDCF) that 
allowed primary dealers to obtain liquidity from the Federal Reserve on a collateralized basis. 
Following  the  bankruptcy  of  Lehman  Brothers  in  September  2008,  these  CDS  prices 
increased dramatically. 
In response to the deterioration in the economy as well as to mounting loan losses, banks 
tightened their lending standards and credit spreads increased. This can be seen using data 
from  the  Federal  Reserve’s  Senior  Loan  Officer  Opinion  Survey  (Chart  10).  Values  above 
zero  represent  tightening  of  standards,  widening  of  spreads  and  weaker  loan  demand.  All 
three were taking place as the economy entered the recession. A consequence was a sharp 
contraction of lending activity (Chart 11). To the extent that the decline in lending was not 
completely due to lower loan demand, then this credit contraction exacerbated the decline in 
real  activity  –  creating  what  is  called  an  adverse  feedback  loop  between  the  financial  and 
real sectors of the economy. 
The  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC)  reacted  aggressively  in  response  to  the 
recession and financial crisis. The FOMC quickly lowered its policy rate – called the federal 
funds rate – to essentially zero (Chart 12). The aggressive pace for lowering the fed funds 
rate reflected lessons learned from Japan’s earlier experience dealing with a housing market 
boom  and  bust.  At  the  same  time,  the  FOMC  increased  its  provision  of  liquidity  to  the 
financial  system.  Initially,  liquidity  was  added  through  the  traditional  discount  window,  and 
later through a wide range of new liquidity facilities that were developed. Up until the Lehman 
bankruptcy, the FOMC provided this liquidity without expanding the size of its balance sheet 
(Chart 13). As the crisis intensified following the Lehman bankruptcy, the FOMC significantly 
escalated its support for the economy. The FOMC could not provide additional support to the 
economy in the traditional manner by reducing the fed funds rate since the policy rate was 
already  at  zero.  Instead,  the  FOMC  initiated  the  Large-Scale  Asset  Purchase  (LSAP) 
program. The objective was to ease financial market conditions to provide more support to 
the economy. Central bank purchases of assets raise the price and therefore lower the yield 
on  these  assets.  These  purchases  crowd  out  some  investors  who  shift  their  purchases  to 
other assets, which lowers the yields on these assets, as well. In this way, financial market 
conditions  are  eased  more  generally.  A  consequence  of  the  LSAP  program  was  a  rapid 
expansion of the central bank’s balance sheet. 
The combined monetary and fiscal support for the economy helped to arrest the decline in 
economic  activity.  As  final  sales  began  to  stabilize,  firms were  able  to  manage  down  their 
inventories. The aggregate inventory-to-sales ratio rapidly declined to its pre-recession level 
(Chart  14).  With  their  excess  inventory  worked  off,  firms  needed  to  meet  demand  by 
increasing  production.  Aggregate  industrial  production  rebounded  –  especially  for  durable 
goods (Chart 15). Growth was also improving abroad, which increased the demand for our 
exports  (Chart  16).  In  this  chart,  each  business  cycle  is  contrasted  with  real  exports 
normalized to a value of one at the business cycle peak, which is dated as time zero on the 
chart. The chart shows the relative path of real exports during the contraction and recovery 
for each cycle. The recovery in exports for this cycle was quicker than for the prior recession 
in 2001. Firms reacted to the significant challenges presented by the recession by focusing 
on  cost  cutting  and  improved  efficiencies.  These  efforts  led  to  a  rise  in  measured  labor 
productivity (Chart 17). With labor compensation growth declining due to the weakness in the 
labor market, the higher labor productivity resulted in sharp declines in the costs of producing 
goods  –  unit  labor  costs.  The  decline  in  unit  labor  costs  helped  firms  to  restore  their 
profitability. 
As demand conditions improved, firms on net began to increase their employment and hours 
worked by their staff (Chart 18). It is important to note that improvement in the demand for 
workers will not necessarily lead to a steady decline in the aggregate unemployment rate. 
During the recession, many unemployed workers withdrew from the labor force and stopped 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
actively  looking  for  employment.  This  can  be  seen  by  the  decline  in  the  labor  force 
participation rate (Chart 19). While there are around 15 million unemployed workers, there 
are  also  around  9  million  workers  who  are  working  part  time  for  economic  reasons  (as 
opposed to their own choice), and around 1.3 million “discouraged” workers who want a job 
but  who  are  not  currently  actively  looking  for  work  –  and  therefore  are  not  counted  as 
unemployed.  As  firms  decide  to  increase  their  total  hours,  some  of  this  additional  labor 
demand will take the form of firms restoring part-time workers to full-time status – an action 
that does not reduce the unemployment rate. In addition, as conditions begin to improve in 
the labor market, discouraged workers may decide to reenter the labor force and to renew 
their search for a job. This reentry pushes up the measured unemployment rate until these 
reentrants find new employment. 
As the recession ended, consumption growth returned to positive, supported by improvement 
in  disposable  income  growth  and  a  leveling  off  of  the  household  saving  rate  (Chart  20). 
Household  wealth  began  to  recover  as  equity  markets  improved  and  the  deterioration  in 
house  prices  abated,  supported  in  part  by  demand  created  by  the  housing  tax  credit 
programs (Chart 21). As conditions in financial markets improved, banks ceased tightening 
their lending standards (Chart 22). Lending activity stopped contracting, and credit became 
more readily available for large firms that had access to the credit markets (Chart 23). 
Midway through 2010, however, questions started to arise as to whether the economy was 
entering  a  “soft-patch”  or  heading  toward  a  “double-dip”  recession.  Real  gross  domestic 
product (GDP) growth had slowed from 5 percent in the fourth quarter of 2009, to 3.7 percent 
in the first quarter of 2010 and to only 1.7 percent in the second quarter. Soft patches are 
common in expansions, but are difficult to distinguish from a more serious deterioration in an 
expansion. Examples of soft patches include the expansions of 1976 and 2002 (Chart 24). 
Foreign  risks  also  appeared  on  the  radar  screen  with  growing  concerns  about  debt 
sustainability in Greece, Ireland, Portugal and Spain. This can be seen in the sharp rise in 
the sovereign risk spreads for these countries (Chart 25). At the same time, core consumer 
price index (CPI) inflation, which is used as an indicator of where overall inflation is heading, 
was low and trending downward (Chart 26). 
Given the FOMC’s dual mandate to promote price stability and maximum sustainable growth, 
the risk of a double-dip recession in 2011 was a concern. In more normal times, the FOMC 
could  respond  to  this  risk  by  deciding  to  reduce  the  fed  funds  rate.  However,  with  the  fed 
funds  rate  essentially  at  zero,  other  options  had  to  be  considered.  At  their  November 
meeting,  the  FOMC  decided  to  restart  its  large-scale  asset  purchases  by  announcing  an 
intention  to  purchase  an  additional  $600  billion  in  Treasury  securities.  Again,  as  with  its 
earlier  asset  purchase  program,  the  intent  was  to  improve  financial  market  conditions  and 
thereby  reduce  the  risk  of  the  economy  stalling.  Subsequent  to  the  FOMC’s  decision,  a 
compromise  was  reached  on  extending  the  Bush  tax  rates  in  conjunction  with  additional 
fiscal stimulus measures for 2011. The flow of economic data as 2010 came to a close on 
balance  indicated  that  the  economy  was  in  fact  regaining  its  lost  momentum.  Economists 
began to mark up their forecasts for 2011 economic growth. 
This  recent  improvement  in  the  economic  outlook  is  welcomed  news.  We  should  keep  in 
mind, though, that there is considerable uncertainty associated with every economic forecast. 
There are both upside and downside risks that could cause actual economic growth this year 
to  deviate  from  the  consensus  forecast.  One  important  downside  risk  to  the  outlook  is 
associated with housing markets. Following the end of the homebuyer tax credits, there was 
a  sharp  drop-off  in  home  sales.  In  addition,  the  firming  of  house  prices  noted  earlier  has 
given way to renewed house price declines in many markets (Chart 27). There still remains a 
significant excess supply of housing that will exert downward pressure on house prices and 
new construction (Chart 28). Given the very low level of new home construction, the primary 
driver of this excess supply of housing is the on-going foreclosure process. The foreclosure 
pipeline  continues  to  grow  (Chart  29).  How  far  along  are  we  at  resolving  the  foreclosure 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
problem?  Total  completed  foreclosures  including  short  sales  and  deeds-in-lieu  from  the 
beginning of 2008 until the end of the third quarter of 2010 represent around 58 percent of all 
foreclosure starts over that same period. In addition, in each quarter the pace of foreclosure 
starts has exceeded the pace of completed foreclosures. At best, then, we are only halfway 
through the resolution process. 
To  conclude  where  I  began,  the  name  “Great  Recession”  is  also  appropriate  in  that  it 
reminds  us  not  only  of  the  severity  of  what  took  place,  but  also  of  the  travesty  that  was 
avoided – that is, the second Great Depression. This was only possible with the aggressive 
monetary and fiscal policy actions that were undertaken both domestically and abroad. Much 
was  learned  in  the  process  about  how  to  effectively  deal  with  a  financial  crisis,  and  much 
remains to be learned about how to prevent them from recurring in the future. 
 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
  8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
  10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
  12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
  14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15
  16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 17
  18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 19
  20 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 21
