Thomas M Hoenig: Financial reform – post crisis? 
Speech by Mr Thomas M Hoenig, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 
at Women in Housing and Finance, Washington DC, 23 February 2011. 
 Thank  you  for  inviting  me  here  today  to  address  this  outstanding  organization.  It  is  my 
pleasure to do so. My remarks are entitled “Financial Reform: Post Crisis?” and will address 
financial regulatory reform and too big to fail. Like most Americans, I am a strong defender of 
free market capitalism and I’m here today to make an argument that our country should take 
the difficult steps required to move its financial industry back toward that system.  
I acknowledge that there is more than one view on this topic. There are those who believe 
we  have  made  great  strides  with  Dodd-Frank  and  if  we  implement  it  well,  all  will  be  fine. 
Some believe that that the industry is over-regulated, which may be true, but we should not 
confuse  over-regulated  with  well-regulated.  And  some  of  us  are  certain  that  in  spite  of  all 
that’s  been  done  and  debated,  the  soundness  of  the  largest  financial  institutions  and  the 
systemic risks they continue to pose is no better. In my view, it is even worse than before the 
crisis.  As  well-intentioned  as  the  Dodd-Frank  Act  may  be,  it  will  not  improve  outcomes. 
Today I will describe why I believe that is the case and, more importantly, what must be done 
to give the United States a financial system that is healthy and competitive, and that supports 
rather than endangers the economy.  
There  are  many  villains  in  the  story  of  the  recent  crisis  and  much  written  to  name  them, 
describe them and even curse them. If you want to know how it happened, read “Thirteen 
Bankers” and “All the Devils Are Here.” If you want to know how to fix the problem, I highly 
recommend “Regulating Wall Street,” from New York University’s Stern School of Business. 
If you want to understand why the American public refuses to ignore the injustices associated 
with  executive  compensation  in  bailed  out  companies  versus  budget  cuts  borne  by  the 
middle class, read Rolling Stone’s article “Why isn’t Wall Street in Jail?” If you wonder why 
“no one saw it coming” then I suggest you read up on Brooksley Born or, a decade later, 
Meredith Whitney.  
Or,  you  might  even  read  the  remarks  of  an  Iowa-educated  bank  regulator  turned-policy 
maker  in  Kansas  City.  Fifteen  years  ago,  I  gave  a  speech  entitled  “Rethinking  Financial 
Regulation,” which summarized the major threats facing our financial system. My suggestion 
then  was  to  take  steps  to  reduce  interdependencies  among  large  institutions  and  to  limit 
them  to  relatively  safe  activities  if  they  chose  to  provide  essential  banking  and  payments 
services and be protected by the federal safety net. I also argued that safety net protection 
and public assistance should not be extended to large organizations extensively engaged in 
nontraditional and high-risk activities. A final point of those remarks was that central banks 
must pursue policies that preserve financial stability. I am going to repeat those suggestions 
today, and as often as the opportunity allows. History is on my side.  
Today,  I  am  convinced  that  the  existence  of  too  big  to  fail  financial  institutions  poses  the 
greatest risk to the U.S. economy. The incentives for risk-taking have not changed post-crisis 
and the regulatory factors that helped create the crisis remain in place. We must make the 
largest  institutions  more  manageable,  more  competitive,  and  more  accountable.  We  must 
break up the largest banks, and could do so by expanding the Volcker Rule and significantly 
narrowing the scope of institutions that are now more powerful and more of a threat to our 
capitalistic system than prior to the crisis.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The recent financial crisis  
The recent financial crisis was one of the world’s worst and most pervasive. Actions taken 
affecting an array of institutions during the crisis, like each crisis before it, set new precedent 
and invited new risks going forward. First, during the crisis public safety nets and assistance 
were  stretched  far  beyond  anything  that  we  had  done  in  past  crises.  Deposit  insurance 
coverage  was  substantially  expanded  and  public  authorities  went  well  beyond  this  with 
guarantees  of  bank  debt  instruments,  asset  guarantees  at  selected  institutions,  and  many 
other  forms  of  market  support.  Discount  window  lending  sharply  departed  from  previous 
practices  in  terms  of  nonbanks  and  special  lending  programs.  Substantial  public  capital 
injections  were  further  provided  through  TARP  to  the  largest  financial  organizations  in  the 
United  States  and  to  several  hundred  other  banks  on  a  scale  not  seen  since  the 
Reconstruction  Finance  Corporation  in  the  1930s.  These  steps  were  similar  to  those  that 
many other major countries took.  
Second,  at  the  heart  of  the  financial  collapse  were  some  of  the  largest  commercial  and 
investment banks in the country, as well as the markets in which these institutions were key 
players. The five largest investment banks failed, were forced into mergers, or had to convert 
to  bank  holding  company  ownership  to  gain  the  necessary  support.  Bank  of  America  and 
CitiGroup  both  required  extensive  assistance  to  pull  through  this  crisis.  Special assistance 
was provided to AIG, the largest insurance company in the United States. In addition, Fannie 
Mae and Freddie Mac belong in this group because of the influence they exert over the U.S. 
mortgage market, their enormous losses, and public takeover.  
It is no coincidence that two principal features of this crisis were heavily bloated safety nets 
and major financial institutions that were treated as being too big to fail. History shows that 
these two elements have become more intertwined – the growth of one is linked to growth of 
the other, in an increasingly pernicious cycle.  
Andrew Haldane of the Bank of England termed this relationship “Banking on the State” in 
his  excellent  speech  and  paper  of  the  same  title.  Over  time  we  have  experienced  a 
ratcheting process in which public authorities are pressured to widen and deepen their state 
safety  nets  after  every  financial  crisis  brought  on  by  excessive  bank  risk  taking.  This 
expansion  in  safety  nets  then  sets  the  stage  for  the  next  crisis  by  providing  even  greater 
incentives for risk taking and further expanding moral hazard problems.  
As a result, we have become trapped in a repeating game in which participants continue to 
seek ever higher and more risky returns while “banking” on the State to fund any losses in a 
crisis. Large organizations, moreover, are the key players in this process as States become 
more immersed in the perception during a crisis that they must protect any bank regarded as 
systemically important. We must stop this game if we are to create a more stable financial 
system and not condemn ourselves to an escalating series of crises with rapidly rising costs.  
Over the decades of crisis and bailouts there is considerable evidence of increasing levels of 
banking risk, which includes the long-term declining trend in bank capital and liquidity ratios, 
higher and much more variable returns on bank equity in recent years, and a link between 
higher leverage and the expansion in trading assets among large organizations.  
In  the  United  States,  we  observe  with  each  crisis  and  market  collapse  that  policymakers 
consistently intervene to protect an ever broader group of creditors and investors from loss. 
This includes the LDC debt crisis, the failure of Continental Illinois, and the thrift industry and 
stock  market  collapses  of  the  1980s.  These  previous  public  interventions,  though,  pale  in 
comparison  to  what  was  done  recently.  Market  participants  and  large  financial  institutions 
have little reason to doubt that they will be bailed out again.  
Let me offer just one staggering example. When Gramm-Leach-Bliley was passed in 1999, 
the  five  largest  U.S.  banking  organizations  controlled  $2.3  trillion  in  assets,  or  about 
38 percent of all banking industry assets. Currently, Bank of America by itself and in spite of 
its need for government support during the crisis has the same level of assets – $2.3 trillion – 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
as  the  top  five  did  in  1999  and  the  top  five  now  have  52  percent  of  all  banking  industry 
assets. What clearer sign could we find that market discipline no longer exists?  
Past  actions  and  this  growth  have  given  our  largest  organizations  significant  competitive 
advantages over other financial institutions. For example, creditors and uninsured depositors 
at too-big-to-fail organizations believe that there is almost no chance that they will have to 
take a loss. This idea is formally acknowledged by the credit rating agencies when they give 
these organizations separate “support” and “standalone” ratings, which explicitly factor in the 
government support they likely will receive. The difference in these two ratings thus provides 
one measure of the funding advantages that too-big-to-fail organizations have over others.  
Haldane estimated that this funding advantage amounted to about $250 billion in 2009 for 28 
of the largest banks in the world. At the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, we estimated 
the ratings and funding advantage for the five largest U.S. banking organizations during this 
crisis. In June 2009, these organizations had senior, long-term bank debt that was rated four 
notches higher on average than it would have been based on just the actual condition of the 
banks, with one bank given an eight notch upgrade for being too big to fail. Looking at the 
yield curve, this four-notch advantage translates into more than a 160 basis point savings for 
debt with two years to maturity and over 360 basis points at seven years to maturity.  
In a competitive marketplace, where just a few basis points make a difference, these funding 
advantages are huge and represent a highly distorting influence within financial markets. I’ll 
name three. They don’t have to sell creditors on the strength of their condition. They have 
significant advantages in competing for funds. And, they have significant incentives to take 
on more risk, hold less capital, and book more assets.  
We  should  also  recognize  that  the  perverse  incentives  associated  with  such  a  system  not 
only  can  contribute  to  a  crisis,  but  tend  to  impede  our  ability  to  recover  from  a  crisis. 
Normally, market forces would steer funds away from institutions having trouble and toward 
those  that  are  the  strongest  and  most  capable  of  fulfilling  their  roles  as  financial 
intermediaries.  However,  coming  out  of  this  crisis,  much  the  opposite  may  have  occurred. 
Too many dollars appear stuck in institutions that must restore capital and work through bad 
asset problems before they can think of pursuing new lending opportunities. One sign that 
this  outcome  may  have  happened  is  the  significant  holdings  of  excess  reserves  at  large 
institutions and the various strategies they are adopting to use low-cost, short-term funds to 
go out on the yield curve for Treasuries and other instruments.  
It  is  ironic  that  in  the  name  of  preserving  free  market  capitalism  in  this  country,  we  have 
undermined it so deeply.  
The road to a more stable financial system  
How can we change this game in which some institutions are repeatedly doubling up after 
taking losses, while public authorities are forced to underwrite the losing streaks? There are 
a  number  of  options  that  currently  are  in  the  works:  more  effective  regulation  and 
supervision,  higher  levels  of  capital,  and  a  resolution  policy  for  too-big-to-fail  institutions. 
However, one additional option used after the Great Depression still needs to be introduced: 
Glass-Steagell type limitations on the activities of those organizations that are otherwise too 
big to fail and that so dramatically affect our national and global economies. Let me take a 
moment to explain my views on each of these options.  
More effective supervision. The idea of more effective regulation and supervision is a major 
focus  in  the  Dodd-Frank  Act.  This  act  mandates  enhanced  supervisory  standards  for  all 
systemically important financial institutions. Such standards are to include provisions for risk-
based  capital,  leverage,  liquidity,  overall  risk  management,  exposure  concentration  limits, 
and resolution plans and living wills.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
With  my  supervisory  background,  I  certainly  support  such  efforts.  But  we  should  also 
recognize that supervision alone is not sufficient to address the challenges we face.  
As an example, two decades ago we were told that supervision based on “prompt corrective 
action” was the answer to the thrift and banking crisis of the 1980s. This system may have 
led  to  more  timely  supervisory  enforcement  steps  and  established  a  timeframe  for  the 
resolution  of  most  institutions.  But  prompt  corrective  action,  other  previous  supervisory 
reforms,  and  enhanced  supervision  under  Dodd-Frank,  still  must  rely  on  examiners 
unfailingly coming up with an accurate picture of a bank’s condition and then being able to 
act on those findings.  
In large, complex organizations, this is an exceedingly difficult task and much more so than 
when  I  spoke  about  it  15  years  ago.  This  crisis,  in  fact,  confirms  that  even  the  senior 
management, boards, and financial experts at our largest banks failed to assess adequately 
the risks they were taking, even though they were involved with such issues on a constant 
basis and had their reputations at stake.  
Also, as I previously stated, the substantial incentives that large organizations have to take 
on  more  risk,  with  the  government  expected  to  pick  up  the  losses  should  they  incur, 
unfailingly lead to undue risks throughout the balance sheet. In the hands of any banker, the 
combination of competitive pressures and perverse incentives are almost certain to result in 
noticeably higher risk exposures. Against these odds, we cannot expect examiners to have a 
100  percent  success  rate.  Factoring  in  the  political  power  of  the  largest  institutions,  we 
cannot expect even a modest success rate during the upswing in the cycle.  
Higher capital standards. I also support stronger capital standards, especially in the form of a 
maximum  leverage  ratio  based  on  equity  capital.  Basel  III  and  the  Dodd-Frank  counter 
cyclical  capital  provisions  may  provide  some  constraint  on  excess  risk  in  firms  if  they  are 
implemented successfully.  
But again, we must be cautious in what we can expect from this step by itself. Basel I and II 
were supposed to provide a better means for linking a bank’s capital to the amount of risk it 
assumed. Along the way, we found that risk was very difficult to measure and that capital 
needs  determined  during  normal  circumstances  were  not  enough  for  tail  events  or  shocks 
that  create  financial  crises.  It  is  a  fact  that  the  largest  financial  firms  easily  met  their  risk 
based capital requirements just prior to this crisis.  
In addition, too big to fail incentives have provided an irresistible motive for large banks to 
game any capital system, particularly since their uninsured creditors do not count on capital 
but on a bailout for protection. There were several notable signs of this “gaming” of capital 
standards leading up to the crisis, including the growth of off-balance sheet activities and the 
construction of subprime mortgage-backed instruments that marginally met the standards for 
AAA  credit  ratings.  Even  with  firmer  leverage  standards,  the  incentive  is  for  these 
organizations to increase balance sheet risks.  
Resolution policy for too-big-to-fail institutions: A third option is to establish a framework for 
resolving  systemically  important  institutions.  I  would  add  that  this  framework  –  to  be 
successful  –  must  convince  all  market  participants  that  they  are  fully  at  risk  when  dealing 
with these entities.  
Most  important,  this  option  offers  the  only  direct  means  to  address  the  incentive  issues 
surrounding  too  big  to  fail  and,  as  a  result,  provides  the  best  opportunity  to  curtail  the 
repeated  game  of  expanded  safety  nets  and  escalating  risk.  Ending  too  big  to  fail  in  this 
manner  would  also  bring  market  discipline  back  into  play  as  a  key  force  supporting 
supervision and capital standards.  
The Dodd-Frank Act provides a framework for resolving systemically important organizations. 
While  it  adds  to  what  we  already  have  for  closing  commercial  banks,  there  are  important 
weaknesses with this framework. In particular, the final decision on solvency is not market 
driven  but  rests  with  different  regulatory  agencies  and  finally  with  the  Secretary  of  the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Treasury,  which  will  bring  political  considerations  into  what  should  be  a  financial 
determination.  
So long as we have systemic organizations operating under the government’s protection, we 
will face the matter of whether we have the will to allow the market and bankruptcy to resolve 
them. In a major crisis, there will always be an overwhelming impulse to avoid putting such 
institutions through receivership. Always, it is feared that public confidence will be shattered, 
creditors  or  depositors  at  other  institutions  will  panic,  and  that  there  are  too  many 
connections that will bring down other institutions. In addition, important services will be lost 
and the international activities will be too complex to resolve.  
Many  of  these  fears  are  likely  overstated.  I  maintain  the  view  that  the  long-term 
consequences are much more severe if we fail to take action to end this cycle of repeated 
crises. In an environment where market participants are truly at risk, they will be much more 
likely to take steps to protect themselves, thus reducing the side effects of resolutions, and a 
failed  institution’s  essential  activities  can  be  continued  through  bridge  banks  and  other 
means.  
A recent Moody’s comment further voices a belief that the resolution regime, as outlined in 
the FDIC’s interim rules, “will not work as planned, posing a contagion risk and most likely 
forcing the government to provide support in order to avoid a systemic crisis.” Based on this 
belief,  Moody’s  intends  to  continue  assuming  government  support  for  the  eight  largest 
banking  organizations,  thus  helping  to  carry  on  the  funding  advantage  these  entities  have 
over other market players.  
Separate  risk  taking  from  the  safety  net.  If  too  big  to  fail  organizations  cannot  be  effectively 
supervised, capitalized, or resolved – which is exactly where I contend things stand right now – 
what option remains?  
For  me,  the  answer  is  firm:  they  must  be  broken  up.  We  must  not  allow  organizations 
operating  under  the  safety  net  to  pursue  high-risk  activities  and  we  cannot  let  large 
organizations put our financial system at risk. Protected institutions must be limited in their 
risk activities because there is no end to their appetite for risk and no perceived end to the 
public purse that protects them. As we have seen in this crisis, size and expanded activities 
have  not  led  to  better  and  more  diversified  firms  as  many  once  argued,  but  instead  have 
created very large firms with very similar risk profiles that closely mirror the overall financial 
system and economy.  
The serious problems that too-big-to-fail organizations encountered in this crisis provide clear 
evidence  that  some  have  reached  a  level  of  complexity  and  size  that  defies  good 
management  and  operational  efficiency.  A  number  of  financial  analysts  have  even  argued 
that the separate parts of most too-big-to-fail firms would add up to a value much larger than 
each firm in its entirety.  
Some  have  suggested  that  we  should  limit  the  overall  size  of  a  banking  or  financial 
organization, much like we do now with the 10 percent nationwide deposit cap. There were 
some failed efforts to include a size or funding cap in Dodd-Frank, but I agree it would be 
difficult  to  figure  out  a  good  way  to  restrict  size.  Having  said  that,  real  opportunities  were 
missed to deal with size issues during the crisis. In the heat of the moment, rather than break 
firms  into  smaller  more  manageable  firms,  even  the  weakest  U.S.  organizations  were 
allowed  to  acquire  major  entities  that  failed  or  needed  assistance  during  the  crisis.  This 
compounded the too big to fail problem in an already concentrated financial industry. Instead 
of taking important steps to restructure these firms or resolving them as failures, regulators 
were  required  to  turn  their  attention  to  such  side  issues  as  executive  bonuses  and  how 
troubled institutions could be forced to lend more.  
To me the evidence is overwhelming, we should vigorously pursue the restructuring of these 
firms  in  a  manner  that  mitigates  risk  and  that  would  influence  the  size  and  complexity  of 
these firms. That is, we must expand the Volcker Rule and carve out business lines that are 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
not  essential  to  the  basic  business  of  commercial  banking  or  consistent  with  public  safety 
nets and then require that these lines be spun off into separate firms.  
In the excellent book, “Regulating Wall Street,” several of the studies indicate that there are 
few synergies among financial activities that could lead to economies of scope. The studies 
also  demonstrate  that  multiple  functions  in  large,  complex  firms  can  actually  increase 
systemic risk. Moreover, they suggest that the spun-off activities could thrive without explicit 
or implied government support.  
The conclusion in this book is that separating activities in this manner, together with stronger 
resolution processes and better capital standards, would do much to strengthen our financial 
system, making it more accountable and stronger.  
It is time we rethink how the world’s largest firms should operate and what combination of 
activities should be permissible. For commercial banks operating under the safety net, any 
additional activities must necessarily be restricted to those regarded as relatively safe and 
amenable  to  prudential  supervision.  We  should  give  more  thought  and  analysis  to  those 
activities and their risk implication and impact on the safety net. It is time we ended the cycle 
of “failure and reward” and return to “failure as failure.”  
Conclusion  
In a 2009 article on too big to fail and the problems that resulted from the repeal of Glass-
Steagall, Martin Mayer gave a very good description of where we currently stand. He stated:  
“We know now that despite the violence of the shock, both the big banks and the 
cadre of bank regulators and supervisors – and academics – are shaking off the 
awful memories of 2008 and are setting up the same pins in the same alleys for 
the same players to try again. We will have to do this, at least, once more before 
we even try to get it right.”  
I share Mayer’s concern that the United States is stuck in much the same game that came 
out so poorly this last time, but with the prospect for an even greater loss in the next game. 
We  must  make  sure  that  large  financial  organizations  are  not  in  position  to  hold  the  U.S. 
economy  hostage.  But  unlike  Mayer,  I  refuse  to  accept  that  we  must  endure  yet  another 
crisis before we are willing to finally right the system. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
