Mohd Razif bin Abd Kadir: Our strategy towards developing a 
progressive takaful industry 
Keynote address by Mr Mohd Razif bin Abd Kadir, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of 
Malaysia, at the official launch of AIA AFG Takaful Bhd. (a joint-venture company between 
American International Assurance Bhd. and Alliance Bank Malaysia Berhad), Kuala Lumpur, 
28 January 2011. 
 It is indeed an honour to be here this morning to commemorate the launching of AIA AFG 
Takaful  Bhd.  This  occasion  marks  another  accomplishment  in  the  takaful  industry  in 
Malaysia, with the collaboration between two major players from the banking and insurance 
sector;  American  International  Assurance  Bhd.  and  Alliance  Bank  Malaysia  Berhad,  in 
forging a strategic alliance aimed to attain synergistic benefits that are of mutual business 
advantage. As we continuously position ourselves towards achieving a dynamic, competitive 
and efficient Islamic financial system that is able to contribute to the overall development of 
our economy, the launching of AIA AFG Takaful Bhd. is another important milestone in our 
strategy towards developing a progressive takaful industry that is resilient and is better able 
to meet the increasingly challenging and competitive business environment. I therefore wish 
to congratulate both partners on this momentous event.  
The  evolution  of  the  takaful  industry  in  Malaysia  has  been  a  progressive  one  since  its 
inception  more  than  two  decades ago.  We  have  witnessed  significant  progress  amidst  the 
orderly development of the takaful industry, which growth is underpinned by the holistic and 
pragmatic  approach  taken  in  developing  the  Islamic  financial  industry.  The  market  has 
become  more  diverse,  as  there  has  been  tremendous  increase  in  the  number  of  takaful 
operators operating in Malaysia, where from having a single takaful operator in 1984, we now 
have  9  takaful  operators,  4  retakaful  operators  and  one  international  takaful  operator.  In 
Labuan  International  Business  and  Financial  Centre,  there  is  also  strong  presence  of  the 
takaful  industry,  where  its  takaful  market  comprises  14  retakaful  operators.  The  market 
segment  for  takaful  has  also  widened  over  the  years  to  meet  the  financial  needs  of  the 
economy as its appeals and value propositions have transcended beyond religious reasons. 
Product offerings by takaful operators have further broadened to cater to the differentiated 
needs of customers, with family takaful products now dominating the market with a share of 
78  percent  of  net  contribution,  as  compared  to  general  takaful  products  that  dominated  a 
share of 63 percent back in 1984. 
The  takaful  industry  exhibits  high  potential,  as  demonstrated  by  its  robust  expansion  with 
annual  growth  rate  of  total  assets  and  contributions  averaging  between  20  percent  and 
26 percent over the period of 2004 to 2009. Globally, Malaysia also signifies its presence in 
the takaful market, being the second largest takaful market in the world as its total assets of 
US$3.2 billion dominated 26 percent of total global takaful assets in 2009. Whilst sustaining 
the current pace of development, growth prospect remains strong for the takaful sector, in 
view of the large untapped potential, where out of the 53.5 percent market penetration rate 
for  both  takaful  and  insurance,  the  market  penetration  rate  for  takaful  was  merely 
10.9 percent in September 2010.  
The  takaful  industry  indeed  represents  an  important  component  in  the  overall  Islamic 
financial system. Given its role in providing risk protection, the takaful industry offers a suite 
of  financial  products  and  services  that  complement  the  existing  range  available  for 
consumers. In recognising its importance, focus has been given in developing a dynamic and 
vibrant takaful industry within our Islamic financial system. Where the industry is today has 
been  an  outcome  of  an  accumulation  of  efforts  in  instituting  a  comprehensive  Islamic 
financial  landscape  in  Malaysia’s  financial  system.  A  strong  institutional  infrastructure  and 
effective  legal,  regulatory  and  Shariah  framework  are  the  underpinnings  of  our  Islamic 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
the 
takaful 
financial industry. In our pursuit to develop Islamic finance, the recent enhancement to the 
Central Banking Act has accorded formal recognition to the existence of Islamic finance as 
an  arm  of  the  dual  financial  system,  thereby  giving  significance  and  due  prominence  to 
Islamic finance. Moving forward, a number of initiatives are planned to further enhance the 
competitiveness  and  growth  momentum  of 
industry,  emphasising  on 
enhancement  of  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  and  the  Shariah  governance 
framework.  Such  initiatives  are  laid  down  for  industry  players  to  capitalise  on,  to  achieve 
sustainable success and to unleash their potential gains both locally and abroad. In light of 
this,  allow  me  to  share  my  thoughts  on  some  key  focus  areas  and  developments  which 
embed our aspirations on the future direction of the takaful industry.  
Against  a  backdrop  of  growing  opportunities  and  challenges  as  the  business  environment 
becomes  more  intensified  and  challenging,  capacity  and  capability  building  measures  for 
industry  players  to  compete  effectively  and  efficiently  will  continue  to  be  pursued.  These 
complement  our  efforts  to  further  strengthen  the  institutional  infrastructure  of  our  takaful 
industry by  increasing the diversity and strength  of players in the Islamic financial system. 
The  emergence  of  AIA  AFG  Takaful  Bhd.  in  the  Islamic  financial  landscape  is  therefore 
timely  to  further  inject  the  competitive  element  that  would  propel  the  growth  of  the  takaful 
industry. This is particularly so, as part of Malaysia’s recent liberalisation measures aim to 
develop a resilient, diversified and efficient financial sector with financial institutions that are 
in greater state of readiness to compete in a more liberalised and challenging environment. 
The  granting  of  four  new  family  takaful  licenses  by  Bank  Negara  in  2009  is  also 
complementary  of  Bank  Negara’s  initiatives  of  promoting  the  establishment  of  a  core  of 
robust  industry  players  that  could  heighten  competition  and  spur  innovation  in  the  takaful 
industry. The commencement of AIA AFG Takaful Bhd., being the second takaful operator to 
be launched among the new licensees, offers strong value propositions and is envisioned to 
further  enhance  the  development  of  the  family  takaful  industry  in  Malaysia,  namely  in 
penetrating  untapped  areas  of  business  within  the  family  takaful  industry,  such  as 
microtakaful, medical and retirement products. This would certainly enhance the breadth and 
depth of family takaful products available in the market, thereby widening the financial safety 
net of the general population. The establishment of the two additional takaful joint ventures 
that  would  InsyaAllah,  be  in  operations  by  the  end  of  this  year  would  also  reinforce  the 
competitive element and innovation in the takaful industry.  
On the regulatory front, regulations for the takaful industry will continue to focus on ensuring 
effective  risk  management  in  the  product  development  process  and  operations  of  takaful 
operators.  The  takaful  industry  has  been  progressively  on  its  track  to  fully  embark  on  the 
principle and risk-based supervisory approach that has been implemented for the insurance 
sector.  This  is  seen  by  the  recent  issuance  of  the  Guidelines  on  Takaful  Operational 
Framework,  which  establishes  principles  governing  the  operational  processes  of  takaful 
business to ensure that business activities and innovations are within the takaful operator’s 
risk management capacity. With effective discharge of takaful operators’ duties, the interests 
of  takaful  stakeholders  will  be  safeguarded  as  the  guidelines  place  emphasis  on  sound 
management to ensure sustainability of takaful operators.  
A robust Shariah governance framework is another important element to assist the takaful 
industry  in  achieving  full  Shariah  compliance  in  the  development  and  application  of  their 
products and services. Given that Islamic finance has its roots in Shariah, it is an overarching 
requirement for an Islamic financial institution to ensure that its objectives and operations are 
in  accordance  with  Shariah  principles.  Recent  enhancements  to  the  Shariah  governance 
framework  are  aimed  to  assist  Islamic  financial  institutions  in  meeting  this  overarching 
requirement,  through  further  strengthening  of  the  existing  Shariah  governance  process, 
decision  making,  accountability  and 
the  Shariah 
compliance functions include introduction of internal Shariah review and audit requirements, 
supported  by  an  appropriate  risk  management  process  and  research  capability.  The  new 
framework  is  envisaged  to  contribute  towards  evolving  a  more  robust  and  sound  Shariah 
independence.  Reinforcements  of 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
governance framework within Islamic financial institutions, with the establishments of end-to-
end  Shariah  compliant  control  mechanism  that  promotes  greater  Shariah  observance 
throughout  an  organisation.  Effective  implementation  of  the  new  Shariah  governance 
framework  will  further  promote  stakeholders’  confidence  and  enhance  the  integrity  of  the 
Islamic financial industry, and for the takaful industry, by reducing the risk of Shariah non-
compliance,  takaful  products  would  be  at  a  more  competitive  edge  in  comparison  with 
conventional  insurance  products,  as  discerning  customers  would  opt  for  takaful  as  their 
ethical financial solutions.  
In respond to the ever changing business environment, it is imperative for takaful operators 
to enhance their institutional capabilities and operational efficiency with the aim to strengthen 
their  competitive  position.  It  is  also  important  for  the  takaful  business,  like  other  financial 
services  providers,  to  select  an  efficient  and  cost-effective  distribution  channel  that  is 
strategically aligned to meet the participants’ reasonable expectation. Strategic alliance in the 
bancatakaful  arrangement  has  become  an  important  delivery  channel  with  significant 
improvements  in  the  takaful  contributions  during  the  past  years,  evident  by  its  positive 
increasing trend for general takaful and by being the leading distribution channel for family 
takaful, accounting for 50.3 percent of contributions in September 2010.  
The  bancatakaful  arrangement  between  Alliance  Bank  Malaysia  Berhad  and  American 
International Assurance Bhd. indeed offers attractive value proposition for both partners. It is 
our aspiration to see AIA AFG Takaful Bhd. emerge as an effective and progressive takaful 
operator with strong presence in the domestic financial landscape and be among the anchor 
players to expand takaful business at the global front. I am confident that AIA AFG Takaful 
Bhd. should be able to strategise itself by optimising and leveraging on its shareholders’ wide 
customer  base  and  network,  strength,  expertise,  experience  and  infrastructure  in  offering 
diversified  products  of  high  quality  and  enhanced  customer  service.  Given  the  strong 
international network and experience of its foreign insurance partner, AIA AFG Takaful Bhd. 
is  also  certainly  well  positioned  to  establish  its  global  Takaful  centre  of  excellence  for  the 
region  in  Malaysia,  therefore  reinforcing  Malaysia’s  position  as  an  international  Islamic 
financial hub. On this note, I wish AIA AFG Takaful Bhd. every success in its endeavours and 
look forward to its contribution towards further development of the Islamic financial services 
industry in Malaysia. 
Dengan 
pelancaran AIA AFG Takaful Bhd. 
Terima kasih. 
lafaz  Bismillahir  Rahmanir  Rahim,  saya  dengan  sukacitanya  merasmikan 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
