Lars Nyberg: Will cash replace cards? 
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  Nyberg,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the  Cards  and 
Cash Payments Forum, Stockholm, 3 May 2011. 
 I would like to thank Björn Segendorff for his contributions to this speech. 
Since  the  latter  half  of  the  19th  century,  the  theory  of  evolution  has  gained  general 
acceptance. It is considered to be self-evident that better-adapted species will outcompete 
those  that  are  less-well  adapted.  Environmental  changes  may  even  lead  to  some  species 
becoming extinct. There are no longer any sabre-toothed tigers or mammoths because the 
Ice Age is over. A new species may also be superior to another species in a crucial way. This 
is  why  we  no  longer  see  Neanderthals  walking  the  streets.  Nevertheless,  some  other 
amazingly old species are still with us. Crocodiles have been around for 85 million years and 
the coelacanth, if I am correctly informed, can be traced back 400 million years! 
An evolutionary process, although of a slightly different kind, is now also taking place on the 
payment  market.  Rapid  technological  development  is  changing  the  world  around  us.  New 
payment methods are arising. Bank cards and credit cards have become a natural part of our 
everyday lives, as has Internet banking. In Sweden, cheques have been outcompeted and 
are hardly used at all. The number of paper-based giro payments is falling rapidly and it also 
appears that the use of cash is declining. The value of the banknotes and coins in circulation 
has fallen from 9.6% of GDP in 1950 to 2.9% in 2010. So, the question is: Should cash be 
compared with the extinct Neanderthals or the surviving Crocodiles? 
But why is this of interest to the Riksbank? Well, a first obvious answer is because it is the 
Riksbank  that  issues  banknotes  and  coins.  Another,  and  more  complicated,  answer  is 
because one of the tasks of the Riksbank is to promote a safe and efficient payment system. 
This may sound a little high-flown, but it means, among other things, that we should promote 
the development of safe and efficient payments. This is why  we have a natural interest in 
cards and cash. Hence, we are interested in the evolution of the market for payments, and 
that is why I am standing before you today. 
What I intend to talk about today is why I believe that cash will continue to play an important 
role in our payment system for the foreseeable future (even though not 85 million years) and 
why cards and other technological developments will not be able to fully take the place of 
cash. Ironically, part of the explanation for this lies in the strong position that debit and credit 
cards hold on the Swedish market. As usual I would like to make clear that my speech is an 
expression of my own views and that it may not necessarily be shared by my colleagues in 
the Board of the Riksbank. 
Cards and cash in Sweden 
Cards  compete  with  cash  when  we  pay  directly  at  the  point  of  sale,  for  example  in 
supermarkets, petrol stations, restaurants or at cinemas. It is the customers who choose how 
they want to pay, and as we no longer use cheques in Sweden the choice is between cards 
and cash. A high level of card usage thus tends to go hand in hand with a low level of cash 
usage, and vice versa. 
In  Sweden,  the  use  of  cards  has  increased  rapidly  in  recent  years.  In  2009,  the  average 
Swede  made  182  card  payments  but  less  than  30  cash  withdrawals.  This  means  that  the 
value  of  the  payments  made  by  card  has  increased  fivefold,  and  that  the  number  of  card 
payments has increased more than sevenfold, over the last 10 years. Unfortunately, there 
are no corresponding statistics for cash payments, but if we assume that the cash withdrawn 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
from ATMs is used to make purchases then the value of all the card payments is three times 
higher than the value of all the over-the-counter cash payments. Another way of measuring 
cash  usage  is  to  compare  the  value  of  the  banknotes  and  coins  in  circulation,  which  is 
usually referred to as MO, with GDP. If we do this we can see that between 2001 and 2010, 
MO fell from 3.8 per cent to 2.9 per cent of GDP. Approximately two-thirds of the payments in 
the retail sector are made using cards, with some reservation for the fact that it is difficult to 
measure the number of cash payments in the economy exactly.  
The situation in Denmark and Finland is roughly the same as in Sweden. In Sweden’s case 
this  means  that  we  have  really  caught  up  since  the  beginning  of  the  millennium  when  we 
used  cards  only  half  as  much  as  our  Nordic  neighbours.  In  a  broader  international 
perspective, we use cards to a relatively high extent in Sweden. This particular combination 
of low cash usage and high card usage is unique to a limited number of countries, including 
the Nordic countries and Canada.1 Some countries, for example the United States, have high 
levels of both card usage and cash usage, but we must also bear in mind that a proportion of 
the United States’ banknotes and coins is in circulation outside the country. This applies to 
the euro area too, but the level of card usage is much lower there. 
Why is cash used? 
Why do people choose to pay in cash? There are several reasons. First, paying in cash is 
quick  and  easy  for  small  sums.  Handing  over  the  exact  sum  in  cash  to  buy  an  evening 
newspaper, for example, may be quicker than using a card. In a survey commissioned by the 
Riksbank in the autumn, 59 per cent of the respondents said that they preferred to pay in 
cash for sums below SEK 100. For sums between SEK 100 and SEK 500, 22 per cent said 
that  they  prefer  cash.  Second,  it  appears  that  cash  imparts  a  sense  of  security  and  our 
survey  showed  that  65  per  cent  felt  very  secure  about  using  cash  as compared  to  35  per 
cent for cards. The term security may mean many different things, but the feeling of having 
the entire transaction under control is central. A card transaction may feel less concrete and 
be harder to understand. It may also be difficult to estimate the risk of fraud, for example as a 
result of skimming. We know that older people are much more prone to use cash and less 
prone  to  use  cards  than  younger  people.  The  difference  is  also  substantial.  Third, 
appropriate  substitutes  for  cash  are  not  always  available.  Although  cards  are  accepted 
almost everywhere, there are few alternatives when it comes to payments between private 
individuals, for example on second-hand markets on the Internet. Using your Internet bank in 
the evening to make a transfer between two bank accounts in order to pay for a sofa is not 
always a smooth and easy alternative to cash. It was in such cases that cheques performed 
an  important  function.  Fourth,  cash  is  one  way  of  storing  a  value  and  it  is  often  wise  to 
maintain a certain liquidity reserve in the form of cash.  
However, despite everything I have said about the use of cash in Sweden and internationally, 
there is a lot that we do not know or cannot explain. The Riksbank conducted a study in 2007 
with  the  aim  of  investigating  how  large  a  proportion  of  the  cash  in  circulation  could  be 
explained  on  the  basis  of  what  we  know  about  cash  usage.2  The  study  was  based  on 
available  statistics  on  retail  sales,  secondary  markets,  liquidity  buffers,  lost  or  destroyed 
banknotes and coins and a number of other factors. Despite this we were unable to explain 
more than around 40 per cent of the value of the banknotes and coins in circulation. Although 
the study did not reach beyond 2004, I dare to claim that we still cannot explain what a large 
proportion of the cash is used for. Part of the explanation may be that the public has more 
                                                 
1   This comparison  is based  on cash  usage  measured  as the value  of the banknotes  and coins in circulation 
(MO) in relation to GDP and on the number of card payments per person and year. 
2   Guibourg, Gabriela and Björn Segendorff (2007). The Use of Cash and the Size of the Shadow Economy in 
Sweden. Sveriges Riksbank Working Paper Series, No. 204. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
cash at home, as a buffer, than we believe. Unfortunately, it is difficult to get good statistics 
on things like this as people may feel it is risky and sensitive to say how much cash they 
have at home. Another explanation is that cash is used in the shadow economy, for example 
for various household services such as repairs and cleaning.  
There are thus a number of good reasons that explain why we use cash and why we will 
continue to do so for some time to come. For this reason alone there is a lower limit below 
which cash usage cannot fall. Where exactly this limit lies and how quickly we may reach it 
will  largely  depend  on  what  other  payment  services  are  developed.  For  payments  from 
private  individuals  to  companies  there  are  a  number  of  competing  services  such  as  card 
payments, mobile payments, Internet transfers and so on. However, for payments between 
private  individuals  there  are  far  fewer  alternatives.  Despite  the  rapid  rate  of  technological 
development, no satisfactory replacement for cheques has emerged in this context. 
What is required to make new payment services successful? 
There  are  a  number  of  fundamental  characteristics  of  the  payment  system  that  affect  the 
chances  of  successfully  launching  new  substitutes  for  cash  and  other  existing  payment 
services.  Some  of  these  characteristics  raise  barriers  to  innovation  and  may  thus  help  to 
protect the already established payment services. If we assume that, in one way or another, 
new payment services will be based on payment by electronic means between accounts in 
one  or  several  custodial  institutions,  then  there  at  least  three  problems  that  a  payment 
service must overcome in order to succeed.  
First, launching a new payment system is in itself costly. On the other hand, it is in general 
not much more expensive to produce a large number of payments than a small number of 
payments due to the benefits provided by economies of scale. However, it takes some time 
before  a  new  system  can  reap  these  benefits.  The  costs  for  building,  manning  and 
maintaining such a technical system are rather high and it is only when the system is in place 
that costs begin to fall. Then the cost of processing an additional payment is almost zero. 
The average cost of making a payment thus falls as the number of payments increases. The 
price per transaction that the producer can charge without running at a loss is therefore low. 
Already established payment services that handle large volumes of payments therefore have 
a  cost  advantage.  The  larger  the  volume  the  established  service  has,  the  greater  is  its 
advantage. The situation for a new service is exactly the opposite. At least initially, a new 
service will have a small number of payments to distribute the fixed costs between. In order 
not  to  price  itself  out  of  the  market,  the  new  service  will  have  to  run  at  a  loss  until  it  has 
achieved a sufficiently high volume. A new service thus has a significant cost disadvantage 
compared with an established service.  
Second,  a  new  system  has  to  compete  against  the  so-called  network  effects.  The  classic 
example of a network effect is telephony. Being the first person to have a telephone offers no 
advantages.  If  two  people  have  telephones  they  can  at  least  call each  other,  which  has  a 
value. For every new telephone owner that is linked to the telephone network the benefit of 
having a telephone to those who are already connected increases as the number of people 
that  can  be  reached  has  now  increased.  This  reasoning  about  telephony  can  easily  be 
applied  to  payment  services  where  everyone  wants  to  be  able  to  send  payments  to  and 
receive  payment  from  everyone  else,  for  example  a  service  for  payments  between  private 
individuals (P2P).  
The reasoning becomes more complicated when we talk about payments from consumers to 
companies (P2B). Payment service markets with two distinct sets of customers for payment 
services and payment flows in only one direction are usually called two-sided markets. The 
market  for  point-of-sale  payments  (POS)  is  one  such  two-sided  market.  The  payments  on 
this market go from the private customer to the company and not the other way. The card 
market is only attractive to merchants if there are a sufficiently large number of consumers 
with cards. Similarly, it is only attractive for consumers to have cards if it is possible to use 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
them in a sufficiently large number of shops. A new payment service on a two-sided market 
must  solve  this  “chicken  and  egg”  problem,  that  is  ensure  that  sufficient  numbers  of 
consumers  and  merchants  start  using  the  service.  Launching  a  product  that  is  not 
fundamentally based on existing payment services thus entails major problems. The banks 
managed  to  solve  this  problem  for  card  payments,  but  just  consider  how  long  it  took  to 
achieve the volumes that we see today. Consider also the fact that the banks did not manage 
to solve this problem for an e-money product called Cash Card that was finally phased out a 
number of years ago. 
A natural consequence of network effects is that those who are already connected to a well-
developed  network,  for  example  for  card  payments,  will  think  carefully  about  whether  it  is 
worth connecting to a new network that is currently much smaller but might in the future be 
as  large  or  larger  than  the  existing  network.  There  is  a  risk  of  not  being  able  to  reach  as 
many  payers  and  payees  in  the  new  network.  It  may  thus  be  better  for  consumers  or 
merchants to wait and perhaps join the network later when a critical mass of users has been 
achieved. Launching a service that is not based on an established network is therefore much 
more difficult and more costly than adding new services to an established network. 
Third, it is easier and less costly for established payment mediators to launch new products 
as they have the advantage of having already attracted a circle of customers that buy their 
services. These customers can easily be reached through the relationship that is already in 
place. The customers also already have an account with the mediator, usually a bank, which 
can be used as the basis for new payment services.  
The established players also have an advantage in that their relationship with the customers 
gives rise to a certain lock-in effect, that is changing from one service supplier to another, for 
example from one bank to another, may entail certain costs for the customer. It may be the 
case  that  the  local  branch  of  the  new  bank  is further  from  the  customer’s  home,  the  legal 
terms and conditions governing the payment services may be different, the customer service 
centre  may  be  slower,  the  personnel  may  be  less  friendly  and  so  on.  Getting  private 
individuals  to  change  their  bank  has  proved  to  be  much  more  difficult  than  expected.  The 
new alternative service must be better than the existing payment service by a broad margin 
in order to make changing from one service provider to another an attractive prospect. This 
affects what innovators will be able to charge for their new services, and thus reduces their 
incentives to launch such services.  
However,  despite  such  difficulties,  there  are  examples  of  very  successful  launches  of 
innovative payment methods. One such example is the introduction of M-PESA in Kenya in 
2007. M-PESA is a mobile payment service based on SMS and was launched by the leading 
mobile operator, Safaricom. One of the points here is that a large part of the population had 
mobile phones but not bank accounts. The mobile operator thus had a large, well-established 
circle  of  customers  and  thus  an  advantage.  By  first  launching  M-PESA  as  a  service  for 
payments between private individuals, the company was able to focus on getting one group 
of customers to connect to the service. This made it possible to exploit the existing network 
effects immediately and completely. Once the private customers were connected and were 
using the service, the time was ripe to also offer it to merchants. In this way the company got 
around  “the  chicken  and  egg”  problem.  Finally,  the  company  already  had  access  to  the 
required  IT  platforms  and  communications  equipment  as  part  of  its  standard  business 
operations. This made it possible to avoid high investment costs and to exploit advantages of 
scale  by  producing  payment  services  using  the  existing  infrastructure.  Nor  was  there  any 
competition  from  any  other  product.  A  well-developed  business  concept  thus  made  it 
possible to overcome all the barriers I mentioned earlier.  
Cash usage in the future 
But  what  does  all  this  mean  to  the  use  of  cards  and  cash  in  the  future?  Will  cards  be 
outcompeted by new products and will cash gradually disappear entirely? I don’t think so. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Assume that someone wants to launch a new payment service for everyday payments and 
that this service is not based on any existing payment service. If it is to be anything more 
than a niche product it will have to compete with cards. However, high initial costs combined 
with  the  strong  position  of  cards  in  terms  of  low  costs,  extensive  networks  and  a  reliable 
circle of customers at the banks who are used to handling cards present strong barriers to 
such genuinely new payment services. Remember that M-PESA’s success is based on the 
fact that only a small part of the population had bank accounts and that cards were unusual. 
The situation in Sweden is entirely different and as far as Sweden is concerned I do not think 
that the threat to cash (or cards) comes from a genuinely new product. 
One alternative to building an entirely new payment service is to further develop an existing 
service.  This  could  relate  to  a  new  way  of  initiating  card  payments,  for  example  by  using 
mobile phones. In this way the new service would benefit from the advantages of scale and 
network effects provided by the existing service. The initial investment would also be lower 
as  the  infrastructure  is  already  in  place.  The  barriers  to  such  payment  services  are  lower 
than  for  genuinely  new  payment  services  and  it  is  probable  that  development  of  this  type 
would  primarily  be  pursued  by  the  existing  players  on  the  payment  market,  possibly  in 
cooperation  with  an  external  party  such  as  a  mobile  operator.  Swedbank  and  Payair  are 
currently  running  a  pilot  project  in  Uppsala  on  the  initiation  of  card  payments  by  mobile 
phone.  Such  solutions  may  reduce  card  usage  in  the  retail  sector  if  they  are  perceived  to 
safe and easy to use. 
The role played by cash in payments from customers to companies is declining steadily, but 
the position of cash as a means of payment between private individuals is still strong. Unless 
cash  is  superseded  in  this  area  of  usage,  it  will  continue  to  play  an  important  role  in  our 
payment  system.  I  therefore  believe  that  the  major  challenge  to  cash  will  come  if  a  new 
payment  service  appears  that  could  be  used  to  make  quick  and  safe  payments  between 
private individuals. There are interesting projects and products that may threaten cash in this 
respect. Sweden is well to the fore in this field and the Swedish banks are working on an 
interesting mobile phone-based service for person-to-person payments in real time.3 Square 
is  another  interesting  product,  as  yet  only  available  in  the  United  States,  that  allows  card 
payments  to  be  made  between  private  individuals  by  connecting  a  small  card  reader  to  a 
mobile phone.4  
Whatever path technological development takes, it will probably mean that the use of cash 
continues  to  decline.  We  will  have  more  payment  services  to  choose  between  and 
competition  will  increase.  How  far  the  use  of  cash  is  pushed  back  will  depend  on  what 
alternative payment services are established. The same barriers that protect cards against 
competing products will also protect cash to a certain extent. But, above all, cash is simple 
and  easy  to  use  as  a  means  of  payment,  especially  for  small  transactions.  This  is 
appreciated  by  the  consumers  and  it  has  proven  to  be  quite  difficult  to  change  consumer 
habits. It will be exciting to follow developments. Evolution will follow its inexorable course. 
However, cash will survive, like the crocodile, even though it may be forced to see its habitat 
gradually cut back. 
                                                 
3   Press release from the Swedish Bankers’ Association, 24 March 2010. 
4   Squareup.com 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
