Mario Draghi: Economic growth outlook, regulatory measures and the 
situation of Italian banks 
Speech  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Italy  and  Chairman  of  the  Financial 
Stability  Board,  at  the  17th  Associazione  Italiana  Analisti  Finanziari–Associazione  Italiana 
Operatori  Mercati  dei  Capitali  (The  Financial  Market  Association  of  Italy)  (AIAF-ASSIOM 
FOREX) Congress, Verona, 26 February 2011. 
 The economy 
The world economic recovery is continuing, albeit amidst many uncertainties. Global output 
grew  by  5  per  cent  on  average  in  2010;  the  previous  year  it  had  fallen  by  almost  one 
percentage  point.  It  is  commonly  believed  that  the  expansion  will  continue  at  almost  the 
same pace as last year. 
In the United States, GDP growth accelerated to almost 3 per cent at the end of 2010; the 
increase  in  consumption  became  more  robust.  Growth  at  similar  rates  is  expected  for  the 
current year. For the emerging economies, the growth estimate is on the order of an average 
of 7 per cent this year and next. 
In the euro area the German economy is providing the strongest impetus for growth, thanks 
to sharp increases in exports and investment in machinery and equipment. 
In Italy growth is running at around 1 per cent. The expansion of output is concentrated at 
exporters, particularly large firms, with outlets in the emerging economies. Domestic demand 
remains weak, especially consumption, which is affected more severely than in other euro-
area  economies  by  uncertain  employment  prospects  and  the  protracted  stagnation  of 
households’ real incomes. 
The improvement in the world macroeconomic situation and the overcoming of the financial 
disorder  engendered  by  the  crisis  are  nevertheless  accompanied  by  old  and  new 
weaknesses. Sharply divergent growth rates can easily accentuate the volatility of exchange 
rates and interest rates, jeopardizing the recovery.  
The interconnections between economies make the system vulnerable even to local shocks. 
The human dimension and the still uncertain outcome of the popular uprising in Libya are of 
concern  to  the  international  community.  The  immediate  impact  of  potential  problems  for 
energy supplies from northern Africa may be mitigated by the abundant unused capacity of 
the  other  producer  countries,  but  the  dramatic  events  we  are  witnessing  may  undermine 
investment  in  the  oil  industry  in  the  area  and  raise  energy  prices,  with  repercussions  for 
world  growth.  For  the  Italian  economy,  other  things  being  equal,  a  20  per  cent  rise  in  oil 
prices would shave half a percentage point off growth over three years. 
Economic policies 
Economic policies have less and less room for manoeuvre. 
In  the  last  three  years  the  crisis  has  increased  the  government  budget  deficit  for  the 
advanced countries as a group by over 6 percentage points of GDP and the public debt by 
almost  25  points  to  almost  100  per  cent  of  GDP.  In  the  United  States  and  Japan  fiscal 
consolidation can hardly be put off any longer: the OECD considers that just stabilizing the 
debt ratio of these two countries within the next fifteen years would require a correction of the 
primary  budget  balance  on  the  order  of  8–9  percentage  points  of  GDP.  In  Europe  we  are 
already working to reduce the imbalances in the public finances. The strains that affected the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
sovereign  debt  of  some  of  the  euro-area  countries  have  focused  attention  on  the  risks  of 
prolonged imbalances.  
The euro area’s budget deficit is expected to improve sharply this year from 6.3 to 4.6 per 
cent  of  GDP  according  to  the  European  Commission’s  latest  estimates.  The  debt  ratio  is 
likely to rise further, but much more slowly than in the last two years.  
In Italy the ratio of public debt to GDP, close to 120 per cent, should begin to decline next 
year, when the Government intends to bring the deficit down to below 3 per cent of GDP. 
In the ten years preceding the crisis, current expenditure, net of interest on the public debt, 
grew by 4 per cent per year in nominal terms, far outpacing GDP. Last September’s Public 
Finance Decision forecasts that its increase will be limited to 1 per cent per year in 2011–12. 
This trend must continue beyond 2012 and the composition of primary expenditure must be 
geared to growth. There is no other way to reduce the deficit, since the burden of taxes and 
social  security  contributions  is  already  3  points  above  the  euro-area  average.  Additional 
revenue that comes in as a result of the reduction of tax evasion should be used to ease the 
burden on the taxpayers who already pay what is due. It may also be necessary to offset at 
the  central  government  level  any  increases  in  decentralized  taxation  caused  by  fiscal 
federalism.  
The financial aid that Greece and Ireland received last year from the European Union and 
the  IMF  was  conditional  on  their  enacting  strict  fiscal  consolidation  plans  and  incisive 
economic  and  institutional  reforms.  A  major  contribution  to  preventing  new  sovereign  debt 
crises should come from the reform of European governance now under discussion, which 
aims to strengthen multilateral surveillance of national economic policies. It is important that 
semi-automatic rules come into play when deviations from the agreed parameters occur, as 
this will drastically reduce the chance of their being evaded. Rescue funds should be used 
only in emergencies and, as IMF experience suggests, should be tied to rigorous adjustment 
programmes. 
Monetary policy faces different situations in different parts of the world.  
In  the  emerging  countries,  good  growth  prospects  and  high  yields  are  attracting  abundant 
inflows of private capital from abroad. In 2010 these amounted to around $900 billion, equal 
to almost 5 per cent of these countries’ GDP. At a time when demand is already expanding 
rapidly  and  the  financial  system  is  not  yet  well  developed,  such  inflows  can  cause  high 
inflation and financial bubbles. The inflation rates already recorded in these countries – about 
6 per cent on average and well over 4 per cent in China – are partly due to the higher cost of 
food and energy products, although the acceleration in domestic demand also plays a part, 
since  it  is  behind  the  jump  in  international  commodity  prices.  These  increases,  which  are 
particularly  hard  on  the  poorest,  could  be  countered  by  currency  appreciation,  which  is 
necessary in any event in order to reduce global payments imbalances. In the absence of 
such appreciation, monetary policies in these countries are becoming more restrictive.  
In the advanced economies inflation is dampened for the time being by the ample margins of 
spare capacity. In the United States, the Federal Reserve recently confirmed its plan of last 
November to increase liquidity by purchasing Treasury paper.  
In the euro area, consumer price inflation, driven up by the sharp rises in commodity prices, 
in  January  widely  overshot  the  definition  of  price  stability  fixed  by  the  ECB  Governing 
Council.  Core  inflation  remains  low,  given  the  moderate  growth  in  domestic  costs  and  a 
cyclical recovery proceeding without any spurts. Inflation expectations over the medium term 
remain well-anchored. 
However, the appearance of inflationary tensions does require that we carefully assess the 
timing  and  methods  for  restoring  normal  monetary  conditions  and  interest  rates.  Monetary 
policy  must  prevent  a  deterioration  of  expectations,  in  order  to  keep  the  stimulus  of 
international prices from passing through to domestic prices and wages in the longer-term. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Real short-term interest rates that are markedly negative, as they have been over the past 
two  years,  have  not  improved  the  growth  prospects  of  the  less  dynamic  economies.  As 
economic  policies  reach  the  end  of  their  expansionary  phase,  this  will  not  necessarily 
endanger growth. In the weakest countries, in particular, the cost of borrowing could benefit 
from the narrowing of spreads on government securities following the adjustment of budget 
policies and from the containment of risk premiums as inflation expectations are kept under 
control. 
International financial rules and controls 
Considerable progress was made last year in building a more robust international financial 
system, better able to withstand crises. 
The Basel III regulatory framework was drawn up, with new capital and liquidity requirements 
and limits to financial leverage. Its gradual phasing in will prevent it from impeding economic 
recovery.  The  over-the-counter  derivatives  markets  will  have  a  sounder  and  more 
transparent basis, with greater standardization of transactions, the requirement to use central 
counterparties  for  standardized  contracts,  and  full  and  prompt  access  to  data  for  the 
authorities. We have identified many of the perverse incentives that encouraged excessive 
risk-taking – in banks’ executive compensation systems, in the role of rating agencies and in 
the accounting rules – and begun to rectify them.  
But much still remains to be done. 
The  activity  of  the  Financial  Stability  Board  is  now  concentrating,  in  accordance  with  the 
mandate  given  by  the  Seoul  Summit  of  the  G20,  on  the  moral  hazard  problem  posed  by 
systemically important financial institutions (SIFIs), those that in the latest crisis and earlier 
ones were considered too large, or too complex and interconnected, to be allowed to fail and 
that have often received injections of public capital. Knowing that they cannot fail encourages 
them to take greater risks, while the markets finance them at lower interest rates than they 
apply to intermediaries exposed to the risk of failure.  
The  ability  to  wind  up  these  institutions  without  undermining  the  markets  or  using  public 
money,  the  certainty  that  they  can  absorb  larger  losses  than  those  that  less  important 
intermediaries  can  bear,  and  more  extensive  and  penetrating  supervision;  these  are  the 
three pillars on which the FSB’s recommendations will be based. Within the year the Board 
will publish the essential features of national rules for the winding up of SIFIs, a framework 
for the restructuring and winding up plans that every SIFI must prepare, and a preliminary 
analysis of the questions involved in the international coordination of laws on this matter. It 
will then be up to governments and parliaments.  
By the middle of this year we plan to have established the parameters for identifying global 
SIFIs, to which to start applying more rigorous prudential rules. The criteria will include not 
only  the  size  of  intermediaries  but  also  the  extent  to  which  they  are  interconnected  with 
others  and  their  importance  in  specific  segments  of  the  financial  market.  The  necessary 
discretion to be left to national authorities in applying the criteria will have to be balanced by 
peer reviews starting at the end of 2012.  
SIFIs’ ability to absorb losses needs to be improved in order to minimize the probability and 
systemic impact of a crisis; the measures to this end include capital requirements additional 
to those laid down by Basel III. There are various possible techniques: higher ordinary capital 
ratios, the participation of some creditors in losses (bail-in) and debt instruments that convert 
into common equity on the occurrence of specific events (contingent capital). 
Another field for action by the FSB concerns the “shadow banking system”. We are preparing 
a  map  of  the  non-bank activities and  intermediaries  that,  insofar  as  they  create  credit  and 
transform  maturities,  need  rules  and  supervision  similar  to  those  of  the  regulated  banking 
system. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
The  new  European  supervisory  bodies  are  now  operational.  The  first  task,  in  which  the 
European  Banking  Authority  will  be  primarily  engaged,  is  to  carry  out  stress  tests  on  the 
leading banks. The tests will have to satisfy four requirements: very severe scenarios; strict 
assessment  of  the  results  using  a  common  methodology  and  backed  by  thorough  peer 
review;  complete  transparency;  and  prompt  identification  of  the  remedial  measures.  The 
requirements are essential for the credibility of the exercise and the markets’ assessment of 
the European banking system. 
Harmonization of the prudential rules is the other urgent object to achieve. A set of common 
rules – the single rulebook – will help to prevent less strict supervisory rules and practices in 
one  country  from  jeopardizing  the  stability  of  the  European  financial  system,  having 
repercussions on the economies of other countries and distorting competition. A first test will 
be  the  implementation  in  Europe  of  the  Basel  III  rules.  All  the  countries  of  Europe  have 
pledged to transpose those rules into law, in keeping with rigorous principles, already present 
in our model of supervision, whose validity was confirmed in the course of the crisis. 
The  European  Systemic  Risk  Board,  charged  with  signalling  areas  of  risk  and  making 
recommendations, will need to be able to accompany its analyses with effective intervention 
measures.  It  will  avail  itself  of  systemic  stability  risk  assessments  shared  with  the  micro-
prudential supervisory authorities. 
Italian banks and the Bank of Italy’s supervisory action 
The  money  and  financial  markets  are  now  functioning  better,  but  the  return  to  complete 
normality  will  take  time.  Banks,  particularly  European  banks,  are  having  difficulty  raising 
funds in the market. Their balance-sheet assets are exposed to significant risks stemming 
from the after-effects of the recession and the strains in the sovereign debt markets, which 
give rise to liquidity risk and the possibility of capital losses. 
With  the  financial  crisis,  the  global  environment  in  which  Italian  banks  operate  has  been 
altered.  Competition  for  funding,  including  competition  with  sovereign  borrowers,  has 
become  fiercer.  The  structural  contraction  in  the  volume  of  assets  in  some  capital  market 
segments has brought a permanent decline in income.  
In  the  closing  months  of  2010  the  main  Italian  banking  groups’  net  liquidity  position  one 
month  ahead  remained  positive,  on  average,  but  shrank.  In  January,  however,  they  made 
bond  issues  worth  some  €10  billion,  or  about  one  fifth  of  the  wholesale  funds  maturing  in 
2011. Short-term funding capacity also showed improvement, although the volume of these 
placements remains smaller and the duration shorter than before the sovereign debt crisis. 
Maintaining adequate reserves of liquidity is vital to safeguarding stability and continuing to 
provide finance to the real economy, especially while the market is still vulnerable to sudden 
crises of confidence. Prudence must not be sacrificed to profitability. 
In 2008, in the thick of the financial crisis, the fall in the earnings of Italian banks due to write-
downs of securities, trading losses and reduced fee income was quite modest compared with 
the severe losses suffered by banks elsewhere. But since 2009 the situation has changed. 
Italian  banks’  profits  are  weighed  down  by  a  contraction  in  net  interest  income  and  a 
deterioration in loan quality, the consequence of the severe economic recession. 
In the first nine months of last year the earnings of the five largest groups declined by 8 per 
cent compared with the corresponding period of 2009. Return on equity fell below 4 per cent 
on an annual basis. In two years net interest income has fallen from 2.0 to 0.9 per cent of 
total assets, owing to the slowdown in lending and the decrease in the mark-down on sight 
deposits caused by the low level of interest rates. Value adjustments to loans, though lower 
than  their  2009  peak,  continue  to  absorb  more  than  half  of  operating  profit.  The  average 
balance-sheet  cover  ratio  for  impaired  loan  assets  remains  below  its  long-run  level.  The 
recovery in margins is also slowed by the heightened competition for retail funds. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
In recent months a country-risk effect has been added. Today Italian banks, even the most 
efficient, are penalized in fund-raising on the wholesale markets. They pay about 70 basis 
points more than their German counterparts. 
The low profitability of Italian banks reflects not only the sluggishness of the Italian economic 
recovery  but  also  their  prevalent  business  model:  concentration  on  lending  to  retail 
customers  (households  and  small  businesses);  retail  fund-raising;  low  leverage;  limited 
securities  trading  on  own  account;  and  less  maturity  transformation  than  banks  in  other 
countries, owing in part to the predominance of variable-rate loans. This model means our 
banks are less exposed to financial market volatility and protected them during the crisis. The 
other side of the coin is that it makes them heavily dependent on net interest income and 
macroeconomic conditions. It makes their operating costs more rigid. 
Resolute  action  is  needed  to  lower  the  ratio  of  costs  to  total  income.  In  recent  years  the 
largest Italian banks have enhanced their operating efficiency, bringing the cost/income ratio 
closer to that of their European competitors: 62 per cent, against an average of 58 per cent 
for all EU banks in the first half of 2010. Italian banks must improve further, and decisively, 
by rationalizing sales networks, extending and refining the use of technology, simplifying the 
structure  of  production,  selling  other  non-strategic  assets,  and  adapting  compensation 
policies at all levels. 
Curbing costs will permit the recovery in profits needed for the capital strengthening that the 
markets and the new capital rules demand. Given the difficulty of raising fresh equity capital, 
it is essential to generate sufficient resources internally.  
The  capital  ratios  of  the  top  five  Italian  banking  groups  are  rising  overall.  At  the  end  of 
September the tier 1 ratio stood at 9.0 per cent, while core tier 1 capital came to 7.9 per cent 
of risk assets, up from just 5.7 per cent at the end of 2007.  
On  average  Italy’s  smaller  banks  already  have  levels  of  capitalization  in  line  with  the  new 
regulatory minimums set by Basel III. These banks supply more than half the credit needs of 
the country’s small and medium-sized enterprises. For the major banks, which use internal 
rating  models,  the  Basel  II  rules  for  containing  the  capital  charges  for  loans  to  smaller 
companies stand confirmed. 
This year we shall again assess the resilience of Italian intermediaries in the face of highly 
adverse conditions, as part of the new series of stress tests of the European banking system. 
Thanks to the experience gained to date, the Bank of Italy and intermediaries will be able to 
interact fruitfully for the success of this new exercise.  
For banks to be prepared when the new capital adequacy rules are fully phased in, capital 
strengthening must proceed, above all through retained earnings. We expect that as in 2009 
a  large  part  of  last  year’s  profits  will  be  allocated  to  increasing  the  banks’  capital. 
Nevertheless,  recourse  to  the  capital  market  would  also  appear  unavoidable  as  soon  as 
conditions permit. 
Another major structural change in Italian banks’ business environment involves consumer 
protection, which is considerably stronger today than in the past. In recent years the Bank of 
Italy  has  stepped  up  its  work  to  improve  banks’  customer  relations.  We  have  acted  on 
several  fronts:  new  rules,  intensified  controls,  new  consumer  protection  instruments.  We 
have always favoured the elimination of the distortions that put the Italian banking industry at 
a disadvantage vis-à-vis the competition. The Government’s recent initiatives concerning the 
tax treatment of banks go in this direction and respond to long-standing requests of ours. But 
we  are  just  as  strongly  convinced  that  the  Italian  model  of  banking,  given  the  nature  of 
banking customers, has a greater need than others for customer relations to be based on 
transparency. Any retreat on this front will encounter the Bank of Italy’s firm opposition.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Growth 
The  essential  objective  remains  growth  –  growth  that  is  equitable  and  pays  heed  to  the 
quality  of  life.  Without  growth,  financial  stability  cannot  be  consolidated  in  the  world,  in 
Europe, or in our country. 
The Monetary Union can overcome the sovereign debt crisis of some of its members if it is 
able  to  reach  agreement  not  only  on  the  ways  to  ensure  fiscal  discipline  but  also  on  the 
structural reforms needed to impart enduring impetus to growth and on the forms of mutual 
control over their implementation. 
In Italy, growth has been languishing for fifteen years now. We have dwelt on the underlying 
causes and the contours of reform action in various venues, on the basis of the analyses that 
we have conducted in recent years. Let me recall some of them.  
The  growth  of  the  whole  economy  would  benefit  from  a  legislative  overhaul  keyed, 
pragmatically,  to  enhancing  the  system’s  efficiency.  If  legislation  is  not  transparent,  well-
designed  and  stable,  if  the  administrative  burdens  are  disproportionate  to  the  activities 
regulated,  in  the  long  run  the  economy  will  decline.  Despite  the  progress  made,  Italy  still 
stands  out  in  all  the  international  rankings  for  the  burdensomeness  of  its  bureaucratic 
obligations, especially those incumbent on firms.  
The educational system is decisive. The achievement gap  between our students and their 
peers  in  other  countries  has  narrowed  but  remains  wide,  and  it  is  particularly  large  in  the 
South. The school system must reward academic merit and diligence. It must guarantee a 
satisfactory  level  of  education  to  all  students,  irrespective  of  their  social  background  and 
geographical origin. Our university system, despite some notable exceptions, is still far from 
the  standards  of  quality  prevailing  in  most  of  the  advanced  countries.  Our  research 
institutions are unable to attract talented scholars, technicians and managers, Italian and not, 
in sufficient numbers. Recognition of merit is one of the central principles of the reform of the 
university system just approved. This is a first step in the right direction. 
For over a decade the entry wages of young people in the labour market have been stuck 
below  the  levels  of  the  1980s  in  real  terms.  The  recession  has  made  the  situation  more 
difficult. The youth unemployment rate verges on 30 per cent. Already high by international 
standards,  young  people’s  dependency  on  their  parent’s  wealth  and  income,  a  factor  of 
conspicuous  social  inequity,  has  been  accentuated.  A  major  contributory  factor  is  the 
segmentation of the Italian labour market, where the rule is minimum mobility at one extreme 
and maximum precariousness at the other. This is a waste of resources that mortifies young 
people and seriously impairs the efficiency of the productive economy. 
Our  firms’  propensity  to  innovate  and  their  international  projection  are  insufficient  to  drive 
growth,  ultimately  because  too  many  firms  remain  small,  including  successful  ones.  The 
conduct  of  entrepreneurs  also  reflects  improper  incentives  not  to  grow.  A  tax  system  with 
less evasion and lower rates would be conducive to firms’ decision to scale up and to accept 
contributions of new equity capital.  
As  we  have  seen  on  several  occasions,  the  North-South  gap  in  Italy  depends  largely  on 
national policies and their application at local level.  
We can regard the possibility of a reform drive with fair confidence. Italy possesses abundant 
resources,  has  many  companies,  entrepreneurial  ability  and  a  hardworking  and  thrifty 
people.  It  is  a  matter  of  freeing  the  spirit  of  entrepreneurs  and  individuals  from  many 
constraints.  This  has  already  begun,  but  bolder  reform  measures  would  improve  the 
expectations of firms and households and would give a boost to growth. 
This  year  we  celebrate  the  150th  anniversary  of  the  birth  of  a  united  Italy.  More  than  one 
third of our history has been characterized by the choice – more and more deeply felt with 
the passage of time – to be part of Europe in every phase of its integration. We have made 
no  small  contribution,  and  received  no  little  in  return.  More  than  in  the  past,  the  strategic 
choices  that  we  face  as  Italians  and  as  Europeans  now  coincide.  To  transform  this 
awareness into action shared by citizens is the noble task of politics in Europe. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
