Duvvuri Subbarao: The global economy and framework 
Intervention  by  Dr  Duvvuri  Subbarao,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  G20 
Ministerial Meeting, Washington DC, 15 April 2011. 
 Chairperson, Finance Ministers and colleague Governors, 
1.  
After  its  very  successful  efforts  at  a  coordinated  response  to  the  challenges 
emerging  out  of  the  recent  unprecedented  global  financial  crisis  and  safeguarding  the 
process  of  economic  recovery,  the  G-20  is  now  turning  to  the  more  challenging  task  of 
addressing structural imbalances in the global economy. India has had the privilege of co-
chairing, together with Canada, the G-20 collective effort towards drawing up a Framework 
for Strong, Sustainable and Balanced Growth. The success of this initiative is critical for a 
durable global economic recovery and for better global economic and financial governance. 
Importantly, the success of this initiative is also critical for the credibility of the G-20 and its 
ability to forge a consensus in non-crisis situations.  
2.  
At  the  Seoul  Summit  last  November,  the  leaders  of  G-20  tasked  us  to  formulate 
indicative guidelines for the identification of persistently large imbalances requiring corrective 
action, including their root causes and impediments to adjustment. Earlier this year at Paris, 
we decided to break up the exercise into an integrated two step process. For the first step, 
while  agreeing  on  a  set  of  indicators,  we  resolved  to  firm  up  indicative  guidelines  against 
which each of these indicators will be assessed to identify persistently large imbalances by 
our  next  meeting  in  April.  We  now  need  to  finalize  these  guidelines  and  move  on  to  the 
second step of the exercise. Presumably, this would focus on root causes, impediments to 
adjustment and corrective policies and actions. 
Having set the context, I would now like to make four comments. 
3.  
4.  
First, the IMF is doing a commendable job in providing timely technical inputs for our 
exercise.  Developing  the  indicative  guidelines  requires  selection  of  reference  values  or 
norms for each indicator, as well as rules to guide the assessment of the indicators against 
the norms or reference value to determine if imbalances are large. This has been done using 
two different methodologies – structural and statistical. While the IMF’s preference is for the 
structural  approach  because  of  its  theoretical  consistency,  given  the  inherent  fragility  and 
contestability of econometric estimates that can deviate sharply from the observed data, the 
Framework  Working  Group  has  designed  a  method  that  combines  these  two  approaches. 
The question we need to consider is whether there is consistency between the results of the 
statistical and structural approaches. If not, how do we deal with the divergences? 
5.  
Second,  in  the  first  stage  of  the  exercise,  the  criteria  applied  to  the  systemically 
important  countries  have  been  more  stringent.  The  screening  however  has  been  largely 
mechanical though, based as it was, mainly on deviations from the mean or median. There 
has  been  no  analysis,  however,  to  check  whether  such  deviations  indeed  constitute  large 
and systemic imbalances warranting corrective action. Such a mechanical approach, without 
the application of mind, can lead to anomalies. Let me give two illustrations of the type of 
potential anomalies using India as a case study. 
6.  
Large deviations from the mean is the criteria adopted for screening in on the basis 
of private savings irrespective of whether the country concerned is running a current account 
deficit or a current account surplus, or its stage of economic development. If, for the sake of 
argument,  such  a  country  was  running  a  current  account  deficit  and  adjusted  its  private 
savings  downwards,  it  would  need  to  expand  its  current  account  deficit  and  then  get 
screened in by the external imbalance indicators. In India, for example, our growth has been 
driven by domestic savings. If because of the mutual assessment process (MAP), India was 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
asked  to  reduce  domestic  savings,  it  will  increase  our  dependence  on  foreign  savings, 
actually adding to imbalances. This would indeed be paradoxical. 
7.  
The second illustration is the treatment of public debt. Instead of deviations from the 
mean/median,  what  was  attempted  was  deviations  from  asymmetric  reference  values  for 
developed and developing countries, with higher thresholds for developed countries. These 
thresholds  are  based  on  historic  averages  rather  than  on  current  assessments  of  debt 
sustainability  related  to  expected  or  projected  growth  rates.  The  adjustment  period  to 
stabilize  the  debt  is  also  very  backloaded.  The  year  2030  is  long-term  enough,  and  to 
paraphrase  the  immortal  words  of  Lord  Keynes,  many  of  us  here  may  well  be  dead.  One 
reason why the fiscal balance in advanced countries is so important to the global economy is 
that by virtue of being reserve currency issuing countries their deficits have large spillover 
effects.  
8.  
There are two issues here. First, there is no justification for using different debt to 
GDP ratios for advanced countries and emerging and developing countries (EMDCs). If we 
take a forward looking view, it will be easily apparent that EMDCs will need to raise public 
debt to finance their development and in relative terms their public debt as a proportion of 
GDP will need to be higher than that of advanced countries. Second, the debt sustainability 
of countries should be evaluated not on some global norms, but with reference to individual 
country context. To what extent countries will be able to finance the servicing of their debt 
through higher growth should be built into the evaluation. Furthermore, the nature of debt has 
to  be  kept  in  view.  For  example,  in  India  our  public  debt  is  predominantly  domestic  and 
therefore India’s potential to influence global systemic imbalances because of public debt is 
negligible if not nil. 
9.  
The third comment I want to make has to do with how we are interpreting the intent 
of our leaders which was to focus on persistently large imbalances. The question I would like 
to raise is whether we should dissipate our energies in the second step by looking at all large 
imbalances,  or  focus  instead  only  on  large,  systemically  important  imbalances  that  have 
significant  spillover  effects.  Is  it  so  difficult  to  identify  the  latter  through  a  simple  statistical 
exercise such as country imbalances as a proportion of total imbalances or global GDP? This 
way  we  can  focus  our  attention  on  the  root  causes  of  persistently  large  imbalances  and 
impediments to their adjustment as mandated by our leaders?  
10.  
That takes me to my fourth and final comment. A question has arisen whether the 
Framework exercise should be looking at only net imbalances of countries or also at intra-
country or intra-regional imbalances, as appropriate. The critical question to my mind is not 
whether  imbalances  are  internal  or  external,  or  gross  or  net,  but  whether  the  concerned 
imbalance generates, or has the potential to generate, significant external spillovers affecting 
the wider global economy. 
In conclusion, let me say that an effective outcome is needed to provide a signal that 
11.  
the  G-20  is  not  only  serious  in  ensuring  strong,  sustainable  and  balanced  growth  for  the 
world economy going forward, but that it is, and it intends to remain, an effective and relevant 
institution  for  addressing  current  structural  problems  in  a  fast  evolving  global  economy. 
Thank you.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
