Daniel Mminele: Monetary policy in volatile and uncertain times 
Address by Mr Daniel Mminele, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
breakfast  of  the  Association  of  Corporate  Treasurers  of  Southern  Africa,  Johannesburg, 
27 May 2011. 
 Introduction 
1.  
Good morning ladies and gentlemen. 
Thank  you  to  the  Association  of  Corporate  Treasurers  of  Southern  Africa  (ACTSA)  for 
extending this invitation to share some thoughts with you this morning on monetary policy. 
However, before I delve into issues related to monetary policy, I would like to provide a brief 
overview  of  the  global  policy  agenda,  how  it  has  been  shaped  by  the  crisis  and  efforts 
underway  to  restore  macroeconomic  and  financial  stability  and  a  more  balanced  global 
economy.  
As  the  title  of  my  speech  suggests,  the  global  economic  and  financial  environment  is  one 
fraught with volatility. While we may have emerged from the crisis, the recovery has been 
difficult and risks remain large. Sovereign debt difficulties in peripheral Europe as well as in 
some  other  advanced  economies,  banking  systems  still  in  need  of  repair,  and  geopolitical 
risks, all compounded by natural disasters, are issues we need to grapple with. It is within 
this  highly  uncertain  environment  that  central  banks  need  to  manoeuvre  and  find  ways  to 
best deal with rising inflationary risks without jeopardising the recovery and creating threats 
to financial stability.  
An uncertain and volatile global landscape 
2. 
The  sovereign  debt  crisis  in  peripheral  Europe  shows  little  signs  of  abating.  Speculation 
around  a  possible  Greek  debt  restructuring  or,  in  some  quarters  even  around  an  eventual 
exit  from  the  euro  zone  is  gathering  momentum  and  threatens  the  outlook  for  Ireland  and 
Portugal, and could possibly cause disruptions in Spain and core Europe. We have recently 
seen further rating downgrades and revisions to rating outlooks by rating agencies. Martin 
Wolf,1  in  an  article  in  the  Financial  Times,  relates  the  euro  zone’s  approach  to  the  fiscal 
crises to the story of a man sentenced to death by his king. The king tells him that he can 
keep  his  life  if  he  teaches  the  monarch’s  horse  to  talk  within  a  year.  Surprisingly,  the 
condemned man agrees. Asked why he did so, he answers that anything might happen: the 
king  might  die;  he  might  die;  and  the  horse  might  learn  to  talk.  In  essence,  Martin  Wolf 
argues  that  policymakers  have  decided  to  play  for  time  in  the  hope  that  the  countries  in 
difficulty  will  restore  their  creditworthiness.  The  significant  rise  in  the  cost  of  borrowing  for 
peripheral European countries shows that, if this indeed was a deliberate strategy, it is not 
succeeding.  It  is  unclear  how  a  debt  restructuring  would  affect  markets  and  the  real 
economy. Some argue that this would be the most practical solution for Europe, while others 
say that, given the interconnectedness of sovereign debt markets and the banking systems 
in  Europe,  this  has  the  potential  to  trigger  developments  similar  to  what  was  witnessed 
around the Lehman Brothers collapse.  
The  International  Monetary  Funds’  (IMF)  latest  World  Economic  Outlook  and  Global 
Financial  Stability  Report  (April  2011)  reflects  a  recovery  that  appears  to  have  solidified. 
However,  growth  on  average  remains  below  pre-crisis  levels,  unemployment  is  high,  and 
                                                 
1  The euro zone’s journey to default, 10 May 2011, FT 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
inflationary  risks  have  picked  up.  The  story  of  the  two-speed  economic  recovery  is  well 
known  –  modest  growth  and  still  high  unemployment  in  advanced  economies,  contrasted 
with  robust  growth  in  emerging  market  economies,  but  marred  by  high  rates  of  youth 
unemployment and rising inflation. In many emerging economies output gaps have become 
positive, inflation is rising and capital flows from developed to emerging economies continue 
unabated.  The  combination  of  weak  sovereign  balance  sheets,  weak  real  estate  markets, 
high funding requirements for sovereigns and banks in advanced economies, together with 
overheating and booming asset markets in emerging market economies, tilts the balance of 
risks  to  growth  to  the  downside.  Political  and  social  unrest  in  the  Middle  East  and  North 
Africa as a result of rising food and commodity prices also threatens to add to already heady 
inflationary pressures. 
Thus, while the global recovery may be on a firmer footing than a year ago, it is questionable 
whether  growth  is  more  balanced  than  before  the  crisis.  Improved  growth  prospects  in 
developed countries have largely been driven by fiscal spending and loose monetary policy, 
although  more  recently,  certain  advanced  economies  have  begun  to  reduce  the  fiscal 
stimulus and started raising policy rates. On the other hand, emerging markets reflect robust 
consumer  spending  and  private  sector  investment.  Such  an  uneven  recovery  could  fuel 
further  imbalances  and  delay  the  current  recovery  while  also  sowing  the  seeds  of  future 
crises.  
The global policy agenda and South Africa 
3. 
Global  imbalances  were  one  of  the  foremost  causes  of  the  crises  and  therefore,  have 
become  a  significant  agenda  item  for  the  G20,  which  effectively  replaced  the  G8  as  the 
leading  forum  for  international  economic  co-operation  and  coordination.  Since  2008,  the 
status  of  the  G20  has  been  elevated,  recognising  that  co-operation  on  a  global  scale  is 
required  to  successfully  and  sustainably  deal  with  the  crisis.  To  this  end,  the  vital  role  of 
emerging market economies was recognised, and rightly so. Over the past five decades, the 
global  balance  of  power  has  shifted  towards  emerging-market  economies,  whose  share  of 
global  GDP  has  increased  alongside  the  decline  in  that  of  advanced  economies.  Between 
1960 and 1985, advanced economies on average accounted for about 75 per cent of global 
GDP  (based  on  purchasing  power  parity  weights),  this  share  declined  gradually  to 
57 per cent  in  2009.  In  contrast,  over  the  same  period,  the  share  of  emerging  market  and 
developing  economies  increased  steadily  from  17  per  cent  to  almost  40  per  cent.2  At  the 
height of the financial crisis during 2008 and 2009, emerging markets were the sole engine of 
world growth. 
In 2009, G20 countries committed to a new framework for strong, sustainable and balanced 
growth (referred to as the Framework), as well as a Mutual Assessment Process (MAP). The 
Framework is intended to ensure that the individual country actions contribute to a coherent 
path forward, while the MAP is intended to gauge the degree of collective consistency of G20 
macroeconomic policy actions. To this end, a number of indicators have been agreed upon 
to enable the identification of globally systemic imbalances and to ensure that preventative 
and  corrective  action  is  taken  timeously.  The  co-operation  to  a  large  extent  proved  to  be 
highly  effective  in  the  immediate  aftermath  of  the  financial  crisis,  but  is  now  facing  some 
challenges given the increasingly divergent developments across countries and regions.  
There is wide recognition that there is a need for an adjustment in exchange rates in order 
for  global  rebalancing  to  occur.  This  process  is  also  referred  to  as  demand  rotation  and 
requires  deficit  economies  to  save  more  and  consume  less,  while  surplus  economies  are 
required  to  spend  more  and  save  less.  Surplus  countries  are  therefore  expected  to  shift 
                                                 
2  Emerging Markets come of Age, Finance and Development, December 2010, Vol 47, No 4 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
focus  from  external  demand  to  domestic  demand  in  order  to  sustain  growth.  In  contrast, 
deficit  economies  will  need  to  rely  more  on  external  demand.  This  implies  that  exchange 
rates will adjust, with the exchange rates of deficit economies depreciating, while the surplus 
economies  will  need  to  let  their  currencies  appreciate.  As  you  can  well  imagine,  this  is  a 
contentious issue amongst G20 countries, given that developed and developing economies 
have differing policy priorities. However, what is important is that co-ordination does exist on 
various economic aspects, including sustainable, balanced growth, financial sector reforms, 
and reform of international financial institutions.  
Excess  global  liquidity  on  account  of  easy  monetary  policies  in  advanced  economies, 
coupled  with  the  combination  of  promising  growth  prospects,  improved  governance  and 
capital account liberalisation, made emerging market economies very attractive investment 
destinations.  Consequently,  currency  tensions  came  to  the  fore  early  last  year  as  volatile 
capital flows returned to emerging market economies, resulting in currency appreciation and 
thereby eroding export competitiveness and disrupting macroeconomic stability. Apart from 
currency appreciation, these inflows have also increased the possibility of bubbles in asset 
prices in emerging economies. There have been a range of responses to the surge in capital 
inflows,  from  outright  intervention  to  the  imposition  of  capital  controls.  The  thinking  behind 
the  management  of  capital  flows  has  shifted somewhat  in  the  process.  In  essence,  where 
previously  much  criticism  was  directed  at  measures  to  deal  with  capital  inflows,  it  is  now 
widely accepted that under certain conditions this can be a legitimate component of policy 
responses  to  deal  with  the  surge  in  capital  inflows.  To  this  end  country-specific 
circumstances  are  an  important  consideration  when  deciding  what  measures  may  be 
appropriate or not.  
Accordingly,  although  an  old  topic  in  economic  literature,  the  G20  under  the  French 
Presidency  has  added  a  new  agenda  item,  namely,  the  “Reform  of  the  International 
Monetary System”. A working group was established to discuss the future global monetary 
system, with a view to achieving a more stable and representative system. A key focus area 
of this working group centres on developing a better understanding of the consequences and 
causes of capital flows, with a view to developing a framework of non-prescriptive guidelines 
to govern currency interventions in the face of volatile flows. This agenda item is very much 
aligned with the Framework.  
Movements  in  currency  markets  over  the  past  few  years  are  indicative  of  global 
developments, where the US dollar’s role as the sole global reserve currency is increasingly 
being  questioned.  Other  currencies,  including  those  of  major  emerging  market  economies 
(when they satisfy relevant criteria) are likely to play a larger role in future. But, it will be a 
long journey before there is any significant change to the US dollar’s status as the world’s 
reserve currency.  
South  Africa,  being  the  only  African  country  represented  on  the  G20,  supports  efforts 
towards  strong,  balanced  and  sustainable  growth  and  the  reform  of  the  international 
monetary  system,  and  officials  from  the  National  Treasury  and  the  South  African  Reserve 
Bank  actively  participate  in  G20  working  groups.  There  is  certainly  a  need  for  global 
co-operation, as we have clearly seen, economic and financial disruptions in one place can 
cause not just ripple effects elsewhere, but crises of significant proportions. Co-operation at 
the global level is essential to ensure that the seeds of the next crisis are not inadvertently 
sown in the measures currently being developed and implemented, and to ensure that we 
will be adequately prepared to tackle future challenges.  
In April this year, South Africa was also accepted officially as a fully-fledged member into the 
BRIC (Brazil, Russia, India and China) bloc, bolstering its position on the global economic 
arena,  and  strengthening  political  and  trade  ties  within  the  bloc.  South  Africa  accounts  for 
about a third of gross domestic product in sub-Saharan Africa. This membership is mutually 
beneficial,  opening  up  vast  opportunities  for  Africa,  while  at  the  same  time  offering  BRIC 
members improved access to mineral resources and approximately one billion consumers on 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
the continent. It is important for South Africa to harness the opportunities that come with its 
membership  of  BRICS  and  to  leverage  its  position  to  support  growth,  development  and 
employment creation initiatives in the country. 
South Africa’s growth outlook  
4. 
Although the South African financial system has to date emerged relatively unscathed from 
the  financial  crisis,  largely  owing  to  sound  financial  regulation  and  supervision,  the  real 
economy  did  suffer.  The  economy  contracted by  1,7  per  cent  in  2009,  following  growth  of 
5,6 per cent  in  2006  and  2007  and  3,6  per  cent  in  2008.  Growth  in  real  gross  domestic 
product has improved since the recession experienced in 2009, but is insufficient to address 
the  burgeoning  joblessness  rate,  which  measured  25  per  cent  in  the  first  quarter  of  2011. 
The output gap remains negative, as growth remains below trend and output below levels 
achieved prior the crisis.  
The  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance  of  the  Bank  over  the  past  few  years  has 
certainly  helped  to  prop  up  household  consumption  expenditure.  Household  consumption 
expenditure  has  been  the  main  driver  of  growth,  making  the  largest  contribution  of 
2,8 percentage  points  to  growth  in  GDP  during  2010.  Even  so,  growth  has  not  been 
excessive and there are tentative signs that this positive momentum may be levelling off, as 
suggested by recent economic data in the form of retail sales, motor vehicle sales and credit 
growth.  Consumers  remain  relatively  highly  indebted,  while  impaired  advances  as  a 
percentage  of  total  loans  and  advances  have  remained  somewhat  sticky  since  the  end  of 
2009 at levels close to 6 per cent. High levels of household indebtedness together with the 
elevated level of the number of consumers with impaired credit records, is likely to constrain 
consumers to some extent going forward.  
Positive  trends  in  the  composite  leading  business  cycle  indicator  and  the  Kagiso/BER 
Purchasing Managers Index suggest that the recent trends and outlook for the manufacturing 
sector  has  improved.  The  details  in  the  various  business  confidence  surveys  confirm  this 
view. The year-on-year increase in the physical volume of manufacturing output measured 
4,6  per  cent  in  March,  following  the  5,7  per  cent  increase  registered  in  February.  On  a 
three-month on three-month basis, the increase was 4,0 per cent. These developments are 
encouraging  especially  when  viewed  against  the  backdrop  of  the  appreciation  in  the 
currency. However, there is still a substantial degree of slack in the manufacturing sector.  
The Bank’s forecast reflects GDP growth averaging 3,6 per cent and 3,9 per cent in 2011 
and  2012,  respectively.  These  forecasts  are  somewhat  lower  than  those  of  some  other 
emerging market and developing countries.  
South Africa’s monetary policy response 
5. 
Inflation  in  a  number  of  emerging  market  countries  has  been  rising  steadily  over  the  past 
year, driven by the rise in global food and commodity prices. The large share of food and 
energy in the CPI baskets of many emerging market countries is a major factor behind rising 
inflation.  In  addition,  in  many  cases  output  gaps  have  closed,  resulting  in  a  tightening  of 
monetary policy in many emerging market economies.  
In contrast, South Africa has maintained a repo rate of 5,5 per cent since November 2010, 
following  the  reduction  in  the  policy  rate  by  650  basis  points  since  March  2008.  South 
Africa’s  inflation  picture has  been  somewhat  benign  compared  to  other  emerging  markets. 
Domestic CPI reached a low point of 3,2 per cent in September 2010, at a time when other 
emerging  market  countries  inflation  rates  had  already  started  rising  owing  to  rising 
commodity  prices.  South  Africa’s  inflation  rate  has  risen  steadily  since  then,  with  CPI 
measuring 4,2 per cent in April 2011.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
At this stage there are no discernible inflationary pressures coming from the demand side of 
the  economy,  the  output  gap  remains  negative  and  there  are  tentative  signs  that  the 
momentum in consumer demand may be levelling off. Furthermore, core inflation readings, 
when  measured  by  adjusting  overall  CPI  for  food,  non-alcoholic  beverages  and  energy 
prices, were relatively subdued at 3,4 per cent in March.  
However, the inflation outlook has deteriorated over the past couple of months, largely due to 
external cost-push factors. The main factors behind the upward trend in inflation have been 
food, and transport prices. Food price inflation increased from 3,5 per cent in February 2011 
to  4,8  per  cent  in  April,  while  petrol  prices  increased  at  a  rate  of  16,3  per  cent.  Other 
administered  prices  also  placed  upward  pressure  on  prices,  with  electricity  increasing  by 
19,0 per cent in April. Administered price inflation increased by 10,7 per cent in April, driven 
by a 12,1 per cent increase in the regulated component. If one excludes administered prices 
from CPI, the CPI would have measured 3,1 per cent in April. So far, these developments 
have  not  filtered  through  to  broader  price  pressures  and  the  appreciation  bias  in  the  rand 
exchange rate for most of this year, has helped to contain price pressures. That said, April 
inflation data does suggest that core measures may be beginning to rise.  
The  Bank  has  revised  higher  its  inflation  forecasts  over  the  past  few  MPC  meetings.  The 
main risks to the inflation outlook continue to emanate from cost push pressures, including 
administered prices. While annual inflation rates are expected to average 5.1 per cent and 
6.0  per  cent  in  2011  and  2012,  respectively,  our  latest  forecast  shows  that  inflation  is 
expected to breach 6 per cent in the first quarter of 2012 and to peak at 6,3 per cent. Inflation 
is expected to return to within the target range thereafter, but remain close to the upper end 
of  6  per  cent.  The  breach  is  likely  to  be  temporary,  but  is  also  dependent  on  further 
developments in food and oil prices and the potential second round effects, and the risk that 
these  price  pressures  feed  through  to  more  generalised  inflation.  The  recent  decline  in  oil 
prices  and  moderation  in  international  food  prices  to  some  extent  alleviates  some  of  the 
inflationary pressures that have confronted the South African economy. Another risk factor 
on  the  domestic  front  is  the  developments  in  wage  inflation.  Despite  high  unemployment, 
wage increases remained in excess of inflation and in the first quarter of 2011, measuring 
8,2 per cent according to Andrew Levy Employment Publications. At the same time, labour 
productivity has declined, resulting in an increase in unit labour costs.  
Despite the upward revision to the inflation forecasts, the repurchase rate was maintained at 
5,5  per  cent  at  the  most  recent  MPC  meeting  in  May.  This  is  essentially  due  to  the  large 
influence  of  exogenous  factors  on  current  and  projected  inflation  trends.  The  MPC  is 
however  cognisant  of  the  current  cost-push  pressures  and  the  potential  of  these  to  filter 
through to more generalised price pressures. These pressures will be closely monitored, and 
the MPC will take timeous action to ensure that second round effects do not take hold and 
that inflation pressures are kept in check.  
Conclusion 
6. 
To conclude, uncertainty in the global environment has not abated, as reflected by increased 
volatility in financial markets. While the global recovery has proceeded at a moderate pace, it 
remains  unbalanced  and  uneven.  To  this  end,  the  G20  is  addressing  issues  of  global 
imbalances and also reflecting on the future global monetary system. Such developments will 
have an impact on South Africa and policy developments going forward, as we are part of the 
global economy and one of the more liquid amongst emerging market financial markets.  
South Africa’s growth outlook has improved, although it remains below pre-crisis levels and 
below that of other emerging and developing countries. Inflation has recently trended higher, 
and while the Bank’s forecast shows that CPI will breach the upper end of the target range, 
based on current information the MPC expects that this will be a temporary breach. However, 
developments will be closely monitored for any second round effects which could result in 
broader based price pressures.  
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
