Miguel Fernández Ordóñez: Reflections on the Spanish banking sector 
and economy  
Opening remarks by Mr Miguel Fernández Ordóñez, Governor of the Bank of Spain, at the 
“XVIII Encuentro del sector financiero”, organised by Deloitte-ABC, Madrid, 5 April 2011. 
 Good morning, 
I am most grateful to Deloitte and to ABC for giving me this opportunity to share with you 
some reflections on the banking sector and economy of our country.  
In my talk I am going to take a hopeful view of the future of our economy and our banking 
system, based on the extent of the adjustment already under way and the progress made 
with fiscal consolidation and structural reforms.  
Let no one be mistaken, I am speaking about the future, because the present continues to be 
dominated  by  an  overwhelming  statistic:  the  more  than  four  million  who  are  unemployed. 
Until  this  number  is  significantly  reduced,  nobody  is  entitled  to  even  hint  at  the  slightest 
satisfaction. But it is true that, for the first time since imbalances began to build up in the late 
1990s, Spanish society seems to be prepared to change and to undertake reforms that are 
absolutely  essential,  not  just  for  growth,  but  for  solid  and  sustained  growth.  And  such 
change, perceived and appreciated by the markets, is the main base for a hopeful view of the 
future, although there is clearly still much to be done and no time for any let-up in our efforts. 
What has been done so far 
I shall begin by examining progress to date. 
At  the  time  of  the  outbreak  of  the  international  financial  crisis  the  Spanish  economy  and 
banking system had seen more than ten years of real estate expansion, excessive private 
indebtedness and continual competitiveness losses. Such imbalances had been generated in 
an environment characterised by very low interest rates and dominated by the absence of 
any significant structural reforms in relation to public spending, pensions, the labour market 
or savings banks. After ten years building up imbalances it was inevitable that the economy 
would have to adjust and reforms were essential to restore growth and employment as soon 
as possible. 
If  we  examine  what  has  happened  during  the  two  and  a  half  years  since  the  collapse  of 
Lehman Brothers, it is clear that our country’s economy and banking system have both made 
considerable progress in terms of adjustment and restructuring.  
The private sector has made progress in reducing its imbalances at a faster rate than in other 
countries with similar problems: the external deficit fell from 10% of GDP at the beginning of 
the crisis to 5% last year and Spain has even managed to turn some long-standing deficits, 
such as those in trade with the European Union and in non-tourism services, into surplus. A 
large number of Spanish firms have remained in operation and in profit as a result of having 
undertaken rapid adjustment, although unfortunately this has almost always been achieved 
through  the  only  channel  permitted  by  our  obsolete  and  inefficient  labour  market:  staff 
layoffs.  
Households,  whose  saving  rate  had  fallen  to  11%,  reacted  by  swiftly  raising  it,  which  is 
enabling them to lower the rate in the present phase of the adjustment. At the same time we 
saw how non-energy inflation, which had been continuously far above that of our euro area 
partners since the creation of the single currency in 1999, fell substantially, to the extent that, 
in 2009 and 2010, its annual rate was under 1%, holding below that of the euro area. Finally, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
with regard to the banking sector, the rapid expansion of credit, which had reached a rate of 
25%  per  annum  and  had  been  the  most  important  source  of  excessive  household  and 
corporate  indebtedness  during  the  years  of  expansion,  fell  rapidly  to  stabilise  at  slightly 
negative levels over the past few years. 
Some  might  say  that  all  this  was  inevitable,  that  ten  years  of  imbalances  required  a 
correction, and that is partly true. But if we compare with the adjustment observed in other 
countries in a similar situation, the reaction of the Spanish private sector has been notably 
swift. The results obtained by those firms that have survived and the behaviour of Spanish 
exports, which have grown faster than German exports during the three years of crisis, are 
examples  of  how  the  Spanish  private  sector  is  reacting  positively  to  the  challenge  of  the 
crisis. 
And as I have said, all this has been achieved with a labour market that, unlike those in other 
more  prosperous  countries  with  greater  social  solidarity,  forces  firms  to  adjust  through 
quantities. Thus, for the third time in thirty years, with the same institutional framework, our 
unemployment rate stands once again at over 20%. Nor should we overlook the damage to 
the productive fabric, which has occurred because so many firms have had to close owing to 
the lack of appropriate mechanisms allowing a flexible response to the crisis. 
The  development  of  the  crisis  highlighted  the  need  for  structural  reforms  in  areas  like  the 
labour  market,  public  spending  and  savings  banks.  Initially  the  progress  made  in  fiscal 
consolidation  was  very  modest,  but  the  outbreak  of  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  a  year  ago 
marked a significant turning point in the economic policy stance. Since then, government and 
Parliament  have  adopted  an  ambitious  raft  of  measures,  with  the  drastic  reduction  in 
structural public spending being particularly notable. This has involved unpopular measures 
such as reducing the wages of public sector employees, freezing all pensions except for the 
minimum ones and sharply reducing public investment, as well as the recent agreement to 
improve the sustainability of our public pension system. 
In relation to the banking sector, the government and Parliament initiated the reform process 
a  year  before  the  markets  began  to  show  signs  of  concern  with  the  explosion  of  the 
sovereign debt crisis. Far-reaching measures were taken that enabled the principal problems 
of the sector to be tackled before they became intractable. 
The  main  task  undertaken  to  tackle  the  structural  problems  in  our  banking  system  has 
undoubtedly been the restructuring of the savings bank sector. Part of this sector had built up 
significant  imbalances  during  the  expansionary  years.  This,  along  with  the  duration  and 
depth  of  the  international  economic  crisis,  made  evident  the  need  to  create  an  instrument 
with considerable financial capacity and sufficient powers to carry out extensive restructuring 
of  the  savings  bank  sector.  For  this  purpose,  at  the  beginning  of  the  summer  of  2009  the 
Royal Decree-Law on the creation of the Fund for the Orderly Restructuring of the Banking 
Sector (the FROB) was approved, which would be ratified by Parliament one month later. 
Since  then,  the  restructuring  of  the  sector,  partly  achieved  with  the  assistance  of  FROB 
funds, has been of an extraordinary intensity. In less than two years, the 45 savings banks 
previously  in  place  have  been  reduced  to  a  third  of  that  number,  and  the  consolidation 
process has affected more than 95% of the total assets of the sector.  
The objectives of this restructuring and integration process were very clear. First, to correct 
the  excessive  fragmentation  of  the  sector.  Indeed,  the  average  size  of  the  resulting 
institutions is two and a half times larger, which boosts their competitiveness and facilitates 
the  raising  of  external  funding.  Second,  to  reduce  the  excess  capacity  in  their  branch 
networks  and  central  services.  The  adjustment  envisaged  in  the  restructuring  plans  would 
involve a reduction of 10 to 25% in the number of branches and 12 to 18% in the number of 
employees. These cuts are in addition to those which had already been made previously, of 
5%  in  branches  and  4%  in  staff  from  their  peak  levels  in  2008.  However  the  ultimate 
objective  of  the  integration  processes  was  to  strengthen  the  viability  of  the  resulting 
institutions with the funds and management capacity of the savings banks best positioned to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
lead  each  of  the  integration  processes,  and  to  contribute  to  cleaning  up  savings  banks’ 
balance  sheets.  In  fact,  thanks  to  these  processes,  savings  banks  have  recognised 
additional  losses  on  their  loans  and  receivables  and  foreclosed  assets  for  more  than 
€20 billion.  Finally,  the  savings  banks  law  was  amended  in  an  effort  to  increase  the 
professionalism  in  the  management  of  these  institutions,  and  to  open  them  up  to  market 
discipline and the possibility of raising share capital to strengthen their solvency. 
In parallel with the restructuring of the savings banks, there has been a significant drive to 
clean  up  balance  sheets  in  the  Spanish  banking  sector  and  to  ensure  that  assets  are 
appropriately valued. As is well known, Spain’s current system for valuing assets is highly 
demanding,  both  in  terms  of  the  criteria  for  classifying  assets  as  troubled  and  in  terms  of 
provisioning  and  write-downs.  One  example  would  be  the  treatment  of  savings  banks’ 
exposure  to  the  construction  and  real-estate  development  sector.  The  total  amount  of  this 
exposure is €217 billion, of which 28 billion (13%) is made up of doubtful assets. That said, 
the  requirements  of  the  Banco  de  España  force  the  banks  to  also  record  as  potentially 
troubled investments, and make the necessary provisions for, assets acquired in payment of 
debt, as well as standard loans under surveillance owing to some observed weakness, even 
if payments are up to date. 
As a result of these rigorous asset classification criteria, as at 31 December 2010 savings 
banks were obliged to recognise €100 billion of potentially troubled lending to construction 
and property development, i.e. 46% of their total loans and receivables in this sector. This 
gives an idea of the transparency efforts made, which have been far beyond those required 
in other parts of the world. Accumulated specific loan loss provisions represent 31% of these 
“extended”  troubled  assets,  and  if  we  add  the  general  provisions  this  percentage  reaches 
38%. If we take into account the margin provided by the loan-to-value ratio and the fall in real 
estate  prices  that  has  already  taken  place,  it  would  be  necessary  to  make  catastrophic 
assumptions, beyond all reasonable expectations, regarding the expected losses in order for 
the total losses to be well above the total volume of loan loss coverage.  
Moreover,  the  Spanish  system  of  specific  provisioning  has  been  tightened  so  that  banks 
have an even greater incentive to speed up their balance sheet write-downs. Thus doubtful 
loans,  once  the  value  of  the  collateral  has  been  taken  into  account,  have  to  be  fully 
provisioned  within  a  period  of  one  year.  In  addition,  the  value  of  collateral  is  subject  to 
significant haircuts ranging from 20% for completed housing to 50% for land. Finally, the law 
requires provisions of up to 30% to be recorded for foreclosed assets that have remained on 
the  balance  sheet  for  two  years.  But  perhaps  the  characteristic  which  makes  Spanish 
provisioning regulations unusually strict is that the parameters determining the provisions are 
transparent  and  apply  to  all  banks.  Therefore,  unlike  in  other  countries,  they  are  not  left 
entirely to be negotiated between the bank and its external auditors. 
It  is  not  only  legislators  and  regulators  who  have  adopted  measures  to  anticipate  future 
problems.  Spanish  banks  too,  savings  banks  included,  have  made  an  enormous  effort  to 
clean up their balance sheets, something which is not always duly acknowledged in analyses 
of the Spanish banking system. In fact, adding up the net specific provisions made for loan 
losses  since  the  beginning  of  2008,  the  general  provisions  also  used  to  cover  impaired 
assets,  and  the  charges  to  reserves  by  savings  banks  involved  in  the  aforementioned 
restructuring processes, write-downs in the last three years by the Spanish banking system 
amount to about €96 billion, or around 9.5% of GDP. Moreover, in that same period, thanks 
to FROB resources, but also, especially, to the efforts by banks, the latter have increased the 
capital held in excess of minimum requirements by approximately €53 billion, or roughly 5% 
of GDP. 
A  key  factor  in  the  sector  restructuring  strategy  has  been  the  decision  to  increase  the 
transparency  of  the  Spanish  banking  system  as  much  as  possible.  Whenever  the  general 
perception is more negative than the reality, the best policy is to present all the data clearly. 
For that reason the Banco de España announced last June that it would conduct stress tests, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
which it was later agreed should be carried out at the European level under the coordination 
of the CEBS. Although these tests were severely criticised after the collapse of some banks 
in other countries which had successfully passed them a few months earlier, the rigour and 
transparency  of  the  exercise  carried  out  by  the  Spanish  supervisor  must  be  emphasised. 
Demanding  criteria  were  used  and,  unlike  in  other  countries,  all  listed  banks  and  savings 
banks were tested and much more detailed information on their portfolios was offered. The 
markets  appreciated  that  effort  and,  after  the  summer,  Spanish  banks  were  again  able  to 
issue debt on the international wholesale markets.  
However, Ireland’s sovereign debt crisis again increased the strains on the government debt 
markets and a fresh lack of confidence in the Spanish banking sector and misgivings as to 
the quality of its assets resurfaced. 
Those  events  highlighted  the  need  for  more  rapid  and  far-reaching  action  to  confront  the 
difficulties facing a part of the Spanish banking system. Immediately, the Banco de España 
stepped up its transparency requirements for the asset portfolios on which doubts centred. 
Thus early this year all savings banks were obliged to make public their exposure to the real 
estate development sector, their doubtful assets, their standard exposures under surveillance 
and their provisioning levels, and to specify the type of collateral securing those exposures. 
Also, they were asked to publish information on their foreclosed assets and on their exposure 
to households through residential mortgages so that, although this is not an area of concern, 
the market could distinguish between risks which at times – unjustifiably – it treated similarly. 
Further  to  the  recently  ratified  Royal  Decree-Law,  the  Spanish  Parliament  has  taken  an 
additional step to strengthen bank solvency. Happily, it was understood that, while important, 
what had been achieved thus far was not sufficient and that it was necessary to take further 
measures to hasten the restructuring process. The markets’ reaction has demonstrated that 
the  Royal  Decree-Law  has  been  most  effective  in  restoring  confidence  in  the  Spanish 
banking  system  and  has  ushered  in  a  new  stage  in  the  process  of  savings  bank 
restructuring,  adding  to  the  progress  of  recent  years  in  cleaning  up  balance  sheets  and 
reducing the sector’s capacity and fragmentation. 
The Royal Decree-Law has some very specific aims. The first is to strengthen the solvency 
of all Spanish banks, setting a level of core capital of at least 8%. Also, given that investors’ 
misgivings  centred  on  a  small  group  of  unlisted  banks  with  a  greater  dependence  on  the 
wholesale  market,  it  was  decided  to  require  those  banks  to  hold  core  capital  of  10%. 
Additionally,  the  Royal  Decree-Law  stipulates  that  credit  institutions  needing  government 
funds  will  have  to  pursue  their  financial  activity  through  a  commercial  bank.  This measure 
speeds  up  the  strategy  followed  so  far.  Savings  banks  that  have  to  increase  their  level  of 
core  capital  may  raise  that  capital  on  the  market  through  the  commercial  banks  which,  in 
most cases, they have created and started up since the end of last year. Investors now have 
highly granular information on the portfolios of these banks, which moreover will be audited 
and published shortly.  
Sometimes it is alleged that the injection of capital into the savings banks has come late and 
that Spain should have followed the example of other countries which injected huge amounts 
of public funds into their major banks immediately after the Lehman crisis. That would have 
been a mistake as the problems were different. Spain’s task was fortunately not to urgently 
recapitalise  its  large  banks,  which  were  indeed  collapsing  in  other  countries  owing  to 
deficient regulation and supervision. The unavoidable issue here was to oblige certain small 
and  medium-sized  institutions  removed  from  market  discipline  –  the  savings  banks  –  to 
restructure,  after  they  had  lent  in  excess  to  the  real  estate  sector.  In  Spain,  rather  than 
recapitalising, it was vital to restructure these banks and clean up their balance sheets. To 
have recapitalised banks before cleaning up their balance sheets would have been to waste 
public funds, without having achieved changes in management or capacity reductions, which 
are essential for the soundness of the income statements of the surviving banks. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
What is clear now is that the reform of the governance of savings banks and their subjection 
to  market  transparency  and  discipline  should  have  been  carried  out  sooner,  in  the  boom 
rather than in the crisis. The banking crisis management legislation then in place, which was 
of  no  use  for  addressing  non-commercial  institutions  and  was  not  adapted  to  the 
requirements of the European legal framework, which prohibits monetary financing, should 
also have been amended at that time. These banking reforms, like all the others now under 
way (on public spending, pensions and the labour market), should surely have been carried 
out  during  the  years  of  expansion,  when  everything  seemed  to  be  going  well  and  the 
problems  that  would  eventually  surface  because  of  the  imbalances  that  were  building  up 
were blithely ignored. Unquestionably, we would not now be facing the problems then being 
incubated and which have now emerged with the crisis. 
Regarding what has been done so far, it would be unfair not to mention the contribution of 
the  EU  authorities,  since  although  there  were  initially  some  serious  communication  and 
coordination problems, the fact is that subsequently they took appropriate measures aimed 
at  imposing  greater  economic  discipline  and  improving  confidence,  such  as  the  reform  of 
economic governance and the Stability and Growth Pact and the recent “Pact for the Euro”. 
And,  of  course  we  cannot  overlook  the  ECB’s  contribution  with  its  policy  of  providing 
unlimited  liquidity  and  its  programmes  to  purchase  covered  bonds  and  the  government 
bonds of the countries hit hardest by the crisis.  
In short, at this stage it can now be said that both the authorities and private agents have 
made  considerable  efforts  in  the  right  direction  and  that,  as  a  result,  the  process  of 
adjustment  of  the  banking  sector  and  of  the  Spanish  economy  as  a  whole  is  progressing 
reasonably well.  
The challenges ahead 
It  is  clear  from  the  foregoing  review  of  events  that  at  a  time  like  the  present  we  cannot 
become complacent because there is still a long path ahead.  
In the banking sector, it is necessary to complete the process of recapitalisation and adoption 
of new organisational structures envisaged in the February Royal Decree-Law.  
The  Royal  Decree-Law,  which  increases  the  capital  requirements  of  Spanish  banks,  also 
promotes the raising of private capital and sets the timetable for recapitalisation of the banks 
that fail to reach the levels of capital required by the new legislation. 
Of  the  114  groups  or  individual  institutions  (commercial  banks,  savings  banks  and  credit 
cooperatives)  that  the  Banco  de  España  examined  pursuant  to  the  Royal  Decree-Law,  in 
more than 100 cases it concluded that there was no need for more capital. Accordingly, the 
great majority of Spanish institutions satisfied these exacting requirements. In twelve cases it 
was  determined  that  additional  contributions  of  capital  were  necessary  to  comply  with  the 
provisions  of  the  new  legislation.  In  one  of  these  projects,  the  institutions  that  make  it  up 
have decided to go their separate ways, while in the other eleven cases there have been no 
incidents  of  note  to  date.  Therefore,  the  Banco  de  España  will  probably  have  to  analyse 
thirteen rather than twelve recapitalisation plans. 
Last  week  the  banks  submitted  their  strategies  for  complying  with  the  new  capitalisation 
requirements.  The  Banco  de  España  has  to  approve  or,  where  appropriate,  require  the 
necessary  changes  to  be  made  to  these  plans,  which  must  be  implemented  by 
30 September, although the Banco de España may grant an extension of this deadline in the 
cases specified in the Royal Decree-Law. 
It is important to stress that the FROB is obliged to contribute the necessary capital to the 
banks  which  request  it,  as  either  a  first  or  a  subsequent  option,  to  supplement  or  replace 
private  capital.  This  contribution  of  government  funds  does  not  constitute,  as  some  have 
argued, a nationalisation of banks, but rather exceptional and temporary support, since the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
FROB funds must be repaid or replaced by private capital as required by the Royal Decree-
Law.  The  participation  of  the  FROB  in  this  process  enables  an  orderly  entry  of  private 
investment in the savings bank sector. But what has been most effective to improve market 
confidence has been the very existence of the FROB as a backstop, assuring investors and 
lenders that, from the entry into force of the Royal Decree-Law, all Spanish banks are, de 
facto, operating with levels of core capital exceeding 8–10%.  
The  entry  of  private  capital  will  require  savings  banks  to  undertake  a  definitive  and  clear 
professionalisation  of  their  management.  This  requirement  is  fortunate  because  it  is  a 
necessary condition for preventing a repeat of past events. Thus it is not only the regional 
authorities who must avoid any action which may deflect banks from their essential objective 
of serving households and firms; also, those who are now at the helm of savings banks must 
hasten the reform of their corporate governance because very likely the market will not lend 
again to anyone unable to give it an assurance of professionalism and corporate governance 
on a par with that of commercial banks. 
Going back to the economy, we must be patient. Immediately ahead of us, the adjustment 
phase  will  continue.  True,  there  has  been  a  notable  correction  in  some  of  the  main 
imbalances in recent years. But it is still too early to say that the Spanish economy is at a 
stage where it can once again resume robust growth. Further effort will be needed to digest 
the  excesses  of  the  housing  boom,  and  it  will  be  some  time  before  net  job  creation  gains 
momentum, unless ambitious reforms are implemented. The structural reforms launched in 
the past year represent positive progress. At present it is essential to persevere with these 
measures  –  such  as  the  fiscal  consolidation  process  –  and  maintain  the  pace  of  reform, 
tackling  the  reforms  needed  in  areas  which  are  essential  for  competitiveness  and  for 
boosting the Spanish economy’s potential growth. 
The  key  issue  now  is  not  to  stop,  but  to  push  ahead  with  the  reforms,  with  all  of  them, 
including of course the restructuring of the savings banks, which has been the subject of my 
speech. But most important, due to it being an area which sets us furthest apart from other 
developed countries, is the reform of the labour market institutions which are the cause of the 
our economy’s main problem. Our labour market framework makes us unique in comparison 
with other countries: it hampers job creation and encourages the use of job destruction as a 
mechanism for adjustment. 
Here it will not be enough, when the reform has been passed, to say “it’s a move in the right 
direction”.  In  this  connection,  not  only  the  direction  but  also  the  scale  of  the  reform  is 
important.  Yet  we  would  surely  not  have  to  go  very  far.  It  would  suffice  for  employers  in 
Spain to be able, as in other developed countries, to offer jobs with productivity-based wages 
to the millions who are unemployed and for the latter to have the possibility of considering job 
offers that Spanish employers can’t even make to them due to the inflexibility of our singular 
regulations. 
Reducing unemployment and increasing employment is not only an indispensable social goal 
but  it  is  a  vital  economic  target  at  this  juncture.  If  we  manage  to  bring  the  labour  market 
framework  more  into  line  with  that  of  our  European  partners,  there  will  be  a  swifter  and 
stronger recovery in employment. And that would have effects that go beyond the obvious 
increase in the welfare of the workers, such as making it easier to restore health to public 
finances and reducing defaults, which would encourage lending. 
In this context, 2011 will remain a difficult year for almost all economic agents, especially for 
Spanish banks, which must strive to defend their bottom line. Their net interest income will 
come under pressure from the stagnation of business volumes and the increase in financing 
costs, although, to qualify this, the pass-through of higher marginal rates to average margins 
is relatively slow. Furthermore, despite the substantial efforts made, the Banco de España’s 
provisioning  rules  will  continue  to  compel  banks  to  carry  on  recording  provisions  to 
restructure their assets. Against this backdrop, banks must counter the negative pressure on 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
profitability  through  cost  containment,  especially  in  those  banks  involved  in  restructuring 
processes. 
Banks will continue to suffer from the flatness of their main line of business, namely lending. 
Solvent  demand  will  remain  low  and,  if  credit  usually  only  recovers  at  the  end  of  an 
adjustment phase, in the Spanish case, since households and corporations have to reduce 
their debt, solvent demand for credit can be expected all the more to take longer to grow. 
Given this outlook, it is most important that the banking sector is ready to provide credit when 
the  related  solvent  demand  recovers  in  parallel  with  the  improvement  in  the  situation  of 
corporations and households. Accordingly, the restructuring measures adopted to date have 
prevented the survival of zombie banks which, were it not for their integration into the best 
banks, would have ultimately proven useless for providing credit. Along the same lines, since 
the recently approved Royal Decree-Law reacted in time to the huge distrust triggered by the 
crisis in Ireland, it headed off the sharp credit crunch that would have occurred as a result of 
the vast majority of Spanish banks being locked out of the markets. 
Most  projections  point  to  a  stronger  economic  recovery  in  the  second  half  of  2012  and  in 
subsequent years. And this scenario should be strengthened by the effects of the structural 
reforms.  This  more  favourable  environment,  together  with  synergies,  cost  cutting  and 
increased  efficiency  associated  with  the  completion  of  the  savings  bank  integration  and 
restructuring processes and the reduction of surplus capacity in the sector, should contribute 
to shaping a more positive scenario for the profitability of the Spanish banking sector. 
Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude  by  reiterating  that  there  are  grounds  for  us  to  be  hopeful  and  patiently 
optimistic  subject  to  certain  conditions.  Indeed,  during  the  latest  phase  all  the  agents 
involved  –  government,  Parliament,  the  European  authorities,  the  ECB,  the  Banco  de 
España and the banks – have moved in the right direction, and this has had its reflection in 
market perceptions in recent weeks.  
However, market confidence è mobile; it can be easily lost and, therefore, we must not be 
complacent. We are on the right path to emerging successfully, and even strengthened, from 
the difficulties that have affected our economy and banking system. But, for this to happen, it 
is essential for the reforms to continue and for them to remain ambitious. Consequently, our 
optimism can only be conditional upon the continuation of the reforms. 
Finally,  we  must  be  patiently  optimistic  not  only  with  the  reforms,  which  need  to  be 
accelerated as much as possible, but also with their results. 2011 will continue to be another 
year of adjustment and it will even be one of the hardest years for the banking system. It is 
said that some marathon runners hit a “wall” in the final miles of the race. Even though they 
have completed most of the race, the finishing line seems far off to them and they need great 
mental  fortitude  not  to  give  up.  We,  too,  should  ensure  that  the  adjustment  process  and 
reform of the Spanish economy does not hit any “walls”. During the recession to date there 
has been a highly substantial correction in the real economy and in the banking sector, but 
now we need patience and perseverance to successfully conclude this process. 
Thank you very much 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
