Mugur Isărescu: The history of the Romanian monetary system in a 
European context 
Opening speech by Mr Mugur Isărescu, Governor of the National Bank of Romania, on the 
occasion  of  the  inauguration  of  the  Euro  Exhibition  at  Banca  Naţională  a  României, 
Bucharest, 10 March 2011. 
 Dear Mr González-Páramo,  
Your Excellencies,  
Distinguished guests,  
It is an honour for us and we are glad to welcome you today, at the opening of an exhibition 
not only educational and attractive, but also relevant considering Romania’s euro adoption. 
We do hope the Euro Exhibition that the National Bank of Romania is hosting, on behalf of 
Romania, will prove successful all the more so as our country is destination No. 10 of the 
European Central Bank’s travelling exhibition.  
Let  me  thank  Mr.  José  Manuel  González-Páramo  for  accepting  to  jointly  launch  the  Euro 
Exhibition today in Bucharest where it will be open for about three months, here, in the old 
financial centre of Bucharest where the Romanian leu was born.  
The leu-euro relation is thus acquiring a symbolical dimension with a certain meaning in the 
current European context.  
The reference to the European context is neither conventional nor formal. It reveals that the 
Romanian  leu  is  one  of  the  strong  historical  bonds  that  put  our  country  on  the  European 
map. Its roots in the olden leeuwendaalder or the Dutch lion-thaler show not only its descent 
from  the  former  Dutch  coin  (and  therefore  its  being  related  to  the  US  dollar),  but  also  its 
European  dimension  as  ever  since  its  birth,  shortly  after  the  creation  of  the  modern 
Romanian state, our leu currency was French. This means that the 1867 Monetary Law was 
designed in terms of the Latin Union, most of all France. The law stipulated that metal coins 
should be minted in French style. But our bonds with Europe were broader as the law set 
forth  that  the  gold  and  silver  coins  issued  by  France,  Belgium,  Italy  and  Switzerland  (all 
members  of  the  Latin  Union)  should  be  accepted  by  all  exchange  houses,  along  with  the 
Romanian  ones.  Thus,  Romania’s  European  aspirations  were  strongly  asserted,  while 
spreading to Germany through King Carol I of Hohenzollern, whose effigy was placed on the 
first Romanian gold and silver coins, and to Spain, Mr. González-Páramo, via its Latin spirit.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
It is my pleasure to restate here with you what I have often underlined throughout 2010 when 
we  celebrated  the  NBR’s  130th  anniversary  since  its  establishment  which  made  it  the 
16th central  bank  in  the  world  in  chronological  order.  The  fact  is  that  the  history  of  the 
Romanian monetary system is closely linked to the history of the modern Romanian state. 
Feel free to discover this reality by visiting the space dedicated to the leu in the lobby of the 
Euro Exhibition. Moreover, the NBR Museum has on display valuable exhibits testifying to a 
“culture of money” dating back to ancient times in our region.  
The NBR Museum has made substantial efforts to raise awareness about the history of the 
national currency, the features of banknotes and coins, as well as the role of money in the 
economy.  For  instance,  in  2005–2006,  the  National  Bank  of  Romania  conducted  an 
extensive  communication  campaign  on  the  leu’s  redenomination,  and  in  view  of  the  prime 
function of a central bank, namely currency issue, keeps the public informed about the leu’s 
security features. At the same time, apart from these efforts, our central bank often includes 
among  its  strivings  to  increase  financial  education,  themes  related  to  the  history  of  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
European single currency. It is only natural that Romanians be well aware of the currency of 
the club that we aim to be part of.  
Keeping  the  public  informed  is  an  ongoing  process,  prepared  and  unfolded  long  before 
Romania’s  euro  adoption.  This  is  why  we  appreciate  and  support  the  ECB’s  effort  to 
showcase this travelling exhibition to the EU Member States to the benefit of all European 
citizens.  I  therefore  totally  agree  with  Mr.  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  the  ECB’s  President,  who 
said  precisely  one  year  ago  (on  10  March  2010,  when  this  exhibition  was  inaugurated  in 
Frankfurt) that “the euro should speak both of Europe’s diversity and its common culture, its 
history  and  its  future”.  The  euro  speaks  clearly  about  Europe’s  diversity  through  the 
architectural  motifs  of  the  euro  banknotes  as  well  as  through  the  cultural  symbols  on  the 
national sides of the euro coins.  
For Romania, as a euro area hopeful, thorough preparation in order to fulfil all criteria, with 
no exception, is crucial. As I stated before, it is important to define a target (horizon). Even if 
changed,  the  target  must  exist  so  that  the  commitment  to  implementing  reforms  does  not 
wear off. The creation within the NBR of a committee for preparing euro adoption in February 
2010,  to  whose  meetings  we  have  invited  ever  since  October  2010  representatives  of  the 
Finance Ministry, is a solid proof for the fact that we care about are strongly interested in the 
future of our country within the euro zone. Nevertheless, it is of utmost importance to ensure 
coherent policies and a sustained reform pace to render our endeavour sustainable so as the 
euro adoption becomes certain as close as possible to 2015.  
Getting back to the Euro Exhibition, which has arrived in Bucharest shortly after Estonia, the 
17th country to join the euro area, I want to underscore once again the ECB’s efforts to raise 
awareness  of  Romanians  and  other  EU  citizens  about  the  single  currency,  as  well  as  its 
history, role and symbols. From today until the end of May, Romanians have an opportunity 
to find out more about the currency we strive to adopt. Starting with the history of money to 
the production of euro banknotes and on to the security features and the educational games 
in the Kids’ Corner, all visitors will definitely find useful information displayed in an attractive 
manner.  
For  the  NBR,  the  Euro  Exhibition  is  yet  another  opportunity  to  strengthen  our  external 
communication  activities,  to  get  closer  to  the  public  at  large  and  to  open  the  doors  of  our 
institution in a special context: consolidating the steps towards full integration in Europe.  
Let  me  end  by  thanking  all  of  you  here  today.  I  now  give  the  floor  to  Mr.  José  Manuel 
González-Páramo to share with us his thoughts about the exhibition.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
