Nils Bernstein: Danish economy developments and the 2020 plan 
Speech  by  Mr  Nils  Bernstein,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Denmark,  at  the  annual 
meeting of the Association of Danish Mortgage Banks, Copenhagen, 27 April 2011. 
 Growth in the global economy remains robust and is increasingly self-sustained. As regards 
2011,  the  International  Monetary  Fund  has  lowered  its  growth  expectations  for  the  USA, 
Japan  and  the  UK  a  little,  while  expectations  for  Germany  have  been  adjusted  upwards. 
Factors such as the high energy and commodity prices are expected to curb growth. 
The rising energy and commodity prices have contributed to higher inflation worldwide, not 
least in many developing countries. In the euro area, inflation stood at 2.7 per cent in March, 
which is considerably above the medium-term target of just below 2 per cent. 
In the assessment of the European Central Bank, inflationary risks in the euro area are on 
the upside. Against this background, the ECB raised its lending rate by 0.25 percentage point 
at the beginning of this month, after having kept it constant at a very low level for almost two 
years. Danmarks Nationalbank followed suit. 
The debt crisis in the EU is still evolving. Portugal has now – some people might say finally – 
applied to the EU and the IMF for financial assistance. Matters are further complicated by the 
uncertain political situation in Portugal, where a caretaker government is in charge until the 
election  in  June.  It  has  been  indicated  that  the  assistance  package  will  impose  more 
stringent  conditions  than  the  reform  package  which  brought  down  the  Portuguese 
government  –  and  that  broad  political  agreement  must  be  reached  before  the  election. 
Viewed on the basis of developments in yield spreads, there seems to be a decoupling of 
market assessments of the situation in the three troubled member states – Portugal, Ireland 
and Greece – on the one hand, and the rest of the euro area – including Spain and Italy – on 
the other hand. This is positive and gives us reason to hope that the debt crisis in the EU can 
be contained.  
 Turning  to  the  Danish  economy,  the  upswing  is  also  becoming  more  evident  here.  The 
negative  growth  in  the  4th  quarter  of  2010  seems  to  have  been  a  one-off.  Danmarks 
Nationalbank expects growth in 2011 to be just below 2 per cent, which is actually above the 
EU average. Household disposable income is set to develop at a substantially weaker pace 
than last year, but on account of the currently very low consumption and investment ratios – 
combined with strong growth in some of Denmark’s largest export markets – we still expect 
some  growth  in  private  consumption  and  business  investment.  Momentum  in  the  Danish 
economy  is  presumably  so  strong  that  a  gradual  increase  in  short-term  interest  rates  to  a 
more  normal  level  is  unlikely  to  trigger  an  economic  reversal,  although  it  will,  viewed  in 
isolation, have a dampening effect. 
labour  market.  Gross 
The  positive  outlook 
unemployment  had  been  flat  for  a  while,  but  fell  by  3,000  in  February.  It  is  probably  too 
optimistic  to  expect  similar  declines  in  the  coming  months, but  the  figures  do indicate  that 
unemployment has peaked at a considerably lower level than previously expected. Right now 
it is only slightly above its structural level. 
So there is no need to ease fiscal policy relative to the plans laid down for the next couple of 
years.  In  the  current  situation,  expansionary  fiscal  policy  could  easily  strengthen  cyclical 
trends  rather  than  smoothing  them,  as  it  did  in  the  boom  years  before  the  financial  crisis. 
That would not be expedient. 
is  supported  by  developments 
the 
in 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
A few weeks ago, the Danish government presented its 2020 plan. The plan quantifies the 
challenges that we must meet if we are to ensure balanced public finances in 2020. It also 
includes proposals for tackling these challenges. I welcome that. 
Some of the assumptions behind the 2020 plan are highly ambitious, not least the target of 
very  low  growth  in  public  spending  in  the  next  decade.  However,  it  is  essential  to  keep 
growth  in  public  spending  under  control  if  we  are  to  achieve  balanced  public  finances. 
Otherwise  we  will  be  heading  for  unsustainable  debt  developments  that  will  amplify  the 
problems.  Unlike  many  other  countries,  Denmark  has  little  room  for  manoeuvre  on  the 
revenue side as taxes are already high. Consequently, balance must be achieved by reining 
in expenditure. 
If we look at the development in public consumption as a ratio of GDP over the last 50 years 
– from the introduction of the welfare state until today – two facts stand out. Firstly, public 
consumption has increased relative to total output throughout the period – except in the first 
4 years of the Schlüter government in the 1980s. Secondly, it is worth noting that the rising 
trend has continued, irrespective of the colour of the government. 
It is not surprising that growth in public consumption was strongest in the first 25 years of the 
welfare state, when the educational level and participation rate of women increased rapidly. 
That has not been the case in the last 25 years. Yet public consumption as a ratio of total 
output has still risen, albeit at a slower rate. My conclusion is that in Denmark there is an 
ingrained pressure to solve problems by increasing public spending, both among politicians 
and  in  the  population  in  general.  Altering  that  will  require  a  radical  change  of  attitude; 
statutory  control  mechanisms  to  cap  public  spending  as  a  ratio  of  GDP  could  be  the  first 
step. It will be difficult – extremely difficult! But it is unavoidable. 
Even if all the proposals in the 2020 plan were to be adopted, we will be facing a lengthy 
period  of  sustained  government  deficits  after  2020.  So  although  the  deficit  remains  well 
below the 3-per-cent limit in the baseline scenario presented by the government, we still risk 
being hit by large government deficits in connection with the cyclical downturns that tend to 
occur from time to time. For this reason it is important to have automatic stabilisers in place 
that can curb cyclical fluctuations. 
This  is  the  main  background  to  Danmarks  Nationalbank’s  proposal  to  phase  out  deferred-
amortisation  loans  and  to  let  property  value  tax  develop  in  step  with  house  prices.  Both 
proposals would contribute to dampening fluctuations in the housing market and hence in the 
economy overall. 
 In addition to strengthening public finances, we need to boost growth in the Danish economy. 
I am chiefly thinking of measures to increase potential output. This is not achieved through 
expansionary fiscal policy, but through structural reforms to improve the economic framework 
conditions and increase the supply of labour. 
Phasing out the early retirement scheme is an example of such a reform. Discussions tend to 
centre  on  how  much  this  step  might  improve  public  finances.  That  is  indeed  an  important 
aspect,  but  we  often  forget  that  phasing  out  the  scheme  is  also  likely  to  contribute  to 
increasing potential growth in the economy in the phasing-out period by preventing a decline 
in the labour force. In other words, phasing out the early retirement scheme can contribute 
both to improving public finances and to strengthening the growth potential of the economy, 
thereby providing a permanent wealth gain. Few alternative measures can match that. 
Potential growth is the determining factor for how difficult it will be to achieve the 2020 plan’s 
target of reducing public consumption as a ratio of cyclically adjusted GDP from 29 to 27 per 
cent.  The  lower  the  potential  growth,  the  more  painful  the  process  will  be.  In  the  coming 
decades  demographics  are  against  us.  Productivity  developments  will  be  of  paramount 
importance to growth in the Danish economy. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 The extraordinary measures introduced by the European Central Bank to supply liquidity to 
the market during the crisis led to a period of very low market interest rates in the euro area. 
Spreads to the corresponding Danish interest rates widened, leading to capital inflows and a 
tendency for the krone to strengthen. To keep the krone stable against the euro, Danmarks 
Nationalbank  purchased  foreign  exchange  in  the  market  in  the  1st  half  of  2010  and  on 
several  occasions  lowered  its  interest  rates  unilaterally.  From  the  spring  of  2010,  only  the 
rate of interest on certificates of deposit and the current-account rate were lowered, while the 
lending rate was kept unchanged, so that the spread to the ECB’s benchmark interest rate 
remained 0.05 percentage point. 
Liquidity  conditions  in  the  euro  area  are  now  normalising,  and  euro  area  money  market 
interest rates are, once again, approaching the ECB’s benchmark interest rate. To the extent 
that higher market interest rates in the euro area lead to pressure on the krone, Danmarks 
Nationalbank will follow its usual practice, including raising interest rates if necessary. This 
will apply to both lending and deposit rates. We have no plans to deviate from the principle of 
operating with a margin between the rate of interest on certificates of deposit and the lending 
rate. 
 Public debate sometimes focuses on the high gross debt of Danish households relative to 
GDP or to household disposable income. But the households’ pension and housing wealth is 
also high. The fact that the assets are less liquid than the liabilities entails a certain degree of 
vulnerability. 
The high gross debt is primarily reflected in household mortgages. This, in turn, should be 
viewed against the background of the efficient Danish mortgage credit system, which differs 
materially from those seen in most other countries. 
Despite their high gross debt, Danish households have weathered the financial crisis. Losses 
in the banking sector have been limited seen in relation to the crisis in the early 1990s, and 
have only to a small extent been attributable to the household sector. Mortgage arrears ratios 
are also low and declining. 
All  the  same,  I  believe  that  the  resilience  of  the  households  should  be  strengthened  on 
account of their high debt ratios. After all, tax cuts, special pension savings disbursements 
and very low interest rates might not be on the agenda the next time a crisis comes knocking 
on  our  door.  High  debt  goes  hand  in  hand  with  a  risk  of  technical  insolvency  and  lack  of 
mobility. 
 Since it became possible to issue covered bonds – in Denmark known as SDOs – instead of 
traditional mortgage bonds in 2007, these bonds have accounted for an increasing share of 
the outstanding volume of mortgage bonds – currently 60 per cent. As you know, SDOs are 
subject to the condition that the value of the individual loan must never exceed 80 per cent of 
the underlying collateral. If house prices go down, the mortgage banks must pledge top-up 
collateral.  One  way  of  financing  this  is  by  issuing  less collateralised  junior  covered  bonds. 
The  proceeds  are  used  to  buy  e.g.  government  securities  that  are  pledged  as  top-up 
collateral.  In  our  estimate,  a  10-per-cent  fall  in  house  prices  entailed  a  need  for  top-up 
collateral  amounting  to  around  kr.  25  billion  in  2008.  By  2010,  this  figure  had  risen  to  an 
estimated  kr.  100  billion  plus,  mainly  due  to  the  more  widespread  use  of  SDOs. 
Consequently, Danmarks Nationalbank is pleased to note that the minister for economic and 
business affairs has met the wish to look into this issue. The risk is increasing and should be 
addressed in time. Danmarks Nationalbank has on previous occasions pointed to the option 
of reducing the borrowing limit in connection with mortgage credit. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Another familiar issue is refinancing risk in connection with adjustable-rate loans – in both 
kroner  and  euro.  Spreading  the  refinancing  auctions  over  the  year  reduces  the  volume  of 
adjustable-rate loans affected if an auction date coincides with a complete or partial market 
crash.  Danmarks  Nationalbank  welcomes  the  invitation  from  the  Association  of  Danish 
Mortgage Banks and the Danish Mortgage Banks’ Federation to work with them to identify 
the possibilities of reducing the refinancing risk on adjustable-rate loans. 
With  these  words  I  would  like  to  thank  the  Association  of  Danish  Mortgage  Banks  and  its 
members for our successful cooperation during the past year. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
