Paul Tucker: Macroprudential policy – building financial stability 
institutions 
Remarks by Mr Paul Tucker, Deputy Governor for Financial Stability at the Bank of England, 
at the 20th Annual Hyman P Minsky Conference, New York, 14 April 2011. 
 These  remarks  do  not  necessarily  represent  the  views  of  the  Bank  of  England  or  the  interim  Financial  Policy 
Committee.  I  am  grateful  for  comments  from  Charles  Bean,  Alastair  Clark,  Roger  Clews,  Spencer  Dale,  Paul 
Fisher, Andy Haldane, Don Kohn and Hector Sants. 
Thank  you  very  much  for  inviting  me  to  join  you  this  evening.  Having  spent  much  of  my 
career thinking about or living through the issues studied by Hyman Minsky, it is a very great 
honour to be here.  
I am going to begin with the birth of the Federal Reserve. And then I am going to discuss the 
birth, a century later, of a new institutional framework for financial stability in the UK.  
It  is  almost  a  hundred  years  since  the  Federal  Reserve  was  established,  after  successive 
waves of bank runs. Against the instincts and interests of the followers of President Andrew 
Jackson, America finally found itself with a central bank. Its purpose, cast in 1913, was “to 
furnish  an  elastic  currency,  to  afford  a  means  of  rediscounting  commercial  paper,  [and]  to 
establish a more effective supervision of banking in the United States”. In other words, the 
Federal  Reserve  was  to  be  the  lender  of  last  resort  and  it  was  to  ensure  stability  of  the 
banking  system:  a  financial  stability  mandate.  Experience  showed  that  instability  often 
followed  a  speculative  bubble  and  that  such  bubbles  were  often  fuelled  by  credit.  The 
framers of the 1913 Act were, accordingly, anxious to avoid the new Federal Reserve making 
it easier for the private sector to lend into such bubbles. The Act gave the Fed permission to 
“discount  notes  and  bills  of  exchange  arising  out  of  actual  commercial  transactions  for 
agricultural,  industrial  or  commercial  purposes”.  But  it  barred  the  Fed  from  rediscounting 
paper  “drawn  for  the  purpose  of  carrying  or  trading  in  stocks,  bonds  or  other  [private] 
investment  securities”.  The  Real  Bills  Doctrine  was,  therefore,  a  driving  principle  of  the 
Federal Reserve’s original charter. And in 1935 Senator Carter Glass, who had sponsored 
the 1913 Act, resisted attempts by Fed Chairman Marriner Eccles to change that part of the 
Fed’s  mandate,  because  he  blamed  the  Great  Depression  on  the  preceding  speculative 
excess. 
The mandate did not really have anything to say about preserving nominal stability – that is, 
low  and  stable  inflation  of  consumer  prices.  So  long  as  the  Gold  Standard  delivered,  that 
lacuna was probably masked. But as the Fed became the anchor for a flat currency, the Real 
Bills  Doctrine  proved  woefully  inadequate  as  a  founding  precept.  Lending  only  against 
self-liquidating commercial paper does nothing to prevent an acceleration in prices, as the 
central bank’s balance sheet simply accommodates any increase in credit driven by a rising 
general  price  level.  As  central  banks  around  the  world  came  to  concentrate  on preserving 
stability in the value of their money in terms of goods and services, they put the Real Bills 
Doctrine in the dustbin of ideas. 
Wind forward a hundred years. The buzzword is “macroprudential”. And the talk is of how to 
lean against speculative bubbles or tame the credit cycle; of how to contain contagion and 
systemic  crises;  of  the  role  of  central  bank  liquidity  facilities;  and  of  how  to  give  banking 
supervision a more systemic perspective.1 It is striking that those concerns are not so distant 
from  those  of  the  framers  of  the  1913  Federal  Reserve  Act.  Much  is  said  about  “missing 
                                                 
1   See, for example, “Enhancing Financial Stability and Resilience: Macroprudential Policy, Tools and Systems 
for the Future, Group of 30, 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
instruments”. It has been a mistake for central bankers, and the legislators to whom they are 
accountable,  to  focus  at  different  points  of  their  history  on  only  one  of  either  the 
stability-threatening excesses of (real) credit cycles or, alternatively, inflation. In the language 
of the Bank of England’s 1991 statement of Core Purposes, central banks need a mandate 
for both monetary stability and financial stability. 
In the UK that will now be enshrined by putting a Financial Policy Committee alongside the 
Bank of England’s existing Monetary Policy Committee. The Committee has recently been 
established, on a non-statutory basis for the interim. But that poses a host of questions. How 
do we define financial stability? What is the FPC and what is its objective? Why should it be 
separate from the microprudential supervisor, which is also being moved to the Bank? What 
will be the FPC’s instruments? Are they all directed at banks? Will they conflict with monetary 
policy? And, more prosaically, how will the FPC operate and be accountable?  
I shall set the scene with some general reflections on financial stability, including how it might 
be defined, and how its scope extends to the resilience of capital markets as well as that of 
banks  (and  shadow  banks).  After  those  more  general  observations,  I  shall  try  to  answer 
some of the key questions about the FPC. 
What is financial stability? 
Why financial stability matters 
Under legislation introduced in the UK in 2009, the governing body of the Bank of England, 
Court, is required to set out a strategy for the Bank’s financial stability work. We publish it in 
our Annual Report. We have tried to clarify why society should care about financial instability. 
It  is  for  the  obvious  reason  that  we  need  to  preserve  the  key  services  that  the  financial 
system  provides 
the 
intermediation  of  savings  and  investment  via  credit  and  equity;  and  insurance  and  risk 
transfer. In the latest crisis, the payment system was preserved but only at a massive cost to 
the taxpayer, and even then official support operations could not prevent the severe credit 
crunch  that  led  to  a  horrible  global  recession.  That  is  why  we  care.  And  it  underlines  the 
importance of ensuring that the system of credit intermediation (and risk transfer), not only 
the payment system, is robust.  
the  real  economy:  payments  and 
transactions  deposits; 
to 
Instability and resilience  
But  not  every  severe  interruption  in  the  provision  of  financial  services  is  the  result  of 
instability. Instability is characterised by a problem in one of part of the financial system – a 
bank, a market, part of the infrastructure-spreading to other parts and threatening to spiral 
out of control.  
Financial systems are prone to bouts of instability, due to the inherent fragility of the balance 
sheets  of  many  participants,  together  with  the  complex  networks  through  which  they  are 
connected. First, many firms are highly leveraged, meaning that a given fall in the value of 
their assets has a magnified effect on their net worth; and run significant liquidity risks, so 
that  they  can  face  distress  if  their  liabilities  crystallise  before  their  assets.  Given  opacity 
about their financial strength, this can leave such firms exposed to runs when the weather 
turns  nasty.  Second,  as  recently  laid  out  by  Governor  Tarullo,2  a  problem  in  one  firm  can 
spread  via  the  domino  effect  created  by  chains  of  counterparty  credit  exposures;  forced 
asset sales; or contagion due to the reality or perception of common problems.  
                                                 
2   Daniel K Tarullo, “Regulating Systemic Risk”, March 2011. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
And, to be clear, this is not just a vulnerability of firms. Markets too can suffer a self-fulfilling 
evaporation of liquidity. A central element of the recent crisis was, indeed, the drying up of 
liquidity in the ABS markets and the money markets. As liquidity premia soared, many asset 
values  collapsed,  and  the  net  worth  of  many  traders  and  banks  was  eroded.  This  was  a 
vicious circle, because the liquidity of many financial markets depends on short-term traders 
being ready and able to trade, since end-buyers and sellers will not always want to transact 
at the same time. Those traders often depend, in turn, on maintaining access to financing 
from  banks.  Everyone  has  been  reminded,  therefore,  that  the  liquidity  of  markets  and  the 
well-being of leveraged, maturity-mismatched firms are inextricably intertwined.  
Our  capital  markets  and  much  of  the  “plumbing”  of  the  financial  system  –  notably  the 
payments  system  –  rely  on  confidence  in  the  integrity  of  the  assets  being  traded,  in  the 
robustness of counterparties, in the reliability of infrastructure. Crises nearly always involve 
that confidence sliding away. So, although financial systems look solid most of the time, they 
can in fact prove brittle. Their degree of vulnerability or resilience depends, amongst other 
things,  on  the  leverage  and  the  liquidity  mismatch  in  the  system  as  a  whole.  That  entails 
thinking of the system in aggregate (effectively netting out intra-system exposures), in terms 
of  its  position  vis  a  vis  borrowers  and  savers  in  the  rest  of  the  economy.  And  it  means 
thinking of the system distributionally (ie gross), meaning the network of exposures amongst 
firms and taking into account the weakest links in the chain.  
Pulling those various strands together, a definition of financial stability that has informed my 
own contributions to the reform debate is the following:  
“financial stability prevails where the financial system is sufficiently resilient that 
worries about bad states of the world do not affect confidence in the ability of the 
system to deliver its core services to the rest of the economy.” 
The key words are “confidence” and “resilience”. 
“Bad states of the world” obviously include recessions; and other jolts from the real economy, 
due to the accumulation of too much debt within or between countries. Macro imbalances do 
not invariably lead to instability in the financial system, but they do often extend the chain of 
intermediation between savers and investors, can unravel in ways that reduce asset values 
and increase volatility, and are often sustained by accumulating indebtedness. In the face of 
ultimately unsustainable macroeconomic imbalances, whether domestically or internationally, 
the  financial  system  therefore  needs  to  be  more  resilient  than  otherwise.  That  was  badly 
neglected  around  the  western  world  in  the  years  running  up  to  the  current  crisis.  (And  it 
remains a risk going forward.)  
Resilience sounds, and is, highly desirable. But it is not a free good. There are trade-offs. 
And  here  lies  an  important  contrast  with  monetary  policy.  No  one  seriously  believes  that 
there is a trade off in the long run between, on the one hand, inflation and, on the other hand, 
growth  and  employment.  While  a  monetary  authority  can  pump  up  nominal  demand  to 
enhance output and employment in the short run, in the long term the impulse is dissipated in 
a higher price level, with the economy’s real equilibrium determined by real factors alone. But 
in  the  financial  stability  arena,  there  is  a  long-run  trade  off.  An  economy  with  a  repressed 
financial system is unlikely to experience financial instability, but it would have plenty of other 
problems.  
In  consequence,  the  authorities  have  to  set  standards  of  resilience  suited  to  tail  events 
without impairing the wider functioning of the economy. But we also need to be equipped to 
raise the required standard of resilience in the light of changing circumstances, notably if we 
judge the world to have become more threatening than previously foreseen. That is the basis 
for  macroprudential  policymakers,  such  as  the  UK’s  FPC,  being  able  to  deploy  “cyclical” 
instruments, as I shall describe later.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Firms, markets and infrastructure 
The resilience of the system depends on that of its component parts and on how they are 
connected. In the real world, that means firms, markets and infrastructure. It means looking 
for and addressing vulnerabilities or faultlines in all three. And it entails choices, trade offs, 
about  how  far  to  make  individual  firms  robust  and  how  far  to  strengthen  the  system  by 
reducing spillovers from a distressed firm to other firms and markets. 
Amongst firms, plainly banks are a priority. As monetary institutions, they are special. Their 
deposit-liabilities are money. And that enables them to provide committed, on-demand lines 
of credit, ie liquidity, to households and firms in the real economy and to traders in financial 
markets. Firms of all kinds are able to economise on the stock of liquid assets they would 
otherwise  need  to  hold.3  But  banks  can  provide  those  liquidity-insurance  services  only  if 
depositors are confident that they can convert their deposits into cash (central bank money). 
That  does  not  mean  that  every  bank  must  be  completely  safe,  but  it  does  mean  that  the 
resolution  regime  must  be  equipped  to  preserve  their  core  monetary  services  whether  by 
resurrection or the transfer of transactions-deposits to a healthy competitor.  
In talking about banks, I must stress that it is the economic substance that matters, not the 
legal  form.  We  must  also  take  care  with  the  resilience  of  “shadow  banking”  firms  and 
structures characterised by liquidity transformation and leverage.4 And we must take account 
of  the  network  of  exposures  and  behavioural  influences  of  funds,  long-term  institutions, 
brokers etc.  
They are all connected by markets. 
I  find  it  is  helpful  to  distinguish  between  those  markets  whose  role  is  to  provide  essential 
support  to  banking  and  insurance,  and  those  markets  that  directly  deliver  the  financial 
system’s core functions to the rest of the economy.  
For example, the overnight wholesale money markets are vitally important, because banking 
could  not  operate  without  them.  They  are  effectively  part  of  the  payments  system 
infrastructure,  and  have  long  been  of  concern  to  central  banks.  The  financing  markets, 
notably  repo,  fall  into  the  same  broad  category,  although  the  authorities  could  have  been 
closer to the securities lending markets over the past decade. There is a lesson in that.  
Some  other  markets,  typically  in  the  past  more  distant  from  the  attention  of  the  financial 
stability  authorities,  may  matter  in  their  own  right  to  end  users.  That  is  especially  relevant 
where a significant proportion of the intermediation of savings/investment occurs via capital 
markets  rather  than  via  bank  balance  sheets.  In  the  USA  at  least,  some  securitisation 
markets probably pass that test. In the UK, I would guess that the equity and corporate bond 
markets  do  so.  The  integrity  of  those  core  capital  markets  is  vital.  Such  markets  must  be 
resilient  to  shocks.  Otherwise  disruptions  could  materially  impair  the  supply  of  credit  (and 
equity)  to  the  economy,  with  macroeconomic  and  other  welfare  costs.  When  the 
securitisation markets closed in the USA, it was not realistic for that part of the credit system 
to be reintermediated by the banking system in short order.  
The essential ingredients of a resilient market include a robust post-trade infrastructure for 
clearing  and  settlement.  But  trading  platforms  matter  too,  as  do  disclosure  standards,  and 
even the pattern of demand. In my book, a market is unlikely to be resiliently liquid if demand 
is almost entirely from leveraged investors and traders: not only do they vanish when prices 
stop  rising,  but  prices  are  then  subject  to  the  sudden  force  of  gravity.  Much  of  the 
                                                 
3   Anil Kashyap,  Raghuram Rajan  and Jeremy Stein, “Banks as liquidity providers: an explanation for the co-
existence of lending and deposit-taking”, Journal of Finance, February 2002. 
4   See  “Shadow  Banking,  Financing  Markets  and  Financial  Stability”,  Tucker,  January  2010.  The  Financial 
Stability Board released a first paper on Shadow Banking earlier this week. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
securitisation  markets  would  have  failed  those  tests  from  around  the  middle  of  the  past 
decade.  That  is  a  lesson  we  and  our  successors  will  need  to  recall  when  contemplating 
future innovations.  
Over time the Financial Policy Committee will need to consider whether, as a matter of fact, 
core capital markets in the UK are sufficiently resilient for stability to be preserved in stressed 
conditions. We will not be able to do that without working constructively with the securities 
markets regulator and with infrastructure providers.  
Resilience, risks, and financial firm behaviour 
So  far,  I  have  spoken  as  if  the  external  threats  to  the  financial  system  from  the  business 
cycle and its capacity to withstand the crystallisation of those risks are essentially separate. 
That  is  not  remotely  true,  of  course.  The  behaviour  of  the  financial  system  affects  the 
weather.  
This  is  due  to  the  particular  features  of  the  credit  system.  A  credit  boom  leads  both  to 
borrowers  becoming  overindebted  and,  unless  they  have  shed  the  risk,  to  lenders  finding 
themselves overextended as well. As the probability of default rises, the capacity of lenders 
to absorb default typically becomes impaired. A double whammy. And a credit boom can fuel 
asset price rises, giving a boost to banks’ net worth and back into lending conditions, in an 
apparently virtuous circle, until it proves vicious.5 
It matters enormously, therefore, that the system is prone to periods of exuberance in which 
credit  conditions  become  loose,  borrowers  overextended  and  asset  prices  inflated.  That 
owes  a  lot  to  myopia  about  tail  risks.6  But  incentives  matter  too.  Whether  the  diluted 
incentives of bondholders to price risk in banks prudently, given a belief that they would be 
bailed out. Or the incentives, here in the USA, for Government Sponsored Enterprises such 
as Fannie and Freddie – massive players in global capital markets and so with a significance 
stretching beyond your borders – to take on more risk in lending to poorer households. Or for 
banks to badge illiquid ABS tranches as trading positions in order to benefit from much lower 
Trading  Book  capital  requirements.  Or  for  banks  to  move  credit  portfolios  to  off-balance 
sheet vehicles supported by liquidity lines against which no regulatory capital had to be held. 
I  could  go  on  and  on.  The  microeconomics  of  finance  matters  hugely  to  stability.  The 
faultlines of the system are sometimes obscure.  
And  a  macroprudential  authority  needs,  therefore,  to  be  attentive  to  the  complex  ways  in 
which  the  different  parts  of  the  financial  system  interact,  generating  leverage  and  liquidity 
risk.  Threats  may  often  be  buried  in  the  complex  details  of  the  system  –  subprime  CDO2, 
conduits and SIVs etc in the latest crisis; investment trust cross holdings in the 1920s – but 
the task is to make the connections without getting lost in the trees.  
Which brings me from scene setting to the real world of the new UK framework.  
The UK’s new Financial Policy Committee  
Who we are 
The FPC exists. We will hold our first formal policy meeting in June.  
We  are  a  Committee  of  eleven.  Five  of  us  are  drawn  from  the  executive  of  the  Bank, 
increasing to six when  microprudential supervision of banks and insurers moves  across in 
                                                 
5   Hyun Shin has set this out with great clarity. 
6   See  Tucker,  Comments  at  Clare  College,  discussion  of  Lord  Turner’s  Lecture,  “Reforming  finance:  are  we 
being radical enough?”, Cambridge, February 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
2012/13.  The  two  senior  officials  of  the  UK’s  existing  regulator,  the  Financial  Services 
Authority, are members during the interim period. And once the legislation has passed, the 
chief  executive  of  the  planned  new  securities/consumer  regulator,  the  Financial Conduct 
Authority, will be a member, reflecting, as I have outlined, the vital role of market regulation in 
preserving stability. There are four external members, including from the USA Don Kohn, the 
former Vice Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board.  
The Government expects the legislative process to be complete towards the end of 2012. In 
the meantime, during the interim, non-statutory phase of our existence, the Financial Policy 
Committee has two broad functions: “paving” and “shadowing”. We will pave the way for the 
statutory incarnation of the Committee by advising the government on the instruments and 
powers we could be given by Parliament. And, secondly, we will as far as possible shadow 
the role of the statutory FPC, which essentially means advising the FSA on where and how it 
should use its regulatory tools for system-wide ends.  
So what are those ends? They are consistent with my earlier overview of financial stability.  
The Objective of the FPC 
The UK government has proposed that the FPC’s main responsibility should be taking action 
to remove or reduce systemic risks with a view to protecting and enhancing the resilience of 
the UK financial system (my emphasis). “Systemic risk” is defined to embrace both faultlines 
in the structure of the financial system, ie the way its components are joined up; and cyclical 
threats from unsustainable levels of leverage, debt or credit growth. 
Two glosses on that are warranted. 
First, the government’s plan does not entail the FPC being held accountable for fine tuning 
the credit cycle, but rather for ensuring stability by maintaining the resilience of the financial 
system. An example might help. Say that in the face of a credit boom, the FPC raised banks’ 
capital requirements. That might help to slow the boom, and it would be helpful if it did so. 
But even if the boom continued, by virtue of having higher capital ratios the banking system 
should be more resilient when the bubble burst. If those FPC actions prevented the banks 
going bust, the downswing in the credit cycle, and so in the business cycle, would be less 
severe  because  the  flow  of  credit  services  could  be  sustained.  That  would  be  a  success. 
Perhaps not always a glorious success, but a whole lot better than where we are right now.  
Secondly,  due  to  the  trade  offs  I  described  earlier,  the  government  has  proposed  that  the 
FPC  be  subject  to  a  constraint  that  it  should  not  act  to  preserve  stability  at  the  cost  of 
significantly  impairing  the  capacity  of  the  financial  sector  to  contribute  to  medium-to-long 
term economic growth. What this means in practice is that when faced with an immediate or 
incipient  threat  to  stability,  we  must  try  to  find  a  solution  that  avoids  damage  to  long-term 
growth. That discipline is welcomed by the Bank. 
This  is  obviously  all  novel  stuff.  It  is  therefore  helpful  that  the  government  plans  to  ask 
Parliament for a power periodically to flesh out the statutory objective, via a Remit from the 
Chancellor of the Exchequer – an arrangement that has worked well in the monetary field in 
the UK. It will enable practical lessons to be incorporated into the regime over time.  
Why is the UK’s macroprudential body separate from microsupervision? 
Most  central  banks  have  traditionally  regarded  their  contribution  to  financial  stability  as 
deriving from their markets and banking supervision functions. That is explicit in the Federal 
Reserve’s  1913  statute,  with  which  I  began  these  remarks.  And  given  the  UK’s  heavily 
concentrated  banking  system,  effective  banking  supervision  is  obviously  an  essential 
precondition for preserving stability. But in terms of how organisations work in the real world, 
the flaw in relying entirely on this is that it assumes that those operational areas of the central 
bank  will  invariably  make  time  and  space  to  address  the  financial  system  as  a  system. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Incentives work in the opposite direction. Nearly all the bank supervisors I have known over 
the past three decades have invariably been drawn towards the parts of their InBox about 
individual  firms,  for  the  simple  reason  that  that  is  where  their  individual  accountability  is 
starkest. At its heart, the FPC is a device to overcome this problem. It charges a group of 
policymakers to step aside from the fray, resisting myopia and synthesising the perspectives 
of supervision, securities regulation, market operations and macroeconomics, with the goal 
of identifying and addressing the big developments that could jeopardise stability.  
Lest  it  be  doubted,  that  task  will,  of  course,  be  unachievable  without  a  suitable  flow  of 
information from the bank supervisors (and the securities regulators) to the FPC and its staff 
in the Bank. The FPC’s instruments will not be aimed at individual firms per se. But we are 
expecting  that  the  Committee  will  be  briefed  by  Hector Sants’  supervisory  team  on  the 
circumstances of the most significant firms, and to be informed routinely about shifts in the 
supervisors’ ratings of firms generally. Symmetrically, the FPC’s concerns will surely help the 
efforts  of  the  microsupervisors.  In  particular,  the  macro  perspective  can  make  a  big 
contribution to the design of stress tests of firms’ soundness, whether “top down” stress tests 
conducted  for  the  FPC  itself  or  “bottom  up”  stress  tests  conducted  as  part  of  micro 
supervision.  And  the  markets  perspective  can  help  to  identify  issues  or  types  of  firm  that 
warrant  closer  examination.  We  need  to  make  that  work  on  the  ground.  Being  part  of  the 
same organisation, the Bank of England, will help. The legislation needs to wipe away legal 
impediments  to  the  free  flow  of  information.  And  we  need  to  embed  a  culture  of  mutual 
respect and co-operation.  
The FPC’s instruments 
But what will the FPC be able to do? 
What, indeed, would the world’s financial stability authorities have done if they could have 
their time again? The answer is surely reasonably clear in the programme of the Financial 
Stability Board, as endorsed by the G20 leaders.  
On  markets,  we  –  where  “we”  throughout  is  the  authorities  internationally  –  would  have 
subjected the burgeoning CDS markets to the disciplines of central clearing in, I would say, 
around 2003–05; and the CDO markets to a more rigorous transparency regime. We could 
have contained the extent to which shadow banks could be built within insurance companies, 
money market funds, securities lending markets, etc. We would all have been noisier about 
the  distortions  in  global  capital  markets  caused  by  Fannie  and  Freddie.  We  would  have 
pressed  harder  on  the  adequacy  of  the  consolidated  supervision  of  US  securities  dealers. 
We would have plugged the most obvious problems in the Basel Capital Accord for banks, so 
that  they  were  less  levered;  and  we  would  have  remembered  that  banks  need  to  carry  a 
liquidity  cushion,  and  that  treasury  functions  should  not  be  profit  centres.  We  would  have 
been attentive to the opacity around the ABS market; and to the cliff effects stemming from 
mechanistic  reliance  on  rating  agency  ratings  by  banks,  investors  and  regulatory  regimes. 
And, finally, I trust that we would have been more exacting in following up the early-2000s’ 
G10/Financial Stability Forum report on the difficulties of resolving Large Complex Financial 
Institutions.  
Some of those interventions would have addressed long-standing structural faultlines in the 
global financial system. Others, perhaps more speculatively, would have been contingent on 
cyclical conditions. For example, a respectable macroprudential authority would ideally have 
tightened banks’ capital requirements against exposures to property and to shadow banking. 
Perhaps more compellingly, I think a macroprudential authority equipped with powers to do 
things  would  at  least  have  asked  whether  the  system  was  sufficiently  resilient  given  a 
pervasive sense, from the market itself, that risk was underpriced.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Lo  and  behold,  the  sphere  of  influence  of  the  FPC  will  come  via  both  “structural”  and 
“cyclical” instruments.7 
Once  the  legislation  is  in  place,  the  FPC  will  be  able  to  make  Recommendations,  on  a 
“comply or explain” basis, to the Prudential Regulation Authority and to the Financial Conduct 
Authority  (the  planned  securities  markets-cum-consumer  regulator)  on  their  rules  and 
policies. And the FPC will also be able to Direct the microregulators to take certain kinds of 
action,  to  be  set  out  in  secondary  legislation;  that  is  so  that  our  Parliament  decides  the 
spheres in which the microregulators will be obliged to follow the FPC’s lead. On the US side 
of the Atlantic, some of you will recognise echoes here of the Paulson Plan for the creation of 
a financial stability authority in the Federal Reserve.  
Furthermore, FPC will have a responsibility to advise the government on when the perimeter 
of  the  PRA’s  microprudential  supervision  should  change.  Very  obviously,  this  is  aimed  at 
countering  the  risk  of  regulatory  arbitrage  undermining  attempts  to  tighten  up  banking 
regulation.  It  also  recognises  that  the  shape  of  the  financial  system  is  bound  to  evolve  in 
unexpected ways over the years. The regulatory regime needs to be adaptable. 
it 
to  be  warranted, 
the  FPC  could  potentially 
It is not all about banks: instruments addressed to network issues 
That underlines that the UK’s new macroprudential regime is not all about banks.  
For  example,  were 
intervene  via 
Recommendations  or  Directions  to  the  microregulators  on  disclosures  made  around  the 
issuance and structuring of securities; on the trading infrastructure of markets, to  increase 
the likelihood that liquidity would prove resilient under stress; on limits on large exposures 
amongst  different  kinds  of  firm;  and  on  the  rules  of  the  game  for  the  many  varieties  of 
shadow banking.  
On the last, for example, it is no secret that, speaking only for myself, I should like to see the 
rules for money market mutual funds altered to address the “break the buck” problem. That 
could be done either by making MMMFs hold capital, which essentially amounts to turning 
them  into  de  jure  banks;  or  by  requiring  MMMFs  to  mark-to-market  daily,  so  that  they 
become Variable Net-Asset Value investment vehicles. In other parts of the shadow banking 
forest, I hope that we can consider the merits of the industry establishing a Trade Repository 
for data on what goes on in the securities lending market, including on the reinvestment of 
cash or securities collateral. While that will sound technical, this is one of the world’s biggest 
financing markets: firms and the authorities need at least to be able to gauge broadly what is 
going on. And, to give a third example, I hope that we will treat ostensibly “non-bank” prime 
brokers as banks if they finance their business with client balances that can be withdrawn on 
demand.  
My  FPC  colleagues  will  not  necessarily  agree  with  all  of  that,  but  I  hope  the  examples 
illustrate that we are not going to focus myopically only on the banking system.  
“Cyclical” instruments: how does macroprudential policy relate to monetary policy? 
The cyclical dimension of macroprudential policy is essentially about leaning against credit 
booms with a view to maintaining financial system resilience.8 
                                                 
7   See Chapter 2 of HMT’s Consultative Document, “A new approach to financial regulation: building a stronger 
system”, February 2011. 
I  set  out  the  Bank’s  developing  thinking  in  this  area  in  Tucker,  “The  debate  on  financial  system  resilience: 
macroprudential instruments” in the Barclays Annual Lecture, October 2009. See also the Bank’s paper: “The 
role of macroprudential policy: A discussion paper”, November 2009. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches
8  
8 
 The benchmark instrument, in the sense that it will definitely exist, will be the countercyclical 
buffer (CCB) in the Basel 3 Capital Accord. In the UK, it will be the FPC that decides whether 
to switch off the semi-automatic application of the CCB when triggered by the ratio of credit 
to GDP and other indicators exceeding certain thresholds. (It is not altogether clear, by the 
way, who will have that responsibility in other countries; the function requires a system-wide 
perspective  and  a  macroeconomic  capability  and  so  is  not  exclusively  in  the  domain  of 
microprudential regulators.)  
Beyond  the  one  instrument  agreed  internationally  so  far,  the  UK  government  is  also 
considering whether to give the FPC a variety of other instruments. These include varying 
liquidity  requirements;  and  varying  capital  requirements  against  specific  types  of  exposure 
(“risk  weights”)  and/or  minimum  haircuts  for  specific  types  of  secured  lending,  whether 
financing  hedge  funds  etc  or  Loan-To-Value  ratios  for  property-related  lending.  The 
availability of such targeted instruments might be especially useful where the FPC wished to 
mitigate  risks  from  overexuberance  and  collective  imprudence  in  lending  to  a  particular 
sector  without  necessarily  affecting  credit  conditions  more  generally.  Targeting  a  specific 
area of business might also sometimes help to resolve a collective action problem sustaining 
a bubble if enough lenders themselves thought risk was being underpriced. 
That  is  all  about  maintaining  the  resilience  of  firms  as  and  when  the  environment  proves 
more threatening than catered for in the standard, static regulatory requirements. There is 
also  the  possibility,  argued  by  Governor  Carney  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  that  maintaining 
appropriate minimum margining requirements across the cycle would help to prevent liquidity 
spirals in key funding markets.9 The Basel Committee of the Global Financial System, when 
under  the  chair  of  my  new  colleague  Don  Kohn,  has  published  a  review  of  this  important 
area.10 
The interim FPC will have to advise HMG over the next year or so on which instruments in 
particular we think we should be granted by Parliament.  
In  their  different  ways,  as  well  as  making  the  system  more  resilient,  they  would  have  the 
effect  of  intervening  in  the  (real)  credit  cycle.  And  so,  in  some  degree,  this  endeavour 
recovers something of the spirit of the Real-Bills Doctrine disciples of a century ago.  
In consequence, this part of the macroprudential scene has, naturally, posed questions about 
how it will interact with the setting of monetary policy. Not that the nominal business cycle 
and the credit cycle are the same thing or always perfectly aligned. In the years during which 
the  latest  crisis  was  brewed,  credit  conditions  were  plainly  too  loose,  but  the  UK  did  not 
obviously  experience  burgeoning  nominal  demand  growth  or  upward  pressures  on 
underlying inflation.  
Nevertheless, influences will obviously flow in both directions. If the FPC requires lenders to 
carry higher capital, liquidity or collateral, that will affect credit conditions and so the outlook 
for  aggregate  demand  and  inflation.  In  the  other  direction, monetary  policy  settings  plainly 
affect asset prices, and so influence credit conditions through the net worth of borrowers and 
lenders. Also, it seems to me plausible that they affect risk-seeking behaviour,11 especially in 
a world in which many investment managers have nominal return targets.  
Given those two-way interactions, some commentators worry about co-ordination problems 
from  having  separate  monetary  policy  and  macroprudential  committees  with  different 
objectives.  
                                                 
9   “Reforming the International Financial System”, Mark Carney, Bank of Canada 2009. 
10   “The  role  of  margin  requirements  and  haircuts  in  procyclicality”,  CGFS  Paper  No.36,  Bank  for  International 
Settlements. 
11   See, for example, De Nicolo, Dell’Ariccia, Laeven and Valencia, “Monetary Policy and Bank Risk Taking”, IMF, 
2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
in 
I  have  already  explained 
the  context  of  having  distinctive  machinery 
for 
As 
microsuperivsion,  the  UK  has  favoured  having  a  separate  macroprudential  committee  in 
order  to  ensure  that  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  is  not  neglected.  The  “macro”  in 
macroprudential  is  not  synonymous  with  macroeconomic  but,  as  I  have  said,  points  us 
towards  thinking  of  the  financial  system  as  a  system.  The  members  of  the  FPC  need  a 
knowledge base that, while overlapping, is different from that of the MPC. They need to know 
about the microstructure of the capital markets as well as about cyclical credit conditions. 
A number of features of the FPC regime are relevant to ensuring effective co-existence with 
the MPC. Neither has goal independence. The objectives of both are set by the government. 
The  MPC  is  charged  with  managing  the  path  of  nominal  demand  to  achieve  an  inflation 
target,  while  the  planned  function  of  the  FPC  is  to  ensure  the  resilience  of  the  financial 
system.  Although  the  FPC’s  mission  does  not  lend  itself  to  the  disciplines  of  a  numerical 
target,  government  could  use  the  Remit  to  check  any  systematically  odd  interpretations  of 
what counts as Stability. 
We recognise, however, that there could be challenges. That might emerge from signs of a 
boost (or hit) to productivity. Improved future productivity would tend to cause both current 
spending and borrowing to rise, given the prospect of higher permanent incomes down the 
road, but before the improved supply capacity was effective. In that case, monetary policy 
and  macroprudential  policy  might  move,  if  at  all,  in  the  same  direction:  towards  tightening 
and building resilience. That would not necessarily be so in the event of an immediate but 
temporary  shift  in  productivity  (or  the  terms  of  trade).  In  those  circumstances,  monetary 
policymakers might be faced with a temporary undershoot of the inflation target, while credit 
growth still picked up. But the task of the FPC in those circumstances would not be to fine 
tune  credit  growth.  Its  first  order  challenge  would  be  to  reach  a  judgment  on  whether  the 
financial  system  was  undermining  its  own  resilience  by  getting  carried  away  in  extending 
credit in an environment of rising asset prices and optimism about future output levels. The 
FPC  would  need  neither  to  obstruct  an  improvement  in  the  underlying  performance  of  the 
economy, nor let the party get out of control. But that is what Taking Away the Punchbowl is 
about. The same difficult judgments would face a combined monetary-and-macroprudential 
decision maker. And a separate monetary policymaker would have a shared interest in the 
downside risks to inflation not being exacerbated by the prospect of a credit bust following an 
unchecked boom.  
In those kind of circumstances, we should be helped by the tempo of the two endeavours 
differing.  The  FPC  is  less  likely  to  make  frequent  course  changes.  That  is  reflected  in  its 
meeting routinely on a quarterly basis, contrasting with the MPC’s monthly meetings. So, as 
in the relationship between monetary policy and fiscal policy, the MPC will be able to take 
into  account  perturbations  to  aggregate  demand  from  the  FPCs  interventions.  Both 
committees are part of the Bank of England, so the executive of the Bank will ensure that 
there  is a  common  information  base.  FPC  members  are  invited  to  the  monthly  briefing  for 
MPC members. And vice versa, consistent with MPC members already being free to attend 
the internal financial stability briefings established over the past year or so. And finally, there 
will be a common chair, the Governor, and overlapping membership. The members common 
to  the  two  committees  –  four  of  us  –  will  be  in  a  minority  on  both  to  ensure  that  our 
perspective does not dominate either. 
How will the FPC operate and be accountable? 
Although  separate,  the  FPC  will  in  many  respects  operate  in  much  the  same  way  as  our 
Monetary  Policy  Committee.  There  will  be  a  schedule  of  regular  policy  meetings:  four  per 
year.  A  record  of  each  will  be  published.  And  twice  a  year,  the  analysis  underpinning  our 
Committee’s deliberations and decisions will be set out in the Financial Stability Report. The 
role  of  the  FSR  will,  therefore,  become  more  like  that  of  the  Bank’s  Inflation  Report  in 
monetary policy. Put crudely, warnings will carry greater weight under a regime where the 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
FPC can actually take action. Consistent with that, the FSR will in future be launched via a 
press conference. 
We expect, and hope, to be called regularly to give evidence to the Treasury Committee of 
the House of Commons, and perhaps Committees of the House of Lords too. Public hearings 
will help to keep financial stability issues in the public eye, and us on our toes, even when 
stability once again prevails and is expected to last. The Select Committee process, and the 
debate it sparks, will be a vital bulwark against complacency. 
It will also give us the most important public platform to explain and defend our decisions, 
which sooner or later will prove unpopular. Unlikely as it may now seem, there will come a 
day  when  much  of  the  public,  businesses  and  banks  find  themselves  on  the  same  side, 
united in their opposition to the FPC taking away the Punchbowl before the party gets totally 
out of control. 
But the FPC will not be like the MPC in all respects. In contrast to monetary policy decisions, 
at least as practiced in the UK where we decide via individual votes, we will aim to reach 
decisions  by  consensus  (although  there  will  be  provision  for  voting).  That  is  essentially 
because  of  the  wide  range  of  issues  the  FPC  will  consider  and  the  range  of  instruments 
potentially under our control.  
Another contrast with monetary policy is that, in some respects, we are entering unchartered 
territory  for  a  developed  economy.  We  will  all  –  policymakers,  bankers,  investors, 
commentators, politicians – be learning about how, for example, varying capital, liquidity or 
collateral requirements is transmitted into the credit markets and the economy more widely. I 
therefore expect us to publish papers on how we approach our task and on the underlying 
economics. And, through the Remit process I described earlier, the government will be able 
to adapt the regime at the edges as we all learn. And we will need to learn, sometimes from 
mistakes or missed opportunities. 
The international dimension 
I  have  discussed  the  interaction  of  the  UK’s  macroprudential  regime  with  our  domestic 
arrangements for microsupervision and for monetary policy. But the third set of interactions 
will be with our counterparts in other countries.  
This  is  especially  important  to  the  UK.  London  hosts  what  is  probably  the  world’s  most 
international  financial  centre.  Crucially  for  us,  it  is  not  an  entrepot.  It  is  more  than  an 
important source of jobs and tax revenues. Many of the overseas firms active in the City are 
also  active  in  providing  services  to  parts  of  the  UK’s  real  economy.  We  therefore  have  a 
double stake in their safety and soundness. If they get into distress, there are spillovers to 
UK financial firms through wholesale markets, but also at least a temporary reduction in the 
financial services available to UK firms and households.  
For all these reasons, the UK has a special stake in the adequacy of international standards 
for  financial  firms  and  markets.  And,  hosting  many  subsidiaries  of  major  global  firms,  our 
supervisors  need  to  play  a  special  role  in  the  collective  consolidated  supervision  of 
internationally Systemically Important Financial Institutions (SIFIs). 
This extends into the macroprudential arena. At a global level, we are active participants in 
the  Financial  Stability  Board.  And,  regionally,  the  UK  authorities  will  be  engaged  in  the 
European  Supervisory  Authorities.  Our  Governor  is  first  Vice  Chairman  of  the  European 
Systemic Risk Board (on which I and Adair Turner, Chairman of the FSA, also sit). The FPC 
might well find itself wanting the Bank executive to take an issue with EU-wide ramifications 
to the ESRB or to the European Banking Authority, Markets Authority or Insurance Authority. 
And  sometimes  the  FPC  may  find  itself  wanting  to  follow up  an  EU-wide  recommendation 
from the ESRB.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
Co-operation will be especially important in the deployment of “cyclical” instruments. If one 
country tightens capital or liquidity requirements on exposures to its domestic economy, the 
effect will be diluted if lenders elsewhere are completely free to step into the gap. Basel and 
the  EU  are  addressing  how  to  handle  that  where  the  instrument  is  the  Basel  3 
Countercyclical Buffer. But we need to explore whether other potential instruments should be 
subject to similar rules of the game. This is not like monetary policy with a floating exchange 
rate. 
 The big challenges 
The reform of the financial system is a global endeavour. Much of it is about strengthening 
existing regimes. But two parts of it are essentially new. One, on which I spend a good deal 
of my time, I have not discussed this evening: building effective resolution regimes for the 
world’s largest and most complex firms.12 
The other new challenge is building macroprudential regimes. This is about plugging a gap 
between microprudential regulation and macroeconomic policy. It will entail the following: 
 
 
 
focusing on the resilience of the system as a whole 
on “shadow banks” as well as banks 
attending to core capital markets and infrastructure as well as to the robustness of 
firms 
increasing transparency to reduce, but no doubt not eliminate, myopia 
attending to incentives that can distort behaviour in stability-threatening ways 
adapting requirements to changing conditions, including leaning against the wind 
co-operating  closely  with  the  securities  market  regulators,  as  well  as  with  the  line 
supervisors of banks and insurers 
transparency and accountability. 
 
This  will  not  be  easy.  And  in  a  world  of  global  capital  markets,  it  is  unavoidably  a  shared 
enterprise. National authorities will fail unless we work together. Which is why I am giving this 
speech here.  
Governor  King  and  I  have  long  believed  that  the  market  intelligence  available  to  central 
banks  through  our  operational  roles  has  a  central  place  in  identifying  threats  to  stability, 
whether  exuberance  in  markets  or  faultlines  in  the  fabric  of  the  system.  If  that  is  true  of 
central banks in general, it is especially so for the Bank of England and the Fed, based as we 
are  in  the  two  most  significant  financial  centres.  The  partnership  between  our  institutions, 
going back to Benjamin Strong and Montagu Norman, is more important than ever. We need 
to maintain a free flow of information and ideas. We owe that to the public we each serve, 
and we owe it to the rest of the central banking and macroprudential community. As those of 
us at the Bank of England build the UK’s Financial Policy Committee, we will need the active 
support of you all here and, in particular, of our colleagues from around the Federal Reserve 
system, for whom central banking began very nearly a century ago.  
                                                 
12   See Tucker, “Developing an EU cross-border crisis management framework”, September 2010. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
