Ben S Bernanke: Implementation of the Dodd-Frank Act 
Testimony  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal 
Reserve System, before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, US Senate, 
Washington DC, 17 February 2011. 
 Chairman Johnson, Ranking Member Shelby, and other members of the Committee, thank 
you for the opportunity to testify about the Federal Reserve’s implementation of the Dodd-
Frank  Wall  Street  Reform  and  Consumer  Protection  Act  of  2010  (Dodd-Frank  Act).  The 
Dodd-Frank Act addresses critical gaps and weaknesses in the U.S. regulatory framework, 
many  of  which  were  revealed  by  the  recent  financial  crisis.  The  Federal  Reserve  is 
committed to working with the other U.S financial regulatory agencies to implement the act 
effectively and expeditiously. We are also cooperating with our international counterparts to 
further strengthen financial regulation, to ensure a level playing field across countries, and to 
enhance  international  supervisory  cooperation.  And  we  have  revamped  the  supervisory 
function at the Federal Reserve to allow us to better meet the objectives of the act.  
The act gives the Federal Reserve important responsibilities both to make rules to implement 
the  law  and  to  apply  the  new  rules.  In  particular,  the  act  requires  the  Federal  Reserve  to 
complete more than 50 rulemakings and sets of formal guidelines, as well as a number of 
studies  and  reports.  We  have  also  been  assigned  formal  responsibilities  to  consult  and 
collaborate with other agencies on a substantial number of additional rules, provisions, and 
studies. So that we meet our obligations on time, we are drawing on expertise and resources 
from  across  the  Federal  Reserve  System  in  banking  supervision,  economic  research, 
financial  markets,  consumer  protection,  payments,  and  legal  analysis.  In  all,  more  than 
300 members  of  the  Federal  Reserve  staff  are  working  on  Dodd-Frank  implementation 
projects.  We  have  created  a  senior  staff  position  to  coordinate  our  efforts  and  have 
developed project-reporting and tracking tools to facilitate management and oversight of all 
of our implementation responsibilities.  
We have made considerable progress in carrying out our assigned responsibilities. We have 
been providing significant support to the Financial Stability Oversight Council, of which the 
Federal  Reserve  is  a  member.  We  are  assisting  the  council  in  designing  its  systemic  risk 
monitoring  and  evaluation  process  and  in  developing  its  analytical  framework  and 
procedures for identifying systemically important nonbank firms and financial market utilities. 
We  also  are  helping  the  new  Office  of  Financial  Research  at  the  Treasury  Department 
develop potential data reporting standards to support the council’s systemic risk monitoring 
and evaluation duties. We contributed significantly to the council’s recent studies – one on 
the  Volcker  rule’s  restrictions  on  banking  entities’  proprietary  trading  and  private  fund 
activities and a second one on the act’s financial-sector concentration limit. And we are now 
developing for public comment the necessary rules to implement these important restrictions 
and limits. Last week, the Board adopted a final rule to ensure that activities prohibited by the 
Volcker rule are divested or terminated in the time period required by the act.  
We also have been moving forward rapidly in other areas. Last fall, we issued a study on the 
potential  effect  of  the  act’s  credit  risk  retention  requirements  on  securitization  markets,  as 
well  as  an  advance  notice  of  proposed  rulemaking  on  the  use  of  credit  ratings  in  the 
regulations  of  the  federal  banking  agencies.  In  addition,  in  December,  the  Board  and  the 
other federal banking agencies requested comment on a proposed rule that would implement 
the  capital  floors  required  by  the  Collins  Amendment.  In  December,  we  also  requested 
comment on proposed rules that would establish standards for debit card interchange fees 
and  implement  the  act’s  prohibition  on  network  exclusivity  arrangements  and  routing 
restrictions.  In  January,  the  Board,  together  with  the  Office  of  the  Comptroller  of  the 
Currency,  Federal  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation,  and  Office  of  Thrift  Supervision  (OTS), 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
provided the Congress a comprehensive report on the agencies’ progress and plans relating 
to the transfer of the supervisory authority of the OTS for thrifts and thrift holding companies. 
In  addition,  as  provided  by  the  act,  we  and  the  Federal  Reserve  Banks  each  established 
offices  to  consolidate  and  build  on  our  existing  equal  opportunity  programs  to  promote 
diversity in management, employment, and business activities.  
We continue to work closely and cooperatively with other agencies to develop joint rules to 
implement the credit risk retention requirements for securitizations, resolution plans (or "living 
wills") for large bank holding companies and council-designated nonbank firms, and capital 
and margin requirements for swap dealers and major swap participants. We are consulting 
with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) and the Commodity Futures Trading 
Commission  (CFTC)  on  a  variety  of  rules  to  enhance  the  safety  and  efficiency  of  the 
derivatives markets, including rules that would require most standardized derivatives to be 
centrally  traded  and  cleared,  require  the  registration  and  prudential  regulation  of  swap 
dealers  and  major  swap  participants,  and  improve  the  transparency  and  reporting  of 
derivatives  transactions.  We  also  are  coordinating  with  the  SEC  and  the  CFTC  on  the 
agencies’ respective rulemakings on risk-management standards for financial market utilities, 
and we are working with market regulators and central banks in other countries to update the 
international standards for these types of utilities.  
The  transfer  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s  consumer  protection  responsibilities  specified  in  the 
act to the new Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection (CFPB) is well under way. A team at 
the Board, headed by Governor Duke, is working closely with the staff at the CFPB and at 
the  Treasury  to  facilitate  the  transition.  We  have  provided  technical  assistance  as  well  as 
staff members to the CFPB to assist it in setting up its functions. We have finalized funding 
agreements and provided initial funding to the CFPB. Moreover, we have made substantial 
progress toward a framework for transferring Federal Reserve staff members to the CFPB 
and integrating CFPB employees into the relevant Federal Reserve benefit programs.  
One  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s  most  important  Dodd-Frank  implementation  projects  is  to 
develop more-stringent prudential standards for all large banking organizations and nonbank 
firms  designated  by  the  council.  Besides  capital,  liquidity,  and  resolution  plans,  these 
standards will include Federal Reserve- and firm-conducted stress tests, new counterparty 
credit  limits,  and  risk-management  requirements.  We  are  working  to  produce  a  well-
integrated  set  of  rules  that  will  significantly  strengthen  the  prudential  framework  for  large, 
complex financial firms and the financial system.  
Complementing these efforts under Dodd-Frank, the Federal Reserve has been working for 
some time with other regulatory agencies and central banks around the world to design and 
implement a stronger set of prudential requirements for internationally active banking firms. 
These  efforts  resulted  in  the  adoption  in  the  summer  of  2009  of  more-stringent  regulatory 
capital  standards  for  trading  activities  and  securitization  exposures.  And,  of  course,  it  also 
includes the agreements reached in the past couple of months on the major elements of the 
new  Basel  III  prudential  framework  for  globally  active  banks.  Basel  III  should  make  the 
financial system more stable and reduce the likelihood of future financial crises by requiring 
these banks to hold more and better-quality capital and more-robust liquidity buffers. We are 
committed to adopting the Basel III framework in a timely manner. In December 2010, we 
requested  comment  with  the  other  U.S.  banking  agencies  on  proposed  rules  that  would 
implement the 2009 trading book reforms, and we are already working to incorporate other 
aspects of the Basel III framework into U.S. regulations.  
To  be  effective,  regulation  must  be  supported  by  strong  supervision.  The  act  expands  the 
supervisory  responsibilities  of  the  Federal  Reserve  to  include  thrift  holding  companies  and 
nonbank  financial  firms  that  the  council  designates  as  systemically  important,  along  with 
certain payment, clearing, and settlement utilities that are similarly designated. Reflecting the 
expansion  of  our  supervisory  responsibilities,  we  are  working  to  ensure  that  we  have  the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
necessary  resources  and  expertise  to  oversee  a  broader  range  of  financial  firms  and 
business models.  
The act also requires supervisors to take a macroprudential approach; that is, the Federal 
Reserve  and  other  financial  regulatory  agencies  are  expected  to  supervise  financial 
institutions and critical infrastructures with an eye toward not only the safety and soundness 
of each individual firm, but also taking into account risks to overall financial stability.  
We  believe  that  a  successful  macroprudential  approach  to  supervision  requires  both  a 
multidisciplinary and wide-ranging perspective. Our experience in 2009 with the Supervisory 
Capital Assessment Program (popularly known as the bank stress tests) demonstrated the 
feasibility  and  benefits  of  employing  such  a  perspective.  Building  on  that  experience  and 
other lessons learned from the recent financial crisis, we have reoriented our supervision of 
the largest, most complex banking firms to include greater use of horizontal, or cross-firm, 
evaluations  of  the  practices  and  portfolios  of  firms,  improved  quantitative  surveillance 
mechanisms, and better use of the broad range of skills of the Federal Reserve staff. And we 
have  created  a  new  Office  of  Financial  Stability  within  the  Federal  Reserve,  which  will 
monitor financial developments across a range of markets and firms and coordinate with the 
council and with other agencies to strengthen systemic oversight.  
The  Federal  Reserve  is  committed  to  its  long-standing  practice  of  ensuring  that  all  of  its 
rulemakings  are  conducted  in  a  fair,  open,  and  transparent  manner.  Accordingly,  we  are 
disclosing  on  our  public  website  summaries  of  all  communications  with  members  of  the 
public – including banks, trade associations, consumer groups, and academics – regarding 
matters  subject  to  a  proposed  or  potential  future  rulemaking  under  the  act.  We  also  have 
implemented  measures  within  the  act  to  enhance  the  Federal  Reserve’s  transparency.  In 
December,  we  publicly  released  detailed  information  regarding  individual  transactions 
conducted between December 1, 2007, and July 20, 2010, across a wide range of Federal 
Reserve  credit  and  liquidity  programs,  and  we  are  developing  the  necessary  processes  to 
disclose  information  concerning  transactions  conducted  after  July  20,  2010,  on  a  delayed 
basis as provided in the act.  
To conclude, the Dodd-Frank Act is a major step forward for financial regulation in the United 
States. The Federal Reserve will work closely with our fellow regulators, the Congress, and 
the Administration to ensure that the law is implemented expeditiously and in a manner that 
best protects the stability of our financial system and our economy.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
