Ben S Bernanke: The economic outlook and monetary and fiscal policy 
Testimony  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  System,  before  the  Committee  on  the  Budget,  US  Senate,  Washington  DC, 
7 January 2011. 
 Chairman Conrad, Senator Sessions, and other members of the Committee, thank you for 
this  opportunity  to  offer  my  views  on  current  economic  conditions,  recent  monetary  policy 
actions, and issues related to the federal budget.  
The economic outlook 
The economic recovery that began a year and a half ago is continuing, although, to date, at a 
pace that has been insufficient to reduce the rate of unemployment significantly.1 The initial 
stages of the recovery, in the second half of 2009 and in early 2010, were largely attributable 
to the stabilization of the financial system, expansionary monetary and fiscal policies, and a 
powerful  inventory  cycle.  Growth  slowed  somewhat  this  past  spring  as  the  impetus  from 
fiscal policy and inventory building waned and as European sovereign debt problems led to 
increased volatility in financial markets.  
More recently, however, we have seen increased evidence that a self-sustaining recovery in 
consumer and business spending may be taking hold. In particular, real consumer spending 
rose  at  an  annual  rate  of  2–1/2  percent  in  the  third  quarter  of  2010,  and  the  available 
indicators  suggest  that  it  likely  expanded  at  a  somewhat  faster  pace  in  the  fourth  quarter. 
Business investment in new equipment and software has grown robustly in recent quarters, 
albeit from a fairly low level, as firms replaced aging equipment and made investments that 
had been delayed during the downturn. However, the housing sector remains depressed, as 
the  overhang  of  vacant  houses  continues  to  weigh  heavily  on  both  home  prices  and 
construction,  and  nonresidential  construction  is  also  quite  weak.  Overall,  the  pace  of 
economic recovery seems likely to be moderately stronger in 2011 than it was in 2010.  
Although  recent  indicators  of  spending  and  production  have  generally  been  encouraging, 
conditions in the labor market have improved only modestly at best. After the loss of nearly 
8–1/2 million jobs in 2008 and 2009, private payrolls expanded at an average of only about 
100,000 per month in 2010 – a pace barely enough to accommodate the normal increase in 
the labor force and, therefore, insufficient to materially reduce the unemployment rate.2 On a 
more  positive  note,  a  number  of  indicators  of  job  openings  and  hiring  plans  have  looked 
stronger in recent months, and initial claims for unemployment insurance declined through 
November and December. Notwithstanding these hopeful signs, with output growth likely to 
be  moderate  in  the  next  few  quarters  and  employers  reportedly  still  reluctant  to  add  to 
payrolls, considerable time likely will be required before the unemployment rate has returned 
to a more normal level. Persistently high unemployment, by damping household income and 
confidence, could threaten the strength and sustainability of the recovery. Moreover, roughly 
40  percent  of  the  unemployed  have  been  out  of  work  for  six  months  or  more.  Long-term 
unemployment not only imposes exceptional hardships on the jobless and their families, but 
                                                 
1  This testimony was submitted before this morning’s employment report for December, which will provide an 
important update on the state of the labor market. 
2  Average job gains for 2010 are through November. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
it also erodes the skills of those workers and may inflict lasting damage on their employment 
and earnings prospects.  
Recent data show consumer price inflation continuing to trend downward. For the 12 months 
ending  in  November,  prices  for  personal  consumption  expenditures  rose  1.0  percent,  and 
inflation excluding the relatively volatile food and energy components – which tends to be a 
better gauge of underlying inflation trends – was only 0.8 percent, down from 1.7 percent a 
year earlier and from about 2–1/2 percent in 2007, the year before the recession began. The 
downward  trend  in  inflation  over  the  past  few  years  is  no  surprise,  given  the  low  rates  of 
resource  utilization  that  have  prevailed  over  that  time.  Indeed,  as  a  result  of  the weak  job 
market,  wage  growth  has  slowed  along  with  inflation;  over  the  12  months  ending  in 
November,  average  hourly  earnings  have  risen  only  1.6  percent.  Despite  the  decline  in 
inflation,  long-run  inflation  expectations  have  remained  stable;  for  example,  the  rate  of 
inflation that households expect over the next 5 to 10 years, as measured by the Thompson 
Reuters/University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers, has remained in a narrow range over 
the past few years. With inflation expectations stable, and with levels of resource utilization 
expected to remain low, inflation is likely to be subdued for some time.  
Monetary policy 
Although it is likely that economic growth will pick up this year and that the unemployment 
rate  will  decline  somewhat,  progress  toward  the  Federal  Reserve’s  statutory  objectives  of 
maximum  employment  and  stable  prices  is  expected  to  remain  slow.  The  projections 
submitted  by  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC)  participants  in  November  showed 
that,  notwithstanding  forecasts  of  increased  growth  in  2011  and  2012,  most  participants 
expected the unemployment rate to be close to 8 percent two years from now. At this rate of 
improvement, it could take four to five more years for the job market to normalize fully.  
FOMC participants also projected inflation to be at historically low levels for some time. Very 
low rates of inflation raise several concerns: First, very low inflation increases the risk that 
new  adverse  shocks  could  push  the  economy  into  deflation,  that  is,  a  situation  involving 
ongoing declines in prices. Experience shows that deflation induced by economic slack can 
lead  to  extended  periods  of  poor  economic  performance;  indeed,  even  a  significant 
perceived risk of deflation may lead firms to be more cautious about investment and hiring. 
Second, with short-term nominal interest rates already close to zero, declines in actual and 
expected inflation increase, respectively, both the real cost of servicing existing debt and the 
expected real cost of new borrowing. By raising effective debt burdens and by inhibiting new 
household spending and business investment, higher real borrowing costs create a further 
drag on growth. Finally, it is important to recognize that periods of very low inflation generally 
involve very slow growth in nominal wages and incomes as well as in prices. (I have already 
alluded to the recent deceleration in average hourly earnings.) Thus, in circumstances like 
those we face now, very low inflation or deflation does not necessarily imply any increase in 
household purchasing power. Rather, because of the associated deterioration in economic 
performance, very low  inflation or deflation arising from economic slack is generally linked 
with reductions rather than gains in living standards.  
In  a  situation  in  which  unemployment  is  high  and  expected  to  remain  so  and  inflation  is 
unusually low, the FOMC would normally respond by reducing its target for the federal funds 
rate. However, the Federal Reserve’s target for the federal funds rate has been close to zero 
since December 2008, leaving essentially no scope for further reductions. Consequently, for 
the past two years the FOMC has been using alternative tools to provide additional monetary 
accommodation. Notably, between December 2008 and March 2010, the FOMC purchased 
about $1.7 trillion in longer-term Treasury and agency-backed securities in the open market. 
The proceeds of these purchases ultimately find their way into the banking system, with the 
result that depository institutions now hold a high level of reserve balances with the Federal 
Reserve.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Although longer-term securities purchases are a different tool for conducting monetary policy 
than  the  more  familiar  approach  of  managing  the  overnight  interest  rate,  the  goals  and 
transmission mechanisms of the two approaches are similar. Conventional monetary policy 
works by changing market expectations for the future path of short-term interest rates, which, 
in  turn,  influences  the  current  level  of  longer-term  interest  rates  and  other  financial 
conditions.  These  changes  in  financial  conditions  then  affect  household  and  business 
spending. By contrast, securities purchases by the Federal Reserve put downward pressure 
directly on longer-term interest rates by reducing the stock of longer-term securities held by 
private investors.3 These actions affect private-sector spending through the same channels 
as conventional monetary policy. In particular, the Federal Reserve’s earlier program of asset 
purchases  appeared  to  be  successful  in  influencing  longer-term  interest  rates,  raising  the 
prices  of  equities  and  other  assets,  and  improving  credit  conditions  more  broadly,  thereby 
helping stabilize the economy and support the recovery.  
In light of this experience, and with the economic outlook still unsatisfactory, late last summer 
the FOMC began to signal to financial markets that it was considering providing additional 
monetary  policy  accommodation  by  conducting  further  asset  purchases.  At  its  meeting  in 
early  November,  the  FOMC  formally  announced  its  intention  to  purchase  an  additional 
$600 billion in Treasury securities by the end of the second quarter of 2011, about one-third 
of the value of securities purchased in its earlier programs. The FOMC also maintained its 
policy,  adopted  at  its  August  meeting,  of  reinvesting  principal  received  on  the  Federal 
Reserve’s holdings of securities.  
The FOMC stated that it will review its asset purchase program regularly in light of incoming 
information  and  will  adjust  the  program  as  needed  to  meet  its  objectives.  Importantly,  the 
Committee  remains  unwaveringly  committed  to  price  stability  and,  in  particular,  to 
maintaining  inflation  at  a  level  consistent  with  the  Federal  Reserve’s  mandate  from  the 
Congress.4 In that regard, it bears emphasizing that the Federal Reserve has all the tools it 
needs to ensure that it will be able to smoothly and effectively exit from this program at the 
appropriate  time.  Importantly,  the  Federal  Reserve’s  ability  to  pay  interest  on  reserve 
balances held at the Federal Reserve Banks will allow it to put upward pressure on short-
term market interest rates and thus to tighten monetary policy when needed, even if bank 
reserves  remain  high.  Moreover,  the  Fed  has  invested  considerable  effort  in  developing 
methods to drain or immobilize bank reserves as needed to facilitate the smooth withdrawal 
of policy accommodation when conditions warrant. If necessary, the Committee could also 
tighten policy by redeeming or selling securities on the open market.  
As  I  am  appearing  before  the  Budget  Committee,  it  is  worth  emphasizing  that  the  Fed’s 
purchases of longer-term securities are not comparable to ordinary government spending. In 
executing  these  transactions,  the  Federal  Reserve  acquires  financial  assets,  not  goods  and 
services.  Ultimately,  at  the  appropriate  time,  the  Federal  Reserve  will  normalize  its  balance 
sheet by selling these assets back into the market or by allowing them to mature. In the interim, 
the  interest  that  the  Federal  Reserve  earns  from  its  securities  holdings  adds  to  the  Fed’s 
remittances to the Treasury; in 2009 and 2010, those remittances totaled about $120 billion.  
                                                 
3  More  specifically,  the  Fed’s  purchases  should  tend  to  reduce  term  premiums,  a  component  of  the  yield  to 
longer-term securities. Longer-term interest rates are also influenced by market expectations of the future path 
for short-term interest rates, which in turn depend on the outlook for the economy and so for the target federal 
funds rate. 
4  Most  Committee  participants  judge  that,  in  the  longer  term,  inflation  in  the  range  of  2  percent  or  a  bit  less 
appropriately balances the risk that adverse economic shocks could tip the economy into deflation against the 
benefits  of  low  and  stable  inflation.  An  inflation  rate  modestly  above  zero  also  reduces  the  probability  that 
monetary policymakers  will be constrained from easing policy  when necessary by the zero lower bound on 
nominal  interest  rates.  Many  central  banks  around  the  world  have  come  to  similar  quantitative  judgments 
about the long-run level of inflation that best fosters growth and stability. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Fiscal policy 
Fiscal policymakers also face a challenging policy environment. Our nation’s fiscal position 
has deteriorated appreciably since the onset of the financial crisis and the recession. To a 
significant  extent,  this  deterioration  is  the  result  of  the  effects  of  the  weak  economy  on 
revenues  and  outlays,  along  with  the  actions  that  were  taken  to  ease  the  recession  and 
steady financial markets. In their planning for the near term, fiscal policymakers will need to 
continue to take into account the low level of economic activity and the still-fragile nature of 
the economic recovery.  
However, an important part of the federal budget deficit appears to be structural rather than 
cyclical; that is, the deficit is expected to remain unsustainably elevated even after economic 
conditions have returned to normal. For example, under the Congressional Budget Office’s 
(CBO) so-called alternative fiscal scenario, which assumes that most of the tax cuts enacted 
in  2001  and  2003  are made  permanent  and  that  discretionary  spending  rises  at  the  same 
rate as the gross domestic product (GDP), the deficit is projected to fall from its current level 
of  about  9  percent  of  GDP  to  5  percent  of  GDP  by  2015,  but  then  to  rise  to  about  6–1/2 
percent  of  GDP  by  the  end  of  the  decade.  In  subsequent  years,  the  budget  outlook  is 
projected  to  deteriorate  even  more  rapidly,  as  the  aging  of  the  population  and  continued 
growth  in  health  spending  boost  federal  outlays  on  entitlement  programs.  Under  this 
scenario, federal  debt  held  by  the  public is  projected  to  reach  185  percent  of  the GDP  by 
2035, up from about 60 percent at the end of fiscal year 2010.  
The CBO projections, by design, ignore the adverse effects that such high debt and deficits 
would likely have on our economy. But if government debt and deficits were actually to grow 
at the pace envisioned in this scenario, the economic and financial effects would be severe. 
Diminishing  confidence  on  the  part  of  investors  that  deficits  will  be  brought  under  control 
would  likely  lead  to  sharply  rising  interest  rates  on  government  debt  and,  potentially,  to 
broader  financial  turmoil.  Moreover,  high  rates  of  government  borrowing  would  both  drain 
funds  away  from  private  capital  formation  and  increase  our  foreign  indebtedness,  with 
adverse long-run effects on U.S. output, incomes, and standards of living.  
It is widely understood that the federal government is on an unsustainable fiscal path. Yet, as 
a nation, we have done little to address this critical threat to our economy. Doing nothing will 
not be an option indefinitely; the longer we wait to act, the greater the risks and the more 
wrenching the inevitable changes to the budget will be. By contrast, the prompt adoption of a 
credible  program  to  reduce  future  deficits  would  not  only  enhance  economic  growth  and 
stability in the long run, but could also yield substantial near-term benefits in terms of lower 
long-term  interest  rates  and  increased  consumer  and  business  confidence.  Plans  recently 
put forward by the President’s National Commission on Fiscal Responsibility and Reform and 
other  prominent  groups  provide  useful  starting  points  for  a  much-needed  national 
conversation  about  our  medium-  and  long-term  fiscal  situation.  Although  these  various 
proposals  differ  on  many  details,  each  gives  a  sobering  perspective  on  the  size  of  the 
problem and offers some potential solutions.  
Of course, economic growth is affected not only by the levels of taxes and spending, but also 
by their composition and structure. I hope that, in addressing our long-term fiscal challenges, 
the Congress will seek reforms to the government’s tax policies and spending priorities that 
serve not only to reduce the deficit but also to enhance the long-term growth potential of our 
economy  –  for  example,  by  encouraging  investment  in  physical  and  human  capital,  by 
promoting research and development, by providing necessary public infrastructure, and by 
reducing disincentives to work and to save. We cannot grow out of our fiscal imbalances, but 
a more productive economy would ease the tradeoffs that we face.  
Thank you. I would be pleased to take your questions.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
