Ardian Fullani: Press conference at the presentation of the First 
Financial Stability Report of the Central Bank of the Republic of Kosovo 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the presentation of the First 
Financial  Stability  Report  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Republic  of  Kosovo,  Priština, 
20 December 2010. 
 Dear Mr. Gërguri, 
Dear Members of the Governing Board of the Central Bank of the Republic of Kosovo, 
Dear Mr. Yilmaz, 
Dear guests, 
It is always a great pleasure for myself and my colleagues to come to the Central Bank of the 
Republic of Kosovo. I would like to express my positive consideration that this institution is 
now well-shaped and is growing stronger at a stable and rapid pace. This development is an 
outcome of the clear vision of the governing structures and the commitment of the central 
bank’s staff in implementing the best standards relevant to the area. This time I am invited to 
testify  another  achievement  of  this  institution,  the  first  release  of  the  Financial  Stability 
Report.  
I have the conviction that the public authorities, economic operators in Kosovo and the public 
will  appreciate  the  contribution  of  the  central  bank  with  respect  to  the  identification  and 
management of risks facing the financial system’s activity.  
In my speech I will first provide a general assessment of the great deal of importance given 
to financial stability issues and the central bank’s role in this regard. Then I will share our 
experience  at  the  Bank  of  Albania  with  the  institutional  approach  to  financial  stability 
assessment function. 
The  global  crisis,  which  originally  emerged  as  a  financial  system  crisis,  very  soon 
transformed into a real economy crisis. Due to the high integration of financial markets as a 
result  of  the  presence  of  financial  institutions  engaged  in  cross-border  activities  and  the 
manifold  interinstitutional  exposures,  a  financial  system  crisis  can  spread  rapidly  across 
many countries. On the other hand, due to the exceptional role in financial intermediation, a 
financial  system  crisis  may  hit  the  real  sectors  of  the  economy,  placing  the  economic 
mechanism in a negative spiral that tends to reinforce itself. 
These developments will likely result threatening to the sustainability of the entire financial 
system and be followed by severe social consequences that are costly to public wealth. 
This two-year experience triggered an accelerated identification process of the mechanisms 
and  measures  that  aim  at  preventing  and  handling  similar  situations  in  the  future.  At  a 
broader  economic  context,  these  measures  aimed  at  reforming  the  international  monetary 
framework and reduce imbalances in the global macroeconomic framework. 
G-20 policy-makers, the Basel Committee, the Financial Stability Board and the international 
financial institutions have set out some measures, which in fact have only one aim: reduce 
systemic risk and create the conditions for its proper management.  
At a global level, these measures envisage: 
a) 
Reforming the supervisory superstructure by establishing institutions that focus on 
assessing systemic risk; 
  1
b) 
c) 
d) 
financial 
institutions,  hence  reduce 
Setting  higher  quantitative  and  qualitative  capital  and  liquidity  requirements  for 
systemically-important 
for 
excessive risk-taking; 
Determining the mechanisms that reduce procyclicality in financial activity, mainly by 
creating  reserve  funds  (in  the  form  of  capital  or  provisions)  that  may  be  used  for 
countercyclical purposes; 
Strengthening  the  capacity  of  national  authorities  to  address  systemic  financial 
crises.  
their  appetite 
For this purpose, legal changes need to be made in order to regulate the harmonization of 
interinstitutional relationships at home and abroad. I would summarize the following:  
• 
• 
• 
Actions between supervisory authorities of different countries,  
Actions between public authorities at home, and 
The implementation of actions that enable a smooth exit from the market of those 
financial institutions that cannot be recovered.  
Central banks play an important role in this process, which in some respects is unique and 
exclusive.  In  the  monetary  area,  it  should  be  guaranteed  that  the  liquidity  injection  and 
collateral evaluation procedures are complete and adequate.  
In  the  meantime,  the  sustainability  of  systemically-important  infrastructure,  more  precisely 
the payment systems’, must be monitored and guaranteed. Moreover, if the central bank is 
also responsible for the licensing and supervision of the banking sector, there should be a 
modern supervisory framework that prevents and reduces systemic risk in accordance with 
the new international standards.  
Public authorities should be prepared to act in situations of financial emergency, aiming at 
preserving public confidence in the financial system and ensure that there is a limited and 
efficient use of public resources. In the context of the role of a central bank that carries out 
an independent monetary policy, the integration of financial stability considerations into the 
monetary policy decision-making is particularly important.  
Countries  of  our  region  share  similar  features  in  terms  of  the  financial  system  and  the 
economic  structure.  Banks  make  up  the  bulk  of  activity  and  they  are  regulated  and 
supervised by central banks. We almost share similar banks operating in our banking sector. 
Hence, the developments are similar and the dynamics of the emergence and performance 
of risk is often alike.  
Though  we  do  share  similarities,  we  also  have  certain  differences,  mainly  related  to  the 
monetary area and the capacity to implement an independent monetary policy.  
Both  similarities  and  differences  are  important  in  order  to  understand  the  role  of  our 
institutions in the assessment and availability of actions taken to safeguard financial stability. 
Despite  the  arsenal  of  these  actions,  central  banks  cannot  carry  out  this  mission  alone. 
Central  banks  are  in  possession  of  a  full  arsenal  of  measures  and  instruments,  but  their 
implementation,  albeit  timely  and  complete,  cannot  have  full  effect  unless  they  are 
coordinated and supported by other agents’ actions.  
It  is  thus  essential  that  all  economically-important  agents,  public  authorities,  the  public  at 
large  and  the  media  are  fully  aware  of  this  matter.  Apart  from  legal  definitions,  this 
awareness requires receiving comprehensive, regular and timely information on the events 
that may jeopardize financial stability and identifying the necessary protective actions. The 
regular release of reports dedicated to financial stability is the key instrument that meets this 
obligation.  
Let me now share with you our experience at the Bank of Albania. According to our concept, 
the Bank of Albania has full legal responsibility for safeguarding financial stability.  
2 
 The Bank of Albania is attributed the exclusive role in terms of licensing and supervising the 
banking activity, the right to organize and monitor the operation of the payment systems, the 
lender-of-last-resort  function  to  assist  banks  facing  difficulties,  the  liquidity  management 
function in the interbank market, and the determinant role in foreign exchange policy. 
The  Bank  of  Albania  has  the  obligation  to  inform  the  public  about  the  events  that  may 
jeopardize  the  financial  stability.  In  early  2007,  the  Supervisory  Council  of  the  Bank  of 
Albania considered a better coverage of developments in the financial system – that is, not 
only in the banking sector’s alone – as highly important. In addition, it required strengthening 
the analysis of interaction between macroeconomic developments and the financial system’s 
activity. 
Our  ultimate  goal  was  setting  up  a  more  sustainable  mechanism  that  would  allow  the 
conversion of these analyses into proposals for concrete actions, in order to reduce systemic 
risk not only through the Bank of Albania’s actions but also through measures taken by other 
public authorities that have a role in monitoring the developments in the financial market.  
From the institutional viewpoint, in September that year, the Supervisory Council of the Bank 
of Albania, approved the establishment of the Financial Stability Department, by selecting the 
most outstanding human capacities in the area of monetary operations, banking supervision, 
research and statistics.  
The conclusions derived from the analysis of this department would be regularly discussed at 
a higher central bank level, thus providing a useful filtering and enriching mechanism prior to 
the decision-making of the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania.  
For this purpose, in November 2007, the Supervisory Council approved the establishment of 
the Advisory Committee on Financial Stability (ACFS), which gathers the high executives of 
the Bank of Albania and the heads of the main departments.  
According to the regulation on the functioning of the ACFS, representatives of other public 
authorities are also invited to attend the meetings in cases when matters of particular interest 
are being discussed. 
In addition to analyses for internal use, the Financial Stability Department is responsible for 
releasing two main products: a) Financial Stability Statement, which is also mandated by law; 
and  b)  Financial  Stability  Report.  From  the  institutional  viewpoint,  this  process  has 
progressed.  Very  soon,  the  Financial  Stability  Department  became  operational  and  the 
Financial  Stability  Report,  which  was  prepared  and  released  from  the  first  year  this 
Department was established, has been released regularly and at an ever-increasing quality.  
However, we had to face several challenges along this process, which I think exist no matter 
if the financial stability’s assessment function operates as a single structure within the central 
bank or not. Among them I could mention: 
a) 
The  necessity  to  obtain  complete  information  from  all  the  sectors  of  the  economy 
and produce complete, reliable and timely statistics; 
The necessity to establish better communication among different departments within 
the central bank, as well as between the central bank and other institutions that may 
have a role in monitoring the financial market. This communication creates optimal 
conditions  for  the  clear  identification  and  full  assessment  of  the  most  important 
issues  that  have  affected  and  are  expected  to  affect  financial  stability  during  the 
periods  under  consideration.  Ultimately,  a  good  level  of  communication  allows 
interinstitutional  cooperation  in  addressing  the  concerns  that  may  jeopardize 
financial stability effectively; 
The  need  to  quantify  systemic  risk.  This  objective  is  obviously  not  easy  but  our 
endeavours in this regard must be ongoing and begin from the easiest and concrete 
approaches; 
b) 
c) 
  3
d) 
The need to have a balanced content of the Financial Stability Report. In this regard, 
we focused on the following considerations: 
• 
First,  this  report  attempts  to  clearly  identify  the  underlying  risks  to  financial 
stability,  not  only  those  created  as  a  result  of  the  financial  system’s  activity, 
but  also  those  stemming  from  its  interaction  with  the  surrounding  economic 
environment. 
Second, the Financial Stability Report is an essential element of the monetary 
policy  decision-making,  thus  providing  a  real  understanding  to  macro 
prudence (Stability and monetary policy slogan). 
Third,  we  intend  this  report  to  be  part  of  the  trialogue  philosophy,  which 
involves  the  Bank  of  Albania,  the  Government  and  the  market,  at  an 
appropriate level of transparency before the media and the public at large. 
Fourth, we intend not only to produce a report that limits to the description of 
past event, but also enrich it gradually and to a certain extent with research 
analyses and incorporate elements of forecast. 
Fifth, the report should arrive at some conclusions on the issues it addresses, 
which enable the identification of relevant recommendations.  
Sixth,  the  contents  of  the  report  should  include  a  main  part,  which  must  be 
consistent  over  time  for  the  effect  of  consistency  of  analysis  and  its 
comparability, and another part which provides greater degree of freedom to 
elaborate on more specific issues that materialize the main analysis. 
Lastly, we have paid special attention to the language used in producing this 
report,  aiming  at  using  plain  and  clear  language,  free  of  equivoques  and 
understandable to the professionals of this area and the public at large.  
      We are fully aware that this process requires constant improvement.  
Dear guests, 
In conclusion, let me offer the support of the Bank of Albania in cooperating with the Central 
Bank  of  the  Republic  of  Kosovo  on  matters  relating  to  financial  stability.  This  cooperation 
may aim at identifying matters of importance for both institutions, which later may turn into 
joint projects. 
More  concretely,  we  can  cooperate  on  the  assessment  of  the  suitability  of  stress-test 
methodologies or on the process of systemic risk quantification. In a more informal fashion, 
the parties may exchange information on the issues to be addressed in the next Financial 
Stability Report. 
The parties may also discuss the way of transforming the findings in the Financial Stability 
Report  into  concrete  actions  of  the  central  bank  and  other  public  authorities.  I  am  fully 
convinced that regular and constant communication on these issues will expand into possible 
directions of cooperation. 
Once again, I wish you success in your work! 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 