Duvvuri Subbarao: India and the global financial crisis what have we learnt? 
Text of the K R Narayanan Oration by Dr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank 
of India, at the South Asia Research Centre of the Australian National University, Canberra, 
23 June 2011. 
 Thank you for inviting me to deliver the 2011 K R Narayanan Oration. It is an honour to which 
I attach a lot of value. 
President Narayanan 
Late  President  Narayanan  was  a  distinguished  diplomat,  a  reputed  parliamentarian,  a 
capable minister and above all an erudite scholar. Born at the very bottom of India’s social 
pyramid, he rose on to occupy the highest office in the country with no assets other than hard 
work, integrity and humility. ‘A working President’, as he described himself, he never allowed 
dogma to overwhelm his beliefs and convictions. 
President Narayanan was in office from 1997 to 2002, a time when globalization, as we are 
experiencing it in the current times, was taking root. At the banquet he hosted for the visiting 
US  President  Bill  Clinton  in  New  Delhi  in  March  2000,  President  Narayanan  remarked:  
“Mr.  President,  we  do  recognise  and  welcome  the  fact  that  the  world  has  been  moving 
inevitably towards a one-world... But, for us, globalization does not mean the end of history 
and geography, and of the lively and exciting diversities of the world.” This was a thoughtful 
remark.  As  much  as  globalization  may  be  inevitable,  history  and  geography  need  not  be 
destiny. If we learn the lessons of experience, we will not repeat the same mistakes. This 
indeed is the topic for my oration, and my tribute to late President Narayanan – to seek the 
lessons of the crisis that we have just gone through so that we can make this a better world 
of all of us. 
Is this time different? 
By all accounts the 2008/09 crisis has been the deepest financial crisis of our times. It has 
taken a devastating toll on global output and welfare. Arguably, the fundamental causes of all 
financial crises are the same – global imbalances, loose monetary policy and high levels of 
leverage driven by “irrational exuberance”. In that respect this crisis has been no different. 
Where this crisis has been different, however, is in its manifestation. Most recent crises had 
occurred  in  individual  emerging  economies  or  regions,  and  they  were,  at  their  core, 
traditional  retail  banking  or  currency  crises.  The  countries  in  trouble  could  be  rescued  by 
multilateral  interventions;  besides,  the  advanced  countries  provided  a  buffer  for  trade  and 
financial support. In contrast, this crisis originated in the most advanced economy, the United 
States, and hit at the very core of the global financial system. With virtually no buffers to fall 
back on, the crisis rapidly engulfed the whole world. Much to their dismay, emerging market 
economies too were soon pulled into the whirlpool. 
How was India hit by the crisis? 
India was no exception. We too were affected by the crisis. Output growth which averaged 
9.5 per cent per annum during the three year period 2005/08 dropped to 6.8 per cent in the 
crisis  year  of  2008/09.  Exports  which  grew  at  25  per  cent  during  2005/08  decelerated  to 
12.2 per  cent  in  the  crisis  year  (2008/09)  and  declined  by  2.2  per  cent  in  2009/10.  In  the 
pre-crisis years, we had capital flows far in excess of our current account deficit. In contrast, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
during the crisis year, net capital flows were significantly short of the current account deficit 
and  this  put  downward  pressure  on  the  rupee.  The  exchange  rate  depreciated  from 
` 39.37 per dollar in January 2008 to ` 51.23 per dollar in March 2009.  
Notwithstanding our sound banking system and relatively robust financial markets, India felt 
the tremors of the tectonic shocks in the global financial system. The first round effects came 
through  the  finance  channel  by  way  of  sudden  stop  and  then  reversal  of  capital  flows 
consequent upon the global deleveraging process. This jolted our foreign exchange markets 
as  well  as  our  equity  markets.  Almost  simultaneously,  our  credit  markets  came  under 
pressure as corporates, finding that their external sources of funding had dried up, turned to 
domestic bank and non-bank sources for credit. 
By  far  the  most  contagious  route  for  crisis  transmission  was  the  confidence  channel.  For 
weeks after the Lehman collapse in mid-September 2008, everyday there was news of yet 
another  storied  institution  crashing.  In  this  global  scenario  of  uncertainty,  the  lack  of 
confidence in advanced country markets transmitted as hiccups to our markets too. The net 
result was that all our financial markets – equity, debt, money and foreign exchange markets 
– came under varying degrees of pressure. Finally, the transmission of the crisis through the 
real  channel  was  quite  straightforward  as  the  global  recession  that  followed  the  financial 
crash resulted in a sharp decline in export demand for our goods and services. 
Why was India hit by the crisis? 
There  was  dismay  in  India  that  we  too  were  affected  by  the  crisis,  and  this  dismay  arose 
mainly  on  two  counts.  First,  the  exposure  of  our  banks  to  toxic  sub-prime  assets  was 
marginal and their off balance sheet activities were limited, and so, the argument went, we 
should not have been affected by a financial sector crisis that originated from these causes. 
Second, India’s growth is driven by domestic demand and a drop in external demand, it was 
contended, should have caused no more than a small dent in output growth. Yet the crisis hit 
us, and did so more ferociously than we thought possible. The reason for this is globalization: 
India  is  more  integrated  into  the  global  system  than  we  tend  to  acknowledge.  Let  me 
illustrate that point with some broadbrush numbers. 
India’s two way trade (merchandize exports plus imports), as a proportion of GDP, more than 
doubled over the past decade: from 19.6 per cent in 1998/99, the year of the Asian crisis, to 
40.7 per cent in 2008/09. Note that global trade declined by 11 per cent in 2009 as a result of 
the crisis in contrast to a robust average growth of 8.6 per cent during the previous few years 
2004/07.  Such  a  sharp  collapse  in  world  trade  had  an  impact  on  our  export  demand 
demonstrating that our trade integration was quite deep. 
If our trade integration was deep, our financial integration was even deeper. A measure of 
financial integration is the ratio of total external transactions (gross current account flows plus 
gross capital account flows) to GDP. This ratio had more than doubled from 44 per cent in 
1998/99 to 112 per cent in 2008/09 evidencing the depth of India’s financial integration. In 
sum, the reason India was affected by the crisis, despite mitigating factors, is its deepened 
trade and financial integration with the world.  
Managing globalization 
What  the  experience  of  the  crisis  demonstrated  clearly  was  the  power  of  globalization. 
Globalization is a double edged sword; it opens up incredible opportunities but also poses 
immense  challenges.  India  surely  benefitted  from  opening  up  to  the  world  but  had  also 
incurred  costs  on  that  count.  The  challenge  for  India,  and  indeed  for  all  Emerging  Market 
Economies  (EMEs),  is  really  to  minimize  the  costs  and  maximize  the  benefits  of 
globalization. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Lessons of crisis 
A lot is being written about how this crisis has been too important to waste, how we should 
learn the lessons of the crisis and apply them in a Schumpeterian creative destruction mode. 
Some  people  have,  however,  questioned  the  wisdom  of  drawing  lessons  even  before  the 
crisis is fully behind us. When Zhou Enlai, former Chinese Prime Minister, was asked what 
he thought of the French Revolution, he said it was too early to say. Historians who take a 
long view may agree with Zhou Enlai but practical policy makers do not enjoy that luxury. So, 
let me use the opportunity of this platform to draw out eight big picture lessons of the crisis. 
Lesson 1:  in a globalizing world, decoupling does not work 
The  crisis  challenged  many  of  our  beliefs,  and  among  the  casualties  is  the  decoupling 
hypothesis. The decoupling hypothesis, which was intellectually fashionable before the crisis, 
held  that  even  if  advanced  economies  went  into  a  downturn,  EMEs  would  not  be  affected 
because  of  their  improved  macroeconomic  management,  robust  external  reserves  and 
healthy  banking  sectors.  Yet  the  crisis  affected  all  EMEs,  admittedly  to  different  extents, 
bringing into question the validity of the decoupling hypothesis. 
Some  analysts  argue  against  such  an  outright  dismissal  of  the  decoupling  hypothesis  and 
suggest  a  more  nuanced  evaluation.  Recent  IMF  research1  in  fact  illustrates  that  the 
transmission  of  distress  from  advanced  economies  to  EMEs  took  place  in  three  distinct 
phases. The first phase runs from the time early signs of the crisis appeared in mid-2007 till 
the  Lehman  collapse  in  September  2008.  During  this  period,  the  growth  performance  of 
EMEs  outshone  that  of  advanced  economies  indicating  decoupling.  The  second  phase, 
starting with the Lehman collapse till the first quarter of 2009 was one of “recoupling” when 
advanced  economies  pulled  EMEs  too  into  the  downturn.  The  third  phase  started  in  the 
second  quarter  of  2009  when  EMEs  started  recovering  from  the  crisis  ahead  of  advanced 
economies suggesting a shift once again to decoupling. 
So, have EMEs decoupled from the advanced economies? The answer has necessarily to be 
nuanced.  A  useful  way  to  visualize  decoupling  in  the  wake  of  the  crisis  is  to  distinguish 
between “trend” and “cycle” decoupling. “Trend” decoupling is reflected by the widening gap 
between the trend rates of growth of EMEs  and of advanced economies. This is evidently 
owing to the growing weight of domestic factors, mainly consumption, in the EMEs’ growth 
process. However, given that there is still significant integration between the two groups of 
countries,  cycles  are  still  coupled.  From  a  “lessons”  perspective,  what  this  means  is  that 
EMEs should focus on strengthening domestic drivers of demand and instituting automatic 
stabilizers to buffer themselves against cyclical shocks from advanced economies. 
Lesson 2:  global imbalances need to be redressed for the sake of global stability 
No  crisis  as  complex  as  this  has  a  simple  or  a  single  cause.  In  popular  perception,  the 
collapse of Lehman Brothers in mid-September 2008 will remain marked as the trigger of the 
crisis. At one level that may well be true. Indeed, I can visualize future text books in finance 
dividing the world into “before Lehman” and “after Lehman”. But if we probe deeper, we will 
learn that at the heart of the crisis were two root causes – the build up of global imbalances 
and developments in the financial markets over the last two decades. And received wisdom 
today  is  that  these  two  root  causes  are  interconnected,  and  that  financial  market 
developments were in a sense driven by the global imbalances. 
                                                 
1  Llaudes,  Ricardo,  Ferhan  Salman,  and  Mali  Chivakul,  “The  Impact  of  the  Great  Recession  on  Emerging 
Markets”. IMF Working Paper 237, October 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Global  macro  imbalances  got  built  up  because  of  the  large  savings  and  current  account 
surpluses in China and much of Asia in wake of the East Asian Crisis a decade ago. These 
were mirrored by large increases in leveraged consumption and current account deficits in 
the US. In short, Asia produced and America consumed. Between the US consumption boom 
and the Asian savings glut, there is a raging debate on what was the cause and what was 
the effect. Regardless, the bottom line is that one was simply the mirror of the other and the 
two share a symbiotic relationship. 
And how did these imbalances build up? The answer lies in globalization – globalization of 
trade, of labour and of finance. The world witnessed a phenomenal expansion in global trade 
over  the  last  three  decades;  global  trade  as  a  proportion  of  global  GDP  increased  from 
34 per  cent  in  1980  to  51  per  cent  in  2007,  just  before  the  crisis  hit  us.2  Globalization  of 
finance was even more prolific, especially over the last decade. For the world taken together, 
the ratio of foreign assets and foreign liabilities to GDP rose from 133 per cent in 1994 to 
over 300 per cent in 2008.3 The impact of globalization of labour was by far more striking. 
Emerging Asia added nearly three billion to the world’s pool of labour as it integrated with the 
rest of the world over the last two decades thus hugely improving its comparative advantage. 
Together,  the  three  dimensions  of  globalization  –  trade,  finance  and  labour  –  helped 
emerging Asia multiply by a factor its exports to the advanced economies. The result was 
large  and  persistent  current  account  surpluses  in  the  Asian  economies  and  corresponding 
current account deficits in the importing advanced economies. 
The chain of causation from these imbalances to the financial crisis is interesting although 
not  obvious.  As  Asia  accumulated  savings  and  simultaneously  maintained  competitive 
exchange  rates,  the  savings  turned  into  central  bank  reserves.  Central  banks,  in  turn, 
invested these savings not in any large, diversified portfolio but in government bonds of the 
advanced economies. This in turn drove down risk free real interest rates to historically low 
levels triggering phenomenal credit expansion and dropping of the guard on credit standards, 
erosion of credit quality and search for yield, all of which combined to brew the crisis to its 
explosive dimensions. 
It is argued that if the US Fed had refused to supply the incipient demand for liquidity in the 
late 1990s and early 2000s, higher interest rates could have prevented the borrowing boom 
and the follow on widespread deterioration of financial standards and the subsequent melt 
down. But this also would have meant lower growth in the US and the rest of the world. The 
short point is that even as macroeconomic imbalances should not be allowed to proliferate, it 
is necessary to balance the need for global economic growth against the disruptions which 
follow the unwinding of such imbalances. 
So, where do we go from here? The G-20 is now actively engaged in the challenging task of 
redressing  structural  imbalances  in  the  global  economy.  At  their  Pittsburgh  Summit  in 
September  2009,  the  G-20  leaders  agreed  on  a  “Framework  for  Strong,  Sustainable  and 
Balanced Growth” and committed to a “Mutual Assessment Process” (MAP) which is a peer 
review  of  each  country’s  progress  towards  meeting  the  shared  objectives  underlying  the 
framework. Recognizing that global imbalances which had narrowed during the crisis started 
widening again in the exit phase, driven mainly by the uneven recovery around the world, the 
G-20 resolved that promoting external sustainability should be the focus of the next stage of 
the MAP and entrusted this task to a Framework Working Group (FWG). 
India is privileged in co-chairing, together with Canada, the FWG for managing the task of 
developing  the  indicative  guidelines  for  assessing  and  addressing  persistent  global 
imbalances. The FWG has adopted a two-stage approach: a limited number of indicators will 
                                                 
2  Calculations based on IMF Direction of Trade Statistics, June 2010. 
3  Calculations based on IMF Balance of Payments Year Book, 2010. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
guide the initial assessment process, while a broader set – including qualitative ones – will 
be used in the second stage to inform an in-depth external sustainability assessment. The 
success of this initiative is critical for redressing the problem of global imbalances. 
Lesson 3:  global problems require global coordination 
The  crisis  demonstrated  the  interconnectedness  of  the  world  through  trade,  finance  and 
confidence channels. What originated as a bubble in the US housing sector soon snowballed 
into a crisis and radiated in two different ways – first, in a geographical sense, from the US to 
other  advanced  economies  and  then  to  the  rest  of  the  world;  and  second,  in  a  sectoral 
sense, from housing to all productive sectors. Even as each country started dousing the fires 
on its own, it was soon realized that the effort was in vain and that global coordination is a 
necessary condition for managing a global crisis. 
From that perspective, the London G-20 Summit in April 2009 will go down in history as a 
clear  turning  point  when  the  leaders  of  the  world  showed  extraordinary  determination  and 
unity. Sure, there were differences, but they were debated and discussed and compromises 
were made without eroding the end goal – that is to end the crisis. This resulted in an agreed 
package of measures having both domestic and international components but all of them to 
be implemented in coordination, and indeed in synchronization where necessary. The entire 
range of crisis response measures – accommodative monetary stance, fiscal stimulus, debt 
and deposit guarantees, capital injection, asset purchases, currency swaps – all derived in 
varying degrees from the G-20 package. 
Now, as we exit from the crisis, there are concerns and apprehensions that the vaunted unity 
that the G-20 had shown during the crisis is dissipating. But might it also be a tad unrealistic 
to expect the degree of unity shown in managing the crisis to also be shown in addressing 
“peace  time”  issues?  The  focus  of  G-20  now  is  to  flesh  out  the  agenda  for  economic  and 
financial restructuring at national and international levels so that the world can prevent, or at 
any  rate  minimize  the  probability  of,  another  crisis  of  the  type  we  have  gone  through. 
Differences of opinion, when the agenda is so broad, are not only to be expected, but may in 
fact have a positive influence in determining what is collectively optimal.  
The  common  thread  running  through  the  entire  G-20  agenda  is  the  need  for  global 
cooperation in solving our most pressing problems of today. The crisis has taught us that no 
country can be an island and that economic and financial disruptions anywhere can cause 
ripples,  if  not  waves,  everywhere.  The  crisis  also  taught  us  that  given  the  deepening 
integration  of  countries  into  the  global  economic  and  financial  system,  uncoordinated 
responses will lead to worse outcomes for everyone. 
The global problems we are facing today are complex and not amenable to easy solutions. 
Many of them require significant and often painful adjustments at the national level. Because 
short term national interests conflict with globally optimal solutions, it is quite understandable 
that there are differences of views within the G-20. We must remember though that in a world 
divided by nation-states, there is no natural constituency for the global economy. At the same 
time, the global crisis has shown that the global economy as an entity is more important than 
ever and that global coordination to solve global problems is critical. 
Lesson 4:  price stability and macroeconomic stability do not guarantee financial 
  stability 
The years before the crisis were characterized by steady growth and low and stable inflation 
in advanced economies and rapid growth and development in EMEs. The so called “Great 
Moderation”  prompted  a  growing  consensus  around  the  view  that  the  best  practice  in 
monetary  policy  framework  is  the  pursuit  of  a  single  target  (price  stability)  by  means  of  a 
single  instrument  (short  term  policy  interest  rate).  The  success  of  the  Great  Moderation 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
fortified the argument that price stability is a necessary and (a nearly) sufficient condition for 
economic growth and for financial stability. Central bankers believed they had discovered the 
holy grail. 
That sense of triumph was deflated by the unravelling of the crisis. As the global financial 
sector came to the brink of a collapse even in the midst of a period of extraordinary price 
stability, it became clear that price stability does not necessarily guarantee financial stability.  
Indeed the experience of the crisis has prompted an even stronger assertion – that there is a 
trade off between price stability and financial stability, and that the more successful a central 
bank is with price stability, the more likely it is to imperil financial stability. The argument goes 
as  follows.  The  extended  period  of  steady  growth  and  low  and  stable  inflation  during  the 
Great Moderation lulled central banks into complacency. Only with the benefit of hindsight is 
it now clear that the prolonged period of price stability blindsided policy makers to the cancer 
of financial instability growing in the underbelly.  
A dominant issue in the wake of the crisis has been the role of central banks in preventing 
asset  price  bubbles.  The  monetary  stance  of  studied  indifference  to  asset  price  inflation 
stemmed from the famous Greenspan orthodoxy which can be summarized as follows. First, 
asset price bubbles are hard to identify on a real time basis, and the fundamental factors that 
drive  asset  prices  are  not  directly  observable.  A  central  bank  should  not  therefore  second 
guess  the  market.  Second,  monetary  policy  is  too  blunt  an  instrument  to  counteract  asset 
price booms. And third, central banks can “clean up the mess” after the bubble bursts. The 
surmise  therefore  was  that  the  cost-benefit  calculus  of  a  more  activist  monetary  stance  of 
“leaning against the wind” was clearly negative.  
The  crisis  has  dented  the  credibility  of  the  Greenspan  orthodoxy.  The  emerging  view 
post-crisis is that preventing an asset price build up should be within the remit of a central 
bank. Opinion is divided, however, on whether central banks should prevent asset bubbles 
through monetary policy action or through regulatory action. On one side, there is a purist 
view  questioning  the  efficacy  of  resorting  to  monetary  tightening  to  check  speculative 
bubbles.  Opposed  to  this  is  the  argument  that  a  necessary  condition  for  speculative 
excesses  is  abundant  liquidity,  and  that  controlling  liquidity  which  is  within  the  remit  of 
monetary policy should be the first line of defence against “irrational exuberance”. 
No matter how this debate settles, a clear, if also disquieting lesson of the crisis is that price 
stability and macroeconomic stability do not guarantee financial stability. 
Lesson 5:  microprudential regulation and supervision need to be supplemented by 
  macroprudential oversight 
is  because 
financial  sector.  This 
The crisis has clearly demonstrated that a collection of healthy financial institutions does not 
necessarily  make  a  healthy 
there  are  complex 
interconnections  in  the  financial  sector  across  banks,  other  financial  institutions,  markets, 
and geographies and a problem in any part of the system can rapidly transmit through the 
system,  cascade  across  layers  and  develop  into  a  crisis.  Systemic  safety  can  also  be 
jeopardized  by  procyclicality.  As  the  crisis  demonstrated,  there  is  a  strong  collective 
tendency among financial entities to overexpose themselves to the same type of risk during 
an  upturn  and  become  overly  risk  averse  during  a  downturn.  Importantly,  individual 
institutions, and indeed microprudential oversight too, fail to take into account the spillover 
impact of the actions of the rest of the financial system on them. This raises the paradox of 
the  fallacy  of  composition.  What  is  good  from  an  individual  institution’s  point  of  view  can 
become disruptive, and even destructive, if all institutions act in a similar way. 
That a bubble that started in the US housing sector snowballed into a major crisis is a vivid 
illustration of the risks arising from the interconnectedness of the global financial system and 
the risks of procyclicality. The lesson clearly is that as much as microprudential supervision is 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
necessary,  it  needs  to  be  supplemented  by  macroprudential  oversight  to  prevent  systemic 
risk building up. 
Macroprudential  oversight  requires  both  analytical  sophistication  and  good  judgement. 
Regulators  need  to  be  able  to  analyze  the  nature  and  extent  of  risk  and  be  able  to  make 
informed  judgement  on  when  and  what  type  of  countercyclical  buffers  they  must  impose. 
Both  type  I  and  type  II  errors  –  imposing  buffers  too  early  out  of  excessive  caution  or 
delaying  imposition  of  buffers  till  it  is  too  late  to  avert  an  implosion  –  can  be  costly  in 
macroeconomic terms. 
Lesson 6:  capital controls are not only unavoidable, but advisable in certain 
  circumstances 
As  EMEs  started  recovering  from  the  crisis  earlier  than  advanced  economies,  they  also 
began exiting from the crisis driven accommodative monetary stance ahead of the advanced 
economies.  This  multi-speed  recovery  and  the  consequent  differential  exit  have  triggered 
speculative capital flows into EMEs resulting in currency appreciation unrelated to economic 
fundamentals.  This  poses  complex  policy  management  challenges.  Currency  appreciation 
erodes  export  competitiveness.  Intervention  in  the  forex  market  to  prevent  appreciation 
entails  costs.  If  the  resultant  liquidity  is  left  unsterilized,  it could  potentially  fuel  inflationary 
pressures.  If  the  resultant  liquidity  is  sterilized,  it  puts  upward  pressure  on  interest  rates 
which not only hurts competitiveness, but also, in a curious variation of the Dutch disease, 
encourages further flows. 
Capital  inflows  far  in  excess  of  a country’s  absorptive  capacity  could pose  problems  other 
than currency appreciation. Speculative flows on the look out for quick returns can potentially 
lead to asset price build up. Also, in the current juncture, one of the driving forces behind 
hardening  commodity  prices  in  recent  months  is  the  excess  liquidity  in  the  global  system 
which has possibly triggered financialization of commodities. 
Quite  unsurprisingly,  the  old  debate  about  whether  capital  controls  are  a  legitimate  policy 
option has resurfaced again. This is a debate that has traditionally frowned on moderation. 
Critics  maintain  that  capital  controls  are  distortionary,  largely  ineffective,  difficult  to 
implement,  easy  to  evade  and  that  they  entail  negative  externalities.  On  the  other  hand, 
supporters of capital controls argue that controls preserve monetary policy autonomy, save 
sterilization costs and tilt the composition of foreign liabilities toward long-term maturities and 
ensure macroeconomic and financial stability. 
The debate on capital controls resurfaced after the Asian crisis of the mid-1990s, especially 
as  one  of  the  root  causes  of  the  crisis  was  the  open  capital  accounts  of  the  East  Asian 
economies.  However,  as  the  Asian  economies  recovered  in  quick  order,  regained  their 
export  competitiveness  and  started  building  up  external  reserves  for  self-insurance,  the 
debate was not pursued to its logical conclusion, and the orthodoxy that capital controls are 
undesirable persisted. 
The  recent  crisis  has,  however,  been  a  clear  turning  point  in  the  worldview  on  capital 
controls. Notably, the IMF put out a policy note4 in February 2010 that reversed its long held 
orthodoxy that capital controls are inadvisable always and everywhere. The note has referred 
to  certain  “circumstances  in  which  capital  controls  can  be  a  legitimate  component  of  the 
policy  response  to  surges  in  capital  flows”.  The  World  Bank5  and  the  Asian  Development 
Bank Outlook – 2010 too echoed these views.  
                                                 
4  Ostry,  Jonathan  D.  and  Others  (2010),  “Capital  Inflows:  The  Role  of  Controls”,  IMF  Staff  Position  Note, 
SPN/10/04, February 19, 2010. 
5  World Bank: Global Monitoring Report 2009: A Development Emergency. Washington DC 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
A  useful  way  of  assessing  the  capital  account  management  of  an  EME  is  to  draw  a 
distinction  between  “strategic”  and  “tactical”  controls.  Strategic  controls  would  involve 
defining a long term policy indicating the inter se preference, or the hierarchy of preferences 
as  it  were,  across  different  types  of  capital  flows  and  the  controls  that  will  be  deployed  to 
operationalize  that  policy.  Strategic  controls  give  stakeholders  a  clear  and  predictable 
framework  of  rules  to  make  informed  choices  and  to  manage  risks,  and  they  give  policy 
makers sufficient levers to calibrate the flows; in essence they define the boundaries of the 
playing  field.  Tactical  controls,  on  the  other  hand,  introduce  barriers  into  the  playing  field 
itself. They are deployed opportunistically to stem a surge in inflows or outflows. By their very 
nature, tactical controls introduce a new element of uncertainty into the calculations of both 
domestic and foreign stakeholders.  
India’s approach to capital account management is typically strategic. For example, we have 
an explicitly expressed preference for long term over short term flows and equity over debt 
flows, and we have used both price based and quantity based controls to operationalize this 
policy.  We  have,  of  course,  periodically  recalibrated  elements  of  the  strategy  in  pursuit  of 
capital account liberalization. An important lesson from India’s experience is that even with 
relatively large swings in capital flows during the crisis, the pressure to use tactical controls 
did not build up because the strategic controls provided automatic buffers. 
Even as we debate what EMEs should or should not do to manage excess capital flows, we 
should remember that to the extent that lumpy and volatile flows are a spillover from policy 
choices  of  advanced  economies,  managing  capital  flows  should  not  be  treated  as  an 
exclusive problem of emerging market economies. How this burden is to be shared raises 
both  intellectual  and  practical  challenges.  The  intellectual  challenge  is  to  build  a  better 
understanding of the forces driving capital flows, what type of policy instruments, including 
capital controls, work and in what situations. The practical challenge is the need to reach a 
shared  understanding  on  a  framework  for  cross  border  spillovers  of  domestic  policies  in 
capital-originating  countries,  and  the  gamut  of  policy  responses  by  capital  receiving 
countries. 
Lesson 7:  economics is not physics 
A few months into the crisis, the Queen happened to be at the London School of Economics 
and asked a perfectly sensible question: “how come none of the economists saw the crisis 
coming”. The Queen’s question resonated with people around the world who felt that they 
had  been  let  down  by  economics  and  economists.  As  economists  saw  their  profession 
discredited  and  their  reputations  dented,  the  economic  crisis  soon  turned  into  a  crisis  in 
economics. 
What  went  wrong  with  economics?  It  now  seems  that  by  far  the  most  egregious  fault  of 
economics, one that led it astray, has been to project it like an exact science. The charge is 
that economists suffered from “physics envy” which led them to formulate elegant theories 
and  models  –  using 
impressive  quantitative  
finesse – deluding themselves and the world at large that their models have more exactitude 
than they actually did. 
Admittedly, in a limited sense there may be some parallels between economics and physics. 
But  similarity  in  a  few  laws  does  not  mean  similarity  in  the  basic  nature  of  the  academic 
discipline. The fundamental difference between physics and economics is that physics deals 
with the physical universe which is governed by immutable laws, beyond the pale of human 
behaviour. Economics, in contrast, is a social science whose laws are influenced by human 
behaviour. Simply put, I cannot change the mass of an electron no matter how I behave but I 
can change the price of a derivative by my behaviour. 
The laws of physics are universal in space and time. The laws of economics are very much a 
function of the context. Going back to the earlier example, the mass of an electron does not 
sophisticated  mathematics  with 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
In 
for 
the 
the 
reverse  direction, 
ferocious  search  now  under  way 
change whether we are in the world of Newton or of Einstein. But in the world of economics, 
how  firms,  households  and  governments  behave  is  altered  by  the  reigning  economic 
ideology of the time. To give another example, there is nothing absolute, for example, about 
savings  being  equal  to  investment  or  supply  equalling  demand  as  maintained  by  classical 
economics but there is something absolute about energy lost being equal to energy gained 
as enunciated by classical physics.  
In natural sciences, progress is a two way street. It can run from empirical findings to theory 
or the other way round. The famous Michelson-Morley experiment that found that the velocity 
of light is constant led to the theory of relativity – an example of progression from practice to 
theory. 
the  
Higgs  Boson  –  the  God  particle  –  which  has  been  predicted  by  quantum  theory  is  an 
example of traversing from theory to practice. In economics, on the other hand, where the 
human  dimension  is  paramount,  the  progression  has  necessarily  to  be  one  way,  from 
empirical finding to theory. There is a joke that if something works in practice, economists run 
to see if it works in theory. Actually, I don’t see the joke; that is indeed the way it should be. 
Karl  Popper,  by  far  the  most  influential  philosopher  of  science  of  the  twentieth  century, 
propounded  that  a  good  theory  is  one  that  gives  rise  to  falsifiable  hypotheses.  By  this 
measure, Einstein’s General Theory was a good theory as it led to the hypothesis about the 
curvature  of  space  under  the  force  of  gravity  which  indeed  was  verified  by  scientists  from 
observations made during a solar eclipse from the West African islands of Sao Tome and 
Principe. Economics on the other hand cannot stand the scrutiny of the falsifiable hypothesis 
test since empirical results in economics are a function of the context. 
The short point is that economics cannot lay claim to the immutability, universality, precision 
and  exactitude  of  physics.  Take  the  recent  financial  crisis.  It  is  not  as  if  no  one  saw  the 
pressures building up. There were a respectable number of economists who warned of the 
perilous  consequences  of  the  build-up  of  global  imbalances,  said  that  this  was  simply 
unsustainable  and  predicted  a  currency  collapse.  In  the  event,  we  did  have  the  system 
imploding but not as a currency collapse but as a melt down of the financial system. 
We will be better able to safeguard financial stability both at global and national levels if we 
remember that economics is a social science and real world outcomes are influenced at a 
fundamental level by human behaviour. 
Lesson 8:  having a sense of economic history is important to prevent and resolve 
 financial crises 
Let  me  finish  with  the  last  lesson  which  is  on  a  larger  canvas  –  that  having  a  sense  of 
economic history is important to prevent and to resolve financial crises. In their painstakingly 
researched book, This Time is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly, Kenneth Rogoff 
and Carmen Reinhart argue that every time a crisis occurs and experts are confronted with 
the  question  of  why  they  could  not,  based  on  past  experience,  see  it  coming,  they  would 
argue that past experience was no guide as circumstances had changed. Yet this “this time 
is different” argument does not hold. Reinhart and Rogoff put forward impressive evidence 
showing  that  over  eight  hundred  years,  all  financial  crises  can  be  traced  to  the  same 
fundamental  causes  as  if  we  learnt  nothing  from  one  crisis  to  another.  If  only  teaching  in 
economics  had  included  a  study  of  economic  history,  perhaps  we  can  avoid  repeating 
history, never mind as a farce or a tragedy.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
