William C Dudley: Financial stability and economic growth 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, at the Bretton Woods Committee International Council Meeting 
2011, Washington DC, 23 September 2011. 
 It is a pleasure to have the opportunity to be here today. I want to emphasize in my remarks 
today three points. First, a stable financial system is a prerequisite for sustainable economic 
growth. Second, the financial system that operated in the years leading up to the crisis failed 
in this regard, generating terrible outcomes in terms of economic growth and unemployment, 
returns available to savers and access to credit for borrowers. Third, although we have made 
progress in reforming how we oversee and regulate the financial system, our work toward 
achieving  a  more  stable  and  dynamic  system  able  to  deliver  its  essential  services  to  both 
savers and borrowers is far from complete. We must keep pushing this agenda forward and 
not  be  deterred  by  those  that  defend  the  status  quo.  As  always,  the  remarks  that  follow 
reflect my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System. 
Let me start with a few words about where we are now. It is clear that the build-up of debt 
during the years prior to the crisis, as well as the crisis itself, has contributed to an unusually 
anemic  recovery.  This  has  occurred  despite  the  best  efforts  of  policymakers  to  stimulate 
demand through aggressive monetary and fiscal easing. The extraordinarily poor economic 
outcomes  we  see  today  underscore  the  importance  of  building  a  financial  system  that  is 
resilient in its ability to provide credit to households and business throughout the business 
cycle.  It  also  underscores  the  importance  of  limiting  the  types  of  financial  and  real 
imbalances that develop during times of prosperity. When such balances unwind, they can 
cause significant damage to the financial system and the economy.  
A range of reforms are in train as the Dodd-Frank Act and other initiatives are implemented 
in the United States and abroad. Within the Federal Reserve System, we are building a more 
robust framework for financial stability. And, through the Financial Stability Oversight Council 
(FSOC),  interagency  coordination  in  identifying  and  mitigating  risks  to  financial  stability  is 
being strengthened.  
As we move to implement financial reform, we should not be dissuaded by those who argue 
that  the  costs  of  reform  are  too  high  or  that  the  job  is  simply  too  difficult.  I  grant  that  not 
everyone is, or will be, happy with all the reform measures. Reasonable people can disagree 
about the best way to achieve certain public policy objectives or the appropriate speed of the 
transition.  But  I  think  that  the  fundamental  point  that  the  financial  system  needs  to  be 
changed in profound ways should be broadly accepted at this point.  
 
Policymakers and market participants must acknowledge that the financial system is 
inherently unstable – that it is prone to booms and busts, and that these episodes 
can destabilize the real economy. As a consequence, at times, we must be willing to 
intervene to restrain financial booms in order to temper the busts.  
Reform should be undertaken in ways that better align the economic incentives of 
participants in the financial system with the goal of financial stability.  
We should strive to achieve a degree of transparency in the financial system that 
would enable market participants to make informed judgments about their financial 
market risks and exposures.  
The  core  of 
financial 
intermediaries, and financial market infrastructures – must be made more resilient to 
adverse shocks and less susceptible to runs.  
the  major  banks,  non-bank 
financial  system  – 
the 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  Recovery and resolution regimes must be effective in limiting the contagion to the 
broader  financial  system  when  major  financial  intermediaries  or  financial  market 
infrastructures come under stress.  
We  must  pay  close  attention  to  how  all  the  components  of  the  financial  system 
interact.  It  can’t  just  be  about  particular  institutions  and  infrastructures.  Market 
processes and practices are also very important. 
Turning first to the issue of financial booms and busts, empirical observation makes it clear 
that financial markets are inherently unstable. Throughout history we have seen numerous 
sizable  booms  and  damaging  busts.  The  notion  that  financial  markets  are  dynamically 
unstable is also supported by controlled experiments conducted by behavioral economists.  
Now I accept the notion that some minimum degree of instability is unavoidable. That is the 
price society pays for maturity transformation and the other services provided by the financial 
sector – services that produce large public benefits. But I doubt that this should be the end of 
the story – we also have some control over the amplitude of booms and the severity of the 
busts.  
Although  it  is  impossible  to  attribute  the  instability  of  financial  markets  to  any  one  single 
driving force, recent experience suggests that in many cases innovation plays an important 
role. I explore this point further in the printed version of my remarks – but for the purposes of 
our discussion today let me summarize it by saying that innovations that initially create real 
value  generate  feedback  mechanisms  that  often  fuel  the  development  of  excessive 
expectations – a boom that eventually reverses when the basic belief system that sustained 
it is contradicted by events. 
Such innovations can occur in the real economy – consider the Internet – or in the financial 
sector  –  think  of  subprime  lending  and  structured  finance  products.  Although  the  role  of 
innovation has differed across various booms and busts, some important common elements 
are evident in many of these episodes.  
Early  on  in  the  cycle,  an  innovation  can  lead  to  changes  in  fundamental  valuations  or  the 
creation  of  new  markets  and  financial  products.  Examples  of  this  might  include  the 
technology boom that followed the creation of the Internet or the subprime lending and the 
associated structured finance innovations that supported the housing boom.  
As market participants respond to the innovation, this may cause a surge in business activity. 
Consider the investment in fiber optic cable and telecommunications equipment in the late 
1990s  or  the  surge  in  U.S.  housing  demand  in  the  2000s.  This  surge  in  activity  drives  up 
profits  and  prices,  which  in  turn  sustains  the  boom.  As  part  of  this  process,  feedback 
mechanisms work to reinforce beliefs in the importance and sustainability of the innovation. 
In  the  tech  bubble,  for  example,  some  new  firms  do  displace  traditional  providers  and 
network  effects  support  scale  and  profitability  and  deter  new  entrants.  In  the  case  of  the 
subprime lending boom, the provision of credit led to increased demand, which pushed up 
prices,  and  rising  prices,  in  turn,  held  down  credit  losses.  These  feedback  mechanisms 
reinforce belief in the sustainability of the boom, often extending the boom far beyond activity 
levels or valuations justified by how the innovation has changed the “fundamentals.”  
The  process  often  comes  to  an  abrupt  end,  and  generally  does  so  when  the  basic  belief 
system that underpinned the boom is contradicted by events. In the tech boom, prices fell 
when earnings didn’t materialize because only a few firms could achieve and sustain first-
mover advantages. In the subprime mortgage episode, loss experience climbed sharply once 
the options of selling or refinancing at higher prices was no longer available. With the benefit 
of hindsight, the inherent contradictions supporting the boom are exposed. For example, the 
U.S.  housing  boom  was  unsustainable  because  it  was  not  possible  to  indefinitely  keep 
relaxing  credit  underwriting  standards  to  qualify  new  buyers  to  stoke  demand.  It  was  also 
unsustainable  because  the  rise  in  prices  often  led  to  a  supply  response  that  limited  the 
prospect of further price increases. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Another  class  of  threats  to  financial  stability  emerge  from  sudden  reversals  of  market 
sentiment regarding economic policy and institutional arrangements. This is a complex issue 
which I will not explore in detail today, other than to note that here too, early profits all too 
often  feed  pro-cyclical  behavior,  undermining  market  discipline.  This  in  turn  facilitates  the 
accumulation of both private and public imbalances that are painfully difficult to unwind when 
financing suddenly stops. 
When  sudden  reversals  occur,  large  costs  are  imposed  on  the  real  economy  and  the 
financial system, costs that are not fully internalized by the market participants that may have 
benefited from the boom. The often significant negative externalities associated with financial 
market instability suggest that regulation and prudential standards should be aimed both at 
limiting the frequency and extent of booms and at building a more resilient financial system, 
so  there  is  less  damage  when  the  busts  inevitably  occur.  The  goal  here  is  not  to  use 
regulation to prevent or even limit innovation, whether real or financial.  
Many innovations have generated significant benefits for the macro-economy. For example, 
the Internet, which lay at the heart of the tech bubble, generated myriad benefits. Similarly, 
innovations in the financial realm have enabled businesses to limit risk and specialize in their 
core  competencies,  and  households  to  smooth  consumption.  This  in  turn  has  enabled  the 
economy to be more productive.  
Instead, a critical objective of prudential oversight and regulation should be to enhance the 
system so that financial transactions of all forms reflect an assessment of risk and return by 
both the borrower and the lender that is as accurate as possible, recognizing that we live in 
an  inherently  uncertain  world.  This  means  that  our  reform  efforts  should  be  aimed  at 
strengthening the quality of information and the system of incentives governing risk-taking by 
both  institutions  and  individuals.  And  on  those  occasions  when  regulators  judge  that  a 
systematic understatement and mispricing of risk may be occurring, we need to find better 
and  more  effective  ways  to  actively  lean  against  those  dynamics.  This  includes  using  the 
bully pulpit to point out why a particular boom is likely to prove unsustainable.  
It  also  means  ensuring  that  markets  are  structured  so  that  investors  with  differing 
perspectives  on  the  value  of  an  asset  are  able  to  actively  participate.  Booms  tend  to  go 
further  when  the  ability  to  “go  short”  is  limited  or  emerges  only  late  in  the  game.  Second, 
regulation needs to be oriented to establishing standards that will be appropriate throughout 
the  cycle  –  for  both  the  boom  period  and  the  bust.  For  example,  in  terms  of  subprime 
mortgage  underwriting,  this  would  have  included  enforcing  standards  with  respect  to  loan 
valuation,  loan-to-value  ratios,  household  income  verification,  and  the  quality  of  loan 
documentation. As I have argued before, monetary policy will often, though not always, be 
too blunt a tool for such tasks. Generally, it will be better to develop and use more surgical 
instruments designed to fit the particular circumstances.  
In addition, no matter how effectively we reform the financial system, it seems unlikely that 
we  will  ever  be  able  to  completely  eliminate  booms  and  busts.  There  will  be  problems  in 
identifying the boom – distinguishing between what is sustainable and what is unsustainable. 
There  also  will  be  broader  and  even  more  subtle  obstacles  –  booms,  when  they  are 
underway,  are  typically  enjoyable.  As  a  result,  regulatory  interventions  that  temper  booms 
normally are going to be unpopular. So in practice even activist regulators may struggle to 
act early enough and with sufficient force to arrest a boom before it becomes a bubble. This 
suggests that to make the financial system secure, we are going to have to do much more 
than just act to temper booms and busts.  
In this regard, making financial markets and institutions, in their practices and structure, less 
prone to amplifying and propagating shocks is a critical step. This means, in particular, that 
regulation  should  be  designed  to  create  incentives  that  operate  over  sufficiently  long  time 
horizons so that the entire cycle of boom and bust is included.  
For  risk  management  systems,  this  includes  using  stress  scenarios  to  place  appropriate 
limits  on  concentration  and  risk  exposures.  The  use  of  value  at  risk  (VAR)  models  that 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
emphasize recent experience is clearly inadequate. In the case of compensation practices, 
firms and regulators need to continue to look for ways to tie compensation to the profitability 
of  the  firm  over  the  cycle  and  rather  than  over  shorter  time  frames,  such  as  the  calendar 
year,  and  making  sure  that  compensation  is  appropriately  adjusted  for  the  risks  that  were 
taken.  There  also  needs  to  be  a  framework  for  ensuring  that  collateral  haircuts  are  high 
enough  to  provide  meaningful  protection  in  bad  states  of  the  world  even  if  this  means 
keeping collateral margins higher during the good times. 
Making progress on this front would help limit the propensity for leverage to increase when 
loss  experience  is  low  and  to  provide  greater  protection  when  volatility  climbs  and  market 
conditions  become  less  buoyant.  In  general,  we  need  to  continue  to  look  to  implement 
changes in systems and practices that will help dampen the pro-cyclicality of the system, and 
temper the amplitude of both booms and busts.  
Attention  to  the  incentives  created  by  infrastructure  design  is  also  important.  Poor 
infrastructure design can serve to mask and obscure participants’ understanding of the credit 
and  liquidity  risks  that  they  are  exposed  to.  A  good  example  of  this  is  the  triparty  repo 
market, which plays a central role in providing funding on a collateralized basis. This market 
for short-term credit evolved in the United States in a manner in which transactions between 
lenders and borrowers covered only part of each day – from late afternoon to early morning. 
During the middle of the day, the two large clearing banks supplied huge amounts of intraday 
credit  to  the  major  securities  dealers.  Borrowers’  assumed  this  credit  would  always  be 
available to them, and did not appreciate the rollover risk to which they could be exposed if a 
clearing  bank  decided  not  to  lend  to  them  during  the  day.  Similarly,  triparty  lenders 
underestimated their exposure to borrowers, believing that the clearing banks would always 
return  their  funds  each  morning.  When  triparty  borrowers  encountered  funding  pressures, 
these  assumptions  were  starkly  called  into  question.  The  private  sector  Triparty  Repo 
Infrastructure  Task  Force,  created  in  2009,  has  made  progress  toward  the  objective  of 
creating a more stable triparty market, but deeper change is needed to achieve real systemic 
risk reduction in this market. I will return to this subject later. 
As part of our financial stability effort, we also need to build in short-circuit mechanisms that 
help  to  dampen  shocks  and  increase  resilience.  This  is  reflected  in  work  underway  in 
implementing the Basel III agreements relating to the capital conservation buffer and also on 
capital  planning  in  our  supervisory  process.  This  includes  requirements  for  financial 
intermediaries to cease paying dividends when economic circumstances deteriorate. It also 
includes developing a systematic framework so that banks can be required to raise capital to 
ensure that they have adequate resources to deal with adverse economic scenarios – even if 
those scenarios have a low probability of being realized.  
These innovations are designed to limit behaviors that we saw during the financial crisis that 
made the financial system less robust. Banks were reluctant to cut their dividend payments 
and  compensation  because  of  fears  that  this  would  signal  weakness.  These  payouts 
depleted  capital  and  made  these  institutions  more  vulnerable  to  deteriorating  economic 
circumstances.  
Similarly,  banks  were  reluctant  to  raise  capital  to  protect  themselves  against  particularly 
adverse states of the world. This was unfortunate because the collective behavior of banks to 
be  less  prepared  for  adverse  states  of  the  world,  often  made  such  adverse  states  of  the 
world  more  likely.  In  an  important  sense,  a  poorly  capitalized  bank  generates  negative 
externalities,  making  the  entire  financial  system  less  secure,  with  costs  to  other  financial 
market participants, whereas the reverse is true of a well-capitalized bank.  
As noted earlier, another important step is to increase transparency throughout the financial 
system.  There  are  at  least  two  important  elements  to  this.  First,  regulators  need  to  have 
comprehensive access to information about the financial institutions and markets that they 
oversee  –  including  ones  that  may  not  be  directly  regulated.  Without  such  information, 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
diagnosis of emerging problems is more difficult and less timely, and appropriate remedies 
are more difficult to develop.  
Second,  financial  institutions  and  other  market  participants  need  access  to  high  quality 
information  in  terms  of  the  financial  condition  of  their  counterparties.  Balance  sheet 
information including capital and liquidity positions and counterparty exposures would enable 
financial market participants to more accurately assess the condition of those with which they 
do business. Increased transparency would reduce the level of uncertainty, which contributes 
to  risk  aversion  and  financial  crises.  Greater  transparency  in  terms  of  off  balance-sheet 
activities such as OTC derivatives exposures might also be helpful for the same reasons. 
Greater  transparency  is  often  unpopular  because  it  may  reduce  market  power  and  reveal 
business strategies and, thereby, limit profits. But the private loss of profit opportunities must 
be balanced against the public good of greater financial stability.  
Such  steps  reinforce  the  work  underway  to  make  the  major  financial  intermediaries  and 
financial  market  infrastructures  more  resistant  to  shocks  when  they  inevitably  occur.  This 
includes  appropriate  capital  and  liquidity  requirements  and  appropriate  risk  management 
practices for banks and financial market infrastructures.  
Finally,  when  institutions  do  get  into  difficulty  we  need  a  credible  way  of  enabling  these 
institutions to recover or, if recovery is not possible, to be resolved in an orderly manner so 
that  failure  of  any  one  institution  doesn’t  threaten  to  bring  down  the  rest  of  the  financial 
system.  
So  how  are  we  doing  relative  to  the  agenda  that  I  have  laid  out?  In  my  opinion,  we  have 
made  a  good  start,  but  there  is  a  long  ways  to  go.  In  many  areas,  we  have  identified  the 
necessary  tasks  only  in  general  terms.  Progress  in  figuring  out  the  details  and  the 
implementation  path  and  how  to  coordinate  the  efforts  on  a  cross-border  basis  is  more 
limited.  
I would particularly highlight the cross-border coordination problem – regulatory oversight is 
national,  but  many  financial  firms  and  infrastructures  operate  on  a  global  basis.  Effective 
reform requires mutually consistent global standards – and while international cooperation to 
date has been good on many fronts, progress is uneven,  and the devil is in the details of 
implementation.  We  need  all  national  authorities  to  resist the  temptation  to  favor  domestic 
financial  interests  over  the  interest  of  achieving  a  true  level  playing  field  globally.  And  we 
should resist the urge to favor locally controlled infrastructures where global solutions would 
better advance the collective financial stability interest. Instead we should work to ensure fair 
access to global infrastructures. Also, it is important that national regulators have access to 
data and a role in the regulatory oversight of such global infrastructures when that is relevant 
to their own national financial stability agendas.  
In the United States, I think we have made more progress in bolstering the resilience of our 
banking institutions than we have on the other tracks. There are two elements to this. The 
first  element  is  the  increase  in  capital  that  has  already  occurred.  The  major  U.S.  banking 
institutions are much better capitalized today than they were in the fall of 2008.  
The increase in capital reflects a number of factors – a long period of low capital payouts 
relative to income, significant equity raises, as well as sizable asset dispositions that have 
shrunk the balance sheet and bolstered capital. The fact that credit losses have abated and 
this has enabled banks to release reserves has also been important. 
The  second  element  is  the  international  agreement  to  implement  new  Basel  III  capital 
standards. Not only will Basel III significantly raise the Tier I capital standard when it is fully 
implemented  in  2019,  but  also  it  raises  the  quality  of  capital  by  putting  the  emphasis  on 
tangible common equity.  
In  addition,  we  and  our  partners  in  the  international  community  are  in  the  process  of 
implementing capital surcharges for large, systemically important financial institutions (SIFIs), 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
with  the  size  of  the  surcharge  dependent  on  size,  complexity,  and  interconnectiveness.  I 
appreciate  that  it  is  impossible  to  calibrate  “SIFIness”  precisely,  but  this  is  not  a  valid 
argument for no surcharge.  
The logic behind the SIFI surcharge is that the failure of a systemically important institution 
would generate a very large shock to the rest of the financial system. As a consequence, it 
makes sense to require higher capital for such firms to reduce their probability of failure. 
In addition, the Federal Reserve’s efforts to improve banks’ capital planning processes and 
evaluate  their  capital  dispositions  in  the  context  of  stress  scenarios  –  the  so-called 
Comprehensive  Capital  Assessment  and  Review  (CCAR)  process  –  is  an  important 
innovation.  Most  significantly,  this  process  induces  banks  to  improve  their  capital  planning 
processes in light of potential stress scenarios. It also creates an enforcement mechanism so 
that  dividends  and  share  repurchases  can  be  suspended  more  quickly  when  economic 
circumstances deteriorate.  
On the liquidity side, there has also been progress. U.S. banks have bolstered their liquidity 
buffers  and  the  Basel  Committee  has  proposed  a  liquidity  coverage  ratio  requirement  that 
effectively would require large, systemically important banks to hold sufficient liquid assets so 
that they could reasonably conduct their operations for 30 days without having to raise any 
new funds. In addition, the industry is reengineering how the triparty repo system operates in 
order  to  significantly  reduce  the  large  intraday  exposures  of  the  two  clearing  banks  in  the 
system. This is important because, as we saw during the financial crisis, very large intraday 
exposures can prove destabilizing.  
However,  I  would  argue  that  progress  on  the  liquidity  front  has  not  progressed  as  far  as 
desired.1 First, many banks remain dependent on short-term funding to finance longer-term 
assets from counterparties that tend to flee at the first signs of distress. In particular, money 
market  mutual  funds  remain  vulnerable  to  runs.  Such  runs  can  occur  even  when  the 
underlying risks remain negligible, making money market mutual funds a source of instability. 
Just a question from an investor about the fund manager’s exposures can cause the fund 
manager to withdraw funding from a counterparty. This may be market discipline, but it does 
not operate in a way that makes the financial system more stable. The SEC is leading an 
effort to reform the money market mutual fund industry.  
Second, the Basel liquidity coverage ratio is under review to ensure that it accomplishes its 
goals  without  creating  adverse  unintended  consequences.  It  will  be  implemented  but  in  a 
somewhat altered form, since the proposal is not locked down to the  same degree as the 
Basel III capital standards.  
Ensuring  that  financial  market  utilities  (FMUs)  are  robust  is  another  important  workstream 
with a number of important elements. For example, the Dodd-Frank Act has provisions that 
enable the Financial Stability Oversight Council to designate particular FMUs as systemically 
important  and,  therefore  subject  to  tougher  prudential  standards.  Internationally,  the 
Committee  on  Payments  and  Settlement  Systems  (CPSS),  which  I  chair,  and  the 
International  Organization  of  Security  Commissions 
(IOSCO),  have  proposed  a 
comprehensive set of operational standards for FMUs, which I expect will be finalized early 
next  year.  We  expect  that  these  principles  will  be  endorsed  and  adopted  by  the  G20 
countries, establishing a minimum standard for important FMUs around the world.  
However, progress is slow and uneven. For example, it is unlikely that the G20 countries will 
meet  the  goal  to  clear  all  standardized  over-the-counter  derivative  trades  through  central 
                                                 
1  
In  general,  I  think  progress  on  liquidity  is  inherently  more  difficult  than  on  capital  because  tougher  liquidity 
standards conflict with one of the basic function of banks-maturity transformation. Savers want to hold their 
funds in highly liquid, short-term assets. But borrowers want to lock up their funding over long time periods. 
Banks help bridge that gap. Pushing banks hard on the liquidity side runs up against this constraint. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
clearing counterparties by the end of 2012. Similarly, I have my doubts whether the next set 
of  industry  recommendations  to  reduce  risk  in  the  triparty  repo  market  will  be  sufficient  to 
eliminate  all  the  major  potential  sources  of  instability  –  including  inadequate  risk 
management practices and lack of resiliency to a dealer default. Experience suggests that it 
is  not  easy  for  market  participants  to  agree  on  measures  that  enhance  financial  stability 
when this goal conflicts with the commercial and business interests. If the private sector falls 
short  in  this  instance,  public  authorities  may  need  to  intervene  and  impose  more  forceful 
regulatory solutions.  
I also think that the scorecard is mixed with respect to making financial institutions, in their 
practices and structure, less prone to amplifying and propagating shocks. On one hand, the 
capital  rules  and  the  CCAR  process  should  cause  banks  to  husband  their  capital  better 
during  times  of  stress  than  was  the  case  during  the  financial  crisis.  Also,  compensation 
practices are improving in that more pay is deferred and over longer time periods. Similarly, 
risk  management  practices  have  improved.  Institutions  are  better  able  to  aggregate  and 
assess their risk exposures within short time periods and stress testing means that there is a 
better understanding of how these exposures might perform in adverse environments.  
But  our  task  remains  unfinished.  While  progress  on  reforming  compensation  practices  is 
welcome,  I  recognize  that  there  is  still  much  to  be  done  before  we  can  truly  say  that 
incentives are lined up in a way that fully supports financial stability objectives.  
We  have  work  to  do  on  the  information  front  too.  Consider  the  issue  of  international 
regulatory  access  to  data.  Currently  U.S.  bank  regulators  do  not  have  access  to  the 
consolidated global balance-sheet information of the foreign banks that operate in the United 
States  (or  vice  versa  for  that  matter).  Our  examiners  see  data  associated  with  the  foreign 
firms’ U.S. operations, but not how that fits in with their operations abroad. Without certain 
specific types of consolidated global information, it is difficult to place the U.S. operations of a 
foreign  firm  in  their  global  context,  and  make  informed  judgments  about  the  adequacy  of 
such firms’ capital and liquidity buffers. For example, liquidity is often managed on a global 
basis, and key business lines are frequently managed globally, even if they reside in multiple 
legal entities located in different jurisdictions. Making progress in establishing protocols that 
would enable bank regulators to share more relevant confidential supervisory information on 
a  cross-border  basis  would  be  a  significant  advancement.  Such  enhanced  collaboration 
offers attractive alternatives to ringfencing or other actions that seek to impose local solutions 
to risks facing globally active firms. 
Similarly,  information  about  counterparty  exposures  is  not  broadly  available.  Occasionally, 
information is revealed following specific stress tests, but disclosure is very incomplete and 
irregular. Nor is good pricing information on many financial market instruments such as OTC 
derivatives  readily  available.  This  may  ultimately  change  as  such  OTC  derivatives 
instruments become more standardized, are centrally cleared, and the data associated with 
such trades are reported to trade repositories – but, as noted earlier, this still lies off in the 
future.  Similarly,  implementing  a  global  legal  entity  identifier  standard  that  would  enable 
regulators  (and  potentially  others),  to  easily  aggregate  information  on  a  consolidated  legal 
entity basis is still a work in process.  
Similarly,  there  has  been  little  progress  made  with  respect  to  reengineering  the  financial 
system  so  that  the  transmission  mechanisms  act  to  dampen  rather  than  amplify  shocks. 
However, I wouldn’t be very critical here. This is particularly difficult work for several reasons. 
First, it is difficult because it relates to how all the parts of the financial system interact. It 
requires  a  holistic  approach  and  an  evaluation  of  how  the  financial  system  responds  to 
shocks.  Up  to  this  point,  regulatory  reform  efforts  have  been  more  focused  on  individual 
banks and infrastructures, rather than how the entire system functions. Second, it is difficult 
because the evaluation must extend to entities and activities that operate outside of the more 
tightly regulated core – including, of course, the so-called “shadow banking system.” In the 
U.S., some of this responsibility undoubtedly falls to the Financial Stability Oversight Council, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
to 
financial 
important 
firms,  on 
resolve  certain 
large  systemically 
which  was  created  by  the  Dodd-Frank  Act.  But  this  is  a  relatively  new  institutional 
arrangement  and  how  well  it  will  be  able  to  perform  its  mission  in  practice  remains  to  be 
determined. Similarly, on an international basis, the Financial Stability Board has undertaken 
an initiative to evaluate risks within the shadow banking system, but this effort is also still in a 
fledging stage.  
Finally,  turning  to  the  last  issue  about  how  to  deal  with  institutions  that  run  into  difficulty, 
there has been progress. In the United States, the Dodd-Frank Act (DFA) gave the FDIC the 
authority 
the 
recommendation  of  the  Federal  Reserve  and  the  FDIC,  and  after  the  Treasury  Secretary 
makes  certain  determinations  in consultation  with  the  President.  Among  other  things,  DFA 
enables the FDIC to establish a bridge institution in which critical activities could be moved 
so that the failure of a major institution will not unduly disrupt the provision of key financial 
services. DFA also authorizes the Federal Reserve to require that such institutions develop 
recovery and resolution plans – plans that must be acceptable to the Federal Reserve and 
the FDIC. The need to produce such plans will likely create some incentive for rationalizing 
complex corporate structures and, presumably, make resolution easier to implement.  
But a major challenge remains in implementing resolution effectively on a cross-border basis. 
The  legal  rules  and  regulatory  regimes  differ  across  legal  jurisdictions.  So,  when  a 
multinational banking organization becomes insolvent, each subsidiary and affiliate must be 
resolved in multiple bankruptcy proceedings, with the prospect of inconsistent treatment and 
larger than necessary losses in aggregate. Although the Financial Stability Board has taken 
up this issue, the legal impediments to progress here are significant despite the best efforts 
and intentions of regulators. The difficulty in implementing an efficient cross-border resolution 
is one of the reasons why the largest globally active firms are being asked to hold additional 
capital. 
In  conclusion,  let  me  emphasize  the  importance  of  the  mission  –  to  reform  and  better 
regulate the global financial system so it can perform its key financial intermediation function 
of funneling savings from investors to borrowers even under adverse circumstances. Clearly, 
the financial system we had in 2008 was woefully inadequate relative to this mission.  
Both the official sector and the private sector have responsibilities with respect to the work 
that remains ahead. It falls on us as regulators to seek to minimize the costs and adjust as 
the  unforeseen  consequences  of  reform  become  apparent,  and  to  be  mindful  of  the 
adjustment costs and challenges facing many firms and markets. In particular, we need to 
understand  as  best  we  can  how  all  the  threads  of  the  reform  effort  interact  within  one 
integrated  global  financial  system.  We  also  need  to  ensure  that,  where  the  law  gives  us 
latitude,  that  compliance  and  other  costs  are  calibrated  to  be  commensurate  with  the 
financial stability benefits generated by particular reform measures. In this respect, we must 
be particularly sensitive to the burden that the regulatory environment places on smaller, less 
systemically important institutions.  
But  the  private  sector  has  responsibilities  too.  Banking  leaders  and  industry  trade  groups 
should  propose  smart  solutions  to  achieve  essential  financial  stability  objectives  and  not 
simply lobby against change. The industry has an interest in a healthy financial system that 
can  withstand  shocks  and  adverse  economic  circumstances.  More  statesman-like 
engagement is both warranted and welcome.  
Thank you very much for your attention. I am happy to take a few questions. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
