Stefan Ingves: The housing market, the banks and household debt 
Speech by Mr Stefan Ingves, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, to the Riksdag 
Committee on Finance, Stockholm, 1 March 2011. 
 The origins and the course of the financial crisis can be described in slightly different ways 
and in more or less detail. I will not provide any detailed account here – I have already done 
so on more than one occasion, not least here before the Riksdag Committee on Finance. An 
essential component of the crisis was the build-up of credit and house price bubbles over a 
number years in a number of countries. When these bubbles burst, the financial system was 
rocked to its foundations, and governments and central banks around the world were forced 
to take exceptional measures to stabilise the situation.  
The  decades  prior  to  the  crisis  were  marked  by  extensive  deregulation  of  the  financial 
markets.  There  was  a  strong  belief  that  the  financial  sector  was  to  a  large  extent  self-
regulating,  and  that  it  was  able  to  resolve  most  problems  on  its  own  through  market 
incentives. This belief was seriously undermined during the crisis. There is now considerable 
international agreement that the market’s ability to “manage itself” was overestimated, and 
that regulations need to be stricter and supervision tightened. Of course, what one wants to 
achieve is to reduce the risk of future financial crises. Although more and stricter regulations 
may  be  linked  to  a  certain  cost,  for  instance,  in  the  form  of  higher  interest  rate  margins, 
studies indicate that this is more than counterbalanced in the long run by more favourable 
economic development.1 
I would like to point out that I am not talking about a return to the strictly regulated credit and 
finance markets we had before – deregulation has of course had some positive effects and 
meant  that  the  economy  in  many  ways  functions  better.  But  I  think  that  most  people  will 
agree that the financial sector needs a tighter rein than it has had for the past fifteen, twenty 
years.  
Tighter regulations and supervision planned  
Reform work is already under way on an international level. The Basel III rules, which in brief 
entail the banks having to hold more and better capital and larger liquidity buffers, are one 
example  of  this.  In  the  supervisory  field,  the  EU  has  established  a  special  body,  the 
European Systemic Risk Board, which is to identify risks in the financial system as a whole 
and to provide warnings and recommendations to the countries and authorities concerned. 
Sweden of course supports and participates fully in this international reform work.  
But  one  thing  we  really  need  to  ask  ourselves  is  whether  this  work  sufficiently  takes  into 
account the specific circumstances prevailing in each individual country. Is it really the case 
that “one size fits all”? Or might there be reasons for Sweden and other countries to specially 
design our own solutions, over and above those imposed by international regulations?  
Lending and house prices in Sweden relatively unaffected by the crisis  
One  area  where  Sweden  stands  out  in  comparison  with  many  other  countries,  is  the 
development of house prices and household indebtedness. As I noted earlier, house prices 
                                                 
1   See, for instance, the report “An assessment of the long-term economic impact of stronger capital and liquidity  
 
requirements” by the Basel Committee and the Financial Stability Board 
(http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs173.htm). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
in many countries have fallen heavily after being pushed up in a credit-driven boom over a 
number  of  years.  In  Sweden,  too,  house  prices  and  lending  to  households  have  risen 
substantially. But here we have not experienced any corresponding fall in housing prices in 
connection  with  the  crisis;  we  can  just  distinguish  a  minor  dent  in  the  curve  (Figure  1). 
Lending to households has also continued to increase rapidly.  
  
It has been profitable for the banks to fund the increase in Swedish mortgage borrowing in 
the international capital markets. Funding in foreign currency has shown an increase trend 
(Figure 2). This has meant that Swedish households have been able to obtain mortgages at 
a lower cost and probably to a greater extent than would otherwise have been the case.  
But this method of funding is not entirely without risk. It assumes that the rest of the world 
has  confidence  in  the  Swedish  housing  market  and  the  Swedish  financial  system. 
Historically,  foreign  investors  have  often  been  the  most  “fickle”  in  times  of  financial 
turbulence. If their confidence in the banks is damaged, for instance, through a heavy fall in 
housing prices, investors will either reduce their lending or charge more for loans. This could 
happen so quickly and in such large volumes that the banks might experience problems.  
The fact that we have not experienced a fall in housing prices is certainly one of the reasons 
why  the  effects  of  the  crisis  were  milder  for  us,  since  it  helped  to  sustain  demand  in  the 
economy.  But  it  is  also  a  cause  for  concern,  particularly  as  household  debt  has  been 
increasing  more  than  household  income  for  a  fairly  long  time.  Ultimately,  this  is  not 
sustainable. The danger is that this trend will continue so long that when it finally breaks it 
will  be  under  dramatic  forms  and  cause  problems  similar  to  those  we  have  seen  in  other 
countries. We all want to avoid this happening.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
The problems have varied from one country to another. In many countries the banks have 
suffered such severe problems that the state has had to intervene. At the same time as fiscal 
policy has been used to support the banking sector, it has also needed to uphold demand in 
the  economy.  As  tax  revenue  has  meanwhile  declined  as  demand  has  weakened 
substantially, this has led to large budget deficits and rapidly growing government debt.  
What many countries also appear to have in common is that the recovery is sluggish, even 
after  the  financial  sector  has  once  again  begun  to  function  reasonably  well.  A  possible 
contributory explanation for this is that households no longer want to have such large debts 
and prefer to reduce these rather than increase consumption.  
Of course, we do not know that we will face the same problems that other countries have 
faced. For instance, we have not experienced the same construction boom that many of the 
hardest-hit  countries  went  through.  But  the  difficulties  faced  in  other  countries  underscore 
how essential it is to try to bring about a gentle slowing down in credit growth and property 
prices in Sweden.  
What has been done?  
What  have  we  done  so  far  with  regard  to  developments  in  household  debt  and  housing 
prices?  Different  agents  have  contributed  in  different  ways.  The  Riksbank  has  raised  the 
repo rate a number of times and further increases are forecast. These increases are part of 
our monetary policy, but of course also affect the housing market. Finansinspektionen (the 
Swedish Financial Supervisory Authority) has recommended a maximum loan-to-value level, 
a mortgage ceiling. The Swedish Bankers’ Association has issued recommendations on the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
requirement for amortisation for new mortgages. With regard to the latter measure, I would 
like to point out that such initiatives from the banks are of course welcome and praiseworthy. 
But it is also essential that the banks follow up what is happening and that the authorities 
monitor to what extent the recommendations are actually followed.  
Moreover, awareness that rising indebtedness and housing prices could entail problems has 
gradually increased among both lenders and borrowers. The situation on the housing market 
is  now  discussed  regularly  in  the  media.  I  would  like  to  believe  that  this  is  at  least  partly 
because the Riksbank has long been pointing out the risks involved here.  
However,  it  remains  to  be  seen  whether  these  measures  and  the  increased  general 
awareness will be enough to slow down developments and bring us onto a less risky course. 
Very recently there have been signs that developments in both lending to households and 
housing prices have entered a calmer phase. We are of course following developments very 
closely.  
Continued vigilance necessary  
Despite  the  calmer  situation,  there are  nevertheless  strong  reasons  to  remain  vigilant.  If  it 
turns out that this was not a break in the trend, but merely a temporary slowdown, and that 
housing prices and the build-up of debts among households accelerate again, we and others 
must be prepared to take action. We therefore cannot just twiddle our thumbs; the Riksbank 
and others must ensure that we have an effective toolbox of measures that can be quickly 
and smoothly put into operation. I will return to this shortly.  
I would like to emphasise that the question of if and when we should take action ultimately 
depends on the risk aversion we have and the subjective assessments we make. One can 
never know in advance when the time will be right to take measures. It is not possible, for 
instance,  to  “calculate” that  at  exactly  this  particular  level  of  household  debt  or  of  housing 
prices  it  will  be  the  time  to  take  action.2
  Different  countries  have  experience  problems  at 
rather  different  levels  of  debt,  both  higher  and  lower  than  the  one  we  currently  have  in 
Sweden. This uncertainty is something we have to live with; we must nevertheless make the 
best possible assessments and make decisions on the basis of them.  
Given the uncertainty regarding whether or not the recent slowdown is a break in the trend, 
what measures do I think are needed? For the sake of clarity, I would like to distinguish here 
between  three  types  of  measure.  The  first  type  concerns  remedying  well-known  problems 
and deficiencies. The second covers slightly more revolutionary changes in the longer run – 
measures  that  would  improve  our  management  of  the  type  of  problems  caused  by  the 
mortgage  market.  The  third  type  of  measure  involves  strengthening  the  banking  sector  in 
general, regardless of whether future problems are caused by developments in the mortgage 
market or by some other market or phenomenon. I will now describe what I consider to be 
the most important priorities in these three areas.  
Well-known problems and deficiencies  
With  regard  to  measures  involving  correcting  well-known  problems  and  deficiencies,  I  see 
three main priorities.  
One  priority  is  to  gain  a  better  overview  of  the  mortgage  market.  Although  we  have 
information on aggregate changes and mean values with regard to household indebtedness, 
                                                 
2   For a review of how different studies evaluated the housing market in the United States prior to the crash, see 
Gerardi,  K.S.,  C.  L.  Foote  and  P.S.  Willen,  (2010),  “Reasonable  People  Did  Disagree:  Optimism  and 
Pessimism  About  the  U.S.  Housing  Market  Before  the  Crash”,  Public  Policy  Discussion  Papers  No  10–5, 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
how  much  of  their  income  goes  on  paying  interest,  etc.,  this  type  of  data  can  disguise  a 
substantial underlying variation. If we view it uncritically, there is a risk we will be lulled into a 
false sense of security. It may be enough for some households to be so much in debt that a 
fairly modest increase in the mortgage rate forces them to sell their homes. If a sufficiently 
large number are in this situation, it may start up a spiral of falling prices forcing further sales 
and leading to further price falls. But as I said, we do not know how many households are in 
this situation.  
We also need to gain a better idea of the extent to which households amortise their loans. 
We hope to achieve this now. Together with Finansinspektionen, we are currently working on 
producing better and more detailed statistics on the mortgage market with the aim of gaining 
a better insight into potential causes of future problems. Because although – as I mentioned 
earlier – we will never obtain a clear, objective indicator that tells us when it is time to take 
action, there is every reason to reduce the uncertainty in our assessments of the situation.  
The second priority concerns a serious discussion of the level of risk weights for mortgages 
in Sweden.3 Our risk weights are actually among the lowest in Europe (Figure 3). The risk 
weight of a loan determines how much capital a bank needs to hold per krona lent. Lower 
risk weights thus mean that the banks need to hold less capital. But the less capital a bank 
holds, the less resilience it has to loan losses. The low risk weights also contribute to some 
extent to the credit boom in the mortgage sector, as lending to buy housing thus becomes 
cheaper for the bank in relation to other lending. Why do we have such low risk weights? The 
reason  is  that  the  current  risk  weights  are  based  on  actual  data  on  historical  losses  on 
mortgages. And these were not particularly high even during the crisis of the 1990s.  
Despite  this,  I  believe  that  there  are  two  reasons  for  questioning  the  low  risk  weights  for 
mortgages. The first reason relates to a possible reason why loan losses in Sweden have 
historically been low; namely that in times of difficulty the public sector has helped maintain 
the household sector’s debt-servicing ability through the Swedish social insurance system. In 
practice,  this  means  that  when  the  household  sector’s  debt-servicing  ability  is  shaken,  it 
affects firstly the individual, secondly public finances and only thirdly the lenders. This could 
mean  that  the  banks  lack  an  incentive  to  fully  take  into  account  the  risks  entailed  in 
excessive  credit-granting  and  high  loan-to-value  ratios.  To  put  it  another  way,  the  risk 
weights we currently have for mortgages may be “correct” from the banks’ business point of 
view, but they are potentially too low in society’s broader perspective.  
The second reason for questioning the risk weights is that they are backward-looking. And as 
we  all  know,  history  doesn’t  always  repeat  itself.  This  is one  reason why  I  am  concerned, 
despite  the  Riksbank’s  own  stress  tests  showing  that  the  Swedish  banks  would  not  suffer 
particularly  large  loan  losses,  even  if  the  situation  in  the  mortgage  market  worsened 
significantly. One can’t help wondering whether it is reasonable that Sweden’s risk weights 
are among the lowest in Europe, while our households are among the most indebted. And 
their debts are increasing. I don’t think it is reasonable. And consequently I think that from 
the  authorities’  point  of  view  we  need  to  discuss  whether  the  level  of  the  risk  weights  is 
reasonable  or  whether  it  needs  to  be  raised  –  perhaps  by  establishing  a  floor  for  the  risk 
weights the banks use when calculating their capital adequacy.  
The third priority concerns ensuring that public authorities stand ready to use the tools we 
currently  have  at  our  disposal  to  cool  down  the  mortgage  market.  Finansinspektionen  has 
already taken a stand by introducing a cap on the loan-to-value ratio. On our part it would 
involve  using  our  possibility  to  require  that  the  banks  hold  reserves  with  the  Riksbank.  By 
linking the size of the minimum reserve requirement to lending to the housing market, lending 
to  mortgage  customers  would  become  relatively  more  expensive  than  lending  to  other 
                                                 
3   The risk weight of a loan is the risk that the borrower will not be able to meet his or her obligations. Minimum 
Capital Ratios are set in relation to the total loan multiplied by the risk weight. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
sectors.  And  in  this  way  it  should  be  possible  to  steer  the  banks’  lending  away  from  the 
mortgage market.  
 
We at the Riksbank are currently investigating what operational and technical requirements 
need to be met to launch a minimum reserve requirement for this purpose. Whether or not 
we then use the minimum reserve requirement would depend, of course, on the results of the 
investigation, but also on future developments in the mortgage market. It is in any case within 
the  Riksbank’s  mandate  to  introduce  a  minimum  reserve  requirement,  and  the  risks  rising 
from  a  credit  expansion  in  the  mortgage  market  fall  within  the  Riksbank’s  area  of 
responsibility.  
 Better management of systemic risk  
At the same time, there is a need to revise and clarify the division of responsibility between 
the authorities so that we become better at managing the type of problem we now see in the 
mortgage market. I am now talking about measures that are needed in the longer run.  
A  central  issue  concerns  the  current  hesitation  over  which  authority  should  deal  with  a 
runaway development in the mortgage market. The government has a role to play here, of 
course.  But  so  do  Finansinspektionen  and  the  Riksbank,  because  we  are  the  first  natural 
“line  of  defence”  as  public  authorities  with  the  task  of  managing  this  type  of  problem. 
Unfortunately, it is at present unclear exactly which one of us is responsible for what.  
As  you  know,  we  have  our  own  respective  areas  of  responsibility.  Finansinspektionen 
focuses  on  the  supervision  of  individual  financial  institutions  and  upholds  consumer 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
protection,  while  the  Riksbank  is  responsible  for  price  stability.  But  there  is  also  some 
overlap. Both Finansinspektionen and the Riksbank oversee the financial system and try to 
prevent  financial  crises.  But  we  do  this  for  partly  different  reasons,  as  we  have  different 
tasks. The risks now building up in the mortgage market concern individual banks. But risks 
are  also  building  up  that  threaten  financial  stability  –  what  are  known  as  systemic  risks. 
Ultimately,  the  macro  economy  may  also  be  affected.  This  means  that  the  division  of 
responsibility is unclear.  
The problem with the division of responsibility can be illustrated as follows. If we assume that 
the  trend  in  household  indebtedness  and  housing  prices  does  not  slow  down,  despite  all 
efforts, and continues at an alarming pace. Which authority should be the first to take action 
and  on  what  grounds?  Is  it  a  question  of  consumer  protection  or  of  inflation  and  resource 
utilisation? Then the answer is simple. But what if it is a question of risks that threaten the 
financial system? Or perhaps everything at once?  
We  in  Sweden  are  not  alone  in  struggling  with  these  issues.  Around  the  world  there  is 
intensive  debate  on  the  management  of  systemic  risk  –  what  is  usually  known  as  macro-
prudential supervision. As I have already mentioned, we in the EU have agreed to establish a 
European Systemic Risk Board to monitor the build-up of systemic risk in the member states 
and  to  recommend  measures  to  deal  with  it.  It  is  of  course  necessary  that  we  in  Sweden 
have a framework ready to respond to any such recommendations, in the form of allocation 
of responsibility and tools.  
Happily,  the  government  has  now  appointed  a  financial  crisis  commission  with  the  task  of 
looking more closely into these issues. This is good news, and the sooner we can reach a 
satisfactory  solution  regarding  how  best  to  allocate  responsibility,  powers  of  authority  and 
tools, the better.  
And although I do not wish to anticipate the commission’s inquiry, I see a future role for the 
Riksbank  with  regard  to  macro-prudential  supervision.  Monitoring  and  preventing  systemic 
risk is very much in line with our current macro-oriented work on safeguarding price stability. 
Not  least  because  the  cyclical  factors  affecting  price  stability  may  lead  to  the  build-up  of 
systemic risk.  
Increase the resilience of the banking sector4 
The third type of measure concerns, as I said, strengthening the banking sector’s resilience 
in  general.  This  is  important  not  just  because  of  the  current  developments  in  the  housing 
market. The financial crisis showed very clearly that the current regulatory framework for the 
banking sector is inadequate. Although Swedish banks escaped relatively lightly this time, we 
could see how banks in other countries suffered acute liquidity and capital shortages. And 
this is why we now have an international agreement on the new regulatory framework for the 
banking  sector  –  Basel  III  –  which  establishes  new  minimum  requirements  that  the  banks 
must meet with regard to both capital and liquidity.  
This is, of course, welcome. But the fact is that some weaknesses still remain. For example, 
the implementation period for the Basel III rules is very long. This may be justified with regard 
to countries where the economy is still on its knees, to avoid slowing down a recovery. But in 
a country that is doing as well as Sweden there is less reason to wait before introducing the 
new regulations. Moreover, the Swedish banks already meet many of the requirements. The 
adjustments would be relatively minor.  
                                                 
4   A more detailed description of the Basel III regulations and the Riksbank’s view of them can be found in the 
speech by Stefan Ingves on 2 February 2011 – “Basel III – much-needed regulations for a safer bank sector”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
But it is not just a question of when the regulations should be introduced. It is also a question 
of  the  levels  for  the  capital  adequacy  requirements,  which  will  be  higher  than  currently 
agreed levels. They will include the cyclically-based capital requirement now being prepared, 
and which is expected to be in the interval of 0 to 2.5 per cent. They will also include the 
extra  capital  requirements  that  large  banks  that  constitute  a  particular  risk  to  the  financial 
system  will  need  to  fulfil.  The  four  major  Swedish  banks  are  systemically-important  in  the 
Nordic-Baltic region and will most likely be covered by these rules. In total, thus, the capital 
requirements  will  be  raised.  In  addition,  these  are  minimum  requirements  and  there  is 
nothing  to  prevent  countries  from  voluntarily  choosing  higher  levels  if  they  consider  it 
necessary.  
Further  regulation  in  specific  areas  where  Swedish  banks  are  particularly  vulnerable  may 
also  be  necessary.  Here  I  am  mainly  referring  to  the  Swedish  banks’  extensive  market 
funding,  particularly  from  abroad,  which  I  discussed  earlier.  And  which  has  in  many  ways 
enabled  the  expansion  in  the  banks’  mortgage  stocks.  There  is  international  work  on 
producing new regulations in this area, too. When the work regarding the technical details for 
liquidity regulation is complete, we must also decide how and when the regulations should be 
introduced in Sweden, taking into account the structure of our financial sector.  
Don’t forget the supply side  
In talking about the housing market I have mostly talked about the demand side and how we 
can  ensure  a  balanced  development  there.  This  is  what  much  of  the  general  debate  has 
concerned.  But  I  would  like  to  conclude  with  some  words  on  the  supply  side,  or  housing 
construction, and what role this plays and has played earlier. While this is something that is 
fairly often discussed in this context, I nevertheless feel it deserves a little more attention.  
One of the explanations usually put forward for the high housing prices is that relatively little 
new  housing  has  been  built  in  the  past  fifteen  years  or  so  (Figure  4).  The  low  level  of 
construction is what is usually termed a “fundamental explanation” of the upswing in house 
prices. And this is probably true.  
But  I  also  feel  there  is  reason  to  ask  how  fundamental,  in  the  sense  of  how  natural  and 
sustainable,  the  low  level  of  housing  construction  actually  is.  After  all,  it  seems  rather 
remarkable that the rising prices in the housing market have not stimulated supply more. If 
construction had reacted in what might seem a more natural way and followed prices and 
demand better, the increase in prices would have been less dramatic. Part of the explanation 
is probably that we had some excess production of housing during the economic boom, that 
led to the crisis in the early 1990s. But this is not enough to explain why so little has been 
built in the past fifteen years. There appears to be some form of obstacle or sluggishness 
that has held back construction. It is important that we analyse what this is and, if possible, 
try to remedy it.  
I would like to point out that I do not believe that the solution is to try to stimulate massive 
housing  construction.  One  problem  in  many  countries  was  that  there  was  a  boom  in  the 
housing  market,  not  just  with  regard  to  demand  for  housing,  but  also  supply,  where 
excessive  resources  were  attracted  to  the  housing  sector.  The  large  supply  –  the  over-
capacity  that  was  built  up  –  probably  meant  that  the  fall  was  much  greater  once  demand 
declined  and  housing  prices  began  to  fall.  But  here  in  Sweden  developments  have  rather 
been  the  opposite.  Construction  has  not  been  excessively  high;  if  anything  it  has  been 
excessively low. The challenge in the coming period will be to try to get the supply of housing 
in a better long-term balance with demand without transitional problems, for instance in the 
form of overly rapid price falls, being too great.  
These  questions  are  not  easy  ones.  They  are also  beyond  the  domain  of  monetary  policy 
and cannot be managed very well through better supervision and regulations in the financial 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
sector. But they are nevertheless part of the overall picture, and I think it is important that 
they are discussed. 
 
 9
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 