Goh Chok Tong: Singapore as a philanthropy hub 
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Goh  Chok  Tong,  Senior  Minister  and  Chairman  of  the  Board  of 
Directors of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, at the Credit Suisse Philanthropists Forum 
2011, Singapore, 7 April 2011. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen 
1. 
I welcome the launch of the inaugural Credit Suisse Philanthropists Forum in Asia. 
Importance of philanthropy 
2. 
In recent years, the problems facing the world have been getting more acute. The 
World Bank estimated that the recent Global Financial Crisis pushed an additional 64 million 
people into extreme poverty. Rising energy and food prices have put additional stress on the 
most vulnerable, who spend more than half their income on food. The New Zealand, Japan 
and  Myanmar  earthquakes  are  the  latest  in  a  line  of  disasters  to  plague  the  Asia-Pacific. 
Climate  change  and  natural  disasters  are  creating  new  and  pressing  needs  on  an 
unprecedented scale. 
3. 
Fortunately,  philanthropy  has  risen  to  play  an  important  role  in  dealing  with  these 
problems. Generous  donations  have  brought  about  immediate  relief  in  the  aftermath  of 
disasters, and have also funded medium to long term programmes, such as education and 
health services, to improve the well-being of communities. 
4. 
Perhaps more critically, giving back to society is an important way to help maintain 
cohesiveness  in  our  society  as  the  income  gap  widens.  All  around  the  world,  the  gap 
between the rich and the poor is growing, particularly in fast growing emerging economies. 
Unless  the  successful  demonstrate  compassion  and  help  the  less  successful,  it  will  be 
difficult to maintain social cohesion and harmony. 
5. 
Philanthropy complements government measures to help the weak and the poor. As 
a voluntary act, it has the potential to be much more targeted, and if done correctly, creates 
meaning and social value for the giver and the recipient. 
Growth in philanthropy 
6. 
Today, the world’s philanthropists are in a better position to help than ever before. 
The World Wealth Report by Capgemini and Merrill Lynch estimated that the world’s wealth 
grew 72% over the past decade to US$200 trillion; Forbes magazine now counts more than 
1,200 billionaires on the planet. 
7. 
I am glad to say that philanthropists worldwide have been stepping up and giving 
generously.  Leading  the  way  is  the  United  States,  where  annual  giving  rose  from  a  mere 
US$170 million to more than US$300 billion over the last 20 years. Rising wealth in Asia has 
also  led  to  greater  giving.  The  2010  Hurun  Philanthropy  List  in  China  found  that  its  top 
100 philanthropists  gave  an  average  of  6  percent  of  their  wealth  to  charity,  totalling 
US$3.3 billion  over  the  previous  five  years.  Similarly,  in  India,  many  of  the  ultra-rich  are 
giving  part  of  their  wealth  to  charitable  causes.  Among  them,  Mr  Azim  Premji,  the  third 
richest man in India, pledged US$2 billion last year to fund rural education and development 
programmes. 
8. 
Philanthropy in Singapore is also growing. Some recent foundations that have been 
set up in Singapore include the Wee Foundation. Most recently, a US$100 million donation 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
was made by the family of the late Mr Ng Teng Fong to set up a fund for needy patients and 
other  worthy  causes  at  a  new  hospital  in  Singapore.  To  encourage  more  giving,  the 
Singapore Government has created a very conducive giving environment in Singapore. We 
allow  2.5  times  tax  deduction  for  donations  to  Institutions  of  a  Public  Character.  We  have 
also  increased  the  leverage  effect  of  donations,  with  matching  grants  for  donations  to  key 
causes such as universities and charities providing long term care for the elderly. 
Asian philanthropy is evolving 
9. 
Asian philanthropy has deep roots, both in tradition and religion. Giving across Asia 
is typically accomplished without fanfare, with many donors quietly donating millions on an 
anonymous  basis.  There  is  a  tendency  to  prize  modesty,  and  many  are  averse  to  what 
others may view as “flaunting wealth”. However, such private giving may have held us back 
from developing a more structured and sustainable way of giving. 
10. 
This  is  changing,  as  Asian  donors  have  observed  that  Western  philanthropy  has 
developed innovative structures which may be very efficient and effective. More and more, 
we  are  seeing  the  evolution  of  Asian  philanthropy  from  ad  hoc  cheque  book  donations  to 
more sophisticated philanthropic models such as foundations and venture philanthropy. This 
has helped to bring about greater accountability and efficiency in grant making. 
11. 
Another  change  is  the  shift  from  the  traditional  model  of  leaving  behind  legacies, 
towards “giving while living”. This has resulted in more active and engaged philanthropy in 
Asia,  leading  to  an  increased  demand  for  more  philanthropy-related  advisory  services  by 
wealthy  individuals  and  families.  More  of  the  rich  are  incorporating  philanthropy  into  their 
wealth management plans and want professional advice in their philanthropic commitments. 
As  a  result,  Asia  is  seeing  the  growth  of  professional  and  institutionalized  philanthropy 
foundations. China alone now has an estimated 900 philanthropic entities. 
Key challenges remain 
12. 
However, there remain challenges to giving in Asia, mainly because philanthropy is 
developing at varying stages across Asia, in line with the progress of Asian countries. There 
are two key issues which donors face: the nascent charity infrastructure to support donors, 
and weak governance practices by fund recipients. 
13. 
In  Asia,  there  are  many  causes  that  need  championing,  and  many  problems  that 
need addressing. Donors planning to give in Asia have to first understand the needs of the 
region, decide on the cause they intend to support, identify the worthy projects, and navigate 
the giving procedures in each country. 
14. 
The success of giving greatly depends on both the giver and the receiver. Clearly, 
throwing money at charities does not guarantee success of giving. There needs to be follow-
through  on  the  charity’s  part  to  ensure  that  the  money  is  channelled  successfully  to  the 
cause. 
15. 
The  reality  in  Asia  is  that  many  of  the  domestic  charities  are  small,  and  are  not 
equipped  to  handle  large  amounts  of  funds  efficiently  and  accountably.  The  levels  of 
transparency and governance controls in many countries are also not prescribed by law, and 
may vary across charities. As a result, giving in Asian countries suffers from a lack of trust. 
Such  suspicion  holds  back  donors  who  are  concerned  that  their  gifts  should  be  used 
appropriately and effectively, rather than going to waste funding inefficient expenses. 
16. 
Donors have found ways to work around the trust issue. Some have set up their own 
charities or are working together with reliable charities to see through the giving process from 
start to end. Such efforts demonstrate that donors can be an integral part of the solution, but 
this will take time, and it can be a very challenging process for donors. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Singapore as a philanthropy hub 
17. 
Singapore  can  make  it  easier  for  international  donors  to  give  in  Asia.  Our 
infrastructure,  connectivity  and  regulatory  framework  form  a  strong  foundation  to  support 
local and regional philanthropy. 
Infrastructure 
As  a  leading  international  financial  centre,  Singapore  can  provide  a  full  suite  of 
18. 
wealth advisory services ranging from fund management to philanthropic advisory. We have 
recently seen a growing number of private banks in Singapore building up their philanthropy 
advisory capabilities, either in-house or leveraging on third party expertise. SymAsia, which 
was  set  up by  Credit  Suisse,  is  an  example  of  an  umbrella  foundation  that  provides  grant 
making, project review and investment management for donors who do not wish to set up 
their own foundations. 
19. 
To support philanthropy and non-profit organisations seeking to invest in Asia, the 
International  Organisations  Programme  Office  was  set  up  in  2007  by  the  Singapore 
Economic  Development  Board  as  a  whole-of-government  effort  to  facilitate  international 
organisations  planning  to  locate  in  Singapore.  The  Government  has  also  developed 
supporting physical infrastructure, such as the Tanglin International Centre for clustering and 
shared services. 
Connectivity 
20. 
In  addition,  Singapore  has  excellent  international  transport  and  communications 
connectivity,  and  can  serve  as  an  intermediary  for  giving  in  the  region.  Our  location  and 
stable and safe environment provide international donors with a convenient base from which 
to oversee their giving in the region. 
Governance 
Lastly, we cannot over-emphasise the importance of good governance in charities. 
21. 
Governments are working to address this issue. For example, last year, China launched the 
China Foundation Centre (CFC) to promote greater transparency and accountability among 
foundations.  But  there  is  still  much  that  countries  in  Asia  can  do  to  improve  charity 
governance. 
22. 
Singapore, too, is working on improving governance. We have put in place a sound 
regulatory framework and a code of governance to ensure transparency and accountability of 
our local charity sector. In addition, the National Volunteer and Philanthropy Centre will also 
be introducing an independent charity analysis system this year. 
Conclusion 
23. 
In  closing,  I  would  like to  say  that philanthropy  makes  the world  a  better  place.  It 
balances our emphasis on economic growth and the pursuit of profits with our warm, human 
side. Hence, it is crucial that we continue to give generously, to local and foreign deserving 
causes. 
24. 
Yet giving is also difficult to do well because it must not lead to waste and leakage 
or  diminish  the  spirit  of  self-reliance.  I  am  pleased  that  Singapore  is  playing  host  to  this 
global  forum  which  brings  together  leading  philanthropists  and  thought  leaders  to  discuss 
how to better accomplish giving, and to push the frontiers of philanthropy in Asia. 
25. 
capabilities in Singapore, and I wish you a fruitful meeting. 
I  commend  Credit  Suisse  for  playing  an  active  role  in  developing  philanthropy 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
