Paul Fisher: Current issues in monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Paul  Fisher,  Executive  Director  for  Markets  and  Member  of  the  Monetary 
Policy  Committee  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at  the  Global  Borrowers  and  Investors  Forum, 
London, 21 June 2011. 
 I would like to thank Ronnie Driver for his help in preparing this speech. 
Monetary policy is currently a subject of great debate. More so than at any time since the 
start of the inflation targeting era nearly twenty years ago. That almost certainly reflects the 
hardships associated with the recession on the one hand and higher inflation on the other, 
with the resultant squeeze on real incomes affecting the vast majority of us. In this keynote 
address today, I want to assess some of the reasons why the current conjuncture is proving 
so difficult for achieving the inflation target. In summary, the nature of the shocks that have 
hit the economy mean that there is no easy path for monetary policy and the outlook for the 
economy is especially uncertain. The main message I want to get across, is that there is no 
magic  solution  to  these  challenges.  The  MPC  are  trying  to  set  the  best  path  back  to  the 
inflation target, but even the best path is an extremely uncomfortable one. 
Why has CPI inflation been so high recently? 
CPI inflation has been above its 2.0% target since December 2009, reaching 4½% in April 
and May 2011. And, as discussed in the Monetary Policy Committee’s (MPC) May Inflation 
Report,  it  is  likely  to  rise  further  in  the  near-term  before  beginning  to  fall  back  (Chart  1). 
Moreover,  the  rate  of  inflation  may  well  stay  above  target  for  the  remainder  of  2011  and 
2012.  
Chart 1 
CPI inflation projection based on market 
interest rate expectations and £200 billion 
asset purchases 
 As I and many of my colleagues have already discussed in various speeches, MPC Minutes 
and the Inflation Report, the MPC attribute the rise in CPI inflation to three main shocks – the 
rise in VAT, increases in global commodity prices, and the impact of the fall in sterling since 
mid-2007. 
First, let me consider the increase in the standard rate of VAT to 20%. Mechanically this tax 
increase  could  account  for  around  1½  percentage  points  of  the  current  inflation  rate 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
although,  allowing  for  the  behaviour  of  retailers  in  absorbing  some  of  the  increase,  the 
marginal impact is probably nearer 1 percentage point.1  
Second, there have been large increases in a number of commodity prices over the past two 
years  or  so.  Those  increases  reflected  the  combination  of  renewed  strength  of  the  world 
economy,  especially  in  emerging  market  economies,  and  the  limited  ability  of  the  world’s 
commodity producers to increase supply – at least at the same pace as demand. Commodity 
prices are traded as an asset – they are inherently forward looking. Information about future 
demand  and  supply  levels  ought  to  be  reflected  in  the  current  price  and  in  the  prices  of 
commodity futures. But the increases from Autumn 2010 onwards were largely unexpected, 
and have been a genuine surprise for our forecasts. For example, spot oil and gas prices 
have risen very substantially since their low points in 2009.2 Spot oil prices are well above 
the levels implied by futures prices at the time of the February Inflation Report (Chart 2). Gas 
futures prices have also moved markedly higher since then (Chart 3).  
Chart 2  
Sterling oil prices(a) 
Chart 3  
Sterling gas prices(a) 
Sources: Bloomberg, Thomson Reuters 
Datastream and Bank calculations. 
Sources: Bloomberg, Thomson Reuters 
Datastream and Bank calculations. 
the 
(a)  Futures  prices  for  February  and  May  are 
averages  during 
to 
9 February  and  4  May  respectively.  Each  futures 
curve  assumes  that  the  sterling-dollar  exchange 
rate  remains  constant  at  its  average  during  those 
periods. 
fifteen  working  days 
(a)  Futures  prices  for  February  and  May  are 
averages  during 
to 
9 February and 4 May respectively. 
fifteen  working  days 
the 
(b) One-day forward price of UK natural gas. 
(b) Brent forward prices for delivery in 10–21 days’ 
time converted into sterling. 
Third, we have been experiencing the ongoing effects of sterling’s fall during 2007 and 2008, 
when  the  nominal  effective  exchange  rate  fell  by  around  25%  (Chart  4).  Estimating  the 
impact of such a shock on CPI inflation, and the time it takes for that impact to come through, 
is very difficult, not least because the precise scale depends in large part on the reasons for 
the shock. It is fair to say that the MPC originally underestimated the degree and timing of 
                                                 
1  Since the change was only announced in July 2010, this was a surprise addition to our inflation projections 
made before that date.  
2  These prices impact directly on the retail prices of petrol, gas and electricity, which together account for just 
under 10% of the CPI basket. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
exchange  rate  pass  through  into  consumer  prices.  One  possible  reason  for  that  is  that  it 
would appear that the sensitivity of CPI to the exchange rate has been rising over the past 
decade or so. 
Chart 4  
Sterling exchange rates 
 A one-off, autonomous shock to the exchange rate would ultimately change the price level 
not  the  inflation  rate.  But  this  particular  shock  probably  reflected  a  reappraisal  of  real  UK 
economic performance in the light of the financial crisis rather than, for example, interest rate 
differentials between the UK and its major trading partners.3 During the decade prior to the 
crisis – the NICE or non-inflationary, consistently expansionary decade – the UK experienced 
an unparalleled run of sustained growth, falling unemployment and low, stable inflation. But 
the economy also became badly unbalanced – overly dependent on domestic demand and 
with  a  trade  deficit  that  was  steadily  expanding  relative  to  domestic  output.  The  real 
exchange rate change brought about by the depreciation of sterling (and indeed the increase 
in  VAT)  reflected  a  need  to  rebalance  the  economy  away  from  domestic  expenditure  and 
towards net exports. That real exchange rate shock will cause a change in relative prices, 
with import prices rising relative to domestic wages and prices. It may take several years for 
that price level effect to work through fully, generating higher inflation rates for the duration. It 
is possible, but by no means certain, that this effect has now worked through.  
A key and recurring theme in setting monetary policy is that one has to look at the source of 
the  shocks to  understand  their  inflationary  consequences  and  judge the  appropriate  policy 
prescriptions. The first question I want to address today is, given our inflation target, what is 
the right monetary policy response to these shocks? I then want to talk a little about how we 
make such decisions and, in particular, the role played by models and forecasts. 
How should monetary policy have responded to the recent shocks to inflation? 
The  economics  profession  has  long  accepted  that  different  shocks  warrant  different  policy 
responses. Assume for a moment that one can perfectly identify the source and nature of a 
shock to the economy (which of course, one never can). Faced with a demand shock – such 
as  an  exogenous  increase  in  consumer  spending  (for  example  driven  by  a  change  in 
preferences)  –  inflation  and  output  would  be  pushed  in  the  same  direction.  The  monetary 
                                                 
3  For example, policy rates in the United States were being cut well before those in the UK. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
policy  prescription  in  such  cases  is  relatively  simple  –  monetary  policy  just  has  to  lean 
against  the  demand  shock  sufficiently  that  inflation  returns  towards  the  target.  Tightening 
policy  helps  to  reduce  the  deviation  of  both  inflation  (from  target)  and  output  (from  its 
sustainable path) albeit with somewhat different time lags. For such a shock the challenge for 
the policy-maker is one of recognition and timing (because demand will usually react more 
quickly than inflation to a policy change) rather than direction. 
Things are much, much more complex when faced with real, relative price shocks, such as a 
rise  in  world  energy  prices.  Such  a  cost  shock  pushes  up  on  inflation  but  simultaneously 
pushes  down  output  relative  to  its  previous  level.  Technically  it  is  a  negative  supply-side 
shock. That makes policy-making much more difficult – one can only counter the resulting 
inflation  by  exacerbating  the  fall  in  output.  Moreover,  the  pressure  of  demand  on  inflation 
becomes  much  harder  to  estimate  when  both  actual  output  and  the  level  of  sustainable 
supply are moving around at the same time. 
The three price shocks share a common feature – they all represent real shocks to relative 
prices.  Each  has  manifested  itself  in  the  form  of  an  upwards  shock  to  large  parts  of  the 
CPI basket: VAT-able elements, energy, and imported goods and services respectively.4 But 
these do not reflect increased pressure of demand. In fact, because each of them will push 
prices up relative to wages, it is likely that each shock will have pushed down on domestic 
demand,  at  least  temporarily5.  In  addition,  one  can  argue  that  the  financial  crisis  also  had 
elements  of  a  negative  supply-side  shock:  forcing  up  the  cost  of  credit  and  depressing 
activity levels. 
How should monetary policy have responded? In principle, the best policy path is probably to 
allow the one-off price level effects of such shocks to flow through to final prices but to make 
sure that there are no second-round effects – such as compensating wage increases – that 
would leave inflation above the target in the medium term. That is essentially what the MPC 
has been trying to do. Yes, we could have tightened policy to keep inflation at target when 
the shocks first hit – but it would have needed to be a very material tightening. I believe that 
would have engendered a worse outcome on all counts. 
First, shocks such as the VAT rate increase and the step up in the level of commodity prices 
were not anticipated, and their impact on inflation is likely to be temporary in nature. By the 
time Bank Rate had exerted its full influence on the price level, the effect of the shocks was 
likely to have already dissipated, if not reversed. Second, Bank Rate would have dampened 
inflation  by  adding  even  more  downwards  pressure  on  demand  on  top  of  the  existing 
recessionary  forces.  The  consequent  fall  in  output  and  rise  in  unemployment  would  have 
been greater. These two considerations mean that a monetary policy response would most 
likely have only injected extra volatility to inflation: by the time the price shocks wore off, we 
would have been facing a severe undershoot of the inflation target and deflation would have 
been a distinct possibility. The path of output would have been unnecessarily volatile and the 
deviation of inflation from target might have been different but no more acceptable.  
The  possibility  of  such  shocks,  and  indeed  the  ability  to  respond  as  we  have  done,  was 
foreseen  when  the  inflation  target  regime  was  conceived.  Indeed  our  Remit  from  the 
Government is clear on the consequences. The Remit says that (with my emphasis): 
“The framework takes into account that any economy at some point can 
suffer from external events or temporary difficulties, often beyond its 
control. The framework is based on the recognition that the actual inflation 
rate  will  on  occasions  depart  from  its  target  as  a  result  of  shocks  and 
                                                 
4  The latter would affect CPI directly though its impact on imported consumer goods and services, and indirectly 
by affecting the cost of domestic production reliant on imported intermediate inputs. 
5  The real exchange rate shock is likely to push down on domestic demand but should increase export supply. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
disturbances.  Attempts  to  keep  inflation  at  the  inflation  target  in  these 
circumstances may cause undesirable volatility in output”.6 
In other words, if shocks drive inflation sufficiently away from the target, the MPC are allowed 
to choose how quickly to return inflation to 2% and should explain such policy decisions via 
the open letter system. 
I have often been asked whether or not changes to the target, or the remit, or to CPI itself 
would help us to set policy. The answer is a clear no. Of course, the Government can decide 
to  change  these  things  if  it  wants  to,  but  that  wouldn’t  magic  away  the  problem.  The 
unfortunate and difficult truth is that the shocks that have hit the economy recently have not 
been  caused  by  monetary  conditions.  They  are  real  economy  shocks  which  make  us 
individually and collectively worse off – we have to pay more tax, we have to pay more, in 
real  terms,  for  petrol,  gas,  electricity  and  imported  goods  or  services.  The  choice  that 
monetary  policymakers  face  is  how  much  of  these  relative  price  shocks  should  be 
accommodated by a higher level of prices, and how much should be accommodated by a 
squeeze on nominal wages (and higher unemployment). Even if we had had perfect foresight 
at the time, the MPC would have still been faced with the same choice – the adjustment in 
real wages was unavoidable. Of course if nominal wages start to rise in an attempt to offset 
that  inevitable  fall  in  standards  of  living,  risking  a  wage-price  spiral  as  the  UK  had  in  the 
seventies, then the MPC would be duty-bound to raise Bank Rate sooner to bring inflation 
back to target, regardless of any short-run pressures on output. 
Given  the  nature  and  timing  of  the  shocks,  I  would  argue  that  the  best  we  can  do  with 
monetary policy is accept the initial impact and then to gently steer inflation back to target in 
the medium term. In the remainder of this speech, I want to consider how we come to make 
our  judgments  about  that,  month-by-month,  and  in  particular,  discuss  the  relative  role  of 
economic forecasts and human judgment. 
Monetary policy in practice 
The Bank has come in for a lot of criticism recently about its forecasting record. For a period 
now, CPI inflation has been significantly higher than the Bank had been previously expecting. 
And  in  2010  Q4  and  2011  Q1,  output  growth  disappointed  relative  to  our  central 
expectations. In this section, I want to dig a little deeper into the issues around models and 
forecasts. 
Step back for a second and consider what an economic model actually is and why it might be 
useful. At its heart, a model – any model – is just a framework for thinking about an issue, be 
it how the economy reacts to different shocks, how the setup of a car might affect the way it 
handles  a  corner,  or  how  a  disease  might  spread  through  a  population.  As  all  modellers 
would concede, they can only provide an approximation of reality, which is always far more 
complex.  
That isn’t to say that models aren’t useful – far from it. Economic models, like any other, are 
essential. But they are not a panacea. For example, it would be a mistake to think one can 
just keep learning and adding to a single economic model until it gets ever more complete. 
What tends to happen is that one just ends up with a very large model which nobody can 
understand or use for any practical purpose. Instead, the best way forward in understanding 
the  economy  seems  to  be  to  use  a  variety  of  different  models,  remembering  the  relative 
strengths and weaknesses of each, and applying judgment accordingly. That is exactly what 
the  MPC  does  when  it  considers  the  appropriate  stance  of  monetary  policy.  The  Bank’s 
approach to modelling strives to be eclectic. 
                                                 
6  The remit can be found at http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/monetarypolicy/pdf/chancellorletter110323.pdf 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
What about forecasts? They too are essential, given that the lags between setting policy and 
its impact on inflation require us to be forward-looking. To come up with its forecast, the MPC 
has to reach a view based on all the information available to us: data, theories, a variety of 
models, business and market intelligence, our own experiences and judgement and so on. 
But  there  are  huge  uncertainties  within  the  information  set  and  so  there  must  be  equally 
great  uncertainties  about  the  resulting  judgements.  That  is  why  the  one,  indeed  the  only, 
thing we know for certain about any forecast of the economy is that it will be precisely wrong. 
That  is  also  why  the  MPC  puts  little  weight  on  its  central  projection,  and  chooses  to 
communicate its judgments to the public by focusing on the range of possible outcomes and 
the balance of risks, as summarised in the fan chart.7  
What this means is that setting monetary policy is about decision making under uncertainty. 
It isn’t clean. In fact it’s very messy. But nobody has a working crystal ball. The important 
question for us is not whether we got the central projection right but whether we set the right 
policy, given what we knew at the time. Crucially, we are accountable to the public, including 
via the Treasury Select Committee, for our policy decision. I do not think I have heard many 
argue that we should have done something materially different with policy during the depths 
of  the  recession  in  2009  (i.e.  to  the  extent  necessary)  in  order  to  generate  a  different 
outcome for inflation now.  
Conclusion 
What I hope this discussion highlights is that, in practice, the job of monetary policy makers 
comes down to making difficult and complex decisions in the face of uncertainty. Over the 
past couple of years the challenge has been dealing with a succession of real changes in 
relative  prices  (via  negative  supply  side  shocks)  which  have  pushed  up  on  prices  whilst 
depressing  demand  and  output.  That  is  extremely  uncomfortable  for  everybody.  But  there 
was, and is, no easy way for monetary policy to deal with the impact of such shocks. In our 
current projections there are very major risks to either side of the central case. On one side, 
higher inflation expectations could become entrenched making it very costly for the MPC to 
subsequently bring inflation back to target. On the other side, the economy could be much 
weaker  than  we  expect  pushing  down  on  inflation  and  risking  deflation.  Recovering  to  the 
target from that could be even harder (at least in my personal view). MPC members place 
different  weight  on  these  possibilities  and  reach  different  judgements  accordingly.  But  it  is 
clear to all of us that both risks exist.  
I  believe  the  MPC  is  charting  the  right  course  through  these  difficult  times.  Despite 
temporarily  higher  inflation  for  a  period,  and  notwithstanding  all  the  uncertainty,  I  want  to 
assure you that we remain determined to bring inflation back to target in the medium term, 
consistent with our remit. 
                                                 
7  For more information, see Britton, E, Fisher P, and Whitley J, “The Inflation Report projections: understanding 
the fan chart”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, February 1998, pages 30–37. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
