Jean-Claude Trichet: Making decisions in an uncertain world 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
Rheinisch-Westfälische Technische Hochschule (RWTH), Aachen, 1 June 2011. 
 Introduction 
I. 
It is a pleasure for me to be here in Aachen, a city that has played such a central role in the 
project of European integration.  
As  students  at  RWTH  Aachen,  you  must  be  proud  to  be  part  of  one  of  Europe’s  leading 
institutions  for  science  and  research.  This  university  has  an  international  reputation, 
demonstrated  both  by  its  participation  in  global  networks  of  higher  education  and  by  the 
presence  of  a  large  contingent  of  students  from  around  the  world.  A  degree  from  such  a 
renowned  university  is  indeed  a  great  asset  and  a  remarkable  insurance  against  the 
uncertainties of your working lives. 
In  pursuing  your  studies,  you  have  already  had  to  make  important  decisions  under 
uncertainty. Your choices of university and degree course were made with limited information 
– about the chances of obtaining the degree, about the impact of your degree on future job 
opportunities and about its relative merits compared with alternatives. Such uncertainty is a 
constant  feature  of  our  lives,  as  we  experience  the  structural  transformation  of  our 
economies driven by new technologies and globalisation.  
Fifty  years  ago,  future  career  paths  were  clear  for  most  graduates.  Engineering  students 
would  become  engineers  and  medical  students  would  become  doctors.  Nowadays  all 
professions change at much greater speed. Engineers and doctors work side-by-side in such 
areas as nanotechnology and biomedical engineering. Many of you will be not so much filling 
existing jobs as inventing whole new jobs.  
At  the  same  time,  increasing  interactions  between  people  and  organisations  across 
geographical borders makes it more difficult to appreciate the potential impact of economic 
developments elsewhere in the world on the prospects for your home country. The process 
of  globalisation  has  many  positive  consequences,  such  as  the  benefits  of  trade,  financial 
market integration and the acceleration of global growth. But there are risks too, such as the 
accumulation  of  so-called  “global  imbalances”,  which  were  a  key  underlying  cause  of  the 
global crisis.  
All of you will be aware of the difficulties that the world economy has experienced in recent 
years: the financial crisis that began in 2007 and led to the deepest recession since World 
War II. Devising appropriate policy responses to the crisis has been a challenge for central 
banks  everywhere.  Many  decisions  have  had  to  be  made  under  exceptionally  uncertain 
conditions,  sometimes  with  very 
in  constantly  changing 
circumstances.  
Today  I  would  like  to  discuss  with  you  our  recent  experience  of  decision-making  in  an 
uncertain  world.  I  will  outline  how  the  crisis  developed  and  then  describe  how  we  at  the 
European Central Bank (ECB) responded – the kinds of information we draw on, the tools we 
use and the principles on which we base our decisions. I will close with some brief reflections 
on dealing with uncertainty.  
information  and 
limited 
Uncertainty and the crisis 
II. 
The origins of the crisis lay in changes in the economic and financial environment over the 
past  two  decades.  During  that  time,  there  was  a  marked  decline  in  the  volatility  of  such 
aggregate  economic  indicators  as  total  household  consumption  and  total  business 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
production. This led to a widespread perception that we were living in very benign economic 
conditions. 
At the same time, some developed countries underwent a process of financial deregulation 
and  innovation  aimed  at  improving  efficiency.  New  financial  products  were  developed  with 
the  promise  of  enabling  financial  institutions  to  manage  the  risks  in  their  lending  activities 
more effectively. As a result, larger segments of the population obtained mortgage financing, 
and credit generally was more easily available.  
But the promised benefits of financial risk management turned out to be illusory. Risk did not 
disappear, indeed in many cases it was magnified. And the process of deregulation led to a 
huge increase in private indebtedness and an accumulation of financial imbalances.  
At  the  global  level,  a  number  of  developed  economies  were  able  to  finance  increased 
household  consumption  by  borrowing  from  fast-growing  emerging  economies  that  had  an 
abundance  of  savings.  These  sustained  global  imbalances  contributed  to  lower  interest 
rates,  which  further  encouraged  the  process  of  credit  creation  in  countries  that  were 
receiving capital inflows. 
It was clear to many careful observers that this process eventually should come to a halt. 
With  the  considerable  benefit  of  hindsight,  warning  signals  of  the  subsequent  financial 
distress  in  the  data  for  2006–07  are  clearly  evident.  In  the  name  of  my  colleague  central 
bankers, I gave myself a clear warning in January 2007 on the likelihood of a major market 
correction due to a significant under-assessment and under-pricing of risks in the financial 
markets. But the specifics of how a crisis might be triggered and the course of its subsequent 
propagation proved hard to predict in real time.  
Ultimately, the crisis was ignited in August 2007 by unprecedented tensions in the interbank 
market,  in  which  financial  institutions  lend  to  and  borrow  from  one  another.  Following  the 
bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers in September 2008, the financial market tensions developed 
into a loss of confidence across the whole economy and eventually a deep recession. After 
years  of  benign  economic  developments,  all  policy-makers  suddenly  faced  very  uncertain 
circumstances.  
A  key  feature  of  the  uncertainty  generated  by  financial  crises  is  that  it  places  decision-
makers  in  uncharted  territory.  Events  happen  that  were  deemed  to  be  almost  impossible 
before the crisis, and were therefore difficult to forecast on the basis of statistical methods.  
This was the case for developments in the interbank market in the first phase of the crisis. Up 
until July 2007, the general perception among market participants was that loans between 
financial  institutions  were  essentially  safe.  Banks  trusted  each  other,  both  because  bank 
defaults  in  developed  economies  had  previously  been  rare  events  and  because  the  very 
short loan periods minimised the risks that borrowers would not repay their loans. 
As a result, banks were happy to lend to other banks in large amounts at the same interest 
rate that they were charged when borrowing from the central bank. Occasional differences of 
a  few  hundredths  of  a  percentage  point  between  these  interest  rates  were  interpreted  as 
signs of stress, but they were often due to technical factors and therefore very short-lived.  
But in August 2007, in response to negative developments in the market for US sub-prime 
mortgages,  uncertainty  about  the  creditworthiness  of  many  financial  institutions  suddenly 
increased. Banks became unwilling to lend in the money market. As funds disappeared from 
the  market,  the  difference  between  the  cost  of  unsecured  short-term  funding  from  other 
banks – what in the euro area is called EURIBOR – and the interest rate on money provided 
by  central  banks  suddenly  jumped  from  near  zero  to  unprecedented  levels  of  around 
60 basis points. 
This  sudden  widening  in  the  interest  rate  differential  –  what  is  known  as  the  spread  – 
happened simultaneously in the euro area, the US and the UK (see Figure 1). Not only was 
this unpredictable, but policy-makers and market participants were also extremely uncertain 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
about whether the spread would widen further and when there would be a return to normal 
conditions.  
Some  researchers  have  drawn  a  parallel  between  the  money  market  crisis  and  Nassim 
Taleb’s1 description of “black swan” events. The idea of black swan events originates from 
the assumption, based on centuries of experience in Europe, that there was only one kind of 
swan: white swans. This assumption was invalidated only in the eighteenth century by the 
observation of a black swan in Australia.  
In  Taleb’s  analogy,  “black  swans”  are  extreme  outcome  but  low  probability  and  highly 
unpredictable events. The parallel arises as the opening up of interbank market spreads in 
August 2007 could not be predicted based on historical data, because it was a low probability 
event. It became predictable – and justifiable – only with hindsight.  
What happened next was that tensions remained high for a protracted period. In September 
2008,  spreads  increased  much  further  with  the  bankruptcy  of  Lehman  Brothers.  Economic 
uncertainty – as reflected, for example, in stock market volatility – rose dramatically.  
The  unpredictability  of  rare  events  highlights  an  important  distinction  between  “risk”  and 
“uncertainty”, which was first made by the famous economist Frank Knight in 1921. 
According to Knight, “risk” refers to a situation of randomness where the range of possible 
events  and  the  associated  probability  distribution  are  known.  Risk  therefore  characterises 
situations  such  as  the  toss  of  a  coin  or  weather  forecasting.  In  both  cases,  we  can 
characterise the set of possible outcomes and we can compute their likelihood. 
“Uncertainty” refers instead to a situation where events cannot be enumerated and/or it is not 
possible  to  attach  a  probability  to  them.  Events  like  the  “black  swan”  can  more  easily  be 
characterised as uncertain, rather than risky. Since they have never been observed before, 
we do not know how to judge their likelihood. 
Permanent alertness, judgement and experience  
III. 
So how did central banks respond to the crisis?  
I  would  like  to  highlight  one  simple  principle:  the  timing  of  the  policy  response  is  crucially 
important.  Financial  crises  can  strike  suddenly.  The  response  to  the  crisis  should  be 
commensurably swift and decisive. This requires a stance of what I call permanent alertness, 
to  identify  promptly  new  threats  to  economic  stability  and  price  stability,  including  those 
arising from the crisis itself.  
The  decline  in  banks’  ability  to  raise  funds  on  the  interbank  market  led  to  a  tightening  of 
credit  conditions  facing  households  and  businesses.  There  was  a  clear  danger  that  this 
tightening  would  lead  to  a  serious  decline  in  economic  activity,  further  credit  losses  and  a 
vicious  downward  cycle  of  distress  in  financial  markets  and  the  real  economy.  When  the 
crisis intensified in 2008, permanent alertness led to a resolute sequence of actions using the 
ECB’s standard policy tool, the short-term nominal interest rate. 
But  the  crisis  also  demonstrated  that  deeper  market  failures  in  the  financial  sector  might 
mean  that  standard  policy  responses  alone  prove  insufficient  to  restore  economic  stability 
and  price  stability.  Identifying  these  market  failures  and  introducing  measures  to  address 
them was a second dimension of the ECB’s policy response. This led to the introduction of a 
variety  of  what  we  call  “non-standard”  measures  to  complement  the  reduction  of  policy 
interest rates.  
                                                 
1  John Taylor and John Williams (2011) and Nassim Taleb (2007). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Permanent  alertness  is  my  lesson  on  how  to  deal  with  the  unpredictability  of  events.  But 
alertness  per  se  may  suggest  that  we  should  simply  be  ready  to  adopt  a  specific,  known 
reaction, once we observe a certain, possibly unpredictable, event. The problem in situations 
of  “Knightian”  uncertainty  is  that  we  are  also  uncertain  in  our  assessment  of  the  overall 
consequences of the unpredictable event and how we respond to it.  
Let me again illustrate this point with an example. Once the crisis intensified in September 
2008, central banks faced the major new difficulty of assessing how the combination of this 
exceptional event and of the unprecedented response of policy authorities would affect the 
medium-term  outlook.  We  normally  employ  various  statistical  tools  to  help  make  this 
assessment, but would these tools provide useful guidance at this particular time?  
Figure 2 provides an answer showing the evolution of our projections for annual economic 
growth in the euro area in 2009 together with the corresponding forecasts from a range of 
private sector and international organisations. Observations correspond to forecasts for GDP 
growth  in  2009  made  at  different  points.  Over  the  months,  information  is  updated  and  the 
forecast horizon becomes shorter and shorter. At the end of 2009, forecasting GDP growth in 
2009 is almost tantamount to forecasting the past, so forecasts converge to the actual value 
indicated by a constant red line.  
In  2008,  all  projections  were  strongly  lagging  actual  developments.  Only  at  the  end  of  the 
year did public and private institutions begin to make downward adjustments to their growth 
forecasts for 2009, while nonetheless clearly underestimating the actual developments.  
There is a similar pattern in Figure 3, which shows the forecasts for 2010 produced during 
the period 2009–10. In this case, forecasts systematically underestimated the strength of the 
recovery.  In  2009,  most  forecasters  expected  very  slow  growth  in  2010.  As  more  positive 
news emerged in the second half of 2009, the forecasts were steadily revised upwards but 
still remained well short of the final outcome until the last quarter of the year.  
The lagging nature of the information contained in most projections, together with the large 
projection  errors,  highlight  the  relative  inadequacy  of  standard  tools  to  deliver  accurate 
forecasts during times of heightened economic distress. 
What can guide a decision-maker in such circumstances?  
A well-known recommendation of control theory is to apply robust control. This is designed to 
achieve robust performance in the presence of potential modelling errors. One approach will 
deliver the best possible outcome in the worst case scenario. This strategy is used widely in 
engineering applications, and it has the advantage of avoiding nasty surprises. 
But the strategy also has disadvantages, should the worst case scenario be too extreme or 
highly unlikely. For example, if students think that the worst case scenario is that they will 
never find a job after gaining a degree, they may act accordingly and immediately abandon 
their studies. But that choice would be very far from ideal in the event that jobs are indeed 
available for graduates.  
In  very  uncertain  circumstances,  judgement  and  experience  may  be  the  safest  bets  for  a 
policy-maker. To illustrate this point, I like to draw a comparison to chess.  
Over  several  decades,  psychologists  have  explored  how  chess  grandmasters  obtain  their 
advantage over lesser players. The evidence indicates that grandmasters rely significantly on 
a  vast  store  of  carefully  structured  knowledge  of  game  positions,  which  has  been 
accumulated over many years. So their advantage is not necessarily due to innate superior 
mental computation ability, but rather the stock of knowledge built up from countless hours of 
practical experience. 
Monetary policy is not chess. Nevertheless, knowledge and experience are always useful in 
complementing a strong analytical exploration of the possible decisions. When dealing with a 
very  high  degree  of  uncertainty  the  analytical  work  might  be  less  reliable  and  experience 
appears  to  be  playing  a  more  important  role  in  the  decision-making  process.  The 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
occurrences of such very uncertain situations are also an additional reason for central banks 
to rely upon what I call “collegial wisdom”. From different vantage points we could take stock 
of our knowledge of the sovereign debt crisis of the emerging countries in the 1980s, of the 
crisis of the European monetary system in 1992 and 1993 of the Mexican and Asian crisis of 
the 1990s and the dotcom bubble burst in the 2000s. Pooling experiences of members of the 
members of the Executive Board and the Governing Council of the ECB proved extremely 
important in the circumstances. 
Conclusions 
IV. 
Let me sum up my three simple lessons for dealing with highly uncertain circumstances: first, 
remain permanently alert and ready to respond to change when it happens; second, always 
ask the analytical preparation to be as comprehensive and robust as possible; and third, do 
not  forget  that  in  such  circumstances  collegial  wisdom  and  experience  are  always  of  the 
essence.  
I am of course fully aware that my three lessons are not a straightforward solution to life’s 
uncertainties. Nor are they contingent mathematical laws that you can apply when you see 
fit.  As  the  great  physicist  and  Nobel  laureate  Richard  Feynman  once  said  “Imagine  how 
much harder physics would be if electrons had feelings!”  
Monetary policy-making – and life – would certainly be much simpler, but also much duller, if 
as in physics a few basic laws could explain most experiences. 
Thank you for your attention – and may I wish you well in your studies and in your future 
when making decisions in an uncertain world. 
 
 Figure 1 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  5
Figure 2 
 Figure 3 
  6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
References 
Kenny, G. and J. Morgan (2011), “Some Lessons from the Financial Crisis for the Economic 
Analysis”, unpublished manuscript, European Central Bank.  
Knight  F.  (1921)  “Risk,  Uncertainty,  and  Profit,”  Boston,  MA:  Hart,  Schaffner  &  Marx; 
Houghton Mifflin Company. 
Taleb N. (2007), “The Black Swan: The Impact of the Highly Improbable”, Random House. 
Taylor J. and J.C. Williams (2009), “A Black Swan in the Money Market”, American Economic 
Journal: Macroeconomics, 1(1), pp. 58–83. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
