G Padmanabhan: Forex market development – issues and challenges – 
thoughts of a returning forex market regulator 
Keynote address by G Padmanabhan, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India, at 
the Seminar of Forex Association of India, Singapore, 13 August 2011. 
 Friends, 
I am delighted to be in your midst after a long gap of a decade. The occasion brings back 
reminiscences  of  late  1990s  and  the  early  years  of  this  century  when  the  forex  market  in 
India was quite different from what exists today. A nascent market that it was, needed a lot of 
hand-holding  from  RBI.  The  Rupee  was  always  moving  down  a  one-way  street  and  every 
bout  of  volatility  (plenty  those  days,  for  example,  the  South  East  Asian  crisis,  Nuclear 
sanctions, Kargil flare up, 9/11 attack, attack on Indian Parliament, etc) hogged the headlines 
in the newspapers. Volatility was synonymous with rupee depreciation and a specie called 
“rupee appreciation” was not even born or even conceived those days. RBI’s only task was 
to wage a battle against the villain of depreciation with the meagre reserves at its behest. 
This situation made the battle more interesting for the onlookers and hence every episode of 
volatility was packed with as much thrill as a 20–20 game. 
By  the  end  of  2002,  the  Indian  growth  story  had  taken  firm  roots  and  capital  inflows  had 
resumed, as indeed to the other emerging market economies. The world was also entering 
into  an  era  of  abundant  dollar  liquidity  with  the  Fed  Fund  Target  rate  falling  from  6.5%  in 
January 2001 to 1.75% in January 2002, then to 1.25% in January 2003 and finally, to 1% by 
July 2003. It is a different thing that seeds of a crisis that would overtake the global financial 
system five years later were allegedly being sown and nurtured by the overhang of cheap 
global  liquidity.  But,  the  markets  and  market  participants  were  relaxed  and  we  at  Reserve 
Bank  were  mostly  concerned  with  dealing  with  the  after-effects  of  capital  inflows.  The  last 
decade saw unprecedented expansion of the financial markets, in terms of both innovative 
new  products  as  well  as  the  scale  of  activity.  The  Indian  markets  witnessed  huge  capital 
inflows, exerting sharp upward pressure on the Rupee, fuelling expectations and warranting 
massive  intervention  by  the  Reserve  Bank.  The  tide  soon  turned,  however.  The  onset  of 
global financial crisis post-Lehman caused large capital outflows leading to all time low for 
the INR. The experience of the last couple of years or so is too recent in all our memories 
and it would be unnecessary to repeat the same here. Let me mention that even as I speak, 
the global financial markets are in a state of turbulence with risk aversion and uncertainties 
resurfacing  across  the  globe  in  the  backdrop  of  faltering  US  recovery,  the  obstinate 
sovereign debt problem in the EU zone and the downgrade of the US sovereign rating by 
one  of  the  three  large  credit  rating  agencies.  I  would  like  to  mention  two  other  important 
developments  in  this  context.  Firstly,  the  conventional  thinking  on  capital  controls  has 
undergone  a  change  with  wide  acknowledgement  that  capital  controls  can  serve  useful 
public  purpose  in  certain  circumstances.  Second,  the  regulators  worldwide  have  initiated 
steps to refurbish the market infrastructure, particularly for the OTC derivatives, opaqueness 
of which is often the reason ascribed for the crisis. 
As of now, it is not clear how long it would take for the uncertainties to recede from the global 
financial markets and what would be the final shape of the regulatory framework and market 
infrastructure. Nevertheless, the vulnerability of the Indian financial system or any system for 
that matter – to pro-cyclical and uncertain capital flows would remain. Therefore, even as our 
capital account is virtually open in a de facto sense for individuals and non-financial firms, 
further opening of the capital account particularly for the financial firms has to be dealt with in 
a  carefully  calibrated  manner.  An  instructive  way  to  guide  our  thoughts  would  be  to 
distinguish between strategic controls and tactical controls on capital flows. Strategic controls 
in  so  far  as  they  relate  to  capital  inflows  would  involve  defining  a  pecking  order  of  flows 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
(eg. in the Indian context the order is foreign direct investment, portfolio investment and debt) 
and  provide  a  credible  framework  of  rules  of  the  game  which  can  be  used  by  foreign 
investors to decide their investment strategy. On the other hand tactical controls would be 
situation specific – to be imposed when particular circumstances arise and withdrawn when 
they abate. The exact combination and extent of the control, however, is dynamic and would 
have to be determined by the country context and international milieu. 
It is against this backdrop that I wish to share my thoughts with you on a few major themes 
that would guide our endeavours for development of markets in the next few years. 
During the past few years, the USD-INR exchange rate dynamics have been driven mainly 
by  capital  flows.  In  view  of  the  savings  –  investment  gap  on  the  one  hand  and  persistent 
current account deficits on the other, capital inflows are necessary for sustaining the growth 
momentum.  Apart  from  the  growth  perception  of  the  Indian  economy,  risk  appetite  of  the 
global  investors  and  prevailing  global  liquidity  conditions  have  driven  the  magnitude  and 
direction  of  capital  flows.  While  the  growth  trajectory  of  the  Indian  economy  has  been 
reasonably  stable,  the  other  factors  mentioned  above  have  swung  from  one  extreme  to 
another during the last few years resulting in sharp appreciation, depreciation and volatility of 
the  Rupee.  Needless  to  mention,  volatility  in  a  key  macro-variable  like  the  exchange  rate 
affects optimal decision making of the economic agents in the real sector. As stated in the 
preamble to the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999, the Reserve Bank is committed 
to  maintaining  orderliness  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  and  in  fulfilment  of  this 
responsibility, RBI has intervened in the foreign exchange market, whenever necessary, only 
to curb excessive volatility and restore orderly conditions. 
Over  the  years,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  made  available  a  wide  range  of  hedging  tools  to 
enable firms to manage foreign exchange risk. It is heartening to note that diverse market 
participants, firms and individuals are actively managing their foreign exchange risk and have 
become  accustomed  to  dealing  with  exchange  rate  volatility  effectively.  One  of  the  major 
developments  in  recent  years  is  the  introduction  of  exchange  traded  currency  futures  and 
options,  which  have  registered  significant  growth  in  volumes  since  their  introduction.  The 
increase in the currency futures volume, in a sense, is expected, in view of cash settlement, 
no requirement of underlying exposure and absence of any restriction on cancellation and 
re-booking. However, open interest in the futures, which captures the extent of its use by the 
end-users  for  hedging,  is  far  lower  in  comparison  to  the  amount  of  outstanding  forward 
contracts. Is this a pointer to the fact that notwithstanding many advantages that exchange 
traded products offer, OTC market is going to be the preferred domain of operations for the 
end-users in respect of, the forex derivative products where transactions are in the nature of 
relationship banking? 
As  far  as  OTC  markets  are  concerned,  the  first  theme  I  wish  to  discuss  relates  to  the 
appropriateness of transactions between the banks and their clients. As I mentioned earlier, 
forex  transactions  between  banks  and  clients  are  a  part  of  the  relationship  banking. 
Secondly, often the corporate does not need derivative products to profit from its position but 
to  reduce  or  eliminate  the  uncertainty  from  their  future  cash  flows.  Thus,  the  use  of  a 
derivative product by a corporate would have to be dictated by the character of its exposures, 
nature  of  the  uncertainties  and  the  risk  appetite  or  aversion  as  embodied  in  its  risk 
management framework. We often notice that the volatile foreign exchange market, or any 
other market for that matter, entices ordinary mortals to throw their hat into the ring and make 
money  on  the  side,  mechanically  projecting  the  immediate  past.  The  banks  owe  it  to  their 
clients to ensure that they do not fall prey to such temptations and the derivative positions 
they  contract  are  “appropriate”.  While  we  have  issued  comprehensive  guidelines  on  the 
subject, I would like to impress upon you the imperative of this aspect from the perspective of 
credibility of the OTC market, financial stability and above all, stable relationship banking. In 
the same breath, I would like to exhort the corporates (who are also members of the FAI) to 
put 
framework,  which  will  ensure  comprehensive 
understanding of the product to be contracted, proper oversight of the financial products that 
in  place  a  strong  governance 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
are  being  bought  by  their  dealing  rooms,  assess  the  inherent  risk  characteristics  of  these 
products and have a strong system of checks and controls which can prevent any dealing 
room from running astray. 
This brings me to my next theme, i.e, improvements in the OTC market infrastructure. As you 
are  aware,  the  Pittsburg  declaration  of  the  G-20  mandates  that  all  standardised  OTC 
derivatives contracts should be traded on exchanges or electronic trading platforms, where 
appropriate  and  cleared  through  CCPs  by  end  2012.  Further,  OTC  derivative  contracts 
should  also  be  reported  to  trade  repositories.  The  Financial  Stability  Board’s  report 
“Implementing  OTC  derivative  market  reforms”  (October  2010)  addresses  the  practical 
issues concerning standardisation, central clearing, exchange or electronic platform trading, 
and  reporting  of  OTC  derivatives  transactions  to  trade  repositories  that  authorities  may 
encounter in implementing. However there are strong views in favour of the OTC products. 
Their  bespoke  nature  imparts  flexibility  to  cater  to  specific  requirements  of  any  market 
participant. Further, the OTC market acts as a nursery for new products and has remained 
the  major  source  of  product  innovation.  Again,  in  a  market  that  is  essentially  wholesale  in 
nature  and  confined  to  a  few  large  participants,  an  OTC  trade  may  offer  cost  /price 
advantage  in  comparison  with  its  exchange  traded  alternative.  As  we  know,  standardising 
products is a pre-requisite for moving them to exchanges and this can pose challenges. If not 
carefully  orchestrated  the  exchanges  themselves  can  pose  vulnerabilities  and  systemic 
challenges. Lastly, the oversight of such exchanges has to be robust and effective. 
Let  me  now  dwell  on  the  developments  in  our  own  forex  market  as  regards  centralised 
clearing  and  reporting  of  OTC  transactions.  Even  before  the  onset  of  the  crisis  and 
emergence of the new line of thinking, Reserve Bank has been alive to the need for a robust 
trading  and  settlement  infrastructure  and  has  taken  several  initiatives  in  this  direction 
spanning various market segments. As you are aware, CCIL has been providing guaranteed 
settlement facility for all US Dollar – Indian Rupee, inter-bank Cash, Tom, Spot and Forward 
transactions  by  becoming  the  central  counterparty  to  every  trade  accepted  for  settlement, 
through the process of novation. The risk mitigation efforts sought to be put in place for this 
guaranteed  settlement  were  extensively  discussed  with  Fed  Reserve  in  the  spirit  of 
co-operative oversight as was brought out in the Lamfalussy report. 
The  benefits  that  have  accrued  from  this  mechanism  could  be  seen  from  the  data  for  the 
month of July 2011. During this month, the total USD-INR deals (including forwards) settled 
through CCIL was USD 3.4 trillion with a netting benefit of 95 percent. This netting benefit as 
you would recall was specifically useful during the global financial crisis wherein liquidity lines 
had  virtually  dried  up.  Due  to  this  arrangement  the  banks  in  India  did  not  face  much  of 
liquidity and funding shortage during the financial crisis. 
We have since permitted CCIL to start centralised clearing of forex forwards. I understand 
that at present, there are 77 member banks who are members of the USD-INR spot segment 
but  only  35 of  them  are  member  of  Forex  Forward  segment.  The  feedback  we  get  on  the 
reasons for the reluctance of banks to join the guaranteed settlement is linked to margining 
requirements and low exposure limits set by banks against CCIL. This is surprising to say the 
least. Probably the banks perceive the benefits in terms of reduced risk weight and release of 
exposure limit accruing from centralised clearing not commensurately attractive vis-a-vis the 
cost  of  margins.  In  the  current  thinking  this  approach  becomes  difficult  to  accept  as  this 
limited participation by banks reduces the netting benefits of centralised clearing. Given our 
experience of the successful CCP arrangement that we have in place and the G-20 initiatives 
for  centralised  clearing  of  OTC  derivatives,  RBI  may  consider  mandating  that  all  forex 
forward  and  USD-INR  trades  be  necessarily  settled  through  guaranteed  central  clearing 
mechanism. 
If the Reserve Bank is required to take such a decision, there is a need to guard against the 
compromise  in  the  margining  process  since  risk  management  through  margining  system 
assumes critical importance for a CCP. Compromise on stringency of margin requirements 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
due  to  commercial/profitability  considerations  and  the  “race  to  bottom”  approach  towards 
margining  has  systemic  implications.  CCIL’s  margining  processes  have  therefore  been 
reviewed and streamlined. CCIL will now allow members to use MTM gains as MTM credits. 
Initial margin and spread margin will be calculated using VaR for all settlement date wise net 
USD dollar positions and all settlement date positions will be considered as a single portfolio. 
International efforts are also afoot to mandate reporting of OTC trades to a trade repository 
where  ever  CCP  arrangements  are  not  found  feasible.  TRs  are  Financial  Market 
Infrastructures that maintain a centralised database of OTC derivatives transaction data. TRs 
therefore are in a position to provide information – both to the regulators as well as to the 
market. By doing so TRs enhance the transparency in OTC markets and promote financial 
stability.  Even  prior  to  the  onset  of  global  financial  crisis  and  the  global  initiatives,  the 
Reserve Bank through regulatory mandate had tasked CCIL to collect and collate transaction 
level  data  for  interest  rate  swaps.  Though,  the  CCIL  does  not  yet  offer  any  post-trade  life 
cycle management services , it has all the information that a trade repository typically has 
and in this sense is perhaps the world’s first trade repository for interest rate swaps. Reserve 
Bank had also set up a Working Group consisting of various stakeholders including CCIL and 
market  participants  to  work  out  the  modalities  for  an  efficient,  single  point  reporting 
mechanism  for  all  OTC  interest  rate  and  forex  derivative  transactions.  The  public 
consultation period is over and the recommendations are being examined. 
In recent years, non-deliverable forward (NDF) markets have become, as it were, the talk of 
the town. I wonder whether the choice of venue for this assembly has been influenced by this 
fact. The BIS Triennial Central Bank Survey 2010 estimates that aggregate daily INR market, 
off-shore and on-shore included, at about USD 36 billion. Given the size of the on-shore INR 
market then, we guess on sheer deductive logic that the NDF market has witnessed rapid 
growth over the years with average daily turnover somewhere around $16 billion during the 
survey period. 
The  NDF  market  in  different  currencies  came  into  existence  with  increased  globalisation 
which led to the fact that there were economic agents with direct or indirect exposure to a 
currency but limited or no avenue to hedge the risk either due to regulatory restrictions in the 
host  country  or  non  availability  of  hedging  products  or  markets  or  simply  because  of 
cumbersome  nature  of  entering  into  a  hedging  contract  in  an  unfamiliar  country.  Evidence 
seems to suggest that even when, in some jurisdictions, the regulatory regime was relaxed 
and full access to the domestic market was available to the non-residents, the NDF market 
continued  to  be  significant,  presumably  due  to  the  fact  that  it  afforded  the  interested  non-
residents  ease  of  transaction  and  a  familiar  market.  The  question  that  then  arises  is  that 
whether  there  is  a  linkage  between  the  NDF  market  and  the  on  shore  market  and  how 
exactly does the NDF market affect the domestic market. At the outset, we must recognise 
that after all, both NDF and on-shore rates are influenced by the identical set of economic 
and geo-political developments at home and abroad and there is no a priori reason to believe 
that the two rates will respond differently to the same set of events, except for the difference 
in time zone leading to difference in the time the prices capture market action. 
That said it is true that trans-national entities with presence in India and abroad can provide a 
link  between  the  two  markets  and  can  be  instrumental  in  arbitraging  away  any  emergent 
differences between the two markets. As far as the question of NDF market influencing the 
domestic  market  is  concerned,  as  long  as  the  movements  in  the  domestic  rates  are 
adequately explained by economic and geo-political factors, the most important of which in 
recent  times  have  been  the  capital  flows  and  movements  in  major  currencies,  there  is  no 
reason to debate the issue further. 
A  related  issue  that  has  been  raised  in  recent  times  is  the  Internationalisation  of  the  INR. 
With  our  progressive  integration  with  the  global  economy,  both  in  trade  as  well  as  capital 
account,  and  the  enduring  growth  prospect,  the  Indian  economy  has  captured  interests 
world-wide. It is but natural that the investor community across the globe would like to buy 
stake in the growth story that is India either by way of direct investment in industry or the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
equity market or even debt. Doesn’t it follow as a corollary that the INR should also become 
an object of their attention? However, as an economy moves along the path of liberalisation 
and  globalisation,  ideally  the  endeavour  must  be  to  bring  on-shore  all  genuine  hedging 
requirements  of  non-  resident  entities.  A  connected  issue  is  invoicing  in  INR.  We  are  well 
aware that this is yet to catch the fancy of the market participants on a sustained basis. A 
one-way  movement  of  INR  certainly  increases  its  invoicing  flavour  amongst  the  probable 
beneficiaries.  But  the  true  test  of  a  currency  of  invoice  is  the  country’s  macro  economic 
strength. The ease with which the currency and related risks can be hedged would be a key 
determinant  in  accessing  the  product.  All  that  I  would  like to  emphasise  is  that  RBI  would 
endeavour to create an enabling environment. We have recently moved a step forward by 
allowing hedging opportunities to non residents. The experience gained will certainly facilitate 
evaluation and moving ahead. 
I  believe  a  congregation  of  this  nature  must  go  beyond  deliberating  issues  of  proximate 
concerns.  A  strategic  element/flavour  would  add  value  to  the  deliberations  and  aid  in 
delineating  the  future  trajectory  of  regulations.  Moving  towards  this  vision,  I  suggest  a 
futuristic question on this occasion to the market participants- an intellectual debate. What 
are the attributes of a reserve currency? Is fuller capital account convertibility of the currency 
a prerequisite? Where does INR stand in this regard? I would like the Annual meet to have a 
robust discussion, may be in a more sober mood. 
Let  me  now  conclude.  I  have  highlighted  the  following  issues  that  will  guide  our  efforts  in 
development and regulation of forex market in the foreseeable future. 
a. 
Further development of the forex market has to be looked alongside the progress on 
capital  account  liberalization  which  in  turn  is  dictated  by  broader  macroeconomic 
concerns and emergent international environment. 
The  Reserve  Bank  has  been  actively  pursuing  improvement  in  the  OTC  market 
infrastructure and is committed to making further efforts to ensure compliance with 
the global best practices. 
The  OTC  forex  market  in  India  is  a  part  of  the  relationship  banking  and  thus,  the 
banks  have  a  responsibility  to  ensure  the  appropriateness  and  optimality  of  the 
transactions from the customer’s view point. 
International  interest  in  INR  and  emerging  off-shore  markets  are  consistent  with 
progressive globalisation of the Indian economy and the efforts must be to bring all 
genuine users seeking to hedge underlying exposures on-shore. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
Thank you once again for inviting me to this conference and for your patience. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
