Ardian Fullani: Latest economic and financial developments in Albania 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the press conference on 
the  monetary  policy  decision-making  of  the  Supervisory  Council  of  the  Bank  of  Albania, 
Tirana, 27 April 2011. 
 Today,  on  27  April  2011,  the  Supervisory  Council  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  reviewed  and 
approved the quarterly Monetary Policy Report. Based on a thorough analysis of Albania’s 
latest economic and financial developments and following discussions on their performance 
outlook, the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania decided to leave the key interest rate 
unchanged at 5.25%. The Supervisory Council holds that the actual monetary conditions are 
appropriate  for  meeting  the  inflation  target  and  for  continuing  to  stimulate  the  economic 
activity. 
Let me now proceed with an overview of economic developments and main issues discussed 
at today’s meeting of the Supervisory Council.  
The  Albanian  economy  is  deemed  to  have  had  a  positive  performance  during  2011  Q1. 
Economic  activity  increased,  main  macroeconomic  balances  improved,  and  risk  premiums 
and  interest  rates  in  financial  markets  dropped.  Economic  growth  during  2011  relies  on 
foreign  demand  for  Albanian  goods  as  well  as  on  domestic  demand.  Consumption  and 
investments  in  the  country  remain  slow,  beyond  the  seasonal  effect  that  characterises  the 
first  quarter.  Rapid  expansion  of  exports  and  moderate  growth  of  imports  have  led  to  an 
improvement in trade deficit, contributing to the balancing of demand and supply for foreign 
currency and retaining the national currency value. 
Demand-generated  inflationary  pressures  remain  contained,  due  to  the  existence  of  free 
capacities in the economy and controlled consumption, while import prices increase was a 
principal contributor to the price rise in the country.  
In March 2011, inflation pointed to 4.3%. During the first quarter of 2011, inflation averaged 
4.0%, i.e., one percentage point above the mid-term inflation target. The country’s economy 
continued to grow during the fourth quarter of 2010, and indirect available data suggest that 
even  the  first  quarter  of  2011  was  positive.  On  average,  this  growth  is  estimated  to  have 
been  lower  than  the  potential  growth  of  the  economy,  suggesting  that  domestic  demand 
inflationary pressures have been weak. The rapid upsurge in prices over the last two months 
is  mainly  due  to  the  effect  of  food  and  oil  prices  increase  in  international  markets,  thus 
leading  to  light  increase  of  inflationary  pressures  and  initial  appearance  of  second  round 
effects, in February. In response to this phenomenon, the Bank of Albania increased the key 
interest rate by 0.25 percentage points at the end of March 2011. Inflationary expectations 
remain  anchored  close  to  the  mid-term  target  of  the  Bank  of  Albania.  In  addition  to  the 
domestic demand, the relative stability of the exchange rate contributed to preventing further 
inflation increase.  
More  specifically,  during  2011  Q1,  inflation  reflected  a  hike  in  prices  of  some  food  items, 
further  increase  of  oil  prices  as  well  as  an  upturn  in  medication  prices.  With  the  warmer 
season  approaching,  domestic  agricultural  output  is  expected  to  contribute  to  an  upward 
domestic demand, thus buffering high pressures from export prices.  
The Bank of Albania deems that policies to encourage domestic production, which reduces 
the exposure of the Albanian economy to external shocks, are necessary.  
Annual inflation of tradable goods sector in 2011 Q1 was 4.9%, explaining about 75% of the 
headline inflation. Primary reasons for this conduct were the actual and expected aggravated 
conjunctures  of  commodity  prices,  unusual  geo-political  situation  in  large  economies  of  oil 
and agro-industrial products, as well as unfavourable weather conditions that has damaged 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
agricultural  production.  Inflation  of  non-tradable  goods  of  the  CPI  basket,  which  represent 
internal pressures, in the first quarter of 2011, reached 2%. This value is close to that of the 
previous year and comparable to its historic average.  
Inflation  trend,  without  counting  temporary  effects  on  it,  that  is  core  inflation,  was  close  to 
3.0%,  reaching  high  historical  values.  This  long-term  inflation  component  shows  that 
inflationary outlook in the economy, though reflecting a value that is relatively higher, remains 
well anchored with the Bank of Albania target.  
In the future, inflationary pressures along the time span of action of the monetary policy are 
forecasted to be high, but their intensity will be falling over the course of the year. I would like 
now  to  address,  in  more  details,  the  factors  that  determine  inflation  developments  and 
relevant risks. 
During 2011 Q1, world economy demonstrated growth, while unemployment remains high. 
Economic growth is expected to intensify, mainly owing to the private sector, hence providing 
the conditions for attracting the public sector.  
As  a  result  of  high  divergences  among  countries,  authorities  have  to  deal  with  diverse 
challenges; in advanced economies focus is on reducing public debt and adjusting economic 
agents’ financial balances, while in emerging economies the main risk appears to be about 
overheated economy and rapid credit growth. Inflationary pressures are considered to follow 
an upward trend due to supply shocks in the oil and other commodity markets. On the other 
hand,  as  a  result  of  a  rapid  increase  of  demand  in  some  developing  countries,  prices  of 
factors  of  production,  such  as  energy,  raw  materials  and  labour,  increased.  The  forecasts 
reveal a heightened level of insecurity, as a result of social and political turmoil and natural 
disasters in some countries of the world. Price increases worldwide and the extent of their 
transmission to various economies, has affected decisions on interest rates applied by some 
central banks. Therefore, as a result of anticipation for an inflation rate above the targeted 
level, 
interest  rate  by 
0.25 percentage  points.  Likewise,  in  international  financial  markets  is  noticed  a  slight 
increase of interest rates factorising anticipation for a higher inflation. 
Domestic economic activity over the fourth quarter recorded a growth of 5.4% year-on-year, 
significantly  narrowing  the  negative  output  gap.  Economic  growth  was  supported  by  the 
external demand and was boosted in positive terms by a consistent recovery of the global 
economy.  An  acceleration  of  the  annual  growth  rate  of  real  GDP  during  the  fourth  quarter 
was triggered by a higher positive contribution of the industry sector. Meanwhile, the added 
value of the services and agriculture sectors contributed positively, albeit at a lower level, to 
annual real GDP growth.  
Latest  data  on  2011  Q1  from  the  business  confidence  survey,  the  external  trade 
performance,  and  monetary  and  fiscal  indicators  support  a  continued  domestic  economy 
recovery, mainly due to the positive contribution of the production sector.  
Partial data available on household consumption suggest a rapid rise y-o-y during 2010 Q4. 
In  the  meantime,  partial  data  for  the  first  quarter  suggest  a  moderate  contribution  of 
consumption to the aggregate demand. First quarter 2011 surveys show that uncertainty for 
the  future  is  considered  as  high  by  consumers,  affecting  the  stability  of  consumption  for 
upcoming  periods.  The  Bank  of  Albania  considers  that  in  the  short  run,  the  Albanian 
consumer  has  the  space  to  adopt  a  more  rational  behaviour  towards  expanding 
consumption. As regards investments, their performance is assessed to have been more 
stable  over  the  last  two  quarters.  The  increase  of  the  external  demand  for  producing 
businesses, positive expectations on demand in some producing sectors as well as easing of 
funding  terms  and  conditions  during  the  last  quarter  of  2010  signal  a  continuation  of  the 
positive contribution of private investments during the current year. Nonetheless, producing 
capacity  utilization  remains  low  and  the  internal  consumption  situation  remains  unclear, 
suggesting that the economy continues to operate below its potential. 
the  European  Central  Bank  decided 
the  key 
increase 
to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
In 2011 Q1, government expenditures are estimated to have given an important contribution 
to keeping demand at positive levels, in contrast to the trend of the preceding year. At the 
end of 2011 Q1, budget deficit reached ALL 11.8 billion, against the surplus of ALL 0.7 billion 
recorded in the same quarter of the previous year.  
During this period, budget expenditure increased in nominal terms by 16.8% year-on-year, 
mainly due to increased current expenditures. Maintaining similar growth rates over the rest 
of the quarters is expected to be translated into a higher contribution of expenditures to the 
aggregate  demand,  as  compared  to  2010.  Developments  observed  both  on  revenues  and 
expenditures side have led to a drop of the primary balance to negative values during 2011 
Q1, after an apparent improvement in the last quarter of 2010. 
In 2010 Q4, net position of the current account was estimated in a deficit of EUR 373.6 million 
or 16.4% of nominal GDP. In contrast to the first three quarters of the year, which posted a 
narrowing of the annual current-account deficit, in the fourth quarter of 2010, this deficit has 
expanded by 15.1% in annual terms. The main factor for the expansion of the current account 
deficit  was  the  expansion  of  the  trade  deficit,  albeit  a  high  rise  in  exports  of  goods  and 
services by  20.7% year-on-year. Foreign demand continued to support  economic growth in 
the first two months of 2011. Good performance of exports contributed to a narrowing of the 
trade deficit by 5.9% y-o-y for this period. Average ratio of covering imports with exports was 
47.3% recording its highest historic peak. Trade annual growth was 30.4% during the first two 
months of the year. Exports value continued its accelerating upward trend, which had started 
in the first quarter of 2010, and expanded by 66% in annual terms.  
The  three-digit  growth  in  the  electric  energy  exports  was  a  key  contributor  to  this 
performance,  while  processed  metal  exports  and  textile  re-exports  continued  to  contribute 
positively to the value of annual export performance.  
In the post-global-crisis period, domestic economy is adapting to a new growth model, which 
requires significant structural changes. During this process of reallocating resources to most 
efficient  sectors  of  the  economy,  as  well  as  a  more  conservative  behaviour  by  Albanian 
households  towards  consumption,  its  potential  output  is  expected  to  be  lower  for  the 
mid-term  horizon.  According  to  the  demand  components  analysis,  improvement  of  growth 
rate in the last two quarters may have significantly narrowed the negative output gap, but the 
existence of spare capacities in the economy even during 2011 suggests that the Albanian 
economy will continue to operate below its potential, generating weak inflationary pressures 
by the internal demand. 
On the supply side, increasing productivity during 2010 Q4 and a slower rise in unit labour 
cost, generate lower inflationary pressures from the labour factor. Inflationary pressures over 
the level of domestic prices, which come as a result of fluctuations in the prices of oil and 
food items in international conjunctures, are estimated to be present during the current year, 
but with a continuous downward trend. Due to the aggravated geo-political situation in the 
world,  the  uncertainty  that  surrounds  these  expectations  remains  high.  The  absorbing 
capacity  of the  domestic  economy  to  these  shocks  and  avoidance  of  steady  pressures  on 
inflation will be a function of the Albanian economy performance and the control of agents’ 
inflationary expectations.  
Monetary indicators performance has reflected a slowdown of the money supply over the first 
two months of the current year, confirming contained monetary inflation pressures. The M3 
aggregate  marked  an  annual  average  increase  by  11.2%.  The  currency  component  of  the 
money  supply  provided  a  downward  contribution  to  the  broad  money  expansion;  however, 
the use of foreign currency at high levels in the banking system and the economy remains 
one  of  the  weaknesses  of  the  Albanian  economy.  As  an  expression  of  its  interest  in 
addressing  this  issue,  in  today’s  meeting,  the  Supervisory  Council  of  the  Bank  of  Albania 
decided  to  waive  the  remuneration  of  the  mandatory  foreign  reserve.  This  measure  will 
encourage commercial banks effectively to reduce their funds collection costs and will favour 
intermediation in the national currency. The level of the demand for money by private and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
public economic agents has increased. Our assessments indicate that monetary expansion 
is in conformity with the private sector demand for real money. The performance of loans to 
the  private  sector  has  been  in  line  with  its  seasonal  behaviour  at  this  period  of  the  year, 
increasing on average by 10.1% in annual terms. Although insofar credit developments have 
been  slow,  there  are  encouraging  signs  for  a  better  performance  of  lending  in  the  future. 
Private sector’s demand for loans, whose low levels have been a primary obstacle for the 
revitalisation of lending, increased during the first quarter of the year and is expected to grow 
in the next quarter as well. The banking system enjoys good health and liquidity conditions 
for supporting a growing demand for loans, with even better lending conditions. The Bank of 
Albania supports the banks’ initiative to clean up their balance sheets, aiming at increasing 
transparency and creating free funds to support lending. 
The overall performance of financial markets for the first quarter of 2011 has been positive.  
In  light  of  its  primary  objective  to  maintain  price  stability,  the  Bank  of  Albania  decided  to 
increase  the  key  interest  rate  at  the  end  of  March.  This  decision  was  reflected  in  higher 
interest  rates  in  the  inter-bank  market,  while  it  is  expected  to  be  transmitted  into  other 
markets  during  the  upcoming  period.  In  parallel  with  this  move,  the  Bank  of  Albania  has 
supplied  the  inter-bank  market  with  the  necessary  liquidity  for  a  normal  functioning.  In  the 
meantime,  in  the  deposit  market,  the  downward  tendency  of  their  interest  rate  continued. 
Interest rates in the credit market varied; increased in lek and decreased in euro, though this 
development  is  deemed  to  represent  special  bank  policies  for  certain  segments  of  the 
economy.  Lastly,  the  nominal  effective  exchange  rate  for  the  seventh  consecutive  quarter 
reduced its depreciating trend. Our analysis indicates that, overall, fundamental factors of the 
economy  support  a  new  equilibrium  of  the  exchange  rate,  which,  albeit  higher  than  three 
years  ago,  is  adjusting  to  domestic  financial  and  economic  equilibriums,  supporting  the 
strengthening of the competitiveness of the Albanian economy in international markets. The 
stable  performance  of  the  exchange  rate  has  contributed  to  a  further  consolidation  of  the 
domestic financial stability, without exercising pressure on the banks’ activity and conduct of 
economic agents.   
Our  future  projections  support  the  maintaining  of  a  positive  performance  of  the  Albanian 
economy even in 2011. Consumption and private investment are expected to grow further, 
while the fiscal sector is expected to give a positive contribution to the economic growth, after 
a  slowdown  in  2010.  Notwithstanding  this,  demand  growth  is  expected  to  be  below  the 
potential of our economy even in 2011.  
This will condition downward pressures on inflation from the domestic economy, which are 
expected to balance the effect of rising foreign prices. The Bank of Albania is determined to 
take all the necessary measures in due time to comply with its inflation target in the mid-term 
horizon. 
Taking  into  consideration  the  information  set  out  above,  the  Supervisory  Council  deemed 
that  inflationary  pressures  for  the  medium  term  horizon  are  added;  however,  they  remain 
subdued.  Consumer  price  performance  is  expected  to  be  under  the  pressure  of  price 
increase  in  international  markets.  On  the  other  hand,  insufficient  demand  will  continue  to 
condition below-potential domestic capacity utilization rate, exercising downward pressures 
on inflation. Inflationary anticipations continue to be anchored around the inflation target of 
the Bank of Albania.  
At the end of its discussions, the Supervisory Council concluded that the monetary conditions 
are appropriate for compliance with the mid-term inflation target and decided to keep the key 
interest rate unchanged at 5.25 %. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
