Miguel Fernández Ordóñez: Current status of the Spanish financial 
system 
Speech by Mr Miguel Fernández Ordóñez, Governor of the Bank of Spain, to the Council on 
Foreign Relations, New York, 11 March 2011. 
 Let me thank the Council on Foreign Relations and Mr. Rubin for giving me the opportunity to 
address this distinguished audience. 
The  current  difficulties  faced  by  certain  Spanish  savings  banks  have  their  roots  in  a  long 
expansion in the Spanish economy dating back from 1996 to 2006. It was a period of sharp 
growth in employment, activity, and wealth. At the same time the budget deficit diminished 
drastically  and  the  level  of  public  debt  over  GDP  fell  below  40%.  However,  the  expansion 
was  also  accompanied  by  some  imbalances.  House  prices  rose  substantially;  the  current 
account deficit climbed significantly, reflecting in part the loss of competitiveness, and in part 
the  need  to  fund  investment  rates  that  rose  to  around  30%  of  GDP,  targeted  not  only  on 
increasing  residential  investment  but  also  on  investment  in  equipment  and  infrastructure; 
Spanish households and firms increased their debt levels notably, in response to low interest 
rates  prompted  by  euro  area  membership,  reflecting  their  asset  purchases  (real  estate 
assets in the case of households, and productive assets in the case of firms, coinciding with 
a major internationalisation of Spanish corporations).  
The  big  financial  crisis  that  began  in  2007  had  a  very  limited  impact  on  the  asset  side  of 
Spanish  banks.  In  Spain,  neither  conduits  nor SIVs  (Structured  Investment  Vehicles)  were 
developed,  because  the  Bank  of  Spain  obliged  banks  to  consolidate  these  vehicles  and 
required capital of them for the attendant exposures, which eliminated at root any incentive to 
create  these  off-balance-sheet  vehicles.  Accordingly,  Spanish  banks  had  hardly  any  toxic 
assets. They did not use the originate-to-distribute model to distribute credit risk but pursued 
a retail banking strategy, in close proximity to bank clients, households and firms alike. On 
the  liability  side,  when  the  mistrust  and  uncertainty  worsened,  European  banks  began  to 
suffer  the  consequences,  and  their  difficulties  in  raising  funds  increased.  Nonetheless,  the 
long-dated maturities on these products in the past (around 10 years) meant that Spanish 
banks did not undergo pressing short-term liquidity problems.  
The financial crisis passed through rapidly to the real economy, with output slumping heavily 
in late 2008 and over much of 2009. The economic downturn in Spain, and the subsequent 
recession, impacted banks and progressively raised their doubtful assets and, therefore, their 
provisioning requirements. Their volume of activity, and new lending in particular, decreased, 
and the high profitability of Spanish deposit institutions seen so far, began to be eroded. The 
impact  of  these  developments  was  uneven,  impacting  with  greater  force  those  banks  that 
had  most  grown  in  the  expansion  and,  in  particular,  a  group  of  savings  banks  that  had 
concentrated a significant portion of their lending portfolio in financing real estate developers. 
Expectations  about  house  prices,  which  had  started  to  lose  momentum  in  2006,  changed 
and  prices  began  to  fall,  in  a  much  more  unfavourable  macroeconomic  setting  and  with 
financial institutions much more cautious about extending credit given the rise in bad debts 
and provisions, and the tightening of funding conditions.  
In view of these problems, the Government and the Bank of Spain began to take decisive 
measures to tackle this “classic” crisis based on credit to the real estate market and to the 
abrupt change in cycle, as well as to the changes in the markets.  
Firstly, to address the uncertainty on funding markets, a programme was set up that would 
allow banks to issue debt with the backing of the State and the ECB started to inject liquidity 
allowing  full  allotment.  Secondly,  the  Fund  for  the  Orderly  Restructuring  of  the  Banking 
Sector  (FROB)  was  created  in  2009.  With  the  FROB  we  anticipated  the  need  to  equip 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
ourselves  with  an  instrument  to  carry  out  a  far-reaching  restructuring  of  the  savings  bank 
sector.  
The  scale  of  the  savings  bank  restructuring  process  has  been  huge.  Of  the  45  previously 
existing savings banks, only 17 remain. The aims of the process were very clear. First, to 
take  advantage  of  the  concentration  processes  to  restructure  assets  and  correct  the 
excessive fragmentation of this sector. Second, to reduce the excess capacity in the savings 
bank  sector.  The  adjustments  are  between  10%  and  25%  in  the  number  of  offices,  and 
between  12%  and  18%  in  staff.  Third,  to  reinforce  the  viability  of  the  new  institutions 
(resulting  from  the  mergers  of  several  savings  banks)  with  the  resources  and  the 
management  capacity  of  the  savings  banks  best  placed  to  lead  each  of  the  concentration 
processes. Finally, to ensure in the medium term that the lower number of institutions and 
the  diminished  capacity  will  allow  a  reasonable  level  of  profitability  in  step  with  the  risks 
incurred for the remaining institutions. To round off the adjustment, the legislation governing 
savings  banks  was  also  amended  in  an  attempt  to  make  the  management  of  these 
institutions more professional and, most notably, opening them up to market discipline and to 
the possibility of them raising capital (shares) to reinforce their solvency. 
In short, the central aim of the efforts made by the Bank of Spain since 2009 has been to 
restructure the balance sheets of banks, and of savings banks in particular. Spanish deposit 
institutions  have  made  an  enormous  write-down  drive  to  date,  this  effort  often  going 
unnoticed by certain observers of the Spanish banking system. Overall, provisions totalling 
€91 billion which is a 9% of GDP, more than the cost of numerous bank crises experienced 
by  developed  countries.  These  major  provisions  have  been  possible  because  Spanish 
banks, with their retail business and the significance of their banking franchise, were able to 
obtain high levels of profitability in the recent past, despite maintaining some of the lowest 
levels of leverage among European banking systems and having to retain a portion of such 
profits under the system of countercyclical provisions in place. On top of that, Spanish banks 
have increased their capital buffer over minimum requirements by €53 billion – around 5% of 
GDP – in the last three years. 
After the first crisis of mistrust, the Greek debt crisis, the Bank of Spain, within the European 
Union,  led  the  disclosure  process  through  the  carrying  out  and  subsequent  publication  of 
stress tests which, in a coordinated fashion, were conducted by the European supervisory 
authorities.  Spain,  whose  weight  in  the  Community  banking  system  is  around  8%,  was 
represented in the stress tests by 27 banks, 30% of the total number analysed. This figure 
meant  that  information  on  90%  of  the  Spanish  system  was  disclosed,  compared  with  the 
minimum of 50% required by the European authorities. All listed Spanish commercial banks 
and all savings banks were subjected to this exercise. Significantly, the exercise consisted of 
very tough scenarios for Spain and it was carried out under the attentive eye and control of 
the  Spanish  supervisor.  For  instance,  it  assumed  that  the  Spanish  economy  was  going  to 
undergo a second recession, with a cumulative fall in GDP of close to 3 percentage points. 
This  was  far  from  the  market  consensus  and  the  actual  figures,  given  that  the  Spanish 
economy ended 2010 with a growth rate of 0.6%. Further, the haircuts applied to assets were 
most notable: 28% in the case of housing, 50% in that of uncompleted housing and 62% in 
that of land prices. In addition, a fall in net operating income of 40% was assumed, one of the 
most severe for all the countries involved in the exercise.  
Let  me  insist  on  the  rigor  of  our  stress  testing,  as  some  have  broadly  criticised  the  test 
because some banks from other countries were given a seal of approval only to collapse a 
few months later. Not only we tested all the banks but the information published by Spanish 
banks for the stress test was more detailed than that of the other countries. Our aim was to 
enable  analysts  and  investors  to  check  the  stress  test  for  themselves  and  know  what 
volumes of problem exposures and expected portfolio losses were involved. 
As a result of the measures mentioned (greater disclosure, amended regulatory framework 
for savings banks and progress in restructuring), Spanish banks, not only the leading ones 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
but also a large number of medium-sized banks and savings banks, were once again able to 
re-fund themselves on international wholesale markets, although the cost of funds continued 
to reflect the sovereign risk premium. 
The  process  of  concentration  and  restructuring  was  making  good  progress  as  from  last 
summer, when the second episode of mistrust – the Irish crisis – struck around November 
2010. The public debt markets tightened immediately and there was a resumption of mistrust 
about the Spanish banking sector, doubts over the quality of its assets, the speed of savings 
bank  restructuring  and  the  possible  need  for  further  public  funds  to  redress  bank  balance 
sheets, which in turn further strained the risk premium of the Kingdom of Spain. 
Although there are important differences between Spain and Ireland in several dimensions, 
the  market  perception  of  potential  similarities  between  both  economies,  however  distorted 
this  is,  impacted  us.  In  anticipation  of  further  problems,  the  government  and  the  Bank  of 
Spain,  in  its  capacity  as  banking  supervisor,  understood  the  necessity  to  speed  up  the 
strategy we had pursued to tackle the difficulties experienced by part of the Spanish banking 
system.  We  insisted  all  the  more  on  the  need  for  institutions  to  be  fully  transparent 
concerning  potentially  problem  lending.  Early  this  year  we  obliged  all  savings  banks  to 
disclose their exposure to real estate developers, their non-performing loans, and the portion 
of normal exposures under surveillance, their coverage and information as to what collateral 
is backing such lending (land, housing under development, completed housing, etc.). They 
were also asked to publish information on foreclosures, by collateral class, and on exposure 
to households via house mortgages, along with the attendant loan-to-value ratios, although 
this is not an area for concern. 
Transparency  and  disclosure  are  very  important  but  we  believed  it  was  not  sufficient.  We 
have  thus  been  working  closely  with  the  Vice-President  on  strengthening  our  banks’ 
solvency.  A  result  of  this  has  been  the  recently  approved  Royal  Decree-Law,  which  we 
believe is a definitive step and a crucial quantitative and qualitative leap forward in restoring 
market confidence in Spanish banks.  
The aims of the new Royal Decree-Law are very clear. The first is to reinforce the solvency 
of  all  our  banks,  requiring  them  a  level  of  core  capital  of  8%  and  because  the  doubts  of 
investors  over  a  small  group  of  unlisted  banks  with  some  need  to  resort  to  the  wholesale 
market, we are demanding of such banks 10% of core capital.  
We publicly announced yesterday which banks need capital to reach the 8–10% level, and 
how much capital they need. We have given them fifteen days to submit a recapitalisation 
plan. Those intending to tap the markets will have until end-September to attain the new level 
of capital. But we have made it very clear that if a bank believes it will be impossible to reach 
these solvency levels, it can apply to the FROB for these funds. The capital shortfall is for a 
maximum of €15.152 million, whereby the impact on public debt if the FROB has to be used 
would  be  relatively  limited.  By  the  way,  let  me  remind  you  that  the  Spanish  public  debt  to 
GDP ratio at the end of 2010 stood at 60%, well below those of other euro area countries. 
Allow me to conclude by addressing some of the doubts raised by investors, which it is our 
duty to try and resolve. 
The  first  message  I  wish  to  convey  is  my  absolute  confidence  in  the  Spanish  banking 
system’s  solvency.  The  measures  we  have  taken  in  the  past  for  their  restructuring  are 
beginning  to  bear  fruit  (creation  of  banks,  market  orientation,  downsizing,  etc.)  and  the 
recently adopted measures, specified yesterday, along with the pressure we are exerting on 
our banks to increase their solvency, should raise confidence in our banks and dispel doubts 
about their present and future situation. 
It should be stressed that our asset valuation system is very demanding, both in terms of the 
classification  of  problem  assets  and  of  provisioning  and  write-downs.  Savings  banks,  with 
exposure  to  the  construction  and  real  estate  developers  sector  of  €217  billion,  have 
€28 billion  of  doubtful  loans,  in  which  the  borrower  is  not  paying  interest  or  repaying  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
principal. As Banco de España requirements stand, banks have, in addition to the foregoing 
amount,  to  record  as  problematic  the  assets  foreclosed  in  payment  of  debts.  Even  more, 
standard loans under special surveillance owing to weaknesses observed in them are also 
considered  as  problematic.  These  rigorous  asset  classification  criteria  indicate  that 
potentially  problematic  assets  at  savings  banks  in  credit  to  construction  and  real  estate 
developers are €100 billion, 46% of the total. The specific loan loss provisions set aside for 
these problem assets account for 31% (if we added general provisions, the figure would be 
38%).  Obviously,  the  specific  provisions  considered  to  compute  these  figures  are  those 
associated  to  this  potentially  problematic  loans  and  not  the  total  amount  of  specific 
provisions.  
Spain’s  system  of  specific  provisions  has  been  tightened  to  drive  banks  towards  making 
tougher and swifter provisions. A non-performing loan, once the value of the collateral has 
been  taken  into  account,  should  be  fully  provisioned  in  one  year.  Collateral  value  is 
considered  using  significant  haircuts,  which  range  from  20%  in  the  case  of  completed 
housing to 50% in that of land. Provisioning must also be made for foreclosures, up to 30% if 
they have been on the balance sheet for two years. The provisions are determined by means 
of transparent parameters, compliance with which is obligatory for all banks. This means they 
are not the subject of negotiation between bank managers and external auditors.  
In  sum,  Spanish  deposit  institutions  are  not  hiding  potentially  problem  exposures,  and  nor 
are the figures for losses small or the provisions made low or far removed from the fair value 
of these assets. We are very transparent and rigorous in valuing assets and we will continue 
to be so in the future.  
Admittedly, 2011 is still going to be a difficult year for Spanish banks, with their net interest 
margins  under  pressure  owing  to  the  higher  marginal  cost  of  funding  and  to  rather  flat 
business volumes, and with the need to continue making loan loss provisions to write down 
assets. However, banks have room for manoeuvre to combat these negative pressures on 
profitability  through  acting  on  costs,  which  should  begin  to  reflect  the  impact  of  the 
restructuring  processes.  If  provisioning  requirements  persist  along  with  pressure  on  the 
margin,  the  banks  most  affected  should  consider  additional  cost-containment  measures. 
Looking ahead, resumption of notable economic growth for 2012 and successive years, in 
keeping with market consensus forecasts, together with the culmination of the savings bank 
concentration  and  restructuring  processes,  bringing  about  synergies,  cost  cuts,  efficiency 
gains and a substantial reduction in the number of players, will all shape a positive scenario 
for the recovery of profitability in the Spanish banking sector.  
I should further point out that net interest income as a percentage of total assets in Spanish 
banking  business  has  not  changed  much  over  the  past  four  or  five  years,  with  a  ratio  of 
around 1.25%. True, there is more pressure on marginal rates, but their impact on average 
margins is fairly slow. The marginal cost of funding has risen, but the average cost in 2010 
was  lower  than  that  observed  in  the  five  previous  years.  Sometimes  there  is  confusion 
between new rates and average rates.  
As  regards  funding,  our  banks  have  a  relatively  reasonable  wholesale  funding  maturity 
structure,  with  nearly  half  of  the  maturities  after  2013.  Around  20%  of  the  debt  issued  on 
markets  matures  this  year.  The  recent  measures  to  reinforce  solvency  should,  along  with 
headway in restructuring, allow our banks to re-fund when the foregoing maturities fall due 
without excessive strains, although probably at still-high costs. Evidently, there was a bout of 
tension  last  year  in  the  funding  of  Spanish  banks  when  the  wholesale  markets  practically 
shut down following the Greek sovereign debt crises. Spanish banks – inevitably – resorted 
to  a  greater  extent  to  the  ECB.  Once  the  tensions  began  to  evaporate,  Spanish  banks 
immediately  returned  to  the  wholesale  market  to  place  covered  bonds,  senior  debt  and 
guaranteed  debt.  This  response  by  Spanish  banks  is  very  positive  and  shows  their 
willingness  to  cut  to  the  full  the  resort  to  the  ECB.  Indeed,  our  ECB  funding  levels  are 
currently slightly below our relative weight in the euro area. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
I have so far talked about those areas where we have risks and concerns. I would not wish to 
wrap up without mentioning an area where we do not have problems. This is, namely, banks’ 
and savings banks’ exposure to households via mortgage loans for house purchases. Other 
countries have serious problems with their mortgages, but in Spain the doubtful assets ratios 
ended 2010 at levels below 3% in this lending portfolio segment, which accounts for more 
than  one-third  of  the  total  portfolio.  Elsewhere,  in  credit  to  construction  and  real  estate 
developers,  bad  debts  are  around  five  times  greater.  These  mortgage  default  figures  are 
somewhat  more  than  one  percentage  point  lower  than  those  observed  in  the  early  1990s, 
when we also had a recession combined with a real estate market crisis. And this is possible 
with the unemployment rate currently around 20%. The explanation for this is that interest 
rates  on  Spanish  mortgages  are  currently  below  3%,  while  in  the  early  1990s  they  were 
around  14%,  with  an  unemployment  rate  close  to  24%.  The  fact  that  the  average  loan-to-
value  ratio  stands  at  62%,  with  only  3%  of  mortgages  with  an  LTV  above  100%,  and  the 
widely  rooted  wish  in  Spanish  society  to  own  one’s  own  house  explain  why  the  mortgage 
portfolio is, in fact, the least risky of all Spanish deposit institutions’ credit portfolios.  
Conclusions 
I could talk a good deal more about what we have done in Spain to tackle and resolve the 
problems of our banking system. But I believe it would be much more interesting to listen to 
your concerns and worries and try to allay them. I shall thus conclude that the steps taken by 
the  Spanish  government  and  Parliament  on  fiscal  consolidation,  labour  market  reform  and 
pensions  system  reform,  along  with  the  changes  I  have  explained  to  you  in  relation  to 
savings  banks  and  the  strengthening  of  banking  solvency,  should  –  little  by  little,  since 
confidence  takes  some  time  to  pick  up  –  afford  us  greater  recognition  by  international 
investors. Recently, in fact, we have seen how our sovereign spread has been converging 
more  towards  the  core  euro  area  countries,  distancing  itself  from  those  economies  with 
bigger  challenges  outstanding.  Our  firm  commitment  to  transparency,  to  the  rigorous 
valuation of assets through a clear provisioning system and our significant increase in capital 
requirements  should  contribute  to  fully  dispelling  doubts  about  the  current  situation  of 
Spanish banks and their medium-term prospects. 
Thank you for your patience. I am at your entire disposal to respond to your questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
