Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: Financial integration and stability  
Closing  remarks  by  Ms  Gertrude  Tumpel-Gugerell,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European Central Bank, at the ECB colloquium “European integration and stability” in honour 
of Ms Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell, ECB, Frankfurt am Main,19 May. 
 It is my great pleasure to close this Colloquium after an afternoon of inspiring contribution 
and presentations, stimulating discussion and a lot of food for thought for the future.  
It was over 12 hundred years ago here in Frankfurt, where Charlemagne (Charles the Great) 
introduced a wide reform of the coin system. At the great synod in Frankfurt in 794, he not 
only harmonized the coins with respect to weight, size and design, he also decided that the 
new coins would be commonly introduced and accepted, making the “Carolingian Denar” the 
common currency and means of payment on both sides of the Rhine.  
An impressive example of early stage financial and monetary integration, which shows that 
such integration has been preoccupation throughout history.  
This afternoon’s discussion centred around financial integration and stability, the challenges 
of this relationship and the broader link to overall European integration.  
Central  banks  –  also  the  ECB  –  have  always  set  out  the  great  benefits  of  financial 
integration. For very good reasons – I think:  
An integrated financial market is the basis for a smooth and equal transmission of monetary 
policy,  it  increases  the  efficiency  and  overall  welfare  of  the  economy,  and  enhances  the 
resilience of the financial system from risk diversification.  
We have promoted the integration of the euro area’s financial market with concrete action – 
particularly in the area of payments systems and market infrastructures, in which I had the 
pleasure to work on for the past 8 years. 
For  example,  we  created  an  integrated  real  time  large  value  payment  system,  TARGET, 
which today is the first market infrastructure to be completely integrated and harmonized at 
the  European  level.  [This  has  been  instrumental  to  the  integration  of  money  markets  and 
wholesale banking activities in Europe.] We have also supported very much the creation of 
the Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA) in the area of retail payments and have decided to 
setup a fully harmonized platform for securities settlements, T2S.  
But despite our commitment and our support for financial integration, we also had to learn 
– with the experience of the past 4 years in mind – that financial integration and financial 
stability  do  not  always  go  hand  in  hand.  Indeed  we  have  witnessed  that  in  a  financially 
integrated market risks can spread and spillover to other segments of the financial market, 
increasing the likelihood of contagion of financial fragilities and systemic risks. 
So has this recent experience changed our view about the benefits of financial integration? 
Not at all! 
It is true that the cause of the financial crisis has many dimensions – which we still need to 
study carefully. But a key issue has been loose regulation and supervision, opaqueness of 
financial  products  and  practices,  massive  mispricing  of  risk  and  a  distorted  allocation  of 
resources.  
In  my  view,  financial  integration  remains  not  only  a  fact  and  necessity  of  today’s  financial 
markets, but an irreversible process, a process that we do not wish to reverse.  
Instead, we need a more resilient financial sector!  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
 For this, we need financial integration and sound policies guarding our markets. Only with 
appropriate policies, the benefits of financial integration can outweigh its potential risks. 
First and foremost, we need to strengthen financial market regulation and supervision. And 
when  I  say  strengthen,  I  do  not  only  mean  stricter  rules,  greater  buffers  and  better  risk 
management, but also: 
 
 
that regulation and supervision is uniformly applied.  
that  banks’  business  models  and  corporate  governance  become  more 
sustainable[, internalizing the costs of their risk taking and potential failure] 
that  financial  market  activities  become  more  transparent  with  respect  to  financial 
innovations, practices and risk assessments 
and that the soundness of the system as a whole has to be ensured.  
 
The systemic dimension of financial market actors’ – but also governments’ – actions was 
not sufficiently recognized before the crisis. Traditional banking supervision was designed to 
look at individual institutions’ risks in isolation. Today, we know better.  
And  a  lot  of  progress  has  been  made  in  this  regard.  In  Europe,  we  have  established  the 
European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) and three pan European supervisory authorities. And 
similar institutions were setup across the Atlantic in the US.  
I often hear and I am often asked: Is it because we have the euro?  
We cannot make our common currency responsible for issues caused by market failure, lack 
of regulation and supervision and undisciplined fiscal expenditure.  
I  am  convinced  that  maintaining  price  stability  is  the  best  contribution  a  central  bank  can 
make for macroeconomic, but also financial stability. However, we also have seen that price 
stability may be a necessary condition for financial stability but not a sufficient one.  
Moreover,  we  have  seen  that  the  materialization  of  systemic  risk  and  financial  instabilities 
can lead to deep recessions with great economic costs, carrying risks for medium term price 
stability as well.  
Does  this  mean  that  monetary  policy  should  be  used  to  preserve  financial  stability?  Not 
primarily! 
We should not violate the Tinbergen principle: a separate policy instrument for every policy 
objective.  
The first best policy for preserving financial stability and specifically to prevent systemic risks 
from materializing is macroprudential supervision.  
Of course, we cannot judge yet, the success and the effectiveness of the newly established 
macroprudential supervisors – here in Europe and across the Atlantic in the US. But, I am 
convinced  that  if  we  are  wary  on  financial  innovations,  potential  activities  shifting  to 
unregulated markets segments or entities and we are mastering the analytical challenge of 
measuring systemic risk, this undertaking will be a very successful one.  
I  have  started  my  central  banking  career  in  the  70ies  when  the  fight  against  inflation  and 
macroeconomic instability was a big challenge. From this period I have kept my conviction 
that you have to lean against the wind. 
So, I believe, that we as monetary policy makers should not shy away from our responsibility 
to contribute to preserving financial stability.  
Having said that, I believe that we at the ECB are well prepared for this task.  
First, with our medium term orientation on price stability, we have the framework to take into 
account  in  a  systematic  way  more  medium  term  developments  and  potential  imbalances 
occurring at that horizon.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Second, our two-pillar monetary policy strategy foresees that we not only take into account 
economic but also money and credit developments when setting interest rates. Such money 
and credit development can help to identify financial market imbalances and unsustainable 
credit and asset price developments and can serve as early warning indicator for financial 
fragilities.  
And third, we have a framework to implement monetary policy in a flexible way, allowing that 
we can react swiftly when fragilities occur.  
Still,  we  should  be  modest  as  well.  It  is true  that  before  the  crisis,  we  have  seen  signs  of 
imbalances – imbalances at the global level and imbalances in local markets in the euro area 
and we have warned that correction could take place in an abrupt manner. But it is also true 
that nobody – also not at the ECB – has seen such a severe and deep crisis coming.  
Therefore, we also learned our lessons: 
 
that  the  financial  sector  is  absolutely  crucial,  for  macroeconomic  outcomes  and 
monetary policy transmission. This link we still have to better research.  
that  public  policies  at  international,  but  also  national  level  are  all  intertwined. 
National policies – macroeconomic and fiscal policies – can have a systemic effect 
on  the  whole  euro  area.  It  took  this  crisis  to  really  understand  this.  And  the  euro 
countries need to prove now that it can work, that we can make policies consistent 
and can recover trust and confidence.  
The euro countries took the necessary steps to pave the way put of the crisis. As a 
central  bank  we  have  made  our  contribution  to  overcome  the  deep  recession  we 
experienced only 2 years ago, contributing to bring back trust and confidence.  
  Now it’s time to address new challenges: 
First, governments have to work on regaining confidence, putting the necessary reforms in 
place 
Second, the regulatory reform which is on its way has to be fully implemented 
And third, the unwinding of our non-standard monetary policy measures has to go forward as 
financial  conditions  improve,  not  least  to  prevent  moral  hazard  and  delay  in  the  needed 
financial sector restructuring 
We  should  not  forget  that  the  European  Monetary  Union  came  a  long  way.  The  Werner 
report 40 years ago, the establishment of the European Monetary System 30 years ago, the 
Delors report 20 years ago and finally the establishment of the European monetary union a 
bit  more  that  10  years  ago.  We  must  not  undermine  this  great  achievement.  The  serious 
currency turmoil and fluctuations in the 50 years preceding the European Monetary Union, 
notably  the  exchange  rate  shocks  in  the  1980s  and  the  crisis  at  the  beginning  of  the  90s 
should be a reminder how precious the current achievement of a monetary union is.  
Like  with  financial  integration,  I  believe  that  the  European  Monetary  Union  and  more 
integration and consistency of public policies on a European level is a fact, a necessity and 
an irreversible process. What we need to ensure are sound and sustainable policies for an 
ongoing success.  
I thank you for your attention.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
