Patrick Honohan: Restoring Ireland’s credit by reducing uncertainty 
Remarks by Mr Patrick Honohan, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, at the Institute of 
International and European Affairs, Dublin, 7 January 2011. 
 There is a temptation to quantify economic and financial prospects with greater certainty than 
is warranted. But, especially in the aftermath of events as dramatic as we have seen, this 
can  be  a  big  mistake.  All  too  often  in  recent  months,  projections  about  the  economic 
recovery, about the budget and about the likely evolution of banking loan losses have been 
provided  and  received  without  sufficient  acknowledgment  of  the  uncertainty  surrounding 
those forecasts. But uncertainty is itself central, not only in our own assessments of future 
prospects, but in influencing Ireland’s overall creditworthiness and thereby feeding back on 
the recovery process itself. Doing what can be done to reduce the uncertainty facing the Irish 
economy is a large part of what current economic and financial policy is about at present. 
Today I want to focus mainly on uncertainty around the banks, but I’ll also touch on some 
other  key  dimensions  of  short-term  macroeconomic  prospects:  employment  and  output 
growth, the budget and cost competitiveness. I want to illustrate the points with some charts 
which should at this stage be thought of as schematic rather than representing thoroughly 
precise  representations  of  our  current  level  of  uncertainty.  One  great  visual  device  for 
speaking  about  uncertainty  is  the  fan-chart.  Here  (Figs  1,  2)  are  two  fan-charts,  one  for 
growth and one for the budget deficit. This is a better representation of what we know about 
what is likely to happen than a point estimate.  
The central paths shown in the fan-chart for growth and the deficit also correspond broadly to 
those  presented  by  the  institutions  of  the  European  Union  and  the  IMF  –  and  they  have 
committed their institutional funds on the basis of their forecast that Ireland is well able to 
service even if the full amount of €67½ billion debt is drawn. To use a word whose relevance 
and appositeness is more evident now than it was six months ago, they do not consider the 
debt position to be other than manageable.  
A glance at bond market yields suggests, however, that market participants are not yet fully 
convinced that the relatively benign central scenario is the only outcome imaginable. Instead, 
it seems that investors in government bonds are still factoring in the possibility of what are 
called in the jargon “tail events.” 
Take tail risk in the banks. 
In normal times, a well-run bank with good loan appraisal procedures will be able to forecast 
its likely loan losses fairly accurately, especially if the likely macroeconomic prospects can be 
pinned-down. 
But when it becomes clear that banks have made substantial underwriting errors across a 
wide range of their portfolio to the extent that began to become evident in late 2008 and early 
2009,  the  range  of  uncertainty  balloons  out.  Standard  valuation  practices  that  work  for 
properly  underwritten  loans  in  normal  times  are  ineffective  in  such  an  environment  in 
predicting the enormous systemic losses that can occur. Thus over the past couple of years, 
a  point  estimate  –  a  single  number  –  has  been  more  misleading  than  helpful  in  terms  of 
understanding the range of loss possibilities. (That is why we at the Central Bank have been 
determining  bank  capital  requirements  on  the  basis  of  two  scenarios,  a  base  case  and  a 
stress case. But of course there are more than two possible cases.) 
Called  in  from  Trinity  College  by  an  Oireachtas  Committee  in  June  2009,  I  expressed  the 
opinion that the plausible range was as wide as €50 billion. Information that could narrow this 
range  was  not  readily  available,  but  the  Central  Bank  began  to  assemble  the  necessary 
information through the PCAR process and from NAMA. Gradually the range of uncertainty 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
narrowed,  especially  with  the  last  of  the  haircuts  on  the  lumpy  NAMA  purchases.  The 
important point is not just that the best estimate of the losses increased, but that the range of 
uncertainty increased at first and has narrowed, but has more narrowing to do. 
(Let me quickly show a sequence of slides – Annex 2 – which illustrate schematically how 
the level of uncertainty regarding future loan losses evolved over the past few years.) 
To oversimplify, Ireland faces two main problems in its current financial balance sheet. First, 
it has too much debt, public and private. Second, there is a market perception of significant 
tail  risk  to  the  debt,  especially  related  to  the  banks.  It  is  these  two  problems,  which  are 
obviously interlinked, and which have both been growing in the course of the past year, that 
have  led  to  the  market’s  reluctance  to  provide  continuing  funding  at  reasonable  rates  of 
interest.  
By making an alternative line of funding available, the provision of financial support from EU 
partners  and  the  IMF  under  the  Programme  buys  time  for  Ireland  to  reduce  these  two 
problems. It does not itself reduce them. In particular, the financing provided is not structured 
to itself reduce the tail risks – that would have been beyond the current scope of the funds 
from which the financial support has been sourced. 
Let  me  digress  a  little on  this  point:  an  ideal  financial  package  for  reducing  tail  risk  would 
have  offered  insurance  against  the  tail  risk.  Of  course  there  would  have  to  be  a  premium 
payable, and probably a retained proportion of co-insurance to avoid moral hazard. But an 
insurance  scheme  would  be  even  more  effective  under  present  circumstances  than 
additional capital in restoring market confidence in both the banks, enabling them to access 
wholesale  term  funding  at  reasonable  cost,  and  it  would  also  lower  the  risks  perceived  by 
lenders to the State. 
Unfortunately  neither  the  IMF  nor  the  EU  facilities  are  able  to  offer  insurance  of  this  type: 
they are simply lenders. This is a pity, because the wider EU and the global community has a 
better capacity to bear tail risks than does a single State. Offering such insurance even at a 
premium in excess of the fair value expected claims on such insurance would evidently be 
very attractive to a country in Ireland’s position for the reasons mentioned above. Of course 
offering such insurance could expose the providers to adverse selection and moral hazard 
behaviour,  ever  the  enemies  of  insurance  markets.  But  these  challenges  have  been 
overcome in tougher insurance situations by innovation in risk mitigation and control, and I 
am  sure  that  they  could  be  overcome  in  the  context  of  the  EU’s  institutions  for  financial 
support operations. 
Absent such insurance, it is not surprising that financial markets have adopted a largely wait 
and see attitude in relation to Ireland, as is evident from spreads (Fig 3). 
The coming couple of years are thus largely an opportunity for Ireland to  
(i) 
(ii) 
in ways that are under domestic control. 
On (i) Ireland can work to demonstrate convincingly that it has brought the fiscal deficit under 
control, thereby removing the largest actual and potential source of continued debt increase. 
On (ii) we can further analyze and document the remaining risk exposures of the banks in 
such a way as to reduce the perceived tail risk and we can also downsize the banks, thereby 
reducing  a  myriad  of  risks,  especially  if  some  of  the  riskiest  parts  of  the  portfolio  can  be 
divested at reasonable prices.  
Ironically then, far from removing discretion from Ireland as a Sovereign entity, the success 
of  the  EU-IMF  programme  hinges  on  actions  that  need  to  be  implemented  at  home,  and 
which,  in  large  part,  the  public  authorities  were  already  planning.  Thus  the  budgetary 
measures  to  meet  the  fiscal  targets  both  for  2011  and  through  the  following  years  are  all 
deal with the level of debt and  
demonstrate that the tail risk is lower than has been believed  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
drawn from the nationally prepared 4 year plan. (That’s also why we can be confident that, if 
a  new  government  were  to  want  to  substitute  alternative  measures  which  were  both 
economically efficient and of equal fiscal effect, it would receive a sympathetic hearing from 
the funders. Besides, the agreed measures for out years tend to be much less specific and 
detailed than those for 2011.) 
On  the  banks,  the  EU-IMF  team  have,  in  effect,  endorsed  the  approach  already  being 
adopted, albeit calling for quicker action. What is that strategy?  
(i) 
Improve in a convincing way information on the quality of the banks’ loan books and 
hence  on  the  adequacy  of  their  capital.  This  year’s  prudential  capital  assessment 
review (PCAR2011) will be more detailed and more intense than what we were able 
to accomplish last year, will be published with much fuller detail and will be validated 
by external consultants.  
Shrink  bank  balance  sheets  by  selling  their  most  distressed  and  other  non-core 
assets;  replenish  their  risk  capital  to  a  demanding  standard,  seeking  new  private 
equity but where necessary taking state ownership. The funders have pressed for 
firm deadlines on downsizing the banks, packaging and selling non-core and other 
saleable assets to reduce credit risk and exposure to funding risk, though not at the 
cost  of  incurring  fire-sale  costs.  This  includes  some  expansion  in  the  role  and 
streamlining  of  NAMA,  and  streamlining  of  the  procedures  required  for  its  price 
determination,  as  well  as  employing  some  borrowed  funds  to  enhance  the  credit 
rating  and  saleability  of  portfolio  assets.  To  the  extent  that  assets  can  be  sold 
outright  (as  distinct  from  being  placed  in  a  „bad  bank”  vehicle),  then  some  of  the 
banks’  excessive  borrowings  from  the  central  bank  –  a  legacy  of  the  years  of 
extravagant bank reliance on footloose foreign funding – can be reduced.  
Remove  terminally  damaged  institutions  from  the  market  while  seeking  to  retain 
enough  participants  to  ensure  competitive  provision  of  services.  This  too  will  be 
accelerated.  
(ii) 
(iii) 
As  I  have  often  remarked,  an  effective  bank  restructuring  requires  that  the  fortunes  of  the 
banks  and  the  budget  be  convincingly  disentangled.  Uncertainty  about  each  damages  the 
other. Despite a promising start in March/April, we have not so far been able to achieve this 
separation,  partly  because  the  initial  round  of  loss  measurement  –  which  has  depended 
heavily on NAMA valuations – was completed only at the very end of the initial guarantee 
period in September (and we were, as mentioned, unlucky in that the sequence in which the 
valuations  came  out  left  the  bad  news  until  late).  In  addition,  the  announced  losses  have 
been  very  large,  and  came  as  a  bit  of  a  shock  to  the  market  at  a  time  when  the  State’s 
finances were already under pressure and with heightened market sensitivity to Sovereign 
debt issues in the euro area. 
A faster and deeper implementation of the existing approach, as agreed under the EU-IMF 
Programme, is clearly the way to go. The funders’ single-mindedness on this point will help 
overcome  hesitation  and  accelerate  the  making  of  hard  choices.  For  example,  given  the 
stressed  funding  position  of  the  Government,  I  would  myself  have  hesitated  to  call  for  an 
additional €10 billion to be applied right away to further strengthening the banks’ capital, as is 
now agreed. It will be important to ensure that the State gets good value for this investment 
and that over-capitalization is not dissipated in cost inefficiencies. 
Reducing  the  banking  uncertainty  will  not  be  fully  accomplished  overnight.  Extracting 
progressively  more  detailed  and  comprehensive  information  from  the  banks  will  help  to 
assess the quality of their remaining non-NAMA book. The evolution of loan performance as 
the economy recovers will provide further precision. 
Still, even though I would be disappointed and surprised if all of the €35 billion earmarked for 
the  banks  in  the  package  were  needed  in  the  end,  the  weaker  and  uncertain  economic 
conditions now forecast by most observers into the years ahead do underline the need for a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
strong  capital  buffer.  We  will  get  a  better  fix  on  this  with  the  work  going  into  PCAR2011, 
which, as I mentioned, is intended to determine any additional capital needs that might have 
emerged since we last stressed the main banks’ non-NAMA portfolio in March 2010. 
Keeping options open while seeking to reduce the exposure of the State to further risks has 
been  a  touchstone  of  the  bank  restructuring  policy  adopted  over  the  past  year.  This  may 
indeed have contributed to prolonging the process. 
Increasingly it seems evident that placing the continuing parts of the system on a firm footing 
can best be done through the involvement of new foreign owners who can bring capital, risk 
control  and  other  management  skills.  This  would  effectively  short-circuit  the  risk-reduction 
process  now  under  way.  With  their  due  diligence  complementing  the  tail-risk  reduction 
envisaged from PCAR2011, it is not unreasonable to suppose that such investors will see 
sufficient franchise value in the continuing banks to convince them that attractive investment 
opportunities  exist.  I  look  forward  to  welcoming  new  owners  of  Ireland’s  downsized  and 
cleaned-up banks. 
Reducing  the  risks  of  an  underperforming  economy  also  calls  for  sustained  energy  and 
commitment on a number of other dimensions. 
I  have  already  alluded  to  the  adjustments  that  have  been  needed  in  the  other  two 
fundamental pillars of the recovery, fiscal balance and cost competitiveness. Both got badly 
out of kilter in, or as a result of, the boom years, in ways that I don’t need to rehearse today. 
As a professional deformation, I tend to talk a lot about banking, but I don’t want to fall into 
the trap of having you believe that the fiscal crisis is all about meeting the banks’ losses. To 
be sure, the fiscal crisis has been brought on by the bank-driven boom and bust. But I hope it 
is some comfort to be reminded that only something of the order of one-eighth of the fiscal 
adjustment  over  the  coming  years  is  attributable  to  the  additional  debt  servicing  costs 
resulting from the additional borrowing to fill the banking hole; the remainder is to claw the 
budget back to where it would have been if the structure of tax and the level of spending had 
not veered out of what could be sustained during the bank-driven property boom. 
The current impact of the banking losses on the economy is not so much via the net long-
term taxpayer cost, but comes mainly as a result of the accumulation of debt. The jump in 
debt  associated  with  these  losses  is  of  the  same  order  of  magnitude  as  the  rest  of  the 
borrowing  2009–10  (Fig.  4).  Either  of  these  components  would  have  been  unproblematic, 
together  they  make  the  markets  and  the  rating  agencies  nervous.  The  fiscal  adjustment 
could possibly have been delayed by a year or two had it not been for the banking losses; 
now it cannot wait. 
There have been misgivings about the scale of the fiscal adjustment and the withdrawal of 
aggregate demand that it will entail. Before the EU-IMF Programme was agreed, it was clear 
that  a  less  rapid  adjustment  was  infeasible  given  the  rapidly  diminishing  appetite  of  the 
market for additional Irish government bonds. Now that the Programme is in place, the bond 
market  can  be  left  for  a  while  to  digest  its  previous  meals;  but  that  does  not  remove  the 
necessity to stay on the agreed fiscal path: the new lenders – partners though they are – also 
need to be convinced of Ireland’s societal capacity for the fiscal adjustment essential to bring 
the  debt  dynamics  under  control.  Besides,  a  slower  adjustment  would  add  to  the  stock  of 
debt, and worsen the long-term prospects of the economy. 
The EU-IMF programme adds external credibility to the fiscal programme and should provide 
assurance  that  the  adjustment  is  feasible  regardless  of  any  differences  of  opinion  on  the 
likely macroeconomic growth rates. 
I don’t have time to elaborate today on the importance of restoring cost competitiveness if 
Ireland  is  to  resume  exploiting  its  traditional  potential  in  international  markets  and  more 
generally  in  reducing  the  risks  to  jobs.  Remember  that  the  sustainable  job  growth  of  the 
nineties was predicated on wage restraint delivered by the social partnership process. There 
has already been a deal of adjustment, especially in the public sector. But it’s not easy to see 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
how rapid job growth can be assured if wage costs are not rolled back on a broader basis 
from their unsustainable run-up in the early 2000s.  
The process of rolling back the excesses that have marred the great advances made by the 
Irish economy over the past two decades has heightened uncertainty. In order to underpin a 
vigorous economic recovery, risk must be reduced, not least by ensuring the conventional 
elements  of  fiscal  discipline  and  cost  competitiveness,  but  also  through  an  intensified 
process of clarifying and crystallizing the position of the banks and reducing their exposure. 
The  EU-IMF  Programme  funding  provides  the  window  of  time  in  which  to  restore  the 
fundamentals and reduce the risks. 
Let me end on a more philosophical note. If the previous decade had emphasized individual 
endeavour  in  a  globalized  economy,  the  last  couple  of  years  has  revealed  the  degree  of 
interdependence which still exists both in the domestic economy – where the excesses and 
failures of some have influenced all – and between different national governments – as when 
fiscal pressures spill over from one country to the rest of the euro area, for example. Despite 
the scale of the official financial support provided by EU partners and the IMF, in the end it is 
evidently  going  to  be  for  Ireland  to  bear  and  sort  out  the  consequences  of  these  failures. 
Accordingly the national response must be one that achieves a broad buy-in which requires 
among  other  things  not  only  fairness,  but  a  consciousness  of  the  unsettling  effect  of 
uncertainty on individuals throughout society, and a clearer understanding of what is possible 
and what is not possible to be done in managing these uncertainties. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
 6 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  7
