Tiff Macklem: The role of the G-20 in sustaining the recovery and 
protecting financial stability 
Remarks by Mr Tiff Macklem, Senior Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, at the FICCI-IBA 
(Federation  of  Indian  Chambers  of  Commerce  &  Industry  –  Indian  Banks’  Association) 
Conference on “Global Banking: Paradigm Shift”, Mumbai, 24 August 2011. 
 Introduction 
In  some  respects,  Canada  and  India  could  not  be  more  different.  Canada  is  the  world’s 
second-largest country in geographic size, with a population of 34 million. India, as one of 
only two countries with more than a billion people, is the world’s second largest in population 
and  is  expected  to  be  the  largest  within  15  years.  However,  there  is  much  we  share,  not 
least,  vast  and  diverse  geographies,  diversity  among  our  citizens,  a  common  democratic 
heritage as members of the British Commonwealth, and market-based economies. 
In my remarks today, I will focus on these and other similarities between India and Canada, 
as  well  as  our  strong,  joint  interest  –  indeed,  our  leadership  role  –  in  the  G-20  reform 
program  to  achieve  durable  financial  stability  and  sustainable  and  balanced  economic 
growth. 
My  message,  in  a  sentence,  is  that  while  the  G-20  has  made  considerable  progress  in 
strengthening  the  microeconomic  rules  governing  the  regulated  financial  system,  we  have 
fallen short in correcting the imbalances that are plaguing the global economy and fuelling 
financial  vulnerabilities.  And  this  is  having  consequences.  The  slow  progress  by  some 
countries  in  implementing  adjustments  needed  to  address  macroeconomic  imbalances  is 
holding back the global recovery and increasing the risk of financial instability. 
Canada and India are caught in the crosshairs. What can we do? 
Individually,  we  can  ensure  our  own  macroeconomic  policies  –  monetary,  fiscal  and 
exchange  rate  –  are  sound  and  supporting  necessary  adjustments.  We  can  advance  the 
implementation of higher global regulatory standards in our own financial systems. And we 
can ensure rigorous regulatory supervision of our financial sectors. 
Together,  Canada  and  India  can  provide  a  strong  voice  encouraging  G-20  countries  to 
accelerate  their  efforts  to  develop  and  implement  concrete,  measurable  plans  to  reduce 
macroeconomic  imbalances,  address  financial  vulnerabilities  and  support  a  sustainable 
expansion. 
Canada and India weathered the financial crisis better than most 
Worldwide, the cost of the financial crisis that broke out in 2007 and escalated dramatically in 
the  fall  of  2008  has  been  enormous.  The  ensuing  recession  was  the  worst  the  world  had 
seen since the 1930s and the most globally synchronized in history. Almost 28 million jobs 
were lost globally. Economic output in the major advanced countries, as represented by the 
G-7,  fell  by  5  per  cent  from  peak  to  trough.  For  emerging-market  countries,  a  collapse  in 
trade led to a marked growth slowdown. 
And today, four years from the start of the crisis and two years into the recovery, we are still 
not out of the woods. The European sovereign crisis has intensified, the U.S. credit rating 
has been downgraded, and a broad range of data has come in weaker than expected. All 
have led to an abrupt loss of risk appetite in financial markets. The implication is somewhat 
weaker economic momentum globally together with elevated risks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Both  Canada  and  India  weathered  the  financial  crisis  better  than  most,  and  remain  well-
positioned to absorb aftershocks. To an important degree, this reflects the guidance we took 
from our own past mistakes. A central lesson we both learned is that adjustment deferred is 
inevitably adjustment magnified and intensified. And in response to this bitter experience, we 
put  in  place  sound  economic  frameworks  that  have  increased  the  resilience  of  our 
economies. 
In the early 1990s, Canada and India both experienced serious economic crises and deep 
recessions.  These  crises  produced  similar  epiphanies,  which  galvanized  the  political  will 
necessary to make substantive policy reforms: in particular, to liberalize trade; to strengthen 
monetary, fiscal and financial policy frameworks; and to undertake needed structural reforms. 
In Canada, a series of factors coalesced, including the lack of a credible nominal anchor for 
monetary  policy,  inefficient  production,  large  and  chronic  fiscal  deficits,  and  structural 
rigidities  in  labour  markets.  The  resulting  crisis  led  to  key  reforms.  These  included  a  free 
trade  agreement  with  the  United  States  and  Mexico,  an  inflation-targeting  framework  for 
monetary policy, and a major fiscal consolidation that reduced the federal deficit from almost 
6 per cent of GDP in 1992–93 to near zero five years later. Our employment insurance and 
public pension plans were also reformed as were regulations governing the financial sector. 
The  initial  impact  of  each  of  these  separate  reforms  was  modest,  but  the  benefits  quickly 
cumulated  and  reinforced  each  other  to  become  very  substantial:  low  and  stable  inflation, 
declining  government  debt,  stronger  and  more  stable  output  growth,  lower  unemployment 
and financial stability. 
I won’t presume to lecture on the history of the reforms instituted here in India, but I would 
suggest  the  world  needs  to  hear  more  about  India’s  success  story.  The  impact  of  the 
changes  put  in  place  is  both  impressive  and  instructive.  As  the  Indian  economy  became 
more open to the rest of the world and its economy more market-oriented, economic growth 
doubled, rising from about 4 per cent in the early 1990s to more than 8 per cent by the end of 
the decade and this trend of strong growth performance has continued since the turn of the 
century. India’s exports of goods and services, as a share of GDP, more than tripled, rising 
from 7 per cent in 1990 to 22 per cent in 2010. But the most remarkable measure of success 
was that from 1994 to 2005, almost 29 million people – or close to the entire population of 
Canada – were lifted out of poverty. 
The  reforms  adopted  by  Canada  and  India  left  our  economies  better  able  to  adjust  to  the 
financial crisis and ensuing recession. This was a crisis that did not ignite within our borders. 
Yet our sound policy frameworks, combined with diligent implementation, have fortified our 
countries against the international shock waves and afforded us greater policy flexibility to 
respond to adverse real and financial spillovers. 
Canada, India and the G-20 
So it should perhaps not be a surprise that as the G-20 emerged as the premier forum for 
economic co-operation, Canada and India were approached to take on a leadership role in 
forging a global consensus around needed policy reforms. In particular, our countries were 
asked to co-chair two critically important G-20 working groups. 
First,  the  G-20  Working  Group  on  Enhancing  Sound  Regulation  and  Strengthening 
Transparency was established in the lead-up to the London Summit to tackle weaknesses in 
the  financial  system  that  had  been  laid  bare  by  the  crisis.  In  a  remarkably  short  period  of 
time, our working group was able to achieve agreement among G-20 members on the broad 
directions of financial sector policy reform. The recommendations in our report were adopted 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
by  G-20  leaders  at  the  London  Summit  and  set  in  train  an  ambitious  financial  reform 
agenda.1 I will come back to this in a moment. 
Second, the G-20 Working Group on the Framework for Strong, Sustainable and Balanced 
Growth,  which  is  ongoing,  was  launched  following  the  Pittsburgh  Summit  to  build  a 
consensus around the policies required across the G-20 to sustain the recovery and ensure 
that policy frameworks and actions are consistent domestically and globally. 
Let me say a few words about both projects – what has been achieved and what remains to 
be accomplished. 
Financial sector reform 
The financial crisis revealed all too starkly that liquidity buffers were glaringly inadequate, and 
that  the  global  banking  system  as  a  whole  was  dangerously  undercapitalized  and 
overleveraged. To redress this core vulnerability, new global standards in the form of Basel III 
have  been  agreed.  They  substantially  increase  the  loss-bearing  capital  that  financial 
institutions  must  hold  and  establish  new  liquidity  standards  and  a  limit  on  leverage.  These 
new standards represent a significant strengthening of the global rules. The combination of 
greater  emphasis  on  true  loss-bearing  capital  –  namely,  tangible  common  equity  –  and 
increased  minimum  capital  levels  has  effectively  raised  the  minimum  global  capital 
requirement  seven  times.  Moreover,  for  the  largest  and  most  interconnected  global  banks, 
these requirements are being supplemented with additional loss-absorbing capital. These are 
major accomplishments. 
The  new  rules  must  now  be  assiduously  implemented  in  every  institution.  All  jurisdictions 
must  ensure  strong  supervision  and  oversight.  Scrupulous  international  assessment  must 
ensure equivalent implementation of these new higher standards. 
Furthermore, we must agree on and implement a perimeter of regulation and oversight that 
encompasses all systemically important financial institutions, markets and instruments. And a 
new  system  of  firewalls  needs  to  be  built  to  prevent  the  failure  of  one  counterparty  in  the 
over-the-counter derivatives market from creating systemically perilous knock-on effects. 
In  short,  much  has  been  achieved  and  much  remains  to  be  accomplished.  It  is  critically 
important that the momentum driving financial sector reform be maintained. 
G-20 Framework for Strong, Sustainable and Balanced Growth 
Progress on the Framework for Strong, Sustainable and Balanced Growth has lagged that of 
financial sector reform – and needs to accelerate. 
The  G-20  leaders  launched  the  Framework  in  2009,  just  as  the  global  economy  began 
recovering. Their goal was to safeguard the nascent recovery and achieve stronger global 
growth over the medium to long term. Leaders recognized the importance of beginning in the 
early stages of the recovery to put in place policies that would foster the adjustments needed 
to  sustain  recovery,  prevent  a  re-emergence  of  global  imbalances  and  support  financial 
stability. 
At the Toronto G-20 Summit in 2010, agreement was reached on a comprehensive, three-
pillared policy package to support stronger, more sustainable and more balanced growth. It 
included: 
 
fiscal consolidation in advanced countries that is credible and clearly communicated; 
                                                 
1  G-20  Working  Group  on  Enhancing  Sound  Regulation  and  Strengthening  Transparency,  “Final  Report.” 
25 March 2009, which can be found at: <http://www.g20.org/Documents/g20_wg1_010409.pdf>. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  for emerging markets, strengthened social safety nets, infrastructure spending and, 
for some, increased exchange rate flexibility; and, 
for  the  entire  G-20  membership,  the  pursuit  of  structural  reforms  to  increase  and 
sustain our growth prospects.  
task  of 
the  difficult 
legislating  credible,  well-defined 
Advanced  countries  made  their  commitment  to  fiscal  consolidation  more  concrete  by 
agreeing  to  at  least  halve  their  fiscal  deficits  by  2013  and  stabilize  or  reduce  government 
debt-to-GDP ratios by 2016. 
Six months later, in Seoul, G-20 leaders called for indicative guidelines to identify large and 
persistent  macroeconomic  imbalances  and  for  corrective  policy  actions  to  address  the 
underlying root causes. 
But actions have not always kept pace with commitments. 
In  advanced  countries, 
fiscal 
consolidation plans is under way, but in some of these countries, current plans have yet to 
gain  the  full  confidence  of  markets.  Moreover,  the  consequences  of  inadequate  progress 
have become more immediate. Sovereign debt concerns have contributed to a retrenchment 
in risk taking in global markets, sending the prices of safe-haven assets to record highs and 
pushing those of risky assets sharply lower. 
In emerging markets, the pace of foreign exchange reserve accumulation has not slowed; on 
the  contrary,  it  has  accelerated.  In  2010,  aggregate  reserves  of  G-20  emerging-market 
economies  reached  nearly  US$5  trillion,  or  32  per  cent  of  their  GDP.  At  US$3.2  trillion, 
China’s  reserves  alone  have  increased  by  almost  a  third  since  January  2010.  This  is  also 
having more visible consequences. 
The slow pace of exchange rate adjustment between the United States and China is holding 
back  the  recovery  in  the  former  and  fuelling  inflation  in  the  latter.  With  only  very  modest 
adjustments  of  the  renminbi  against  the  U.S.  dollar,  China’s  real  effective  exchange  rate 
against its full range of trading partners has actually depreciated since June 2010. Moreover, 
as  the  consequences  of  this  lack  of  adjustment  spill  over  onto  others,  G-20  members  are 
increasingly  taking  individual  actions  that  collectively  risk  further  thwarting  needed  global 
adjustment.  The  number  of  G-20  countries  that  are  intervening  against  exchange  rate 
movements  has  increased.  And  more  emerging  markets  are  taking  measures  to  reduce 
capital inflows. As a result, countries representing more than 50 per cent of the U.S.-dollar 
trade weight are actively thwarting foreign exchange adjustment, either through quasi-fixed 
exchange rates or with newly introduced capital controls. Canada and India are not part of 
this  group.  But  we  are  bearing  the  not  insubstantial  consequences  of  a  weakened  global 
recovery and the re-emergence of global imbalances.2 
As  co-chairs  of  the  Framework  working  group,  Canada  and  India  are  working  together  to 
develop  concrete  and  measurable  policy  commitments  to  be  tabled  at  the  Cannes  G-20 
Summit  in  November.  We  have  made  good  progress  at  the  G-20  table  on  indicators  and 
guidelines  to  define  significant  and  harmful  economic  imbalances.  This  experience  has 
helped to foster a common understanding of the issues and problems across the G-20 which, 
in turn, serves as a first step in achieving greater policy coordination. The working group’s 
focus now is on the key challenges of fostering greater exchange rate flexibility in emerging 
markets, encouraging deeper and more significant structural reforms, and strengthening the 
fiscal commitments made in Toronto. Both co-chairs also believe that there is a symmetry of 
interests  between  advanced  and  emerging  economies  in  reducing  the  pace  of  reserve 
accumulation and are pursuing measurable commitments on this front. Achieving consensus 
                                                 
2  Projections made by the International Monetary Fund show that imbalances narrowed from 2008 to mid-2009, 
but have been widening ever since and, without policy adjustments, are expected to worsen. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
on all of these issues will require a shared understanding of the mutual benefits and, here, 
Canada and India have an important role to play. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
The G-20 countries have had considerable success outlining what must be done to enhance 
the resilience of the global financial system and to achieve stronger, more balanced growth. 
And the potential achievable benefits of taking collective action are large. The Bank of Canada 
conservatively estimates that the average net economic benefit to be gained over time by G-20 
economies from the stronger agreed capital and liquidity standards is 30 per cent of GDP in 
present-value terms, or about US$13 trillion.3 Further, if the G-20 initiatives to unwind global 
imbalances are realized, the Bank estimates that the level of global demand could be $6 trillion 
to  $9  trillion  dollars  higher  by  2015  than  when  compared  to  a  scenario  of  deficient  global 
demand.4 
But to achieve this promise, the pace of implementation of the G-20 Framework must step 
up.  We  are  already  bearing  the  consequences  of  inadequate  adjustment.  Unsustainable 
macroeconomic  policies  are  increasing  uncertainty,  undermining  a  sustainable  economic 
recovery and raising financial stability risks. And the longer needed adjustments are delayed, 
the  more  serious  the  consequences  will  ultimately  be.  Financial  stability  that  is  durable 
cannot  be  achieved  without  balanced  sustainable  growth  –  nor  can  growth  be  sustained 
without financial stability. 
As the recent extreme market volatility has made all too stark, we hand financial markets the 
opportunity to speculate against needed adjustments at our collective peril. Financial markets 
are content until they are not. Policy-makers cannot predict when market sentiment will shift, 
but  every  delay  in  implementing  policies  to  safeguard  and  support  sustainable  economic 
growth increases the likelihood of another calamity. 
Canada  and  India  are  a  world  apart.  My  country  is  a  medium-sized,  advanced  economy. 
India  is  an  emerging  giant.  But  the  elements  we  have  in  common  are  significant  and 
powerful, including our democratic heritage, our market-based approach to economic policy 
and  our  commitment  to  a  prosperous  global  economy.  We  are  strengthening  the  ties 
between  our  countries.  And  together  we  share  a  leadership  role  on  the  world  stage  to 
achieve  a  global  economy  that  sustains  strong  and  balanced  growth  to  the  benefit  of  all 
citizens. 
Thank you. 
                                                 
3  Bank  of  Canada,  “Strengthening  International  Capital  and  Liquidity  Standards:  A  Macroeconomic  Impact 
Assessment for Canada,” August, 2010. See also Mark Carney, “Bundesbank Lecture 2010: The Economic 
Consequences of the Reforms,” speech to Deutsche Bundesbank, Berlin, 14 September 2010. 
4  K. Beaton, C. de Resende, R. Lalonde, and S. Snudden, “Prospects for Global Current Account Rebalancing,” 
Bank  of  Canada  Discussion  Paper  2010-4.  See  also  Mark  Carney,  “Restoring  Faith  in  the  International 
Monetary Sysem,” speech to Spruce Meadows Changing Fortunes Round Table, Calgary, 10 September 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
