Inia Naiyaga: The banking industry in Fiji 
Opening speech by Mr Inia Naiyaga, Acting Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, at 
the  one-day  Banking  Expo  organized  by  the  Association  of  Banks  in  Fiji  (ABIF),  Suva, 
7 May 2011. 
 Introductory remarks 
Chairman of the Association of Banks in Fiji (ABIF), Mr. Norman Wilson;  
Members of the Association of Banks in Fiji (ABIF);  
Distinguished Guests;  
Ladies and Gentlemen:  
Ni sa bula vinaka and a very good morning to you all.  
I am delighted to be here this morning and would like to congratulate the ABIF for organizing 
this expo to raise public awareness, on the valuable role that commercial banks play in our 
economy. I encourage the public to take this opportunity to come and learn of our banking 
industry here in Fiji. The commercial banks have a very long history in Fiji, the older ones 
spanning over 100 years.  
Role of the commercial banks  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  let  me  say  a  little  about  the  important  role  played  by  the 
commercial banks in Fiji  
Fiji  has  a  well  developed  financial  system  that  not  only  is  secure  and  sound;  but  has 
remained  resilient  despite  the  recent  global  financial  crisis.  The  strong  contribution  of  the 
banking industry to the Fiji Financial System has been a major factor in this regard. Over the 
years  the  Banks  have  invested  heavily  in  Fiji  and  have  remained  committed  to  delivering 
services that have helped shape and develop our country into what it is today.  
At  the  end  of  2010  the  commercial  bank’s  assets  alone  was  around  42%  of  the  entire 
financial system and this highlights the importance of this industry in the local economy. The 
value of total assets of the commercial banks at the end of 2010 was $4.5b and equates to 
around 75% of GDP.  
Their role in facilitating trade  
Commercial banks are – financial institutions that primarily intermediate between the savers 
and the borrowers in an economy. They also buy and sell foreign currencies and facilitate 
trade and the transfer of payments both domestically and across international borders. It is 
these  very  transactions  that  help  to  pay  for  our  salaries,  the  importation  of  goods  and 
services that we use almost every day, and provide the much needed capital for investment.  
At the end of 2010, the total loan book value of all banks stood at $3.1b and this has grown 
by 159% over the last 10 years.  
Commercial  banks  play  an  important  role  in  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  in 
Fiji.  Over  the  last  two  years,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  focused  its  policy  on  creating  an 
economic  environment  that  is  conducive  to  investment  and  growth.  To  this  effect,  the 
overnight  policy  rate  has  been  reduced  further  to  1.5  percent  and  a  passive  approach  to 
liquidity management was adopted. As a result, it is anticipated that commercial banks and 
other  market  interest  rates  will  generally  further  decline.  The  downward  movements  in 
interest  rates  expected  to  provide  incentives,  for  investors  to  borrow  and  pursue  business 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
opportunities,  raise  household’s  disposable  income  and  more  importantly  boost  the 
economic recovery.  
Their role as corporate citizens  
The commercial banks are an integral part of any economy. What is not often appreciated is 
that Banks are also major employers and also pay substantial tax contributions in Fiji. In Fiji 
they  have  also  participated  actively  in  charity  and  social  work.  They  have  not  taken  their 
corporate  social  responsibility  lightly  and  have  taken  the  lead  in  giving  back,  to  the 
communities that they operate in.  
But  most  importantly  they  have  been  partners  together  with  the  Reserve  Bank  and  the 
Government in the development of an internationally recognized sound and robust financial 
system.  
Banking innovation  
Banks over the years in Fiji have been involved in financial innovation. We remember the use 
of old pass books. Banks have been aggressive in introducing new financial products and 
services. We now have the ATMs, EFTPOS and internet banking.  
The Reserve Bank of Fiji in collaboration with the banking sector is focusing on innovative 
ways  of  reducing  costs  of  doing  business  for  the  commercial  banks with  the  emphasis  on 
lowering costs of financial services to be more accessible and affordable to everyone. The 
introduction of revolutionary products can contribute to financial deepening which in turn will 
ensure that more people have access to affordable and appropriate financial services and 
products. One has been the growing number of ATMs around the main urban centers. The 
good news is that now the ATM’s and EFTPOS machines are interoperable, meaning that a 
customer  from  one  bank  can  use  the  machine  of  another  bank  to  conduct  their  banking 
transactions,  except  for  one  bank.  We  are  delighted  with  the  recent  introduction  and  the 
distribution  of  wireless  operated  ETPOS  machines  which  can  be  operated  without  a 
telephone line. These along with smart card products are some of the new tools of the trade 
that help to decentralize and make financial services more accessible.  
I  wish  to  take  this  opportunity  to  express  my  sincere  gratitude  for  the  commitment  and 
collaboration shown by the commercial banks, towards achieving 90 percent interoperability 
to  date.  Ladies  and  Gentleman  this  ensures  any  bank  card  can  be  used  at  any  EFTPOS 
machine at any supermarket, service station or any retail outlet in the country. An important 
component  of  this  initiative  is  ensuring  interchange  fees  are  affordable  and  properly 
disclosed by the banks and the Reserve Bank will be monitoring this closely.  
Developments in the banking industry  
Let me now touch on other developments involving the banking industry.  
Local Advisory Boards  
The Reserve Bank has been working closely with the banks, to ensure alignment and greater 
focus.  
In 2009, a Local Advisory Board (LAB) policy was issued by the RBF. The Policy requires 
Banks’ who are foreign branches to establish LAB’s that are mandated to provide advice and 
guidance to the Head of the Fiji Operations on Fiji’s regulatory and supervisory environment. 
Other  focus  areas  for  these  LAB’s  include  national  development  objectives,  particularly 
providing financial services to the wider community.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Level of fees & charges  
Following  the  deregulation  of  the  Fijian  financial  system,  bank  fees  and  charges  have 
become part of the Fijian banking landscape.  
We  note  that  the  Commerce  Commission  is  currently  undertaking  a  study  of  the  financial 
sector in Fiji to examine whether fees and charges are set in a competitive environment or if 
banks  have  a  substantive  market  power.  I  urge  banks  to  come  to  the  table  and  take  a 
wholistic  and  collaborative  approach  to  this  matter.  We  are  confident  that  in  this  spirit  a 
balanced  outcome  will  be  achieved  for  all  stakeholders:  banks,  their  customers,  the 
prudential supervisor, the economy and the Government.  
The Reserve Bank has been since June last year working closely with banks to enhance the 
disclosure of their fees and charges. The revised policy will be implemented in August this 
year and will ensure not only greater disclosure standards particularly in terms of consistency 
and transparency but equally important, accountability, primarily on the level and justification 
for fees and charges.  
The  Reserve  Bank  also  issued  the  Banking  Supervision  Policy  Statement  Number  17: 
Interest  Spread  Disclosure  Statement  and  this  requires  commercial  banks  to  publicly 
disclose  any  increase  in  interest  rate  spreads  beyond  the  previously  regulated  limit  of 
4 percent for any given quarter. In addition to disclosing the actual interest rate spread, the 
bank  will  also  be  required  to  disclose  the  specific  reasons.  The  objective  of  the  policy 
guideline is to ensure banks are transparent and accountable for any increase in interest rate 
spread.  
In  2006  following  the  introduction  of  the  Financial  Transactions  Reporting  Act  and  the 
establishment of the Financial Intelligence Unit at the RBF, I am pleased to say that we have 
received  very  encouraging  support  and  cooperation  from  the  commercial  banks  who 
continue  to  work  closely  with  the  RBF,  FIU  and  law  enforcement  agencies  in  combating 
money laundering and other fraudulent activities in Fiji.  
In  2009  a  policy  on  the  Complaints  Management  Framework  was  issued  by  the  Reserve 
Bank.  We  have  since  been  able  to  monitor  the  manner  in  which  customer  complaints  are 
handled by the banks and are pleased with the way in which they collaborated in resolving or 
in addressing the complaints.  
Promoting financial inclusion  
Financial Inclusion is the new buzz word and its significance cannot be undermined. Whilst 
there has been no detailed study done here in Fiji, there is ample evidence to suggest from 
other  countries  that  limited  access  to  basic  financial  services  such  as  savings,  loans 
products,  payments  and  micro-insurance  to  the  poor  and  the  unbanked  tends  to  restrain 
economic growth and development in any country.  
One  of  the  major  focal  areas  that  the  Reserve  Bank  is  championing  is  greater  financial 
inclusion in Fiji. A range of new initiatives have been implemented by the Reserve Bank in 
partnership  with  relevant  stakeholders  over  the  last  two  years  to  achieve  this  goal.  The 
commercial  banks  have  been  an  integral  partner  of  this  process  as  the  banks  are  well 
positioned to offer financial services to a broader range of customers due to their extensive 
branch network, strong resource backing and experience.  
National Microfinance Workshops  
As most of you are aware, in 2009 a National Microfinance Workshop was organized by the 
Reserve Bank of Fiji with support from the Pacific Financial Inclusion Programme (PFIP). A 
key outcome that was agreed upon at this workshop was the commitment by participants to a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
common vision of “reaching at least 150,000 unbanked citizens through a coordinated 
national effort by the year 2014”.  
A National Financial Inclusion Taskforce was then set up to monitor and drive strategies in 
achieving the medium term financial inclusion goals Furthermore three working groups were 
also  established  to  support  the  Taskforce  in  the  areas  of  financial  literacy,  statistics  and 
microfinance.  The  banks  have  been  very  forthcoming  and  are  represented  at  all  the  three 
working groups and at the National Taskforce level.  
The banks have also participated at all the RBF Microfinance expos which have been held in 
various centers around Fiji.  
Conclusion  
Let me conclude by thanking everyone today for taking time off from your busy Saturday to 
visit this banking expo. This is a very good opportunity for everyone to talk to the banks and 
give them your feedback on how you would like them to serve you better. Not only that, also 
learn of what they have to offer in terms of financial services and products.  
Commercial banks provide a valuable service to the people of Fiji and are strategic partners 
of  economic  development  and  change.  We  need  them  as  much  as  they  need  us.  There 
however  is  a  need  to  work  together  in  creating  more  accessible  and  affordable  financial 
services not only in the urban areas but also in the rural and outer islands that do not have 
such fundamental services.  
I applaud the Association of Banks in Fiji (ABIF) for staging this one day expo.  
I  wish  each  one  of  you  an  enjoyable  and  productive  day  and  I  declare  the  Expo  officially 
open.  
Vinaka and Dhanyabaad  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
