Prasarn Trairatvorakul: Bank of Thailand’s policy direction in 2011 
Speech  by  Dr  Prasarn  Trairatvorakul,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the  Bank  of 
Thailand, Bangkok, 26 January 2011. 
 With retrospect, the year 2010 testified to the strength and resilience of the Thai economy. 
Economic activity was able to continue uninterrupted, despite various unfavourable shocks 
such as political unrest, volatile capital flows, flood, and delayed economic recovery in some 
advanced  economies.  Policy  measures,  both  monetary  and  fiscal,  had  been  supporting 
factors. The economy expanded by as much as 8 per cent in 2010 as a result.  
Given  the  strong  growth  momentum  and  solid  economic  fundamentals,  the  Thai economic 
growth is expected to expand at 3–5 per cent this year. This pace of growth is consistent with 
the long-term potential growth of the economy, and is an indication that the economic activity 
has  returned  to  its  normal,  more  balanced  state.  This  is  in  contrast  with  the  catching  up 
episode last year, characterized by extraordinary growth rate. 
As the economy operates closer to its potential, the demand pressure on prices will begin to 
accumulate, and consequently inflation is projected to be higher than those registered in the 
last couple of years. The rising costs, stemming largely from commodity prices, can further 
add to upward pressure on prices. Upside risks to inflation should return to focus this year, 
while the downside risks to growth should continue to abate. Meanwhile, many risk factors of 
the previous year may continue to pose threat. For example, episodes of volatile capital flows 
may return, while the economy’s long-term competitiveness remains in need of improvement.  
Policy objectives in 2011 
The Bank of Thailand envisages two economic policy objectives this year: (1) to safeguard 
macroeconomic  stability,  and  (2)  to  continue  strengthening  underlying  fundamentals  of  the 
economy.  Both  objectives  should  be  interpreted  in  the  broad  sense,  for  example, 
macroeconomic  stability  entails  price  stability, 
fiscal 
sustainability. Likewise, strong economic fundamentals encapsulate resilient private sector, 
efficient public sector, and sound banking sector among others. Given these broad goals, the 
Bank of Thailand and everyone all have parts to  play. The government, for example, is in 
charge  of  ensuring  a  sustainable  fiscal  position  in  the  long-term,  and  an  efficient 
disbursement of budget so as to best strengthen the economy. 
financial  stability,  as  well  as 
Monetary policy 
Maintaining economic  balance  is  key  to  the  making  of  monetary  policy,  as  it is  one  of  the 
most important pre-requisites of macroeconomic stability. In practice, this means that as the 
economic activity returns to normalcy, monetary policy stance must similarly be normalized. 
Failure  to  do  so  will  add  undue  pressure  on  inflation,  ultimately  posing  risks  to 
macroeconomic stability. Thus this year, the monetary policy committee (MPC) will need to 
continue normalizing monetary policy. 
The amount and pacing of policy interest rate adjustments this year will be consistent with 
the outlook for growth and inflation as well as the surrounding risks. As always, the policy 
decisions will be grounded on informed and prudent deliberation by the MPC, with an aim of 
keeping  core  inflation  within  the  target  band  as  mandated  by  law.  Because  many  shocks, 
both of temporary and structural nature, cannot be foreseen, it is difficult to say beforehand 
what  level  of  policy  interest  rate  should  be  appropriate  for  this  year.  However,  sustained 
negative  real  interest  rates  are  usually  not  consistent  with  fostering  economic  balance. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Timely adjustments in policy interest rate will help keep inflation pressure in check, which in 
turn lead to low and sustainable borrowing costs in the long run. 
The  Bank  of  Thailand  has  taken  steps  to  enhance  the  transparency  of  Monetary  policy 
making, by announcing the MPC voting result together with the statement for the first time 
early this month. The first minutes of the meeting has also been released this morning. It is 
hoped that these information will help businesses and households understand the rationales 
behind  the  MPC  policy  decisions,  and  enable  them  to  make  better  and  more  informed 
economic decisions. 
Exchange rate policy 
The Bank of Thailand adheres to our policy framework, where exchange rate is not a policy 
instrument and hence is market-determined. However, recognizing the risks of high volatility 
in  capital  movements  looking  ahead,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  has  followed  a  three-part 
approach. 
The first is to develop a systematic capital flows master plan, with sequencing appropriate for 
the development of the Thai economy and the evolving international financial market. Part of 
this plan is to relax regulations that hinder Thai residents from investing abroad, in order to 
foster more balanced capital flows. 
Secondly,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  will  encourage  the  use  of  appropriate  financial  hedging 
instruments,  in  order  to  strengthen  the  risk  management  capability  of  the  private  sector, 
especially the small and medium-sized businesses. Given the possibility of more volatility in 
the  financial  market  looking  ahead  including  the  exchange  rate,  those  businesses  with 
sufficient hedging capacity will be able to absorb shocks better.  
In  preparation  for  any  extreme  event  with  respect  to  capital  flow’s  volatility  that  may  pose 
risks to the economic stability as a whole, the Bank of Thailand has prepared various options 
of  regulating  capital  flows,  with  varying  degrees  of  control.  This  constitutes  the  third  plan. 
These three-pronged plans should ensure that the Thai economy has enough resilience and 
safeguard to meet challenges of capital flows. 
implementation  of  monetary  policy  requires  a  strong  system  of 
Financial institutions policy 
Effective 
financial 
intermediaries.  An  important  characteristic  of  strong  financial  institutions  is  the  ability  to 
recognize and adapt swiftly to changes in the financial environment, domestic and abroad. 
For  example,  the  ongoing  process  of  economic  and  financial  globalization  will  bring  about 
ever closer interconnectedness and more volatility that will continue to challenge businesses 
and financial institutions. Meanwhile, the advent of modern financial tools, while enhancing 
the  risk  management  capability  for  businesses,  can  also  bring  about  closer  and  more 
complex integration between the capital market, the money market as well as the insurance 
industry.  On  the  other  hand,  from  the  perspectives  of  consumers  themselves,  greater 
demand for funds and financial services is often constrained by limited financial access.  
The  appropriate  course  of  policy  on  financial  institutions  must  take  into  consideration 
challenges  posed  by  these  trends  of  changes.  In  this  context,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  sees 
three policy priorities going forward: (1) to preserve the soundness of the financial institution 
system, (2) to enhance the efficiency of financial intermediation, and (3) to place emphasis 
on consumer protection. 
The  soundness  of  financial  institutions  is  the  major  foundation  of  macroeconomic  stability. 
Currently,  financial  institutions  are  in  top  conditions,  with  NPL  ratio  last  year  as  low  as 
3.6 despite  credit  expansion  of  11.3  per  cent.  Banks’  capital  is  also  much  higher  than 
recommended international standards. This strong soundness must be preserved. The Bank 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
of  Thailand  will  continue  to  apply  micro-prudential  approach  to  the  regulation  of  financial 
institutions,  to  ensure  that  financial  institutions  put  in  place  appropriate  risk  management 
framework, are prudent in extending credits, and maintain sufficient level of capital according 
to new international standards such as the Basel III guideline.  
The  recent  global  economic  crisis  highlights  the  importance  of  extending  the  coverage  of 
supervision  to  foster  the  soundness  of  system  as  a  whole,  in  addition  to  individual 
institutions. “Systemic risk”, in particular, can pose serious threat to macroeconomic stability 
at large. The Bank of Thailand has taken steps to guard against the potential development of 
such  risk,  by  establishing  macro-surveillance  framework  that  provides  early  warning  about 
areas  that  may  be  under  threat.  In  practice,  Thailand  is  also  among  the  first  countries  to 
implement “macro-prudential policy”, the application of supervisory and regulatory policy in 
pursuit of system-wide financial stability. 
The second policy priority is to continue enhancing the efficiency of financial intermediation. 
The  Bank  of  Thailand will  encourage  a  more widespread provision  of  hedging  instruments 
and will seek to improve financial access especially for small and medium-sized businesses 
and retail customers. In addition, for businesses, people and government agencies to receive 
fast,  safe  and  efficient  payment  services,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  will  work  with  all  related 
parties  to  promote  electronic  payments  such  as  using  money  transfer  instead  of  cheque 
usage and using debit card instead of cash payment, which would reduce payment costs and 
allow  government  and  businesses  to  manage  cash  more  efficiently.  The  goal  is  to  ensure 
that all parts of the economy benefit from the strong and stable financial system, an aspect of 
what constitutes an “inclusive growth”. 
The  third  and  last  policy  element  is  consumer  protection.  Consumers  of  financial  services 
have  the  rights  to  good  quality  of  services  and  fair  protection.  The  Bank  of  Thailand 
encourages  financial  institutions  to  disclose  all  relevant  information,  including  fees,  to 
consumers before providing services to them. Financial institutions should also educate their 
customers, and provide financial services that are suitable both in terms of business and risk 
management  capability  of  the  customers,  followed  by  dedicated  after-sales  services. 
Improvements along these lines will further strengthen growth inclusiveness.  
Other policies 
The Bank of Thailand will also seek to strengthen the economy through its other functions. In 
managing  international  reserves,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  advocates  further  diversification  by 
expanding the investment asset universe, as permitted by the new royal decree. The Bank of 
Thailand  also  supports  a  speedy  repayment  of  outstanding  FIDF  debt,  based  on  the 
principles of monetary policy independence and long-term fiscal discipline.  
While monetary and financial stability certainly provide a favourable backdrop, the economy 
cannot prosper on the back of these alone. The nation’s competitiveness, in particular, needs 
to be strengthened and improved further. The private sector should continue to place greater 
emphasis on innovation and seek to compete on the basis of quality rather than prices. The 
public  sector,  meanwhile,  must  ensure  that  a  sufficient  part  of  budget  is  set  aside  for 
infrastructure investment on a sustained basis, which will help improve the productivity and 
benefit  all  parts  of  the  economy  in  the  long  run.  Joint  efforts  by  all  sides  are  needed  to 
achieve  our  common  goals  of  macroeconomic  stability  and  economic  strength  and 
prosperity. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
