Andreas Dombret: Private equity and Basel III 
Keynote  speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the 12th BVK German Private Equity Day, Berlin, 12 May 2011. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Ladies and gentlemen  
Thank you very much for your invitation to the 12th German Private Equity Day. I am, as ever, 
impressed  by  the  atmosphere  in  the  wonderfully  designed  glass  courtyard  of  the  Jewish 
Museum.  It  is  certainly  a  step  ahead  of  the  international  financial  system  in  terms  of  the 
abundance of light and transparency. In this, the largest global financial and economic crisis 
in  decades,  we  are  becoming  painfully  aware  of  just  how  many  dark  corners  and  opaque 
areas of the financial sector there are.   
In order to prevent similar developments in the future, several important reform steps have 
been  agreed,  for  instance  the  new  capital  and  liquidity  requirements  generally  known  as 
Basel III. Other important measures, for instance to monitor what is generally described as 
the  “shadow  banking  system”,  have  been  initiated.  Of  all  the  new  rules,  the  European 
Directive on Alternative Investment Fund Managers is doubtless of most interest to private 
equity  companies.  It  is  to  establish the  regulatory  framework  for  alternative  investments  in 
the European Union from mid-2013 onwards. I am convinced that it will not only impose new 
duties  on  private  equity  companies.  Indeed,  greater  transparency  and  improved  sales 
possibilities represent a large opportunity, particularly for private equity firms.   
I  would  like  to  start  my  presentation  by  briefly  discussing  private  equity’s  macroeconomic 
importance. I will subsequently outline what has been achieved so far in terms of financial 
sector reform, focusing mainly on those regulatory initiatives that are of particular relevance 
to the private equity industry. And lastly, I will attempt to shed some light on the issue of the 
“shadow banking system”.  
On the significance of private equity  
2. 
On the long road towards a post-crisis world in which there is a greater distinction between 
equity and debt and the two are – as is appropriate – perceived differently, I am sure there is 
no need to reiterate the economic benefits of private equity. Private equity’s positive role as a 
form of equity is obvious. As you know, private equity can be provided in all phases of an 
enterprise’s  life  cycle,  from  venture  capital  to  financing  growth  right  up  to  buy-outs.  In 
Germany,  the  many  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises  that  form  the  backbone  of  the 
German economy are the main beneficiaries of the equity capital that your industry provides. 
Countries  with  a  greater  share  of  private  equity  investment  also,  on  average,  have  higher 
growth rates.1 Private equity is also an important variable for the German labour market: BVK 
statistics show that, at the end of 2010, German portfolio enterprises in which private equity 
companies were invested employed some 1.2 million people.2  
As for the financial sector as a whole, the last few years were not exactly rosy for private 
equity  companies  either.  Investments  by  private  equity  companies,  which  had  plummeted 
during the crisis, are now, however, showing signs of recovery. In 2010, new investments by 
                                                 
1   See  Meyer  (2006):  Private  Equity:  Spice  for  European  Economies,  Journal  of  Financial  Transformation, 
Vol 18, November, pp 61–69. 
2   See BVK statistics – The year 2010 in figures, March 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
private  equity  firms  in  Germany  rose  by  almost  60%  year-on-year  to  stand  at  €4.4  billion. 
Capital invested by German private equity companies thus totalled just under €36 billion last 
year.  At  roughly  0.1%  of  German  GDP  in  2009,  investments  are,  however,  still  relatively 
insignificant. Moreover, they are below the European average of just under 0.2% of GDP.3 
However,  that  also  demonstrates  the  growth  potential  of  the  German  market  for  private 
capital. Generally speaking, growth always requires a stable environment, and that brings me 
to the reform of the international financial system. 
3. 
Reform of the international financial system: the road towards new regulation 
It is clear that we must do all we possibly can to prevent a repeat of the global financial and 
economic crisis that has been keeping us enthralled for some four years now. Reform of the 
institutional and regulatory framework of the international financial system is therefore in full 
swing; and it has doubtless already been improved significantly in key areas.  
Besides creating greater transparency, a central aspect of the ongoing reform is to increase 
the quality and quantity of financial institutions’ equity capital. The new capital and liquidity 
standards for the banking sector were discussed at length; they will go into the post-crisis 
text  books  as  “Basel  III”.  The  new  rules  will  ensure  that  capital  requirements  rise 
considerably – in terms of both quantity and quality. To ensure that financial institutions have 
a better liquidity cushion in future and are less vulnerable even in periods of stress, the first-
time introduction of global liquidity standards has been agreed.  
The  G20,  at  their  meeting  in  Seoul  in  November  of  last  year,  committed  themselves  to 
implementing  the  new  standards.  This  voluntary  agreement  must  now  be  fulfilled,  and  an 
internationally consistent implementation of the agreements must be assured. 
Another subject that is closely associated with Basel III is already being tackled: the right way 
to  deal  with  systemically  important  financial  institutions.  Such  institutions,  called  SIFIs  for 
short, are defined as particularly large, particularly complex and/or particularly interconnected 
institutions  or  as  those  that  exercise  specific  functions  that  other  market  players  cannot 
easily take on. The insolvency of SIFIs is therefore regarded as virtually intolerable. 
Back at the Seoul Summit, the G20 accepted a comprehensive concept on how to deal with 
SIFIs  put  forward  by  the  Financial  Stability  Board.  Work  on  specifying  the  individual 
recommendations is currently being pursued as a matter of urgency, and the final framework 
is to be ready at the latest by the next G20 Summit in Cannes in November. Here, too, the 
focus  lies  on  increasing  the  quantity  of  capital  held,  as  a  central  component  of  the  FSB 
concept are systemic capital surcharges for SIFIs that go well beyond the requirements of 
Basel III. These surcharges can take the form of a higher tier 1 capital ratio or contingent 
capital,  ie  debt  that  converts  into  equity  if  the  institution  becomes  distressed,  for  example 
contingent convertibles.  
These  are  all  important  steps  towards  enhancing  individual  institutions’  resilience  through 
more and better-quality capital. They simultaneously strengthen the resilience of the financial 
system as a whole. At the same time, the regulations must not overshoot their objective and 
cause  disproportionately  high  macroeconomic  costs.  However,  I  do  not  think  that  will 
happen.  For  instance,  a  joint  Basel  Committee  and  FSB  working  group  analysed  the 
macroeconomic  impact  of  the  proposed  stricter  regulatory  standards  during  the  transition 
                                                 
3  See EVCA/PEREP Analytics, 
http://www.evca.eu/uploadedFiles/Home/Knowledge_Center/EVCA_Research/Statistics/4_3_Investment/YB1
0_Private_equity_investment_as_a_percentage_of_GDP.pdf. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
period.  It  concluded  that  while  the  transition  to  stricter  capital  and  liquidity  standards  will 
cause slightly higher capital costs, the impact on economic growth should be small overall.4 
Nonetheless,  there  is  no  denying  that  implementing  Basel  III  will  cause  more  intense 
competition for funds. For leverage in the banking system overall to drop, more capital will be 
required.  At  the  same  time,  the  crisis  has  raised  all  market  participants’  risk  awareness. 
Although the possibility of another exaggerated “search for yield” cannot be generally ruled 
out in future, risk managers can initially be expected to take a more critical stance. My next 
point is directly related to that: I am firmly convinced that investors will tend to spread their 
risk even more than they do at present; investments will therefore be more diversified and 
also smaller overall. Finally, I believe that “covenant lite” structures have seen their heyday. 
In  a  nutshell,  this  means,  especially  for  private  equity  companies:  more  banks  involved, 
smaller  credit  volumes  and  more  security!  Not  a  bad  new  formula  for  the  economy,  in  my 
view.  
Reforming  the  financial  system  will  therefore  lead  to  structural  change  overall,  which  will 
affect private equity firms not exclusively, but particularly noticeably. As always, this creates 
new challenges as well as new opportunities. In the following, I will mainly focus on the new 
opportunities that I believe are opening up in the single European market.  
Where do we stand in terms of regulation of the private equity industry? 
4. 
Before I start, let me say that the European Union is a pioneer in the regulation of alternative 
investments! The European Directive on Alternative Investment Fund Managers (AIFM) has 
now  been  passed  and  is  to  be  the  regulatory  framework  for  alternative  investments  in  the 
European Union from mid-2013 onwards. In the United States, private equity funds are also 
to be subjected to higher registration and transparency requirements, although the details of 
the Dodd-Frank Act, which was passed in the United States, on this issue are not yet known. 
I  do  not  believe,  however,  that  the  United  States  will  present  any  major  new  standards  in 
terms of the surveillance and regulation of the private equity industry.  
While the European AIFM Directive does go significantly further than the Dodd-Frank Act, it 
does not go too far, in my opinion. First, it outlines general requirements for all alternative 
investment fund managers. These core provisions include registration and information duties 
vis-à-vis  the  competent  supervisory  authorities,  minimum  capital  requirements,  disclosure 
requirements  towards  investors  and  targeted  organisational  and  operational  stipulations. 
Moreover, private equity fund managers will be subject to specific information duties when 
investing  in  a  non-listed  company.  Second,  asset  stripping  will,  in  future,  be  banned  for  a 
certain period after the acquisition of control – subjecting it to a “retention period”. In a bid to 
strengthen the single European market, the AIFM Directive also introduces an EU passport 
allowing  alternative  investment  fund  managers  to  market  alternative  investment  funds  to 
professional investors throughout Europe.  
In  a  single  European  market  for  financial  services,  a  harmonised  set  of  requirements  is 
indispensable. Moreover, corporate governance and investor protection should be improved. 
The AIFM  Directive makes an important contribution to all these points. As I have already 
explained, this does not only entail duties – it also creates large opportunities. For instance, 
the introduction of an EU passport further improves private equity funds’ marketing options. 
Moreover,  enhanced  transparency  is  likely  to  strengthen  investors’  confidence  in  private 
equity firms. This could place the debate on private equity, often very emotional in the past, 
on a more rational footing.  
                                                 
4   Macroeconomic Assessment Group, Assessing the macroeconomic impact of the transition to stronger capital 
and liquidity requirements, August 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
In summary: I believe that the AIFM Directive makes an important contribution to regulating 
alternative  investments  in  the  European  Union.  The  benefits  of  the  directive  should  far 
exceed the costs that regulation imposes on those involved. I am certain that your industry 
will adapt easily to the new rules and make the most of the resulting opportunities. 
Beyond Basel III: the new regulations and the shadow banking system 
5. 
Although the G20 reform agenda has largely been successfully implemented, there is still a 
long  way  to  go  before  the  international  financial  system  can  be  compared  with  the 
transparent  glass  courtyard  in  which  we  find  ourselves  today.  As  a  “guardian  of  financial 
stability”, I am particularly interested in the “dark corners” of the financial sector: the “shadow 
banking system”.  
Before  I  start  and  by  way  of  introduction,  I  would  like  to  stress  that  bank-like  transactions 
outside of the banking sector should not per se be regarded as a bad thing, even if this might 
be implied by the common – but in my opinion misleading – term “shadow banking system”. 
There  may  well  be  advantages  in  certain  activities  being  carried  out  by  specialised 
enterprises rather than banks or in banks outsourcing these activities to them – provided the 
specialists are indeed better at managing the associated risks. The shadow banking system 
should  therefore  certainly  not  be  treated  with  disdain  or  seen  as  criminal,  nor  should  its 
activities be prohibited. 
Rather,  the  objective  is  for  financial  supervisors  to  have  at  their  disposal  sufficient 
information  on  any  activities  which  could  jeopardise  the  stability  of  the  financial  system. 
Amongst  others,  stricter  regulation of  banks  will  provide  them  with  an  incentive  to  transfer 
activities  or  assets  to  less  regulated  areas.  This  must  not  mean  that  these  risks  move  off 
supervisors’ radar screen. It is therefore indispensable that the shadow banking system be 
monitored in addition to the regulated banking system. At this point, I would like to explicitly 
promote  greater  transparency.  Of  course,  I  am  aware  that  more  extensive  reporting 
requirements entail higher costs; however, given the potential systemic risks emanating from 
the shadow banking system, I believe that such a price is more than justified.  
In  particular,  those  involved  must  provide  insightful  reporting  and  meaningful  statistics.  To 
date, the size of the shadow banking system could only be estimated based on the national 
accounts.  This  puts  the  size  of  the  German  shadow  banking  system  –  definitions  are 
naturally  difficult  here,  I  will  nevertheless  make  a  cautious  estimate  subject  to  the  usual 
reservations  –  at  around  17%  of  the  assets  of  the  banking  sector.  However,  this  includes 
investment funds in general; excluding them, the figure would be less than 4%. In any case, 
its volume would be far lower than in the United States, where the shadow banking system is 
larger than the banking sector itself according to first estimates by the New York Fed.  
Good  oversight  also  makes  it  easier  to  check  whether  regulatory  requirements  are 
appropriate.  The  responsible  bodies  will  not  take  action  for  action’s  sake;  in  my  view, 
regulation is not intended to restrict market activity, but to contain risks to the stability of the 
financial  system.  This  also  means  that  we  will  prevent  any  flouting  of  the  stricter  banking 
regulations set forth in Basel III and the planned regulations for SIFIs. Comparable activities 
and risks must be subject to comparable regulation. After all, all market players benefit from 
greater financial stability. 
What players are in the light, which in the shadows? The answer to this question is likely to 
be  of  particular  interest  to  the  present  audience.  However,  the  interested  public  is  also 
demanding  an  answer 
this  question,  and  confusion  and  misinterpretation  are 
commonplace. I would therefore like to take this opportunity to make a contribution to this 
ongoing debate and provide a basic classification of private equity. At the behest of the G20, 
the  FSB  is  currently  drawing  up  recommendations  to  monitor  and  regulate  the  shadow 
banking  system.  And  this  committee  recently  defined  what  that  means,  namely  “credit 
intermediation  involving  entities  and  activities  outside  the  regular  banking  system”.  This 
to 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
credit  intermediation  can  involve  non-banks  such  as  special  purpose  vehicles  and  money 
market  funds.  However,  the  definition  also  comprises  activities  such  as,  for  instance, 
securitisations. It is my firm conviction that this does not include the private equity business 
model  in  its  pure  form.  This  is  quite  obvious  in  my  opinion,  as  private  equity  companies 
provide  equity  capital.  It  is  also  worth  mentioning  that  the  situation  is  very  similar  for 
sovereign  wealth  funds  if  they  invest  in  participating  interests  in  enterprises,  but  in  return 
provide equity rather than debt.  
In  a  nutshell:  whether  an  enterprise  or  a  fund  is  classified  as  belonging  to  the  shadow 
banking  system  depends  not  so  much  on  its  name  as  on  its  activities.  For  precisely  this 
reason, some money market funds are included in the shadow banking system. In the run-up 
to the crisis, they, in particular, helped fund real estate loans in the United States by investing 
in asset backed commercial paper issued by special purpose vehicles to finance securitised 
real  estate  loans.  Hedge  funds,  too,  at  least  constitute  links  in  the  intermediation  chain 
outside of the banking sector. After all, they gather funds and invest these in bonds and other 
credit  instruments,  including  the  associated  derivatives.  Consequently,  as  the  distinction 
between hybrid private equity funds and hedge funds is blurred and the former partly operate 
under  the  umbrella  of  hedge  funds,  they  too  belong  to  the  shadow  banking  system.  This 
requires  increased  vigilance,  as  the  number  of  structures  established  under  their  umbrella 
appears to be rising as first evasive action is taken. 
Now, before you get uneasy – where regulation is concerned, I am generally opposed to ill-
considered  action  for  action’s  sake,  and  this  is  no  exception.  When  identifying,  monitoring 
and, where appropriate, later introducing regulation, the primary objective is to contain those 
lending-related  risks  that  are  systemic  and  therefore  relevant  to  financial  stability.  Future 
regulation  should  be  strictly  based  on  the  degree  of  risk  inherent  in  the  activities  of  the 
respective financial corporations. 
Summary 
6. 
The general public may hardly have noticed, but those responsible for regulation have long 
since become active. For instance, parts of the shadow banking system have been subject to 
regulation  for  some  time.  Elsewhere,  regulation  has  been  improved  since  the  onset  of  the 
crisis. One example is the introduction at EU level of the 5% retention rule for securitisations. 
However,  it  is  also  already  evident  that  merely  illuminating  specific  areas  of  the  shadow 
banking system and a one-off regulation drive will not suffice. After all, it is impossible at the 
current juncture to foresee all financial innovations and evasion strategies which may occur 
in  the  future,  for  instance  in  response  to  Basel  III.  Further  adjustments  will  therefore  be 
necessary. Even in a glass structure, light and shadow shift as the sun moves across the 
sky. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
