Durmuş Yilmaz: Recent economic and financial developments in Turkey 
Opening  speech  by  Mr  Durmuş  Yilmaz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Republic  of 
Turkey, at the 79th Ordinary Meeting of the General Assembly, Ankara, 12 April 2011. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Esteemed  Shareholders,  Distinguished  Guests  and  Members  of  the  Press, 
Welcome to the 79th Ordinary Meeting of the General Assembly of the Central Bank of the 
Republic of Turkey. 
2. 
I would like to start my speech with a brief evaluation of the international economic 
developments in the aftermath of the global economic crisis. Later on, I will summarize the 
key macroeconomic developments that took place in Turkey in 2010. Finally, I will share my 
evaluations pertaining to the recent monetary policy implementations of our Bank and their 
effects. 
Global economic developments 
Distinguished Guests, 
3. 
In  2010,  the  growth  discrepancy  between  advanced  and  emerging  economies 
became more pronounced while the global economy continued to recover. In the post-crisis 
period,  economic  growth  in  emerging  economies  has  been  robust,  and  mainly  driven  by 
domestic  demand.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  most  of  these  economies  have  already  surpassed 
their  pre-crisis  production  levels.  Amid  the  fast  recovery,  output  gaps  in  these  economies 
have tended to close, and employment conditions have significantly improved. 
4. 
Meanwhile,  advanced  economies,  the  epicenter  of  the  crisis,  have  continued  to 
exhibit a slow and gradual recovery. Downside risks regarding the pace of recovery in these 
economies have yet to completely disappear, albeit having gradually waned. As a matter of 
fact,  the  contribution  of  private  consumption  and  investment  spending  to  the  recovery  in 
advanced  economies  has  not  currently  reached  the  desired  level.  The  ongoing  balance-
sheet  restructuring  across  households  and  firms,  and  the  consequent  slow  and  protracted 
recovery  in  employment  and  credit  conditions  put  a  cap  on  private  consumption  and 
investment.  Furthermore,  persisting  and  mounting  concerns  over  the  sustainability  of 
sovereign debt continue to pose downside risks on global economic activity, especially in the 
euro  area.  The  growing  discrepancy  between  advanced  and  emerging  economies,  which 
became more pronounced in the post-crisis period, is expected to continue for an extended 
period of time. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  
 
5. 
The  divergence  in  the  pace  of  recovery  between  these  two  country  groups  has 
undoubtedly significant implications for inflation and monetary policy. Yet, before moving on 
to global inflation and the monetary policy outlook, I find it useful to mention the upward trend 
in  commodity  prices  observed  with  the  recovery  process  since  this  upsurge  is  becoming 
even more significant for both the global inflation outlook and the monetary policy.  
The  recovery  in  global  economic  activity  has  also  been  manifested  in  commodity 
6. 
prices,  and the  upward  trend  in  commodity  prices,  which  started  following  the  peak  of  the 
crisis,  continued  throughout  2010.  In  this  period,  the  strong  course  of  economic  activity  in 
China  and  India,  two  countries  that  account  for  a  significant  share  of  global  commodity 
demand, reinforced the upward trend in commodity prices. This trend gained pace especially 
in the second half of the year. 
7. 
Crude  oil  and  agricultural  commodity  prices  which  are  critical  for  emerging 
economies  as  well  as  Turkey,  increased  sharply  amid  the  global  economic  recovery.  The 
reluctance  of  OPEC  countries  to  raise  quotas  and  reduction  of  over  production  by  some 
member countries bolstered the rise in oil prices. Moreover, recent political tensions in the 
Middle  East  and  North  Africa  accelerated  the  upward  trend  in  oil  prices.  Adverse  weather 
conditions in major parts of the world in the second half of the year had affected the energy 
and agricultural prices from demand and supply side respectively, posing additional upward 
pressure on prices. 
8. 
Besides increases in oil and agricultural commodity prices, 2010 was also marked 
by ongoing price increases in industrial and precious metals. The upward trend in the prices 
of precious metals in this period was primarily driven by the fact that investors use precious 
metals  as  a  hedge  against  inflation  and  economic  risks.  In  addition  to  these  factors,  the 
ample liquidity fuelled by the ongoing quantitative easing in 2010 by major central banks in 
addition to the increased inflationary risks raised the investment demand for commodities by 
underpinning price movements in the short term. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 
9. 
The  upward  trend  in  commodity  prices  poses  an  upside  risk  on  inflation  in  both 
advanced and emerging economies. As a matter of fact, the effect of the recent increases in 
commodity prices has been materialized on inflation in many countries and more primarily in 
emerging  economies.  One  reason  for  this  is  the  higher  share  of  food  and  energy  in  the 
consumption  basket  in  emerging  economies  compared  to  that  of  advanced  economies. 
Another reason is the rapidly closing output gaps amid the strong course of economic activity 
in emerging economies causing higher pass through of commodity driven supply-side shocks 
to prices. Hence, advanced and emerging economies diverge significantly not only in terms 
of economic activity, but also in terms of inflation outlook.  
 
 
10. 
This  divergence  between  growth  and  inflation  outlook  also  led  to  differences  in 
monetary  policy  practices  between  advanced  and  emerging  economies  in  2010.  In  this 
period, central banks of advanced economies focused on supporting the economic recovery 
and speeding up the improvement in employment and credit conditions. Accordingly, the low 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
level  of  interest  rates  in  advanced  economies  was  maintained,  and  monetary  easing 
continued in 2010 as well.  
11. 
Ample liquidity as a result of low interest rates and the ongoing quantitative easing 
in  advanced  economies  encouraged  global  investors  to  seek  higher  returns  and  demand 
risky assets. Consequently, emerging economies experienced a surge of capital flows. The 
divergence between the pace of recovery in advanced and emerging economies in favor of 
emerging  economies,  as  well  as  the  permanent  improvement  of  the  risk  sentiment  for 
emerging economies in the post-crisis period also supported these capital inflows. Indeed, 
the fact that the risk premium indicators in many emerging economies including Turkey are 
below pre-crisis levels, and the consequent upgrades by credit rating agencies indicate the 
permanent change in risk sentiment for these countries.  
 
  
12. 
As  a  result  of  capital  inflows,  emerging  market  currencies  appreciated  and  asset 
prices  rose  sharply.  Furthermore,  capital  inflows  in  emerging  economies  raised  concerns 
over financial stability by fuelling domestic demand and thus causing rapid credit growth. 
13. 
Under  these  circumstances,  central  banks  of  emerging  economies  focused  on 
containing  upside  risks  on  inflation  amid  the  strong  rise  in  domestic  demand  as  well  as 
limiting  financial  risks  due  to  massive  capital  flows.  Accordingly,  many  central  banks  of 
emerging  economies  withdrew  the  liquidity  measures  adopted  during  the  crisis  and 
embarked on monetary tightening in 2010. Meanwhile, central banks of emerging economies 
took additional measures against financial and macro financial risks such as excessive credit 
growth  due  to  accelerated  capital  inflows,  widening  current  account  deficits  and  the  short 
maturity of the foreign capital. Accordingly, in addition to using policy rates, they opted for a 
tighter  monetary  policy  stance  through  the  active  use  of  alternative  instruments  such  as 
required reserve ratios, reserve accumulation and capital controls. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
14. 
The monetary tightening in emerging economies through policy rates and alternative 
instruments  is  expected  to  continue  in  the  upcoming  period.  Meanwhile,  advanced 
economies  are  expected  to  end  their  easing  measures  in  2011  and  to  start  normalizing 
policy. In fact, the European Central Bank took the first major step in this regard by raising 
the policy rate to 1.25 percent in April by 25 basis points.  
15. 
However, as I mentioned previously, it is impossible to claim that downside risks on 
the  global  economy  have  completely  faded  away.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  recently  mounting 
concerns over debt sustainability in peripheral euro area countries indicate that these risks 
still remain, albeit to a lower degree. Furthermore, the ongoing surge of commodity prices, 
especially of oil, stands out as another risk factor that may slow down the global economic 
recovery.  
Distinguished Guests, 
16. 
in Turkey in line with the global economic developments in 2010. 
In this part of my speech, I would like to evaluate key macroeconomic developments 
Developments in the Turkish economy 
17. 
Adoption  of  additional  easing  measures  in  emerging  economies  led  to  growing 
expectations  that  low  interest  rate  and  ample  liquidity  conditions  in  advanced  economies 
would be maintained for an extended period, which in turn increased the global risk appetite 
in  2010.  Consequently,  capital  inflows  to  emerging  economies  accelerated  and  risk 
premiums of these countries declined. Meanwhile, risks regarding the debt sustainability of 
peripheral  euro  area  countries  remained  vigorous  and  continued  to  dominate  the  financial 
markets.  In  fact,  renewed  concerns  over  sovereign  debt  since  November  increased  risk 
aversion and raised risk premiums across emerging economies.  
18. 
However,  what  should  be  highlighted  is  that  despite  the  volatile  course  of  risk 
sentiment  across  emerging  economies,  Turkey’s  risk  premium  indicators  performed  better 
than many other countries and remained below pre-crisis levels. This positive development is 
attributable  to  country-specific  favorable  conditions  such  as  upgrades  by  credit  rating 
agencies,  reduced  political  uncertainty  in  the  aftermath  of  the  referendum  period  and  the 
revised Medium Term Program (MTP) signaling further fiscal discipline. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
 19. 
On the other hand, risk premiums have recently increased due to current unrest in 
the Middle East. Fear of spillover to peripheral countries and the expectations of persistence 
in oil price hikes deteriorated the risk sentiment. Accordingly, Turkey’s risk premium has also 
increased. 
Esteemed Guests, 
20. 
In  2010,  fiscal  and  monetary  policies  had  growingly  expansionary  effects  on 
domestic  demand.  Although  the  weak  recovery  in  advanced  economies  continued  to  curb 
domestic  economic  activity,  Gross  Domestic  Product  (GDP)  registered  an  8.9  percent 
increase amid the rapid recovery in domestic demand. Indeed, the main drivers of the GDP 
growth in this period were private demand for investment and consumption.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 The impact of the global financial crisis on the labor market has subsided and non-
21. 
farm  employment  has  started  to  recover  rapidly  starting  from  the  first  quarter  of  2009.  In 
2010,  the  rise  in  non-farm  employment  compensated  the  crisis  driven  job  losses,  and 
employment in all sectors surpassed the pre-crisis levels.  
22. 
As I have previously mentioned on several occasions, sustainability of the favorable 
labor  market  outlook  in  2010  is  contingent  on  implementation  of  the  required  reforms  for 
enhancing productivity and flexibility in the market. These reforms would also contribute to 
Turkey’s social security system by promoting registered employment. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23. 
Real labor costs, which have gradually been increasing since the second quarter of 
2010, remained flat in the final quarter. Unemployment rates hovering above pre-crisis levels 
continued to contain the rise in unit labor costs, becoming the primary factor restricting the 
run-up in services prices in 2010.  
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
  
 
Esteemed Guests,  
24. 
In 2010, the foreign trade deficit soared amid weak external demand and the rapid 
recovery in the domestic demand. In addition to the surge in the foreign trade deficit, the run-
up  in  services  expenditures  further  aggravated  the  current  account  deficit.  In  this  period, 
transportation costs also increased due to rise in imports. Thus, the current account deficit, 
which was down to USD 14.3 billion in 2009, reached USD 48.6 billion in 2010.  
25. 
Recent  data  indicate  that  the  surge  in  imports  continued  in  the  January-February 
period in line with the robust domestic demand, and exports continued to recover gradually 
owing to weak external demand. However, the political unrest in North Africa slows down the 
recovery  in  Turkey’s  exports,  and  also  pushes  up  our  imports  through  oil  price  hikes. 
Therefore, we predict the upward trend in the current account deficit to persist in the short 
run also taking into account the low base effect from last year. Yet, we also envisage that the 
dampening effects of our recent policy measures on loans and imports will materialize as of 
the second quarter of the year.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
 
Distinguished Guests, 
Domestic  credit  volume,  which  surged  in  2010,  accelerated  further  in  the  final 
26. 
quarter of the year. As the effects of the crisis waned, the number of sectors utilizing loans 
increased rapidly and maturities were extended. An analysis of the rise in real sector loans 
by  sub-categories  reveals  that  this  rise  was  supported  by  the  rally  in  both  consumer  and 
business  loans.  Meanwhile,  loan  utilization  by  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises,  which 
were those hit most severely by the crisis, increased as well.  
27. 
I  would  like  to  underline  that  the  vigorous  loan  utilization  was  underpinned  by 
measures  taken  by  the  CBRT  in  the  aftermath  of  the  crisis  with  a  view  to  maintain  the 
functionality of the credit markets, as well as by the consequent rapid recovery in economic 
activity and the favorable economic outlook. Furthermore, ample global liquidity owing to the 
monetary easing implemented by  major central banks and the favorable economic outlook 
providing  low  and  foreseeable  interest  rates  were  also  instrumental  in  stimulating  loan 
utilization. At this point, I would like to highlight that the measures that we adopted in 2010 to 
contain the negative effects of the rapid credit growth created by ample global liquidity are 
critical  for  maintaining  financial  stability  and  enhancing  resilience  to  external  shocks;  yet, 
their impacts on loans are expected to be observed with a lag. This matter deserves close 
attention, which is why I will be returning to this issue in the upcoming parts of my speech.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
  
 
Distinguished Guests, 
28. 
The decline in public revenues due to global crisis driven economic contraction and 
the comprehensive fiscal stimulus packages to alleviate the effects of the crisis led to large 
fiscal  deficits  and  rising  debt  stocks  across  the  globe,  especially  in  advanced  economies. 
Many  emerging  economies,  including  Turkey,  are  on  a  more  stable  fiscal  footing,  as  they 
entered the crisis with relatively low budget deficits and debt stock, adopted relatively less 
comprehensive fiscal stimulus measures and recovered more swiftly. 
29. 
The  October  2010  MTP  for  the  2011–2013  period  envisages  a  gradual  decline  in 
non-interest  expenditures  to  GDP  ratio  by  2010.  In  addition,  interest  expenditures  are 
expected to decrease amid falling domestic borrowing rates. Tax revenues are planned to be 
raised by legal and administrative measures aiming to enhance tax audits and expand the 
tax base. It is notable that the ratio of public debt to GDP has reverted to a downward track 
amid the gradual reduction in the budget deficit.  
30. 
As a matter of fact, the faster-than-expected economic recovery and falling interest 
expenditures have helped to improve Turkey’s fiscal outlook. The increase in tax revenues 
amid  rapid  economic  growth  and  tax  adjustments  were  the  major  drivers  of  the  improved 
budget  balances  in  2010.  Moreover,  the  relative  slowdown  in  the  growth  of  non-interest 
expenditures  as  well  as  the  significant  decline  in  interest  expenditures  driven  by  falling 
domestic borrowing rates contributed to the improvement in fiscal balances. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
31. 
Fiscal  indicators  in  the  MTP  suggest  that  the  positive  outlook,  which  was  also 
underpinned  by  the  stronger-than-expected  recovery  in  2010,  would  continue  in  the 
upcoming period. Indeed, the recent data imply that the favorable outlook persists in tandem 
with  the  robust  economic  activity.  Nevertheless,  I  would  like  to  remind  that  in  order  to 
maintain fiscal discipline and ensure that Turkey continues to have more positive readings 
than other emerging economies, implementation of the institutional and structural reforms set 
out in the MTP remains critical. 
Esteemed Guests, 
32. 
In the last part of my speech, I would like to mention monetary policy decisions in 
2010 and the monetary policy strategy that we currently implement. In this context, I will first 
summarize 
to  monetary  policy 
implementations within the inflation targeting framework.  
inflation  developments,  and 
I  will  move  on 
then, 
Monetary policy decisions and implementations 
33. 
Inflation was mainly determined by tax adjustments and the course of unprocessed 
food  prices  in  2010.  Core  inflation  indicators  remained  low  and  stable  as  unemployment 
rates and capacity utilization rates hovered below pre-crisis levels. Thus, inflation came down 
to  6.4  percent  by  the  end  of  2010,  almost  reaching  the  year-end  inflation  target  of 
6.5 percent. With the downward revision in food prices, the decline in inflation continued in 
the first quarter of 2011, and inflation rate was down to 3.99 percent in March 2011.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
 
(consumer  price 
Core 
inflation 
indicator  SCA-H 
34. 
index  excluding  energy, 
unprocessed food, alcoholic beverages, tobacco and gold) increased 3.49 percent year-on-
year while SCA-I (SCA-H excluding processed food) registered an all-time year-end low of 
2.99 percent. In the first quarter of 2011, despite a slight upward movement, the annual rate 
of increase in core inflation indicators remained relatively low. 
 
 35. 
Although year-end inflation expectations fluctuated due to the volatile course of food 
prices throughout 2010, medium-term expectations remained basically unchanged. As of the 
first  quarter  of  2011,  the  24-month  ahead  inflation  expectation  stands  at  6.29  percent, 
hovering slightly above our medium-term target of 5 percent.  
 12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 36. 
Inflation may rise in the short term due to lagged effects of oil prices and base effect. 
I would hereby like to remind you that we will be more extensively providing the public with 
updated evaluations and forecasts on the medium-term inflation outlook along with possible 
risks and policy measures, in the Inflation Report to be published on April 28, 2011. 
Distinguished Guests, 
Following  the  deepening  of  the  global  financial  crisis,  we  focused  on  policies  to 
37. 
contain the adverse effects of the crisis on economic activity and financial stability, while also 
overseeing price stability. Accordingly, our Bank slashed policy rates and kept them at low 
levels for quite some time in addition to deploying supportive liquidity measures.  
38. 
In view of the normalization in money and credit markets amid waning effects of the 
global crisis on financial markets, we announced our exit strategy on April 14, 2010, which 
encompasses  the  withdrawal  of  crisis  measures  and  the  normalization  process  of  the 
monetary policy. Unlike other emerging economies, Turkey entered the global crisis with a 
strong  and  well-regulated  banking  system  as  well  as  a  flexible  and  efficient  liquidity 
management  tailored  to  previous  crisis  experience.  Hence,  our  balance  sheet  deteriorated 
only slightly due to anti-crisis measures and we were not forced to adopt radical measures 
during the crisis. Thus, our exit strategy was simple compared to those of many other central 
banks.  
39. 
As  part  of  the  exit  strategy  and  also  considering  the  favorable  developments  in 
credit  markets  and  the  recovery  in  economic  activity,  the  CBRT  started  to  withdraw  the 
temporary  liquidity  measures  introduced  during  the  crisis.  Hence,  the  excess  liquidity 
provided  to  the  market  was  gradually  drained  in  tandem  with  the  normalization  process. 
Moreover,  as  the  first  step  of  the  technical  rate  adjustment  process,  the  1-week  repo  rate 
was adopted as the key policy rate in May. 
40. 
Euro  area  sovereign  debt  problems  starting  from  May  2010  led  to  renewed 
uncertainties  regarding  external  demand.  This  outlook  confirmed  our  projection  that  policy 
rates should be kept at low levels for an extended period. Hence, the monetary policy stance 
was maintained and policy rates were held fixed at low levels throughout May-August 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
 
41. 
After  necessary  conditions  to  implement  the  second  step  of  the  technical  rate 
adjustment  process  within  the  exit  strategy  were  attained,  overnight  interest  rates  were 
reduced by 25 basis points in September 2010. With the completion of the gradual technical 
interest  rate  adjustment  process  in  line  with  the  exit  strategy,  1-week  repo  auctions  have 
been the main funding instrument of the CBRT. However, with other short-term lending and 
borrowing  options  being  granted  overnight  and  in  order  to  harmonize  maturities  of  similar 
liquidity  management  tools,  it  was  decided  that  the  repo  facility,  which  was  extended  to 
primary  dealers  within  the  open  market  operations  framework,  would  only  be  available  at 
overnight  maturity  starting  from  October  15,  2010,  and  3-month  repo  auctions  were 
terminated. 
Furthermore, with the objective to bring foreign exchange liquidity facilities orderly 
42. 
and  gradually  back  to  pre-crisis  levels  as  part  of  the  exit  strategy,  the  foreign  exchange 
reserve requirement ratio was raised by a total of 2 percentage points to 11 percent with the 
adjustments  in  April,  July  and  September.  Moreover,  in  view  of  the  improved  international 
liquidity conditions and the increase in foreign exchange liquidity of the banking system, our 
Bank  has  terminated  its  intermediary  role  in  the  Foreign  Exchange  Deposit  Market  as  of 
October 15, 2010. In addition, the maturity of the foreign exchange deposits borrowed within 
the pre-determined borrowing limits by banks from the CBRT was reduced to one week, as 
was the case before October 2008.  
Distinguished Guests, 
43. 
The quantitative easing adopted in the last quarter of 2010 by some major central 
banks  and  the  consequent  boost  in  capital  flows  to  emerging  markets  have  necessitated 
significant  changes  to  our  monetary  policy  strategy.  Short-term  capital  inflows  feeding  the 
divergence between domestic and external demand caused current account deficit to widen 
rapidly,  thus  necessitating  macroprudential  measures.  Hence,  we  jointly  use  liquidity 
management facilities and reserve requirements as well as policy rates in order to achieve 
price stability and financial stability.  
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
In  line  with  the  new  policy  design,  the  TL  required  reserve  ratio  was  raised  by 
44. 
0.50 points  each  in  September  and  November  to  6  percent.  Additionally,  in  order  to  more 
effectively use the required reserve ratio as a tool to contain macroeconomic and financial 
risks, interest payments on TL reserve requirements was terminated in September.  
45. 
Due to the accelerated capital inflows, our Bank reduced its overnight borrowing rate 
from  5.75  percent  to  1.50  percent  in  November,  and  increased  the  lending  rate  by 
0.25 points to 9 percent. Late liquidity window rates were accordingly revised. Besides these 
measures, with an extensive arrangement made in December, the TL required reserve ratios 
were differentiated by maturity and the reserve requirement base was expanded to include 
certain  foreign  and  domestic  repo  transactions  which  were  formerly  not  subject  to  reserve 
requirement. This arrangement aims to reduce maturity mismatch in banks’ balance sheets 
by extending the maturity of banking sector liabilities and also aims to encourage long-term 
capital flows.  
for 
ratios 
reserve 
required 
sight  deposits  and 
 
46. 
The ongoing strong course of credits as well as other domestic demand indicators in 
March implied that additional monetary tightening would be necessary. The CBRT assessed 
that  implementing  monetary  tightening  through  reserve  requirements,  rather  than  using 
policy  rates,  would  be  more  effective  in  containing  macro  financial  risks  resulting  from  the 
divergence of domestic and external demand. In this respect, the CBRT decided to deliver a 
notable  hike  in  the  weighted  average  of  required  reserve  rates  on  short  term  liabilities. 
Accordingly,  TL 
short-term 
deposits/participation accounts and other liabilities were raised. Our measures regarding the 
required reserves are displayed on the slide. With the last arrangement to be effective as of 
April  15,  2011  in  addition  to  prior  adjustments  since  October  2010,  a  total  of  TL  38 billion 
liquidity will have been withdrawn from the market. 
47. 
Our  measures  are  expected  to  have  an  impact  on  domestic  demand  and  credits 
starting  from  the  second  quarter.  The  adopted  policy  measures  ultimately  aim  to  contain 
macro  financial  risks  by  inducing  a  more  balanced  growth  path  for  aggregate  demand 
components. The recent outlook of export orders for domestic and foreign markets exhibiting 
a more balanced pattern suggests that policy measures have started to become effective.  
Distinguished Guests,  
48. 
I  would  like  to  remind  you  that  we  continued  to  implement  floating  exchange  rate 
regime  along  with  inflation  targeting  regime  in  2010.  In  line  with  its  general  strategy  to 
maintain  a  strong  foreign  exchange  position,  the  CBRT  designs  foreign  exchange  buying 
auctions  at  times  when  supply  is  higher  than  the  demand  for  foreign  currency,  and  also 
assuring  to  affect  the  free  market  conditions  at  the  minimum  level.  Accordingly,  the  daily 
amount to be purchased in foreign exchange auctions was increased in August on the back 
of a stable increase in capital inflows to Turkey as well as to other emerging economies. With 
a  view  to  strengthen  foreign  exchange  reserves,  the  CBRT  modified  its  method  of  foreign 
exchange buying auctions effective as of October 4, 2010 in order to benefit more effectively 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15
from capital inflows and to enhance resilience against volatility in these capital flows. In this 
regard, the CBRT may raise the amount to be bought at regular foreign exchange auctions in 
order to accelerate foreign exchange purchases if liquidity conditions ease on global financial 
market  developments  and  capital  inflows  remain  strong.  In  case  the  CBRT  decides  to 
accelerate foreign exchange purchases, the additional amount that may be purchased will be 
announced on the first working day of the week.  
 
 49. 
Given that the new method provides sufficient flexibility to build up reserves at times 
when foreign exchange supply increases relative to foreign exchange demand, The CBRT 
decided that banks would no more hold option at regular auctions starting from January 3, 
2011. Moreover, the daily amount of purchase was raised to USD 50 million in order to avoid 
a  possible  sharp  decline  in  CBRT”s  foreign  exchange  purchases  due  to  termination  of 
options. The amount purchased through foreign exchange auctions totaled USD 14.9 billion 
in 2010. Gross foreign exchange reserves excluding gold amounting to USD 80.7 billion at 
end-2010, increased to USD 86.2 billion as of March 2011.  
Distinguished Guests 
50. 
The  general  framework  of  the  monetary  and  exchange  rate  policy  for  2011  was 
disclosed to public by the release of the “Monetary and Exchange Rate Policy for 2011” on 
December  21,  2010.  Accordingly,  the  CBRT  will  continue  with  the  inflation  targeting  and 
floating  exchange  rate  regimes  in  2011.  The  inflation  target  for  end-2011  has  been  set  at 
5.5 percent  and  the  uncertainty  band  has  been  maintained  at  2  percentage  points  in  both 
directions.  
51. 
In line with our primary objective of achieving and maintaining price stability, we will 
continue to monitor macroeconomic risks and financial stability, and hence, take measures 
towards  enhancing  the  effectiveness  of  the  monetary  policy  and  liquidity  management  in 
2011.  Accordingly,  in  the  upcoming  period,  the  CBRT  may  alter  its  liquidity  management 
strategy  to  meet  the  emerging  needs  and  actively  use  additional  policy  tools,  such  as  the 
corridor  between  borrowing  and  lending  rates  and  reserve  requirements,  to  maximize  the 
effectiveness  of  the  1-week  repo  auction  rate,  the  main  policy  tool,  and  to  contain  macro 
financial risks.  
52. 
In  the  period  ahead,  monetary  policy  will  continue  to  focus  on  achieving  price 
stability  on  a  permanent  basis.  To  this  end,  the  impact  of  the  macroprudential  measures 
taken by the CBRT and other relevant institutions on the inflation outlook will be considered 
carefully.  Fulfillment  of  the  commitments  to  fiscal  discipline  in  the  medium  term  and 
strengthening  the  structural  reform  agenda  will  contribute  to  the  improvement  of  Turkey’s 
sovereign  risk,  and  thus,  support  macroeconomic  stability  as  well  as  price  stability. 
Sustaining  the  fiscal  discipline  will  also  provide  room  for  monetary  policy  maneuver, 
supporting  the  social  welfare  by  keeping  interest  rates  permanently  at  low  levels.  In  this 
16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
respect, I would like to conclude my remarks by underlining that timely implementation of the 
structural  reforms  envisaged  by  the  MTP  and  the  European  Union  accession  process 
remains to be of utmost importance. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 17
