Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz:  International  thoughts  on  leadership  –  “Too  many 
bosses, too few leaders” 
Opening address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 
launch  of  Leading  Voices  and  the  International  Centre  for  Leadership  in  Finance’s  (ICLIF) 
latest publication, Kuala Lumpur, 23 May 2011. 
 Today I am pleased to launch the first session of LEADING VOICES, an international thought 
leadership series presented by The ICLIF Leadership & Governance Centre. This is where 
you  will  come  up  close  and  personal  with  exceptional  and  extraordinary  leadership  from 
various  industries  to  exchange  leadership  thinking  and  realities  in  our  now  highly  dynamic 
operating environment. 
Any individual who has assumed a leadership role – at any level in any type of organisation 
needs  to  have  a  platform  that  will  provide  an  opportunity  to  meet  other  leaders  and 
leadership thinkers to exchange and learn from each other's leadership experience. Leading 
Voices is that platform. These sessions will be arranged by ICLIF, starting with this inaugural 
session today. 
While  leadership  requires  distinct  behaviors,  there  are  wide  ranging  leadership  styles  and 
approaches  that  have  been  successfully  adopted.  Moreover,  the  now  highly  dynamic 
operating environment has become more complex, ambiguous and uncertain. What are the 
ways  then  to  lead  and  bring  success  to  our  organisations  in  this  more  challenging 
environment. 
While the foundations for leadership are essential, we also need to keep abreast of the new 
developments taking place and the new leadership capabilities needed in this ever changing 
environment. Having an understanding of the range of possibilities, having the ability to make 
sound  strategic  decisions  and  excelling  under  the  different  circumstances  also  becomes 
important. 
The  ICLIF  leadership  centre  was  established  in  2003  as  part  of  Bank  Negara  Malaysia’s 
commitment towards providing a focused and coordinated approach to enhance leadership 
capability  and  to  develop  world-class  leaders.  It  was  initially  for  the  financial  services 
industry,  post  the  Asian  Financial  Crisis,  with  the  aim  of  producing  a  new  generation  of 
leaders to steer the industry in a fundamentally transformed financial landscape. It has since 
been extended to corporate and public sector participation. The Centre, the first of its kind in 
Asia, focuses on the emerging market experience, contextualized mainly to Asia. 
ICLIF has now grown to offer a wide range of services in the areas that include leadership 
development, organizational performance, corporate governance and advisory services that 
are designed to enable sustainable and responsible business growth. In 2010, the ICLIF has 
further repositioned itself through the setting up of a new governance centre with a vision to 
promote  high  impact  boards  and  develop  world  class  directors  who  are  advocates  of  best 
practices  and  excellence  in  corporate  governance.  Known  as  the  Financial  Institutions 
Directors’  Education  Program  or  FIDE,  it  is  currently  the  only  governance  initiative  in  the 
region that focuses exclusively on the financial sector and has trained hundreds of directors 
since  its  inception.  The  Centre  has  now  been  renamed  as  the  ICLIF  Leadership  and 
Governance Centre with an enhanced faculty comprising renowned experts from the world 
leading institutions. ICLIF is also currently expanding its outreach beyond the Asia Pacific, 
Middle East and African regions. 
These initiatives are based on the conviction that human capital development needs to also 
include the leadership level. Human capital development in general is of strategic importance 
and  is  integral  to  the  success  of  any  organisation.  Building  human  capital  capability  has 
never been more important in today’s world. Successful businesses of the future will be the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
ones  that  are  able  to  fully  harness  their  pool  of  talent.  This  more  difficult  operating 
environment demands new abilities to manage the new challenges and the new emerging 
opportunities, and the ability to deal with the high level of unpredictability. 
The  role  of  leaders  in  such  an  environment  is  to  create  organisations  that  are  able  to 
effectively respond to the changing environment and at the same time nurture flexibility and 
innovation. Also important is that it is also supported with high values. Effective leaders in 
this era, will be those that can deliver results in this environment. It is all about having clarity 
of purpose and aligning the entire organisation to achieve these goals. Thus, the investment 
in  leadership  development  is  vital  to  equip  leaders  and  future  leaders  with  the  necessary 
capability to perform their role in the organisation. 
This brings us to the second part of our event today – the launch of one of ICLIF’s research 
studies  which  has  been  written  by  Mr.  Rajeev  Peshwaria,  the  CEO  of  ICLIF,  published 
globally as a book entitled “Too Many Bosses, Too Few Leaders” by Simon Schuster of New 
York. The book illuminates on what it really takes to be an effective leader. The book extends 
beyond the advice on the distinct behaviors and attributes required of leaders to providing “a 
clear  path”,  “a  road  map”  to  achieving  leadership  excellence  at  every  level  in  the 
organisation. 
In my own experience, the core foundations to achieve superior performance set out in the 
book is essential. Defining with great clarity the purpose and values of the organisation and 
articulating  it  throughout  the  entire  organisation  is  key  towards  achieving  these  desired 
results.  Then,  it  is  sustaining  the  high  level  of  energy  and  talent  at  all  levels  of  the 
organisation is what will ignite the motivation to achieve the breakthroughs – that will achieve 
the ground breaking results – that will bring the organisation to the frontier of the business. 
Energy is the one thing you need heaps of in order to lead. Such energy to stay on course 
despite the most formidable of obstacles needs to be sustained. Not only must you find your 
own  sources  of  energy,  but  you  also  have  to  energise  others  around  you.  The  book 
discusses how to find that personal energy and how to energise others in an intrinsic way. 
I will let Mr. Rajeev Peshawaria give you a bit more flavour about the book later. You will find 
it both practical and inspiring. We are also pleased to have with us today Datuk Seri Tony 
Fernandes, the Group CEO and Director of AirAsia Berhad who is also the founder of Tune 
Group  Sdn.  Bhd.  He  is  a  corporate  leader  and  a  personality  that  needs  no  further 
introduction.  He  will  today  share  his  leadership  experience  in  our  inaugural  LEADING 
VOICES session. 
And now, ladies and gentlemen, I am very pleased to officially release “Too Many Bosses, 
too Few Leaders”. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
