Lim Hng Kiang: Bank capital adequacy and institutional structure – 
Singapore’s approach 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Lim  Hng  Kiang,  Minister  for  Trade  and  Industry  and  Deputy 
Chairman  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore,  at  the  38th  Association  of  Banks  in 
Singapore (ABS) Annual Dinner, Singapore, 28 June 2011. 
 Introduction 
Chairman, ABS, 
Council members of ABS, 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
It is my pleasure to be here this evening. I was last here to deliver the keynote address in 
2007, prior to the global financial crisis. 
As  economies  now  recover,  especially  in  Asia,  it  is  easy  to  forget  how  close  the  global 
financial system was to the precipice. Following the failure of Lehman Brothers, the solvency 
of  many  well-known  financial  institutions  in  the  advanced  economies  came  into  question. 
Weaknesses and failures at the core of their banking system were transmitted to almost all 
sectors  and  countries.  A  global  meltdown  was  averted  only  through  extraordinary  actions 
taken by central banks, governments and financial institutions themselves. 
Regulators  globally  have  had  the  benefit  of  some  distance  from  the  depth  of  the  crisis  to 
reflect on what needs to be done to strengthen the resilience of the financial system. MAS 
has been doing likewise and tonight, I would like to explain MAS’ approach to reforms in the 
regulation of banking. 
Post-crisis reflection 
Singapore’s financial system withstood the global financial crisis well. This did not happen by 
chance.  Singapore  banks  were,  on  the  whole, prudent  and  had  less  risky  balance  sheets. 
MAS has always required banks to meet high prudential standards, exceeding international 
norms in several areas. This ensured adequate safeguards were in place and, in turn, helped 
to maintain market confidence during the downturn. In its annual assessment on Singapore 
last year, the IMF stated that “Singapore’s strong supervision and risk management systems 
had been crucial in safeguarding financial stability in the global downturn.”1  
Although  banks  in  Singapore  were  relatively  unscathed  during  the  crisis,  we  cannot  be 
complacent.  Over  the  past  40  years,  Singapore  has  evolved  into  an  international  financial 
centre,  anchored  by  strong  local  and  foreign  banks.  We  are  a  small  and  open  economy, 
intricately  connected  to  the  global  financial  system.  Such  openness  and  connectivity  has 
strengthened  the  diversity  of  our  financial  system,  but  has  also  made  us  vulnerable  to 
contagion risks from the external environment. Locally-incorporated banks and most foreign 
branches here did not have significant exposures to the complex financial assets that caused 
severe  losses  in  the  U.S.  and  Europe.  Despite  this,  they  were  not  immune  to  the  ripple 
effects of the global spike in risk aversion.  
Our approach to regulation is to allow the financial sector to grow, innovate, and support the 
needs  of  the  economy,  without  compromising  the  safety  and  soundness  of  the  financial 
system as a whole. With this context, let me now turn to the reforms.  
                                                 
1  
International Monetary Fund, Executive Board Assessment, 23 July 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The emerging global regulatory paradigm 
Following  wide-ranging  discussions  and  consultation,  the  global  regulatory  community  has 
made progress to strengthen the resilience of the financial system. The Basel Committee on 
Banking Supervision has strengthened global minimum capital standards as part of its Basel 
III Framework. The Financial Stability Board (“FSB”) has released guidelines to reduce the 
risks posed by systemically-important financial institutions, or “SIFIs”. 
MAS welcomes the Basel III reforms. They will strengthen the resilience of individual banks 
during periods of stress, and in doing so, contribute to banking sector stability. Basel III is a 
major step forward in several areas: 
(i) 
First,  it  strengthens  capital  requirements  for  trading  activities,  off-balance  sheet 
vehicles, securitisation, and counterparty credit derivatives. 
Second, it improves the quality of capital, with a greater focus on common equity to 
absorb losses. 
Third, it raises the level of capital that banks will have to hold to absorb losses in 
both going-concern and unwinding scenarios. 
Fourth, it introduces international liquidity standards for the first time, to make banks 
more 
liquidity 
mismatches. 
funding  disruptions  and 
to  short-term 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
longer-term 
resilient 
The  FSB  is  finalising  its  recommendations  for  global  systemically  important  financial 
institutions,  or  G-SIFIs.  This  will  comprise  a  package  of  measures,  the  most  important  of 
which are quite clear: 
 
First,  G-SIFIs  will  have  to  meet  higher  capital  requirements,  above  the  Basel  III 
minimums.  This  is  to  reflect  the  greater  risk  that  their  failure  would  pose  to  the 
financial system. 
Second,  resolution  frameworks  have  to  be  established,  to  ensure  that  all  banks, 
however complex or large, can be resolved in an efficient and safe manner. Such 
frameworks may involve the simplification of firm structures and the design of “bail-
in” mechanisms, where creditors are forced to absorb losses when a bank is close 
to failure2. 
Third,  G-SIFIs  will  face  more  intensive  supervisory  oversight,  guided  by  an 
enhanced set of core principles for effective banking supervision.  
  Singapore’s regulatory approach 
Many  jurisdictions  are  now  considering  their  responses  to  the  FSB  and  Basel  Committee 
recommendations. MAS’ regulatory approach is guided by three principles: 
(i) 
First,  we  must  maintain  the  high  standards  of  financial  regulation  which  have 
become  associated  with  Singapore.  Maintaining  high  regulatory  standards  is 
completely  compatible  with  fostering  a  vibrant  financial  sector.  Being  a  well-
regulated,  trusted  and  stable  financial  centre  is  a  source  of  advantage  for 
Singapore.  It  provides  confidence  for  banks  to  operate  in  Singapore  and  for 
customers to transact with banks here.  
                                                 
2 
“Bail-in” is the process  where bank debt in failing firms is forcibly converted into equity. This is intended to 
make it possible to rapidly recapitalise a bank such that it can continue in business without an equity injection 
from taxpayers. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
(ii) 
(iii) 
Second, our rules must be risk-appropriate. International standards must sometimes 
be enhanced to be appropriate for Singapore’s context. They must be targeted to 
address well-defined risks or concerns that could have systemic implications.  
Third, our approach must be sensitive to the impact on industry. No new regulation 
is costless. MAS must weigh the cost of new regulations on institutions which have 
to comply with them, against the broader benefits that those regulations have for the 
economy and society.  
With  these  principles  in  mind,  I  will  now  outline  MAS’  approach  to  the  issues  I  mentioned 
earlier.  I  will  first  touch  on  what  Basel  III  will  mean  for  Singapore’s  capital  adequacy 
requirements.  After  which,  I  will  share  MAS’  views  on  the  current  debate  on  universal 
banking.  
Capital requirements for locally-incorporated banks 
MAS has reviewed its bank capital adequacy rules. We will require Singapore-incorporated 
banks to meet Basel III earlier and at a higher standard. 
Singapore-incorporated banks will be required to meet the Basel III minimum standards by 
1 January  2013,  ahead of  the  Basel  Committee’s  January  2015  timeline.  Singapore  banks 
are well-capitalised and are in a good position to adopt Basel III sooner than 2015. Moreover, 
the  long  phase-in  period  provided  by  the  Basel  Committee  was  to  ensure  that  the  new 
requirements did not stall the economic recovery in countries that were at the centre of the 
crisis.  Singapore’s  situation  is  different:  the  recovery  has  been  robust and  the  economy  is 
well above pre-crisis levels.  
MAS will increase the minimum levels of common equity that locally-incorporated banks will 
be  required  to  hold.  The  experience  of  other  countries  in  the  recent  crisis  shows  that 
common  equity  is  the  most  effective  capital  instrument  to  absorb  losses  and  write-downs. 
Research done by the Basel Committee shows that banks that failed or required government 
capital injections during the crisis had significantly lower levels of common equity than those 
banks that did not.  
MAS will enhance the quality of regulatory capital in our banks in the following ways:  
(i) 
There will be an explicit Common Equity Tier 1 capital adequacy requirement, to be 
set at 6.5%. This will be fully phased in by 1 Jan 2015. 
The  Tier  1  capital  adequacy  requirement  will  be  increased  from  6%  to  8%,  to  be 
phased in over the same period. The Total capital adequacy requirement will remain 
unchanged at 10%. 
In  addition  to  these  minimum  requirements,  there  will  be  a  capital  conservation 
buffer3, set at 2.5%, to be met with Common Equity Tier 1. This will be phased in 
between 1 Jan 2016 and 1 Jan 2019. 
The  new  eligibility  criteria  for  regulatory  capital  will  also  be  phased  in  between 
1 Jan 2014 and 1 Jan 2018. 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
With these changes, locally-incorporated banks will be required to meet capital requirements 
that are higher than the minimum levels in Basel III. The requirements will apply at both the 
bank-group and bank-solo levels. Taking into account the capital conservation buffer, locally-
                                                 
3   The capital conservation buffer is a Basel III requirement for banks to maintain a capital buffer that can be 
used to absorb losses during periods of stress. Constraints on earnings distributions through dividends, share 
buybacks and discretionary bonus payments to staff will be imposed on a bank when the conservation buffer 
is breached. The closer a bank’s regulatory capital ratio approaches the minimum requirement, the greater the 
constraints on earnings distributions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
incorporated banks will have to maintain at least 9% Common Equity Tier 1, compared to the 
Basel III minimum of 7%. Let me explain the reasons for this.  
(i) 
First,  the  Basel  III  minimums  do  not  adequately  take  into  account  the  systemic 
importance  of  banks.  Each  locally-incorporated  bank  is  systemically-important  in 
Singapore and has a substantial retail presence. Together, they account for more 
than  half  of  the  total  non-bank  resident  deposits  and  loans  in  Singapore.  Hence, 
higher  capital  levels  are  required  to  strengthen  their  ability  to  absorb  unexpected 
losses effectively in a crisis. This is necessary to protect depositors, reduce risks to 
the real economy, and safeguard our financial stability. The experience of countries 
at  the  centre  of  the  crisis  in  Europe  and  the  U.S.  showed  that  the  total  cost  of  a 
financial crisis to the economy and the public can be substantial. 
Second,  Common  Equity  Tier  1  capital  requirements  that  are  significantly  above 
Basel  III  will  not  result  in  a  large  reduction  in  economic  output  but  would  be 
beneficial  in  reducing  the  likelihood and  cost  of a  crisis.  Several  empirical  studies 
confirm this. Notably, the Basel Committee’s assessment of the long-term economic 
impact  of  Basel  III  was  that  the  economic  costs  of  going  above  Basel  minimums 
were still lower than the costs arising from banking crises. 
In deciding on the levels appropriate for Singapore, MAS carefully weighed the costs 
of additional capital against the benefits. Banks that are well-capitalised, prudently 
regulated,  and  located  in  stable  financial  centres  such  as  Singapore,  present  an 
attractive  value  proposition  to  depositors  and  investors.  Holding  systemically-
important banks to a higher solvency standard reduces both the likelihood of failure 
and impact to the real economy if one of them runs into difficulties. 
Third, the impact on banks’ capital structures will be manageable. This is, in part, 
due to the already high internal capital buffers held by the banks and also due to the 
transition arrangements that will apply.  
(ii) 
 (iii) 
In  short,  the  locally-incorporated  banks  are  in  a  good  position  to  meet  the  higher  capital 
adequacy requirements and will emerge stronger in a post-Basel III world. 
Institutional structure of banking 
One strand of the regulatory debate that is still ongoing relates to whether reforms to how 
banks  structure  themselves  can  help  promote  financial  stability.  There  are  several 
dimensions  to  this.  I  will  focus  on  the  dimension  that  is  most  relevant  to  Singapore  as  a 
financial centre. This relates to the merits of the universal branching model compared to a 
subsidiary model for retail banking.  
Most foreign banks in Singapore operate under a universal branching model. Branches here 
undertake a combination of retail, commercial, and investment banking activities, without the 
need to legally separate these activities. Some other regulators prefer that banks operating in 
their jurisdictions operate as subsidiaries, or separate the retail and wholesale activities into 
different legal entities.  
MAS  has  a  long  history  of  permitting  the  universal  branching  model  and  we  continue  to 
support it. The universal branching model provides significant efficiency benefits for banks. It 
permits a bank to take advantage of economies of scale by sharing management resources 
and capital across its business lines, in addition to pooling its risks across the banking group. 
A branch can rely on the capital of the parent bank to borrow from the interbank market for 
funding purposes. This may not be possible for a local subsidiary with a smaller capital base. 
A branch structure can also give the banking group a greater ability to withstand idiosyncratic 
shocks to part of the group, because excess liquidity and capital from one part of the group 
can be redeployed to the parts in need. This, of course, is provided that the shock is not so 
large as to overwhelm the group as whole.   
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
During periods of severe stress, however, the close linkages between business functions in a 
single,  integrated  entity  make  it  difficult  to  isolate  and  contain  problems.  The  provision  of 
essential  services  by  a  branch  such  as  domestic  lending  and  deposit-taking,  as  well  as 
payment  transactions,  could  be  disrupted.  Local  depositors  would  be  exposed  to  possible 
contagion or a crisis of confidence arising from problems in the bank’s home market, or from 
problems related to its wholesale banking activities.  
MAS  imposes  a  number  of  regulatory  requirements  on  the  locally-incorporated  banks  to 
protect  depositors,  including  the  higher  capital  adequacy  requirements  that  I  mentioned 
earlier and a minimum paid-up capital of $1.5 billion. However, there are Qualified Full Banks 
(QFBs) and foreign full banks which operate as branches and accept retail deposits without 
any  capital  in  Singapore.  MAS’  approach  has  been  to  closely  supervise  these  branches. 
They are also required to be members of the deposit insurance scheme, which provides a 
safety net for all non-bank depositors by insuring their deposits up to $50,000 per depositor 
per bank.  
There are clear benefits, however, for foreign banks with a large retail presence to operate 
their retail business from a locally-incorporated subsidiary. Where the banks have corporate 
or investment banking businesses, these activities can continue to operate as part of their 
existing  branches.  This  will  allow  banks  to  continue  to  benefit  from  cost  efficiencies 
associated  with  a  branch  structure  and  minimise  changes  to  their  business  models. 
Moreover, by conducting retail activities from a separate locally-incorporated entity, the bank 
will be seen by local retail customers as being strongly committed to the local market for the 
long-term.  International  discussions  on  this  topic  are  ongoing  and  MAS  is  monitoring  the 
debate closely.  
Conclusion 
To  conclude,  Singapore  has  built  a  reputation  for  credibility  and  prudence  in  the  last 
40 years. Our financial sector has weathered several crises well. But we cannot take this for 
granted.  There  will  continue  to  be  risks  and  challenges  in  the  financial  and  economic 
environment. The changes to the capital adequacy requirements that I have outlined tonight 
will  help  keep  our  banking  system  strong,  and  preserve  Singapore’s  reputation  as  a  safe, 
open and dynamic financial centre.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
