Rundheersing Bheenick: Clearing cheques – clearing the arteries of 
business and finance 
Welcoming remarks by Mr Rundheersing Bheenick, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, on 
the  occasion  of  the  Launching  Ceremony  of  the  Cheque  Truncation  System,  Bank  of 
Mauritius, Port Louis, 6 September 2011. 
 throats,  engaged 
their  regulatees  at  each  other’s 
What a fine spectacle this is! To find the Bank of Mauritius and all the commercial banks in 
our jurisdiction – we have twenty of them gathered together on the same platform, looking in 
the same direction, with – in their midst − the top political and economic leadership of the 
country – the Prime Minister and his Minister of Finance, who, I cannot help observing, look 
perfectly at ease in our company. 
What a special symbol this is of the public/private partnership we enjoy as part of Mauritius 
Inc!  I said  “fine  spectacle”  because,  these  days,  around  the  world,  it is  more  usual  to  find 
bank  regulators  and 
in  mutual 
recrimination. Over the waters, we see legislators and other policy-makers hauling bankers, 
labeled as greedy and irresponsible, if not downright criminal, over hot coals, breathing fire 
and  brimstone  and  threatening  to  make  up  for  past  legislative  and  regulatory  laxity  by 
swinging the axe of overregulation. Judging from the language and the tone of the outrage 
and  condemnation  of  bankers,  it  is  a  wonder  that  no  bankers  have  yet  been  attacked  by 
lynch mobs. 
In comparison, our own occasional grumbles are more in the nature of gentle parental raps 
on the knuckles of occasionally wayward children although one could be readily excused for 
thinking  otherwise  as  our  inventive  press  corps  has  made  an  art  form  of  blowing  up  tiny 
molehills into towering Everests. 
But broadly speaking, this evening, we can feel proud that we have together navigated rather 
well, by judicious piloting, and perhaps a slice of good fortune, the turbulent waters of the 
economic  and  financial  mayhem  of  the  past  few  years,  that  has  so  troubled  the  western 
world and so many of its principal trading partners. 
Thus,  in  this  general  atmosphere  of  trust,  respect  and  support,  it  is  again  an  honour,  and 
indeed a personal pleasure for me to be your guide to welcome you all to this launch event, 
which the Bank is happy to host on behalf of the entire banking community. Thank you for all 
being here with us. 
But  there  is  more  than  mere  symbolism  here.  The  Bank  has  always  viewed  its  statutory 
obligations  relating  to  the  clearing  house  and  the  payments  system  as  a  shared 
responsibility,  to  be  discharged  in  conjunction  with  commercial  banks.  The  Cheque 
Truncation System (or CTS) that we are launching today exemplifies that approach very well. 
A change in the way we process cheques was long overdue. And we would have rolled out 
the CTS long before, had we not unfortunately got ourselves embroiled in internal turf battles 
which  almost  paralysed  decision-making  at  the  Bank  and  led  to  serious  operational  and 
procurement  difficulties.  The  Bank  has  a  mandate  to  promote  greater  efficiency  in  the 
banking sector. The system of payments and settlements is the backbone of any economy; it 
forms  the  arteries  for  conducting  trade,  commerce  and  indeed  all  economic  activities  in  a 
country;  creating  the  momentum  for  economic  growth,  prosperity  and  welfare.  It  is  an 
essential feature of the modern state. 
First, may I be allowed to offer a little dose of the history of the decision to modernize the 
way we process cheques. The Port Louis Clearing House (PLCH) has been functioning since 
1968, meeting twice a day, at the premises of the Bank, every working day including once on 
Saturdays, that is when our high street banks used to work on Saturdays, (Ah! those were 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
the days). At that time cheques of different banks varied in size and format, which did not 
pose any problem when cheques were handled manually. But a challenge was presented to 
all  the  banks  when  in  the  early  1990’s,  the  then  Managing  Director,  Ranapartab  Tacouri, 
tasked Anil Gujadhur, who was later to succeed him, to automate the handling of cheques by 
moving to electronic capture of essential fields. 
The first stage in the modernisation process, somewhat delayed for reasons we need not go 
into here, was the introduction of the Mauritius Automated Clearing and Settlement System 
(MACSS) in 2000. This provided the springboard for a quantum leap in the transformation of 
the payment system. A strategic decision was taken to focus on this electronic platform for 
real-time  high-speed  settlement  of  large-value  transactions.  The  automation  of  cheque 
clearing was put on the back burner. I understand that they toyed with the idea of calling it 
MACH with obvious reference to the MACH number, which measures the speed of sound. 
This would have been quite ironical, given the leisurely speed at which matters progressed! 
After this, the next logical step was the extension of this electronic clearing to all cheques. At 
first, there was some resistance, especially from the smaller banks who were worried about 
the added cost. The resistance was overcome and, by 2003, all cheques were standardized 
and  made  machine-readable,  which  enabled  the  PLCH  to  transform  itself  into  PLACH, 
adding  the  critical  A  for  “Automated”.  The  process  of  standardization  continued  with  the 
introduction  of  MICR-technology  –  Magnetic  Ink  Character  Recognition  −  which  is  an 
electronic code line, in all cheques in 2002. But there were also some legal obstacles in the 
way and these were only resolved with changes brought to the Bills of Exchange Act in 2004. 
As  part  of  our  due  diligence,  we  fielded  a  joint  Bank  of  Mauritius  and  Mauritius  Bankers’ 
Association mission, led by my First Deputy Governor and the Chief Executive of MBA, to 
Southeast  Asia  where  the  members  could  see  for  themselves  how  cheque  truncation  has 
modernized  cheque  settlement  in  Hong  Kong  and  Singapore.  They  came  back  convinced 
that  this  was  the  way  of  the  future.  In  the  meantime,  modernisation  continued  with  the 
introduction, in 2009, of the RTSX, a system based on the then best international practice 
and supporting multi-currency transactions, with extended settlement windows. 
Now many of you will know that missions to Asia are the easy part; it is putting the lessons 
we have learned there into practice that taxes our resolve, our skills and our stamina. Since 
then,  senior  officials  from  commercial  banks,  at  different  levels  and  with  different 
backgrounds, have worked diligently and hand-in-hand with Bank of Mauritius staff to take 
the project through to completion and now to the formal launch of the CTS. We might regret 
that  we  took  so  long  to  get  us  here  and  we  owe  an  apology  to  all  cheque  users  for  the 
delays, but as the system unfolds it will be of immense benefit to all. We hope to move to the 
next  stages,  may  be  not  quite  at  the  speed  which  you  measure  in  mach  numbers,  but 
somewhat faster than it took us to get here. 
This is a potted history of the process leading us to CTS. All this required close participation 
not  only  of  the  banking  industry  but  of  business  in  general  and  of  representatives  of  that 
widening community of cheque-users, as so many more Mauritians have moved, in the past 
generation from keeping their cash and savings in little brown envelopes under the mattress, 
to the regular use of high street banks. 
Let  me  pause  here  to  put  to  rest  a  canard  about  the  cost  of  the  CTS  which  is  doing  the 
rounds and seems to be gaining some traction. No, it is not costing Rs100 million. And no, it 
is not costing more than the cost proposed by a party which is styling itself as the “preferred 
bidder”. The initial costs work out at 35% of the costs of the self-appointed “preferred bidder”. 
After taking into account the costs of the software license and maintenance costs over five 
years, the project comes in at about 60% of the other offer. The cost over five years amounts 
to a grand total of less than Rs19 million – a far cry from the Rs100 million being bandied 
about! 
It  is  a  simple  thing  to  write  a  cheque  and  put  it  in  the  post.  But  most  of  us  are  blissfully 
unaware of the complex journey these ubiquitous cheques now make before the values they 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
represent are transferred to the account of the payee. So long as it works, there’s no reason 
why the normal cheque-users should concern themselves with what is essentially a matter of 
the internal plumbing of our financial system and payments infrastructure. I’m sure you will 
be  glad  that  only  time  inhibits  me  from  revealing  everything  you  always  wanted  to  know 
about the plumbing arrangements for cheques, but were probably afraid to ask. But let me 
just give you a glimpse of the complexity of that everyday process which will throw some light 
on the full extent of the change that the, shortly-to-be-unveiled, CTS will bring us. 
In Mauritius, as elsewhere, plastic and electronic payments have made substantial inroads 
over the years. But cheques still constitute a full 20 percent of all non-cash payments in the 
country. We have half a million cheques passing through the Clearing House each month, 
that is 25,000 cheques each working day. Add to this the intra-bank cheques, that is cheques 
paid out from and paid into the same bank; and we are talking about 50,000 cheques each 
working day. 
Whilst this volume of cheques has been continually rising by about 3% since I have been at 
the Bank, the value transacted has been rising even faster, increasing by nearly 30 percent 
over  the  same  period  of  four  years.  The  total  average  value  of  cheques  cleared  at  the 
Clearing House exceeds Rs 1 billion a day. If we add to that the value of intra-bank cheques, 
we  are  now  clearing  over  Rs2.5  billion  in  cheques  each  working  day.  50,000  cheques 
cleared everyday; Rs2.5 billion settled everyday – these are serious numbers. 
Now, just imagine those 21,000 cheques, or the 50,000 if you look at all cheques and not 
only those coming to the PLACH, beginning their journey at one of the 215 or so banks and 
bank branches dotting the length and breath of the country, laboriously finding their way to 
the main branch where they are processed, sorted and bundled, then being taken twice a 
day  to  the  PLACH  by  the  fourteen  clearing  banks,  then  beginning  their  journey  back,  and 
starting all over again if they bounce for any reason. Each of those cheques went through 
many hands, often travelling many miles. Everyday, some 300 officers – or 5% of banking 
sector employees − put in an estimated 325 person-hours to operate the system. No wonder 
it took three to five days before value was received for cheques cleared. 
This process, to which we say goodbye this evening, has served us well and I would not wish 
to run it down. It was quite efficient and reliable in its own way – few cheques went astray. 
But, in these modern high-tech times, it was clearly wasteful, inefficient, and antiquated. It 
had clearly done its time and was ripe for overhaul. As we proceed to bury it, spare a thought 
for all those wonderful people who kept it running so well for so long. 
Happily  this  evening  our  Prime  Minister  will  officially  launch  its  successor  and  present  the 
very  first  cheque  for  clearance  under  the  CTS.  I’m  pretty  sure  we  don’t  need  to  hold  our 
breath  in  case  it  bounces,  as  I  know  this  Bank’s  financial credit  is sure  and  has not  been 
downgraded, unlike that of some who have been making the news. 
So what does the CTS do for us? To begin with, it does away with the need for the physical 
movement  of  cheques  to  the  Clearing  House.  Instead,  their  images  are  captured 
electronically and used for transmission and processing. All this happens in the back-office 
and may not be visible to cheque users. The CTS is more efficient, has lower attendant risk, 
it is less time-consuming and less costly into the bargain. It has many benefits for both users 
and  for  banks.  Cheque  imaging  makes  it  easier  to  detect  fraudulent  transactions  as 
electronic processing facilitates signature authentication, curtailing forgery and other cheque 
alterations. It also clears the arteries of business and finance. Funds become available faster 
as the clearing cycle is shorter. The significant reduction of the float-time enables a better 
management of cash flows and working capital for economic operators. The CTS will add to 
the  convenience  of  cheques  and  may  even  stimulate  their  greater  use  as  there  are,  at 
present, many merchants who are reluctant to accept cheques for reasons of security and 
liquidity. 
Over  and  above  its  benefits,  the  CTS  also  has  an  emblematic  value.  It  illustrates  our 
unrelenting  quest  for  change,  for  innovation  and  for  new  technology  to  achieve  greater 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
the  GEF  rating 
those  vital  pillars  of 
efficiency  in  the  banking  industry,  to  enhance our  banking  experience  and  to  increase  our 
competitiveness,  especially  on 
for  efficiency 
enhancement and technical innovation. It is not surprising therefore that the news of the new 
Mauritian system is already exciting the curiosity of other countries and we have had over the 
past  two  years  delegations  from  central  banks  of  Kenya,  Nigeria,  Papua  New  Guinea, 
Rwanda, Seychelles and Uganda, visiting us to learn more about our new system which we 
are putting in place. 
The CTS is here. But our quest for efficiency enhancement and innovation continues. So let 
me give you a very brief overview of what you may expect from the Bank of Mauritius in the 
months ahead. 
– 
First, we shall extend the CTS to the Accountant General’s Office so that Treasury 
officers will be spared their daily trudge to the bank’s counters, carrying a sackful of 
paper  cheques.  They  will  be  able  to  scan  and  digitize  their  cheques  and  transmit 
them for clearance just like the clearing banks. 
Second, we shall examine with the Mauritius Revenue Authority whether it may also 
benefit from similar arrangements. We greatly value our collaboration with MRA and 
it was in response to their requirement that we introduced a multi-currency payment 
facility  which  assisted  us  to  obtain  the  mandate  to  run  the  COMESA  REPSS 
(Regional Payments and Settlement System). 
Third we are also implementing a Bulk Clearing System for deferred net settlements, 
compliant with the World Bank and BIS recommendations, This will allow low-value 
high-volume  regular  transactions  such  as  payrolls,  standing  orders,  direct  debit 
cards and point-of-sale transactions to be incorporated in the electronic system. 
Fourth,  we  begin  work  soon  on  a  major  project  to  introduce  a  National  Switch, 
provided  for  under  our  Act,  −  a  technological  platform  which  will  become  a  key 
element of our national payments infrastructure. It will serve as a sound, low-cost, 
platform  for  future  e-payments.  This  ATM/POS  switch  will  enable  us  to  handle 
domestic  ATM  and  POS  transactions  without  incurring  the  extra  charges  which 
apply when the handling is done via the card networks. 
   Once we provide e-clearing on a locally-provided network like the National Switch, we are 
confident that our payment system infrastructure can stand comparison with the best in the 
world. 
A word about the banking landscape and the global economy may be in order. We can crow 
as much as we want that our banks and our economy have been spared the worst effects of 
the  prolonged  crisis  which  has  ravaged  the  banks  and  the  economies  of  the  developed 
world. The fact of the matter is that we live in an interdependent world and, whether we like it 
or  not,  we  are  an  open  and  export-dependent  country.  Our  large  import  and  export 
elasticities mean that we are exposed in multiple ways. 
There are dark clouds hanging over the global economy and the recovery, which never quite 
got going, is now clearly faltering and growth is stalling. Plans to save the Eurozone succeed 
one  another  like  one  of  those  interminable  soap  operas,  but  they  do  not  succeed.  The 
doomsayers are out in full throttle and another recession is on the cards. The crisis, far from 
abating, may actually be mutating into an even more intractable form. For global economic 
recovery, we may well be in for the long haul. We shall have to take preemptive measures 
wherever we can to ensure that we minimise any negative fallout. 
Large  universal  banks  are  facing  increasing  balance-sheet  pressure,  under  the  double 
impact of past bad debts, including sovereigns, and the prospect of higher capital-adequacy 
and  liquidity  rules  coming  under  Basel  III.  Several,  like  UBS,  ABN/AMRO,  Credit  Suisse, 
Barclays,  HSBC,  and  others  have  started  laying  off  large  numbers  of  staff.  Others,  like 
Citigroup and Santander, are disposing of overseas branches where they can unlock value to 
raise much-needed capital. This has at least three lessons for us: 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
First, the worsening economic outlook underlines the need for cost-cutting measures and for 
increasing efficiency in the banking sector – which is exactly what we aim to achieve with the 
CTS which we are rolling out this evening. Despite our skilled navigation, we remain exposed 
to the financial distress and the sovereign debt crisis of the western world. Any step we can 
take  to  increase  efficiency  and  complete  financial  transactions  more  rapidly  to  reduce  the 
need for working capital, will help us to elude the general slowing of the world economy and 
the adverse impact of the faltering recovery elsewhere. 
Second,  we  should  not  be  surprised  if  some  of  the  international  bank  branches  and 
subsidiaries which are operating in our country are affected by the policies being pursued by 
their overseas parent. We can seek to insulate our jurisdiction a little by insisting that any 
future international bank, that sets up operations in Mauritius, does so via a subsidiary. 
Third, it is vital that we address issues going under the seemingly-innocuous triple acronyms 
of LCFI, SIFI, and TBTF. Telling ourselves “It won’t happen here!” won’t do. We must come 
to  grips  with  LCFI’s,  large  complex  financial  institutions,  especially  those  that  are  SIFI’s, 
systemically important financial institutions, and may qualify as TBTF, or too big to fail. 
This last point is particularly troublesome for a small economy. We have a high degree of 
concentration in the banking sector, with the Hirshman-Herfindahl Index standing at 2024 in 
June  this  year,  which  is  unusually  high  and  well  above  1800,  the  entry  point  for  high 
concentration. The top two banks, both local, have total domestic assets which exceed by 
more than 30 per cent the combined assets of all the other 15 banks which have domestic 
operations. We have associated problems arising from the concentration of asset ownership 
in  the  country  −  which  makes  it  very  problematic  to  apply  such  notions  as  “independent 
directors”, “related party transactions”, or to have recourse to such prudential principles as 
the regular rotation of auditors and so forth. These may become a source of vulnerability and 
undermine financial stability as contagion can spread rapidly through the domestic banking 
and financial system. 
More pointedly, some of the banking groups have just become too large and too diversified 
for the central bank to supervise as effectively as we would wish with the resources at our 
disposal.  We  intend  to  work  with  the  banking  industry,  and  in  particular  with  the  banks 
directly  concerned,  to  ring-fence  domestic  banking  operations  which  will  be  subject  to  full 
supervision including risk-based and macroprudential supervision. To achieve that, we shall 
move  away  from  the  current  bank-holding  model  to  the  bank-subsidiary  model.  This  will 
require some re-structuring and re-engineering. That, and more innovation is for the future. 
Before I leave the changing face of the banking scene let me offer a final word on how the 
central bank is playing its role beyond our borders. We have been providing technical advice 
to  many  of  our  central  banking  colleagues  from  abroad  who  have  come  to  assess  our 
innovations  in  the  payment  system,  credit  information,  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy, 
foreign exchange management, and even how we run the Governor’s Office. We now host 
the REPSS to meet the cross-border payment settlement needs of COMESA countries. We 
are  now  engaged  in  consultations  to  make  REPSS  the  settlement  platform  for  countries 
beyond COMESA. Our voice is increasingly heard in regional fora. 
And  the  hot  news:  we  have  just  been  invited,  along  with  ten  other  countries  to  join  the 
Financial  Stability  Board’s  regional  consultative  group  for  Sub-Saharan  Africa.  The  FSB, 
which  functions  under  the  aegis  of  the  BIS  in  Basel,  develops  and  promotes  effective 
regulatory,  supervisory  and  other  financial  sector  policies  to  further  financial  stability.  It 
comprises 24 countries and jurisdictions of systemic importance. The regional consultative 
groups  will  feed  into  FSB  deliberations  to  support  the  work  of  promoting  international 
financial stability. For so small a country, in so large a region, − this is a signal honour with a 
GDP of US$10 billion, or less than 0.6% African Continental GDP. 
So  the  process  of  banking  and  financial  sector  reform  continues.  Rest  assured  that  your 
central bank remains both vigilant and innovative, seeking always to ensure that we have a 
safe, dependable, and efficient banking industry, which fulfils our role of clearing the way for 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
local modern business and for all those who use our continually improving high’tech banking 
system. 
And  so  this  evening  as  we  focus  on  the  new  Cheque  Truncation  System,  at  a  stroke  the 
Prime  Minister  will  now  ensure  that  old  process  of  manually  clearing  cheques  passes  into 
history! 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
