Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Advancing women’s leadership in public life  
Speech by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the Women in 
Leadership Forum “Power sharing in the public sector”, Kuala Lumpur, 22 February 2011. 
 Introduction 
In  this  twenty-first  century,  it  is  human  capital  rather  than  physical  capital  that  will  define 
performance and progress. Women represent half of the world population and therefore half 
the potential resource that can drive such performance. This is reinforced by the more recent 
trend that increasingly, the majority of those with college education are women. Increasingly 
therefore,  this  group  represents  a  more  significant  resource  potential  that  can  rise  to 
leadership  positions.  In  emerging  economies,  where  such  high  powered  talent  is  scarce, 
gender has not been of an issue. Women have risen to leadership positions based on their 
merits and capabilities. 
Women  in  Malaysia  have  certainly  made  significant  strides  in  their  participation  in  all 
segments  of  the  Malaysian  economy  and  have  demonstrated  their  ability  to  lead  and  to 
succeed in both the public and private sectors. It is my honour to be here today to speak at 
this Women in Leadership Forum on the topic on “Advancing Women’s Leadership in Public 
Life:  Power  Sharing  in  the  Public  Sector”.  In  Asia,  in  particular,  women  have  risen  to  key 
positions  and  have  been  given  the  opportunity  to  contribute  to  the  nation’s  progress  and 
development.  In  an  age  of  greater  demands  for  performance  and  in  an  environment  of 
increased scrutiny and transparency, the transition to such leadership positions has not been 
based on gender. Indeed, it is based on the capability as administrators, policy makers and 
thought  leaders.  Power  sharing  is  therefore  the  shared  power  to  contribute  to  the  nation 
rather than on the power that is wielded. My presentation today will therefore start on the role 
of the public sector and its accountabilities before discussing women and leadership in the 
public sector, its challenges and some strategies for success.  
is 
therefore 
immense.  History  has  shown 
Accountabilities of the public sector  
The  role  and  accountabilities  of  the  public  sector  differs  markedly  from  the  private  sector. 
Unlike  in  the  private  sector,  financial  measures  are  generally  not  the  indicator  of  the 
performance of agencies in the public sector. In addition, actions taken by the public sector 
have far reaching implications on the economic well being of the public at large and entire 
spectrum of businesses. Such actions may even have implications on other countries given 
the  greater  international  interdependence  that  prevails  in  the  current  environment.  The 
responsibility  and  accountability 
that 
mismanagement  can  greatly  damage  a  nation  resulting  in  high  costs  to  the  people  of  the 
country. In contrast, well managed nations have brought great prosperity to its people. 
Being in the public sector is all about bringing value and benefits to its citizens. Such benefits 
can  include  improved  housing,  education,  health  and  transportation.  It  could  also  include 
eradication  of  poverty,  reduction  in  crime  and  environmental  sustainability.  In  the  current 
environment of greater transparency and enhanced communication channels, there is now 
greater awareness of the prevailing circumstances. This has produced high expectations. It 
has also reduced tolerance for inefficiency, poor performance, irregular practices and non-
delivery of the results. The expectations are for a public sector that best serves its nation and 
that delivers the expected results in the most effective and efficient manner.  
Similar to the private sector, the public sector is confronted with a dynamic environment of 
rapid change. Approaches that have produced previous successes may now have become 
no  longer  relevant.  In  these  situations,  previous  skills  and  capabilities  will  no  longer  be 
adequate. In addition, it will be the cumulative efforts of all parts of the public sector that will 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
produce the results. It will no longer depend on a specific part of the system but on several 
parts of the system. Previous arrangements will therefore become no longer effective. New 
challenges  that  have  become  more  complex  will  require  new  tools  and  systems  to  solve 
them. The organisation will thus need to be transformed to meet the changing requirements 
of the new environment. 
To contribute to a nation’s progress and development, therefore, demands for the ability to 
manage  these  new  challenges.  The  role  of  the  leadership  in  the  public  sector  has  thus 
changed significantly. Successful nations are those that have accorded priority to its human 
capital  and  to  organisational  review  and  transformation.  Given  the  scarce  high-powered 
human capital, there are tremendous opportunities for women with the capabilities to take on 
leadership  responsibilities  in  the  public  sector  and  thus  contribute  towards  achieving  the 
greater well being of the population.  
Advancing women’s leadership in the public sector 
As  an  important  component  of  the  human  capital  resources  women  are  increasingly 
becoming  a  growing  force  in  the  talent  pool.  To  advance  forward  to  leadership  positions 
requires the investment in leadership development. While there are several common threads 
in  leadership  in  both  the  private  and  public  sectors,  there  are  some  specific  leadership 
characteristics that are important for the public sector. 
Firstly,  it  involves  having  great  clarity  of  the  vision  –  of  the  objective  that  needs  to  be 
achieved by the organisation and the results that needs to be delivered. Unlike in the private 
sector, this is not measured in terms of financial results. Frequently this may be difficult to 
measure in quantitative terms. Nevertheless, it is vital so that the resources and energies of 
the  organisation  can  be  aligned  to  achieving  the  results.  Equally  important,  it  allows  the 
organisation to stay focussed, to stay on course when there are a multitude of pressures that 
may  disrupt  or  distract  the  organisation  by  different  stakeholders  that  have  different 
perceptions and expectations on the organisation. 
Secondly, is having the ability to articulate this vision with others in the organisation and also 
with those that will be affected by the actions taken by the organisation. This is to ensure that 
the energies of the workforce will be channelled to achieving the strategic results required. 
Very often, the shared vision with those that are affected by the actions of the organisation 
also allows for the combined efforts to be mutually reinforcing. 
Thirdly,  and  importantly  is  knowing  and  understanding  the  business  and  the  key  elements 
that drive the organisation. Knowing how the system works and how the objectives might be 
realised. This involves having the knowledge, the skills, the information, the methodologies 
and the organisational structures needed to deliver the results. This is important so that the 
ideas can be translated into results.  
Fourth,  given  the  nature  of  the  business  of  the  public  sector  and  the diverse  stakeholders 
involved, leadership in the sector requires coordination and integration skills that is able to 
pull together diverse thinking and diverse information and the ability to integrate the different 
perspectives  into  a  solution  that  produces  the  desired  outcomes.  This  will  also  involve 
coordination skills required to bring together not only the different parts of the organisation 
but also other organisations in the public sector that can contribute to achieving the desired 
results. 
Fifth,  it  involves  managing  trade-offs.  Frequently,  actions  that  need  to  be  taken  involve 
different  implications  on  different  target  groups.  This  may  involve  interests  that  are 
conflicting. This will therefore involve balancing the trade-offs and managing the risks to the 
different interests of the different segments of society.  
Sixth, is a skill that is increasingly important in the current environment. It is the management 
of crisis. Unlike previously, when conditions were relatively stable, the current environment is 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
frequently plagued by crisis. During such times of distress and instability, the public sector is 
at  the  forefront  in  providing  a  response,  in  providing  a  solution  to  the  crisis.  In  making 
decisions, during such times, any delays, inaction or wrong policies can produce widespread 
damage to the entire country.  
Seventh,  is  the  ability  to  effectively  manage  under  intense  pressures. Such  pressures  can 
emanate  from  the  high  expectations  of  the  different  stakeholders,  the  crisis  conditions  or 
from the failure of other parts of the public sector that have implications on your performance. 
However, being strategically focussed and having the ability to stay on course avoids being 
derailed by such pressures. 
Eighth,  is  then  courage  and  bravery  to  undertake  the  responsibilities.  At  the  extreme  it 
requires having nerves of steel. This is to enable sound decisions at the time of high level of 
distress and ensures that the organisation remains calm and cohesive during such times. 
Ninth, is having the drive and unwavering perseverance to pursue the vision. The agenda of 
public  sector  which  is  to  ultimately  improve  the  well  being  of  its  citizens  is  a  long  haul 
business which therefore requires perseverance. It often requires several pre-conditions to 
be in place, it requires having the enabling environment and the different parts of the public 
sector  to  come  together  to  act  cumulatively  to  deliver  the  results.  Frequently,  this 
synchronisation  does  not  happen.  Strong  convictions  on  the  cause,  reinforced  by  the 
capabilities  and  supported  by  the  perseverance  increases  the  potential  to  produce  results 
that makes the difference. 
Finally,  and  most  importantly  is  the  ability  for  continuous  reinvention.  The  changing 
environment  is  more  globalised,  more  competitive,  more  uncertain  and  ambiguous,  more 
technologically driven, more prone to crisis, and is subject to greater scrutiny and demands 
for greater transparency. This more difficult operating environment demands new skills and 
abilities to manage these new challenges. Indeed, the role of leadership is dynamic and has 
changed considerably. Reinvention is to support the ability to creatively respond to change. 
Building effective organisations 
To  strengthen  our  ability  to  manage  the  new  challenges  arising  from  the  changed 
environment, equally important is building effective organisations with the capabilities that will 
deliver results. This will involve organisational reviews and the continuously modernising of 
the organisation so that it can continue to best serve the nation. Such endeavour will require 
periodic  environmental  scans  and  envisioning  to  revalidate  the  strategic  thrust  of  the 
organisation. Modernisation efforts then need to be supported by a blueprint of the strategic 
steps and initiatives that need to be taken. Women that have the capability must be brought 
in at the leadership levels to participate in this process. To increase opportunities for women 
would require opportunities for education and for the acquisition of experience and exposure. 
After formal education, it is experience and expertise gained from coaching and mentoring 
that will further enhance an individual’s contribution to organisational effectiveness. 
In a modernised organisation, the performance management process demands the highest 
level  of  excellence  and  the  ability  to  produce  the  desired  results  within  the  specified  time 
frame.  Transformed  organisations  involve  a  shift  from  task  based  activities  to  becoming 
result  oriented  with  clear  focus  on  the  mandate  and  the  key  performance  indicators.  To 
incentivise  such  a  performance  driven  organisation,  recognition  of  performance  and  the 
reward system in place needs to be highly differentiated. For many countries this is yet to be 
put in place.  
The organisational transformation also needs to place value on life-long learning, knowledge 
management and opportunities for greater work life balance. Opportunities for learning are 
vital for capability development. Finally, new governance structures also are keys to ensure 
the rigour of how decisions are made in the organisation and that there are sufficient checks 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
and balances to ensure the best decisions are made and the highest level of credibility and 
integrity are achieved. 
Challenges 
While  the  opportunities  are  immense  for  women  in  the  public  sector,  yet  few  rise  to 
leadership  positions.  While  there  is  still  a  glass  ceiling,  as  we  advance  forward  into  the 
future,  the  foundations are  already  in  place  for women  to  advance  forward  into  leadership 
positions. The challenge is to recognise continuous reinvention that is needed – to acquire 
new knowledge, new skills, new experience so as to be able to have the new capabilities to 
deal with the new challenges.  
For  a  woman  who  is  a  mother,  wife  and  daughter,  the  sacrifice  involved  is  great.  The 
challenge will be to achieve a balance so that work performance is not being adhered at all 
cost.  Support  systems  at  the  work  place  and  at  home  is  vital.  Equally  important  is  time 
management,  stress  management  and  people management.  Finally,  more  so  in  the  public 
sector – as the pressures come from several fronts given the far reaching and wide spread 
implications  of  the  actions  taken,  leadership  positions  require  a  high  level  of  courage  and 
endurance. Having strategic focus and energies aligned to achieving the results reinforces 
the ability to cope under such pressures. 
Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude  my  remarks.  The  demands  that  leadership  in  the  public  sector  entails  is 
immense. Such leadership is about delivering results and making a difference in the lives of 
others. To achieve this, there needs to be a conscious need to reinvent ourselves to be able 
to  rise  to  the  imperatives  of  duty  to  the  nation.  This  reinvention  involves  leadership, 
institutional and organisational capabilities to respond to the changes in the environment. It is 
with these transformations that we are set to successfully lead. 
While women are a growing force in the talent pool, the real power will be a shared power. It 
will be women and men working together leveraging on each others comparative strengths, 
experience  and  knowledge  that  will  allow  us  to  make  the  difference  that  best  suits  our 
circumstances and that is able to bring us to the best level of performance and progress. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
