Erkki Liikanen: The European experience – the foundation for the 
promotion of securities markets in Finland 
Speech  by  Mr  Erkki  Liikanen,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Finland,  at  a  seminar  entitled 
“Lessons of the financial crisis”, Helsinki, 10 June 2011. 
 The European experience 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
In  Europe,  the  first  signs  of  the  latest  financial  crisis  emerged  in  the  money  market.  The 
spreads between collateralized and uncollateralized market rates started to increase rapidly. 
We  witnessed  the  development  of  elevated  financial  market  stress  that  turned  out  to  be 
unprecedented  in  modern  financial history.  Liquidity  was  suddenly  becoming  a  scarce  and 
costly  asset.  These  developments  were  particularly  disturbing  to  central  banks  as  the 
damaged  transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  policy  ruptured  the  steady  relationship 
between policy and lending rates. 
It was not only the pricing of the liquidity risk that had been ignored over the years preceding 
the  crisis.  Banks  started  to  feel  uncomfortable  with  the  exposures  they  had  been  used  to 
taking on with each other. Suddenly it was not enough to rely on close business relationships 
and trust.  
Once banks started to hoard liquidity, it was not only an indication of scarce liquidity, but a 
sign  of  an  even  more  fundamental  problem.  Counterparty  risks  had  risen  to  a  new  level. 
Increases in counterparty risk were fuelled by falling asset prices – as banks saw how their 
own balance sheets started to deteriorate, they became worried about other banks’ balance 
sheets being affected even more. 
Also  unprecedented  in  financial  history  was  the  speed  with  which  counterparty  risk  was 
shifted  from  one  country  to  another.  The  global  lack  of  trust  between  banks  had  a  major 
negative  impact  on  international  trade.  Inventories  in  firms  were  cut  to  a  minimum  and 
investment  plans  were  frozen  at  a  record  pace.  Consumers  increased  their  precautionary 
savings. All this caused a sharp global downturn, or a Great Recession as it is now called. In 
many countries this was comparable to the great depression of the 1930s. 
Policy  makers  reacted  promptly  and  massively  to  the  crisis  in  all  areas.  A  strong  fiscal 
stimulus  was  supported  globally.  TTT,  Timely,  targeted  and  temporary  was  the  often-used 
phrase. Monetary policy reacted aggressively in all advanced economies. Interest rates were 
lowered at a record pace and liquidity was pumped into to the banking systems. 
As  the  first  signs  of  the  banking  crises  started  to  materialize,  actions  taken  were 
miscellaneous, depending on the symptoms. But there was one common source of risk that 
had a global impact. It was related to the mortgage markets in the US. Housing loans had 
been  originated  without  sufficient  documentation  or  with  overly  optimistic  underwriting 
assumptions.  Then  these  housing  loans  were  sold  off  in  complex  derivative  securities 
globally. Credit rating agencies had given them high ratings. Suddenly financial institutions 
had highly risky positions in their balance sheets due to either a lack of diversification or to 
excessive leverage ratios. This risk taking was high enough to wipe out all big investment 
banks in the US and to cause bank failures and serious deleveraging needs in Europe. 
Often these failures had an insidious reason behind them. The transparency of the banks’ 
balance  sheets  had  been  weakened  by  the  off-balance  arrangements.  This  was  a  further 
reason  for  increased  counterparty  risk.  Regulators  and  supervisors  had  allowed  financial 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
institutions to shift a considerable part of their activities to special purpose entities. This often 
happened with generous credit lines from the parent financial institutions. 
When liquidity became scarce and asset prices started to fall, those credit lines turned out to 
be  a  big  burden  for  banks’  capital.  Failures  of  the  off  balance  sheet  institutions  and  the 
resulting losses to the parent companies were the origin of serious deleveraging needs that 
put a burden on banks, especially in Europe, to this day. 
Banks’ problems, first country by country, and after Lehman, globally, forced governments to 
promise – implicitly or explicitly – blanket guarantees to safeguard financial institutions. For 
some countries and financial institutions this was a blessing, but for other countries it turned 
out to be a fatal kiss. During the years leading to financial crisis some countries had made a 
choice to centre their growth strategies around financial services. UK, Iceland, Ireland and to 
come extent even Sweden were examples. 
The strategy worsened the downturn and increased the banks’ need to deleverage further. 
New capital was also needed. What was not recognized were the consequences of financial 
crises in the situation when the size of the banking sector was huge compared to the GDP. 
Iceland and Ireland were leading examples, In Ireland and Iceland this strategy was also the 
main cause of the government debt crises that immediately followed. 
There  was  also  another  route  that  ended  in  problems  to  banking.  In  Greece  and  Portugal 
government  deficits  turned  out  to  be  unsustainable.  This  was  the  outcome  of  slumping 
competitiveness  and  slow  growth.  It  also  became  evident  that  the  banking  sector  in  any 
country is highly dependent on the sovereign market of the home country. 
The outcome was unfortunate and highly costly. In Greece, Ireland and Portugal banks have 
lost their access to interbank markets. They have become dependent on the central bank’s 
liquidity provision. 
Eurosystem has provided liquidity at various stages of the crises, in different ways, and at 
various  maturities.  These  were  known  as  non-standard  measures.  The  response  of  the 
central banks around the world can be characterized similarly. 
Within the euro area the maturities of lending operations were extended from three months 
up  to  one  year  and  fixed  rate  full  allotment  auctions  were  introduced.  Non-standard 
measures were introduced aimed at restoring a more normal functioning of the transmission 
mechanism and an environment where the standard measures could operate effectively. 
One of the lessons from the crisis is that the terms and conditions of how collateral is priced 
are  vital  to  modern  financial  markets.  The  importance  of  collateral  policies  of  the  central 
banks may not have been sufficiently appreciated from the financial stability perspective. In 
times  of  an  economic  boom  banks  feel  they  are  very  liquid  as  asset  prices  increase  and 
emission of new credit flourishes. 
When  financial  markets  were  encouraged  to  expand,  many  decisions  were  guided  by 
efficiency considerations. Liquidity pools and acceptance of various assets and asset classes 
as  collateral  to  central  bank  credit  made  it  very  easy  for  banks  to  rely  on  central  bank 
financing or short term market financing in general. 
The  Eurosystem  can  extend  credit  only  against  adequate  collateral.  Before  the  crisis,  the 
Eurosystem accepted a wider set of assets as collateral than most of its peer institutions did. 
Furthermore,  some  of  the  collateral  eligibility  criteria  were  expended  during  the  financial 
market crises. Once the still ongoing series of crisis becomes economic history, we should 
rethink our collateral policy. 
One possibility, suggested by our in-house analysis, is to make a clearer separation between 
the assets that are eligible for monetary policy operations and the assets that are eligible for 
operations  addressing  banks’  specific  liquidity  needs.  For  example,  the  Eurosystem  could 
limit the set of collateral eligible to Main Refinancing Operations – the weekly operations by 
which  the  monetary  policy  stance  is  signalled  –  to  the  assets  eligible  for  the  most  liquid 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
private repo markets. Through this, the monetary policy operations would more directly affect 
the  market  rates  relevant  for  monetary  policy  transmission,  instead  of  impacting  rates  that 
carry  significant  liquidity  and  credit  risk  premia  compared  to  the  market  repo  rates.  The 
central bank would clearly be the rate setter with its policy operations. 
Less  liquid  assets  could  continue  to  be  eligible  for  marginal  lending,  being  used  to  cover 
banks’  temporary  liquidity  needs,  and  possibly  also  for  longer  term  and  other  structural 
liquidity  providing  operations,  if  the  banking  sector’s  liquidity  deficit,  i.e.  banks’  structural 
need  for  central  bank  reserves,  remains  wide.  Contrary  to  the  policy  operation,  the 
Eurosystem normally acts as a rate taker in longer term operations. Hence, the lower liquidity 
of the collateral eligible in these operations would be priced by the market demand. 
Using  this  kind  of  segregation  of  collateral,  between  the  different  functions  that  can  be 
assigned to various operations, the Eurosystem would not only assist its control over the risk 
free short term interest rates, but this idea could also be used to facilitate the monetary policy 
implementation  once  the  Basel  III  liquidity  regulation  becomes  effective.  For  example,  the 
assets  eligible  for  Main  Refinancing  Operations  could  equal  the  set  of  debt  instruments 
meeting the Basel III Level 1 criteria. 
Greater focus on financial stability and macroprudential oversight1 
The latter part of my presentation is related to the conduct of macroprudential policies. 
One of the key lessons of the latest global financial crisis is that central banks – and other 
authorities  –  need  to  pay  much  more  attention  to  financial  stability  and  macroprudential 
oversight. New institutions in which central banks play a key role have already been created 
to identify the emerging systemic risks and to take actions to mitigate these risks. Examples 
of  such  institutions  include  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB)  in  the  EU,  the 
Financial  Policy  Committee  (FPC)  within  the  Bank  of  England  and  the  Financial  Stability 
Oversight Council (FSOC) in the United States. 
There is a plethora of open and difficult issues concerning how macroprudential policy should 
be conducted and which policy instruments are the most efficient in reducing systemic risks. 
Today, I will set most of these difficult questions aside and concentrate on an issue that has 
not  yet  received  as  much  attention  as  it  deserves.  How  should  national  macroprudential 
policies  be  coordinated  so  that  the  combination  of  these  policies  would  be  efficient  at  the 
regional or global level? 
The  recent  financial  crisis  painfully  showed  how  quickly  and  forcefully  financial  crises  can 
spread  over  national  borders  in  a  world  of  integrated  financial  markets  and  systems. 
Because of the ever-deepening financial integration, financial cycles are likely to be highly 
correlated across countries also in the future. 
In such a world, a successful national macroprudential policy entails positive externalities, as 
a reduction of financial risks in one country contributes to financial stability in other countries. 
Conversely, a national inaction entails negative externalities, as financial problems are more 
likely to spread to other countries in the absence of decisive national policy measures. 
I  argue  that  in  the  absence  of  strong  international  coordination,  national  policymakers  are 
likely  to  fail  to  internalize  these  positive  externalities.  This  would  lead  to  a  combination  of 
passive  national  macroprudential  policies  that  are  dangerously  weak  in  preventing  future 
global financial crises. 
Let me elaborate further. 
                                                 
1  This section owes much to Tuomas Saarenheimo (2010). Towards a European macroprudential policy. Bank 
of Finland Bulletin 1/2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Consider a strong upturn of an international financial cycle, during which asset prices grow at 
a fast pace, leverage increases excessively and the pricing of risk declines simultaneously in 
many  countries  with  interconnected  financial  markets.  This  scenario  resembles,  of  course, 
the developments in the years preceding the latest global financial crisis. To prevent these 
risks  materialising into a  systemic  global  financial  crisis,  national  authorities  should  tighten 
their macroprudential policy and possibly other economic policies. 
Now,  consider  the  decision-making  problem  of  a  macroprudential  authority  or  body  in  an 
individual country. This authority may find it difficult to tighten the national macroprudential 
policy for two reasons. 
First,  there  is  a  well  known  problem  of  “taking  the  punch  bowl  away  in  the  middle  of  the 
party”. This political economy constraint is likely to be even stronger than when interest rates 
are increased to contain inflation: there is at least some constituency that dislikes inflation, 
but none that dislikes the intoxicating feeling of getting richer2. 
Second,  as  I  mentioned  earlier,  a  country  which  is  tightening  its  macroprudential  policy  in 
isolation  would  internalise  only  part  of  the  financial  stability  benefits  of  macroprudential 
tightening while bearing all the perceived costs in terms of the reduced competitiveness of 
the national financial industry. This may lead to a first-mover disadvantage problem, where 
no country is willing to be the first to tighten its macroprudential policy unless it knows that 
other countries are committed to doing the same. 
Unless  properly  addressed,  these  disincentives  to  pursue  active  national  macroprudential 
policies may lead to a bad equilibrium, where global macroprudential policies become overly 
passive. This implies that the identification of effective macroprudential instruments – which 
in itself is a formidable task – does not guarantee that these instruments are used efficiently 
either at the national or global level. 
What can we do to avoid this bad equilibrium? I have three suggestions. 
First, to decrease the extensive political pressure not to take action, we should try to develop 
and improve the rules-based macroprudential policy instruments as much as possible. These 
instruments,  such  as  the  dynamic  loan  loss  provisions  used  in  Spain  and  the  capital 
conservation buffer of the Basel III framework, act at best as automatic stabilisers that do not 
require  continuous  discretionary  policy  decisions.  The  countercyclical  capital  buffer 
requirement  included  in  the  Basel  III  framework  also  includes  a  rules-based  element,  as 
national authorities are advised to use an indicator developed by the Basel Committee as a 
benchmark in their national buffer decisions. 
Economists in the Bank of Finland have done some preliminary analysis on the feasibility of 
rules-based loan-to-value requirements3. I urge the research community to intensify its efforts 
to develop simple and robust rules-based macroprudential tools. 
Second, national macroprudential authorities need strong enough mandates, independence 
and  legitimacy  to  make  their  discretionary  macroprudential  policy  decisions.  Efficient 
macroprudential actions will be highly unpopular. The costs of these actions are immediate 
whereas  their  benefits  become  visible  only  in  the  years  to  come.  The  weaker  the 
macroprudential authorities, the more likely they are to bow under the political pressure and 
not intervene in the developing systemic risks. 
Third,  to  reduce  the  first-mover  disadvantage  problem,  we  need  a  strong  international 
coordination  of  national  macroprudential  policies.  In  the  EU,  the  European  Systemic  Risk 
Board should take this coordinating role. 
                                                 
2  Claudio  Borio  (2010).  Implementing  a  macroprudential  framework:  Blending  boldness  and  realism.  Speech, 
22.7.2010. 
3  Juhana Hukkinen and Karlo Kauko (2011). Macroprudential tools (in Finnish), unpublished, Bank of Finland. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
to  a 
recommendations 
larger  group  of  authorities. 
Without  doubt,  this  is  a  difficult  task.  The  ESRB  has  to  strike  the  right  balance  between 
directing  its  recommendations  on  macroprudential  policies  to  individual  authorities  and 
making  collective 
Individual 
recommendations may be more effective in alleviating the first-mover coordination problem 
but may, at worst, be regarded by national authorities as a critique that they have failed to do 
their job properly. In such a case, their response may be defensive rather than constructive. 
Collective recommendations, in turn, would largely remove the stigma related to individually 
targeted  recommendations  but  be  less  effective  in  reducing  the  problem  of  first-mover 
disadvantage. 
Finding  a  workable  solution  to  this  trade-off  will  be  one  the  ESRB´s  key  challenges  in  the 
coming years. 
I thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
