Rundheersing  Bheenick: 
financial services industry – a regulator’s view 
Address by Mr Rundheersing Bheenick, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at the Mauritius 
Institute of Directors’ Breakfast Forum, Ebène, 22 March 2011. 
Improving  corporate  governance 
the 
in 
 I  am  a  bit  disappointed  this  morning  with  this  breakfast  event!  I  was  looking  forward  to  a 
hearty English breakfast – I believe this is the only breakfast that is worth inviting people to!  
But, I am delighted to learn that I am the very first Mauritian that you have asked to join you 
at your breakfast meetings. I’ll tell you why I was looking forward to this breakfast – my own 
first contact with the English breakfast was memorable. You might be interested to know that 
my  very  first  encounter  with  the  English  breakfast  was  when  I  went  up  to  Oxford  as  a 
Laureate and as a near-vegetarian. I immediately had to protest that the whole of the College 
menu was for me well-nigh inedible. I was forthwith summoned to the office of the Domestic 
Bursar, a very English gentleman, Rear-Admiral Denis Hetherington.  
“You’re from Mauritius, I believe?” he asked.  
“Yes, Sir”.  
“Ah! Mauritius! I was in Mauritius with my ship in 1926; wonderful place for a brief 
stop-over for revictualling”.  
I explained my revictualling problem and he resolved it forthwith; so, instead of the English 
breakfast staple of eggs and bacon, I had a diet of two fried eggs for breakfast …an omelet 
for lunch…and another omelet for dinner. I really went to work on eggs in my College days.  
Those of you who, like me, have lived in England for a while, will have mixed views on the 
quality  of  English  cuisine.  That  fine,  though  sadly  now  out  of  fashion,  writer  W  Somerset 
Maugham,  when  confronted  by  a  friend  who  said  he  hated  English  food,  responded  with 
telling irony:  
“All you have to do is eat breakfast three times a day”. 
So, I’m sorry that the start we have made today is not based on that sound English culinary 
principle:  
“Go to work on an egg”. 
I am, of course, just being facetious to make sure that everybody is wide and truly awake! I 
must say it is a real pleasure to be here and I am most grateful for your invitation to introduce 
a breakfast discussion, with or without my college diet of eggs. So let’s get to work on the 
subject you have given me through your Chairman, my friend Georges Leung Shing: 
“Improving Corporate Governance in the financial services industry in the World 
and, in particular, in Mauritius from the regulators’ point of view” 
Not a narrow topic, I see. Each one of these elements might perhaps justify a lecture in its 
own right, if not a book!  
Corporate Governance is far from being a narrow subject but going into the intricate details 
might,  I  fear,  provoke  some  indigestion  this  morning.  I  thought  that,  in  his  introductory 
remarks, my friend Georges has done a good job of setting up the boundaries within which to 
conduct our discussions on Corporate Governance. 
Among the previous guests that your Institute has invited at similar events in the past, I noted 
the names of Alex Berg and Prof Bob Garratt, who are well-known for their contribution in the 
area of corporate governance. I also see in the audience my good friend, Tim Taylor, who 
chaired  a  major  committee 
time  ago  
I  understand  some 
the  subject. 
locally  on 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Mervyn King – not Governor King from the Bank of England, but Prof King from South Africa 
– also paid us a visit and talked to many of you about Corporate Governance. He has been 
taking a key role in his own country, South Africa, which has established a name for itself in 
the area of Corporate Governance, with the King I, King II and King III Reports.  
What is corporate governance?  
The  modern  focus  on  corporate  governance  traces  its  origin  at  least  as  far  back  as  the 
Cadbury Report. Cadbury, with his own Quaker background, would obviously be concerned 
with issues of corporate governance, with its ethical and moral dimensions. 
We  don’t  need  to  discuss  Corporate  Governance  in  great  detail  here  this  morning.  Your 
Institute  has  been  paying  considerable  attention  to  the  subject  over  the  years  and  you  all 
know what it is. You are all aware of the various issues that crop up in this particular area. 
But I would all the same like to remind ourselves of the half a dozen or so key elements in 
Corporate  Governance,  which  cut  across  different  forms  of  organisation  and  areas  of 
economic  activity.  Those  elements  are:  Efficiency,  Openness,  Participation,  Accountability, 
Transparency, Probity, Effectiveness and Coherence. These key elements stand out in the 
different  treatments  of  the  subject  in  any  Report  on  Corporate  Governance  that  you  may 
come across.  
In  addition  to  national  reports  such  as  the  Cadbury  Report  of  the  UK  in  1992,  the  US 
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, the three King Reports in South Africa, and here in Mauritius, 
the Taylor Committee report of 2003/4, the World Bank has also deliberated on the subject. It 
produced  Standards  and  Codes  of  Conduct  on  Corporate  Governance  applicable  to  all 
countries,  rich  or  poor,  drawing  largely  on  the  principles  outlined  by  the  Organisation  for 
Economic Cooperation and Development, a grouping of rich countries. These global takes on 
the  subject  have  helped  extend  our  vision  of  Corporate  Governance  beyond  its  erstwhile 
narrow  focus  on  efficient  internal  management  of  a  company  to  cover  its  impact  on  the 
economy,  on  society  and  on  the  environment.  In  other  words,  the  scope  and  framework 
within  which  we  have  to  judge  Corporate  Governance  has  been  drastically  changed.  All 
these  codes  of  conduct  have  special  relevance  for  the  banking  and  financial  services 
sector –  as  well  as  for  central  banks  and  other  financial  sector  regulators,  which  act  as 
guardians of financial stability and promoters of economic growth.  
We,  at  the  Central  Bank,  have  issued  many  guidelines  on  different  issues  relating  to 
Corporate Governance. One of direct relevance is, appropriately enough, our Guideline on 
Corporate Governance. All these guidelines have been reviewed in line with the Banking Act 
of 2004, the Companies Act of 2001 and The Report on Corporate Governance for Mauritius 
mentioned earlier. They give special attention to the composition of the Boards of banks and 
their operation, the limitations on tenure of office, the importance of independent directors, 
the  qualifications  of  Board  members,  the  responsibilities  of  the  Board  and  its  various 
committees,  and  the  operation  of  the  audit  function.  These  are  all  factors  that  we,  at  the 
Bank,  use  in  our  monitoring  and  surveillance  of  the  banking  sector.  That  is  basically  the 
framework within which I am going to approach Corporate Governance in the banking and 
financial services sector.  
Let me now turn to the second leg of my remit this morning. 
What is the financial services industry?  
I  am  closer  to  home  here,  coming  from  the  Central  Bank  and  I  think  that  some  working 
definitions  are  helpful.  Financial  services  is  an  omnibus  term  covering  the  wide  range  of 
services provided by a gamut of financial institutions of which banks are only one part and an 
increasingly  smaller  part  as  they  are  commercial  banks  increasingly  overshadowed  by 
nimble,  but  often  undercapitalised  and  less  regulated,  entities  driven  by  the  pressure  of 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
financial  engineering.  We  have  foreign  exchange  bureaus,  loan  facilities  providers,  credit 
unions,  private  banks,  investment  banks,  investment  advisers,  building  societies  and  other 
mortgage  providers,  savings  units,  insurance  companies,  stock  exchanges,  financial  call-
centres,  etc.  –  we  could  extend  that  to  include  credit  rating  agencies,  suppliers  of 
professional and technology services to the rest of the industry, and so forth.  
Financial institutions,  such  as  these,  have  become  an  integral  part  of a  modern  economy: 
they  have  become  a  key  element  in  the  process  of  economic  transformation  from  basic 
subsistence  agriculture  to  the  modern  state  where  industrial  production  of  goods  and 
services, and financial services themselves, constitute the bulk of economic activity. Banks, 
along  with  the  joint  stock  company,  might  be  seen  as  the  sine  qua  non  of  economic 
transition. All these institutions have to operate within a framework of  commercial law and 
within codes of conduct and regulation to overcome what economists call “market failure”. In 
recent years, as the global economy got engulfed in an unprecedented peace-time crisis, the 
finger of blame has been pointing at the banking and finance sector as being the cause of it 
all.  Loose  regulation,  poor  supervision,  inadequate  enforcement,  perverse  incentives,  and 
other practices bordering on the criminal have all been identified as the main culprits. It all 
adds up to a massive failure of governance – both within the sector itself and at the level of 
the regulators and supervisors.  
In 2009, when the crisis was in full swing, the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) issued 
a report proposing guidelines for designing effective governance arrangements for each of 
the  major  functions  of  central  banks.  The  BIS-based  Basel  Committee  on  Banking 
Supervision  (BCBS)  has  been  working  towards  establishing  a  code  of  conduct  for  banks 
across the board in response to the crisis. But Basel II, as we all know, failed to forestall the 
crisis that we are living through, or even to forewarn of any impending crisis. Work on Basel 
III is at an advanced stage. It will take on board some of the lessons of the crisis and seek to 
minimize the frequency and severity of future crises. The Bank of Mauritius (BOM) itself is 
governed by the Bank of Mauritius Act of 2004, and those of you who follow les actualités in 
Mauritius,  know  that  we  had  our  own  problems  of  corporate  governance.  It  was  widely 
publicised and had to be ultimately resolved by resort to the Supreme Court. So, on the local 
scene,  we  have  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  Act  and  the  Banking  Act  from  which  we  draw  our 
supervisory remit. In addition, the Mauritius Bankers’ Association (MBA) has adopted since 
2007  a  Code  of  Banking  Practice,  which  encapsulates  international  best  practice,  for  the 
guidance of all commercial banks in the country.  
On  the  international  front,  we  are  bound  by  the  financial  and  commercial  policies  and 
practices of the major international players in the global financial system. A determining role 
in this is played by the so-called “Unholy Trinity”, that is the International Monetary Fund, the 
World Bank and the World Trade Organisation, which have all come under close scrutiny for 
various reasons in recent years, and many people think that all of them are ripe for radical 
reform and must fix their own governance and legitimacy problems in the first place before 
they can, once again, aspire to play a leadership role in these areas.  
What are financial regulators? 
Financial regulators, by and large, tend to be generally publicly-established institutions that 
go under different names in different jurisdictions, such as central bank, monetary authority, 
reserve bank, commission bancaire, autorité de supervision, financial services commission, 
etc,  which  have  oversight,  regulatory,  and  supervisory  authority  over  the  entire  sector,  or 
specific parts of it. All these regulators are there to enforce laws, issue regulations, and set 
standards  and  rules  for  the  conduct  of  financial  business.  The  financial  regulations  may 
cover, for example, the statutory registration of companies, the licensing of banks and the 
functions of the central bank. Other non-statutory rules may cover the extent and nature of 
reserves, liquidity, solvency, interest rates, foreign exchange dealings and holdings etc. The 
institutional framework for such regulatory control varies enormously across countries and is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
the subject of continuing debate. As you may be aware, many changes have been made or 
announced  in  the  US  and  the  UK  for  example,  where  Dodd-Frank  and  the  Vickers 
Committee  can  best  be  described  as  work  in  progress.  But  change  cannot  be  brusque  in 
such a critical area as banking. For regional or international financial centres, change cannot 
ignore any potential regulatory arbitrage or its likely impact. There are many pending issues, 
here  in  Mauritius  as  well.  In  Mauritius,  we  often  tend  to  pattern  our  institutions  on  what 
seems to be working elsewhere. But, in the banking and finance sector, practice varies from 
country to country. We must therefore be very careful when we are comparing to ensure we 
compare like with like. And even more careful when we reformulate supervisory mandates 
and  redesign  institutions  to  guard  against  importing  models  engineered  to  address  an 
entirely different set of problems in an altogether different operating environment. 
Let’s go back to the economic crisis for a moment – I saw that in his presentation, my friend 
Georges had a slide telling us that the crisis can also be seen as a failure of regulation. In the 
case  of  the  country  where  it  began,  the  US,  it  was  most  certainly  a  failure  of  regulation. 
There was a confusing array of regulators, some with overlapping jurisdictions. There was 
undue reliance on self-regulation in broad swathes of the industry. There was considerable 
laxity  in  implementing  those  regulations  that  did  exist!  And  there  was,  most  certainly,  a 
generalised  failure  of  governance  to  ensure  that  incentives  were  properly  aligned  in  the 
financial services industry. Banking and finance, and all sub-sectors within, are therefore all 
prime  candidates  not  only  for  proper  regulation  but  also  for  proper  oversight  by  some 
overarching authority going beyond the sector being regulated. As things stand, there is a 
mixed  bag  of  regulatory  approaches  which  emphasizes  the  need  to  have  greater 
coordination on regulatory reform and some international agreement. The BCBS has been 
doing  some  rethinking  on  what  central  banks  should  be  doing  and  how  financial  services 
should  be  regulated  globally.  These  are  issues  that  have  implications  for  Mauritius  as  an 
offshore financial centre and we must watch developments very closely. 
their  publication, 
the  process  of  external  auditing, 
Self-regulation v/s overregulation 
Statutory regulation needs to be supplemented by self-regulation in well-defined areas within 
strict  parameters,  which  should  themselves  be  subject  to  oversight.  A  whole  range  of 
professional  activities,  such  as  accountants,  actuaries  and  company  secretaries,  unit  trust 
operators, life-insurance companies and independent financial advisors – all of them have, at 
different  times,  opted  to  be  self-regulated  to  the  extent  possible,  thus  escaping  financial 
regulation, – sometimes with disastrous consequences, like in the ENRON saga. Financial 
regulation  covers  many  non-contentious  areas.  Examples  would  be  the  registration  of 
companies,  their  licensing  for  different  activities,  the  forms  of  company  accounts,  the 
frequency  of 
the  regulation  of 
deregistration of companies, bankruptcy processes, and the control of fraud and malpractice.  
The crisis has heightened the long-running debate on the extent of regulation. As you know, 
until the crisis hit us, most of us were opting more for light-touch regulation, and wherever 
possible for self-regulation. And the debate was whether there was need for any regulation at 
all,  and  whether  we  should  not  simply  put  our  trust  in  well-functioning  markets  and  allow 
them to be self-regulated. The crisis has shown how wrong we were in thinking that those 
institutions could be left to regulate themselves. The proper role and function of regulatory 
bodies has come back to the forefront and, after the recent recession, it seems that the case 
for re-regulation is becoming very strong. Other issues have come into sharper focus as well, 
remuneration of financial services staff and boards, the influence of bonuses on risk-taking, 
as well as the role of credit rating agencies. All these are crying out for some regulation.  
When banks and financial institutions fail, it’s the public that ends up with the bill for cleaning 
up the mess. The criteria for bailouts need to be more explicit. The size and power of certain 
financial  institutions  has  also  become  an  issue  of  critical  significance.  We  can  surely 
sympathize with Mervyn King, Governor of the Bank of England, when he asked: “If it is too 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
big to fail, is it not just too big?” The question is not just academic – it has many implications 
on  the  future  of  mega-banks.  Do  you  start  breaking  them  up  to  make  them  more 
manageable, to make them easier to supervise, and to make them easier to bail out in case 
they need bailouts? And when do you proceed with this break-up, assuming it’s the only way 
to combat moral hazard? At the peak of a crisis, when you have other pressing concerns to 
grapple with? Or in good times – when the TBTF institution is quite likely to up sticks and 
move to a more accommodating jurisdiction? 
So we might want to call for more regulation – and internationally-coordinated regulation, at 
that – but the evidence on the impact and cost of regulation remains incomplete. Instinctively, 
many of us believe that there is a strong case for self-regulation, although we know that there 
are limits to be drawn somewhere,  beyond which self-regulation fails. We may invent new 
levers of control, but will they be effective? Or will they turn out to be counter-productive? Will 
regulation be able to catch the market-players that have previously dodged regulation, such 
as the US shadow-banking system around the infamous sub-prime mortgages? Or will the 
regulator  trail  behind  resourceful  operators  perpetually  seeking  ways  around  rules  and 
regulations? Credit ratings by the credit agencies tweaked market signals to the point that 
they failed to give early warning of the impending collapse. Worse, they were the product of a 
conspiracy as the credit agencies were being paid by people who were asking them for good 
ratings, and they all made good money out of it on the way to the blow-up. The field is a very 
complex one, and therefore, we must look for ways and means of trying to make practical 
reforms in Corporate Governance to prevent such catastrophic outcomes. 
Improvement in corporate governance 
This  brings  us  to  the  third  leg  –  what  is  deemed  to  be  an  improvement  in  Corporate 
Governance? From whose point of view is it an improvement? By and large, if you are an 
operator, you would want to have light-touch regulation; you would want to have maximum 
freedom to operate the way you want. If you are the World Bank, you would probably want 
greater  “Ease  of  Doing  Business”,  which  means  fewer  regulations.  If  you  are  one  of  the 
persons who have been ripped off by Mr Madoff, Grand Master of the Ponzi scheme, you 
might be asking what were the regulators doing when he was making off with your money? 
Taxpayers who have been bailing out western banks could also be asking for guarantees of 
greater regulation in the future – hence the pertinence of the question of Mr Mervyn King!  
There  is  a  risk  that  we may  now  overreact  and  go  to  the other  extreme  of  overregulation, 
which,  in  my  view,  would  be  a  bad  thing.  For  all  its  defects,  light-touch  regulation  did 
stimulate  financial  engineering  and  brought  financial  innovation  which  led  to  reductions  in 
transaction costs and facilated capital allocation to sectors that were looking for it. We would 
be doing ourselves a grave disservice if we start over-regulating. What we need is to find a 
middle way. In Mauritius, we have gradually developed our own way of doing it although we 
are  quite  happy  to  be  guided  by  the  work  of  the  BCBS,  the  IMF  and  the  World  Bank.  All 
these institutions have dedicated teams which are busy working out the contours of future 
regulation in different areas relating to banking and financial services. 
We  have  to  distinguish  here  between  perception  and  reality.  Generally,  politics  is  about 
perception; but business is about reality. We at the central bank straddle the divide between 
politics and business; and we have to be aware of both the perception side of the equation, 
and the reality on the ground. So, while politicians are busy watching the opinion polls and 
the press, you as economic operators have to check your books and your cash-flows. We, at 
the  central  bank,  find  ourselves  at  the  intersection  of  these  two  worlds,  pulled  in  both 
directions and predictably unable to satisfy both constituencies for long. We have to make 
sure you are improving your bottom line, but not at the expense of anybody else or of the 
country at large – that is our mandate: price stability in the context of balanced and orderly 
economic development.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
If we just read the world press, and inhale – a practice which is not recommended on health 
grounds  –  Mauritius  looks  to  be  doing  rather  well.  But  this  should  be  a  wake-up  call  for 
skeptics.  Well  done,  all  you  Directors  here.  All  of  you  in  your  own  separate  ways,  in 
companies,  big  and  small,  have  all  become  part  of  that  world-famous  Mauritius  success 
story!  On  this  subject,  I  have  been  reminded  by  a  colleague  of  the  wise  words  of  Adam 
Smith, the grandfather of free-market economics, when he observed:  
“People  of  the  same  trade  seldom  meet  together,  even  for  merriment  and 
diversion,  but  the  conversation  ends  in  a  conspiracy  against  the  public,  or  in 
some contrivance to raise prices”  
For “prices”, read directors’ pay or CEO’s remuneration, or share issues to the Board and the 
management. To complete his observation on the cupidity of the world, Adam Smith added 
this cool assessment of the prospects for regulation:  
“It is impossible indeed to prevent such meetings (of people in a common trade) 
by  any  law  which  either  could  be  executed,  or  would  be  consistent  with  liberty 
and justice.”  
Such, indeed, is the dilemma that we, regulators, face in searching to improve our systems of 
international,  regional  and  national  management  of  the  financial  industry  and  how  best  to 
regulate and supervise a deeply-flawed market which is falling into moral hazard.  
Yet, Mauritius seems to have done rather well. The financial sector has largely escaped from 
the  fallout  from  the  great  crisis  and  is  expected  to  remain  solid,  resilient,  profitable  and 
financially stable. I see many of our CEO’s from banks here and I’d like to congratulate them 
for a job well-done. But that does not mean that they managed it on their own. We at the 
Bank did our best to keep them on the straight and narrow path. As I hinted earlier, if you 
have  only  self-regulation,  you  can  be  easily  tempted  to  stray  from  that  in  the  search  of 
greater  profits  and  greater  returns  for  your  shareholders.  We  believe  that  our  banks  have 
done  very  well,  by  and  large.  Their  performance  is  absolutely  remarkable  when  viewed 
against  the  backdrop  of  the  ongoing  crisis  which  has  impacted  both  the  domestic  and 
offshore  segments  of  their  activity.  In  fact,  a  couple  of  months  ago,  the  chairman  of  the 
Mauritius Bankers’ Association was stung to the quick when, in the course of an address to 
economic  operators,  I  had  the  cheek  to  draw  attention  to  the  profits  that  our  banks  were 
raking in on a daily basis! It’s good that our banks make profits as it shows they are running 
their  affairs  well.  But  if  they  make  excessive  profits,  then  it  could  reflect  badly  on  the 
regulator. It would mean we are not doing our job. 
Transparency 
This  is  the  reason  that  we,  at  the  Central  Bank,  are  keen  to  have  an  extra  dose  of 
competition in the banking sector. We are busy welcoming new players – in fact, I see one of 
them in the room here this morning and he happens to represent the first of a new breed, our 
very first full-fledged Islamic bank. More players mean more competition – which can only be 
good  for  the  consumer  of  banking  services.  We  have  changed  applicable  guidelines  and 
introduced new measures to bring more transparency. We now require all banks in Mauritius 
to  publish  on  our  website,  and  according  to  a  set  template,  the  whole  structure  of  fees, 
commissions and charges which they apply on various transactions and services, to enable 
the consumer to shop around. Obviously, there are still difficulties in moving business from 
one bank to one another. But we are making small, incremental, contributions to make that 
happen and we intend to persevere. We have recently moved into what I believe is entirely 
new territory for any central bank – a world first! 
Credit rating agencies, as you all know, have come under severe attack for their role in the 
crisis. Some of you may recall that I openly berated a leading rating agency for its threatened 
de-rating of a leading local bank – and I was one of the first central bank Governors to do so 
before the role of these agencies emerged as a legitimate source of concern for regulators. I 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
considered the de-rating action unjustified and mistimed. The lesson which I drew from that 
spat with the rating agency is that we should share our information more widely to prevent 
any potential financial instability arising from ill-considered rating action by rating agencies. 
Most  of  our  local  banks  are  not  rated  by  these  agencies.  We  have  thus  avoided  blind 
adherence to their ratings. These agencies do not have the database that we at the Central 
Bank have on each and every bank operating here. Indeed, we have our finger on the pulse 
of each and every bank, big or small, and we believe that we have a much better reading of 
the situation than anyone else. Starting in April this year, we begin publishing the ratings of 
all our banks on the Bank’s website. This is yet another major step in the same direction of 
greater  transparency  that  we  embarked  upon  when  we  began  publishing  all  the  fees  and 
charges applied by banks.  
Earlier this year, we had the usual IMF Article IV Consultation Mission which pored over all 
figures relating to our fiscal, monetary, banking and financial affairs. The IMF and the World 
Bank also conduct a diagnosis of our economy every two years under the Financial Sector 
Assessment Program (FSAP). The IMF and the World Bank are of course not regulators of 
any  country’s  economy  but  they  do  set  standards  in  many  areas,  lend  for  development 
activities, act as lender of last resort, and conduct regular reviews of all economies. A pat on 
the  shoulder  is  not  to  be  scoffed  at!  The  IMF  Mission  was  favourably  impressed  by  our 
initiative to publish our own bank ratings – the so-called CAMEL Ratings.  
The acronym CAMEL is straightforward: C stands for Capital Adequacy, A for Asset Quality, 
M  for  Management,  E  for  Earnings  and  L  for  Liquidity.  The  CAMEL  framework  is  a  much 
better grid for the analysis of banks from a comparative perspective. We have submitted all 
our banks to this assessment systematically, while refining the parameters and minimising 
the subjective element. About 18 months ago, when we first told our bank CEO’s, with whom 
we have regular meetings at the level of the Banking Committee, which I chair, and which 
brings  together  senior  Bank  staff  and  all  the  members  of  the  MBA,  that  we  intended  to 
publish  the  CAMEL  ratings,  they  almost  fell  off  their  seats!  Until  then,  individual  CAMEL 
ratings were discussed and shared only with the bank concerned. We embarked on a long 
process of discussion and clarification and reassured them that publication would lead to a 
better-informed  consumer,  which  would  redound  to  the  benefit  of  all  banks.  We  begin 
publishing on April 5th, not the first of April for fear that you might think I am playing a prank 
on you. 
This  initiative,  as  I  said,  is  a  world  première.  Mr  Stiglitz  did  not  come  to  hear  about  it  yet 
when he was here two weeks ago. He gave us very good marks for many things which we 
have  been  doing  here  for  donkey’s  years.  Our  tropical  cyclone  alert  system,  like  our 
extensive social welfare system, and the provision of free education and health-care could 
serve as a model for the US, he opined. My absence at his lectures has been the subject of 
some negative comment in the local press – especially when Mr Stiglitz apparently had a go 
at central bank governors who were applying the wrong traditional remedies to counter the 
current inflationary surge. I did receive an invitation to attend, but it was an unusual sort of 
invitation as it came with a hefty bill! Mr Stiglitz thought we had a miracle here in Mauritius. 
Those of us, who have been working here for the last 30 to 40 years, know that there is no 
such thing as a miracle. It is all the result of patient, slow, hard work. The only miracle in my 
book  is  how  the  organisers  managed  to  get  many  CEO’s  to  pay  Rs23,000  (US$825, 
approximately) to come and listen to Mr Stiglitz when you could get most of what he said for 
free on the internet or from his books.  
Ombudsperson for banks 
Greater competition in the banking sector, enhanced transparency, and giving the consumer 
a  fair  deal  are  so  many  yardsticks  for  the  regulator  to  gauge  banking  sector  performance 
over and above banking sector profitability. A major weakness is our failure to establish the 
office  of  the  Ombudsperson  for  Banks,  which  is  provided  for  in  the  law.  This  office  can 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
provide a useful service for citizens to turn to if they have been subjected to unfair treatment 
and abusive practices in lieu of, or before, the more expensive and time-consuming recourse 
to  the  courts.  The  establishment  of  the  office  has  become  embroiled  in  the  grey  area 
between  the  Financial  Services  Commission,  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  and  the  office  of  the 
Commissioner for the Protection of Borrowers, set up subsequently. Both the FSC and BoM 
have got core functions, each in its particular area, but I have taken the view that, for a small 
country like ours, there should be only one Ombudsman for all financial services, instead of 
having one Ombudsman for the financial services and for the institutions supervised by the 
FSC and another for the banking sector. The Minister of Finance actually announced a move 
in that direction in his budget speech in 2009 but, sadly, we have made no progress so far. 
Until the issue is de-blocked at the legislative level, there is little that the Central Bank can 
do.  
Review of the Monetary Policy Committee 
Another improvement in governance that we are working on is the review of our Monetary 
Policy Committee. The MPC, as you know, has been in business since April 2007. We have 
had 19 meetings to-date and it became clear quite early, since about the 8th or 9th meeting, 
that there were some major changes required in the way that the MPC conducts its business. 
There is a crying need for greater individual responsibility and more transparency which can 
be  satisfied  by  making  the  individual  voting  patterns  public.  At  the  same  time,  we  have 
proposed that the minutes of MPC meetings should also be published. A third area where we 
are proposing to bring modifications is the requirement that we can only reckon the votes of 
members  who  are  physically  present.  Our  MPC  is  rather  unusual,  at  least  by  emerging 
economy standards, as we have two foreigners, based outside Mauritius, as full members. 
We  propose  to  remove  the  physical  presence  constraint  and  allow  participation  by 
teleconference.  
To conduct this review, we are drawing on the services of Sir Alan Budd who has worn many 
hats  in  the  world  of  academia  and  finance  –  at  the  London  School  of  Economics,  the 
University  of  Oxford,  the  Bank  of  England,  the  British  Treasury,  etc.  With  these  proposed 
changes, the MPC will be able to meet the requirements of the Mauritian economy in a much 
better manner, while communicating better with the public. It would also render the MPC less 
prone to the charge of policy zigzagging. We have often been accused of “zigzagging”, but I 
can assure you that the Governor has not zigged or zagged. If there is zigzagging, the public 
has  a  right  to  know  the  identity,  and  motivation  or  rationale,  of  those  responsible.  The 
composition of the MPC and the profile of the people who sit on it, also figure in the remit of 
Sir Alan Budd. In a fully-monetized economy like ours, with our very heavy reliance on bank 
finance, the operations and decisions of the MPC exert considerable influence on the life of 
the  average  citizen  as  on  the  activities  of  all  economic  operators.  The  governance  of  the 
MPC itself is key to the smooth operation of the economic machine.  
Regional integration 
In  this  world  of  globalised  finance,  the  perspective  of  the  regulator  can  hardly  be 
circumscribed by national frontiers. As Mauritian enterprises turn increasingly to the region 
and beyond, it is only natural that our banks accompany their customers overseas. We are 
encouraging  many  of  our  banks  to  go  regional.  But  we  also  call  for  a  dose  of  
realism: countries in the region are not Mauritius writ large. They have their own specificities 
which must be taken into account. Whether you want to locate an enterprise in Madagascar 
or Bangladesh, or run a bank in Tanzania or India, there is a tremendous adjustment to be 
made. The regulator can facilitate this adjustment by having a framework for cooperation in 
place. Instead of trying to address the issues that are likely to arise on a bilateral country-to-
country  basis,  it  is  preferable  to  address  them  at  the  regional  level.  This  is  the  objective 
which we are pursuing in such fora as COMESA and SADC. At the level of SADC, we have 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
come up with a SADC draft Central Bank model law, which seeks to harmonise our approach 
to central banking to develop a fairly uniform framework for the region. Within COMESA, we 
have set up a regional clearing house, with a regional payment and settlements system so 
that our economic operators, exporters and importers, do not face a multiplicity of regimes 
and  settlements  systems  when  trying  to  tap  regional  trade  opportunities.  The  Bank  of 
Mauritius  is  the  regional  payment  and  settlement  agent  for  the  whole  of  COMESA  for  this 
operation. We are finalizing the operational details and should open for business quite soon. 
On  the  regional  front  therefore,  we  are  playing  a  very  active  role  as  the  banking  sector 
regulator to ensure that most of the difficulties that one can normally expect to encounter in 
going regional – at least, those within our area of competence – are gradually ironed out.  
We  are  also  engaged  in  a  vast  programme  of  monetary,  financial,  and  macroeconomic 
convergence, with the distant objective of a single currency, at the pan-African level with the 
Association of African Central Banks where COMESA and SADC are just two of the building 
blocs.  The  current  problems  in  the  Eurozone  periphery  have  admittedly  thrown  some  cold 
water on our prospects of moving in that direction although the plans are to move there by 
2018–2020 or thereabouts. Before we can seriously envisage that, we have to ensure that 
the  necessary  conditions  are 
the  programme  of  monetary  and 
macroeconomic convergence. At the level of COMESA, we have just set up the COMESA 
Monetary  Institute  which  is  based  in  Nairobi.  This  is  basically  patterned  on  the  European 
Monetary Institute which, as some of you would remember, was the key driver of European 
monetary cooperation which led to the birth of the Euro. The problems in the Eurozone have 
thrown  up  some  issues  that  were  not  sufficiently  addressed  in  the  construction  of  the 
Eurozone. We are aware of the challenges ahead: bringing so many disparate economies as 
the 53 economies in Africa, into one composite economic bloc is a tall order. Although the 
single African currency like the single African Central Bank, are not likely to see the light of 
day any time soon, we continue working on it with our peers in other countries.  
in  place.  Hence, 
International financial institutions 
The last point I want to raise is that a large part of the blame for the current crisis lies at the 
door  of  the  international  financial  institutions  which  play  a  leadership,  monitoring,  or 
supervisory role. Many institutions come in for criticism, much of it justified. Among them, one 
could  mention  the  BIS,  which  is  often  called  the  central  bank  of  central  banks;  the  World 
Bank, which is supposed to look at the real sector on a global basis, and, especially, the IMF, 
which  is  supposed  to  monitor  the  monetary  and  financial  sector  of  every  country  
annually – the famous Article IV Consultation which I alluded to earlier – and ensure global 
surveillance. I mentioned earlier how, we in Mauritius adopted Basel II and were subjected to 
FSAP’s by the World Bank and the IMF. Would you believe that it was only last year that the 
IMF conducted an FSAP for the US? Leaving aside the fact that the Basel II approach turned 
out  to  be  flawed,  the  US  had  made  little  effort  to  tighten  its  regulation  and  supervision  in 
accordance with its precepts. The largest economy in the world got away with it, and brought 
the world economy to the brink of collapse. The US also got its way in bringing modifications 
to the report which the BIS was producing on the US sub-prime crisis. Uncle Sam has been 
throwing his weight around. If you are big, you can call the shots and you can change the 
rules and bend them to suit your own convenience. Just too bad if it causes inconvenience to 
the rest of the world!  
The  international  financial  architecture  that  we  now  have,  is,  by  and  large,  the  one  that 
emerged from the immediate post-Second World War period. And it was the victors of the 
Second World War who shaped it to suit their particular interests. We have been talking a 
long  time  now  about  voice  and  representation,  and  changing  the  voting  structure  in  the 
governance  of  the  World  Bank  and  the  IMF.  In  the  throes  of  this  crisis,  some  tentative 
changes have finally been agreed and are beginning to happen. So, for the first time ever, 
some of the glaring inequities in the voting structure have been corrected and we hope that 
this process will carry on. The current system is built on the convention that the CEO’s of the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
IMF  and  World  Bank  are  respectively  European  or  American.  The  WTO  has  also  been 
headed by a European since its creation. To look at the governance of this unholy trinity, you 
would not know that the centre of gravity of the world has changed to China and India. There 
is a need now to recognise the new reality of the world. The next Managing Director of the 
Fund is most unlikely to be a European.  
There  are  other  changes  that  are  happening,  in  terms  of  the  actual  remit  of  the  Fund  to 
ensure  global  surveillance,  global  financial  stability,  and  address  problems  posed  by 
countries  running  large  and  persistent  balance  of  payments  surpluses.  A  fundamental 
weakness  of  the  IMF  –  apart  from  being  weak-kneed  vis-à-vis  the  US  –  was  the  built-in 
asymmetry in its approach: a roaring tiger where deficit countries were concerned but a soft-
purring kitten when faced with surplus economies. As you know, the global cry at the level of 
the  G20  is  for  rebalancing  economies.  We  have  to  watch  how  this  global  re-balancing  is 
going to happen, who is going to have the power to achieve it, and perhaps what shape the 
new emerging international financial architecture is finally going to take. There will not be any 
cut-and-dried solutions. Instead, it’s likely to be a long drawn-out process. The fear is that the 
receding  crisis,  itself  a  highly-desired  outcome,  may  have  the  unintended  consequence  of 
abating the pressure for reform. In any event, the world as we know it is likely to change – at 
least  in  terms  of  the  currencies  in  which  most  transactions  are  conducted.  Whether  the 
hegemony of the dollar is going to continue or not is an open question. All of you may have 
your own views on it. Is the euro going to survive? Will the EU find a lasting solution to the 
sovereign debt problem of its periphery? Or will the Yuan or Renminbi, or why not the Rand 
and others, emerge as quasi-reserve currencies? 
To sum up, what I have tried to do in this wide-ranging talk is to reassure you, CEO’s and 
operators at the cutting edge of business, that your regulators are very much on the job and 
fully-engaged.  Unlike  some  of  our  counterparts  in  the  US  or  the  UK,  we  can  hardly  be 
accused of sleeping at the wheel. We are trying to anticipate problems that may lie ahead. 
We are trying to ensure that you get a good deal, and – more than that – that our population, 
and not just business, gets a good deal! They deserve no less! And I believe I deserve a real 
breakfast, now! 
 10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
