Emsley Tromp: Opening of the 2011 CFATF assessment 
Welcome  remarks  by  Dr  Emsley  Tromp,  President  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Curaçao  and 
Sint Maarten, on the occasion of the 2011 CFATF assessment, Willemstad, 22 August 2011. 
 Good  morning.  I  would  like  to  welcome  you  to  the  Central  Bank  and  at  the  same  time 
express  my  appreciation  for  the  commitment  of  CFATF  over  the  past  years  to  help  its 
members combat and deter money laundering and terrorist financing. As a member of the 
CFATF  and  the  FATF,  we  applaud  the  efforts  of  the  CFATF  to  continuously  perform 
evaluation of its member jurisdictions. These evaluations serve as an excellent tool for the 
member jurisdictions to receive an independent opinion on their AML & CFT regime and take 
the necessary actions to further strengthen their AML & CFT regime. 
The  Central  Bank  has  played  an  important  role  in  the  fight  against  money  laundering  and 
terrorist  financing  in  our  jurisdiction.  Since  public  confidence  in  the  supervised  institutions 
and  the  financial  system  can  be  easily  undermined  by  adverse  publicity  as  a  result  of  the 
misuse of institutions by criminals for money laundering and terrorist financing purposes, as 
a  regulatory  authority,  we  are  constantly  vigilant  in  deterring  criminals  from  misusing  the 
supervised institutions for money laundering and terrorist financing purposes. 
The Central Bank has been instrumental in the drafting of several legislations governing AML 
and CFT, including the National Ordinances on the Reporting of Unusual Transactions and 
National  Ordinance  on  Identification  when  Rendering  Services.  These  legislations  were 
enacted in 1996 and lastly amended in 2009. 
The  Central  Bank  has  also  issued  sector-specific  provisions  and  guidelines  in  the  area  of 
AML and CFT for the various sectors under its supervision. These guidelines date back to 
1991 and were lastly amended this year. The sector-specific provisions and guidelines have 
significantly increased the awareness of good compliance under the supervised institutions. 
As a result hereof, we have noticed that the industry is increasingly devoting more resources 
to combating money laundering and terrorist financing and that the compliance function has 
taken an even more prominent place in the supervised institutions. 
Furthermore,  the  compliance  programs  of  the  supervised  institutions  are  regularly  being 
subjected to our review during our on-site examinations at the institutions. The AML and CFT 
deficiencies identified during our on-site examinations are communicated to the supervised 
institutions and the institutions are in that respect requested to take corrective measures in a 
timely manner. 
The Bank has also been instrumental in the drafting of the list of indicators that must be used 
by  the  supervised  institutions  to  identify  and  report  unusual  transactions  to  the  Financial 
Intelligence Unit (MOT). 
Our  commitment  to  deter  and  detect  money  laundering  and  terrorist  financing  amongst 
supervised  institutions,  has  also  been  recognized  and  highlighted  by  the  IMF.  In  its  final 
report  issued  in  February  2004  on  the  former  Netherlands  Antilles,  the  IMF  concluded  on 
page 7 of its report that: (quote) “Overall the legal and institutional framework for financial 
supervision meets high standards. It is comprehensive, effective, and to a great extent in line 
with  international  standards.  The  Central  Bank’s  staff  is  highly  capable,  well  trained  and 
dedicated, ……..to perform its functions” (end quote). 
Nonetheless,  the  Central  Bank  realized  the  importance  of  not  becoming  complacent.  The 
Bank  has  continued  to  intensify  its  efforts  by  taking  the  necessary  measures  to  further 
strengthen its supervisory regime by continuously upgrade the AML & CFT requirements in 
line with international standards. You will certainly hear more about these efforts during your 
visit. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
To conclude, I would to say that significant progress has been made in our jurisdiction over 
the  past  years  in  the  fight  against  money  laundering  and  terrorist  financing.  It  is  therefore 
imperative  for  the  market  participants  to  continue  to  work  closely  with  us  and  other 
competent authorities to combat money laundering and terrorist financing. The Central Bank 
is  in  that  respect  striving  to  constantly  promote  a  compliance  framework  that  ensures  the 
soundness  and  stability  of  our  financial  sector  and  to  promote  an  effective  compliance 
environment that not only deter problems, but also detect problems at an early stage. We are 
committed  to  continue  to  promote  an  AML  &  CFT  regime  that  is  dynamic  and  constantly 
adapting to international standards. 
We  wish  you  all  the  best  with  your  assessment  and  want  you  to  know  that  our  staff  is 
available  to  provide  you  with  any  information  you  need  concerning  our  activities  and  to 
answer any inquiry you may have. 
Once again thank you for your support and your commitment to combating money laundering 
and terrorist financing in the Caribbean region. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
