Andres Lipstok: Monetary policy will not become a prisoner 
Article  by  Mr  Andres  Lipstok,  Governor  of  Bank  of  Estonia,  published  in  the  newspaper 
Postimees on 24 March 2011. 
 Governor of Eesti Pank and member of the Governing Council of the European Central Bank 
Andres Lipstok says that avoidance of excessive inflation in the euro area and alleviation of 
inflation expectations are the best measures that the Eurosystem’s central banks can take to 
support the economy. 
Estonia has been a full member of the euro area for almost three months now. The adoption 
of the euro in Estonia was technically smooth and the society’s approval of the changeover 
has increased. The smooth changeover created suitable grounds for paying attention to what 
really matters – how to help ensure the stability of the euro in the future. In other words, the 
focus is now on the key issue – maintaining price stability in the euro area. 
Euro-area price stability is not an abstract and foreign concern for us. We were aware of how 
the reference interest rate on housing loans or the euro’s exchange rate against the dollar 
influence  our  daily  lives  already  before  the  changeover.  However,  what  people  have  not 
realised is how much the general inflation developments in the euro area affect the society’s 
behaviour on the whole. Surveys indicate that general developments in the euro area have a 
greater  impact  on  the  inflation  expectations  of  people  who  live  in  the  single  currency  area 
than one might assume. For instance, in one year the inflation rate of Slovenia and Austria 
may differ greatly due to changes in taxes or differences in the economic cycle, but the long-
term price expectations of people still remain quite similar in these countries. 
This is logical. In the monetary union, it is natural that there occur differences in the inflation 
rate across regions, but these cannot last very long. Otherwise, the competitiveness of the 
country  with  the  faster  inflation  rate  will  suffer:  in  the  best  case,  the  country’s  economic 
growth will slow down gradually, but in the worst case the country will have to adjust through 
a  difficult  crisis  similar  to  the  situation  in  Greece.  One  way  or  another  –  eventually,  this 
entails a decrease in demand and price growth will be forced back to its “correct” level.  
For  us,  not  much  has  changed  after  joining  the  monetary  union.  Inflation  in  Estonia  was 
affected by euro-area price stability already under the fixed exchange rate system. Though 
for  a  short  while,  Estonia’s  inflation  greatly  exceeded  that  of  Europe,  long-term  and 
excessive  deviations  were  corrected  by  the  economy.  Otherwise,  it  would  have  started 
pressuring the credibility of the fixed exchange rate. 
While in the previous monetary system, more fretful analysts might have speculated that the 
economy would be adjusted through devaluation – the weakening of the currency’s value – 
which  would  have  allowed  inflation  to  remain  higher,  luckily  this  is  not  an  option  in  the 
monetary union. 
There  is  a  greater  concern  upon  making  long-term  economic  decisions  in  the  monetary 
union: whether the euro area’s central banks (that is, the Eurosystem as a whole) are able to 
keep  the  pan-European  average  inflation  rate  at  a  suitable  level.  This  means  that  in  the 
medium  term,  the  inflation  rate  has  to  remain  below  but  close  to  2%.  While  in  Austria  or 
Slovenia, or in Estonia for that matter, inflation may temporarily differ from that of the euro 
area, we have to look at the whole picture when making decisions.  
The  ability  of  the  euro  area  to  keep  inflation close  to  2% over  the  entire  past  decade  has 
inspired confidence. The average inflation rate has remained slightly below 2% throughout 
the  history  of  the  single  currency  and  annual  inflation  has  mostly  ranged  within  1.5–2.5%. 
However, we must not be distracted by our success. The euro area’s inflation indicator was 
over 2% at the beginning of this year, and, most recently 2.4%. This is worrying. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The more detailed picture is, of course, more diverse and future monetary policy measures 
will also have to take that diversity into account.  
On the one hand, the European economy is just recovering from a deep economic recession. 
Unemployment  is  higher  than  usual,  the  relatively  high  debt  burden  is  inhibiting  borrowing 
activity in many countries and the majority of the recent price hike stems from global factors, 
such as the price growth of energy and food on the global market. The prices of other goods 
and services, on the other hand, have been posting quite modest growth rates. Therefore, 
the  inflation  expectations  of  entrepreneurs  and  consumers  have  remained  close  to  the 
historical  average.  If  the  price  hike  of  commodities  stops,  the  increase  in  the  euro  area’s 
prices could remain below 2% already next year.  
However, looking at the data from another angle, we can find proof to arguments which insist 
that the current euro-area interest rate level is not suitable for guaranteeing the low inflation 
rate that corresponds to the price stability goal. Although the general public focuses on the 
debt crisis of certain European countries, the developments of the economy itself have, on 
the whole, exceeded expectations. Economic growth has remained above average and the 
utilisation  of  production  capacity  no 
longer  resembles  a  crisis  situation.  Though 
unemployment  is  still  high,  it  is  decreasing  and  the  indicators  of  the  industrial  and  service 
sectors are posting quite high results from the historical perspective. 
If we add here the fact that global price rise pressures have been annoyingly enduring and 
do not show any signs of abatement, the risk of a persistently higher inflation rate in the euro 
area has increased. Therefore, at the press conference after the most recent meeting of the 
Governing  Council of the European Central Bank it was pointed out that, to withstand this 
threat,  the  Eurosystem  might  increase  the  price  of  money  in  the  markets  earlier  than 
expected, maybe already in April. The mandate of the euro area’s central banks is clear on 
this  subject  and  there  is  no  reason  to  think  that  some  other  stray  thoughts  would  let  us 
deviate from our key goal. It should be stressed that the Governing Council of the European 
Central Bank is monitoring the economic situation very carefully and will not commit to future 
decisions in a form that would render the Council a prisoner of their own words. 
Public discussions include two extraneous arguments, based on which it has been claimed 
that the hands of the euro area’s central banks are tied and therefore they cannot fulfil their 
primary goal properly.  
Firstly,  it  has  been  presumed  that  banks’  situation  in  Europe  is  so  weak  that  we  cannot 
abandon  the  extraordinary  monetary  policy  measures  that  made  money  supply  easier  for 
banks during the crisis. Secondly, it is claimed that until the fiscal situation of some euro area 
countries is not firmly under control and the new financial control mechanisms have not been 
implemented, central banks do not dare to focus on the threat of inflation. 
I  do  not  wish  to  underestimate  either  argument.  The  situation  in  global  money  markets, 
including Europe, is not entirely risk-free yet and the leaders of Europe’s public financing are 
struggling to ensure that the amended fiscal framework would help avoid crises in the future.  
However,  upon  fulfilling  their  main  goal,  the  euro  area’s  central  banks  are  not  limited  by 
these  concerns  to  the  extent  that  they  could  or  should  ignore  the  price  stability  goal.  The 
prevention of excessive inflation and the alleviation of inflation fears is the best that a central 
bank can do to support long-term economic growth. 
As  for  money  market  liquidity  and  extraordinary  crisis  measures,  they  do  not  hinder  the 
pursuance of the necessary interest rate policy. If it is necessary to continue fixed rate tender 
procedures with full allotment to guarantee the normal operation of the money market, it may 
also be a reasonable move when the monetary policy interest rates are already on the rise. 
In this case, one does not hinder the other.  
It must also be pointed out that contrary to the popular misbelief, general monetary growth in 
Europe has not been very rapid after the introduction of extraordinary measures. Recent data 
indicate that it amounts to only a couple of per cent a year, which is too little rather than too 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
tender  procedures  become  obsolete, 
much.  Meanwhile,  extraordinary  instruments  in  the  market  do  not  mean  that  the  money 
market  environment  is  too  lenient,  because  the  European  central  banks  have  performed 
monetary policy transactions to curb liquidity according to need. Naturally, if the arrangement 
principles  of  such 
they  should  be  reviewed 
immediately. 
The  same  principle  applies  to  the  impact  of  the  state  budget  on  monetary  policy.  The 
situation of the state budget undoubtedly has a great influence on economic developments 
and  it  plays  a  great  role  in  the  analysis  of  the  economic  situation.  However,  this  analysis 
does  not  give  the  Governing  Council  of  the  European  Central  Bank  cause  to  worry 
excessively  about  the  debt  servicing  costs  of  the  whole  euro  area  or  its  member  states. 
Instead  of  monetary  policy  interest  rates,  the  debt  servicing  costs  of  countries  are  still 
primarily influenced by the credibility of their fiscal policies – this is also reflected by the very 
different interest rates of public debts within the euro area.  
The  government  bond  purchase  programme  that  started  last  spring  may  understandably 
cause concern regarding the goals of central banks. However, that step had a specific goal, 
which  was  related  to  the  situation  in  the  financial  market  and  not  to  fiscal  policy.  Central 
banks are not allowed to finance the state budget and no such financing has occurred within 
the Eurosystem during the crisis. It must also be emphasised that the liquidity provided to the 
markets  as  a  result  of  these  purchases  has  been  eliminated  by  opposite  transactions 
throughout the entire period. This also indicates that the euro area’s central banks regard the 
key monetary policy goal – price stability – as superior. Although the reorganisation of the 
state budget is a serious challenge for many European countries, there are other people and 
measures for solving this problem. Monetary policy will not be imprisoned by it. 
In conclusion, the containment of inflation is the only goal of the euro area’s central banks in 
shaping their monetary policy. Adhering to this principle is the key to how monetary policy 
can support the correction of economic discords. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
