Mojmír Hampl: States as debtors 
Speech  by  Mr  Mojmír  Hampl,  Vice  Governor  of  the  Czech  National  Bank,  to  the  Alpbach 
Financial Market Symposium, Alpbach, Austria, 2 September 2011. 
 I would like to thank the organizers for inviting me to this wonderful and amazing place. And 
that is not a platitude; I really mean it. It is my first time here in Alpbach, and I can only hope 
that it is not the last after I finish my presentation. 
Concerning the sovereign debt crisis, we are describing it as something absolutely fatal. But 
from  a  bird’s  eye  view  –  as  was  said  by  several  speakers  yesterday  –  sovereign  debt 
problems and overindebtedness of nation states are nothing new. Europe as a continent has 
a rich experience with such problems. 
The Czechs share a long part of their history with Austria, so many might remember from 
their  textbooks  the  sovereign  instabilities  and  crises  of  the  19th  and  20th  centuries,  for 
instance the well-known crash of state finances in 1811, in the middle of the wars against 
Napoleon.  That  crash  was  followed  by  a  drastic  monetary  reform,  default  of  the  Austrian 
empire and a search for a better way. 
This time is different, however, at least in the following respects: 
1. 
We forgot that this can happen, that sovereigns can become perfectly insolvent just 
like any other debtor, and states behaved accordingly. 
This is the first time in 60 years or so that a sovereign crisis has hit the developed 
world,  the  rich  world,  not  the  developing  one,  the  hardest.  To  demonstrate  that: 
almost  80%  of  all  the  IMF’s  rescue  loans  have  gone  to  Europe!  Over  40%  have 
gone to the Eurozone itself, and the share is going to rise. The developed world is 
not accustomed to this. 
This  time  the  problem  of  sovereign  debt  has  appeared  at  a  time  of  peace  and 
prosperity. 
Moreover, the Eurozone – a monetary union without a state – is a completely new, 
unprecedented arrangement. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
Typically, the solution to such a crisis used to be: inflation, default or monetary reform, very 
often accompanied by currency devaluation, or a combination of all these. Please note that 
typically when the IMF organizes a programme for a developing country, it requires a partial 
default or devaluation to disburse funds. 
Nothing like that is possible within the Eurozone – monetary solutions are unavailable for the 
weakest sovereign links. And only default remains. Or, of course, a bail-out, i.e. shifting the 
debt burden from some countries to others. 
But,  history  seems  to  suggest  quite  clearly  that  without  some  form  of  debt  reduction  (or 
default, if you wish) it will be really hard to get sovereigns functioning normally again. 
Are there any OTHER alternatives? Yes, either very fast growth or slow deleveraging. The 
first  option  is  possible,  but  unlikely.  The  second  option  might  mean  not  one,  but  two 
“Japanese”  lost  decades.  Moreover,  the  second  option  might  also  endanger  the  strong 
economies. 
So, once again, without one form of debt reduction or another, it will be really hard to move 
forward. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
