Brian Wynter: What’s in your wallet? 
Address  by  Mr  Brian  Wynter,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Jamaica,  at  the  opening  of  the 
12th Annual Sir Arthur Lewis Institute of Social and Economic Studies Conference, Kingston, 
23 March 2011. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen: 
Thank you for inviting me to this gathering of minds meeting here to consider what we have 
done  with  our  political  and  economic  freedom  since  Independence,  what  we  should  learn 
from the experience and where we want to go. 
Coming to a shared vision of the future is one thing that has always eluded us and it might be 
expecting too much for that to be the outcome of the conference. I believe we can agree, 
however, on some aspects of our experience that we would like to keep re-living and others 
that we would not wish upon the next generation. 
In contributing to this process, I am going to focus on an important aspect of the Caribbean 
experience  not  explicitly  addressed  elsewhere  in  the  agenda  –  the  role  of  monetary 
arrangements  in  shaping  our  development.  They  form  a  defining  component  of  the  policy 
choices that we made after Independence and, to my mind, have accounted for more of the 
outcome than we have generally acknowledged. 
There is another reason that makes this occasion an opportune time for introspection and 
reflection  on  these  issues.  The  year  2011  marks  the  50th  anniversary  of  the  start  of 
operations  at  the  Bank  of  Jamaica.  The  establishment  of  the  institution  in  1960  preceded 
Independence as it was seen as part of the institutional machinery that should be in place 
when the time came to manage our own affairs. So, we at the Bank are very much in tune 
with your theme of celebration and welcome the opportunity to appraise the Central Bank’s 
role in our collective affairs and to contemplate the form that this role might take in the future. 
In  this  context,  most  of  my  remarks  will  be  focused  on  Jamaica,  with  references  to  our 
Caribbean neighbours for background and contrast. 
The path taken – post independence, post Bretton Woods 
I will begin with a sketch of the path that was taken after independence and during the post- 
Bretton Woods era. Among the group of former British colonies in the Caribbean, Jamaica 
was the first to establish a central bank, followed by Trinidad & Tobago in 1964 and Guyana 
in  1965.  By  the  end  of  the  1960s  these  central  banks  had  taken  over  the  note  issuing 
function of the currency boards that they replaced but would have done little else in the way 
of  exercising  discretion  over  monetary  and  exchange  rate  policies.  So,  while  national 
currencies appeared, they maintained the look and the parities of the old money except that 
they were now issued by institutions of the newly christened nation states. 
After  the  break-up  of  the  Bretton  Woods  system  in  1971  and  the  adoption  of  generalised 
floating by the major industrial countries, Caribbean nations, like other developing countries, 
were  faced  with  the  issue  of  what  type  of  monetary  arrangements  they  should  adopt. 
Typically,  the  considerations  included  a  desire  for  policy  independence,  “balanced  growth” 
and  price  stability  at  home,  all  in  the  context  of  continued  traditional  trade  links  with  the 
industrial countries. The options they faced ranged from the creation of currency enclaves as 
in  Panama  or  Puerto  Rico,  a  wide  variety  of  pegging  arrangements  and  institutional 
structures,  to  the  formation  of  currency  unions  such  as  the  one  eventually  adopted  in  the 
Eastern  Caribbean.  The  most  liberal  extreme,  joining  the  system  of  independently  floating 
currencies,  was  not  immediately  feasible.  For  the  most  part,  these  developing  countries 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
responded to the changes in the international monetary system by pegging to the currency of 
their major trading partner.  
However,  pegging  arrangements  came  under  unprecedented  pressure  following  the  oil 
shocks  of  the  1970s  and  the  subsequent  swings  in  demand  for  commodity  exports  from 
developing  countries.  The  alternative  to  the  economic  compression  and  restructuring 
demanded  by  these  sharp  changes  was  international  borrowing;  indeed,  this  proved  to  be 
the  road  most  travelled.  But,  as  it  became  clearer  in  the  1980s  that  further  large-scale 
borrowing was unaffordable and that economic restructuring was inevitable, the question of 
suitable monetary and exchange arrangements once again arose. 
The smallest states of the Caribbean – member countries of the Eastern Caribbean Central 
Bank  –  as  well  as  Barbados,  Belize  and  The  Bahamas  chose  to  make  adjustments  to  their 
economies without changing the exchange rate and, in the process, experienced some loss in 
competitiveness but not obviously more than elsewhere. In these territories, wage awards and 
monetary  conditions  needed  to  be  consistent  with  low  inflation  and  a  stable  exchange  rate, 
leaving the brunt of the adjustment process on government finances, employment and output.  
The larger states of the Caribbean – Jamaica, Guyana and Trinidad & Tobago – all adopted 
flexible  exchange  rates  as  part  of  their  structural  adjustment  programs.  The  prevailing 
consensus on development thinking, led by the Washington-based institutions, pointed to the 
likelihood  of  greater  export  diversity,  sustainable  balance  of  payments  and  improved 
economic efficiency if the adoption of flexible exchange rate regimes was accompanied by 
other  economy-wide  reforms.  In  Jamaica,  many  of  these  changes  in  the  areas  of  trade 
liberalisation,  tax  reform  and  fiscal  adjustment  were  implemented.  A  period  of  economic 
growth, spearheaded by nontraditional exports, occurred towards the end of the 1980s but 
the multilaterals themselves agree that the results of the process were relatively modest and 
short-lived when compared with the fast and sustained growth that was promised at the start. 
One  outcome  of  this  process  that  was  particularly  sharp  in  Jamaica  was  its  impact  on 
inflation. Even after the initial adjustments to the domestic price level that accompanied these 
changes tapered off, they had set in motion a wave of negative expectations about exchange 
rate  depreciation  accompanied  by  inflation  which,  in  turn,  pushed  organized  labour  into 
making  wage  demands  to  protect  living  standards.  Government  expenditure  expanded  to 
meet  these  and  other  needs  which  were  funded,  in  large  measure,  by  borrowing.  Fiscal 
dominance, an open capital account and the absence of reserves defined a heavy role for 
monetary  policy  in  reining  in  domestic  expenditure.  A  large  part  of  the  book  “Bank  of  
Jamaica  –  The  First  Forty  Years’  is  devoted  to  narrating  the  range  of  policy  responses 
undertaken by the Central Bank and the uphill fight to maintain macroeconomic stability. 
The inflation experience 
The  average  inflation,  growth  in  GDP  and  change  in  per  capita  income  experienced  by 
Jamaica in each of the last five decades is interesting: 
2 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
Alarming as they are, the average inflation rates for each decade in fact mask episodes of 
even more alarming instability. In one seven-year period – 1990–1996 – inflation amounted 
to 248 per cent and an annual average of 35.5 per cent. 
We  need  to  pause  to  consider  what  inflation  rates  at  this  level  do  to  fixed  contracts  like 
pensions, savings and the salaries of persons with low bargaining power. Inflation at these 
levels virtually destroys the value of the income that they rely on to meet normal expenses 
and erodes the provisions they had put aside for retirement. It is a grim but silent reaper that 
leaves behind a mass of working poor and indigent pensioners while transferring windfalls to 
owners of property and assets denominated in other currencies. 
Many of you who lived through this period would have had the experience of purchasing an 
insurance  policy  to  help  fund  a  child’s  education  or  to  provide  a  source  of  income  in 
retirement. You would have found, for example, that a princely $100,000 policy purchased in 
1971 redeemed today would be worth less than $200 in 1971 dollars. While the face value 
was seen as the equivalent of US$110,000 then, it could purchase just over US$1,200 today.  
People whose lives are shaped by such experiences adapt their responses to survive in that 
environment. Workers negotiate shorter contracts and demand adjustments that compensate 
for past losses and insist on provisions that anticipate further erosion of purchasing power. 
They demand higher interest rates on their savings to sustain the purchasing power of their 
deposits and are attracted to instruments such as insurance policies with a heavy investment 
component  and  periodic  adjustment  which  are  inherently  better  able  to  keep  pace  with 
inflation. And, for many, diversification has been the solution where despite the interest rates 
available  on  domestic  instruments  the  quantum  of  foreign  currency  deposits  in  domestic 
financial institutions exceeds US$2.0 billion and keeps rising each year. 
The inflation experience spawns other behaviour. It makes otherwise sane and conservative 
people  condone,  “invest  in”  and  even  promote  wild  financial  schemes.  It  sends  economic 
activity  underground  –  to  avoid  taxation  and  to  seek  higher  returns.  Can  this  type  of 
behaviour  be  described  as  a  rational  reaction  to  recurring  bouts  of  instability?  That  is  an 
open question. But nothing in my reading of events over the last 50 years better explains the 
perennial uncertainty, constant hedging, relentless rent-seeking and absence of commitment 
to any project with a delayed pay-off that typifies economic behaviour in Jamaica.  
You would have noted from the figures that I read out that in the last decade, things have 
been improving. You would not know it from the usual media channels but, over a week ago, 
STATIN  released,  on  the  usual  date,  its  inflation  report  for  the  month  of  February.  The 
outcome was a reduction in prices by 0.4 per cent bringing inflation for the 11 months of the 
fiscal  year  to  date  to  6.7  per  cent.  The  Treasury  Bill  auction  today  delivered  a  yield  of 
6.46 per cent on the three-month instrument and 6.63 per cent on the six-month instrument. 
So, annual inflation has fallen, financial markets have been more stable and, more recently, 
market-determined interest rates have fallen to their lowest levels in decades. A number of 
factors would have contributed to this including fiscal consolidation, external support and the 
cooperation of many local wealth holders and decision makers. 
The analysis of that on-going transformation is something that will no doubt form part of your 
discussions later in the Conference. The key point that I wish to make in this context is that 
this juncture provides an ideal time for us to consider the institutional safeguards that could 
preserve  price  and  macroeconomic  stability  for  the  next  50  years  and  leave  the  next 
generation with a different and better experience. 
Policy and institutional options for a different future 
We have on the menu essentially the same set of options that policymakers had post-Bretton 
Woods: pegging (or fixing) the exchange rate, monetary union, dollarisation and independent 
central banks. The difference now is that we have had 40years of experience since then and 
have spent a lot of time and energy in discussing some of them as regional issues.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
The  first  three  –  a  fixed  peg,  a  monetary  union  and  dollarisation  –  all  imply  relinquishing 
discretion  over  monetary  policy.  They  differ  in  the  degree  of  commitment  or  reversibility 
inherent in each regime and, in a sense, what the actual currency units would look like. The 
answer to the question “what’s in your wallet?” would tell the world what your choice was. 
A fixed exchange rate 
A fixed peg has the appeal of establishing a known and predictable parity for the Jamaica 
Dollar  against,  most  likely,  the  US  Dollar.  It  would  thus  keep  the  Jamaica  Dollar  in  your 
pocket and preserve its nominal external value by fiat. Other things being equal, policy would 
limit the permissible rate of domestic monetary expansion and would thus, in the absence of 
local  supply  shocks,  tie  domestic  inflation  to  that  of  the  United  States.  Given  the  current 
strength of the Net International Reserves and the growing record of exchange rate stability, 
this might seem to many to be the perfect time to establish an official fixed exchange rate.  
Going back to where we were is not, however, a straightforward move. Somewhat akin to the 
idea of original sin, there is a reputational issue that has been burned into people’s psyche – 
that of perennial uncertainty and the option that the Government would continue to have to 
adjust the parity whenever it deems it necessary. The issue of credibility is stacked against 
years  of  experience  with  expedient  adjustments  when  pressures  have  arisen  and  the 
absence of any statutory or institutional commitment to maintaining the parity.  
There are other realities. Supply shocks are a feature of life in the Caribbean, some of which, 
if they are long-lasting, may require an adjustment to economy-wide prices like the exchange 
rate. Further, exchange controls, which have traditionally been the institutional safeguard to 
ensure  reserve  adequacy,  would  be  an  anachronism  in  these  times  of  open  borders  and 
financial  integration.  Thus,  while  the  reserves  may  be  sufficient  at  this  time  to  support 
exchange rate stability, a change in investor sentiment and a consequent outflow of capital 
could  only  be  managed  by  restrictions  on  credit  expansion,  reserve  requirements  and 
interest  rate  hikes.  This  would  all  be  geared  towards  sustaining  a  rate  which  may  well  be 
unsuitable  to  the  economic  circumstances  of  the  country  and  would  thus  provide  a  safe 
target for those who would wish to bet against the parity being maintained. 
In light of these realities, I would rule out fixing the exchange rate. Determining a parity that 
would  be  suitable  in  all  states  of  economic  nature  is  nearly  impossible.  Defending  an 
inappropriate  parity  is  a  very  expensive  losing  proposition  which  is  almost  guaranteed  to 
occur as circumstances are bound to arise that will test the resolve of the authorities. Finally, 
exchange control, which is the companion measure that is necessary in order to support a 
peg, is ruled out by law, by international agreement, by de facto integration and by progress. 
Monetary union 
The  next  candidate  is  joining  the  rest  of  the  Caribbean  Community  (“CARICOM”)  in  a 
monetary union and using a single Caribbean currency. Partly to enhance the credibility of 
monetary  policy  commitments  but  mainly  to  facilitate  regional  integration,  the  Heads  of 
Government of CARICOM took a decision in July 1992 to establish a Caribbean Monetary 
Authority by 1997 and to move towards a full monetary union of all CARICOM members by 
the year 2000. Suriname and Haiti subsequently joined the group and membership by the 
Dominican  Republic  is  being  considered.  A  CARICOM-based  monetary  union  would  thus 
embrace virtually the whole Caribbean area. 
The development of monetary cooperation is seen as an important and symbiotic adjunct to 
the tendency towards hemispheric cooperation in trade since it would reduce uncertainties 
about  payments.  It  would  also  seek  to  deflect  the  issue  of  each  individual  member 
contending with pressures on their balance of payments by pooling their foreign reserves and 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
conducting  monetary  policy  through  a  regional  monetary  authority  that  would  aim  at 
maintaining the integrity of the regional currency. 
Whatever  its  original  merits  and  clear  advantage  in  facilitating  regional  trade,  the  initiative 
has clearly lost steam over the 20 years of discussion. Part of the reason is that even in its 
absence  there  is  no  difficulty  in  making  payments  across  borders  using  the  de  facto 
Caribbean currency – the US dollar. The other main drawback is that signing on to a single 
currency  implies  ceding  control  over  some  parts  of  national  governance  to  a  regional 
authority.  While  there  would  always  be  representation  from  each  member,  a  regional 
monetary  policy  stance  would  necessarily  affect  members  differently  given  the  wide 
differences  to  be  found  in  the  economic  characteristics  of  members  in  several  important 
areas. This would not be the first union to face that issue but others, like the United States 
with different conditions among its member states, like the European Union and others, have 
mechanisms for effecting fiscal transfers to compensate for the adverse effects of a common 
policy on some members. In this regard, we can note as an example that the so-called “less 
developed  countries”  of  CARICOM  have  always  been  extremely  sensitive  to  the  need  to 
protect their populations via “special and differential treatment”. 
In similar vein, Jamaica has always been and continues to be focused on North America and 
Europe in its external economic relations in a way that relegates a mechanism to promote 
commerce  with  CARICOM  to  a  secondary  role.  Replacing  the  Jamaica  Dollar  with  a 
Caribbean  Dollar  would  be  likely  to  enhance  the  predictability  of  its  external  and  internal 
value and would offer a stronger level of commitment than an announced peg. By the same 
token, it would prove to be a stronger handicap where fundamental economic adjustment is 
required locally and where any change in parity requires unanimity among equal partners in 
the union. 
Dollarisation 
Dollarisation  has  returned  to  the  discussion  table  periodically  and  has  been  touted  as  an 
even stronger commitment to monetary stability as it would abolish the currency entirely and 
replace  domestic  money  with  the  US  Dollar  –  both  for  circulation  and  for  accounting 
purposes.  
As in the case of the Caribbean Dollar, the adoption of the US Dollar would offer the benefit 
of tying our inflation experience to that of the United States and monetary policy would flow 
from the Federal Reserve in Washington. Of course, there are key differences between US 
dollarisation  and  Caribbean  dollarisation.  There  would  be  no  domestic  input  into  policy 
making. There would be no right to the sharing of seigniorage – the income that accrues to 
the  issuer  of  national  currencies.  There  would  be  no  means  of  supporting  the  financial 
system  if  liquidity  shortages  arose.  Dependence  on  the  United  States  for  currency  for 
circulation could raise issues of security and sovereignty (as is reported to have occurred in 
Panama).  
Therefore, dollarisation could offer the kind of assurance that we are seeking to establish for 
ourselves but it would not be our doing and would say to the world “we are just not capable”. 
More important, it would present no guarantees as to reversibility especially when questions 
of security, sovereignty and independent national development issues assume centre stage 
in a nation’s political life. I would argue that there is a better alternative. 
A strong and autonomous central bank 
The starting point for offering succeeding generations a much more pleasing environment for 
price stability, growth and development is to define for ourselves what is a tolerable rate of 
inflation  and  what  is  not.  Currently,  our  medium-term  forecasts  are  built  around  getting 
inflation down to the 4%–5% range which is, approximately, the collective experience of our 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
trading  partners.  There  needs  to  be  a  public  consensus,  involving  the  highest  levels  of 
leadership, academia, commerce and an informed public, about the level of inflation that the 
authorities should be held to. This is the first step. 
The  second  step  is  to  deal  with  the  perennial  imbalances  in  public  finances  that  are  the 
counterpart to the imbalance in our current account. These have led to a huge overhang of 
debt  the  servicing  of  which  consumes  virtually  all  of  the  Government’s  tax  revenue  and 
crowds  out  public  investment  in  infrastructure  and  social  development.  This  is  part  of  the 
story  behind  the  slow  growth  and  sluggish  change  in  per  capita  income.  It  also  retards 
growth in productivity which is the one sure way of achieving growth in GDP without inflation.  
The third step is to put in place the institutional arrangements that ensure that low and stable 
inflation  becomes  the  key  responsibility  of  the  central  bank  and  that  measures  to  ensure 
accountability  are  in  place.  This  is  not  as  difficult  as  it  sounds  and  requires  only  a 
modification to the legal and operational framework that we already have. 
The  emerging  literature  on  the  redesign  of  central  banks  follows  two  strands:  on  the  one 
hand, the delegation of monetary policy to a conservative central bank that then determines 
policy  consistent  with  its  low-inflation  preferences  (the  “reputational”  option);  and,  on  the 
other hand, the formulation of strict principal-agent contracts where inflation targets are still 
set by elected officials but their achievement is contracted to a central bank empowered with 
the instruments to implement this (the “contractual” option). The Federal Reserve Board of 
the  United  States  is  an  example  of  the  first  option  while  New  Zealand’s  Reserve  Bank  is 
often  cited  as  an  example  of  the  second  type.  Their  relative  merits  are  still  unfolding  but, 
given the dependence of the reputational solution on the personality of a single institution, 
the contractual option holds out greater promise of a credible, long-term, apolitical solution. 
An autonomous central bank would be one that is insulated from short-term political priorities 
both by its terms of reference and by its governance provisions. Its focus on low and stable 
inflation would be monitored by its reporting to Parliament and by its implementation of an 
inflation  targeting  regime  which  has  proven  to  be  an  effective  anchor  for  inflation 
expectations  in  a  growing  number  of  industrial  and  developing  countries.  It  would  retain 
responsibility for financial stability and would thus have the mandate and the wherewithal to 
respond  to  potential  threats  to  stability  before  they  arise  and  to  support  systemically 
significant entities where the need arises. Such an institution would be of our making, could 
achieve all of the goals that we think are important to our collective well-being and would see 
us through the next 50 years proudly holding Jamaican dollars in our wallets. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
