Brian Wynter: Economic issues and short-term trends for Jamaica 
Speech  by  Mr  Brian  Wynter,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Jamaica,  at  the  Quarterly  Press 
Briefing, Kingston, 15 February 2011. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen: 
Welcome  to  this  the  release  of  the  first  Quarterly  Monetary  Policy  Report  for  2011.  My 
presentation  will  follow  the  usual  format.  There  will  be  a  brief  review  of  macroeconomic 
developments in the December 2010 quarter, followed by the Bank’s view of the near-term 
prospects  for  the  economy.  In  this  report  we  have  also  included  an  article  on  inflation 
targeting, an alternative monetary policy framework that has become increasingly popular in 
recent years because of the success achieved in reducing inflation. This article comes in light 
of the success the Government has had to date in its effort at fiscal consolidation and the 
commitment  to  a  fiscal  responsibility  framework,  which  are  important  pillars  of  an  inflation 
targeting framework. We encourage you to read the article and let us have your feedback. 
Recent developments 
When we last met on 10 November 2010, I indicated that the process of transformation was 
continuing in line with the objective of lower volatility in domestic prices, lower interest rates 
and stable financial markets. The objectives set out in the financial programme continue to 
be met. To date, the Government and the BOJ have met all the quantitative targets under 
Stand-by Arrangement (“SBA”) with the International Monetary Fund (“IMF”) and are set to 
meet those for end-December 2010. The reviews that the country has received from the IMF 
have  been  encouraging  and  we  continue  to  make  progress  on  the  structural  benchmarks 
which are aimed at increasing efficiency in fiscal management and the financial system. In 
the context of these developments, the outlook for inflation remains favourable, interest rates 
continue  to  trend  down,  the  foreign  exchange  market  remain  relatively  stable  and  net 
international  reserves  continue  to  be  robust  .  However,  although  there  are  signs  of 
improvement in domestic output, the economy remains weak. 
Money and financial markets 
On  15  November  2010,  the  Bank  reduced  the  interest  rate  on  its  30-day  open  market 
instrument by half of one per cent to 7.5 per cent. On 01 February 2011 we reduced this rate 
by  a  further  quarter  of  one  per  cent.  These  rate  reductions  were  done  in  the  context  of 
continued weakness in the domestic economy and the favourable prospects for inflation. In 
addition,  investors  have  continued  to  show  a  preference  for  Jamaica  Dollar  instruments, 
signifying their confidence in the positive near-term prospects for continuing stability in the 
economy. 
Market-determined  interest  rates  also  continued  to  decline  in  the  quarter.  The  weighted 
average  yield  on  the  1-month,  3-month  and  6-month  Treasury  bills  declined  by  78  basis 
points, 35 basis points and 51 basis points, respectively to 7.48 per cent, 7.40 per cent and 
7.48 per cent at the auctions in the December 2010. Yields have continued to decline falling 
by an average of 2 basis points at the auctions in January, with all tenors significantly over-
subscribed. 
The  external  community  has  also  continued  to  demonstrate  its  confidence  in  Jamaica’s 
creditworthiness.  Average  yields  on  Jamaican  sovereign  bonds  have  fallen  from  about 
10.50 per  cent  at  the  end  of  January  last  year  –  just  before  the  implementation  of  the 
Jamaica Voluntary Debt Exchange (JDX) – to 7.57 per cent at the end of January this year. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
This  occurred  in  the  context  of  a  fall  of  about  2  percentage  points  in  the  average  spread 
between Jamaican sovereign bonds and US Treasury bonds – an indication that investors 
perceive a meaningful reduction in the risks associated with investing in Jamaican securities. 
When compared with other emerging markets, Jamaica’s bonds have also performed well. 
The spread between Jamaican sovereign bonds and the benchmark emerging market bond 
index (known as the EMBI) fell by more than 3 percentage points over the course of 2010. 
Also reflective of the increasing confidence about the near-term prospects for the economy, 
the foreign exchange market was relatively stable for the December quarter. In this context, 
there was a marginal appreciation of 0.45 per cent in the weighted average selling rate of the 
Jamaica  Dollar  for  the  review  period.  This  was  in  comparison  to  average  depreciation  of 
3.0 per cent for the last five December quarters. For the calendar year 2010, the value of the 
Jamaica Dollar appreciated by 4.4 per cent against the US dollar. This was in contrast to the 
depreciation of 10.2 per cent in 2009.  
The  appreciation  in  the value  of  the  domestic currency  in  the  quarter was  associated  with 
increased net private capital inflows which were more than sufficient to offset the impact of 
increased demand to satisfy payments for current account transactions. In the context of this 
excess  supply  of  foreign  currency  in  the  market,  the  Bank  made  net  purchases  of 
US$51.9 million  during  the  quarter.  These  purchases  along  with  the  purchase  from 
Government  of  the  proceeds  of  a  US$200.0  million  loan  from  the  Inter-American 
Development  Bank,  contributed  to  an  increase  of  US$197.7  million  in  the  NIR  during  the 
quarter.  At  end-December  2010  the  NIR  amounted  to  US$2  171.4  million,  which  was 
US$351.4 million above target under the IMF-SBA programme. Gross reserves amounted to 
US$2  982.8  million,  representing  23.0 weeks  of  projected  goods  and  services  imports, 
comparing favourably with the international benchmark of 12 weeks. 
Inflation 
The out-turn for inflation for the December quarter was somewhat higher than the forecast 
range I had shared with you at the last briefing. Headline inflation was 3.3 per cent for the 
December  quarter,  compared  to  1.3  per  cent  in  the  September  2010  quarter  and  the 
projected range of 2.0 per cent – 3.0 per cent. As a result of the out-turn for the quarter, 
there  was  an  uptick  in  the  annual  point-to-point  inflation  to  11.7  per  cent  relative  to  the 
10.2 per  cent  in  2009,  the  original  forecast  made  in  December  2009  for  CY2010  was 
11.4 per cent. However, all the annual measures of core inflation recorded declines, with the 
exception of the trimmed mean which remained flat.  
The temporary acceleration in inflation in the review quarter was largely due to the passage 
of Tropical Storm Nicole at the end of September, the impact of which was more prolonged 
than we had Quarterly Press Briefing 15 February 2011 anticipated. This led to temporary 
shortages  in  the  supply  of  some  agriculture  produce  and  consequently  higher  prices  for 
these items, particularly vegetables. 
In  addition  to  the  impact  of  adverse  weather  conditions,  domestic  inflation  was  also 
negatively affected by the pass-through of increases in international commodity prices during 
the review period. The higher inflation in the December quarter also reflected increased costs 
for  energy  and  transportation  as  a  result  of  a  rise  in  international  oil  prices.  The  upward 
movement in oil prices largely resulted from a weakening in the US dollar against all major 
currencies  as  well  as  the  impact  of  improvements  in  the  outlook  for  global  growth. 
Accordingly,  Food  &  Non-alcoholic  Beverages;  Housing,  Water,  Electricity,  Gas  &  Other 
Fuels;  and  Transportation  were  the  major  contributors  to  inflation  in  the  quarter.  Of  note, 
Food and Non-alcoholic Beverages contributed 59.8 per cent of the inflation out-turn in the 
review quarter. The impact of the above factors was moderated by the appreciation in the 
exchange rate and continued weakness in the domestic economy.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
As was indicated previously, the up-tick in inflation in the December quarter was temporary. 
In this regard, the Bank is projecting that there will be a moderation in inflation in the March 
2011 quarter, within the range of 1.0 per cent to 2.0 per cent. The projected deceleration in 
inflation  in  the  March  quarter  is  largely  predicated  on  the  expected  price  reversals  for 
agriculture  crops  which  occurred  in  the  December  quarter.  In  addition,  we  are  expecting 
continued stable domestic capacity and declining inflation expectations to have a moderating 
impact  on  inflation.  However,  the  Bank  is  projecting  continued  increases  in  international 
commodity prices, which should be the major influence on inflation in the quarter. 
Real sector 
The Bank estimates indicate that real GDP contracted in the range of 0.0 per cent to 1.0 per 
cent for the December quarter, similar to the contraction in the September quarter. Similar to 
our  forecast  in  November  2010,  all  industries  are  estimated  to  have  contracted  with  the 
exception  of  Mining  &  Quarrying  and  Hotels  &  Restaurants.  Underlying  aggregate 
demand  is  estimated  to  have  remained  weak  due  mainly  to  continued  declines  in 
Consumption and Investment. 
For  the  March  2011  quarter,  the  Bank  is  projecting  that  there  will  be  marginal  growth  in 
economic activity. This will be largely driven by continued expansion in Mining & Quarrying 
and Hotels & Restaurants as well as growth in Electricity & Water Supply. The strength of 
the expansion in these sectors is expected to offset the slower rate of decline in the other 
sectors.  
Outlook 
The consensus is that the global economy grew at a faster rate in 2010 than was previously 
expected, led by emerging economies such as China and India. Although the prospects for 
global  growth  in  2011  have  also  improved,  this  is  expected  to  be  at  a  slower  rate  than  in 
2010.  This  expectation  of  slower  growth  is  in  the  context  of  monetary  tightening  being 
undertaken by some emerging economies. Nonetheless, the forecast for continued growth in 
the  world  economy,  particularly  the  USA,  bodes  well  for  remittance  inflows  and  tourist 
arrivals to Jamaica. 
In spite of the improvements in the global economy and the expected marginal growth in the 
March quarter, the Jamaican economy is projected to contract in the range of 0.0 per cent to 
1.0 per cent for FY 2010/11. The projected contraction is a direct result of the declines that 
were experienced in the first three quarters. However, we are expecting that growth in the 
March quarter will continue into the next fiscal year with all sectors being projected to register 
expansion.  
Given the forecast for the March quarter, the Bank is expecting inflation for FY 2010/11 to fall 
within our original target range of 7.5 per cent – 9.5 per cent. The forecast for single-digit 
inflation  is  predicated  on  the  continued  weak  consumer  demand,  relative  stability  in  the 
foreign exchange market and continued moderation in inflation expectations. The risks to the 
inflation  projection  are  still  balanced.  Higher  than  anticipated  increases  in  international 
commodity prices continues to be the main upside risk, while on the downside a greater than 
anticipated contraction in domestic demand could contain inflation pressures. 
For the medium-term the Bank is forecasting that inflation will fall in the range of 5.5 per cent 
to 7.5 per cent. Most of the inflation in FY 2011/12 should occur in the first half of the fiscal 
year  due  to  the  forecast  for  increased  prices  for  international  commodities.  Thereafter,  we 
expect  the  prices  of  international  commodities  to  normalise.  The  Central  Bank’s  goal  is  to 
achieve low and stable Inflation in line with that of our major trading partners in the long-term. 
While  the  achievements  to  date  of  high  single-digit  inflation  may  be  satisfactory  from  a 
historical perspective, it is not too soon for us to consider how we will reach the lower single-
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
digits  of  our  trading  partners  which  for  2010  was  5.1  per  cent.  Accordingly,  the  Bank’s 
monetary  policy  stance  will  continue  to  be  consistent  with  the  objective  of  achieving  low 
stable prices and maintaining stability in the financial markets. 
Conclusion 
Ladies and Gentlemen, the Jamaican economy has continued to benefit from the on-going 
transformation  which  commenced  in  2010.  Consolidation  in  the  fiscal  accounts  and  the 
demonstrated  commitment  to  fiscal  responsibility  have  reassured  investors  about  the 
favourable prospects for stability in the economy. This has been reflected in the continued 
decline in interest rates in the money and bond markets as well as the stable to appreciating 
trend  in  the  exchange  rate.  By  now,  you  would  have  heard  of  the  offer  made  to  investors 
amounting to US$400 million by way of a re-opening of the 2019 Global Bond at a yield to 
maturity of 7.95 per cent. That offer which was floated in anticipation of the maturity in May of 
the 2011 Global Bond and was heavily over subscribed. 
The quarterly observance of the targets under the IMF-SBA and the associated programme 
of  reform  have  affirmed  perceptions  about  the  progressive  improvements  in  Jamaica’s 
macroeconomic  management.  These  continuing 
the 
foundation for a more robust participation by the private sector in the creation of sustainable 
economic growth and development. 
Thank you. 
improvements  must  now 
form 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
