Barbro Wickman-Parak: “Translating” forecasts into repo-rate decisions 
– no easy task 
Speech  by  Ms  Barbro  Wickman-Parak,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  a 
meeting with Nordea Markets, Stockholm, 24 May 2011. 
 I would like to thank Hans Dillén for his help with this speech and Lina Majtorp for her help with the illustrations. 
My  speech  here  today  is  about  making  forecasts.  In  order  to  be  able  to  conduct  a  well-
balanced  monetary  policy  we  need  to  make  good  forecasts,  which  in  turn  requires  good 
models.  Models  cannot  of  course  capture  everything,  so  the  forecasts  that  the  Riksbank 
presents are the result of a structured interaction between models and assessments. Further 
assessments are then made when the time comes to make a repo-rate decision. Not even 
the  best  forecasts  can  simply  be  “translated”  into  a  repo-rate  decision.  This  is  always  a 
difficult  process,  but  it  becomes  even  more  difficult  when  the  economy  is subject  to  major 
disruptions such as the financial crisis that hit in the autumn of 2008.  
The Riksbank, and most other analysts, made significant forecasting errors at that time. The 
basic problem was that our models do not capture a number of the financial links that played 
a  role  during  the  crisis,  and  the  risks  associated  with  these  links  were  therefore 
underestimated. I think that we all agree that we need to increase our understanding of the 
various financial links that affect the Swedish economy.  
The  step  from  forecast  to  repo-rate  decision  is  also  affected  by  other  considerations.  One 
issue  is  whether  our  assessments  should  stop  short  at  the  end  of  the  forecast  horizon. 
Another  issue  is  that  positive  and  negative  deviations  from  our  inflation  target  may  entail 
different costs and affect the balance of monetary policy. Finally, I would like to underline my 
view that flexibility is crucial in monetary policy. The fact that we quickly changed the course 
of monetary policy during the crisis is a clear sign of flexibility. But even in more normal times 
it is important to remember that our knowledge of the future is incomplete and uncertain I am 
therefore in favour of repo-rate changes being made gradually in normal circumstances. This 
makes  it  possible  to  continuously  analyse  developments  and  to  determine  whether  to 
continue to follow the chosen path, to call a halt or to change direction. Sudden and dramatic 
changes in monetary policy can then be avoided. 
We cannot do without forecasts 
I  worked  with  macroeconomic  forecasts  long  before  I  became  a  member  of  the  Executive 
Board of the Riksbank. At that time I was involved in the nitty gritty of forecasting, now I am 
part  of  a  process  in  which  the  spadework  is  done  by  others.  My  role  in  this  process  is  to 
contribute assessments.  
A question I have often been asked is why economists bother producing economic forecasts 
–  everyone  knows  that  they  often  prove  to  be  wrong.  The  answer  is  that  many  activities 
cannot  do  without  forecasts  as  a  basis  for  their  planning.  The  spring  budget  bill  that  was 
presented  recently  is,  for  example,  based  on  a  macroeconomic  forecast  of  the  levels  of 
central government income and expenditure in the years ahead and the potential scope for 
reforms that will therefore be available. Forecasts of different kinds also play a practical role 
for the planning of companies, even though they may not call their underlying assessments 
forecasts.  Financial  investors,  who  are  better  able  than  others  to  forecast  macroeconomic 
developments, have an advantage in the search for yield as financial prices such as interest 
rates,  exchange  rates  and  share  prices  are  strongly  affected  by  business  cycle 
developments.  A  final  but  important  example  concerns  households  who,  when  planning  to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
buy  a  home,  largely  base  their  decision  on  what  they  believe  about  the  development  of 
interest rates in the future.  
Although  forecasts  are seldom  entirely  correct,  I  would  still  say  that  they  are  often  correct 
enough  to  provide  a  reasonable  basis  for  planning.  It  is  mainly  in  connection  with  turning 
points in economic activity and with different types of crisis that forecasts prove to be wrong. 
On the other hand, we should be aware that forecasts are predictions of what will happen in 
the future and are therefore shrouded in uncertainty. We must always be prepared to change 
our course of action if events move in a different direction. 
Monetary policy is based on forecasts 
The Riksbank also uses forecasts to “plan” monetary policy. This planning is reflected in our 
repo-rate path and if developments take a different turn than forecast then we have to adjust 
the repo-rate path. It may seem that the Riksbank uses forecasts in roughly the same way as 
other players whose operations are also affected by the development of economic activity. 
There  is,  however,  an  important  difference.  The  Riksbank  can,  in  contrast  to  most  other 
forecasters, affect the forecasts. This is the whole point of monetary policy. Put simply, we 
can  say  that  a  well-balanced  monetary  policy  is  characterised  by  the  forecast  for  inflation 
being close to the inflation target and the forecast for resource utilisation being close to its 
normal level.1 
There is nothing to say that we have to publish our forecasts. Life would in some respects be 
easier if we did not publish them. We would avoid the criticism we are subjected to when our 
forecasts  prove  to  be  wrong  and  we  would  be  able  to  write  in  more  general  terms  about 
economic developments without needing to present a detailed and cohesive forecast. For a 
long time, central banks were rather closed and secretive bodies and when, for example, the 
Riksbank began publishing its inflation forecasts in 1997 there were many people, not least 
in  the  world  of  central  banking,  who  had  misgivings;  wouldn’t  confidence  be  eroded  if  the 
forecasts turned out to be wrong? This proved not to be the case and these days we present 
the  entire  cohesive  forecast  for  the  inflation  target,  wages,  GDP  and  its  components,  the 
repo  rate  and  so  on.  I  believe  that  by  doing  this  we  have  increased  the  public’s 
understanding of monetary policy and reduced the drama surrounding the entire monetary 
policy process. Assessing economic activity entails reviewing material that is in a constant 
state  of  flux,  and  when  we  change  our  monetary  policy  these  changes  can  be  concretely 
related to changes in real-economic conditions. I would also like to add that the quantified 
forecasts are of course interesting, but the associated analyses of the driving forces behind 
different courses of development are at least as interesting.  
How do we make our forecasts? 
Developments abroad play an important role 
For a small open economy like the Swedish economy, the international outlook is the point of 
departure for the forecast. We cannot influence events abroad, but what happens there has a 
major  impact  on  developments  here  at  home.  Here  I  would  like  to  highlight  some  of  the 
special aspects relating to the forecast of developments abroad. 
                                                 
1  Apart from the fact that it is considered desirable to stabilise resource utilisation, resource utilisation is also an 
important  inflation  indicator.  Resource  utilisation  is  thus  an  important  factor  that  plays  several  roles  in  the 
monetary policy analysis and there is an almost constant discussion of what measures of resource utilisation 
are the most relevant. I believe that we should make an overall assessment on the basis of several measures 
but otherwise I lack space in this speech to go into further detail on this important subject. For a review of 
different methods of measuring resource utilisation I refer to Svante Öberg’s speech “Potential GDP, resource 
utilisation and monetary policy” of 7 October 2010. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The world is a big place… 
To  start  with,  the  rest  of  the  world  is  a  big  place  and  we  do  not  have  the  resources  to 
produce  detailed  forecasts  for  individual  countries  in  the  same  way  as  we  do  for  Sweden. 
Instead  we  have  to  limit  the  number  of  forecast  variables  and  focus  on  those  parts  of  the 
world that are most significant to the Swedish economy. For other regions we have to rely to 
a  great  extent  on  the  assessments  of  other  forecasters,  although  this  of  course  does  not 
mean that we copy their forecasts directly. 
Another important aspect is that the forecasts for the different regions of the world must hang 
together in a consistent way. If, for example, we change the forecast for the United States 
then this also affects the forecast for the euro area (and other regions) and vice versa. This 
mutual interdependence is not always easy to manage but the preconditions have improved 
recently following the introduction of a new model for the international outlook. It is called the 
Global  Projection  Model  (GPM)  and  its  main  aim  is  to  produce  cohesive  and  consistent 
forecasts for different regions of the world.2 The GPM also plays an important role when we 
want to produce different risk scenarios. 
…and changeable 
So, what regions of the world are most important to Sweden? The region on our doorstep is 
of course very important. This primarily includes the euro area, but also the UK, Denmark, 
Norway  and  a  couple  of  other  countries  in  central  and  eastern  Europe.  Most  of  our  trade 
takes place with this region. A region that has increased in economic importance over time is 
Asia. The emerging economies in Asia, led by China, have been the driving force behind the 
recovery  of  the  global  economy  following  the  financial  crisis.  The  importance  of  these 
countries  for  Sweden’s  foreign  trade  has  also  shown  an  increasing  trend  since  the  early 
1990s. This of course means that it is now more important to monitor these countries than 
previously. 
The United States affects Sweden through financial links 
Finally,  developments  in  the  United  States  are  always  important  even  though  in  trade-
weighted terms the United States only accounts for about 10 per cent. The reason for this is 
that  the  US  economy  often  sets  the  tone  for  the  development  of  stock  markets  and  bond 
rates  around  the  world.  It  is  true  that  our  knowledge  and  understanding  of  these  financial 
links is limited3 but it appears to be the case that they play a particularly important role during 
slowdowns. The global financial crisis that originated in the US housing market is perhaps an 
all too clear example of this. The IT crash that took place just over 10 years ago is a more 
normal example of how events in the United States affect the global economy via financial 
prices.  
Assessing the current situation – the essential starting point for the forecast for 
Sweden 
Assessing  the  current  situation  entails  producing  a  forecast  for  the  current  quarter,  and 
perhaps  the  next  quarter.  At  such  a  short  forecasting  horizon,  not  so  much  importance  is 
                                                 
2  The GPM has been developed by the IMF. It is available in several versions. For a description of a smaller 
version of the GPM, see Carabenciov, I., I. Ermolaev, C. Freedman, M. Juillard, O. Kamenik, D Korshunov, 
D. Laxton, and J. Laxtion (2008), “A small MultiCountry Global Projection Model with Financial-Real Linkages 
and Oil Prices”, IMF Working Paper No. 08/280, International Monetary Fund. 
3  For a more detailed analysis of how the United States affects the global economy and the role that financial 
links play in this see Chapter 4 of the IMF’s (International Monetary Fund) World Economic Outlook from April 
2007. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
attached  to  large  macro  models;  the  assessment  is  instead  based  on  many  different 
economic  indicators.  An  assessment  of  the  current  situation  is  a  kind  of  mapping  of  the 
disruptions  and  imbalances  that  are  currently  affecting  the  economy;  in  other  words  it 
describes the situation at the starting point for the forecast. It goes without saying that it is 
difficult to assess where you are going if you do not know where you are today. Assessing 
the current situation thus lies at the very core of all forecasting. 
Such an assessment does not simply entail producing forecasts for outcome data like GDP 
and the CPI, it also involves having to assess demand and supply factors in the economy. In 
this  context  the  assessment  of  resource  utilisation  plays  a  prominent  role.  If  resource 
utilisation  is  low  then  the  economy  can  grow  rather  rapidly  without  prices  and  wages 
increasing  in  an  alarming  way.  If  it  is  strained  then  high  growth  may  lead  to  overheating 
tendencies  that  could  be  reflected  in  excessively  high  inflation.  So,  even  if  the  Riksbank 
produces fair forecasts of economic growth monetary policy may be less well-balanced if we 
misjudge  resource  utilisation.  A  complicating  circumstance  in  this  context  is  that  resource 
utilisation, unlike GDP growth, cannot be observed directly. This underlines the fact that the 
assessment  of  the  current  situation  is  fundamentally  an  assessment  of  the  state  of  the 
economy that is very difficult to make. 
Confidence indicators, which capture the mood of the economy, play an important role in the 
assessment. High values in the confidence indicators normally entail relatively strong growth 
in consumption, exports and investment, all else being equal. Important confidence indicators 
include the purchasing managers’ index, data from various business tendency surveys and 
surveys  on  expectations  relating  to  wages  and  prices,  but  there  are  many  more.  We  also 
conduct our own company interviews in which we get direct information on how various sub-
markets are functioning in practice. 
The indicators often provide a slightly diffuse picture of the state of the economy. Here we 
find  various  indicator  models  useful  in  that,  on  the  basis  of  an  analysis  of  the  historical 
significance  of  different  indicators,  they  help  us  to  put  our  most  important  forecasts  into 
figures. Ultimately, we also have to weigh information that is not captured by our indicators 
into our assessment of the current state of the economy. 
Model forecasting is the next step 
Once we have produced a forecast for the outlook abroad and performed an assessment of 
the current situation we are ready, with the help of various large macro models, to produce 
forecasts for longer time horizons. It could be said that the models give a description of how 
prevailing impulses from abroad and the initial state of the Swedish economy will affect the 
development  of  the  economy.  In  the  very  long  term,  however,  the  effects  of  the  prevailing 
impulses will have faded and the economy will then follow a balanced path in the long run. 
This  balanced  state,  which  in  model  terms  is  often  called  a  steady  state,  is  an  important 
characteristic of a model. We could perhaps say that an assessment of the current situation 
tell us where we are while models tell where we are going in the very long term.  
In the monetary policy analysis, however, the focus is often on what will happen in the period 
in-between, or on developments two to three years ahead. It is generally accepted that it is at 
this  time  horizon  that  monetary  policy  has  its  greatest  effect.  As  I  said  earlier,  monetary 
policy aims to make monetary policy decisions that provide as good a target attainment as 
possible and the models are important in this context because they make it possible for us to 
evaluate  different  monetary  policy  alternatives  in  forecast  terms.  Models  are  on  the  whole 
very  useful  when  we  want  to  evaluate  alternative  scenarios  in  which development  takes  a 
different  course  than  predicted  in  the  main  scenario.  However,  the  analysis  of  alternative 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
scenarios  must  not  be  reduced  to  a  purely  model  exercise  and  it  is  important  that  such 
analyses are also complemented by assessments.4 
Let  me  conclude  the  discussion  of  model  forecasts  by  saying  that  they  are  sometimes 
described as being in some way at odds with forecasts that are based on assessments. In 
my opinion there is no such opposition between them. A forecast is always an assessment. 
We develop models so that they can help us to make better assessments. A good and well-
founded  forecast  is  often  produced  in  a  structured  interaction  between  models  and 
assessments by experts. 
Forecasting, extreme scenarios and the financial crisis 
In normal circumstances, a forecast path can be described as a probability-weighted average 
of  different  reasonable  scenarios.  Note  that  I  use  the  term  reasonable  scenarios,  which 
means in practice that in practical forecasting work we disregard certain kinds of scenario. 
Examples  of  scenarios  that  we  choose  to  disregard  include  a  decision  to  abandon  the 
inflation  target,  the  outbreak  of  war,  major  natural  disasters  or  an  epidemic  that  infects  a 
large part of the labour force. We ignore such scenarios partly because they are very unlikely 
and  partly  because  they  would  entail  a  radical  change  in  the  preconditions  for  monetary 
policy. If such a scenario did nevertheless occur, we would have to decide what would be 
required of monetary policy at the time. 
The financial crisis can also be seen as a kind of extreme scenario, even though this was not 
an event that could be regarded as being highly unlikely. Most analysts believed that there 
was  a  clear  risk  that  the  problems  that  arose  on  the  financial  markets  in  2007  could  get 
worse.  The  problem  was  that  the  crisis  not  only  became  unusually  severe;  it  also  took  a 
course that few of us could predict. 
The crisis spread throughout the global economy through various international financial links 
and  fundamental  functions  in  the  financial  system  were  seriously  disrupted.  This  had 
dramatic, negative effects on, for example, the possibilities of companies to get funding and 
on world trade. This was a case of crisis mechanisms that we had very little experience of 
and that were therefore not included in our forecast models. We were unable to take in the 
complexity of the financial system and the contagion that this entailed. 
Although it was extremely difficult to make forecasts, the Riksbank did not stop making them. 
However,  the  forecasts  were  unusually  uncertain  and  we  were  prepared  to  revise  them 
significantly,  which  is  what  subsequently  happened.  The  forecast  for  GDP  was  revised  so 
much that we ended up far outside the uncertainty bands that surrounded the forecast before 
the  crisis  (see  Figure  1).  At  a  later  stage,  we  also  underestimated  the  strength  of  the 
recovery.  
                                                 
4  For a more detailed discussion of the role of assessments in relation to alternative scenarios see the speech 
“Flexible inflation targeting in theory and practice” that Stefan Ingves held on 12 May 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Figure 1 
GDP and forecasts for GDP at different times 
Annual percentage change, seasonally-adjusted data  
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8
90%
75%
50%
Outcome
September 2008
September 2009
September 2010
April 2011
06
07
08
09
10
11
12
13
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8
 Note:  All  forecasts  entail  a  degree  of  uncertainty  but  to  preserve  the 
graphic profile only uncertainty bands for the September 2008 forecast are 
shown. 
Sources: Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank. 
The radically-changed economic conditions of course had a major impact on the repo-rate 
forecast.  It  was  revised  so  much  that  the  repo-rate  path  also  ended  up  far  outside  the 
uncertainty bands that surrounded the forecast produced in September 2008. It could also be 
said  that  the  monetary  policy  actually  conducted  was  closer  to  crisis  management  than  to 
forecasting. Let me illustrate this with an analogy. 
Figure 2 
The repo rate and forecasts for the repo rate at  
different times, per cent 
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
90%
75%
50%
Outcome
September 2008
September 2009
September 2010
April 2011
06
07
08
09
10
11
12
13
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
 Note:  All  forecasts  entail  a  degree  of  uncertainty  but  to  preserve  the 
graphic  profile  only  uncertainty  bands  for  the  September  2008  forecast 
are shown. 
Source: The Riksbank. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 
Monetary policy is sometimes compared to driving a car, in that it is a case of moving forward 
safely along a road at a good speed. The forecast can be compared to looking ahead along 
the road and then adjusting the speed of the car and the movements of the steering wheel to 
keep the car on the road. The financial crisis can be compared to a collision that threatens to 
throw  the  car  off  the  road.  In  such  a  situation,  it  is  a  case  of  using  all  the  means  at  your 
disposal  to ensure  that  you  stay  on  the  road  and  do  not  fall  into  the  ditch.  What  the  road 
looks like 50 meters further ahead is highly uncertain and, in effect, less important. Once you 
are back relatively safely on the road your speed will be very low and you will be able to look 
ahead and try to return to more normal driving. 
In the upturn: patterns had been broken, parallels with previous crises  
Thanks to resolute action on the part of central banks and other authorities the crisis entered 
a less acute phase. However, the financial markets were still not functioning effectively and 
support  measures  were  still  needed.  But,  a  total  collapse  had  been  avoided  and  it  was 
possible  to  see  signs  of  a  normalisation  on  some  financial  markets.  Nevertheless,  the 
situation was highly uncertain. It was also difficult to assess the real economy. Did the major 
falls  in  GDP  in  Sweden  and  abroad  mean  that  potential  GDP  had  declined?  In  many 
countries the households had experienced substantial falls in house prices. To what extent 
would the need of the households to strengthen their balance sheets mean that consumption 
would  decline  and  that  the  ability  of  monetary  policy  to  stimulate  the  economy  would  be 
weakened?5  
It was clear that the economic patterns that prevailed before the financial crisis had largely 
been broken. In such a situation it was natural to study the form of the economic recovery 
following previous crises. The overriding conclusion that could then be drawn was that the 
recovery  would  be  slower  than  normal.6  However,  it  is  also  the  case  that  every  crisis  is 
unique in many respects and there were circumstances that pointed in the opposite direction. 
Among  other  things,  the  emerging  economies  in  Asia,  led  by  China,  recovered  relatively 
quickly  and  became  something  of  a  driving  force  for  the  recovery  in  the  rest  of  the  world. 
Another  positive  factor  was  that  growth  was  rather  good  around  the  world  when  the  crisis 
began.7  With  hindsight,  it  can  be  noted  that  the  recovery  in  many  areas,  and  not  least  in 
Sweden (see Figure 1 above), has been much more rapid than we could have expected. As 
can be seen in Figure 2, the Riksbank began to increase the repo rate somewhat earlier than 
predicted  during  the  most  severe  phase  of  the  crisis  and  the  repo-rate  path  was  given  a 
somewhat more “top heavy” profile. 
It is natural to try to learn from previous crises, but at the same time we must be careful not 
to draw too far-reaching historical parallels. In the midst of the crisis there was, for example, 
sometimes a slightly careless tendency to refer to the Swedish crisis of the 1990s, despite 
the  fact  that  the  circumstances  at  that  time  were  entirely  different.  My  point  here  is  that  if 
somewhere at the back of your head you have a preconceived idea of how a crisis should 
develop  then  it  is  easy  to  miss  signals  that  may  indicate  that  the  course  of  the  crisis  is 
moving in a different direction. 
                                                 
5 
If the households need to consolidate their balance sheets then an expansionary monetary policy may be less 
effective as the households  will be less inclined to take  new loans. Such a situation  is sometimes called a 
balance sheet recession. Lars Nyberg discussed balance sheet recessions in more detail in the speech “After 
the crisis – new thoughts on monetary policy” which was published on 6 December 2010.  
6  See  Reinhart,  C.  and  K.  Rogoff,  (2008),  “Is  the  2007  U.S.  Sub-Prime  Financial  Crisis  So  Different?  An 
International Historical Comparison”. NBER Working Paper No. 13761. 
7  There are studies that indicate that the recovery after a financial crisis is slower if the crisis was preceded by 
low growth, see Cecchetti S., M. Kohler and C. Upper (2009),”Financial Crises and Economic Activity” NBER 
Working Paper 15379. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Some personal reflections on forecasting 
The things I have said about forecasts so far are fairly general observations that I believe my 
colleagues  on  the  Executive  Board  would  essentially  agree  with,  even  though  they  would 
probably  express  themselves  differently.  In  this  concluding  part  of  the  speech  I  would 
therefore like to take up some aspects of forecasting that are perhaps more personal. 
The development of interest rates abroad and the krona exchange rate 
Let me begin with the forecast for economic activity abroad, which I think in some respects 
has been given too much significance in the discussion of our forecasts for, for example, the 
krona exchange rate. As I see it, changes in interest rates abroad relative to Swedish interest 
rates  say  more  about  the  current  exchange  rate  for  the  krona  than  about  the  future 
development of the krona. The fact that interest rates increased more in Sweden than in the 
euro  area  in  the  first  half  of  2010  is  thus  an  explanation  of  why  the  krona  strengthened 
against the euro in the same period, but high Swedish interest rates relative to those in the 
euro area will not necessarily lead to the krona strengthening in the period ahead.8 My belief 
that  too  much  importance  has  been  attached  to  forecasts  of  policy  rates  abroad  does  not 
mean that financial prices abroad are of no interest. On the contrary, developments in 2010 
illustrate that long-term Swedish rates often appear to be strongly affected by developments 
abroad, and especially in the United States, without these shifts being motivated by changes 
in  economic  activity  in  Sweden.  We  need  to  improve  our  understanding  of  international 
financial links of this kind. 
Can assessments stop short at the end of the forecast horizon? 
Another  point  that  I  usually  make  is  that  it  can  be  difficult  to  draw  monetary  policy 
conclusions from our forecasts as they only cover a limited forecast horizon of three years. A 
certain repo-rate path may appear to provide better target attainment than other paths over 
this  limited  forecast  horizon  but  could  well  lead  to  poorer  target  attainment  beyond  it.  It  is 
therefore desirable when making monetary policy decisions to take into account the possible 
state  of  the  economy  beyond  the  forecast  horizon,  even  though  it  is  difficult  to  do  this  in 
terms of quantified forecasts. One way to do this is to choose a repo-rate path that provides 
good  target  attainment  at  the  end  of  the  forecasting  period  but  does  not  entail  serious 
tendencies towards poorer target attainment beyond the forecast horizon. Even though we 
have a limited forecast horizon, the monetary policy decisions must also to some extent look 
ahead to what can happen afterwards.  
The  development  of  house  prices  and  household  indebtedness  could,  for  example,  entail 
risks  that  materialise  beyond  the  current  forecast  horizon,  especially  if  monetary  policy 
remains  far  too  expansionary  for  far  too  long.  The  question  of  whether  risks  of  this  type 
should be considered in the monetary policy decisions has been widely debated. One view is 
that  such  risks  should  already  be  taken  into  account  in  our  standard  quantified  forecasts. 
Although I hope that the analysis will eventually develop to the extent that it is possible in a 
reasonably reliable way to take account of this type of risk in our forecasts we are not there 
yet. My view is that it may sometimes be justified to consider this kind of unforecastable risk 
                                                 
8  According to the theory of uncovered interest rate parity, the market expects the krona to weaken against the 
euro in the period ahead if Swedish interest rates are higher than those in the euro area. Uncovered interest 
rate  parity  also  explains  why  the  krona  strengthened  at  the  same  time  (and  not  afterwards)  as  Swedish 
interest  rates  increased  relative  to  those  in  the  euro  area  in  2010.  However,  the  empirical  support  for 
uncovered  interest  rate  parity  is  weak  and  there  are  many  examples  of  deviations  from  the  theory.  For 
example, the krona strengthened more against the euro in 2010 than implied by uncovered interest rate parity. 
I refer to my speech “Many dimensions to well-balanced monetary policy”, dated 26 January 2011, for a more 
detailed discussion of the development of interest rates and the krona exchange rate in 2010. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
in  our  monetary  policy  decision-making.  Ignoring  such  risks  completely  is,  in  my  view,  the 
same as saying that they do not exist, and that is a position that I would not want to defend. 
Positive and negative risks can have different costs 
There are also other cases where it may be a mistake to let monetary policy be guided by 
forecasts alone. A forecast-based monetary policy is good if it is believed that the costs of 
negative  deviations  from  the  target  are  the  same  as  for  positive  deviations,  but  this  is  not 
always the case. Greater importance should be attached to a scenario in which the collapse 
of  an  asset  bubble  leads  to  a  state  of  deflation  that  is  difficult  to  escape  from  than  to  a 
scenario with high inflation, assuming that the inflation target still has credibility. Experience 
from Japan in the 1990s illustrates this. During the financial crisis, there were discussions in 
the Executive Board9 about temporarily allowing inflation to be relatively high with the aim of 
pushing up inflation expectations, which would lead to lower real interest rates and a well-
needed  stimulation  of  the  economy.  Stimulating  the  economy  with  lower  nominal  interest 
rates  was  not  possible  as  the  Riksbank  had  already  reduced  the  repo  rate  as  far  as  was 
considered possible. I was doubtful about experimenting with our monetary policy framework 
in  this  way  during  an  ongoing  crisis.  I  admit,  however,  that  there  is  a  certain  logic  in  the 
argument that underlines the fact that it is sometimes more costly for inflation to become too 
low  than  for  it  to  become  too  high.  However,  if  the  credibility  of  the  inflation  target  is 
threatened by high inflation then the reverse may also be true. 
We can learn from our mistakes 
Let me now say something about forecasting errors. It is sometimes argued that monetary 
policy was well balanced at a certain point in time given the information that was available at 
that time. Such a stance seems to be based on the attitude that at the time of the decision 
the  decision-makers  were  guided  by  the  best  conceivable  forecasting  model  and  that  any 
forecasting  errors  were  only  due  to  entirely  unforeseen  events.  It  is  normally  not  quite  as 
simple  as  this,  however,  and  forecasting  errors  are  usually  a  combination  of  unforeseen 
events and shortcomings in the assessment of the economy.  
Allow  me  to  be  a  little self-critical and  to  go  back  the  autumn  of  2008  when  the  Riksbank 
raised  the  repo  rate  in  September  but  then  changed  direction  and  adopted  a  highly 
expansionary  monetary  policy  when  the  crisis  got  dramatically  worse.  Even  later  in  the 
autumn,  when  the  financial  risks  were  increasingly  apparent,  we  underestimated  the 
seriousness of the situation. We, like most other analysts, simply lacked the ability to fully 
assess the incredible impact that the crisis would have on the global economy and on the 
Swedish  economy.  Even  though  I  entered  a  reservation  against  the  repo-rate  increase  in 
September  I  can  honestly  admit  that  I  also  underestimated  the  risks  on  the  international 
financial markets. With hindsight, it is possible to identify several areas where the Riksbank 
could have made a better analysis. The basic problem was that our models do not capture 
the various financial links that played a major role during the financial crisis, and we therefore 
underestimated the risks.  
You might think that in such situations we should tone down the model analysis and instead 
rely on assessments of various indicators, which in fact the Riksbank did, but we could have 
performed better here too. We made substantial downward revisions in the figures for GDP, 
but we did not expect the fall to be as great as it actually was. When assessing GDP during 
the fourth quarter of 2008 we should, in my opinion, have attached more weight to the alarm 
signals  that  came  from  our  company  interviews,  especially  as  data  from  the  business 
tendency surveys, the statistics on redundancy notices and falling share prices all pointed in 
the same direction. On the other hand, the underestimation of the fall in GDP did not affect 
                                                 
9  See the minutes of the Executive Board's monetary policy meeting from 10 February 2009. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
the conduct of monetary policy as the repo rate was still reduced substantially, by several 
percentage points, over a short period of time. 
Nor do I believe that the conduct of a less restrictive monetary policy earlier in 2008 would 
have had much effect on the course of the crisis. That is not the point. The point is that the 
misjudgements made by the Riksbank were partly due to shortcomings in the analysis. The 
models  that  have  been  developed  entail  a  tacit  assumption  that  the  financial  markets  will 
continue  to  perform  their  central  functions  of  mediating  payments,  converting  saving  to 
funding and managing risks. We, and all the other macroeconomic analysts, were given  a 
rude  reminder  that  the  analysis  models  lacked  important  elements.  This  is  an  important 
lesson that is reflected in the discussions and in the research work now underway. We need 
to gain greater insight into, and more knowledge about, the branches of the global financial 
system and the connection between real and financial variables. 
Flexibility is the be all and end all in monetary policy 
Even  if  the  Riksbank,  like  many  others,  made  a  number  of  misjudgements,  one  positive 
aspect  of  the  situation  is  that  we  quickly  changed  the  course  of  monetary  policy  and 
implemented extraordinary measures in an attempt to mitigate the downturn in the economy 
and  support  the  financial  system.  There  was  no  question  of  trying  to  stick  to  previous 
forecasts  and  assessments.  This  is  testimony  to  an  essential  flexibility.  We  must  be  able 
react like this when reality turns out to be radically different to what we imagined it would be. 
Even in more normal times we must always bear in mind that our knowledge of the future is 
by  no  means  complete.  I  have  on  several  occasions  expressed  my  view  that  gradual 
changes in the repo rate are to be preferred in the normal case10. It is, I think, a wise strategy 
to proceed cautiously and to continuously observe what is happening around you in order to 
decide  whether  to  continue  following  the  chosen  path,  call  a  halt  or  change  direction. 
Strongly driving policy in a particular direction may be a success factor in other policy areas, 
but for monetary policy it is a case of carefully monitoring the state of the real economy and 
being  constantly  prepared  to  adapt  policy  so  that  our  predetermined  target,  the  inflation 
target, is not put at risk. There are no absolutes in monetary policy. If we fail to realise this 
there is a risk that monetary policy will be subject to sudden and radical changes of direction.  
                                                 
10  The realisation that uncertainty about economic relationships often justifies a more cautious policy goes back 
to  Brainard,  W.  (1967)  “Uncertainty  and  the  Effectiveness  of  Policy”,  American  Economic  review  57(2), 
411-425. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
