Hirohide Yamaguchi: Challenges to Japan’s economy and monetary 
policy after the Great Earthquake – preparations for uncertainties and 
strengthening of growth potential 
Speech by Mr Hirohide Yamaguchi, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting with 
business leaders, Nagano, 20 July 2011. 
 Introduction 
I  am  honored  today  to  have  this  opportunity  to  speak  and  to  exchange  views  with 
administrative  and  business  leaders  in  Nagano  Prefecture.  And  I  express  my  gratitude  for 
your cooperation in various business operations of the Bank of Japan’s Matsumoto branch 
and the local office in Nagano. 
On a personal note, Nagano Prefecture is a place full of memories. I started my career at the 
Bank  in  1974,  and  worked  at  the  Matsumoto  branch  for  two  years  from  1975.  I  frequently 
visited  corporate  managers  and  learned  about  the  details  of  the  conditions  of  the  regional 
economy and finance. Speaking of 1975, Japan was in the face of adversity due to the oil 
shock, and was faced with a shift from a high growth era to a stable growth era. Against such 
a  backdrop,  firms  in  this  region  made  tremendous  efforts  and  honed  their  technical  skills, 
which still strongly impresses me. 
Japan’s economy is also faced with a major turning point due to a demographic vortex. In 
addition, the Great East Japan earthquake occurred, and Japan’s economy is faced with yet 
another  challenge.  Today,  bearing  in  mind  the  medium-  to  long-term  challenges  Japan  is 
faced  with,  I  will  talk  about  economic  developments  at  home  and  abroad  and  the  Bank’s 
policy responses. 
Outlook and risks for overseas economies 
I. 
I  will  begin  with  the  developments  in  overseas  economies.  While  the  pace  of  growth  in 
overseas  economies  has  recently  been  slowing  somewhat,  growth  rates  remain  high  and 
those economies are expected to continue to achieve relatively high growth. In the following, 
I  will  talk  about  the  recent  developments,  outlook,  and  risk  factors  associated  with  the 
outlook, by region. 
The U.S. economy 
A. 
The recent deceleration is temporary 
The U.S. economy, while repeating somewhat strong and weak phases back and forth after 
the Lehman shock in the autumn of 2008, has been recovering moderately on average. Its 
recent deceleration is basically said to be attributable to the following two factors. First, the 
rapid rise in gasoline prices up to this spring. By that, households could not afford to make 
other spending, and private consumption weakened. Second, the effects of the earthquake 
disaster  in  Japan.  In  industries,  particularly  automobile,  parts  procurement  from  Japan 
delayed and a reduction in production spread. Those two factors were only temporary. Oil 
prices have been somewhat stable, and parts procurement from Japan has been returning to 
normal. It is widely viewed that the U.S. economy will gradually regain its pace of growth. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Balance-sheet adjustment pressure will be a headwind in the medium to long term 
There are, to begin with, structural factors at play in the current U.S. economy, which makes 
it difficult to achieve a steady recovery. It is the after-effects of the collapse of the bubble. 
The  Lehman  shock  resulted  in  a  global  financial  crisis  that  involved  countries  including 
Japan. The reason for such a massive crisis is that the housing and financial bubbles that 
had bloated in the United States were extremely big. In the United States, even low-income 
families increasingly borrowed mortgages until after the mid-2000s. Financial products that 
assembled  and  securitized  such  subprime  mortgages  were  sold  as  attractive  investment 
products to investors around the world. In that process, financial institutions gained massive 
profits. The reason that everybody could enjoy such a banquet was the assumption that U.S. 
housing prices would continue to rise. 
Once that assumption collapsed, everything was reversed. As a result, delinquent mortgages 
piled up, which plagued U.S. households and financial institutions. Since it is a problem that 
asset prices declined and liabilities became a heavy burden, or capital ran short, it is called 
“the  balance-sheet  problem.”  Japan’s  economy  also  experienced  a  similar  problem  in  the 
1990s.  As  one  can  tell  from  that  experience,  in  the  economy  after  the  bursting  of  a  huge 
bubble, the average economic growth rate will be contained over a protracted period. Since 
the U.S. economy is recovering against such a headwind, it is likely that weak resilience as 
witnessed recently might occur from time to time in the future. 
European economy 
B. 
Recover moderately with difference among countries 
In  Europe,  major  countries  including  Germany  have  been  basically  buoyant  albeit  exports 
somewhat  decelerating  recently.  Business  fixed  investment  and  private  consumption  have 
been  increasing.  Some  countries  including  Southern  European  countries  are  weak  in 
international competitiveness to begin with, and have to take fiscal austerity to address fiscal 
problems, which has been dragging the economies. While conditions in European countries 
vary  substantially  from  country  to  country,  the  European  economy  has  been  recovering 
moderately as a whole. 
Sovereign debt problem continues to be a destabilizing factor for the international 
financial markets 
The  European  economy  as  a  whole  is  expected  to  continue  to  recover  moderately  in  the 
future.  However,  the  concern  about  the  creditworthiness  of  government  bonds  issued  by 
countries including Greece and Portugal – the so-called sovereign debt problem – is likely to 
be a destabilizing factor for some time not only within Europe but also in the global economy. 
The total economic scale of Greece and Portugal I have just referred to is less than 1 percent 
of the global economy. However, European financial institutions have a substantial amount of 
exposure to those countries. If the government bonds of those countries face default, anxiety 
about the soundness of European financial institutions might rise. In addition, some relatively 
large economies face similar fiscal problems, albeit lesser in magnitude than the countries 
including Greece. If there is a situation in which the creditworthiness of government bonds of 
large  economies  also  declines  significantly,  the  effects  on  financial  institutions  will  also 
become  far-reaching.  As  financial  transactions  have  recently  become  extensive  and 
complex, if anxiety is generated in some part of financial markets, anxiety could spread over 
the  entire  international  financial  markets.  Investors  might  become  increasingly  risk  averse 
and stock prices and foreign exchange markets might fluctuate substantially. We should be 
careful in that once any disruption occurs in Europe, Japan’s economy, seemingly distant, 
might also be involved in turmoil through a plunge in stock prices and appreciation of the yen. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The difficulty of the sovereign debt problem is that a country whose problem once becomes 
serious will be mired in the problem. Fiscal austerity leads to a decline in economic activity 
and  tax  revenue  will  increasingly  decline.  In  addition,  if  financial  institutions  incur  massive 
losses  due  to  a  decline  in  government  bond  prices,  the  real  economy  will  be  adversely 
affected and it will become necessary to augment capital of financial institutions by way of 
fiscal  funds.  As  illustrated,  three  factors  –  deterioration  in  fiscal  conditions,  economic 
downturn, and the weakening of the financial system – are subject to an adverse feedback 
loop that mutually affects each other, and that delays the resolution of the problem. Given 
such characteristic of the European sovereign debt problem, that is likely to continue to be a 
destabilizing factor in the global economy over a protracted period. 
Emerging economies 
C. 
Emerging economies are leading the global economy 
Despite  advanced  economies  being  burdened  with  respective  problems,  according  to  the 
World  Economic  Outlook  of  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF),  the  growth  rate  of  the 
global  economy  is  forecasted  to  register  growth  of  around  4.5 percent  both  in  2011  and 
2012.  While  I  have  mentioned  that  there  had  been  a  credit  bubble  for  a  protracted  period 
before  the  Lehman  shock,  the  average  annual  growth  rate  of  the  global  economy  for 
10 years  until  2007,  which  includes  the  bubble  period,  was  4.0 percent.  Therefore,  the 
forecast of “around 4.5 percent” for this year and next year can be considered to be rather 
robust growth. That is attributable to high growth in emerging economies including China. 
For  instance,  China’s  growth  rate  in  2010  was  10.3 percent  and  it  is  expected  to  be 
9.6 percent  in  2011  according  to  the  IMF  outlook.  China  has  been  growing  at  a  high  rate 
comparable to that of the high-growth era in Japan. As for the contents of growth, China had 
been  called  a  “factory  of  the  world”  up  to  a  little  while  ago,  but  as  people’s  income  levels 
improved, it has also become a “world consuming market.” For reference, the number of new 
cars sold in China last year was 18 million, which exceeds the sum of those in the United 
States and Japan. 
Such high economic growth is occurring not just in China, but also in India, Brazil and many 
other  emerging  countries.  Naturally,  they  need  a  tremendous  amount  of  energy  and  raw 
materials.  As  a  consequence,  buoyant  demand  for  mineral  resources  including  crude  oil, 
ironstone,  and  nonferrous  metals  has  been  generated.  In  addition,  as  living  standards  of 
emerging countries rose, dietary habits have changed and people have come to  eat more 
meat than before, so that demand for grains including those used to feed cattle and pigs has 
increased globally. An increase in global demand for various kinds of natural resources and 
food has brought about high growth in the so-called commodity-exporting countries, such as 
Canada, Australia, and Russia that produce primary commodities. A pattern that the global 
economy continues to grow led by emerging and commodity-exporting economies is likely to 
remain intact for some time. 
The challenge is to overcome inflationary pressure 
Emerging  economies  do  have  a  blind  spot.  It  is  inflation.  Even  emerging  economies  have 
recently been decelerating basically because of the tightening of monetary policy against the 
rise in the inflation rate. But it is not yet known whether the tightening to date can sufficiently 
reduce inflationary pressure. Whether an increase in demand will be properly controlled and 
emerging  economies  will  make  a  soft  landing,  in  a  manner  that  price  stability  successfully 
goes together with economic growth, is likely to remain highly uncertain for some time. 
The inflationary pressure in emerging economies is partly induced by a rise in international 
prices of mineral resources and foods. In order for emerging economies, and eventually the 
global  economy,  to  achieve  high  growth  in  the  medium  to  long  term  without  increasing 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
inflationary  pressure,  I  believe  it  so  important  to  make  efforts  on  a  worldwide  basis  in 
innovation of resource and energy saving as well as in improvement in food productivity. 
Based on overseas economic developments, let me now turn to Japan’s economy. 
Economic activity and prices in Japan 
II. 
A. 
Current state and outlook for economic activity and prices 
Return to the moderate recovery path in the latter half of fiscal 2011 
After the Great East Japan Earthquake on March 11, Japan’s economy once plunged. While, 
in many cases, an economic downturn is induced by a decline in demand, the plunge after 
the earthquake has basically been due to constraints on the supply side, including a shortage 
in  parts  and  power.  First,  factories  and  distribution  infrastructure  have  been  damaged  or 
destroyed  by  the  earthquake  and  tsunami,  and  procurement  of  raw  materials  and  parts 
necessary for production has been disrupted. A complicated network of the supply chain has 
been cut off and nationwide production, particularly automobiles that require many parts, has 
been  greatly  affected.  Second,  due  to  the  nuclear  power  plant  accident,  the  power 
generating capacity of Tokyo Electric Power Company and Tohoku Electric Power Company 
has  once  declined  by  20  to  30 percent.  The  effects  have  spread  over  to  various  activities 
other  than  manufacturing:  Events  including  concerts  have  been  cancelled  and  department 
stores have shortened their business hours. Of course, not everything is due to the supply 
constraints,  and  the  voluntary  restraint  associated  with  the  earthquake  disaster  and  the 
problem of radiation due to the nuclear plant accident have also adversely affected consumer 
sentiment. 
Thereafter, supply constraints have been rapidly alleviated and production and exports have 
been recovering at a faster pace than expected by the concerned parties immediately after 
the  earthquake.  Firms’  production  activity  is  expected  to  return  approximately  to  the  level 
prior to the earthquake in the near future. Such rapid recovery is, after all, attributable to the 
firms’ strenuous efforts. There have been moves of solidarity that go beyond the individual 
corporate framework, such as firms taking over the production on behalf of other firms in the 
same industry, and firms lending factories or machinery to the disaster-stricken small firms. A 
power  shortage  this  summer  is  also  not  likely  to  constrain  economic  activity  to  the  extent 
expected earlier. 
Taking the recent developments into account, Japan’s economy is expected to return to the 
moderate  recovery  path  in  the  second  half  of  fiscal  2011  onward  amid  the  continued 
improvement in overseas economies. In the outlook the Bank released last week, Japan’s 
economic growth will stay at a low rate of 0.4 percent in fiscal 2011 due to the effects of the 
plunge after the earthquake, but is forecasted to accelerate to 2.9 percent in fiscal 2012. 
Inflation is expected to remain slightly positive 
Now, let me turn to prices. The year-on-year rate of change in the typical price indicator, the 
consumer price index (CPI), had been negative since shortly after the Lehman shock. As the 
effects of the shock subsided, the degree of negative had become gradually small, and the 
rate  of  change  turned  positive  for  the  first  time  in  28 months  in  April  and  registered  plus 
0.6 percent in May. 
Since  the  economy  is  expected  to  return  to  the  moderate  recovery  path,  the  year-on-year 
rate of change in the CPI is also expected to remain slightly positive. More specifically, the 
outlook the Bank released last week forecasted a rise of 0.7 percent for both fiscal 2011 and 
2012. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Uncertainties associated with future economic activity and prices 
B. 
Overseas financial and economic developments require caution 
I  emphasize  that  the  outlook  for  economic  activity  and  prices  that  I  have  mentioned  is 
associated with various uncertainties. After the earthquake up to now, there has been high 
uncertainty concerning what extent the supply chain will recover promptly. Such risk has, as I 
mentioned earlier, been subsided considerably. Rather, from now on, economic activity will 
depend on whether demand itself continues to increase steadily. In that regard, consumer 
sentiment,  which  recovered  considerably  compared  with  that  immediately  after  the 
earthquake, has yet to recover completely. 
In addition, the most important assumption for Japan’s economic recovery is a mechanism 
that overseas economies, particularly emerging economies, will continue to grow at a high 
rate,  under  which  Japan’s  exports  increase  and  positive  effects  spread  to  business  fixed 
investment and employment. However, as I have mentioned earlier in detail, the outlook for 
the United States, Europe, and emerging economies is associated with high uncertainty. 
Increasingly uncertain power situation 
In  the  domestic  area,  uncertainty  has  rather  increased  about  the  somewhat  longer  term 
electricity supply beyond this summer. That is because nuclear power plants across Japan 
are not resuming operation smoothly after their regular inspections. Even if nuclear power is 
to be substituted by thermal power, the electricity costs are expected to rise. 
After the earthquake, an earthquake risk in Japan has been recognized again, and firms at 
home and abroad have been increasingly diversifying their parts procurement from Japan’s 
domestic  suppliers  to  overseas  suppliers.  Partly  due  to  the  effects  of  the  nuclear  plant 
accident, the number of foreign tourists has plunged. On top of those, with the addition of 
anxiety  against  stable  power  supply  and  increase  in  costs,  whether  the  hollowing  out  of 
industry, which is sometime called as “passing on Japan” or “avoiding Japan,” might intensify 
or not warrants vigilance. 
Risk of delay in achieving price stability 
If  economic  activity  becomes  weaker  than  the  aforementioned  outlook  due  to  various 
uncertainties,  prices  might  be  lower  than  expected.  In  addition,  prices  are  associated  with 
statistical  uncertainty.  The  CPI  is  subject  to  revision  every  five  years,  and  there  will  be  a 
revision  this  year.  The  current  index  will  be  replaced  in  August  by  a  new  index,  and  the 
recent data will also be revised retroactively. While I have mentioned earlier that the year-on-
year rate of increase in the CPI was 0.6 percent in May, it is likely to be revised downward to 
around zero percent by the index revision. 
As  the  recent  data  will be  revised, the  outlook for  the  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the 
CPI, which was 0.7 percent for both fiscal 2011 and 2012, has to be read slightly lower. The 
Bank  considers  that  a  state  in  which  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  CPI  hovers  in  a 
positive range of 2 percent or lower, centering around 1 percent, is closest to “price stability.” 
The current outlook for prices suggests that it might take some more time to achieve such 
“price stability,” and we need to monitor carefully how future economic developments and the 
index revision might affect the timing of price stability achievement. 
Medium- to long-term challenges to Japan’s economy 
III. 
Long-term downward trend in economic growth is one cause of deep-rooted deflation 
Japan’s  deflationary  trend  has  been  continuing  for  a  protracted  period.  That  suggests  that 
there might be a structural problem as well as cyclical weakness in economic activity on the 
back  of  deflation.  Looking  back  at  Japan’s  economic  growth  rate  over  time,  the  average 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
annual  growth  rate  of  Japan’s  economy  declined  from  around  5 percent  in  the  1970s,  to 
around  1.5 percent  in  the  1990s,  and  below  1 percent  in  the  2000s.  When  the  economic 
growth  rate  follows  a  long-term  downward  trend,  firms  and  households  inevitably  tend  to 
consider  that  future  growth  will  continue  to  be  low  anyway.  Such  decline  in  firms’  and 
households’ expectations for future growth have restrained actual demand, such as business 
fixed investment and private consumption, and thus might have been one cause of a deep-
rooted deflation. 
Deflation is not desirable, and, if the current low growth rate continues, it will become difficult 
to  maintain  fiscal  conditions  and  social  security  in  the  future.  Therefore,  strengthening 
medium-  to  long-term  growth  potential  was  a  major  challenge  to  Japan’s  economy  since 
before the earthquake. To tackle that challenge will lead to avoiding the after-effects of the 
earthquake disaster including the hollowing out of industry. 
Source of economic growth is each person’s power to generate added value 
The demographic vortex might have had a substantial influence on the long-term downward 
trend in the economic growth rate. If that is the case, one natural solution to strengthen the 
growth potential is to correct the demographic vortex. Some examples include creating better 
conditions to support childbearing and rearing to reverse the downward trend in the birth rate 
or  more  actively  accepting  immigrants  and  labor  force  from  abroad.  However,  even  if  we 
boost the birth rate now, it takes about 20 years before it leads to an increase in labor force. 
As strengthening the growth potential is a more urgent challenge to tackle, we cannot afford 
to wait for demographic changes to take place. 
Let us go back to a simple mathematical formula. GDP, which is used to measure economic 
growth,  is  a  multiplication  of  the  number  of  workers  and  GDP  per  worker.  Given  that  the 
number  of  workers  will  be  to  a  large  extent  determined  by  demographics  that  cannot  be 
changed easily, there is no way but to increase GDP per worker in order to increase GDP. 
GDP is, in other words, added value and is distributed in the form of corporate profits and 
household  income.  Therefore,  creating  added  value  is  nothing  more  or  less  than  firms 
increasing  their  own  profit  while  raising  employment  and  wages.  In  order  to  do  so,  it  is 
necessary to tap potential demand of the field that is considered to have a good chance of 
success and create new markets. As specific directions, I mark four points that are deemed 
critical. 
Further tapping global demand 
First, drastic globalization. Incidentally, while the export share in GDP is about 50 percent in 
Germany and Korea and about 30 percent in China, it remains at about 15 percent in Japan. 
Moreover, the number of foreign tourists visiting Japan is only 10 percent compared with that 
visiting France, the United States, and China, and it ranks around 30th in the world, which is 
lower than Korea and Singapore. Depending on the ambition and creativity to open up the 
country, Japan seems to have room for capturing global demand and growing. 
Innovation in the areas of resources and energy 
Second,  to  make  a  leap  in  technology  and  know-how  to  enhance  resource  and  energy 
efficiency.  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  it  seems  to  be  tight  supply  and  demand  condition  of 
resources, energy and food that may become a major constraint for the global economy to 
continue  to  grow  strongly,  especially  in  emerging  countries,  while  avoiding  inflation. 
Innovations  including  energy  saving  will  contribute  not  only  to  a  near-term  domestic 
electricity shortage but also to medium- to long-term global economic growth. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Tapping domestic potential demand 
Third,  there  appears  to  be  plenty  of  unexplored  need  in  the  domestic  markets  where  the 
demographic vortex and maturation are progressing, such as medical and nursing care as 
well as other areas. It is said more than often that Japan is already affluent and consumers 
do not want anything more. Arguably, if we look only at the existing goods and services, not 
a  few  of  them  might  have  already  reached  saturation  point.  Even  so,  in  terms  of  people’s 
potential  desire,  a  desire  to  enjoy  life  more  or  to  live  a  more  comfortable  life  will  not 
disappear.  It  is  the  real  entrepreneurship  to  strategically  tap  potential  demand  that  even 
consumers themselves are not aware of. Incidentally, the generation which is in the prime 
will peak out within 10 years in some Asian countries such as China and Korea, and aging 
will  progress  following  the  path  of  Japan.  If  Japan,  as  a  country  that  faces  the  challenge 
ahead of other countries, is able to build a vigorous economy under aging, it could serve as a 
good role-model for other countries that will be faced with aging at a later stage. 
Strengthening financial power to provide risk money 
Fourth, roles which finance plays. Firms’ aspiring approaches in tapping new demand do not 
necessarily  succeed.  To  put  it  another  way,  challenging  things  that  might  fail  will  lead  to 
exploring a chance of growth. Namely, a certain amount of risk is associated with growth and 
it  is  a  role  of  finance  to  provide  risk  money  to  support  the  growth.  Therefore,  in  order  to 
enhance  the  medium-  to  long-term  growth  potential  of  the  economy,  it  is  necessary  to 
reinforce the role of finance. 
In sum, Japan’s economy is faced with two challenges which have different time horizons. 
First,  achieve  a  cyclical  recovery  in  the  economy  that  has  plunged  due  to  the  earthquake 
disaster  amid  significant  various  uncertainties  including  the  future  of  overseas  economies. 
Second,  tackle  the  strengthening  of  growth  potential  from  a  medium-  to  long-term 
perspective.  The  second  challenge  will  further  ensure  the  first  challenge  of  achieving  an 
economic recovery and contribute to bringing forward the escape from deflation. Based on 
the  summarization,  let  me  explain  how  the  Bank’s  monetary  policy  is  responding  to  the 
challenges. 
IV. 
The Bank’s monetary policy 
Pursuing powerful monetary easing 
In order to support the cyclical economic recovery and achieve price stability as promptly as 
possible, the Bank is pursuing powerful monetary easing measures as follows. 
First, the Bank set its policy interest rate at extremely low level of around 0 to 0.1 percent, 
and made a commitment that it would basically continue with the low policy interest rate until 
it  judged  that  price  stability  was  in  sight.  Moreover,  since  October  2010,  the  Bank  has 
established a new framework called Asset Purchase Program and, through that program, it 
has  been  purchasing  not  only  government  bonds  but  also  a  wide  range  of  risk  assets  – 
namely,  CP,  corporate  bonds,  exchange  traded  funds  (ETFs),  and  Japan  real  estate 
investment  trusts  (J-REITs).  By  way  of  that,  the  Bank  has  been  encouraging  a  decline  in 
longer-term interest rates, and, at the same time, acting as a catalyst for risk money flowing 
into  financial  markets,  thereby  trying  to  generate  favorable  effects  on  the  economy.  The 
Program started at about 35 trillion yen in total, and was increased to about 40 trillion yen 
immediately after the earthquake in March, trying to minimize the deterioration of economic 
conditions. 
Providing support to strengthen the foundations for economic growth 
In  relation  to  Japan’s  economy’s  other  challenge  of  strengthening  medium-  to  long-term 
growth potential, the Bank has been conducting the Fund-Provisioning Measure to Support 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Strengthening the Foundations for Economic Growth since June 2010. This is a measure for 
the Bank to provide long-term funds with maturities of initially one year and maximum four 
years  if  rolled  over  at  a  low  interest  rate  of  0.1 percent  to  financial institutions  that  tapped 
projects that would lead to strengthening medium- to long-term growth potential and made 
equity  investment  or  lending.  Since  the  introduction  of  the  new  measure,  many  financial 
institutions  have  been  taking  positive  approaches  such  as  establishing  special  sections 
devoted to devising and developing new areas of growth. 
The scheduled total amount of loans – 3 trillion yen – had mostly been disbursed. Therefore, 
the  Bank  created  a  500 billion  yen new  line  of  credit  in  June  2011.  The  new  line  of  credit 
provides funds at a low interest rate of 0.1 percent for initially two years and maximum four 
years  to  financial  institutions  that  make  equity  investment  and  conduct  lending  against 
accounts receivable and inventories as collateral. 
Lending that takes accounts receivables and inventories as collateral is called asset-based 
lending (ABL) and is utilized widely in the United States. Compared with real estate collateral 
lending,  the  ABL  is  more  difficult  in  terms  of  making  collateral  assessment.  The  value  of 
assets that have been generated in the process of business cannot be assessed unless a 
borrowing firm and a financial institution share the thorough understanding of the business 
contents  and  developments  in  the  industry.  Nevertheless,  aggressively  putting  such  extra 
efforts will have a great merit in that it enables firms which do not own enough real estate 
collateral  or  personal  guarantees  to  raise  financial  resources.  To  take  advantage  of  such 
merit, the Bank expects that corporate managers and financial institutions will jointly make 
efforts to explore profit opportunities, and the hidden seeds for growth to sprout in Japan as a 
whole. 
Respond flexibly and decisively when risks manifest themselves 
As explained, the Bank has been pursuing powerful monetary easing and providing support 
to  strengthen  the  foundations  for  economic  growth,  while  stepping  into  an  extraordinary 
territory  for  a  central  bank.  However,  as  I  have  repeatedly  mentioned  today,  the  Bank  is 
aware that uncertainties at home and abroad are significant. Upon carefully examining future 
economic and price developments, including the effects of the recent foreign exchange rate 
fluctuation, the Bank will, if judged necessary, take appropriate policy actions in a flexible and 
decisive manner. 
Concluding remarks 
In conclusion, I will refer to Nagano Prefecture’s economy. 
The  development  of  Japan’s  economy  depends  on  what  extent  it  can  incorporate 
globalization  and  aging  into  its  advantage.  In  that  regard,  Nagano’s  economy  has  been 
developing  by  always  paying  attention  to  global  markets,  from  the  prewar  era  of  the  silk 
industry  to  the  postwar  era  of  electric  and  precision  machinery.  Nagano’s  export  share  in 
manufactured  goods  shipments  has  been  consistently  above  the  national  average  most  of 
the time since the 1990s. 
Also in terms of responses to aging, Nagano Prefecture is one step ahead of other regions. 
Nagano is not only one of the leading longevity prefectures in Japan and but also known for 
its high employment rate of elderly people. While the national average of the percentage of 
people aged 65 or older at work is about 20 percent, it is more than 30 percent in Nagano 
and ranks top in the nation. Also here in Matsumoto City, a project is underway to enhance 
health and create a comfortable place to live under the initiative called “the city of long and 
healthful lives.” Such efforts to create an environment that makes it easy for elderly people to 
work will also serve as a good reference for Japan as a whole. 
I will offer my heartfelt support so that your wisdom and actions that go ahead of the times 
will further develop the region and pave the way for Japan’s future. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
