Yves Mersch: Basel III and liquidity surveillance in Luxembourg – 
building an operational systemic and micro-prudential framework 
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Governor of the Central Bank of Luxembourg, at the General 
Assembly of “The Luxembourg Bankers’ Association”, Luxembourg, 27 April 2011. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I would like to thank the ABBL General Assembly organizers’ for inviting me to share with 
you  some  thoughts  on  the  challenging  question  regarding  the  recent  Basel  III  liquidity 
regulation  proposals,  their  potential  impact  for  the  Luxembourg  banking  system,  and  how 
those changes are integrated by the BCL within its mandate for liquidity surveillance. Let me 
say  upfront  that  liquidity  surveillance  has  to  be  put  in  the  broader  perspective  of  the 
increasing key role of central banks in financial stability and macroprudential policymaking. 
The recent financial crisis has highlighted the need to go beyond a purely micro approach to 
financial regulation and supervision. The policy debate and proposed changes in regulation 
and  supervision  are  focusing  in  particular  on  developing  a  macroprudential  framework,  on 
constructing macroprudential tools and on reflecting upon their usage, their relationship with 
other  policy  areas  such  as  monetary  policy,  microprudential,  fiscal  to  competition,  their 
implementation and their effectiveness. In Europe, beyond changes in the architecture, there 
is a number of major planned reforms in financial regulation; as you can see on the slide in 
front  of  you  (taken  from  the  eighth  Financial  Stability  Review  of  the  BCL  to  be  presented 
tomorrow)  the  spectrum  of  those  changes  is  vast.  It  covers  capital  and  liquidity  regulatory 
frameworks, financial institutions, as well as markets and markets infrastructures. Our task 
today  refers  to  the  important  pillar  of  liquidity  surveillance.  Note,  however,  that  all  these 
prospective  changes  are  taking  place  within  the  context  of  evolving  national  supervisory 
frameworks.  I  am  convinced  that  no  matter  how  those  mandates  finish  being  structured 
across countries, central banks, by their unique role in monetary policy and settlement and 
payment systems oversight, ought to have a clear mandate in financial stability and a key 
role  in  macroprudential  policy.  One  of  the  alleged  strengths  of  our  country  has  been  its 
capacity  to  rapidly  adapt,  and  often  even  lead,  key  policy  and  structural  developments 
around the world. Given the large proportion of countries that have already given their central 
banks  a  clear  mandate  in  financial  stability  and  in  macroprudential  policy  formulation, 
implementation  and  coordination,  our  challenge  is  clear.  Already  in  2010,  the  BCL  has 
provided  legislative  proposals  to  the  Executive  branch  in  this  respect  as  well  as  what 
concerns a regulative regime. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
 funds 
Capital 
Liquidity 
resolution 
Markets 
– OTC markets 
institutions 
 LCR 
 NSFR 
Rating agencies 
Alternative 
investment 
Central counterparties 
Corporate 
governance 
Crisis management and 
Individual financial 
Capital and liquidity  
Systemically important 
financial institutions 
Initiatives from the Basel Committee 
Initiatives from the European Commission 
Current main reforms in financial regulation  
 Capital ratio 
 Conservation buffer  
 Countercyclical buffer
 Leverage ratio 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Given the role of liquidity in the recent crisis, an international consensus on liquidity 
regulation  is  emerging  and  has  been  assigned  high  priority  among  regulators  and 
supervisors. 
Let me start by making some remarks on the background of ongoing efforts directed towards 
forging  a  consensus  view  for  the  future  Basel  III  framework.  As  you  know,  Governors  of 
national  central  banks  (NCBs)  along  with  Heads  of  Supervision  authorities,  albeit  without 
Luxembourg given the country’s current institutional framework, have been working in order 
to  finalize  a  definition  of  liquidity  that  will  permit  regulators  to  minimize  system-level 
distortions  through  the  penalization  of  those  banks  holding  assets  with  poorly  structured 
liquidity profiles. As observed during the crisis, illiquid assets played a central and significant 
role  in  the  aggravation  of  the  turmoil.  In  fact,  the  “illiquidity”  phase  of  the  crisis  was 
particularly  acute  as  the  speed  with  which  assets  became  illiquid  lead  to  a  significant 
negative impact on the ability of banks to have access to funding. Now, one naive way of 
addressing  such  systemic  liquidity  problems  would  be  through  the  imposition  of  elevated 
liquidity requirements – spread equally – across all institutions with the central bank playing 
the essential role of liquidity provider. However, a model such as this one runs the risk that 
all  institutions  may,  during  a  crisis,  exhaust  their  liquidity  requirements  simultaneously 
leading to a systemic crisis. This is not an effective approach to regulation. So what is the 
alternative?  To  date,  policy-makers  have  not  yet  reached  a  final  consensus  on  a  suitable 
macro-prudential  framework  able  to  safeguard  against  systemic  liquidity  risk.  This  is  why 
work on liquidity regulation is viewed by the Basel Committee in Basel (CGFS, FSB) as being 
of central importance going forward. So, today I shall discuss the proposed Basel III liquidity 
ratios and their impact on our country, while taking advantage of this opportunity to let you 
know how we envision liquidity surveillance, what we have done, and what we plan to do in 
the near future.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The Basel III regulations will provide regulators with standard empirical measures of 
liquidity risk providing them with a toolkit that can help to mitigate funding and market 
liquidity risk. 
Central  banks  are  deeply  involved  with  liquidity  management  at  the  macroeconomic  level 
and are recognized as the de facto emergency liquidity providers during times of crisis. In its 
current form, the Basel III definition of liquidity relies on two particular measures that have 
been proposed in the context of adopting a new global liquidity standard. As you surely know 
by  now,  these  are  the  Liquidity  Coverage  Ratio  (LCR)  and  the  Net  Stable  Funding  Ratio 
(NSFR). It is broadly recognized that these measures of liquidity should be designed so that, 
from a macro-prudential perspective, they can be used as possible tools to help alleviating 
and mitigating a rise in systemic liquidity risk. They should help increase the banks’ liquidity 
buffers  and  lower  maturity  risk  transformation,  which  in  turn  should  make  them  more 
resistant against the transmission and amplification of liquidity shocks. In particular, there are 
two types of risk that need to be targeted. These are market liquidity risk and funding liquidity 
risk.  
Market liquidity risk results from firms being unable to engage in quick and efficient sales of 
assets, a desirable property of efficiently functioning financial markets. In an illiquid market, 
asset  sales  may  be  hindered  thereby  adversely  impacting  the  price  of  the  asset.  Funding 
liquidity risk, on the other hand, may result in firms being unable to meet their expected cash 
flow requirements over the long or short-term. This can adversely impact a firm’s ability to 
access  funding,  particularly  on  short  notice.  Regulators  recognized  that  both  types  of  risk 
lead  to  market  inefficiencies  and  thus  result  in  undesirable  implications  for  financial  firms 
and, ultimately, the real economy. You can therefore see that quantitative liquidity measures 
such as the LCR and the NSFR, while based on a well established tradition on liquidity risk 
management theory, are a welcome innovation from a regulatory perspective given that – for 
the first time – they provide regulators with the capacity to introduce and harmonize standard 
measures  in  liquidity  risk  management  practice.  Since  these  empirical  measures  will  be 
central to the new Basel liquidity standards, I believe it would be advisable for me to spend 
some time discussing each indicator in turn. 
The  LCR  will  be  used  to  help  mitigating  short-term  liquidity  stress  thereby  allowing 
financial institutions to maintain smooth access to short-term funding requirements. 
Let me begin with the LCR. It is the current consensus of the Basel Committee that the LCR 
should  be  introduced  after  an  observation  or  trial  period  thereby  providing  a  window  of 
opportunity  during  which  any  refinements  to  the  measure  could  be  introduced.  From  a 
technical  perspective,  the  LCR  is  a  short-term  measure  of  liquidity  which  is  specifically 
intended to ensure that financial firms can continue to access near-term liquidity needs in an 
efficient manner. In principle, this should make certain that banks have a sufficient quantity of 
liquid assets so as to be able to withstand up to a month-long period of sustained and severe 
liquidity stress.  
For illustrative purposes, let us consider what would have been the evolution of the LCR in 
the  context  of  Luxembourg’s  financial  sector.  While  the  Banque  centrale  du  Luxembourg 
(BCL) has not yet formally adopted this measure in its role as a liquidity supervisor of the 
Luxembourg 
the 
implementation of Basel III. I will describe its main components later. 
In an internal study conducted by the BCL, the evolution of the LCR was evaluated based on 
a sample of banks that excludes less-relevant branches and covers the period spanning from 
2003:Q1 until 2010:Q4. 
 
framework  necessary 
financial  system, 
is  developing 
the 
for 
it 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Figure 1 
The evolution of the LCR for  
Luxembourg’s banks, 2003q1 – 2010q4 
 Source: BCL calculations. 
 You can observe the evolution of the LCR for this period in the accompanying figure. It was 
found that the median of the LCR decreased from roughly 82% in 2003:Q1 to a minimum of 
52% in 2009:Q1. Since then it has been increasing almost consistently until the present time. 
One possible interpretation of this behavior for the period until 2009:Q1 is that banks were 
reducing  their  holdings  of  liquid  assets.  However,  since  the  end  of  the  crisis,  financial 
institutions  have  been  holding  increasing  amounts  of  liquid  assets  which  represents  the 
beginning of the re-stabilization of the liquidity conditions in the domestic financial markets. 
The  NSFR  will  help  to  enhance  the  medium  to  long-term  funding  needs  of  banks 
thereby mitigating liquidity runs. 
Let me now turn to the second of the two proposed liquidity measures, the NSFR. In contrast 
to the LCR, the NSFR is designed as a medium- to long-term measure of liquidity intended to 
mitigate any future liquidity runs and, subsequently avoid any possible knock-on effects of a 
systemic  liquidity  crisis;  like  firms’  default,  for  example.  In  fact,  the  NSFR  addresses  the 
issue of maturity mismatch between a bank’s assets and liabilities. It is important to make 
clear  that  the  NSFR  has  not  been  designed  to  play  the  role  of  an  early  warning  indicator 
(EWI) of liquidity difficulties. Indeed, if one were to apply the NSFR to the period leading up 
to the recent crisis, the NSFR would have revealed to be an inconsistent indicator of future 
liquidity  stress.  This  results  from  the  inherent  difficulties  of  attempting  to  separate  liquidity 
from solvency. 
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Figure 2 
The evolution of the NSFR for  
Luxembourg’s banks, 2003q1 – 2010q4 
 Source: BCL calculations. 
 As  part  of  the  same  internal  study  I  alluded  to  earlier,  the  NSFR  was  evaluated  over  the 
period from 2003:Q1 to 2010:Q4 using the same sample of banks as for the LCR. If you look 
at the figure displaying the evolution of the NSFR before you, you can see that, on average, 
the  NSFR  declined  continuously  from  a  median  of  90%  in  the  first  quarter  of  2003  to  a 
median of 67% at the end of 2008. Since that time, the NSFR has slowly started to recover. 
Its  decline  until  2008  can  be  mainly  attributed  to  a  faster  increase  in  total  assets  in 
comparison to capital as well as to an increase in wholesale funding from banks and non-
financial corporations (NFCs). These results for the NSFR in Luxembourg are broadly similar 
to the results calculated by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) for Europe.   
For the NSFR, I should also mention that this ratio has been the subject of a study conducted 
by the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) and entitled “BASEL III: Long-term impact on 
economic  performance  and  fluctuations”1.  While  a  slight  negative  effect  on  output  is  not 
disputed,  the  authors  –  in  fact,  Mr.  L.  Clerc  form  the  Banque  de  France  will  actually 
participate  in  our  Financial  Stability  Review  presentation  tomorrow  –  conclude  that  the 
adoption of tighter liquidity requirements leads to an approximate reduction in output volatility 
by  1  percent.  Overall  this  suggests  that  prudent  liquidity  controls  would  have  a  beneficial 
effect for the real economy. 
                                                 
1   P.  Angelini,  L.  Clerc,  V.  Curdia,  L.  Gambacorta,  A.  Gerali,  A.  Locarno,  R.  Motto,  W.  Roeger,  S.  Van  den 
Heuvel  and  J.  Vlcek.  “BASEL  III:  Long-term  impact  on  economic  performance  and  fluctuations”.  Bank  for 
International Settlements, BIS Working Papers No. 338, February 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
The calibration of the LCR and the NSFR will be critical to ensuring the liquidity and 
funding stability of banks, but further research will be required. 
Although the members of the Basel Committee have not yet achieved a final consensus on 
the  exact  structure  of  an  operational  liquidity  management  framework,  the  proposed  new 
standards for liquidity risk management are a welcome development. In combination with a 
more  robust  and  efficient  supervisory  landscape,  the  proposed  Basel  III  recommendations 
should  help  to  bolster  liquidity  risk  management  practices  in  the  financial  sector.  This  will 
have  an  overall  welfare-enhancing  effect  on  the  real  economy  and  will  help  to  ensure  the 
stable provision and access to liquidity and funding between financial institutions. In addition 
to reducing the risk of a rapid drying up of liquidity, this will aid considerably in mitigating the 
risk of excessive interconnectedness in the financial system by encouraging banks to reduce 
their common exposures. 
As  we  have  seen,  these  are  important  ways  in  which  well-calibrated  LCR  and  NSFR  can 
serve  to  enhance  liquidity  and  preserve  access  to  stable  sources  of  funding.  However, 
despite some initial empirical work and theoretical studies, neither the LCR nor NSFR has 
been implemented within the context of an operational supervisory framework yet. This both 
highlights and elevates the need for further quantitative impact analyses and related studies 
in  order  to  ensure  that,  from  a  financial  stability  perspective,  there  is  a  reasonable  and 
justifiable  calibration  underlying  the  LCR  and  NSFR  for  supervisory  frameworks.  In  this 
context, policy-makers can be confident that any calibration is accurate and will not result in 
banks being restricted either in their ability to manage short and long-term liquidity or in their 
ability  to  undertake  the  maturity  transformation  activities  which  are  vital  to  their  financial 
intermediary’s role in the economy. This will also lead to a reduction in the cost of financial 
intermediation. It is for these reasons that regulators must strive towards striking a balance 
between efficient – but not overly restrictive – regulation and a set of rules that do not result 
in  negative  consequences  for  financial  stability.  We  intend  to  maintain  our  dialogue  with 
assertiveness  in  this  respect  and  hope  that  Luxembourg’s  representation  at  international 
level can be improved through a clear assignment of representatives. 
Part II 
How the BCL envisions and implements liquidity surveillance 
The  2008  BCL  mandate  to  monitor  the  liquidity  of  markets  and  market  operators 
recognizes central banks’ unique role in the surveillance of systemic liquidity risk. The 
crisis demonstrated that liquidity risk can emerge quickly. The manner in which liquidity risk 
materializes  and  is  transmitted  is  determined  by  the  nature  of  funding  instruments  and 
linkages among financial institutions, the degree of leverage of market operators, as well as 
their  reactions  to  emerging  stresses.  Policy  responses  to  the  crisis  must,  at  a  minimum, 
enhance  institutions’  liquidity  risk  management  and  information  available  to  measure  and 
track systemic liquidity risk. The task is complicated because the assessment of liquidity risk 
at the systemic level is often susceptible of a fallacy of composition given that the viability of 
banks’ individual approaches to liquidity risk will depend upon the strategies being pursued 
by other market operators. For instance, if banks have a great deal of interconnectedness via 
the  interbank  market,  a  liquidity  shock  impact  will  be  relatively  larger  than  if  their 
interconnectedness  was  lower.  In  addition,  if  banks’  business  models  were  diverse,  the 
impact  of  a  liquidity  shock  would  be  relatively  smaller  than  if  banks’  activities  were 
concentrated on just one business line. The 2008 Law, in giving to the BCL the mandate to 
monitor  markets  and  market  operators’  liquidity,  acknowledged  the  necessity  of  liquidity 
surveillance in Luxembourg. On this capacity, the BCL has issued regulations, such as the 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
BCL regulation 2009/4 requesting banks to apply the BCBS “Principles for Sound Liquidity 
Risk  Management  and  Supervision”.  The  Bank  actively  participates  in  the  shaping  of  the 
Basel  III  framework  for  liquidity  risk  measurement,  standards  and  monitoring.  Taking  due 
account of current regulatory developments, the BCL intends to publish further instructions to 
market participants on liquidity management before the end of this year.  
in  Luxembourg.  Following  the  2008  new  mandate  on 
In  the  same  way  the  BCL  changed  its  architecture  to  comply  with  its  liquidity 
surveillance  mandate,  it  will  also  adapt  to  its  unavoidable  role  in  macroprudential 
policymaking 
liquidity 
surveillance, the BCL adapted its internal structure and resources so as to ensure that the 
Luxembourg  market  and  its  financial  actors  are  constantly  subject  to  analytical  and 
quantitative  scrutiny  so  as  minimize  systemic  liquidity  risk  in  the  Luxembourg  financial 
industry.  The  BCL  has  increased  technical  cooperation  with  regulators  at  the  national  and 
international level and is active in committees and working groups that develop regulations, 
practices,  standards,  as  well  as  measures  and  monitoring  tools  to  improve  the  financial 
sector’s  ability  to  absorb  liquidity  shocks  arising  from  financial  and  economic  stress  of 
various sources. This encompasses not only Luxembourg recent participation in its second 
IMF FSAP exercise, but also in EBA-led stress tests and BIS study groups. But this is only 
one leg, albeit crucial, of the unavoidable role of the BCL in macroprudential policymaking in 
Luxembourg.  As  the  contours  of  a  macroprudential  policy  framework  take  shape,  the  BCL 
will  need  a  clear  mandate  on  financial  stability  and  a  prominent  role  in  macroprudential 
policymaking, whatever shape the framework ends up taking. But this is just the beginning of 
major changes to come in the near future. Given their role in monetary policy, central banks 
monitor markets and economic and financial developments that have a bearing on policies 
designed  to  reduce  procyclical  risks,  a  key  objective  of  macroprudential  policies. Similarly, 
given their role in settlement and payment systems oversight, central banks have developed 
a  unique  expertise  in  systemic  risk  analysis,  inescapable  element  of  macroprudential 
measures  to  reduce  the  probability  of  default  of  individual  financial  institutions.  From  a 
governance  viewpoint,  central  banks  have  the  right  type  of  incentives  to  contribute  to  the 
effectiveness of macroprudential policies because failure in this area is costly for them, and 
eventually, for their hard-earned independence.  
Liquidity risk surveillance requires monitoring liquidity risk pricing both at the macro- 
and  at  the  micro-level.  Observers  (e.g.,  Borio  and  Drehmann)  have  shown  that  financial 
markets have a tendency to misprice risk over time. This was certainly the case in the run-up 
to the crisis. However, it is less widely recognized that banks also had severe pitfalls in their 
models for pricing liquidity internally, which resulted in an under-pricing of liquidity risk and 
compounded the gravity of the crisis. There is no single best indicator that captures systemic 
liquidity  risk.  This  fact  stresses  the  need  to  monitor  a  wide  range  of  indicators  and, 
unavoidably, to use informed judgment to assess liquidity risk. It is necessary to complement 
analysis such as the one described above with information on factors that history tells us that 
are, in one way or another, associated with liquidity stress and that inextricably link systemic 
with  firm-level  liquidity  risk.  I  think  in  particular  about  high  leverage  levels  and  degrees  of 
maturity transformation that rely heavily on short-term funding. A difficulty is that the crisis 
highlighted  that  some  of  those  standard  indicators  tend  to  perform  poorly  or  to  suggest  a 
lower  level  of  vulnerability  than  it  is  actually  the  case.  For  example,  when  risk  premium  is 
low, financial institutions are encouraged to increase their leverage as their bets tend to look 
relatively less risky. In addition, haircuts on collateral tend to fall consistently with this view. 
This  way,  liquidity  risk  accumulates,  and  a  change  in  market  sentiment  suffices  to  lead  to 
forced asset sales on banks’ leveraged positions. Also, observing changes in collateralized 
lending practices and haircut levels are crucial indicators for assessing liquidity risk pricing, 
but  this  information  tends  to  be  viewed  as  proprietary  by  major  market  operators.  At  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
micro-level,  financial  institutions  are  being  required  to  enhance  their  funds-transfer  pricing 
processes, which will be part of the liquidity management requirements I alluded earlier and 
that the BCL will announce in the coming months.  
The  BCL  is  developing  an  operational  framework  for  systemic  and  micro-prudential 
liquidity surveillance. As I have just illustrated, traditional tools for monitoring liquidity risk, 
while necessary, proved to be insufficient in the run-up to the crisis. The task of a liquidity 
risk supervisor is therefore not simple. The approach taken at the BCL strives to integrate the 
multiple facets of liquidity risk. However, to avoid the temptation to “look at everything”, the 
BCL approach is risk based. There is already convincing theoretical and empirical evidence 
that  not  only  size,  but  also  the  degree  of  interconnectedness  of  banks  via  the  interbank 
market,  for  example  or  the  evolution  of  non-core  liabilities  constitutes  good  proxies  for 
institutions’  systemic  risk.  These  characteristics,  as  well  as  the  relevance  of  a  given 
institution for the key role of the Central Bank in preserving financial stability, determine the 
set of financial institutions that are more often and more intensely monitored – classified in 
terms  of  their  degree  of  systemic  importance.  A  key  qualitative  component  of  liquidity 
surveillance in the BCL is the assessment of banks’ liquidity risk management frameworks. 
As  painfully  learned  from  the  crisis,  this  should  be  the  first-line  bulwark  to  defend  an 
institution  against  liquidity  risk.  Particular  emphasis  is  being  laid  on  issues  such  as  sound 
governance both at the banking group and at the local level; the definition of management 
risk  tolerance  level;  the  set  of  monitoring  tools  institutions  use  for  assessing  their  liquidity 
risk;  the  robustness  of  stress  tests  scenarios  and  the  extent  to  which  they  reflect 
Luxembourg  idiosyncrasies;  the  size  and  composition  of  local  liquidity  buffers;  the  internal 
consistency  of  banks’  contingency  funding  plans  and  where  applicable;  intra-day  liquidity 
management.  In  addition,  the  BCL  also  pays  attention  to  the  soundness  of  the  business 
model and the balance sheet structure of local credit institutions and in particular to possible 
liquidity  risks  that  are  being  transferred  from  foreign-based  banking  groups  to  local 
subsidiaries. In this regard, some degree of liquidity management at the local level plays a 
significant role in the BCL liquidity risk assessment of banks, and it must be subject to its 
approval. Finally, the BCL pays particular importance at assessing whether banks’ internal 
pricing of liquidity within the institution and among group member duly reflects liquidity risk. 
But even these tools and procedures are not enough.  
The  BCL  liquidity  surveillance  framework  includes  a  combination  of  qualitative  and 
quantitative  elements.  On-site  visits  are  an  important  component  of  the  BCL  monitoring 
framework  in  order  to  assess  business  models  and  the  liquidity  situation  and  the  risk 
management  framework  of  credit  institutions.  In  the  absence  of  a  formal  MoU,  the  BCL 
surveillance  visits  are  nevertheless  coordinated  and  conducted  with  the  Commission  de 
surveillance du secteur financier. Since 2009, 14 on-site visits have been performed, and a 
similar  number  is  expected  to  take  place  over  the  coming  year.  Another  pillar  of  the  BCL 
liquidity  framework  is  off-site  surveillance.  While  structural  liquidity  risk  may  be  monitored 
and analyzed through information provided by financial institutions (prudential and statistical 
reporting requirements), by the micro-prudential approach or even by market intelligence, the 
BCL endeavors to have timely cash-flow based liquidity projections from market participants 
on  a  short-term  basis.  At  the  moment,  45  financial  institutions  which  are  important  from  a 
financial stability and a monetary policy perspective, provide a forward-looking daily liquidity 
reporting  that  includes  a  five-day  forecast.  The  forward-looking  nature  of  indicators  is  at  a 
premium  given  the  sudden  realization  of  liquidity  risk.  This  is  the  reason  for  the  Bank’s 
analysis and close interaction with the industry in all aspects regarding the two liquidity ratios 
of  Basel  III  and  the  monitoring  tools  proposed  such  as  maturity  ladder  reporting,  funding 
concentration,  and  the  availability  of  unencumbered  assets.  Another  key  in-house  liquidity 
monitoring tool compares every bank’s liquidity position using two different scores: one that 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
compares a bank’s liquidity position across peer banks and another that compares a bank’s 
liquidity over time based on 21 different risk factors. The tool mainly helps identifying banks 
with  weaker  liquidity  positions  and  streamlining  monitoring  tasks.  The  framework  is  also 
useful to draw inferences about the general liquidity trends within the Luxembourg banking 
sector for the purpose of ensuring financial stability. The framework integrates on- and off-
balance sheet data and market and macroeconomic information. Finally, the BCL uses other 
indicators for analyzing the liquidity situation of banks at a micro-level. They include micro- 
and macro-prudential indicators, albeit of a backward- or coincident-nature, such as loan-to-
deposit ratios, liquidity ratios, banks’ data on funding structure by maturity and geographical 
distribution,  portfolio  analysis,  inter-bank  and  intra-group  activity  information,  and  data  on 
banks’ participation in payment systems.  
Liquidity surveillance and EU financial stability frameworks are still built on a national 
basis,  but  surveillance  frameworks  are  evolving.  Each  EU  national  central  bank  is  the 
LLR to financial institutions domiciled in its territory with the obligation of informing the ECB. 
This situation implies that host countries are in theory the providers of ELA to subsidiaries 
and branches, but do not have access to supervisory information about branches, and thus, 
have no way of assessing the risks involved in the ELA operations they undertake. Basel III 
still  proposes  the  application  of  regulations  on  a  consolidated  basis.  This  means  that 
branches  located  in  Luxembourg  should  be  supervised  by  the  home  supervisor.  This  is 
clearly  problematic  for  Luxembourg  since  some  branches  are  relatively  large  and 
systemically-relevant, and have to be monitored. Also there is a tendency for groups to run 
their  subsidiaries  like  branches  which  inevitably  leads  to  conflicts  of  jurisdictions.  The 
challenge for BCL risk-based liquidity surveillance is to take account of the activities and the 
liquidity risk profile at the group level. A major consequence of this state of affairs is that the 
distinction between liquidity and solvency, and the ensuing impact on the sharing of the costs 
of  the  operation,  remain  opaque.  On  the  other  hand,  home-country  authorities  may  delay 
providing 
losses, 
reputational effects or political backlashes. So the home authority does not always have the 
incentive to keep small-country host authorities informed in an acceptable way. In turn, host 
country  authorities  may  seek  to  retain  as  much  intervention  authority  as  possible.  The  EU 
level  MoUs  signed  in  2005  and  2008,  being  voluntary  in  nature,  did  not  help  much.  As  a 
result, several Colleges of Supervisors and Cross-border Stability Groups are being put in 
place  to  alleviate  the  remaining  tension  between  home-country  lead  responsibility  for 
integrated supervision of LCBGs and the host country responsibility for financial stability. The 
BCL  currently  participates  in  several  Colleges  of  Supervisors  and  Cross-border  Financial 
Stability Groups. Additionally, bilateral arrangements with other home supervisory authorities 
and/or regular exchanges of views with representatives from banks’ head offices take place 
in order to keep abreast of developments at the group level and to raise potential concerns 
with regards to the situation at the domestic level. 
taking  crisis-management  actions 
to  avoid  capital 
information  or 
Basel III is work in progress, and one-size-fits-all is incompatible with the richness of 
Luxembourg business models. The final contours of the Basel III framework are still to be 
made precise. It is already clear, however, that the framework is not yet well suited to cover 
the diversity of banks’ business models that characterize the industry  in Luxembourg. The 
BCL is involved in technical discussions to strike the right balance between efficient liquidity 
surveillance  and  competitive  and  robust  banks.  Discussions  cover,  for  example,  the 
possibility of recognizing some stable funding in the period over the one month to which the 
proposed LCR applies and the period over one year to which the proposed NSFR applies. 
Investment funds’ deposits are so far not considered as a reliable funding source within the 
LCR – except those having a proven operational relationship – and are not considered as 
available source of funding in the NSFR. Another feature under discussion is the asymmetric 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
treatment of the loss of funding in covered bonds, and the covered pool inflow which is not 
considered as unencumbered, and thus cannot be included within the stock of highly liquid 
assets. This situation makes it quite difficult to respect the LCR for certain business models. 
These two issues are particularly relevant for custodian banks and banks mostly involved in 
covered bonds issuance, respectively, but they are not the only ones under consideration. 
The road map is complex, but the way is clear. I have already alluded to the results of the 
top-down analysis conducted by the BCL on the new liquidity standards in the first part of my 
talk.  This  analysis  is  currently  being  complemented  through  a  bottom-up  approach 
instrumented  by  means  of  a  joint  survey  of  the  BCL  and  the  CSSF  with  a  representative 
sample of domestic credit institutions covering a large share of total assets. Without going 
into  the  details  of  this  survey,  the  results  of  which  will  be  presented  and  discussed  at  the 
occasion of an ABBL conference scheduled to take place on 24th May, it is already clear that 
Luxembourg  banking  sector  does  on  aggregate  fall  short  of  the  required  standards  at  the 
current juncture. I draw five preliminary lessons from these results: first, the BCL working at 
home  with  the  industry  and  abroad  with  standard-setting  entities,  needs  monitoring  the 
implementation  of  the  upcoming  liquidity  standards  during  the  observation  period,  and 
especially the LCR. Second, it seems almost unavoidable that the new standards will induce 
certain banks to adjust their business models in order to comply with the new agreed pricing 
of liquidity risk components and offer products with more stable or more fee-based income. 
Third, as mentioned above, the BCL will use the survey and its internal studies during the 
upcoming  review  and  calibration  process  at  the  international  level  in  order  to  flag  those 
issues  that  are  considered  to  unduly  penalize  sound  business  models.  Fourth,  contrasting 
and comparing the top-down and the bottom-up approach is a rich source of information that 
the BCL intends to use for refining national regulation taking into account current and future 
qualitative and quantitative liquidity requirements and for designing reporting requirements. 
Finally,  the  BCL  foresees  a  continued  and  increased  focus  on  on-site  visits  and 
complementing the daily liquidity reporting in the near future by other requirements following 
the  implementation  of  Basel  III  as  a  clear  way  of  strengthening  liquidity  surveillance  and 
boosting the robustness of Luxembourg banks. 
Concluding remarks 
Let me conclude with a few final remarks. When times are good, there is tendency to feel 
that there is too much regulation. When times turn bad, everyone wonders why there was not 
enough regulation in place to prevent bad states of the world to materialize. Regulators and 
supervisors experience thus a perennial need to justify their role and actions. Certainly, no 
regulation is perfect. It is especially difficult to develop a regulation that is conceptually broad 
enough to generate a level playing field, and it is at the same time flexible enough to take 
national  specificities  into  account  and  to  dampen  potential  negative  effects  on  the  real 
economy. Basel III regulations strive to fulfill these requirements but, as I reflected during this 
talk,  more  work  is  still  needed.  The  BCL  is  actively  contributing  to  this  task  through  its 
participation all along the development of the Basel III liquidity standards.  
From the banking industry perspective, the crisis and the ongoing regulatory changes are an 
opportunity to enhance liquidity management and the pricing of liquidity risk and take up new 
challenges within the boundaries of the new regulations. In particular, the paramount role of 
high  quality  liquid  assets  within  Basel  III  are  a  call  to  market  operators  to  review  their 
business models, their products and funding sources with the aim of building even stronger 
institutions. 
Thank you for your attention. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
