Axel A Weber: Lessons learnt – the reform of financial regulation and its 
implications 
Speech  by  Professor  Axel  A  Weber,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  to  the 
University College London (UCL) Economics and Finance Society, London, 10 March 2011. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
I would like to thank you for giving me the opportunity to share with you some thoughts on 
the  challenges  of  reforming  financial  regulation.  The  financial  crisis  that  we  have  been 
experiencing  over  the  past  four  years  has  held  a  mirror  up  to  all  of  us  –  academics  and 
policymakers alike. It has provided new insights and opened up new perspectives that will 
have  a  lasting  impact  on  both  economic  analysis  and  economic  policy.  The  overhaul  of 
financial regulation is a case in point. The reforms we have embarked on will lead to a much 
more elaborate regulatory framework and to a more resilient financial system – a perspective 
that is of particular relevance for the United Kingdom, which hosts one of the most important 
financial  sectors  worldwide.  Just  to  give  you  an  impression  of  the  numbers:  in  the  United 
Kingdom the financial sector contributed 9½% to gross value added in 2009, compared to 
5½% in the euro area and just 4% in Germany. 
Looking  back  to  the  origins  of  the crisis,  there  is  little  doubt  that  an  inadequate  regulatory 
framework was its most important cause. Thus, our task is to strengthen the rules to allow for 
a  more  stable  financial  system.  In  this  context,  it  is  essential  that  the  reforms  are  not  just 
guided by the lessons learnt from the current crisis, since the next one might emerge from a 
completely different angle. At the same time, it is imperative that the reform is internationally 
harmonised.  The  financial  system  is  global,  and  to  prevent  regulatory  arbitrage  national 
frameworks have to satisfy certain common standards. Acknowledging the need for a global 
approach,  the  G20  has  drawn  up  a  comprehensive  plan  to  reform  international  financial 
regulation with the general objective of making the financial system as a whole more resilient 
to potential shocks. Nevertheless, we have to bear in mind that the main task of the financial 
system is to support the real economy and to promote economic growth. This is the backdrop 
against  which  the  reform  of  financial  regulation  has  to  be  discussed.  But  let  us  begin  by 
taking  a  look  at  the  envisaged  reforms  before  tackling  the  question  of  how  they  might 
influence the real economy.  
2. 
The reform of financial regulation … 
Towards more stable banks: Basel III 
2.1 
The natural starting point for a reform of financial regulation is the individual bank. Making 
this basic element of the financial system more stable will be an important step towards more 
systemic stability. In essence, there exist two elements of protection for the individual bank, 
one being capital and the other liquidity. Capital serves as a buffer against potential losses, 
and during the crisis it became obvious that regulatory capital provisions were not adequate. 
Hence,  in  the  future,  banks  will  have  to  hold  more  capital  of  better  quality.  Another  major 
problem during the crisis concerned liquidity. When, after the Lehman insolvency, financial 
institutions  stopped  lending  money  to  each  other,  a  number  of  banks  experienced  severe 
liquidity shortages. Their only remaining options were either to sell assets, thereby disrupting 
the markets further, or to approach central banks as lenders of last resort. In fact, had the 
central banks not supplied the financial system with liquidity it would have collapsed. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
On  the  basis  of  these  experiences  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (BCBS) 
proposed far-reaching reforms regarding capital and liquidity provisions. These rules, known 
as Basel III, will make individual banks more stable and will constitute a first line of defence 
against systemic crises. In November 2010, Basel III was endorsed at the G20 Summit in 
Seoul. Now, it needs to be transposed into national law and applied without falling behind the 
agreed timetable.  
Too big to fail: handling SIFIs 
2.2 
Basel III will certainly make banks more stable, but it will never be possible to entirely rule out 
the failure of individual institutions. Thus, a second line of defence is needed to prevent the 
failure  of  individual  banks  from  triggering  a  systemic  crisis.  In  this  context,  systemically 
important financial institutions (SIFIs) are a special issue. SIFIs are banks which are so big or 
so  interconnected  that  their  failure  might  provoke  a  chain  reaction  which  could  eventually 
lead to a systemic crisis. Thus, SIFIs have an incentive to engage in risk-prone behaviour 
and gamble on being bailed out whenever they get into trouble. Consequently, regulation has 
to be designed to counter such moral hazard behaviour. An initial step could be to introduce 
some capital surcharge as well as more intensive supervision for SIFIs in order to enhance 
their  stability.  However,  since  failure  still  cannot  be  ruled  out  entirely,  minimising  moral 
hazard ultimately requires a system that allows an orderly restructuring of SIFIs. Only then 
will  it  be  possible  to  credibly  bail-in  investors  and  thus  impose  the  necessary  market 
discipline on SIFIs. 
In  my  view,  only  globally  active  institutions  should  be  addressed  by  an  international  SIFI 
regime. A pragmatic approach would be to start with a limited number of institutions which 
are  indisputably  of  global  systemic  relevance.  The  Financial  Stability  Board  is  currently 
developing a methodology to accurately define global SIFIs based on criteria such as size, 
interconnectedness or substitutability. First results of this exercise are expected by mid-2011. 
The outcome, that is the specific members of this group of global SIFIs, will probably not be 
much of a surprise. But the issue of how to properly identify systemically relevant institutions 
becomes increasingly complex and contentious when turning to a lower – for example the 
national – level and will keep regulators and supervisors busy for some time to come. For 
this reason, it is a good strategy to focus on the least contentious and at the same time most 
systemically relevant candidates first. 
Into the light: the shadow banking sector 
2.3 
Basel  III  and  special  rules  for  systemically  important  institutions  are  certainly  important 
instruments in safeguarding the stability of the financial system. However, the best dike is of 
little  use  when  there  is  a  whole  ocean  at  your  back.  This  ocean  is  the  so-called  shadow 
banking sector: the part of the financial system that is not subject to regulation, that has been 
inviting  regulatory  arbitrage  and  that  has  been  a  significant  amplifier  of  risk  during  the 
financial crisis. With stricter rules for the regular banking sector, there is a clear danger that 
more and more activities will flow around the newly erected dikes and add to the ocean of 
unregulated activity at our back, thereby increasing systemic risk. Thus, we have to turn our 
heads, take a close look at the shadow banking sector, understand what is going on there 
and ultimately control the systemic risks that we have identified. 
As a first step it is necessary to define the shadow banking sector. Here, a broad approach is 
warranted for two reasons. First, the broader the regulatory view, the less room for regulatory 
arbitrage remains – provided regulation is internationally coordinated. Second, only a broad 
view  allows  the  regulators  to  keep  track  of  the  constant  evolution  of  the  shadow  banking 
sector.  For  the  same  reasons,  it  is  imperative  to  define  the  shadow  banking  sector  not  in 
terms of entities but in terms of activities. The central characteristic of shadow banks is that 
they  replicate  the  classic  activities  of  banks:  they  conduct  credit  transformation,  liquidity 
transformation and maturity transformation. Given that shadow banks pursue similar activities 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
as regular banks, they accumulate similar risks which might easily become systemic, flooding 
back into the regulated part of the financial system. 
Consequently,  as  a  second  step  it  is  necessary  to  monitor  the  shadow  banking  sector  to 
identify  potential  systemic  risks  –  a  task  that  requires  first  and  foremost  enhanced 
transparency requirements for this part of the financial system, for example with respect to 
trade in derivatives. As a third step we have to draw up an adequate regulatory framework. 
One option would be a direct approach whereby the activities of shadow banks are regulated 
via instruments such as capital, liquidity or disclosure requirements. Another option would be 
an  indirect  approach  which  regulates  banks’  interactions  with  shadow  banking  entities. 
Potential  regulatory 
tighter  consolidation  rules,  higher  capital 
requirements  for  exposures  to  the  shadow  banking  sector  or  limits  on  the  size  of  banks’ 
exposure  to  shadow  banks.  The  Financial  Stability  Board  is  currently  discussing  all  the 
options  regarding  the  definition,  monitoring  and  regulation  of  the  shadow  banking  sector. 
However,  as  this  is  a  complex  subject  and  a  number  of  unresolved  issues  exist,  it  might 
prove  to  be  a  lengthy  process.  But  I  am  confident  that  eventually  we  will  be  able  to 
adequately monitor and regulate all potential sources of systemic risk. 
instruments  could  be 
… and its implications: more stability, less growth? 
3. 
Ladies and gentlemen, I have just sketched the main fields of regulatory reform: new capital 
and liquidity requirements as well as systemically important financial institutions and shadow 
banking.  However,  making  the  financial  system  more  stable  is  not  an  objective  in  itself. 
Rather, it has far-reaching implications for the real economy. After all, the financial crisis led 
to the most pronounced downturn since World War II. Nevertheless, if we wish to make a 
sound and comprehensive judgement on the future perspective of economic growth, we have 
to take a long-term view and look beyond the current crisis. In this context, the concept of 
potential  output  permits  a  calm  and  objective  view  of  the  matter.  Abstracting  from  cyclical 
fluctuations, it covers the medium to long-term trend of GDP and links it to the driving factors 
for such a time horizon. 
To  be  more  specific,  it  helps  to  take  a  simple  textbook  model  of  economic  growth  as  a 
starting point. In such a stylised model, growth is determined by three factors: capital, labour 
and technical progress. Now, how are these three factors, in turn, affected by the financial 
system? The first factor – capital – points perhaps most obviously to the importance of the 
financial system. After all, the financial sector is not only a part of the economy with a distinct 
value added – although this value added can be quite significant, as in the United Kingdom. 
Even more importantly, the financial system also plays a crucial role in capital accumulation. 
However,  especially  in  highly  developed  economies  that  typically  boast  sizeable  and 
sophisticated financial sectors, the role of the financial system goes far beyond that of mere 
capital accumulation. In such economies, the financial system plays a key role in identifying 
and  funding  innovations,  thus  helping  to  advance  the  state  of  technical  knowledge  and 
promoting technological progress. For these reasons alone, an efficient financial system is 
indispensable for growth. In a sense, even the crisis with its massive repercussions for the 
real economy and its enormous costs illustrates how important the financial system and its 
stability are for economic performance and welfare. 
With that in mind, it becomes obvious that the reform of financial regulation will not only have 
a profound impact on the financial system itself but will also influence the real economy. The 
question at issue is whether the reforms strike the right balance between financial stability 
and  economic  growth.  In  fact,  the  development  of  Basel III  has  been  accompanied  by 
concerns that tighter regulation might have a negative impact on economic performance by 
severely restricting access to credit. However, a comprehensive cost-benefit analysis by the 
Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  has  revealed  that  fears  of  a  significant  negative 
impact on growth are unfounded. This is all the more the  case given that there will be an 
adequate transition period before the new requirements enter fully into force, which will give 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
banks sufficient time to strengthen their capital base. This favourable overall assessment of 
the macroeconomic impact of well-designed regulatory reform highlights the fact that there is 
no inherent conflict between the objectives of a more stable financial system and of ensuring 
strong and sustainable growth. 
Conclusion 
4. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  crisis  has  certainly  been  a  devastating  event.  But  it  has  also 
presented  the  chance  to  make  the  financial  system  more  resilient.  Trimmed  down,  where 
necessary, to activities with an unquestionable positive net social value added, it can once 
again be an important driver and catalyst for economic growth. And, in terms of the general 
future outlook for growth, we should bear in mind that the financial crisis has not impaired 
major growth drivers. Emerging markets, for instance, will still make great efforts to catch up, 
and  technical  progress  will  continue.  Thus,  the  crisis  certainly  does  not  mark  the  end  of 
economic  growth.  Rather,  what  it  has  done  is  to  highlight  the  importance  of  sustainable 
growth and the need for supportive policies – in financial regulation, but in many other policy 
areas as well. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
