Masaaki Shirakawa: Bubbles, demographic change and natural disasters 
Opening speech Mr Masaaki Shirakawa, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the 2011 Annual 
International Conference hosted by the Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies, Bank of 
Japan, Tokyo, 1 June 2011. 
 Introduction 
I. 
Good  morning.  I  am  very  pleased  to  address  the  Bank  of  Japan  Annual  International 
Conference. On behalf of my colleagues at the Bank of Japan, I welcome all the participants 
from central banks, international organizations, and academia. 
Japan  was  hit  by  an  unprecedented  earthquake  and  tsunami  on  March  11th,  the  day  that 
was etched into our memory. The scars are yet to heal in the quake-stricken regions. In the 
aftermath of the disaster, however, we Japanese were not in a hopeless situation. We have 
received lots of support and numerous warm messages from our friends abroad. I express 
my sincere gratitude to those whose hearts and thoughts have been with us since the day.  
The  title  of  this  year’s  conference  is  “real  and  financial  linkage  and  monetary  policy.” 
Conventional  macroeconomics  has  analyzed  macroeconomic  dynamics  through  the  two 
lenses, trend growth and business cycles. While the two lenses remain important, over the 
past  quarter  century,  the  need  to  incorporate  a  third  lens,  rare  but  large  events  including 
financial crises, was increasingly recognized, by policy makers and academics alike. I myself 
already  addressed  the  issue  of  bubbles  and  financial  crises  in  the  opening  remark  at  the 
previous  year’s  conference.1  This  year,  through  this  third  lens,  I  find  myself  left  with  no 
choice but to refer to the repercussions of a natural disaster. At the other extreme compared 
with sharp, unanticipated shocks like financial crises and natural disasters, I also recognize 
the  fully  anticipated  development,  a  demographic  change,  which  Japanese  economy  is 
undergoing, as the paramount issue. Today, I will pick three issues, bubbles and resulting 
financial crises, demographic changes and natural disasters as the factors driving economic 
dynamics and call for further research on them.  
II. 
A retrospective view of the Japanese economy in the past quarter century and 
research agenda going forward 
The day after the great east Japan earthquake 
Before we move on, I will brief you on how matters stand in the Japanese economy. In the 
aftermath of the earthquake, production has declined very sharply due to supply constraints 
caused  primarily  by  the  destruction  of  capital  stock,  disruptions  in  supply  chains  and  a 
shortage of electric power (Slide 1). As a result, exports have decreased substantially, and 
domestic  private  demand  has  also  been  weak,  partly  accentuated  by  deterioration  in 
business  and  household  sentiment.  Those  constraints  are,  however,  being  relaxed  more 
quickly than expected initially as a result of strenuous efforts by firms. Looking ahead, for the 
time  being,  Japan’s  economy  is  likely  to  continue  to  be  under  strong  downward  pressure, 
mainly  on  the  production  side.  However,  as  supply-side  constraints  ease  and  production 
regains traction, the economy is expected to return to the moderate recovery path from the 
second half of fiscal 2011, backed by an increase in exports reflecting the high growth of the 
global economy and by a rise in demand for restoring capital stock. 
                                                 
1  See Shirakawa (2010). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The Japanese economy in the past quarter century 
Beyond  the  horizons  of  a  short-term  economic  outlook,  the  paramount  issue  for  the 
Japanese  economy  lies  in  the  medium-  to  long-term  growth  prospects.  In  this  regard,  a 
review of the economy over the past quarter-century could benefit us. With this aim in mind, 
we need to underscore the following five facts. 
First, Japan’s real GDP growth rate has steadily decreased. Back in the 1980s, Japan was a 
front-runner  in  terms  of  GDP  growth  among  G7  countries  while  it  continued  to  lose 
momentum  during  the  1990s  and  remained  in  the  most  lackluster  sub-group  in  the  2000s 
(Slide 2).  
Second, Japan’s per capita GDP continued to grow at a high pace comparable to other G7 
economies  in  the  2000s,  although  significantly  slowed  compared  with  the  1980s.  Japan’s 
per-worker GDP growth, in particular, remained in the top sub-group, and in fact it was only 
slightly less than that of the United States (Slide 3).  
Third, after the burst of the bubble, the Japanese economy took a long time to resume its 
expansion (Slide 4). The protracted period of economic underperformance is by now known 
as  the  lost  decade.  The  Japanese  economy  resumed  its  expansion  finally  in  2004. 
Incidentally, it could be noted that after the burst of the bubble in the 1990s, the decline in 
Japan’s growth rate was relatively moderate compared with the declines experienced by the 
U.S. and European countries after the collapse of the global credit bubbles in the mid-2000s.  
Fourth,  the  Japanese  economy  was  precipitated  into  a  sharp  contraction  in  the  wake  of 
instabilities in financial systems. One occasion was the failure of Yamaichi Securities in 1997 
and the other was the Lehman shock. In the latter case, the contraction was more acute than 
the first case (Slide 5).  
Fifth, Japan is facing another sharp decline of economic activity triggered by the Great East 
Japan Earthquake.  
Research agenda going forward 
Admittedly, the global financial crisis in the late 2000s together with the aforementioned five 
facts left us with no choice but to realize how little we knew about macroeconomic dynamics. 
Against the backdrop, I put a bubble and a resultant financial crisis at the top of the research 
agenda. Beyond a variety of discussions prompted by the global financial crises, we need to 
make further progress on this front. The second issue is economic and social consequences 
of sizeable demographic changes, such as a declining population and ageing. The third issue 
is repercussions of natural disasters on economic activity. The second and third issues may 
look remote to financial systems and monetary policy, but it is a prima facie impression as I 
will flesh out later. A declining population gives rise to an outright reduction in the natural rate 
of  interest  and  this  could  constrain  monetary  policy  via  the  zero  lower  bound.  If  the 
guaranteed return of pension policies did not adequately reflect the anticipated decline in the 
natural rate of interest due to a decline in the population, the misalignment could spur the 
search-for-yield which would sow the seeds of a bubble.  
Bubbles and financial crises 
III. 
I will start with the first issue on the agenda, that is, bubbles and financial crises. We have 
commonly  observed  across  countries  that  economic  contractions  following  the  burst  of  a 
bubble tend to be protracted and subsequently, the economies hobble at an early phase of 
recovery.2 In the aftermath of the two bubbles, namely, one in the U.S. late 2000s and the 
                                                 
2  See Reinhart and Reinhart (2010). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the 
from 
resultant 
inefficient 
resource  allocations 
other in the Japanese 1990s, both the GDP growth rate and inflation show similar trajectories 
across the two cases (Slide 6).  
The  crippled  balance  sheets  can  be  detected  as  the  primary  factors  that  impede  the 
economic recoveries, while we also need underscore the linkage of low productivity growth 
and 
the  malfunctioning  credit 
intermediation.  In  fact,  to  promote  economic  growth,  it  is  crucially  important  to  maintain 
economic metabolism by smoothly reallocating economic resources toward the sectors with 
higher growth potential. In this regard, economists at the Bank of Japan estimated that the 
distortion in factor markets can account for one-seventh of the total 3.6 percent point decline 
in  the  GDP  growth  rate  during  the  six  years  in  the  aftermath  of  the  bubble  burst.3  More 
research  would  be  called  for  in  an  attempt  to  further  elaborate  on  the  effects  of  the 
deterioration of banks’ balance sheets and the protracted zero interest rates on the efficiency 
of the resource allocations.  
In this context, I would highlight the subtle distinction between money and credit in a period 
of deflation. Professor Milton Friedman once noted that inflation is always and everywhere a 
monetary phenomenon, the well-known Friedman’s proposition on inflation.4 With my respect 
for Friedman whose last class that I took at the University of Chicago, I would suggest asking 
whether  the  proposition  holds  if  we  replace  the  term,  “inflation,”  by  “deflation”  in  the 
proposition.  Elaborating  on  the  validity  of  this  seemingly  symmetrical  proposition  would 
provide a clue to better understanding how a financial crisis interacts with deflation. You may 
argue that replacing inflation by deflation would simply flip a plus to a minus, but the issue is 
not as simple as it appears. Whether this deflation version of Friedman’s proposition holds or 
not would depend on how we interpret it. 
The  proposition  holds  if  the  proposition  means  that  destabilized  financial  systems  shrink 
money  stock  noticeably,  thereby  resulting  in  deflation.  In  retrospect,  we  can  reaffirm  that 
severe  deflation  was  accompanied  by  financial  crises.5  Friedman  pointed  out  in  his  own 
writing,  “A  Monetary  History  of  the  United  States,”  that  during  the  period  of  1929–1933, 
money  stock  shrank  by  31  percent  and  the  price  level  declined  by  25  percent  primarily 
because  the  Fed  failed  to  act  as  the  lender  of  last  resort.  In  sharp  contrast  to  the  U.S. 
experience in the 1930s, helped by such lessons from history, the Bank of Japan acted very 
aggressively  as  the  lender  of  last  resort.  As  a  result,  contraction  of  money  stock  was 
forestalled  and  the  price  level  dipped  by  only  0.5  percent  per  annum  at  the  maximum.  It 
could also be noted that since 1998, the price level has dropped slightly larger than three 
percent, which is quite different from the U.S. experience in the 1930s (Slide 7). In sum, the 
experiences  of  the  U.S.  and  Japan  confirm  that  the  proposition  holds  in  line  with  the 
aforementioned interpretation. 
On the other hand, if we interpret the proposition in a way that central banks can raise the 
price level at will by flooding the economy with the monetary base, the proposition is, at least, 
not compatible with the recent experiences in Japan as well as in the U.S. In Japan, between 
1997 and 2010, the monetary base soared by 90 percent while money stock increased by 
30 percent.  Likewise,  the  U.S.  experience  between  2008  and  2010  clearly  shows  that  the 
monetary  base  soared  by  140  percent  while,  by  contrast,  money  stock  increased  by  only 
10 percent.  Despite  the  flooding  monetary  base,  Japan’s  consumer  price  level  dipped  by 
3.7 percent for the thirteen years by the end of 2010. The U.S. core CPI inflation rate has 
decreased by more than one percent point despite the increase in monetary base. To sum 
up, significant increases in the monetary base neither gave rise to an equally significant rise 
in  money  stock  nor  inflation,  let  alone  proportional  increases.  Financial  systems  would 
                                                 
3  See Nakakuki, Otani, and Shiratsuka (2004). 
4  See Friedman (1970). 
5  See Bordo and Filardo (2005). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
provide a key to better understanding the proposition. In light of the Japanese experiences, I 
agree with Chairman Bernanke on his remark in his scholarly work, saying, “I doubt that it 
[money]  completely  explains  the  financial  sector-aggregate  output  connection.”6  Without 
more in-depth understanding of the subtle intricacy underlying in financial systems and credit 
markets,  we  would  remain  less  informed  of  macroeconomy  and  transmission  channels  of 
monetary  policy.  Against  the  backdrop,  I  am  hoping  for  more  research  to  proceed  on  this 
front.  
Demographic changes and policy response 
IV. 
Keynes’ Perspective 
We  move  on  to  the  second  issue  on  the  agenda,  demographic  changes.  In  1937,  John 
Maynard  Keynes  gave  a  lecture  titled  “Some  economic  consequences  of  a  declining 
population.” He noted that “in an era of a declining population, …demand tends to be below 
what was expected and a state of over-supply is less easily corrected. Thus a pessimistic 
atmosphere  may  ensue.”7  By  suggesting  these  views,  he  posed  a  question  mark  on  the 
traditional  Malthusian  view  that  warns  against  a  population  explosion.  Neoclassical  growth 
theories tend to focus on per capita economic variables, such as per capita GDP and per 
capita capital stock. This means that the very challenges that Japan is currently faced with 
are left outside the scope of their analysis at the outset. Looking ahead, Japan is heading 
into  a  demographic  vortex,  by  which,  I  mean,  rapid  ageing  and  a  declining  working-age 
population. To deal with the present and forthcoming challenges for Japan, we may need to 
rely  more  on  the  perspective  offered  by  Keynes  who  tried  to  elaborate  on  the  size  of 
population  itself  and  changes  in  its  composition.  It  is  fairly  certain  that  not  only  advanced 
economies, but also a number of emerging economies are, sooner or later, expected to face 
the similar challenge as we proceed down the road (Slide 8).8 
Demography and aggregate demand 
Demographic changes affect economic growth through a variety of channels. To start with, in 
a  country  facing  a  diminishing  population,  like  Japan,  a  declining  working-age  population 
would  rein  in  growth  momentum  on  the  supply-side.  Admittedly,  because  we  need  to  take 
demographic  factors  as  given  for  the  time  being,  we  should  pursue  higher  labor  force 
participation  rates  of  female  workers  and  the  aged  people.  On  top  of  this,  attempts  to 
enhance  the  quality  of  the  labor  force  by  improving  education  and  vocational  training 
systems are warranted as well.  
We  may  need  to  recognize  the  complex  fallout  of  a  demographic  vortex  on  aggregate 
demand.  A  shrinking  working-age  population  could  be  an  outright  factor  that  reduces 
aggregate consumption. On the other hand, the life-cycle model of consumption predicts that 
the ageing of society would spur the consumption of the elderly as they reduce their savings. 
In  fact,  a  common  observation  across  economies  is  that, as  a  general  pattern,  the  elderly 
tend  to  cut  their  spending  on  durable  goods  while  they  increase  demand  for  services  to 
maintain their quality of life, such as medical and nursing services. We may need to bear in 
mind, however, that provision of these services tends to be subject to intensive government 
regulations. If the supply that can meet the demand of aged people would be hampered by 
misaligned regulations which do not reflect the changes in society and technology progress, 
potential consumption demand would not materialize.  
                                                 
6  See Bernanke (1983). 
7  See Keynes (1937). 
8  See Shirakawa (2011). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The foregoing argument reaffirms the importance of the flexibility of the social and economic 
systems  that  can  ensure  their  own  sustainability  in  the  face  of  a  demographic  vortex.  We 
could also bear in mind how the ageing of voters affects the social choices reflecting their 
preferences (Slide 9).  
Demography and business cycles 
As I mentioned at the outset, the third lens suggests that boom-bust cycles and demographic 
changes  could  interact  with  each  other.  For  example,  the  spending  wave  hypothesis 
suggests  a  possible  linkage  between  the  two.  This  simple-looking  hypothesis  argues  that 
peaks of business cycle and asset market booms tend to coincide with the years for baby 
boomers passing their peak spending years, presuming that their consumption reaches its 
highest  for  their  ages  in  their  late  forties.  As  my  colleague,  Deputy  Governor  Nishimura, 
points  out,  the  inverse  dependency  ratio,  which  indicates  workers  per  non-working 
population, appears to be positively correlated with real estate market fluctuations both in the 
U.S. and in Japan9 (Slide 10). Similar studies predict that real estate booms could be driven 
by  increasing  young  generations  when  they  come  in  markets  as  home  buyers.10  All  those 
arguments suggest that demographic factors should not be taken lightly in analyzing bubbles 
and financial crises.  
Managing disaster risks 
V. 
Finally,  I  take  up  the  last  issue  in  the  agenda,  management  of  natural  disaster  risk  in  the 
context  of  economic  activity.  Natural  disasters  are  universal  risks  against  which  human 
beings have been fighting since the dawn of history (Slide 11). The tangible capital stock lost 
in the Great East Japan Earthquake is estimated at five percent of GDP by the Japanese 
government.  
I  will  highlight,  inter  alia,  specific  aspects  of  the  issue,  that  is,  how  much  extra  cost  firms 
should bear to forestall a vast disruption in production. To this end, two issues immediately 
come to mind, inventory management and risk concentration. The Japanese manufacturing 
firms  have  been  enhancing  their  competitiveness  through  constant  efforts  to  minimize 
inventory of intermediate goods, by developing the sophisticated logistics network known as 
the just-in-time system. The efforts can be confirmed by the downward trend of the inventory-
to-GDP ratio (Slide 12). Being faced with disruptions in the production process precipitated 
by the natural disaster, firms with a minimum level of intermediate goods inventory were left 
with no choice but to sharply scale back their production. In the wake of the earthquake, as 
discussed earlier, the ensuing disruption of the supply-chain revealed the risk of the reduced 
inventory, which may be described as a dilemma, namely, just-in-time versus just-in-case. 
While the level of inventory should remain as an important issue, the earthquake uncovered 
concentration risks as the linchpin for further assessment. The concentration risks that have 
been  deeply  buried  under  the  complicated  supply  chain  were  due  to  overreliance  on 
particular plants located in the particular regions.  
There  is  no  free  lunch:  you  need  to  bear  some  additional  cost  in  either  case,  to  raise 
inventory or to diversify procurement. In a related context, Professor Barro pointed out in his 
paper  that  the  insurance  premium  that  households  need  to  bear  at  normal  times  to 
compensate for the disaster risks would be considerably high.11 This question regarding the 
disaster risks needs to be considered at a national level as well as a firm level. For instance, 
                                                 
9  See Nishimura (2011). 
10  See Sterling and Waite (1998). 
11  See Barro (2009). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
over-concentration of a nation’s business activities in particular plants located in a particular 
region would run a significant risk while its cost of such over-concentration could be hardly 
internalized  by  highly  competitive  markets.  As  a  result,  tail  risks  may  be  inadvertently 
elevated. In sum, economists, together with practitioners and policymakers, need to strive for 
a better design of broadly defined public risk-sharing systems against disaster risks.  
Concluding remarks 
VI. 
So far, I have discussed the challenges that the Japanese economy is faced with. I would 
call  for  further  research  on  tail  risks,  such  as  financial  crises  and  natural  disasters,  which 
have  still  relatively  been  given  short  shrift 
the  existing  macroeconomics.  The 
consequences of demographic changes are yet to be explored. We could make a stronger 
case to revamp the present social and economic systems. Those outdated systems, which 
are  not  in  line  with  the  ongoing  demographic  changes,  could  sow  the  seeds  of  another 
bubble because, for example, they could prompt search-for-yields under the low natural rate 
of interest. Now is the time to explore all these issues. With that perspective in mind, I am 
convinced  that  this  year’s  conference  will  catalyze  dialogues  between  policymakers  and 
academics. Thank you.  
 
in 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   7
 8 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    9
  10 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   11
  12 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
References 
Barro,  Robert  J.,  “Rare  Disasters,  Asset  Prices,  and  Welfare  Costs,”  American  Economic 
Review, Vol. 99(1), pp. 243–264, 2009. 
Bernanke,  Ben  S.,  “Nonmonetary  Effects  of  the  Financial  Crisis  in  the  Propagation  of  the 
Great Depression,” American Economic Review, Vol. 73(3), pp. 257–276, 1983. 
Bordo,  Michael  and  Andrew  Filardo,  “Deflation  in  a  Historical  Perspective,”  BIS  Working 
Papers, No 186, 2005. 
Friedman,  Milton,  “The  Counter-Revolution  in  Monetary  Theory:  First  Wincott  Memorial 
Lecture, Delivered at Senate House, University of London, 16 September, 1970,” Institute of 
Economic Affairs Occasional Paper 33, 1970. 
Keynes,  John  M.,  “Some  Economic  Consequences  of  a  Declining  Population,”  Eugenics 
Review, Vol.19, pp. 13–17, 1937.  
Nakakuki,  Masayuki,  Akira  Otani,  and  Shigenori  Shiratsuka,  “Distortions  in  Factor  Markets 
and  Structural  Adjustments  in  the  Economy,”  Monetary  and  Economic  Studies,  Vol.  22(2), 
pp. 71–99, 2004. 
Nishimura, Kiyohiko G., “This Time may be Truly Different: Balance Sheet Adjustment under 
Population Ageing,” Remarks at the 2011 American Economic Association Meeting, January 
7, 2011.  
Reinhart,  Carmen  M.  and  Vincent  R.  Reinhart,  “After  the  Fall,”  Paper  presented  at  the 
Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City  Economic  Policy  Symposium  2010,  August  26–28, 
2010.  
Shirakawa,  Masaaki,  “Future  of  Central  Banks  and  Central  Banking,”  Monetary  and 
Economic Studies, Vol. 28, pp. 17–26, 2010. 
________,  “The  Transition  from  High  Growth  to  Stable  Growth:  Japan's  Experience  and 
Implications  for  Emerging  Economies,”  Remarks  at  the  Bank  of  Finland  200th  Anniversary 
Conference, May 5, 2011.  
Sterling, William P. and Stephen R. Waite, Boomernomics, Ballantine Books, 1998.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
