William C Dudley: US economic policy in a global context 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, at the Foreign Policy Association Corporate Dinner, New York, 
7 June 2011. 
 It is a pleasure to have the opportunity to speak here this evening and I would like to thank 
the Foreign Policy Association for inviting me. The Association has served for decades as a 
catalyst  for  developing  awareness  and  understanding  of  global  issues  and  for  providing 
nonpartisan forums for informed discussion. Your mission is clearly a worthy one – now more 
than ever.  
In  this  discussion  I  will  highlight  how  the  recent  financial  crisis  and  its  aftermath  have 
accelerated  the  shift  in  the  relative  importance  of  the  so-called  developed  and  emerging 
market economies. 
I will then discuss how the global economic system needs to adapt in light of the growing 
relative  importance  of  the  EMEs  in  the  global  economy.  I  will  explore  the  implications  of 
these changes for U.S. economic policy and I will also touch on some of the challenges the 
EMEs face as they seek to consolidate their gains and sustain their success. 
I will argue that the developed countries and the EMEs need to adjust in mutually supportive 
ways. In my view, the current relationship between the EMEs and the United States is not 
sustainable for either side. Not only has an unusually wide divergence in cyclical positions 
opened up that creates immediate strains, but there are also important structural imbalances 
that have developed that must be addressed. 
I will close by turning my attention to what can be done to address these cyclical and secular 
challenges. Although I will discuss the role of U.S. monetary policy in this context, I will also 
discuss  what  other  steps  can  be  taken  to  strengthen  the  relationship  and  make  it  more 
sustainable. 
As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal 
Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve System. 
Over  the  past  few  decades,  the  most  salient  feature  of  the  global  economy  has  been  the 
growing importance of the emerging market economies and the ever-deepening integration 
of these economies into the global economic system. A shift toward more market-based and 
outwardly oriented development on the part of the EMEs has enabled hundreds of millions of 
people across the emerging world to become integrated into the global economy for the first 
time. The outcome has been a rapid rise in living standards and a reduction in poverty on a 
scale that is without precedent in human history. 
These changes have been most evident in China, with a historic transformation that began 
with the economic reforms of Deng Xiaoping and continues to this day. But the EME story is 
much broader than China. Over the past decade,1 excluding China, the emerging world has 
grown at a 4.7 percent annual rate – its fastest rate on record. 
The EME world is, of course, not monolithic. There are the dynamic large economies, EMEs 
that  are  broadly  complementary  to  them,  and  some  countries  that  are  both  less 
complementary  and  less  competitive  than  their  peers.  Happily,  for  the  most  part,  EME 
success is proving mutually reinforcing, as witnessed by growing intra-EME trade. 
                                                 
1  Based  on  the  International  Monetary  Fund  World  Economic  Outlook  database,  covering  the  period  2001 
through 2011 (forecasted). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
As  EME  output  has  grown  rapidly,  their  share  of  the  global  economy  has  increased 
markedly.  EMEs  now  account  for  38  percent  of  global  gross  domestic  product  (GDP),  up 
from 23 percent in 1990. And it is the EMEs, not the developed economies, that have been 
the  engine  of  global  growth  in  recent  years.  For  example,  during  the  2000s,  EME  growth 
accounted for 59 percent of global growth, up from 33 percent and 25 percent, respectively, 
in the two preceding decades. 
By other measures, the EMEs have been even more important. For example, EME growth 
has been very commodity intensive. Thus, while China is still only two-fifths the size of the 
United States in GDP terms, it dwarfs the United States in terms of its demand for some key 
commodities. 
The growth momentum among the EMEs is the result of years of tough choices and sound 
decisionmaking across the emerging world. Policymakers learned from the mistakes of past 
crises and capitalized on globalization and technological change. However, while the rise of 
the EMEs is due mainly to the efforts of the EMEs themselves, the reaction of the developed 
countries in maintaining an open global trading system and resisting calls for protectionism 
has also been essential. 
Even  before  the  financial  crisis,  the  sustained  dynamism  of  the  emerging  economies  was 
bringing  about  a  profound  shift  in  the  role  of  the  EMEs  within  the  global  economy.  The 
traditional  distinction  between  the  industrialized  “core”  of  the  system  and  the  emerging 
“periphery” was becoming harder to justify as an analytical construct – still less an organizing 
framework  for  policy  –  as  the  periphery  took  on  more  weight  and  became  a  much  more 
important driver of global economic developments. 
However,  the  crisis  and  its  aftermath  accelerated  this  transition.  Although  many  emerging 
market economies contracted sharply following the peak of the financial crisis in late 2008, 
economic activity in the EMEs has since rebounded powerfully. In contrast, the recovery for 
the developed economies has been anemic. Economic output for the BRICs this year will be 
about 31 percent higher than it was in 2007; for the G7 just 1 percent higher.2 
The rapid rebound of the EMEs occurred mainly because the locus of the financial crisis was 
elsewhere and that helped limit the damage to their financial system and balance sheets. But 
many EMEs also recovered quickly because they had the capacity and credibility to pursue 
countercyclical  policies  in  response  to  large  external  shocks  to  aggregate  demand  for  the 
first time. 
On  many  fiscal  metrics,  some  economies  in  the  emerging  world  now  look  in  better  shape 
than many of those in the advanced world. This challenges the traditional distinction between 
developed country and emerging market sovereign creditworthiness. Where the developed 
world still stands apart is in the quality of its institutions, legal and policy frameworks, and the 
sophistication of its technologies and markets. But even here the gap is narrowing. 
The story of the EMEs has generally been an extraordinarily positive one for the world as 
hundreds of millions of people have lifted themselves out of poverty. 
Nevertheless, even before the crisis, it was evident that the relationship between developed 
and emerging economies was becoming strained and needed to be adjusted; the status quo 
would clearly be unsustainable. Consider, for example, the economic relationships between 
the United States and China that prevailed over the past decade or so. 
Some  experts  have  summarized  the  arrangements  as  follows.  The  United  States  bought 
Chinese  exports  at  low  prices,  which  bolstered  U.S.  living  standards  and  held  down  U.S. 
inflation. The United States did not take extreme steps to try to force China to revalue the 
renminbi upward against the dollar, and China, in turn, invested its trade surplus and capital 
                                                 
2  Figures are real GDP-weighted indexes for each group. BRICs include Brazil, Russia, India and China. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
inflows into U.S. Treasuries in order to keep the renminbi from appreciating too rapidly. The 
U.S. terms of trade improved as the cost of imported goods dropped, and U.S. interest rates 
stayed  relatively  low  as  China  recycled  its  trade  surpluses back  into  U.S.  financial assets. 
For  China,  the  benefits  included  strong  economic  growth,  technology  transfer  and  the 
creation of many manufacturing jobs. These developments, in turn, helped foster rising living 
standards and political stability in China. 
These outcomes were by no means all the result of a deliberate grand strategy. But I think 
this is a reasonable, albeit overly simplistic, description of what happened. 
Although the pre-crisis arrangements worked reasonably well for a while, the flaws became 
increasingly  evident  over  time.  Looked  at  from  the  lens  of  the  developed  world,  the 
combination of rapid gains in production capacity and relatively repressed consumption in the 
EME  world  helped  foster  a  global  deficiency  of  demand  relative  to  supply.  In  these 
circumstances,  the  United  States  and  many  other  industrialized  economies  had  to  sustain 
domestic  demand  at  elevated  levels  in  order  to  achieve  “full  employment”  and  prevent 
deflation. 
For the United States, the consequence was elevated consumption facilitated by asset price 
inflation, easy underwriting standards for credit and structural budget deficits. Of course, this 
particular  outcome  was  not  preordained  or  caused  by  the  EMEs.  There  were  multiple 
combinations  of  domestic  demand  consistent  with  full  employment  in  the  United  States 
during the pre-crisis period. For example, if the United States had adopted different policies, 
it might have shifted the composition of growth toward more business investment and less 
consumption  and  housing.  But  in  a  disinflationary  global  environment  amid  chronic  EME 
trade surpluses, the United States could not achieve a high level of employment with a high 
level of national saving. 
Looked at from the lens of the emerging world, sustained consumption demand in developed 
nations induced the EMEs to continue to emphasize investment and exports. This meant that 
still poor populations did not reap the full benefit of their labors in the form of increases in real 
income and consumption commensurate with the gains achieved in productivity and output. 
Also, this system led, in many cases, to poor returns to EME savers. This resulted, in part, 
from the cost of sterilizing reserves accumulated in the process of managing exchange rates 
and the use of the banking system as a tool of industrial policy. 
While it is tempting to draw a line of causation from actions in one part of the global system 
to the other, this is overly simplistic. Rather, we have to think of the global economy as a 
single  system,  with  outcomes  based  simultaneously  on  all  the  choices  and  preferences 
throughout the system. What is new is that the so-called periphery is now weighty enough to 
have a large impact on the pattern of economic activity in the core, as well as vice versa. 
Although the outcomes were not caused by currency arrangements per se, it is hard to avoid 
the  conclusion  that  regimes  with  limited  exchange  rate  flexibility  linked  to  the  dollar  at 
undervalued  exchange  rates  frustrated  one  channel  through  which  relative  prices  might 
otherwise have adjusted in a way to induce more balanced global growth. 
It is clear that the pre-crisis formula for global growth was not sustainable. This is obvious in 
the  case  of  industrialized  nations  where  private  consumption  and  fiscal  deficits  reached 
unsustainable levels and needed to be cut back. 
Less obviously, this is also the case for EMEs, as growth strategies that rely on excessive 
consumption  elsewhere  in  the  system  are  no  longer  viable.  Put  simply,  we  now  have  a 
problem of arithmetic – particularly for China as the largest and most dynamic EME. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
As China becomes increasingly weighty in the global economy, it will not be able to sustain 
export growth in the high teens annually3 in a world that is growing (ex China) at less than 
4 percent a year on average. For China, the business fixed investment side of the ledger also 
appears  unsustainably  high  as  a  share  of  GDP.  In  this  context,  China’s  ongoing  rapid 
accumulation of foreign exchange reserves, which carries real economic costs, seems less a 
sign of strength than an indication of how difficult it is to shift to a different growth path. 
The  financial  crisis  did  not  cause  the  old  growth  patterns  to  become  unsustainable.  They 
already  were.  But  its  aftermath  forces  us  to  confront  the  need  for  adjustment  with  greater 
urgency,  due  to  the  added  imposition  of  extreme  cyclical  pressures  on  what  were  already 
unsustainable structural relationships. 
There are now two additional dimensions to the problem: (1) the stress created by exchange 
rate regimes that link the monetary conditions of economies at very different stages in the 
business cycle, and (2) the need for far-reaching fiscal adjustment in the crisis-hit economies 
of the developed world in the coming years. 
Again, to simplify, take the case of the United States and China. The Chinese economy is 
experiencing  the  pressures  of  rapid  economic  growth  that  threaten  to  lead  to  overheating. 
Chinese wages – especially in the coastal regions are rising rapidly and consumer prices, on 
a year-over-year basis, are rising at about a 5 percent annual rate. In contrast, U.S. inflation 
is considerably lower, growth is subdued, and the United States is still 7 million jobs short of 
the peak reached in 2007. 
An  extreme  cyclical  imbalance  exists  between  the  EME  world  and  the  United  States.  The 
monetary policy appropriate for the United States is increasingly inappropriate for the vast 
majority of EMEs and vice versa. This creates for EME authorities a dilemma that cannot be 
resolved entirely via macro-prudential regulatory policies, regardless of their merit. 
An  EME  faces  the  choice:  let  its  currency  appreciate  more  rapidly  and  risk  losing 
competitiveness  in  international  markets,  or  restrain  the  rise  in  its  currency  through 
intervention  and  risk  inflation.  The  steps  required  to  mitigate  the  inflation  risk  through 
sterilization  can  involve  big  fiscal  costs.4  Neither  option  is  attractive,  though  the  former 
strategy  of  currency  appreciation  is  much  less  problematic  if  other  EMEs  are  acting  in  a 
similar manner. 
Meanwhile, we all have to bear in mind that current circumstances put stress on the support 
for open global markets in the developed world. 
On the U.S. side, the recovery remains distinctly subpar in spite of aggressive monetary and 
fiscal  stimulus.  On  the  monetary  policy  front,  short-term  rates  remain  near  zero  and  the 
Federal Reserve is just about to complete its $600 billion Treasury purchase program. On 
the  fiscal  policy  front,  the  U.S.  government  has  engaged  in  large  stimulus  program.  This 
supported demand and employment while the private sector shifted its saving balance into 
surplus in an effort to repair balance sheets. 
However,  the  large  size  of  the  fiscal  deficit  and  the  rapid  increase  in  the  country’s  federal 
debt-to-GDP ratio means that this is not sustainable for much longer. 
Ultimately, the composition of economic activity in the United States needs to be rebalanced. 
There  are  two  issues  here.  First,  the  consumption  share  of  GDP  may  still  be  too  high. 
                                                 
3 
In nominal dollar terms Chinese exports rose 20 percent annually from 2000 to 2010. The Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York estimates volume growth of about 18 percent. 
4  EMEs  typically  issue  sterilization  bonds  to  offset  the  increase  in  the  money  supply  caused  by  foreign 
exchange intervention. These generally carry a higher yield than the assets purchased in the course of the 
intervention, typically low-yielding U.S. Treasuries. The difference in yields results in a net fiscal cost. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Second,  the  need  for  U.S.  fiscal  consolidation  implies  that  there  will  have  to  be  offsetting 
increases in investment and the U.S. trade balance as the recovery proceeds. 
To  illustrate  this  second  point  consider  the  following  accounting  identity:  The  public  sector 
balance + the private sector balance = the current account balance 
Right  now  the  identity  holds  as  roughly:  –10  percent  of  GDP  public  sector  balance  
+ 7 percent of GDP private sector balance = –3 percent of GDP current account balance.5 
If  the  public  sector  balance  must  over  time  move  from  around  –10  percent  to  around  
–3  percent  to  stabilize  the  federal  debt-to-GDP  ratio  at  tolerable  levels,  then  the  private 
sector balance and the current account balance must move by roughly 7 percentage points 
of GDP to take up the slack. 
Assuming that the consumption share of GDP still needs to fall over the medium term, the 
adjustment  in  the  U.S.  private  balance  will  have  to  occur  primarily  in  terms  of  rising 
residential or business fixed investment. 
There  does  seem  to  be  room  for  business  investment  to  expand  significantly  when  firms 
become more confident in the economic outlook, provided that the United States remains a 
competitive location for investment. But residential investment is unlikely to climb very much 
for some time given the chronic overhang of unsold homes. 
If these two sectors cannot take up all the slack created by necessary fiscal retrenchment in 
the years ahead – as seems likely – then the U.S. trade balance will need to improve as well. 
This implies that EMEs will no longer be able to rely on expanding U.S. demand as a key 
driver of their own economic growth. 
Of course, this is not just an issue of U.S. and EME adjustment. Adjustments will be required 
in  other  industrialized  countries,  too  –  and  not  just  the  deficit  countries.  There  has  to  be 
recognition  on  all  sides  that  global  rebalancing  in  terms  of  the  composition  of  activity  and 
growth and in terms of global capital flows is necessary. 
Fortunately, this is not a zero-sum game: it is in the interests of all sides. However, it is still 
very  difficult  to  accomplish  because  it  is  not  in  the  short-term  interests  of  some  interest 
groups  in  many  nations.  This  means  that  there  are  likely  to  be  considerable  political 
obstacles to adjustment in many parts of the global economy. 
In  this  process,  the  United  States  needs  to  show  leadership  in  contributing  to  a  smooth 
adjustment. In this regard, I think there are a number of actions that the United States can 
take – unilaterally and in its own interest – that will make this rebalancing process easier and 
less prone to disruption. 
As discussed earlier, no issue is more important than a credible commitment for getting our 
fiscal house in order, but at a pace that does not forestall a sustained economic recovery. 
What is needed here is fiscal consolidation that begins slowly, builds over time to substantial 
magnitude,  and  is  difficult  to  dismantle  –  i.e.,  it  requires  the  commitment  of  both  political 
parties. The decision of how big the U.S. government should be and what functions it should 
perform is a political decision that I leave to the voters and our legislators. However, as a 
nation  we  need  to  acknowledge  that  we  must  be  willing  to  pay  for  whatever  government 
services  and  transfers  we  want  to  have.  We  should  not  assume  that  an  excess  of  global 
savings will always be available to easily finance our public deficits. 
                                                 
5  To  be  more  precise,  as  of  the  first  quarter  of  2011  with  statistical  discrepancy  of  1.2  percentage  points 
attributed  to  private  balance,  the  figures  are  as  follows:  government  balance  –9.5  percent  +  6.3  percent 
private sector balance equals current account balance of –3.3 percent. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
The choice of fiscal sustainability is not a political one, it is an economic one and if we do not 
act  voluntarily  and  preemptively,  the  market  will  inevitably  force  the  outcome  later  –  most 
likely in a much more difficult and messy fashion. 
Moreover, we must recognize that the rest of the world is closely monitoring our ability as a 
nation to come to grips with our long-term fiscal challenges, and to pay our debts when they 
come  due.  This  is  an  important  litmus  test  of  our  credibility  and  ability  to  exercise  global 
economic leadership. 
But the challenges extend far beyond fiscal policy. We, as a nation, have to take steps that 
facilitate the needed structural adjustment of U.S. economic activity that will position us to 
thrive in the next chapter of global economic transformation. We need to make sure the next 
business  cycle  will  be  more  sustainable  than  the  last,  which  was  built  on  an  unstable 
foundation of asset price gains, easy credit and outsized financial-sector profits. 
This will require a shift in orientation from consumption to export and investment-led growth. 
As  EMEs  have  shown  us,  comparative  advantage  and  global  competitiveness  are  not 
inevitable consequences of factor endowments – they are the result of the choices we make 
as nations. 
There are no easy answers or quick-fix solutions. But in this regard, ensuring broad access 
to  educational  opportunity  and  improving  opportunities  for  people  to  retool  their  skills 
mid-career so they can compete in a rapidly evolving global economy are important. 
So too is ensuring that regulation is calibrated such that it achieves public policy goals in the 
most efficient manner possible, with the least compliance costs and unnecessary delays. A 
continued commitment to open markets and free trade is essential. Enlightened immigration 
policies can play a role – making sure that U.S. companies doing business here in the United 
States can augment the skill sets of workers here with those attracted from abroad. 
Tax  reform,  energy  policy,  and  housing  policy  also  have  crucial  roles  to  play  –  as  does 
financial reform, a subject to which I will return later in the speech. 
Leveraging the comparative advantage that the United States has in higher education also 
makes sense. This should include encouraging foreign students to come here to study. Also, 
closer  partnerships  between  universities  and  business  could  leverage  the  technological 
discoveries and advances that occur in university research so that the benefits accrue to a 
greater degree to U.S. firms and workers. 
These  are  fundamentally  structural  issues  –  not  cyclical  issues.  They  cannot  be  tackled 
primarily through monetary policy. Instead, monetary policy is mainly a tool for stabilizing the 
macroeconomy and keeping inflation expectations well-anchored. 
Nevertheless, monetary policy has an important role in supporting the transitions that need to 
take place, consistent with our dual mandate of full employment and price stability. As we do 
so, we must take international developments fully into account. 
The integration of the EMEs into the global economy has been associated with some major 
shifts  in  relative  prices.  For  a  number  of  years,  the  United  States  and  other  industrialized 
nations  benefited  from  disinflation  in  manufactured  goods  produced  in  EMEs.  This  shift  in 
relative prices – a positive terms of trade gain – helped contain inflation. 
More recently, the disinflationary tailwind in traded manufactured goods imported from China 
may have come to an end, at least for a period, as more of the increase in productivity there 
is captured in wage gains. 
Meanwhile, growing prosperity and urbanization in highly populous countries such as China 
and India has been the principal driver of a major, multiyear upward shift in the relative price 
of commodities. This move – a negative terms of trade hit for the United States – has pushed 
up the overall rate of inflation, at least temporarily. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
There are good reasons to believe that commodity prices will not continue to increase at the 
explosive  rate  of  recent  months.  Households  and  businesses  will  adjust  their  activities  in 
response  to  higher  prices,  and  there  will  be  a  supply  response  to  higher  prices  that  will 
gradually build over time. 
In any event, a shift in relative prices, even if spread out over a number of years, should not 
to be confused with the onset of an ongoing inflation problem. But the uncertain future path 
of commodity prices does make the task of the central banker harder. 
It  is  the  job  of  central  bankers  to  ensure  that  changes  in  relative  prices  do  not  infect  the 
general trend in prices. In the United States – unlike in many EMEs that are appropriately 
tightening  policy  –  a  large  amount  of  slack  and  low  unit  labor  cost  increases  provide  a 
disinflationary counterbalance to commodity price gains. Of course, as I noted in a speech 
earlier this year, we will have to monitor inflation expectations closely to ensure that they do 
not become unanchored. 
We also need to keep a close eye on the degree to which unit labor cost increases in EMEs 
and real exchange rate appreciation abroad are passed through into U.S. import prices and 
consumer inflation. Although the historic evidence is that pass-through has been limited in 
the United States, we cannot be complacent about this. 
Meanwhile, we have to recognize that monetary policy works somewhat differently in a world 
in which a large share of global GDP is part of a de facto dollar block. In particular, we must 
take  into  account  the  feedback  loops  this  creates  –  how  U.S.  monetary  policy  influences 
financial conditions elsewhere and, how these changes, in turn, influence activity and prices 
in the United States. 
At the same time, other nations should recognize that we cannot and do not seek to make 
monetary  policy  for  the  world.  Responsibility  for  ensuring  that  financial  conditions  in  other 
nations  are  appropriate  for  their  own  circumstances  appropriately  lies  with  their  national 
authorities, and they have a wide range of fiscal, monetary, exchange rate and other policy 
tools available for this purpose. 
I do not see any fundamental conflict between U.S. domestic economic objectives and the 
interests  of  the  global  system  as  a  whole.  But  the  existing  system  of  global  currency  and 
monetary arrangements does render effective pursuit of these objectives more difficult. 
I believe that we would all be better off if the system evolved toward more flexible exchange 
rates and greater monetary independence in the EME world. 
Notwithstanding  this,  we  can  and  do  pursue  our  monetary  policy  objectives  in  the  United 
States  ever  mindful  of  how  our  policy  choices  affect  other  parts  of  the  global  economic 
system, recognizing that these impacts will, in turn, influence U.S. economic outcomes. 
For the Federal Reserve, pursuing the dual mandate of full employment and price stability 
allows us to make an important contribution to global stability and growth. Ensuring low and 
stable inflation preserves the purchasing power of the dollar and sustains its attractiveness 
as  a  medium  of  exchange.  Supporting  maximum  sustainable  employment  means  that  we 
have an important growth mandate. 
This remains the case even when we are at the so-called zero bound with respect to short-
term rates. In this context, I believe that our large-scale asset purchase programs were fully 
consistent  with  our  global  responsibilities.  For  example,  our  recent  program  to  purchase 
$600 billion of Treasury securities sought to prevent a relapse into recession and to lessen 
the risk of deflation – outcomes that would have been very damaging to global economy. 
I do not mean to dismiss lightly the concerns raised by some EMEs about the program. By 
removing long-duration Treasury assets from private investors’ hands, we encouraged those 
investors  to  purchase  other  assets,  including  foreign  assets.  This  eased  U.S.  financial 
conditions  and,  thus,  boosted  U.S.  demand  for  both  domestically  and  foreign-produced 
goods. The portfolio rebalancing also may have encouraged greater gross capital outflows. It 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
is at least possible that this amplified the fundamentally driven rise in EME asset prices and 
put some upward pressure on some EME currencies. 
But, in my opinion, it would have been irresponsible for us to allow the risk of a deflationary 
outcome  in the  United States  to  persist  without  decisive policy  action.  If  the  United  States 
had slipped back into recession, the global economy and financial system would have been 
destabilized in unpredictable ways, and capital flight to the EMEs and upward pressure on 
EME currencies would have likely increased rather than diminished. 
The  Federal  Reserve  is  fully  committed  to  keeping  inflation  in  check  and  maintaining  the 
purchasing power of the dollar. This is important for U.S. economic stability and growth. It is 
also critical if the United States is to retain foreign investor confidence, which, as an importer 
of capital, we should never take for granted. 
In fact, we recognize that the United States, as the issuer of the global reserve currency, has 
singular  responsibilities  within  the  global  system.  The  central  role  of  the  dollar  and  dollar 
assets rests on several pillars: 
 
confidence in the credibility and coherence of U.S. monetary policy, which preserves 
the long-run purchasing power of the dollar;  
the unimpeachable credit quality of the public debt that anchors our system;  
the resilience and vibrancy of our financial system; and  
the efficiency and security of our payments system. 
 
 
 
These are strengths that we must constantly maintain. 
Ensuring  financial  stability  is  essential  to  advancing  the  common  interests  of  the  global 
economic system. We have much work still to do in the developed world. But the EMEs also 
need  to  be  active  participants  in  this  conversation,  given  their  rising  weight  in  the  world 
economy, already large contribution to global savings and growing importance in the creation 
of financial assets. Everyone benefits if the EMEs can liberalize and deepen their financial 
systems in ways that avoid some  of the mistakes that we in the United States and others 
have made. 
To sum up, the rapid ascendancy of the EMEs in the world economy and the widespread 
improvement  in  living  conditions  associated  with  globalization  are  to  be  applauded.  But 
aspects of this process have occurred in a manner that has led to strains on both a cyclical 
and  secular  basis.  The  current  relationships  in  terms  of  capital  flows  and  composition  of 
growth are not likely to prove sustainable on a long-term basis. 
The issue of global rebalancing has received plenty of attention elsewhere. My goal today is 
not  to  play  the  blame  game.  We  all  share  responsibility  for  addressing  our  current  set  of 
challenges. Rather, it is to lay out the reasons why it is imperative that the United States and 
the EMEs collectively move toward arrangements that put us on a mutually sustainable path. 
I hope I have been convincing. 
The United States must provide leadership in this global process. This is in our own national 
interest. The policy response we need combines fiscal and structural adjustments that would 
enable  the  United  States  to  prosper  in  the  next  phase  of  global  economic  transformation. 
These issues cannot be addressed primarily thorough monetary policy. However, monetary 
policy  has  a  role  to  play  in  supporting  the  necessary  transitions,  and  it  too  needs  to  be 
conducted mindful of its global context. 
As we step up to our responsibilities, we should look to the leading nations of the EME world 
to provide leadership too, commensurate with their growing importance in the global system, 
in rebalancing demand and increasing currency flexibility. If we lead together, with mutually 
supportive actions, we can achieve better outcomes than any of us can achieve on our own. 
Thank you for your kind attention. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
