William C Dudley: Prospects for the economy and monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  New  York  University’s  Stern  School  of  Business,  New 
York, 28 February 2011. 
 It is a pleasure to have the opportunity to speak here today. My remarks will focus primarily 
on two areas. First, what is the outlook for economic activity, employment and inflation? In 
particular,  what  are  the  areas  of  vulnerability  that  we  should  be  most  concerned  about? 
Second, what does the outlook imply for monetary policy? As always, what I will say reflects 
my own views and opinions, not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee 
(FOMC) or the Federal Reserve System.  
In my talk, I’ll argue that the economic outlook has improved considerably. Despite this, we 
are still very far away from achieving our dual mandate of maximum sustainable employment 
and price stability. Faster progress toward these objectives would be very welcome and need 
not require an early change in the stance of monetary policy. 
However,  I’ll  also  focus  on  some  issues  with  respect  to  inflation  that  will  merit  careful 
monitoring. In particular, we need to keep a close watch on how households and businesses 
respond to commodity price pressures. The key issue here is whether the rise in commodity 
prices will unduly push up inflation expectations. 
Inflation expectations are well-anchored today and we intend to keep it that way. A sustained 
rise  in  medium-term  inflation  expectations  would  represent  a  threat  to  our  price  stability 
mandate and would not be tolerated. 
Turning  first  to  the  economic  outlook,  the  situation  looks  considerably  brighter  than  six 
months  ago.  On  the  activity  side,  a  wide  range  of  indicators  show  a  broadening  and 
strengthening of demand and production. For example, on the demand side, real personal 
consumption expenditures rose at a 4.1 percent annual rate during the fourth quarter. This 
compares with only a 2.2 percent annual rate during the first three quarters of 2010 (Chart 1). 
Orders and production are following suit. For example, the Institute of Supply Management 
index  of  new  orders  for  manufacturers  climbed  to  67.8  in  January,  the  highest  level  since 
January of 2004 (Chart 2). 
The revival in activity, in turn, has been accompanied by improving consumer and business 
confidence. For example, the University of Michigan consumer sentiment index rose to 77.5 
in February, up from 68.9 six months earlier (Chart 3). 
Indeed, the 2.8 percent annualized growth rate of real gross domestic product (GDP) in the 
fourth quarter may understate the economy’s forward momentum. That is because real GDP 
growth  in  the  quarter  was  held  back  by  a  sharp  slowing  in  the  pace  of  inventory 
accumulation. The revival in demand, production and confidence strongly suggests that we 
may be much closer to establishing a virtuous circle in which rising demand generates more 
rapid income and employment growth, which in turn bolsters confidence and leads to further 
increases in spending. The only major missing piece of the puzzle is the absence of strong 
payroll  employment  growth.  We  will  need  to  see  sustained  strong  employment  growth  in 
order to be certain that this virtuous circle has become firmly established. 
With  respect  to  the  labor  market,  there  are  conflicting  signals.  On  one  hand,  the 
unemployment rate has fallen sharply over the past two months, dropping to 9.0 percent from 
9.8  percent  two  months  earlier  (Chart  4).  This  is  the  biggest  two-month  drop  in  the 
unemployment rate since November of 1958. On the other hand, payroll employment gains 
have remained very  modest – rising by only  83,000 per month over  the last three months 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
(Chart  5).  Such  modest  payroll  growth  is  not  consistent  with  a  sustained  drop  in  the 
unemployment rate. 
The true story doubtless lies somewhere in between – but probably more on the side of the 
household survey that tracks unemployment. That is because measured payroll employment 
growth  in  January  was  probably  temporarily  depressed  by  unusually  bad  winter  weather. 
Although  some  of  the  recent  decline  in  unemployment  is  due  to  a  drop  in  the  number  of 
people  actively  seeking  work,  the  household  survey  does  show  a  pick-up  in  hiring.  Other 
labor market indicators, such as initial claims and the employment components of the ISM 
surveys  for  manufacturing  and  nonmanufacturing,  have  also  shown  improvement  recently 
(Chart 6 and Chart 7), which suggests that the weakness in payroll growth is the outlier. 
Although there is uncertainty over the timing and speed of the labor market recovery, I do 
expect that payroll employment growth will increase considerably more rapidly in the coming 
months.  We  should  welcome  this.  A  substantial  pickup  is  needed.  Even  if  we  were  to 
generate growth of 300,000 jobs per month, we would still likely have considerable slack in 
the labor market at the end of 2012. 
In monitoring employment trends, we also need to recognize that the data are likely to be 
quite noisy on a month-to-month basis. This is particularly the case during the winter months, 
when weather can play an important role. Recall, for example, the aftermath of the blizzard of 
1996 in the Northeast when the February payroll employment count was originally reported 
as rising by 705,000 workers. It will be important not to overreact to monthly data but to focus 
on the underlying trend. 
So  why  is  the  economy  finally  showing  more  signs  of  life?  In  my  view,  the  improvement 
reflects  three  developments.  First,  household  and  financial  institution  balance  sheets 
continue  to  improve.  On  the  household  side,  the  saving  rate,  which  moved  up  sharply  in 
2008 and 2009, appears to have stabilized in the 5 percent to 6 percent range. Meanwhile, 
debt service burdens have fallen sharply to levels that prevailed during the mid-1990s. Debt 
service  has  been  pushed  lower  by  a  combination  of  debt  repayment,  refinancing  at  lower 
interest  rates  and  debt  write-offs  (Chart  8).  Financial  institutions  have  strengthened  their 
balance sheets by retaining earnings and by issuing equity. For many larger institutions, a 
release of loan loss reserves has been important in supporting earnings. Credit availability 
has improved somewhat as very tight standards start to loosen (Chart 9). As a result, some 
measures of bank credit are beginning to expand again (Chart 10). 
Second,  monetary  policy  and  fiscal  policy  have  provided  support  to  the  recovery.  On  the 
monetary  policy  side,  the  unusually  low  level  of  short-term  interest  rates  and  the  Federal 
Reserve’s large-scale asset purchase programs (LSAPs) have fostered a sharp improvement 
in  financial  market  conditions.  Since  August  2010,  for  example,  when  market  participants 
began to anticipate that the Federal Reserve would initiate another LSAP, U.S. equity prices 
have  risen  sharply  and  credit  spreads  have  narrowed  (Chart  11  and  Chart  12).  Long-term 
interest  rates  have  moved  higher  after  initially  declining,  but  this  does  not  appear 
troublesome as it primarily reflects the brightening economic outlook. 
On the fiscal side, the economy has been supported by the shift in policy toward near-term 
accommodation.  In  particular,  the  temporary  reduction  in  payroll  taxes  is  providing 
substantial  support  to  real  disposable  income  and  consumption.  This  could  have  a 
particularly strong impact on growth during the first part of the year. 
Third, growth abroad – especially among emerging market economies – has been strong and 
this has led to an increase in the demand for U.S.-made goods and services. Over the four 
quarters of 2010 real exports rose 9.2 percent (Chart 13). After a disappointing performance 
earlier in the year, U.S. net exports surged in the fourth quarter (Chart 14). 
The firming in economic activity, in short, is due both to natural healing and past and present 
policy support. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
In  this  regard,  it  important  to  emphasize  that  we  did  expect  growth  to  strengthen.  We 
provided additional monetary policy stimulus via the asset purchase program in order to help 
ensure  the  recovery  did  regain  momentum.  A  stronger  recovery  with  more  rapid  progress 
toward our dual mandate objectives is what we have been seeking. This is welcome and not 
a reason to reverse course. 
We also have to be careful not to be overly optimistic about the growth outlook. The coast is 
not completely clear – the healing process in the aftermath of the crisis takes time and there 
are still several areas of vulnerability and weakness. In particular, housing activity remains 
unusually weak and home prices have begun to soften again in many parts of the country 
(Chart 15 and Chart 16). State and local government finances remain under stress, and this 
is likely to lead to further fiscal consolidation and job losses in this sector that will offset at 
least a part of the federal fiscal stimulus (Chart 17). And we cannot rule out the possibility of 
further  shocks  from  abroad,  whether  in  the  form  of  stress  in  sovereign  debt  markets  or 
geopolitical events. Higher oil prices act as a tax on disposable income, and the situation in 
the Middle East remains uncertain and dynamic. Also, we cannot ignore the risks stemming 
from the longer-term fiscal challenges that we face in the United States. 
But  in  the  near-term,  the  most  immediate  domestic  problems  may  recede  rather  than 
become more prevalent. On the housing side, stronger employment growth should lead to 
increased household formation, which should provide more support to housing demand. And 
anxieties about the large overhang of unsold homes represented by the foreclosure pipeline 
may overstate the magnitude of the excess supply of housing. Families that have lost their 
homes  through  foreclosures  are  likely  to  seek  new  homes  as  their  income  permits,  even 
though many may re-enter the housing market as renters rather than buyers. On the state 
and local side, a rising economy should boost sales and income tax revenue and help narrow 
near-term fiscal shortfalls.1 
Moreover,  although  we  do  need  to  remain  ever-watchful  for  signs  that  low  interest  rates 
could foster a buildup of financial excesses or bubbles that might pose a medium-term risk to 
both full employment and price stability, risk premia on U.S. financial assets do not appear 
unduly compressed at this juncture. 
On the inflation side of the ledger, there are some signs that core inflation is now stabilizing. 
However,  both  headline  and  core  inflation  remain  below  levels  consistent  with  our  dual 
mandate objectives – which most members of the FOMC consider to be 2 percent or a bit 
less on the personal consumption expenditures (PCE) measure. 
Recent  evidence  shows  that  the  large  amount  of  slack  in  the  economy  has  contributed  to 
disinflation  over  the  past  couple  of  years.  This  can  be  seen  in  the  steady  decline  in  core 
inflation between mid-2008 and the end of 2010. As shown in Chart 18, core PCE inflation in 
December had risen at just 0.7 percent on a year-over-year basis, down from 2.5 percent in 
mid-2008. Slack in our economy is still very large, and this will continue to be a factor that 
acts to dampen price pressures. 
Nevertheless, there are several reasons why we need to be careful about inflation even in an 
environment  of  ample  spare  capacity.  First,  commodity  prices  have  been  rising  rapidly 
(Chart 19).  This  has  already  increased  headline  inflation  relative  to  core  inflation,  and  the 
commodity price changes that have already taken place will almost certainly continue to push 
the headline rate on year-over-year basis higher over the next few months. Second, some of 
this pressure could feed into core inflation. Third, medium-term inflation expectations have 
recently  risen  back  to  levels  consistent  with  our  dual  mandate  objectives  (Chart  20).  If 
medium-term  inflation  expectations  were  to  move  significantly  higher  from  here  on  a 
                                                 
1   However, growth alone will not resolve the longer-term problem of the disparity between promises made to 
state and local workers in terms of their public employee pension and health benefits and the resources set 
aside to pay for those benefits. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
sustained  basis,  that  would  pose  a  risk  to  inflation  and,  thus,  would  have  important 
implications for monetary policy. 
With respect to the inflation outlook, I think there are four important questions that deserve 
attention. 
1. 
How much slack is there in the economy? In other words, how fast can the economy 
grow for how long until the economy is close to full employment?  
Are there speed-limit effects on inflation? In other words, could inflation rise because 
the  rate  of  economic  growth  was  unusually  high,  even  though  plenty  of  slack 
remained in the economy?  
Given the emergence of such economies as China and India, can commodity price 
pressures be safely ignored as temporary “noise” in terms of the long-term inflation 
outlook  or  are  these  pressures  likely  to  prove  persistent?  If  commodity  price 
pressures  persisted,  this  could  undercut  one  rationale  for  focusing  on  core 
measures  of  inflation  –  the  argument  that  core  measures  are  better  predictors  of 
future headline inflation than today’s headline rate.  
What  can  the  Federal  Reserve  do  to  ensure  that  inflation  expectations  stay  well-
anchored? 
2. 
3. 
4. 
With  respect  to  the  first  question,  the  economy  retains  a  very  large  amount  of  slack  by 
virtually  all  measures.  For  example,  last  month  the  industrial  capacity  utilization  rate  was 
76.1 percent. This compares with a long-term average of 80.9 percent (Chart 21). Similarly, 
the  current  unemployment  rate  of  9  percent  is  well  above  most  estimates  of  the  non-
accelerating  inflation  rate  of  unemployment  (NAIRU)  –  the  lowest  rate  of  unemployment 
consistent with sustained price stability. 
In the pre-crisis period, the NAIRU was likely in the region of 4.5 percent to 5 percent. There 
are  several  reasons  why  the  NAIRU  may  now  be  higher.  First,  extended  unemployment 
compensation  benefits  create  incentives  for  prospective  workers  to  keep  looking  for  better 
jobs rather than accept less attractive positions. Empirical work on this subject suggests that 
the  NAIRU  might  currently  be  roughly  1  percentage  point  higher  because  of  this  factor. 
However, this effect will only persist for as long as the extended benefits are in place. 
Second,  the  rise  in  unemployment  has  been  associated  with  an  increase  in  the  degree  of 
mismatch  between  unemployed  workers’  job  skills  and  available  job  vacancies.  Some  cite 
the  upward  shift  in  the  Beveridge  curve,  which  illustrates  the  relationship  between 
unemployment and job vacancies (Chart 22), as evidence of this effect. 
Third,  the  longer  that  people  are  unemployed,  the  more  their  skills  tend  to  atrophy,  which 
makes it harder for them to become employed in the future. For unemployed workers, the 
median duration of unemployment has climbed and a growing proportion of the unemployed 
has been jobless for long periods (Chart 23). 
In  my  view,  these  last  two  factors  have  probably  pushed  up  the  NAIRU  by  0.5  to 
1 percentage point on top of the about 1 percentage point effect of extended unemployment 
benefits,  which  is  likely  to  be  a  temporary  effect.  Taken  together,  this  suggests  that  the 
current NAIRU might be between 6 percent and 7 percent. 
Although  undesirable,  this  rise  should  not  create  concern  about  the  medium-term  inflation 
outlook. First, even the higher estimate of NAIRU is still far below the current unemployment 
rate of 9 percent. Second, as discussed above, much of this rise is likely to be temporary 
rather than permanent. As the labor market improves, the extension of unemployment claims 
benefits will almost certainly be allowed to lapse. When this occurs, the NAIRU is likely to 
drop back to somewhere in the region of 5 percent to 6 percent. 
Third, some of the evidence that the NAIRU has increased is not particularly compelling. For 
example, the loop in the Beveridge curve that is evident now has been seen in past business 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
cycles – cycles in which there was no persistent rise in the NAIRU. This strongly suggests 
that the rise in job mismatch has a cyclical component. Fourth, the 9 percent unemployment 
rate may understate the amount of labor market slack. That is because the labor participation 
rate has fallen sharply. 
In my view, the large gap between the current unemployment rate and the long-run NAIRU 
suggests  there  is  little  payoff  from  investing  much  energy  to  more  precisely  estimate  the 
NAIRU. As  the economy expands  and the unemployment rate falls, we will have plenty of 
time to be able to refine our estimates of NAIRU in light of what happens to labor cost trends 
such as the employment cost index, and to unit labor costs. Currently, all these measures 
are quiescent and consistent with a large amount of labor market slack (Chart 24). 
The  second  question  is  whether  the  economy  could  grow  so  fast  that  inflation  pressures 
could rise even with an unemployment rate still well above the NAIRU. The notion is that at 
very fast growth rates wages and prices might have to rise in order to funnel labor and capital 
to those areas where demand and output were rising particularly rapidly. 
Although  this  possibility  shouldn’t  be  ruled  out,  we  should  not  be  too  worried  about  this, 
particularly if growth is broadly based. In particular, the economy is not growing quickly right 
now relative to past recoveries. For example, in the rebound from the comparably deep early 
1980s  recession,  the  annualized  growth  rate  exceeded  7  percent  for  five  consecutive 
quarters.  Moreover,  empirically  there  is  little  historical  evidence  that  discontinuous  “speed 
limit” effects play a significant role in influencing inflation in the United States. 
The third issue is whether the rise in commodity prices will turn out to be persistent and, if so, 
how this might impact the inflation outlook. Recently, commodity prices have risen sharply. 
For example, the spot GSCI – a broad measure of commodity prices – has risen more than 
35  percent  over  the  past  year.  This  was  in  train  before  the  upheavals  in  the  Middle  East 
raised  market  concerns  about  potential  disruption  to  oil  supplies,  pushing  energy  prices  
– though not other commodity prices – still higher. Commodity price pressures are pushing 
measures  of  headline  inflation  above  measures  of  core  inflation,  which  exclude  food  and 
energy prices. How worried should policymakers be about this development? 
Although  there  have  been  commodity  price  cycles  in  the  past,  commodity  prices  have  not 
consistently  increased  relative  to  other  prices,  and  indeed  have  declined  in  relative  terms 
over the very long term. Historically, if commodity prices rose sharply in a given year, it has 
been reasonable to expect that these prices would stabilize or fall within a year or two. This 
property has been important because it has meant that measures of current “core” inflation, 
rather than current headline inflation, have been more reliable in predicting future headline 
inflation rates. 
In  contrast,  over  the  past  decade,  commodity  prices  generally  have  been  on  an  upward 
trend. For example, as shown in Chart 25, fuel prices have generally been in a rising trend 
since  1999  and  non-fuel  prices  since  2001  –  both  trends  interrupted  temporarily  by  the 
financial crisis. 
Setting to one side the near-term effects of geopolitical developments, the rapid urbanization 
and  industrialization  of  nations  such  as  China  and  India  could  be  generating  an  ongoing 
secular rise in commodity prices that might not be fully captured in today’s spot and futures 
market prices. If so, this would undercut the role of core inflation as a good predictor of future 
headline inflation. 
Nevertheless, there are important mitigating factors that suggest that it would be unwise for 
the  Federal  Reserve  to  over-react  to  recent  commodity  price  pressures.  First,  despite  the 
general uptrend, some of the recent commodity price pressures are likely to be temporary. In 
particular, much of the most recent rise in food prices is due to a sharp drop in production 
caused by poor weather rather than a surge in consumption (Chart 26). More typical weather 
and  higher  prices  should  generate  a  rise  in  production  that  should  push  prices  somewhat 
lower. This is certainly what is anticipated by market participants, as shown in Chart 27. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Second,  even  if  commodity  price  pressures  were  to  prove  persistent,  the  U.S.  situation 
differs markedly from that of many other countries. Relative to most other major economies, 
the U.S. inflation rate is lower and the amount of slack much greater. 
Moreover,  for  the  United  States,  commodities  represent  a  relatively  small  share  of  the 
consumption basket (Chart 28). This small share helps to explain why the pass-through of 
commodity prices into core measures of inflation has been very low in the United States for 
several decades. 
Third,  the  Federal  Reserve’s  success  in  anchoring  inflation  expectations  has  also  been 
important  in  limiting  pass-through.  Since  1984,  for  example,  when  the  Federal  Reserve 
began  to  achieve  success  in  driving  down  and  then  subsequently  anchoring  long-term 
inflation expectations, there has been very little evidence of commodity price pass-through 
into core inflation. In contrast, prior to 1984, when inflation expectations were much less well-
anchored,  pass-through  did  occur  and,  at  times,  played  an  important  role  in  pushing 
underlying inflation higher. 
This leads to our final issue – the importance of inflation expectations in shaping the inflation 
outlook. 
Rising inflation expectations tends to push up inflation in a number of ways – by reducing the 
expected  cost  of  borrowing  at  a  given  level  of  interest  rates,  by  pulling  forward  buying 
decisions to beat future expected price increases, and by encouraging more aggressive price 
and wage setting behavior. In a world of unanchored inflation expectations, commodity price 
pressures would more easily be passed through into core inflation. 
Fortunately, inflation expectations remain well-anchored. This can be seen in all three major 
measures  of  inflation  expectations.  First,  market-based  measures  of  inflation  expectations 
are  generally  well-behaved.  For  example,  the  five-year  forward  measure  of  breakeven 
inflation generated from differences in the nominal Treasury yield curve and the TIPS yield 
curve has shown a modest rise since mid-2010 back into the range that has generally been 
in  place  for  the  past  decade  (Chart  29).  Second,  the  long-term  inflation  expectations  of 
professional forecasters have been very stable. As shown in Chart 30, the median long-term 
inflation forecast in the Professional Forecasters’ survey remains around 2.1 percent for the 
PCE deflator. In terms of household expectations, there has been an increase in short-term 
expectations.  This  typically  occurs  when  commodities  such  as  gasoline  go  up  sharply  in 
price.  However,  even  here  longer-term  expectations  remain  well-anchored.  As  shown  in 
Chart 31, the University of Michigan median five-year inflation expectations measure remains 
around  2.9  percent  –  comfortably  within  its  normal  range  and  historically  consistent  with 
slightly lower realized inflation. 
To summarize the main points, we have a considerable amount of slack, little evidence of 
discontinuous speed limit effects, and little inflation pass-through from commodities into core 
inflation  when  inflation  expectations  are  well-anchored,  which  is  currently  the  case.  This 
suggests that the biggest risk in terms of higher underlying inflation over the next year or two 
is  that  inflation  expectations  could  become  unanchored.  This  might  occur,  for  example,  if 
there  were  a  loss  of  confidence  in the  ability  and/or  willingness  of  the Federal  Reserve  to 
tighten monetary policy in a timely way in order to keep inflation in check. 
In this regard, the proof of the pudding will be in our actions – talk is cheap. What is key – 
that the appropriate policy steps are taken in a timely manner. 
However,  let  me  make  two  points.  First,  I  am  very  confident  that  the  enlarged  Federal 
Reserve  balance  sheet  will  not  compromise  our  ability  to  tighten  monetary  policy  when 
needed consistent with our dual mandate goals. Second, I am equally confident that no one 
on  the  FOMC  is  willing  to  countenance  a  sustained  rise  in  either  inflation  expectations  or 
inflation. 
Let me explain why our enlarged balance sheet does not compromise our ability to tighten 
monetary  policy.  Although  our  enlarged  balance  sheet  has  led  to  a  sharp  rise  in  excess 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
reserves in the banking system, this has the potential to spur inflation only if banks lend out 
these  reserves  in  a  manner  that  generates  a  rapid  expansion  of  credit  and  an  associated 
sharp rise in economic activity. The ability of the Federal Reserve to pay interest on excess 
reserves (IOER) provides a means to prevent such excessive credit growth. 
Because the Federal Reserve is the safest of counterparties, the IOER rate is effectively the 
risk-free  rate.  By  raising  that  rate,  the  Federal  Reserve  can  raise  the  cost  of  credit  more 
generally. That is because banks will not lend at rates below the IOER rate when they can 
instead hold their excess reserves on deposit with the Fed and earn that risk-free rate. In this 
way, the Federal Reserve can drive up the rate at which banks are willing to lend to more 
risky  borrowers,  restraining  the  demand  for  credit  and  preventing  credit  from  growing 
sufficiently rapidly to fuel an inflationary spiral. 
For this dynamic to work correctly, the Federal Reserve needs to set an IOER rate consistent 
with  the  amount  of  required  reserves,  money  supply  and  credit  outstanding  needed  to 
achieve its dual mandate of full employment and price stability. If the demand for credit were 
to exceed what was appropriate, the Federal Reserve would raise the IOER rate – pushing 
up the federal funds rate and other short term rates – to tighten broader financial conditions 
and reduce demand.2 If the demand for credit were insufficient to push the economy to full 
employment, then the Federal Reserve would reduce the IOER rate – pushing down the fed 
funds  rate  and  other  short  term  rates  –  to  ease  financial  conditions  and  support  demand, 
recognizing that the IOER rate cannot fall below zero. While the mechanism is different, the 
basic approach is very similar to the way the Federal Reserve has behaved historically. 
Although  our  ability  to  pay  interest  on  excess  reserves  is  sufficient  to  retain  control  of 
monetary  policy,  it  is  not  bad  policy  to  have  both  a  “belt  and  suspenders”  in  place.  As  a 
result, we have developed means of draining reserves to provide reassurance that we will 
not – under any circumstance – lose control of monetary policy. These include reverse repo 
transactions  with  dealers  and other  counterparties,  auctions  of  term  deposits  for banks,  or 
securities sales from the Fed’s portfolio. 
A related concern is whether the Federal Reserve will be able to act sufficiently fast once it 
determines that it is time to raise the IOER. This concern reflects the view that the excess 
reserves sitting on banks’ balance sheets are essentially “dry tinder” that could quickly fuel 
excessive credit creation and put the Fed behind the curve in tightening monetary policy. 
In terms of imagery, this concern seems compelling – the banks sitting on piles of money that 
could be used to extend credit on a moment’s notice. However, this reasoning ignores a very 
important point. Banks have always had the ability to expand credit whenever they like. They 
didn’t need a pile of “dry tinder” in the form of excess reserves to do so. That is because the 
Federal  Reserve’s  standard  operating  procedure  for  several  decades  has  been  a 
commitment  to  supply  sufficient  reserves  to  keep  the  fed  funds  rate  at  its  target.  If  banks 
wanted  to  expand  credit  that  would  drive  up  the  demand  for  reserves,  the  Fed  would 
automatically meet that demand by supplying additional reserves as needed to maintain the 
fed funds rate at its target rate. In terms of the ability to expand credit rapidly, it makes no 
difference whether the banks have lots of excess reserves on their own balance sheets or 
can source whatever reserves they need from the fed funds market at the fed funds rate.3 
                                                 
2   The IOER rate and the federal funds rate are likely to track each other closely in most circumstances. Banks 
do  not  have any incentive to lend reserves in the fed  funds market at rates below  the IOER rate, and can 
arbitrage away any significant price gap that emerges from the activity of non-depository institutions that can 
buy  and  sell  federal  funds,  but  cannot  hold  reserves  at  the  Fed.  Thus,  through  the  IOER  rate,  the  Federal 
Reserve can effectively control the fed funds rate. 
Indeed,  even  the  opportunity  cost  of  making  the  loan  is  similar  in  both  instances.  A  bank  that  has  excess 
reserves and decides to extend credit forgoes the chance to earn the IOER on the money lent out. A bank that 
borrows reserves in the fed funds market in order to extend credit pays the fed funds rate in order to do so. 
The IOER and fed funds rate are likely to be similar. 
3  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
So we have the means to tighten monetary policy when the time comes, but do we have the 
will? I think there should be no doubt about this. It is well understood among all the members 
of the FOMC that allowing inflation to gain a foothold is a losing game with large costs and 
few, if any, benefits. 
In  this  regard,  some  have  argued  that  Fed  officials  might  be  reluctant  to  raise  short-term 
rates because such increases would squeeze the net interest margin on the Fed’s System 
Open Market Account (SOMA) portfolio. Although it is true that a rise in short-term interest 
rates would reduce the Fed’s net income from the extraordinary high levels seen in 2009 and 
2010,4 this will not play a significant role in the Fed’s monetary policy deliberations. 
Fed policy is driven by the objectives set out in the dual mandate, and the net income earned 
by  the  Fed  is  the  consequence  of  the  policy  choices  that  advance  those  objectives.  The 
Federal  Reserve’s  net  income  statement  does  not  drive  or  constrain  our  policy  actions.  In 
short, we act as a central bank, not an investment manager. 
It is also worth pointing out in passing that a failure to raise short-term interest rates at the 
appropriate moment based on our dual mandate objectives would also be a losing strategy 
with respect to net income. Inflation would climb, bond yields would rise and the Fed would 
ultimately  be  forced  to  raise  short-term  rates  more  aggressively,  or  to  sell  more  assets  at 
lower  prices  to  regain  control  of  inflation.  This  would  almost  certainly  result  in  larger 
reductions in net income than a timelier exit from the current stance of monetary policy. So 
what does this all imply for monetary policy? First, barring a sustained period of economic 
growth  so  strong  that  the  economy’s  substantial  excess  slack  is  quickly  exhausted  or  a 
noteworthy rise in inflation expectations, the outlook implies that short-term interest rates are 
likely to remain unusually low for “an extended period.” The economy can be allowed to grow 
rapidly for quite some time before there is a real risk that shrinking slack will result in a rise in 
underlying  inflation.  We  will  learn  more  as  we  go,  and,  as  always,  should  be  prepared  to 
adjust course in a timely manner if incoming information suggests a different strategy would 
better promote our objectives. 
Second,  the  Federal  Reserve  needs  to  continue  to  communicate  effectively  about  its 
objectives, the efficacy of the tools it has at its disposal to achieve those objectives, and the 
willingness  to  use  these  tools  as  necessary.  This  is  important  in  order  to  keep  inflation 
expectations  well-anchored.  If  inflation  expectations  were  to  become  unanchored  because 
Federal  Reserve  policymakers  failed  to  communicate  clearly,  this  would  be  a  self-inflicted 
wound that would make our pursuit of the dual mandate of full employment and price stability 
more  difficult.  If  we  consistently  and  effectively  communicate  our  objectives  and  our 
strategies, we can avoid this outcome. 
Thank you for your kind attention. I would be happy to take a few questions. 
                                                 
4   As a byproduct of actions taken to combat the crisis, the Fed generated record net income in 2009 and 2010, 
and remitted $125 billion to Treasury. In the early phase a significant part of this income came from liquidity 
programs. More recently, the main contributor has been net interest on the expanded SOMA portfolio. At this 
juncture, SOMA continues to generate abnormally high net income. As policy eventually normalizes and the 
cost of financing assets via interest on excess reserves goes up, the net interest margin on the SOMA assets 
will return to more normal levels. However, the net interest margin is unlikely to turn negative because roughly 
$950 billion of assets are – and have been for many years – funded by notes and coins in circulation, on which 
the Fed does not pay interest. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 1 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  9
Chart 2 
 10 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 3 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  11
Chart 4 
 12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 5 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  13
Chart 6 
 14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 7 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  15
Chart 8 
 16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 9 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  17
Chart 10 
 18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 11 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  19
Chart 12 
 20 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 13 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  21
Chart 14 
 22 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 15 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  23
Chart 16 
 24 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 17 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  25
Chart 18 
 26 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 19 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  27
Chart 20 
 28 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 21 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  29
Chart 22 
 30 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 23 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  31
Chart 24 
 32 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 25 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  33
Chart 26 
 34 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 27 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  35
Chart 28 
 36 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 29 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  37
Chart 30 
 38 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 31 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  39
