Masaaki  Shirakawa:  Japan’s  economy  after  the  great  earthquake  – 
rebuilding, revival, and further growth 
Speech by Mr Masaaki Shirakawa, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting held by the 
Naigai Josei Chousa Kai (Research Institute of Japan), Tokyo, 25 May 2011. 
 Introduction 
I am privileged to have the opportunity to speak before such a large audience today. 
Two  and  a  half  months  have  passed  since  the  Great  East  Japan  Earthquake,  but  many 
continue to face severe hardship, including those being forced to live at evacuation sites. I 
would like to offer my heartfelt sympathy to those who are suffering. At the same time, moves 
toward rebuilding life and infrastructure are under way in disaster areas, albeit gradually. At 
the beginning of May, the Diet approved the supplementary budget aimed at early rebuilding 
following the disaster. Discussions toward revival of the disaster areas are also under way. 
Moreover, discussions toward formulating growth strategies for Japan’s economy, which has 
been  the  great  challenge  since  even  before  the  earthquake,  have  also  been  regaining 
momentum.  Those  individual  efforts  and  discussions  are  important  and  linked  together. 
Today, I will first explain the current situation and near-term outlook for Japan’s economy. I 
will then share with you some of my ideas on the challenge Japan’s economy faces in each 
of the coming phases of rebuilding, revival, and further growth. 
I. 
The current situation and outlook for Japan’s economy 
Downward pressure on the economy by the earthquake disaster 
Let me start with the current state of Japan’s economy. From early 2011, Japan’s economy 
had  emerged  from  the  pause  since  autumn  2010.  The  earthquake  disaster  struck  the 
economy when it was about to regain recovery momentum. The earthquake, tsunami, and 
accident  at  the  nuclear  power  plant  have  changed  the  situation  significantly,  and  Japan’s 
economy is currently facing strong downward pressure. Let me note that industrial production 
for March decreased by 15 percent on a month-on-month basis, the largest one-month drop 
on record. The recent sharp and substantial economic plunge is similar to that following the 
failure  of  Lehman  Brothers  but  different  in  terms  of  its  mechanism:  the  recent  downward 
pressure  is  caused  by  a  supply-side  shock.  The  earthquake  and  tsunami  caused 
considerable  damage  to  social  capital  stock,  such  as  roads  and  ports,  as  well  as  private 
capital  stock,  such  as  factories  and  commercial  facilities,  in  a  wide  area  from  the  Tohoku 
region to the northern Kanto area. The destruction of factories led to disruptions in the supply 
chains of parts and materials, which affected production not only in disaster-stricken areas 
but  also  a  wide  range  of  non-affected  areas.  The  damage  to  power-generating  facilities 
constrained electricity supply mainly in the Kanto and Tohoku regions. These factors have 
resulted in a decline in the capacity for supplying goods and services in Japan’s economy as 
a whole. As a result, exports have decreased substantially and domestic demand has been 
declining.  It  should  be  noted,  however,  that  demand  itself  has  not  disappeared,  but  that  it 
could  not  be  realized  due  to  supply  constraints.  In  this  regard,  the  current  situation  is 
significantly different in nature from that which followed the failure of Lehman Brothers, when 
demand  both  at  home  and  abroad  “evaporated”  due  to  the  rapid  contraction  of  financial 
markets. There has been no significant change in the fundamental conditions that supported 
Japan’s economic recovery prior to the earthquake – namely, the expansion of markets for 
Japan’s exports on the back of robust growth in overseas economies. Therefore, the most 
vital  near-term  challenge  for  Japan’s  economy  is  to  resolve  supply  constraints  as  early  as 
possible, and this should be addressed with utmost efforts. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
At  the  same  time,  however,  the  supply-side  factor  is  not  the  sole  cause  of  downward 
pressure  on  the  economy.  Additional  downward  pressure  from  the  demand  side,  which  is 
partly  related  to  the  supply-side  shock,  is  also  contributing.  The  accident  at  the  nuclear 
power  plant  and  power  shortages  have  exerted  downward  pressure  on  economic  activity 
through a deterioration in business and household sentiment, as well as a declining number 
of  tourists  from  abroad.  Voluntary  restraint  by  consumers  spread  nationwide  immediately 
after  the  earthquake,  dampening  spending  particularly  for  services  such  as  tourism  and 
eating out, as well as for luxury goods. Even if the initial shock is brought about by supply 
constraints, if the sluggishness in production persists, there will be an increase in adverse 
effects on corporate profits and on employment and wages, thereby putting the brakes on 
business fixed investment and private consumption. 
In sum, the current downward pressure differs from the “evaporation”  of demand following 
the failure of Lehman Brothers. Nevertheless, it is necessary to carefully examine whether or 
not demand-side factors will exert downward pressure on the economy. 
The baseline scenario for the outlook 
Next, I will talk about the outlook for Japan’s economic activity. The Bank of Japan judges 
that  Japan’s  economy  for  the  time  being  is  likely  to  continue  facing  strong  downward 
pressure, mainly on the production side. But from the beginning of autumn 2011, supply-side 
constraints are likely to ease as the power shortage problem is mitigated amid the progress 
with  reconfiguration  of  supply  chains.  In  fact,  in  the  past  two  and  a  half  months  since  the 
earthquake, an increasing number of factories have made progress in restoration efforts and 
resumed  production.  Against  this  background,  some  firms  have  brought  forward  their 
originally  targeted  dates  to  resolve  supply  chain  disruptions.  As  for  consumer  sentiment, 
which deteriorated sharply immediately after the earthquake, voluntary restraint has recently 
eased  somewhat,  and  from  April  there  have  been  signs  of  recovery  in  sales  of  electrical 
appliances as well as sales at department stores. During the Golden Week holidays – the 
period from late April to early May that includes four national holidays – more than just a few 
tourist sites were crowded compared with the pessimistic forecast made ahead of this period. 
These  developments  suggest  that  Japan’s  economy  has  started  to  move  toward  recovery 
from the tumble immediately after the earthquake. Overseas economies have also continued 
to grow rapidly. According to the forecast by the International Monetary Fund, the growth rate 
of the global economy will be 4.4 percent in 2011 and 4.5 percent in 2012, surpassing the 
average rate of 4.0 percent for the ten years preceding the financial crisis. In this situation, 
Japan’s  exports  are  likely  to  start  recovering  as  supply-side  constraints  ease.  The 
replenishment of inventories, which was significantly reduced due to the disaster, will act as 
a factor to boost production, and demand for restoring capital stock will gradually increase. 
Therefore, in the second half of fiscal 2011, the sense of recovery will be somewhat more 
noticeable, although it will fall short of a V-shaped recovery. In fiscal 2012, Japan’s economy 
is projected to continue to realize relatively high growth because we will see a more effective 
utilization  of  the  transmission  mechanism  by  which  the  strength  in  exports  and  production 
feeds  through  into  income  and  spending,  and  because  rebuilding  demand  will  continue 
increasing. If expressed in numerical terms, the annual real GDP growth rate is projected to 
expand to 2.9 percent in fiscal 2012, after staying at a low 0.6 percent in fiscal 2011 due to 
the drop in the first half. 
Uncertainty regarding the outlook 
As I mentioned earlier, the Bank’s baseline scenario is that, in the second half of fiscal 2011, 
Japan’s  economy  will  recover  from  the  tumble  caused  by  the  earthquake  and  return  to  a 
moderate recovery path. However, the Bank fully recognizes that this outlook entails various 
uncertainties. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
First  of  all,  there  are  uncertainties  regarding  developments  in  overseas  economies  and 
international  commodity  prices.  There  continues  to  be  the  two-speed  pattern  of  overseas 
economies,  with  moderate  recovery  in  advanced  economies  and  very  strong  growth  in 
emerging economies. In the United States, balance-sheet adjustment pressure following the 
bursting  of  the  credit  bubble  –  such  as  a  decline  in  home  prices  and  excess  debt  in  the 
household sector – has continued to weigh on the economy. In Europe, concern about fiscal 
problems in some peripheral countries such as Greece has not been resolved. Meanwhile, in 
many fast-growing emerging economies, continued monetary tightening has not sufficiently 
calmed economic overheating and concern over inflation. This might cause another longer-
term  risk  of  more  volatile  fluctuations  in  economic  activity,  which  could  undermine 
sustainability in growth. Although our minds have been occupied with domestic events, we 
also need to pay careful attention to these developments in overseas economies. 
Having  said  that,  the  highest  degree  of  uncertainty  lies  in  the  effects  of  the  disaster  on 
Japan’s  economy.  It  is  particularly  important  to  consider  when  various  supply  constraints 
associated with the disaster will be removed. In terms of electricity, the supply and demand 
balance  is  expected  to  tighten  in  the  summer,  when  demand  peaks  due  to  the  use  of  air 
conditioners.  Various  measures  have  been  taken  to  weather  this  difficult  period:  a 
strengthening  of  supply  capacity  by  electric  power  companies;  the  use  of  in-house  power 
generation; and firms and households’ efforts to conserve electricity and to level out demand. 
As for supply chains, the situation has been improving. However, we should not forget the 
difficulty in making precise projections at this point regarding the prospect of electricity supply 
shortages  and  supply  chain  disruptions.  The  summer  demand  for  electricity  depends 
significantly  on  the  temperature.  Concern  over  electric  supply  might  be  long-lived  beyond 
summer  2011  depending  on  the  rate  of  operation  in  nuclear  power  plants  across  Japan, 
which  could  be  affected  by  the  recent  decision  to  shut  down  the  Hamaoka  nuclear  power 
plant  located  in  central  Japan.  Moreover,  the  pace  of  reconfiguration  of  supply  chains  will 
differ  across  industries  and  products.  It  might  take  time  for  consumer  sentiment  to  fully 
recover depending on the aftermath of the accident at the nuclear power plant and on the 
employment and income situation. 
To put it the other way around, if problems regarding supply constraints start to be resolved 
at a faster pace than expected, the economy could deviate upward from the projection. While 
there is a high degree of uncertainty about the prospect of supply constraints, in conducting 
monetary policy, the Bank considers it appropriate to pay more attention to downside risks 
for  the  time  being.  What  is  certain  is  that  the  most  important  challenge  to  eliminating 
downside  risks  is  to  remove  supply  constraints  as  early  as  possible.  On  this  point,  many 
firms have been making their utmost efforts to restore affected facilities, carry out production 
at  alternative  sites,  and  secure  alternative  suppliers.  Looking  at  worksites 
the 
manufacturing industry, various continued efforts and attempts have involved putting aside 
the  usual  rivalries;  for  example,  firms  in  the  same  industry  temporarily  covering  the 
production of disaster-stricken firms and several manufacturers of final products cooperating 
in  terms  of  sending  staff  to  parts  manufacturers  to  support  their  restoration  efforts.  The 
Japanese industry has proved its competitiveness in overcoming and addressing challenges 
in a flexible manner on many occasions. I hope that an early resolution of supply constraints 
will be enhanced by utilizing such “competitiveness at worksites,” or genbaryoku, in various 
areas.  Needless  to  say,  it  is  important  to  prevent  any  deterioration  in  sentiment  and 
heightening of risk aversion with a view to avoiding any additional decline in demand until 
supply constraints will be resolved. In this  regard, the Bank has been swiftly implementing 
various measures since immediately after the earthquake, which I will address later. 
in 
Price developments 
Next, I will talk about price developments. I have just mentioned that the recent decline in 
economic  activity  is  basically  caused  by  the  supply  shock.  Thus,  there  is  a  view  that  the 
decrease  in  supply  capacity  will  cause  a  tightening  of  the  supply  and  demand  balance, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
thereby potentially increasing inflationary pressure. However, as I said earlier, the disaster 
has also resulted in a decline in demand. Therefore, the near-term prospect of the aggregate 
supply and demand balance is not so obvious. Still, in the longer run, the year-on-year rate of 
change  in  the  consumer  price  index  (CPI)  is  expected  to  remain  slightly  positive,  as  the 
economy returns to a moderate recovery path from the second half of fiscal 2011. 
For this projection to materialize, it is important that medium- to long-term expected rates of 
inflation for businesses and households remain stable. On this point, as far as the results of 
economists’ surveys are concerned, no significant change has emerged in medium to long-
term  expected  rates  of  inflation.  Another  factor  that  affects  prices  is  import  costs.  In  this 
regard, developments in international commodity prices, such as prices of crude oil, grains, 
and nonferrous metals, are important. International commodity prices rose rapidly until spring 
2011 and have experienced some adjustment since the end of April. It is difficult to forecast 
the  short-term  fluctuations  of  market-determined  international  commodity  prices.  Thus,  in 
making  its  forecast,  the  Bank  assumed  that  such  prices  are  likely  to  continue  a  moderate 
uptrend  given  strong  growth  in  emerging  economies.  Expressing  the  outlook  in  numerical 
terms, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI is projected to be 0.7 percent both in fiscal 
2011 and 2012. 
If this projection materializes, the CPI for fiscal 2011 will become positive on a year-on-year 
basis for the first time in three years, although this requires a supplemental explanation. In 
August 2011, the Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications, which compiles the CPI, is 
scheduled to conduct the base-year change to the CPI, regularly conducted every five years. 
It has been pointed out that there is usually a technical upward bias in the CPI compilation – 
namely, a greater chance of having a somewhat higher inflation rate on a year-on-year basis 
in  the  period  immediately  before  the  revision  because  substantial  price  declines  in  goods 
such as personal computers and televisions are not sufficiently reflected. Thus, the rebasing 
is likely to cause the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI to be revised downward. 
Although there are some points that should be kept in mind, as described earlier, Japan’s 
economy is expected to return to a sustainable growth path with price stability in the longer 
run.  Having  said  that,  the  question  we  must  ask  ourselves  is:  to  what  kind  of  growth  path 
should  Japan’s  economy  return?  I  would  also  like  to  stress  the  significant  importance  of 
serious efforts to raise Japan’s economic growth rate in the medium to long term – beyond 
the cyclical economic recovery. 
Efforts to address medium- to long-term challenges 
II. 
Even before the earthquake, the great challenge for Japan’s economy was to raise its growth 
potential amid a rapidly aging population that is unprecedented in other countries. Now, the 
task of rebuilding and revival following the disaster is added to the list of challenges. In the 
meantime,  we  cannot  stop  ongoing  structural  changes  in  the  global  economy,  such  as 
economic  and  financial  globalization  as  well  as  emerging  economies  catching  up.  What  I 
would like to emphasize today is that, even when doing our utmost to overcome the disaster, 
we should not retreat from efforts to address the medium- to long-term challenges that have 
been  recognized  for  years.  Rather,  we  need  to  change  our  way  of  thinking  such  that  we 
regard the post-quake responses and measures, including the revival of the disaster areas, 
as a new starting point for the task of raising the growth potential of the economy. 
Efforts toward raising the growth potential of the economy 
A. 
The average growth rate of Japan’s economy fell substantially to around 1.5 percent in the 
1990s. In the 2000s, the average fell to barely 1 percent, partly due to the economic plunge 
triggered  by  the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers.  This  long-term  downtrend  in  the  growth  rates 
reflects  the  slowdown  in  the  productivity  growth  rate  from  the  1990s  and  the  accelerated 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
decline  in  the  working-age  population  from  the  early  2000s.  These  problems  need  to  be 
addressed in order to sustainably raise Japan’s economic growth rate. 
First,  given  that  the  decline  in  the  working-age  population  is  the  result  of  demographic 
dynamics,  it  is  not  possible  to  immediately  stop  this  long-term  trend.  Thus,  in  order  to 
revitalize the economy based on the current demographic trends, efforts to raise the share of 
working people – namely, the labor force participation rate – are essential. In this regard, of 
key importance is how to raise the labor force participation rate of the elderly and women, 
especially women in their 30s, whose participation rate is low compared with abroad. With 
regard to the participation rate of the elderly, large firms typically used to have a retirement 
age  of  55.  Upon  reaching  that  age,  the  remaining  average  life  expectancy,  which  was 
20 years  for  men  and  24  years  for  women  at  the  beginning  of  the  1970s  –  the  last  high-
growth era – has risen to 27 years for men and 33 years for women, an increase of around 
10 years over the past 40 years. Although their working patterns are not exactly the same as 
those of younger generations, it is essential that the elderly join the workforce by making use 
of  their  experience.  In  order  to  raise  the  labor  force  participation  rate,  it  is  necessary  to 
change the way of thinking within firms and society as a whole, such that workers are able to 
have more flexible working patterns depending on their lifestyles and sense of values. 
Second, it is also essential to raise the productivity growth rate. “Raising productivity” is often 
perceived  as  pursuing  more  efficient  management  through  a  reduction  in  personnel  and 
equipment. It is true that, in the case of Japan, firms have a tendency to enhance productivity 
through intensive cost reductions. However, such “streamlining” alone in many cases does 
not  lead  to  the  enhancement  of  productivity  for  the  economy;  rather,  it  might  end  up  in 
contracted  equilibrium.  Raising  productivity  that  would  contribute  to  economic  growth  is 
nothing more than raising individual persons’ capacities for generating value-added, thereby 
increasing  the  size  of  the  economy  as  a  whole.  To  this  end,  of  importance  are  efforts  to 
discover  new  demand  and  create  new  markets  both  at  home  and  abroad  –  namely, 
embracing the role of innovation. In what follows, I will talk about these challenges in terms of 
both global and domestic demand, and then the demand directly related to the earthquake 
disaster. 
Capturing global demand 
In order to raise the productivity and growth potential of Japan’s economy, even in this tough 
situation  after  the  earthquake,  it  is  important  to  actively  capture  fast-growing  demand  in 
overseas  markets  by  adjusting  to  accelerating  globalization.  Since  the  earthquake,  mainly 
because  of  the  effects  of  the  accident  at  the  nuclear  power  plant,  Japan’s  reputation  for 
being  “safe  and  secure”  has  been  undermined;  as  a  result,  the  number  of  visitors  from 
abroad have fallen substantially across the country and exports of food have been adversely 
affected.  This  underscored  the  need  to  accurately  and  actively  provide  information  on 
Japan’s situation, thereby dissuading from “passing on Japan,” which might otherwise occur 
on  the  basis  of  misunderstanding  and  rumors.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  important  to  further 
increase  the  added  value  of  Japanese  goods  and  services  by  responding  to  the  needs  of 
foreign customers in a flexible manner. 
Before  the  earthquake,  the  number  of  tourists  from  Asia  increased  by  three  times  in 
10 years,  in  what  could  almost  be  called  a  “Japan  Boom.”  The  disaster  has  ruined  many 
factories  but  not  Japan’s  sophisticated  technologies.  The  “soft  power”  that  has  supported 
Japanese  society  is  still  there,  as  epitomized  by  good  public  safety,  reliable  business 
operations,  and  personalized  and  courteous  customer  service.  By  making  use  of  this 
strength,  if  efforts  continue  to  be  made  to  polish  the  attractiveness  of  Japan’s  goods  and 
services, Japanese brands will see a revival and be viewed as more attractive with resolution 
of the nuclear power plant problems and the passing of time since the earthquake. 
It  is  a  cause  for  concern  that  the  disaster  might  affect  Japanese  firms’  strategies  for  their 
overseas production network and foreign firms’ policies for procuring parts. Specifically, the 
possibility has been pointed out that disruptions to supply chains and power shortages may 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
accelerate Japanese firms’ shift to overseas production. Some foreign firms have started to 
replace  parts  and  materials  obtained  from  Japan  with  products  made  abroad.  There  is  a 
possibility  that  this  will  not  be  a  temporary  emergency  measure  and  thus  result  in  a 
permanent decline in the ratio of procurement from Japan. However, from a different point of 
view,  the  disaster  has  reconfirmed  that  Japan’s  high-end  parts  and  materials  occupy 
irreplaceable  positions  within  worldwide  manufacturing,  especially 
the  areas  of 
automobiles  and  electronics.  Japanese  manufacturers  have  been  increasing  the  ratio  of 
overseas production in the long run while creating new technologies and products in Japan 
that other countries cannot easily imitate. This process is not the so-called hollowing-out of 
Japan’s manufacturing base, but rather product differentiation or a more advanced division of 
labor across the national border. Since emerging economies are becoming more competitive 
and  sophisticated,  the  only  way  Japan  can  sustain  itself  in  the  global  economy  is  by 
continuing to strengthen efforts to generate products and services that are always one step 
ahead.  So  long  as  Japanese  firms  maintain  their  fundamental  strength,  the  global  supply 
chains will be reconfigured, with manufacturing within Japan as the central core. Moreover, in 
order  to  provide  a  favorable  environment  in  which  Japanese  firms  and  industries  prosper 
together with the global economy, it is important to steadily expand the framework for free 
trade agreements and economic partnership agreements. 
in 
Exploring new domestic markets 
Next, I would like to emphasize the need to explore new domestic markets. I mentioned the 
decline in the working-age population as one of the factors behind the decrease in Japan’s 
economic  growth  rate.  At  the  same  time,  however,  Japan’s  economy  has  been  faced  with 
chronic excess employment, and developments in wages and prices have been weak for a 
protracted period. This fact suggests that simply blaming the decreasing workforce numbers 
due  to  the  aging  of  the  population  as  the  cause  of  the  slowdown  in  Japan’s  growth  rate 
misses the point. The structural cause of slow growth in Japan is that firms and industries 
have  failed  to  recognize  changes  in  the  content  of  the  potential  demand  driven  by 
demographic  dynamics.  The  other  side  of  the  coin  is  that,  once  the  existing  markets  for 
goods and services mature and fall into excess supply, this situation tends to persist, and this 
has  become  a  factor  responsible  for  generating  excess  employment  and  deflationary 
pressure.  The  demographic  dynamics  of  a  declining  working-age  population  itself  is  not  a 
direct  cause  of  a  decline  in  the  economic  growth  rate;  rather,  it  is  more  attributable  to 
economic  and  social  systems  that  have  failed  to  appropriately  adapt  to  such  demographic 
changes. 
The decline in the working-age population also represents the decline in the population that 
accounts for the bulk of consumption. This will act as a factor to shrink the domestic market, 
mainly the market targeting families, on the demand side. In this situation, without capturing 
new demand arising from the aging of the population, the domestic market would shrink as a 
whole.  The  desire  to  make  life  more  comfortable  is  constant  regardless  of  age.  An 
increasingly aging population should be creating new potential demand across a wide range 
of areas such as health and nursing care, tourism, leisure, and cultural activity. The growth 
areas are not limited to global demand. If potential demand is carefully examined, there are 
also  many  seeds  for  growth  in  the  domestic  market.  Of  course,  in  order  to  explore  new 
demand, it is essential to have a strongly motivated management and financial infrastructure 
that  enables  risk  taking.  In  this  regard,  determination  and  efforts  by  the  management  of 
individual firms to take up such challenges is the starting point for everything. At the same 
time,  it  is  important  to  have  a  business  environment  that  supports  such  forward-looking 
corporate  activity,  and  to  this  end,  collaborated  efforts  by  all  the  concerned  parties  in  the 
country are needed. The aging population is not the only key area with regard to exploring 
new  markets.  Given  the  problems  in  electricity  power  supply  after  the  earthquake, 
technological  innovation  in  the  energy  area  is  promising  as  a  way  to  increase  the  growth 
potential of Japan’s economy. Having nurtured sophisticated technologies for years, Japan is 
well placed to explore business opportunities by pursuing the following three goals together: 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
“saving energy” to conserve energy through the wider use of LED lighting; “creating energy” 
through the use of solar power; and “storing energy” through the efficient storage of energy 
through improvements in battery storage. Constraints from natural resources and energy is 
the big challenge that the global economy faces in the long run, and becoming a forerunner 
in this area will be helpful in capturing global demand going forward. 
Innovations to rebuilding and disaster prevention 
In  order  to  raise  the  growth  potential  of  Japan’s  economy,  the  strength  to  develop  new 
markets  by  discovering  potential  demand  is  required.  This  also  applies  to  the  rebuilding 
process in the disaster areas, which will make further progress going forward. The Tohoku 
and northern Kanto areas are endowed with rich resources for agriculture and fishery as well 
as  tourism.  These  areas  also  have  a  solid  foundation  in  academic  research  and 
manufacturing,  indicating  considerable  potential  for  responding  to  prospective  demand. 
Rebuilding of the disaster areas involves the process of reconfiguring places for industries 
and  employment  in  accordance  with  local  peoples’  needs,  by  making  use  of  the  areas’ 
advantages and competitiveness. Needless to say, the first priority is to return the people in 
the affected areas to safe and comfortable lives as soon as possible. After completing such 
rebuilding of lives, even if it takes some time, the disaster areas will definitely move forward 
into  the  next  phase,  in  which  measures  with  new  innovative  ideas  for  regenerating  the 
regional economy will be implemented. 
Moreover,  the  earthquake  disaster  has  brought  a  renewed  recognition  that  the  Japanese 
Islands always hold the inherent risk of earthquakes and tsunami. Not only the disaster areas 
but  also  Japan  as  a  whole  need  to  make  efforts  to  improve  both  physical  and  human 
infrastructures, in order to make the country more resistant to natural disasters. There are 
many kinds of potential demand, and in order to meet such demand, innovation again plays 
an important role. 
Efforts toward sustaining fiscal balance 
B. 
I have stressed the importance of addressing the challenge of raising the medium- to long-
term growth potential of the economy, which is closely related to another challenge: efforts 
toward sustaining fiscal balance. As the aging of the population will advance further, pension 
payments and the costs of health and nursing care are projected to increase substantially. In 
this situation, allowing the fiscal deficit to perpetuate itself would result in the uncontrollable 
expansion  of  government  debt  outstanding,  which  is  not  sustainable.  Once  concern  about 
fiscal sustainability heightens, this could impair the smooth issuance of government bonds. 
Moreover,  if  more  people  expect  that  a  greater  burden  on  the  working-age  population  is 
inevitable, the economy could fall into a vicious circle in which more cautious spending by 
firms  and  households  leads  to  a  further  economic  downturn  and  a  deterioration  in  fiscal 
conditions. 
As just described, the two challenges of raising the growth potential and fiscal consolidation 
are not independent but inextricably linked. One challenge should not be given priority over 
the other, but rather these must be addressed together. The large fiscal deficit has continued 
since the 1990s on the back of successive fiscal stimulus measures and the rise in social 
security  costs,  and  addressing  fiscal  consolidation  was  an  urgent  task  even  before  the 
earthquake. Fiscal measures for the rebuilding and revival of the disaster areas will definitely 
push up fiscal spending further even though it is still difficult to make an accurate estimate. 
The  expected  fiscal  deterioration  in  the  short  run  makes  it  all  the  more  important  for  the 
government to present a more definite path toward medium- to long-term fiscal consolidation. 
Fortunately, long-term interest rates in Japan remain stable at a low level on an international 
comparison. With regard to the issuance market for government securities, these have been 
issued  quite  smoothly  since  the  earthquake.  There  are  two  reasons  why  the  market  for 
government securities remains stable in this manner. The first is with regard to the aggregate 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
savings and investment balance. That is, in view of the continuing net saving position in the 
household and corporate sectors, and given that financial institutions are maintaining a solid 
capital  base,  there  is  a  sufficient  amount  of  domestic  funds  to  purchase  government 
securities  for  the  moment.  The  second  reason  concerns  confidence  in  future  policy 
management.  As  for  fiscal  policies,  despite  the  significant  deterioration  in  fiscal  balance, 
market  participants  still  expect  that  necessary  steps  will  ultimately  be  taken  to  restore  the 
balance.  Regarding  monetary  policies,  there  is  confidence  that  monetary  policies  are 
conducted  with  the  objective  to  achieve  sustainable  economic  growth  with  price  stability. 
Considering the severity of fiscal conditions, none other than the confidence I just described 
is supporting the stability in the government securities market. People tend to believe without 
doubt that what has continued over a long period will stay as it is, but we should be mindful 
of  the  fact  that  confidence  in  the  stability  in  the  government  securities  market  is  only 
maintained by people’s will to adopt such a stance. Therefore, it is essential to take concrete 
steps  toward  raising  the  growth  potential  and  fiscal  consideration  when  stability  in  the 
government securities markets is maintained. Enhancement of market stability through these 
efforts is also likely to contribute to promoting a supportive environment for the rebuilding and 
revival following the disaster. 
Given the already enormous fiscal deficit, underwriting of government securities by the Bank 
of  Japan  is  occasionally  discussed  as  an  option  for  funding  new  government  spending. 
However,  it  should  be  noted  that  there  is  no  magic  wand  that  creates  something  from 
nothing. Whether government securities are underwritten by the central bank or purchased 
by private financial institutions in the market, there is no change to the big picture in which 
government securities are issued using firms and households’ savings as a resource. Rather, 
the  central  bank’s  underwriting  of  government  securities  often  comes  with  a  serious  side 
effect  of  weakening  fiscal  discipline.  If  the  government  depends  on  the  central  bank’s 
underwriting and ignores the market’s risk assessment function, the government debt could 
eventually expand to a level beyond the taxpayers’ funding capacity. After the earthquake, 
there has been increasing public interest in the historical episode of the Bank’s underwriting 
of government securities in the 1930s, when Mr. Takahashi was the Minister of Finance. This 
started as “temporal” but it soon became impossible to put a brake on the increase in the 
amount of underwriting and the associated expansion of currency issuance, which ultimately 
resulted  in  serious  inflation.  We  need  to  reflect  on  this  history.  There  are  some 
counterarguments  that,  if  underwriting  creates  such  a  problem,  the  Bank  could  purchase 
government  securities  from  the  market  instead.  The  Bank  currently  purchases  a  large 
amount of government securities, but its purpose is to stably provide the markets with funds 
corresponding to increasing demand for banknotes, in association with economic growth. If 
the central bank’s purchases of government securities are considered to be conducted with 
the aim of facilitating government financing beyond its original purpose, this will cause the 
same problem as underwriting. 
The Bank of Japan’s response 
III. 
Lastly, let me explain the Bank’s response following the earthquake. A guiding principle for a 
central  bank’s  actions  after  a  major  disaster  such  as  we  suffered  is  very  clear.  That  is,  to 
maintain the functioning of payment and settlement systems as well as ensure the stability of 
financial markets. In other words, to prevent financial shock from developing into economic 
instability. 
The initial task the Bank worked on following the earthquake was to maintain the functioning 
of  settlement  and  financial  systems,  which  are  the  basis  of  people’s  lives  and  economic 
activity. At the time of a crisis, the most important responsibility for a central bank is to firmly 
secure the financial infrastructures. Specifically, the Bank did its utmost to provide cash to 
meet the needs in the disaster areas through its branches and offices in Sendai, Fukushima, 
and Morioka. In the week after the earthquake, the Bank provided 310 billion yen in cash to 
the  Tohoku  region,  about  three  times  more  than  in  the  same  period  last  year.  Meanwhile, 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Japan’s  major  payment  and  settlement  systems,  including  the  Bank  of  Japan  Financial 
Network  System,  or  BOJ-NET,  have  maintained  stable  operations.  Needless  to  say,  the 
Bank’s  actions  alone  could  not  secure  the  smooth  operation  of  payment  and  settlement 
systems. Such a level of operation became possible because many of the parties involved, 
including  private  financial  institutions,  have  made  thorough  preparations  for  business 
continuity  risks  in  normal  times.  Despite  devastating  damage  to  their  offices,  financial 
institutions in the disaster areas have maintained or resumed business operations at teller 
windows  through  strenuous  efforts,  by  utilizing  temporary  offices  and  also  mobile  ones.  I 
have deep respect for and feel very reassured about such efforts by those involved. 
Second, the Bank worked to ensure stability in the financial markets. In the money market 
where financial institutions exchange funds, in order to avoid a heightening of anxiety, the 
Bank  provided  ample  funds  sufficient  to  meet  demand  over  a  period  of  successive  days 
since the earthquake. In particular, on March 14, the first business day after the disaster, the 
Bank provided a total of 21.8 trillion yen in funds. This is almost three times as much as the 
8.1 trillion yen that marked the largest daily funds provision, following the failure of Lehman 
Brothers. 
Third, the Bank further strengthened monetary easing. Specifically, on the next business day 
after  the  earthquake,  the  Bank  decided  to  increase  the  amount  of  the  Asset  Purchase 
Program,  mainly  of  purchases  of  risk  assets  –  such  as  corporate  bonds,  exchange-traded 
funds  (ETFs),  and  Japan  real  estate  investment  trusts  (J-REITs)  –  by  about  5  trillion  yen. 
Immediately after the earthquake, it was not possible to confirm an economic downturn from 
the macro data; nevertheless, the Bank decided to strengthen monetary easing because it 
was already fully aware at that time of downside risks to future developments in the economy 
and  considered  it  necessary  to  respond  to  such  risks  in  a  forward-looking  manner.  At 
present,  the  Bank  is  steadily  proceeding  with  the  increase  in  asset  purchases  while  also 
examining the effects of such increase. 
Fourth,  the  Bank  started  to  conduct  the  funds-supplying  operation  to  support  financial 
institutions  in  disaster  areas.  The  Bank  found  it  necessary  to  financially  support  initial 
response efforts by financial institutions in the disaster areas even in the very early phase 
before  demand  for  funds  for  the  purpose  of  rebuilding  and  revival  becomes  full-fledged. 
Specifically, the Bank extends loans to financial institutions that have business offices in the 
disaster areas with one-year funds at the very low interest rate of 0.1 percent per annum. 
The total amount of loans is 1 trillion yen and new applications for loans can be accepted 
until the end of October 2011. For the first round of funds provisioning, about 74 billion yen in 
loans was applied, and the Bank extended these loans two days ago, on May 23. In June 
2010,  the  Bank  introduced  the  fund-provisioning  measure  to  support  strengthening  the 
foundations for economic growth, and it has already conducted disbursements three times. 
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  the  challenge  of  revival  following  the  earthquake  disaster  partly 
overlaps  with  the  longstanding  challenge  Japan’s  economy  faces  –  namely,  of  raising  the 
growth  potential.  Going  forward,  as  rebuilding  efforts  make  further  progress,  the  role 
expected of a central bank is to indirectly support financial institutions’ activities. The Bank 
will examine how to respond effectively as the central bank while monitoring how demand for 
rebuilding funds emerges and how such demand is met by private financial institutions and 
support from the government. 
Lastly,  let  me  mention  that  the  Bank  has  been  working  hard  to  exchange  damaged 
banknotes and coins. If people in the disaster areas have banknotes and coins that are torn 
or soiled, they can be exchanged for new ones based on criteria specified by law. The Bank 
has been increasing the staff at teller windows at its branches, in the hopes that this will be of 
some help in restoring the economy in the disaster areas. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
Concluding remarks 
Today, I have explained the current situation and near-term outlook for Japan’s economy. I 
have also talked about the challenge Japan’s economy faces in each of the coming phases 
of rebuilding, revival, and further growth. The earthquake suddenly threw Japan into a crisis. 
Looking  back,  whenever  faced  with  severe  difficulties  such  as  postwar  hardship  and  oil 
shocks, the Japanese people have overcome them by tackling problems with a strong sense 
of  urgency.  History  has  proved  that  the  Japanese  people  have  an  outstanding  ability  to 
overcome problems in the face of big shocks and associated crises. On the other hand, they 
do not seem to be particularly good at dealing with problems that gradually become worse 
over  a  protracted  period,  even  though  their  effects  on  the  economy  are  larger  than  the 
sudden shocks. This was the case with the non-performing loan problem in the 1990s. Even 
for  the  predictable  problem  of  a  change  in  demographic  dynamics,  Japan’s  economy  still 
faces many challenges, including the reform of social security systems. 
Due  to  the  disaster,  it  is  no  longer  possible  to  postpone  the  task  of  addressing  the 
longstanding  challenge  of  stopping  the  long-term  downtrend  in  the  growth  potential  of  the 
economy  and  then  revitalizing  growth  into  the  future.  For  the  sake  of  our  children  and 
grandchildren, we have a great responsibility to pave the way for a bright future for Japan’s 
economy. Whether future generations will be able to look back at 2011 as a starting point for 
the renewed growth of Japan’s economy depends on our determination in the coming few 
years. The Bank, while firmly maintaining confidence in the currency, will continue to make 
its utmost contribution as the central bank.  
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
