Darmin Nasution: Strengthening stability towards sustainable growth – a 
transformation challenge 
Speech by Dr Darmin Nasution, Governor of Bank Indonesia, at the Bankers’ Dinner 2011, 
Jakarta, 21 January 2011. 
 Honorable Ministers and Members of Parliament, 
Prominent Bankers, 
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Assalamu’alaikum Wr. Wb, 
Good evening and may God bless us all,  
1.  
2.  
4.  
5.  
6.  
Distinguished guests, ladies, and gentlemen, 
3.  
In this beautiful evening, I would like to invite all of us to jointly extend our gratitude 
to God Almighty for the opportunity to meet in such wonderful settings at the Annual 
Bankers’ Dinner 2011. 
Although slightly belated, please allow me on behalf of all members of the Board of 
Governors of Bank Indonesia, to wish you a Happy New Year 2011. We hope this 
new year will be the year of our great achievement. 
We have just passed the global economic crisis 2008/2009 and if I may construe our 
economy in the period of 2010–2011 will be in the stage of transformation to a new 
era,  shifting  from  a  recovery  phase  towards  a  sustainable  growth.  Our  journey 
during the course of transformation stage, however, would not be an easy one. 
As the first line of defence, Bank Indonesia always puts a prudent and consistent 
management  of  monetary  and  banking  policies  as  a  priority.  Nevertheless,  this 
prudence  and  carefulness  would  not  be  enough.  It  seems  that  the  risks  and 
challenges after the crash of 2008/2009 will be as tough as what we have pursued 
in the midst of crisis. The risks and challenges ahead are much more diverse and 
complex with global economic policy constellation tending to escalate. 
Thus, our transformation process towards a sustainable growth inevitably needs a 
new  mindset  and  approach.  To  put  things  in  the  context,  let  me  recite  Einstein’s 
observation  that  “The  whole  of  science  is  nothing  more  than  a  refinement  of 
everyday  thinking.”  This  statement  seems  to  apply  to  our  state  of  affairs.  The 
effectiveness  of  a  particular  policy  will  always  diminish  and  render  obsolete  along 
the  way,  and  therefore  it  should  be  evaluated,  aligned  and  even  modified  without 
sacrificing its main principles. 
In a very dynamic world and in the face of uncertainty with all of its possible risks, 
our  creativity  and  ability  to  explore  possibilities  through  simulation  will  be  tested. 
Indeed, policy makers cannot rely on a single policy instrument, they have to create 
a multi-front policy and formulate an accurate mix which could provide an optimum 
trade-off.  Decisive  actions  and  top-down  approach  sometimes  are  required  when 
complexity and uncertainty are on the rise.  
Distinguished guests, ladies, and gentlemen, 
7.  
In the beginning of 2011, we should be gratitude that we have gone through all of 
the challenges in 2010 with a number of noted achievements. Nevertheless, a series 
of concerns which has bearing on economic and financial performance remains. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
8.  
9.  
10.  
11.  
In the past two years Indonesia was among a few Asian countries which consistently 
reached  positive  economic  growth.  In  the  midst  of  financial  crisis,  Indonesia  was 
able to grow 4.5% in 2009, and in 2010 our economy has expanded even higher by 
achieving a 6.0% growth. 
The  structure  of  growth  is  now  relatively  more  broad-based.  Although  the 
contribution of private consumption is still dominant, the contribution of investment to 
growth began to pick up by 2.0%. The performance of export was also significant, 
contributing a 5.7% growth. 
On the other hand, CPI inflation reached 6.96% in 2010, predominantly pushed by 
the high pressure of food prices at year end. Such increase of food prices is a global 
phenomenon,  and  it  has  generated  inflation  pressures  in  a  number  of  countries. 
Nevertheless,  the  pressure  on  core  inflation  was  still  manageable,  recorded  at 
4.28%,  due  to  rupiah  appreciation  and  vigorous  economic  capacity  to  respond  to 
rising consumption pressure. 
We  also  recognized  that  the  upward  trend  of  consumption  and  investment  has 
brought on high rate of import activities. The rise of import activities was still met by 
adequate  export  revenues  hence could  keep a  net  surplus  on  Indonesia’s  current 
account balance amounting to USD 6.2 billion or 0.9% of GDP. 
Distinguished guests, ladies, and gentlemen, 
12.  
We have all witnessed how many countries have undergone severe circumstances 
during  2008/2009  crisis  and  we  have  all  witnessed  how  our  economy  has 
remarkable  resilience  during  the  crisis.  Apparently,  it  has  inspired  global  portfolio 
managers of a new economic power in Asia aside from China and India which has a 
huge market potential, solid economic fundamental, and attractive yields and capital 
gains. 
Indonesian financial market was perceived as a magnet which attracted abundant 
global  liquidity.  We  saw  the  surge  of  capital  inflows  into  the  country,  mainly  to 
several  portfolio  instruments  such  as  government  debt  securities  (SUN),  Bank 
Indonesia  Certificate  (SBI),  and  equities.  In  total,  inflow  of  portfolio  investment  to 
Indonesia has reached USD 15.2 billions during 2010. 
A  better  prospect  and  resilience  of  our  economy  also  attracted  foreign  direct 
investors,  though  still  limited  to  resource-based  sectors  such  as  mining.  This  was 
evident  from  the  foreign  direct  investment  which  reached  USD  12.6  billions, 
increasing threefold from 2009 which was recorded at USD 4.9 billions.  
Indonesia’s  balance  of  payments  reached  a  surplus  of  around  USD  30  billions  in 
2010. International reserves also posted an increase as it reached USD 96.2 billions 
or  grew  45.5%  higher  than  2009,  equivalent  to  7.1  months  of  import  and  the 
repayment of short-term government debts due. 
A  solid  balance  of  payments  and  increased  international  reserves  has  put 
Indonesia’s  external  liquidity  position  on  a  stronger  footing.  Furthermore,  a 
decreasing ratio of government debt to GDP (29.5% of GDP as of October 2010) 
provides further contribution to the robustness of Indonesia’s external sector. 
We  believe  that  stronger  performance  and  resilience  of  the  external  sector  was 
among  the  reason  behind  the  recent  improvement  of  our  sovereign  ratings.  I  am 
optimistic that now we are on the way to investment grade. The primary obstacles to 
achieve  investment  grade  mainly  relates  to  infrastructure  development,  which  I 
believe  is  a  task  that  must  be  resolved  together.  Issues  on  infrastructure 
development have been discussed numerously  and policy recommendations have 
been formulated as well. It is time now to consistently implement them. 
13.  
14.  
15.  
16.  
17.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
18.  
19.  
A surplus balance of payments was also reflected by a relatively stable rupiah. In 
2010,  rupiah  strengthened  4.2%,  in  a  range  that  we  view  is  quite  ideal  and 
consistent with the macroeconomic and business environment. 
Increased economic activity during the course of 2010 was also supported by the 
performance  of  banking  sector  which  was  reflected  in  improving  intermediation 
function and stability of the sector. This was evident from several aspects such as 
credit expansion which reached 22.8% in 2010, a relatively high capital adequacy 
ratio  (CAR),  and  a  steady  low  gross  non-performing  loan  (NPL)  which  was  kept 
under  5%.  Overall,  resilience  of  domestic  financial  market  was  improving.  The 
escalated debt crisis in Europe which peaked in May and November 2010 only put 
temporary pressure on the domestic market. 
Distinguished guests, ladies, and gentlemen,  
20.  
All  of  the  achievements  which  I  have  mentioned  are  the  fruits  of  our  hard  work, 
including the banking community. Those achievements are much more appreciated 
and  cherished  since  they  were  achieved  in  the  midst  of  global  uncertainty  and 
calamity.  
In this opportunity, allow me to address Bank Indonesia’s policy responses in 2010 
in  preserving  macroeconomic  and  financial  system  stability.  In  accordance  with 
tonight’s theme, I believe that strengthened stability will support the transformation 
process of our economy in the aftermath of the global financial crisis from a recovery 
stage to a more sustainable growth.  
The  way  Bank  Indonesia  formulates  policy  responses  is  indeed  a  meticulous 
process  involving  deep  internal  discussion.  This  was  undeniable  since  the  threats 
and challenges in 2010 was so diverse and unpredictable creating complexity in the 
policy making process.  
In general, there are three challenges in 2010 which will persist in the future. First, 
the challenge of global economic imbalance. Two years after the crisis, the global 
economy  underwent  two  speeds  of  recovery  in  which  the  recovery  in  emerging 
markets  is  more  rapid  than  that  in  advanced  economies.  To  ensure  durability  of 
recovery, policy makers in developed countries rely on accommodative policies. On 
the  other  hand,  policy  makers  in  emerging  markets  have  to  deal  with  economic 
overheating. We may say that almost all emerging markets have undergone policy 
normalization in 2010, some countries even have shifted to tightening mode. 
Second,  challenges  associated  with  global  capital  mobility  and  currency  war.  The 
differences of economic cycles and policy stances between developed countries and 
emerging markets unfortunately have led to unfavorable consequences for emerging 
market. This is evident in the context of tidal wave of capital inflows into emerging 
markets including Indonesia. The surge of capital inflows bring about complexities of 
macroeconomic policy management to emerging market, including Indonesia, since 
it has bearing on currency appreciation pressure, asset bubble risks, and financial 
fragility following capital reversal. 
Policy  responses  by  way  of  foreign  exchange  intervention  and  managing  capital 
flows  in  several  emerging  market  have  generated  different  appreciation  pressures 
among  countries.  In  the  mean  time,  since  keeping  large  stock  of  international 
reserves is deemed too costly, emerging markets tend to put their reserves in other 
emerging markets. This situation indeed entails a significant negative externality in 
the emerging markets region. Hence, a policy coordination in the multilateral level is 
necessary to avoid negative externality of individual country policy response. 
Third,  challenges  related  to  domestic  demand  and  inflationary  pressure.  Global 
financial  crisis  2008/2009  has  deteriorated  inter  and  intra-regional  trade  which 
prompted many countries to focus on promoting domestic demand. However, in the 
21.  
22.  
23.  
24.  
25.  
26.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
27.  
context  of  Indonesia,  relying  solely  on  domestic  demand  has  two  significant 
implications. 
Firstly,  a  high  domestic  demand  may  generate  inflation  since  supply  side  is  quite 
less flexible to respond to accelerated demand. Secondly, a high domestic demand 
may  accelerate  import  even  faster  since  import  content  in  our  industry  is  still 
perceived high. This situation will bring about decreasing current account surplus or 
even  a  deficit.  Since  the  ratio  of  short-term  capital  to  total  capital  inflows  is  quite 
high, the risk of current account deficit should be monitored closely. 
Distinguished guests, ladies, and gentlemen, 
28.  
On that note, a number of policy mix of monetary and macroprudential instruments 
have been implemented during 2010 to mitigate the global and domestic risks. In the 
midst  of  surging  capital  inflows  and  abundant  excess  liquidity,  efforts  to  combat 
inflationary pressure cannot solely rely on conventional policy instruments such as 
the interest rate. Increasing interest rate may attract even more capital inflows. It is 
for this reason, a mix of policy instruments is needed. 
The  policy  mix  implemented  is  intended  to  address  the  challenge  of  maintaining 
external  and  internal  economic  stability.  Achieving  external  stability  means, 
maintaining strong and sustainable balance of payment, meanwhile internal stability 
implies attaining low and stable inflation to support sustainable economic growth. 
To  maintain  external  stability,  a  policy  mix  is  aimed  at  exchange  rate  stabilization 
and  capital  flows  management  through  macro  prudential  policies.  In  the  midst  of 
surging capital inflows and appreciation pressures, exchange rate stabilization policy 
through  intervention  is  maintained  to  minimize  the  exchange  rate  volatility,  taking 
into  consideration  the  direction  and  movement  of  exchange  rates  in  the  region. 
Given  the  complexity  of  relying  only  on  intervention,  macroprudential  policies  are 
also  pursued.  Since  June  2010,  Bank  Indonesia  has  started  to  implement 
macroprudential policies with the imposing of the one-month-holding-period (OMHP) 
for  SBI  buyers.  This  regulation  requires  SBI  buyers  to  hold  their  holdings  for  one 
month before selling them to other parties. I view this policy very useful in preventing 
large and sudden capital outflows originating from SBI transactions such that it can 
manage to reduce exchange rate volatility. The scope, timing and sequencing of the 
policy  mix  are  based  on  the  consistency  of  the  exchange  rate  to  macroeconomic 
target and the impact of excess liquidity resulting from exchange rate stabilization on 
monetary operation. 
Meanwhile, to sustain internal stability a policy mix is introduced to maintain price 
stability  and  appropriately  manage  domestic  demand.  Measures  taken  include 
among others imposing a level of interest rate in combination with macroprudential 
measure  to  manage  excess  liquidity.  This  is  done  through  increasing  Minimum 
Reserve Requirement. The scope, sequencing and timing of the policy mix took into 
consideration inflation and macroeconomic projections, the current excess liquidity 
(including the impact of foreign exchange intervention and fiscal expansion), and the 
cost of monetary operation.  
We continue to calibrate the mix of policy measures taken to strike an optimal trade 
off  between  various  macroeconomic  targets.  Bank  Indonesia  also  maintains  on 
going coordination with the government especially to minimize the impact of volatile 
foods and administered prices inflation on the economy.  
29.  
30.  
31.  
32.  
Distinguished guests, ladies, and gentlemen,  
33.  
In  the  short  run,  I  believe  the  opportunity  for  higher  economic  growth  is  still  very 
much  wide  open.  Bank  Indonesia  projects  economic  growth  in  2011  to  reach  the 
range  of  6.0%–6.5%,  and  increasing  to  6,1%–6,6%  in  2012.  Investment  which 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
34.  
35.  
began  to  improve  since  2010  is  expected  to  continue  its growth  hence  creating  a 
more balanced economic growth structure.  
Higher growth in 2011 is also supported by solid performance of the external sector. 
Exports is expected to be more diversified and grow stronger while the fast growing 
imports is in line with robust investment and consumption. 
The  portion  of  foreign  direct  investment  as  a  composition  of  capital  inflows  is 
estimated to expand. Overall, the 2011 balance of payment is projected to reach a 
surplus of USD16.4 billion, and the foreign reserves to reach USD112.6 billion by 
the  end  of  the  year.  This  is  equivalent  to  7.5  months  of  imports  and  short-term 
government  debt  repayment.  The  sizable 
foreign  reserves  will  strengthen 
sustainability of the Indonesian economy in mitigating various external shocks (a self 
insurance mechanism). 
Distinguished guests, ladies, and gentlemen, 
36.  
We observe stronger economic growth in 2011 is expected to be accompanied with 
rising  inflationary  pressure.  We  are  well  aware  of  the  number  of  sources  of 
inflationary pressure, especially those coming from increase food prices as well as 
possible adjustment of administered prices. The rise in inflation expectation due to 
the impact of food price increase on the perception and dynamics of the domestic 
financial market recently, is also a special concern to us. 
In  this  context,  Bank  Indonesia  together  with  the  government  will  continuously 
coordinate to fine tune various programs to increase supply and improve distribution 
of staple goods. Bank Indonesia has high hopes and is certain that the Government 
will thoughtfully address this issue. The synergy between an appropriate policy mix 
and a well-built coordination will undoubtedly bring inflation to its target of 5%±1% in 
2011 and 4,5%±1% in 2012. 
In  my  capacity  as  a  monetary  authority,  I  would  like  to  reemphasize  that  Bank 
Indonesia is still very much committed to direct the BI rate to reach the medium term 
inflation target which is in the range of 3.5%. The setting of the BI rate is formulated 
with excise measurement so that inflation and expected inflation will move towards 
the corresponding target without sacrificing economic growth. 
I  have  strong  believe  that  by  the  official  establishment  of  the  ASEAN  Economic 
Community by 2015, we can achieve the medium term inflation target hence bring 
our  inflation  rate  to  the  level  of  neighbouring  countries  in  the  region.  A  low  and 
stable  inflation  accompanied  with  improvements  to  various  structural  impediments 
will support the Indonesian economy which is estimated to grow by 7.5% by 2015.  
Distinguished guests, ladies, and gentlemen,  
40.  
The picture of our state of economy which I have just portrayed is still prone to a 
number  of  global  and  domestic  risks.  The  global  economy  will  continue  to  move 
dynamically  in  its  search  for  equilibrium.  However,  this  process  may  well  be 
described as an indefinite search within a dark and never ending tunnel. 
An imbalanced global economic recovery, a persistent debt crisis in the peripheral 
European area, signs of economic overheating in emerging markets, and extreme 
climate change and its impact on food prices are still considered as risks that may 
affect the stability of the global financial market in years to come. The dynamics of 
the  global  financial  market  can  have  an  immediate  impact  to  Indonesia  as  we 
currently have a relatively open financial market. Our first challenge is how, on the 
one  hand,  we  can  strengthen  our  domestic  financial  system  while,  on  the  other 
hand, reap the benefits of this relatively open market, including efforts to deepen our 
market.  
37.  
38.  
39.  
41.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
42.  
Based on my observation, efforts to deepen our financial market are moving on a 
relatively slow track. In this context, the strengthening of the domestic investor base 
must  be  a  priority  so  that  the  dynamics  of  our  financial  market  is  not  solely 
dependent on changing global investor risk appetite. Furthermore, we may no longer 
have to fear the risk of capital reversal. In this opportunity, I welcome efforts made 
by  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  the  Ministry  of  State  Owned  Enterprises  on  their 
cooperation to maintain the stability of the government debt securities.  
Distinguished guests, ladies, and gentlemen,  
43.  
A number of domestic issues in 2010 are still pending and must be resolved. In this 
context, our second challenge is how to transform the Indonesian economy into a 
more  sustained  economy  supported  by  sustainable  growth.  Despite  its  relatively 
more stable growth compared to most other countries in the region, the structure of 
the domestic demand of the Indonesian economy must be further boosted to be an 
investment-driven  demand.  For  example,  the  high  economic  growth  of  China  and 
India are supported by a share of investment to GDP of 45% and 33%, respectively. 
This is compared to Indonesia with a 24% investment to GDP ratio.  
Indonesia  still  lags  in  attracting  FDI  compared  to  the  two  countries.  Despite  its 
increasing trend in 2010, according to the United Nation’s World Investment report, 
the ratio of the stock of incoming investments to GDP for Indonesia is only 13.5%, 
far below Thailand (37.5%) or Malaysia (39%).  
The dynamics of our economic growth structure in terms of sector must also be put 
to  our  attention.  Labour  intensive  sectors  which  facilitate  transfer  of  technology, 
especially the manufacturing industry, are contributing less and less to the economy. 
On  the  other  hand,  an  accelerating  growth  is  depicted  in  small  value  added, 
resource-based industry and non-tradable sectors such as telecommunication. If left 
unattended, this problem may lead to deindustrialization that may cause reduction in 
the value added of the national industry.  
Our  domestic  manufacturing  industry  is  also  heavily  dependent  on  imports.  As  a 
consequence,  economic  growth  is  followed  by  rising  imports  which  causes  the 
current  account  surplus  to  decline.  Such  a  trend  is  actually  already  happening.  In 
2009,  our  current  account  recorded  a  surplus  of  USD 10.7  billion  (2.0%  of  GDP), 
and  in  2010  in  line  with  strengthening  consumption  and  investment,  it  fell  to 
USD 6.2 billion (0.87% of GDP). 
Distinguished guests, ladies, and gentlemen,  
47.  
The third challenge is how to direct inflation to a low and stable level in line with 
the set target. Recently, market perception on inflation is based more on short term 
phenomena or cyclical factors.  
In  the  last  ten  years,  Indonesian  inflation  on  average  reached  8.2%  and  is  on  a 
declining  trend.  This  rate  is  well  above  regional  average  during  the  same  time 
period. However, there has been significant progress as the inflation gap during this 
period is declining. In fact, compared to the BRIC countries, all having an investment 
grade rating, the inflation rate in Indonesia is relatively close to the level of the rate 
in Russia and Brazil, and even lower than in India. Regardless its improving inflation 
profile, Indonesia needs structural reforms in order to further lower inflation to be in 
line with neighbouring countries.  
The  fourth  challenge  is  reaping  the  benefits  of  incoming  capital  flows.  Foreign 
investors’  appetite  for  domestic  financial  market  should  ideally  be  directed  to 
facilitate  domestic  financial  market  deepening  and  corporate  financing.  In  this 
context,  we  need  to  find  breakthroughs  on  how  to  provide  incentives  to  boost 
initial/secondary  public  offering  or  even  bond  issuance.  Also,  imperative  measure 
44.  
45.  
46.  
48.  
49.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the  strengthening  of 
needed 
infrastructure, which includes institutional aspects, regulation, and market efficiency.  
to  provide  assurance 
investors 
foreign 
to 
is 
Distinguished guests, ladies, and gentlemen,  
50.  
I  am  certain  that  through  commitment,  active  participation,  and  strings  of 
coordination  among  affiliated  parties,  we  are  able  to  face  the  various  risks  and 
challenges  mentioned.  To  direct  inflation  towards  its  target,  policy  taken  by  Bank 
Indonesia during 2011 will take the form of stronger monetary and macro prudential 
policy mix that have been implemented in 2010. This effort is done by taking into 
consideration all available instruments to be optimally calibrated. These instruments 
include:  
a)   BI rate is directed to be consistent with announced inflation targets, 5%±1% 
and  4,5%±1%  for  2011  and  2012,  respectively,  while  keeping  in  mind  the 
increasing inflationary pressure.  
b)   Foreign  exchange  policy  is  aimed  at  achieving  inflation  target  while  keeping 
consistence with other macroeconomic targets and providing certainty to the 
business world. The possible trinity solution Bank Indonesia has opted for will 
be  the  optimal  configuration  of  foreign  exchange  stability,  management  of 
capital  flows,  and  interest  rate  response.  In  other  words,  taking  into 
consideration  the  various  complexities,  Bank  Indonesia’s  strategy  to  go 
around the impossible trinity is by choosing middle ground solution instead of 
corner solution.  
c)   Monetary operation and macroprudential policy to manage domestic liquidity 
are  directed  to  be  consistent  and  supportive  of  the  interest  rate  policy  in 
achieving the inflation target and managing domestic demand.  
d)   Macroprudential  policy  on  capital  flows  is  aimed  at  supporting  foreign 
exchange policy and preventing excessive impact on domestic liquidity. Two 
policy  packages  announced  in  December  2010,  an  increase  in  reserve 
requirement  in  foreign  currency  and  reinstatement  of  the  limit  of  daily  short 
term 
the  category  of  macroprudential 
instruments  directed  to  manage  capital  flow.  In  the  midst  of  capital  inflows, 
such  increase  in  reserve  requirement  in  foreign  currency  will  strengthen 
banking liquidity management. Meanwhile, the limit of daily short term foreign 
debt position will increase prudence in managing banking short term foreign 
debt.  
foreign  debt  position, 
into 
fall 
51.  
In  the  formulation  and  implementation  of  the  policy  mix,  it  is  important  to  keep  in 
mind linkages between monetary and financial stability. Bank Indonesia will continue 
to calibrate various measures so that the policy mix taken will bring optimal trade off 
between  monetary  stability,  financial  system  stability,  and  sustainable  economic 
growth.  
Distinguished guests, ladies, and gentlemen,  
52.  
53.  
In  line  with  the  macroeconomic  development,  allow  me  to  give  explanation  on 
Indonesia’s banking condition, much of which certainly needs to be encouraged and 
dealt  with.  To  this  end,  I  will  underscore  principal  aspects  that  I  believe  require 
closer attention.  
I  would  like  to  begin  with  financial  system  stability  and  the  positive  banking 
performance in 2010. In general, financial system stability is reasonably maintained 
as indicated by the Financial Stability Index of 1.75, much lower than the 2.43 figure 
recorded during the 2007/2008 crisis. The performance of the banking industry, as I 
mentioned before is also quite satisfying. The intermediation function is enhanced 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
including  SBI  amounting 
instruments  as  of  15  December  2010 
although still leaving room for growth, the credit risk is maintained, and the capital is 
adequate with the support from ample liquidity which I believe is more than enough.  
The indication of excess liquidity in the banking sector is reflected by the size of the 
liquid 
to 
Rp 494.5 trillion and Government Debt Securities amounting to Rp 229.9 trillion. The 
banking undisbursed loan amounting to Rp 556.8 trillion also indicated the presence 
of  excess  liquidity.  This  highlights  that  our  economy  is  not  short  of  liquidity.  The 
challenge  is  in  how  to  channel  that  liquidity  to  finance  productive  business  sector 
and economic development as a whole.  
I see a serious issue here, where in a condition of excess liquidity, the role of banks 
in promoting economic growth is still small. The ratio of credit to GDP in 2010 is only 
26.1%, just a slight increase from 25.7% in 2009. This low figure is caused by the 
impact  of  the  1997/1998  crisis  which  has  pushed  Indonesia  into  a  low  leverage 
economy.  In  this condition,  deleveraging  process  in  the corporate  sector  occurred 
for quite a long period. Not surprisingly, during that period, credit to the corporate 
sector grew at a low pace. I indeed hope that banks have the courage to take bigger 
role in reviving the corporate sector, off course with high quality service and efficient 
cost.  
In my opinion, banks need to take a closer look at non-bank sources of financing 
which  have  developed  to  be  more  competitive.  To  illustrate,  in  2010  financing 
through  equity  and  bond  market  reached  Rp  280.6  trillion  or  4.4%  of  GDP, 
compared to 3.7% of GDP in 2009. The number of issuers increased from 57 (2009) 
to  74  (2010).  This  condition  should  be  able  to  encourage  banks  to  increase  their 
efficiency so as to maintain sound competitiveness.  
Apart form the above matter, I see a potential opportunity for SMEs to become an 
engine for the economy. Data as of end 2010 showed that the share of SME credit 
have reached 53.32%, growing 25.17%. These figures indicated the dominance of 
SME to the total credit. Furthermore, the 2.65% non-performing SME loan is lower 
than that of the non-SME (3.51%).  
On top of that, there is room for improvement for the SME sector. The lending rate 
for this sector is still higher than for the other corporate sector. This is a challenge 
for  us  together,  because  if  the  interest  rate  for  SME  can  be  lowered  further,  the 
benefit will be high for the economic activity. 
Regional wide, our banking competitiveness in terms of efficiency, capital and asset 
is  still  lower  compared  to  other  countries  in  the  region.  Based  on  data  from  Bank 
Indonesia  and  Bank  Scope  as  of  end  2009,  our  ratio  of  operational  expenses  to 
operational  income  (OEOI)  and  net  interest  margin  (NIM)  are  81.6%  and  5.8%, 
respectively. Meanwhile, Singapore, Malaysia, Thailand and the Philippines charted 
OEOI  of  32.7%–73.1%  and  NIM  2.3%–4.5%.  This  fact  indicates  how  Indonesian 
banking efficiency is the lowest among ASEAN-5. This is ironic to the other fact that 
the average increase in bank equity price in Indonesia is very fantastic. To this end, 
I request banks to catch up in terms of efficiency.  
Moreover, the challenge ahead that we should confront together is how to reach an 
equal footing for our banking competitiveness as we are heading toward the ASEAN 
Economic Community (AEC). The banking sector liberalization under the AEC will 
be effective in 2020. Like the saying: “9 years a short period of time, the future will 
be here before we know it,” we all have to be ready for the challenge. Therefore, 
banks  are  demanded  to  have  the  capability  to  compete  while  enhancing  their 
resilience  individually,  among  others  through  capital  accumulation  for  sound 
expansion of assets.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches
54.  
55.  
56.  
57.  
58.  
59.  
60.  
8 
 61.  
62.  
63.  
At  the  global  level,  as  a  highly  regulated  industry,  banks  cannot  disregard 
international standards, all the more with Indonesia being a member of the Group 
of 20  (G-20),  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB),  Bank  for  International  Settlements 
(BIS) and Islamic Financial Services Board (IFSB). By implementing various agreed 
commitments, it is expected that Indonesian banking sector keeps growing healthy 
in the corridor of international prudential standard.  
Considering  the  various  global  concessions  in  maintaining  the  financial  system 
stability,  I  notice  that  the  capital  and  liquidity  aspects  need  to  be  reviewed. 
Meanwhile,  crisis  resolutions  for  the  possible  systemic  impact  of  failing  financial 
institutions  also  need  to  be  strengthened.  All  these  challenges  pose  serious 
concerns  and  adopted  by  Bank  Indonesia  as  the  basis  for  strengthening  the 
program of the Indonesian Banking Architecture (API). 
By  the  end  of  2010,  Indonesia  has  completed  the  Financial  Sector  Assessment 
Program  (FSAP)  as  part  of  its  commitment  as  the  member  in  G-20  global 
community.  FSAP  assesses  the  extent  of  resistance,  and  compliance  with 
international  standards  of  financial  sector.  The  results  of  FSAP  are  encouraging. 
The level of Indonesian banking sector resilience is deemed robust and sound. The 
stress tests indicate that the resilience of our domestic banking industry is sufficient 
in  time  of  a  crisis.  Furthermore,  the  level  of  Indonesian  compliance  with  the  main 
principles of effective bank supervision is considered to be sound. Therefore, let me 
extend our appreciation to distinguished ladies and gentlemen for this achievement.  
Distinguished guests, ladies, and gentlemen,  
64.  
Albeit  those  various  issues  to  be  addressed,  I  have  faith  the  macro  economic 
outlook  for  2011  still  provide  hope  for  banking  industries  to  grow.  The  industry 
should see credit growth in the range of 20%–23% in 2011. However, this growth is 
vulnerable  to  the  potential  risk  of  commodity  price  increases  and  inflationary 
pressures,  as  well  as  the  increased  role  of  non-bank  financing.  In  return,  those 
factors might potentially surpress credit growth in the range of 19%–21%.  
To  encourage  the  growth  of  micro-,  small-  and  medium-scale  business  credit 
(UMKM),  Bank  Indonesia  requires  banks  to  include  micro-,  small-  and  medium- 
scale business financing scheme in their business plan. Let me take this opportunity 
to thank all stakeholders who have supported the initiative of synergy through the 
commercial  banks  –  rural  banks  linkage  program,  and  the  initiative  of  using 
guarantee schemes as one of risk mitigation efforts.  
To  increase  the  role  of  rural  banks  in  micro-,  small-  and  medium-scale  business 
credit  sector  and  the  communities  in  their  vicinities,  particularly  lower  and  middle 
class  society,  adjustments  in  the  asset  quality  rules  are  applied  to  obtain  a  more 
encouraging  atmosphere,  hitherto  creating  an  agile  rural  bank  sectors  without 
neglecting  the  prudential  credit  principles.  Likewise,  redesigning  the  rural  banks 
efficiency,  specifically  on  how  to  substantially  reduce  lending  rates,  is  profoundly 
necessary.  
To  strengthen  the  regional  economic  development,  BPD  Regional  Champion 
program is launched to help boosting up the role of Regional Development Banks 
(BPDs).  The  program  is  aimed  to  improve  the  viability  and  competitiveness  of 
regional  development  banks;  hence  they  can  effectively  perform  their  function  as 
agents of development in the regions.  
Related efforts in improving the quality of national Islamic banking industry, I view 
that  there  are  3  respective  aspects  to  take  into  consideration:  (i)  improving  the 
professionalism and the quantity of manpower in the industry, (ii) providing robust 
and  sound incentives,  especially  in the  form  of conducive  regulatory  environment, 
65.  
66.  
67.  
68.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen,  
69.  
and  (iii)  strengthening  product  innovation  and  infrastructure  in  Islamic  banking 
industries.  
Of various opportunities and problems arising in 2010, Bank Indonesia has issued 
the December 2010 Policy Package. Its main objective is to strengthen and improve 
macroeconomic stability as well as banking resilience and intermediation.  
An improved bank intermediation policy seeks to ensure the availability of supplies 
through the deepening of the market (Home Ownership Loans (KPR) securitization 
provisions),  to  create  competitive  loan  costs  (provision  of  transparency  base  rate 
loans), to adjust credit risk weighting of retail and KMK (provision RWA) as well as 
to  reduce  asymmetric  information  with  the  provision  of  credit  information  data 
(private credit bureau requirements). In addition, to extend the scope and depth of 
intermediation,  enormous  efforts  through  expanded  access  to  financial  institutions 
(financial  inclusion)  and  BPD  Regional  Championship  program  are  continuously 
carried out.  
An  improved  resilience  of  banking  industry  policy  seeks  to  sustain  the  banking 
industry growth, to strengthen competitiveness and to mitigate the crisis surprises. 
To  achieve  these  goals,  banking  industries  are  required  to  strengthen  their 
qualitative  and  quantitative  improvement  aspects,  which  is  attained  through  the 
existing  sets  of  rules  in  fit  and  proper  test,  increased  compliance  of  commercial 
banks, risk based balance asset (ATMR) and associated effective risk management 
in business cooperation Bancassurance.  
Policies related to institutional empowerment, competitiveness and the resilience of 
rural  banks  and  Islamic  banks  are  aimed  to  create  an  equal  playing  field  with 
conventional banks. These efforts will be endorsed by sets of rules and regulations 
in  earning  assets  quality  rating,  bank  financing  and  sharia  unit  restructuring,  the 
maximum  limit  of  funds  for  rural  banks  (RB)  sharia  financing,  and  changes  in 
licensing change from conventional banks into Islamic banks.  
Through  this  policy  package,  Bank  Indonesia  attempted  to  strengthen  the 
effectiveness  of  banking  supervision,  particularly 
the  creation  and 
implementation  of  early  warning  system  and  macro  prudential  supervision.  These 
efforts will be in line with the refinement of rules and regulation in risk-based banking 
supervision, improvement in bank entry and exit policies, and adoption of risk-based 
supervision and consolidated supervision.  
through 
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen,  
74.  
Let me also seize this opportunity to propose my ideas on Indonesia’s policies and 
guidelines for desirable future to cope with economic turbulence ahead. These are 
generally  basics  but  in  my  humble  opinion  these  issues  are  critically  important  as 
steps to be taken in order to transform the post-economic conditions of economic 
and banking crisis today, towards sustainable economic growth.  
First,  I  recognize  that  the  sustainable  supply  of  Indonesian  foreign  exchange  is 
crucial to sustain macroeconomic stability, particularly in maintaining exchange rate 
stability.  We  need  to  think  thoroughly  how  the  foreign  exchange,  particularly  from 
export,  can  comprehensively  cover  import  and  financing  needs,  in  addition  to  its 
contribution to financial deepening. 
Second,  I  believe  the  strengthening  of  banking  supervision  system  and  the 
deepening of the banking industry through consolidation remains vital to determine 
the  success  for  overcoming  a  crisis  amid  the  global  competition.  Banking  capital 
might be sufficient to boost up the national economy pillars progressively; however I 
develop a feeling this is not sufficient to face the incoming potential crisis. Lessons 
70.  
71.  
72.  
73.  
75.  
76.  
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
learned from the crises in 1997/1998 and 2007/2008 have taught us to understand 
an important message that the fragility of banking industries would inflict harms on 
the  nation,  the  central  bank  and  eventually  bring  misery  and  misfortune  upon  the 
citizens.  
Bail-out  may  be  necessary  in  time  of  crisis,  but  past  experience  shows  that  such 
measure  might  create  another  new  turbulence  in  terms  of  economic,  political  and 
legal complications. We need to develop preventive steps and an overall soundness 
and  strong capital  defence.  This  paradigm  has  been intensively  discussed  among 
regulators and practitioners in banking industries by replacing the paradigm of bail-
out with bail-in. It means the banks themselves should have a buffer to absorb risks 
and mitigate shocks in establishing the proper crisis protocol.  
This concern has reinforced my conviction that consolidation, both in the capital as 
well  as  in  the  institutional  dimensions,  needs  to  be  accelerated.  Thereby,  it  is 
necessary to evaluate alternatives for the improved soundness and higher efficiency 
in  implementing  consolidation  based  on  the  more  interesting  incentives  and 
disincentives regulation scheme, either in the areas of merger, acquisition, or any 
other corporate actions. The robust and sound banking capital is also beneficial for 
developing competitiveness such as in the  development of information technology 
and  business  scale.  This  endeavour  is  required  to  meet  MEA  implementation 
prerequisites,  since  the  average  capital  level  of  Indonesian  banks  is  the  lowest 
among those in ASEAN-5.  
Third, I extremely emphasize the magnitude importance of efficiency; hence expect 
banking  industries  to  promote  a  lower  and  efficient  NIM.  In  my  modest  opinion, 
efficiency  is  the  key  to  untie  the  knots  of  the  extricable  intermediary  complexity, 
therefore  increasing  credit  and  is  expected  to  stimulate  further  economic  growth. 
Efficiency  as  well  encourages  the  banks  behaviours  in  providing  prudential, 
selective,  productive  and  prospective  credit.  Such  behaviours  in  the  long  run  will 
accelerate  the  prudential  banking  practices,  which  is  the  prerequisite  of  financial 
stability.  This  provides  evidence  that  banking  efficiency  bear  fruitful  growth  and 
stability as well in banking industries.  
Efforts to increase banking efficiency have been initiated. We certainly still recall an 
agreement setting a fixed deposit rate more than a year ago. This is then followed 
by  endeavours  to  review  the  spread  of  interest  rate  led  to  the  implementation  of 
prime lending rate. Bank Indonesia, needless to say, will continue to analyse further 
measures, including those related in providing gifts to customers, and benchmarking 
between banks.  
Fourth, to be better prepared in the era of economic integration, facilitate the flows 
of  banking  transaction  and  boost  the  national  economy,  the  policies  for  the 
development of the payment system are aimed to make the system more efficient, 
reliable,  simple  and  secure.  The  focus  is  on  the  development  of  system  and 
infrastructure, as well as on strengthening the regulatory basis.  
Starting  2011,  Bank  Indonesia  will  enhance  the  existing  systems,  including 
BI-RTGS, BI-SSSS G-II, Direct Debit-SKNBI, Retail Payment Interconnectivity, and 
ATM chip standardization. Efficiency in the payment system will also be increased 
with  the  plan  to  ingrate  the  existing  payment  system  network  through  National 
Payment  Gateway  (NPG),  the  further  promotion  of  financial  inclusion  through 
payment system by retail agent, and the proposal of rupiah redenomination program 
which is currently in the phase of coordination with the government.  
Fifth, my view is that the Indonesian Banking Architecture should not only elaborate 
the  ideal  condition  of  banking  industry  with  all  the  important  pillars  as  its 
components. Two other dimensions should be covered. First, how should we place 
each of different types of banks in Indonesia on its deserved position, based on its 
77.  
78.  
79.  
80.  
81.  
82.  
83.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
84.  
85.  
86.  
87.  
reason  of  existence.  This  should  include  the  consideration  on  the  positions  of 
conventional  bank  vs.  syariah  bank,  general  bank  vs.  people’s  credit  bank,  local 
bank vs. foreign bank, and national bank vs. rural development bank. Moreover, it 
should also be studied how to produce synergy among those.  
Second,  the  Indonesian  banking  architecture  should  contain  a  roadmap  that  can 
guide us from the present situation to the ideal condition architectured. Indonesian 
banking architecture should not be a static snapshot, but a dynamic roadmap. Such 
roadmap should include the implementation of best practices in the banking industry 
covering many dimensions, including business model, standard setting, information 
system, and ownership.  
Sixth, there are many lessons learned since the 2008 global crisis which contribute 
to a new framework of thinking. Despite the repetitive nature of crisis, we cannot rely 
on yesterday logic, or solely relying on conventional macro policy to resolve current 
issues. The introduction of the macroprudential policy strengthens the effectiveness 
of  conventional  policy  and  brings  new  hope  to  the  crisis  recovery.  Such  a  policy 
requires  a  more  collaboration,  coordination,  interaction  and  integration  between 
micro  supervisory  function  and  macro  monetary  function  in  maintaining  financial 
stability. The challenge ahead is securing a comprehensive policy framework and I 
myself hope that it can be maintained and further continued in the future.  
Seventh,  I  would  like  to  invite  all  banking  sector  colleagues  to  utilize  Indonesia’s 
demographic potentials with its large population and still relatively limited access to 
financial  sector.  Bank  Indonesia,  hand  in  hand,  with  the  government  is  currently 
formulating a financial inclusion national strategy. This national strategy will serve as 
a  framework  consisting  of  strategic  actions  to  open  the  access  of  unfinanced 
persons as well as unbanked persons to the financial sector.  
Lastly,  to  promote  good  governance,  I  am  of  the  view  that  excessive  risk  taking 
which  can  potentially  induce  moral  hazard  as  witnessed  during  the  2008  crisis 
needs  to  be  prevented.  On  that  note,  compensation  or  remuneration  structure  of 
bank executives conducive to the development of professionalism and integration is 
needed.  
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen,  
88.  
In addition to the policy direction I have described, we must also formulate medium 
to  long  term  strategies.  My  view  is  that  capital  accumulation,  both  in  the  form  of 
physical  and  human  capital,  and  productivity  improvement  is  key  to  boosting  a 
balanced  aggregate  supply  and  aggregate  demand.  It  is  hoped  that  this  ideal 
condition will lead to higher GDP and lower inflation which will in turn be followed 
with an increase in GDP per capita.  
Different  speed  of  convergence  to  levels  of  developed  countries  is  seen  in  the 
development of income per capita of several main Asian countries. Singapore has 
out-achieved  developed  countries  since  the  1990s  decade,  while  Korea  is 
converging to Japan following the 1997–1998 Asia crisis. To illustrate, for the case 
of Indonesia, the ratio of Japan’s income per capita to Indonesia’s income per capita 
is on a gradual decline since the 1990s decade, with a slight interruption during the 
Asia crisis. This means that Indonesia’s income per capita is catching up to Japan’s 
income per capita.  
According  to  the  October  2010  IMF’s  projection,  the  ratio  is  estimated  to  further 
decline until 2015 and may continue onwards. However, further analysis shows that 
the speed of convergence to match developed countries is not yet sufficient.  
Bank  Indonesia  study  shows  that  in  addition  to  low  capital  accumulation  and 
productivity, the non optimal speed of convergence is also caused by most binding 
constraints  in  the  economy.  Should  these  constraints  be  untangled,  a  more 
89.  
90.  
91.  
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
technology;  4) 
information  and  communication 
accelerated economic growth through increasing investment could be achieved. The 
five  most  binding  constraints  are:  1)  insufficient  innovation  through  research  and 
development;  2)  a  low  standard  quality  of  education  and  health;  3)  insufficient 
possession  of 
inadequate 
transportation and distribution infrastructure; and 5) unsustainable supply of energy 
(for example electricity). Undoubtedly, the role of the state is needed to resolve such 
binding constraints.  
In  my  view,  there  is  a  key  policy  that  should  be  a  priority,  namely  human  capital 
reforms.  This  would  be  a  crucial  precondition  to  elevate  Indonesian  economy  to 
knowledge based-economy of 21st century. Human capital reforms could be initiate 
by a simple yet fundamental initiative on health and education.  
Furthermore,  by  focusing  on  human  capital  reform,  Indonesia  could  avoid  middle- 
income  trap,  a  phenomenon  in  which  a  developing  country  (as  defined  as  middle 
income country group) is unable to move up to higher level of income. I believe that 
all of us have the same vision that in 2050 Indonesia will be free from poverty and 
could  achieve  an  inclusive  growth  with  notable  surplus  in  key  areas,  including 
agriculture.  
92.  
93.  
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen,  
94.  
I hereby invite bankers to shift the mindset of business from “opportunities capture 
mode” in respect of the recovery after the crisis to the “sustainable growth plan” as 
the global economic crisis begins to fade. I am certain the resilient solidity we have 
demonstrated in the previous economic thunderstorm has momentously motivated 
us to go forward in creating a sustainable and robust banking and economic growth  
Let us all join hands in unity and walk confidently towards a better tomorrow. And 
once again, Happy New Year 2011. May God Almighty give our work His blessing; 
strengthen our purpose in achieving a more developed and prosperous Indonesia. 
God bless us all.  
95.  
Wassalamu’alaikum Wr. Wb. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
