Ardian Fullani: Recent economic and monetary developments in Albania 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the press conference on 
the Monetary Policy Decision of the Bank of Albania Supervisory Council, Tirana, 31 August 
2011. 
 Today,  on  31  August  2011,  the  Supervisory  Council  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  reviewed  and 
approved  the  Monthly  Monetary  Policy  Report.  Based  on  the  analysis  of  Albania’s  latest 
economic  and  financial  developments  and  following  discussions  on  their  performance 
outlook, the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania decided to leave the key interest rate 
unchanged at 5.25%. The Supervisory Council holds that the actual monetary conditions are 
appropriate  for  meeting  the  inflation  target  and  for  continuing  to  stimulate  the  economic 
activity. 
Let me now proceed with an overview of actual and expected economic developments and 
main issues discussed at today’s meeting of the Supervisory Council.  
Annual  inflation  in  July  was  3.6%,  following  the  downward  trend  noted  in  the  second 
quarter of the year. Consumer price performance continues to be under the pressure of rising 
prices  in  global  markets,  although  lower  than  in  previous  months.  Annual  inflation  was 
primarily formed by the contribution of processed food prices, most of which are imported. 
Decline of the annual inflation rate reflects the downward contribution of unprocessed foods 
as a result of increased supply of domestic agricultural products, a seasonal development, 
which in July 2011 appeared to be stronger than a year earlier. On the other hand, regulated-
price  goods  and  non-food  goods  had  a  low  and  downward  contribution  to  this  month’s 
inflation.  
In line with Bank of Albania’s expectation, controlled inflationary pressures by the domestic 
economy, as well as anchored inflation expectations created a favourable environment for a 
rapid reduction of imported inflation effects.  
Consumer prices during 2011 were mainly affected by supply shocks, materialised in higher 
prices  of  imported  goods  and  some  products  subject  to  excise,  or  with  regulated  prices. 
These effects appeared to be more moderate in July; in the absence of sudden shocks, they 
are  expected  to  decrease  further  in  the  months  ahead.  Below-potential  economic  growth 
continued  to  generate  controlled  inflationary  pressures  on  the  demand  side.  Hence,  core 
inflation stopped increasing and is set around the Bank of Albania’s target of 3%. Moreover, 
stabilisation of inflation expectations of economic agents and the prudent policy of the Bank 
of  Albania  regarding  their  anchoring  are  reflected  in  moderated  second-round  effects  on 
inflation.  
(Following,  I  will  describe  in  more  detail  economic  highlights  defining  the  inflation 
performance and their expected development.)  
Although  in  an  unfavourable  external  environment  characterised  by  added  uncertainties  in 
our trade partners, the Albanian economy continued to grow during the second quarter of 
2011.  
In the absence of direct data, the Bank of Albania deems that economic growth during this 
period is similar to the one recorded in the preceding quarter, thus remaining below Albania’s 
potential  growth  rate.  Economic  activity  relied  on  the  public  sector  and  external  demand, 
although more moderately than in the first quarter of the year. In the meantime, the private 
sector demand appears sluggish, also conditioning our projections for economic growth for 
the rest of the year.  
 
Private investments continue to be slow, compared with their historical rates and 
the  country’s  needs  for  quantitative  and  qualitative  production  capacities.  This 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The  expected  easing  of  funding  terms  during  the  second  half  of  the  year  as  well  as  the 
decline  of  perceived  uncertainty  by  businesses  and  individuals  are  expected  to  be 
accompanied  by  the  somewhat  more  positive  performance  of  private  consumption  and 
investments in this period.  
 
Stimulating nature of fiscal policy during the first half of the year is reflected in a 
positive contribution of public expenditures to economic growth. For the first seven 
months of the year, public spending increased by 5.9% in annual terms. Moreover, 
performance of fiscal revenues was slow, reflected in their annual growth of 2.3% 
during this period. This behaviour of income and expenditures is materialised in a 
higher  budget  deficit  than  a  year  earlier.  Fiscal  impulse  to  the  economy  was 
consistent  throughout  this  period.  It  showed  tendencies  of  moderation  during  the 
second quarter, which are expected to strengthen further during the rest of the year, 
in conformity with the revised budget of 2011.  
Contribution of foreign demand to economic growth was lower during the second 
quarter of the year. Trade deficit in the second quarter was 20% higher compared to 
a year earlier.  
 Our  exports  shrank  by  about  2.8%  year-on-year  for  this  period,  a  reflection  of  reduced 
exporting of energy, which is a volatile component in exports. Despite this development, the 
core  basis  of  exports  continues  to  maintain  more  sustainable  growth  rates.  On  the  other 
hand,  imports  continued  their  annual  growth,  albeit  at  a  lower  rate  compared  to  the  first 
quarter of the year.  
Aggregate  demand  performance  triggered  economic  activity  growth  but  was  inadequate  to 
fully  utilise  Albania’s  output  capacities.  Developments  in  the  labour  market  seem  sluggish 
and do not have premises for emergence of stable inflationary pressures.  
Signals from economic information are confirmed also by the monetary indicator analysis. 
In  June,  annual  growth  of  M3  aggregate  was  11.8%,  around  average  rates  of  the  past 
12 months. Our assessments show that the expansion of monetary supply is in line with the 
performance of the economy’s demand for monetary assets.  
In June and throughout the second quarter, the public sector demand for funding was high, in 
line  with  the  intensity  of  the  fiscal  activity  during  that  period  of  the  year.  Furthermore,  the 
private  sector  demand  for  funding  continued  to  be  moderate.  Lending  to  private  sector 
posted annual growth of 11.6% in June, in line with the second quarter’s performance.  
Financial markets are characterised by a serene environment with contained risk premia. 
Interbank market experienced increased trade volume; interest rates were close to the key 
rate  and  had  low  volatility.  In  the  primary  market,  government’s  demand  for  funding  is 
reflected in the increased yields of government securities. However, the trajectory of yields 
retained its trend, showing low inflation expectations by market agents.  
As regards the economy’s performance outlook, our projections and assessments suggest a 
continuation of economic growth, in terms relative to those of the first quarter. Composition of 
aggregate demand is expected to be different to the one of the first half of the year: private 
sector  of  the  economy  is  expected  to  be  more  vivacious  in  the  second  half,  while  the 
contribution of the public and external sectors are expected to be more moderate. Size and 
speed  of  the  private  sector  recovery  shall  define  the  stability  of  economic  growth  in  the 
future. In spite of assessments for increased aggregate demand, economic activity in Albania 
is  expected  to  remain  below  its  potential,  thus  conditioning  the  continuation  of  spare 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
capacities  in  the  economy  in  the  period  ahead.  Subsequently,  inflationary  pressures 
originating  from  the  aggregate  demand  are  expected  to  be  contained.  In  addition,  foreign 
prices  effect  is  expected  to  be  more  moderate  in  the  upcoming  months  while  inflation 
expectations  of  economic  agents  continue  to  be  within  the  target  band.  Consumer  price 
inflation  is  expected  to  continue  its  downward  trend  in  the  next  months,  gradually 
approaching the Bank of Albania target.  
Taking  into  consideration  the  information  above,  the  Supervisory  Council  concluded  that 
inflationary pressures in the medium term are contained.  
In  the  absence  of  abrupt  shocks,  inflation  is  expected  to  drop  further  and  stay  within  the 
target band of the Bank of Albania during the time span of the monetary policy action. Risks 
distribution remains overall symmetric: slower than projected economic growth would lead to 
a  rapid  reduction  of  inflation,  while  a  further  consolidation  of  imported  inflation  could  keep 
inflationary pressures high for a longer time.  
At  the  end  of  discussions,  the  Supervisory  Council  concluded  that  the  monetary 
conditions  remain  appropriate  for  meeting  the  medium-term  inflation  target  and 
decided to leave the key interest rate unchanged at 5.25 %.  
In the near future, the downward inflation trend and shift to the downward section of the risks 
balance may establish the premises for a revision of the monetary policy. In any case, the 
future  its  future  position  shall  factorise  the  new  information  obtained,  aiming  to  adopt 
monetary conditions to respect our objectives.  
The Bank of Albania remains fully committed to anchor inflation expectations in accordance 
with its inflation target and to support sustainable and long-term development of the Albanian 
economy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
