Louis Kasekende: The benefits of regionalism 
Opening remarks by Mr Louis Kasekende, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Uganda, at the 
meeting  of  the  Technical  officials  of  the  Association  of  African  Central  Banks  (AACB)  – 
Eastearn Africa Region, Kampala, 2 February 2011. 
 to  represent 
the  Governor  of 
I  am  here 
the  Bank  of  Uganda,  Prof.  Emmanuel 
Tumusiime-Mutebile who would have wished to be here at this opening. However due to a 
conflict in his schedule, he is unable to make it and please accept his apologies.  
The Bank of Uganda is very privileged to be the current chair of the AACB Eastern Africa sub 
region and indeed to be your host for this meeting of technical officials.  
As  you  are  aware,  Africa  has  embraced  regionalism  with  various  regional  groupings  like 
COMESA,  EAC,  SADC,  and  ECOWAS.  We  believe  that  as  a  region,  we  should  leverage 
regionalism  as  a  means  to  generating  efficiencies  in  our  economies  and  to  support 
development of the continent.  
We should also take note of the shift of power in the global economy to countries like China 
that has a population of about one billion people and may soon have an average per capita 
income of over US$ 30,000. Africa on the other hand, has a population of about One billion 
people,  but  with  54  countries,  some  of  which  have  a  population  of  less  than  one  million 
people.  Average  income  of  Africa  is  about  US$  400.  In  order  for  Africa  to  contribute 
effectively to the global agenda, there is need to derive a strong single voice at international 
level using regionalism instead of 54 varying voices. These instead generate a lot of “noise” 
but  not  necessarily  “voice”.  Further  more,  for  Africa  to  compete  effectively  in  the  global 
trading environment, there is need to adapt technology and gain economies of scale. This 
also requires exploiting opportunities generated by regionalism.  
The recent global financial crisis provides more lessons for Africa on the need to strengthen 
continental cooperation. As the global crisis unfolded, the developed countries saw a need to 
coordinate  their  policies  with  strong  emerging  economies  under  the  aegis  of  the  G20. 
Through the cooperation and policy coordination, the G20 was able to avert a global financial 
meltdown and to avoid a long drawn-out global recession. It is for these reasons, that Africa 
should  also  strengthen  regional  and  continental 
lead  policy 
coordination and strengthen the voice of Africa in global meetings. It will not be possible to 
invite all 54 countries or all the regional groupings to the G20 but there is a strong possibility 
of a representative of the continent presenting our views and interests in the G20.  
The AU and indeed the AACB fully recognise the benefits of regionalism and have promoted 
continental programs geared towards strengthening Africa’s voice in the global arena. The 
meeting today should be seen in light of the need to contribute to a continental position in 
areas of interest to central banks. However the recent crisis has clearly shown that central 
banks  should  not  limit  their  interest  to  only  price  stability.  As  the  crisis  unfolded,  central 
banks  across  the  world  were  called  upon  to  play  a  role  in  stimulating  aggregate  demand. 
This was a new role for many of the central banks. Therefore in meetings like this, we should 
discuss the extent to which central banks should directly use instruments to stimulate growth. 
However, the added responsibility should not come at the expense of price stability. It is thus 
our responsibility to share experiences in this area and also propose ways of balancing the 
inflation and the growth objectives. Let us use this opportunity to learn from each other.  
I  am  confident  that  this  meeting  will  ably  attend  to  the  full  agenda  before  us  and  provide 
insight into many of the intricate policy issues that central banks are currently facing. This 
two-day  meeting  is  intended  to  deliberate  on  various  aspects  of  monetary  and  financial 
integration  on  the  African  continent,  with  specific  focus  on  the  Eastern  Africa  Region.  In 
level  organisations 
to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
particular, it is intended to draw consensus on the region’s position on decisions and issues 
as drawn from the 34th ordinary meeting of the AACB Assembly of Governors. This meeting 
is  also  scheduled  to  appraise  the  upcoming  2011  AACB  Bureau  meeting  of  the 
macroeconomic  performance  of  our  region  in  2010  and  offer  guidance  on  the  scheduled 
symposium and continental seminar for 2011.  
To our visiting delegates, please send my Governor’s compliments to his contemporaries. I 
wish you fruitful deliberations and enjoy the warm hospitality of the Bank of Uganda Staff and 
indeed, the diverse riches of the “Pearl of Africa”.  
I now have the pleasure to declare this meeting of the technical officials of the AACB Eastern 
Africa Region Open.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
