Ardian Fullani: Post-crisis challenges for Southeast Europe  
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the annual meeting of the 
European Fund for Southeast Europe, Tirana, 8 June 2011. 
 Honourable Mr. Prime Minister,  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
It is a great pleasure and privilege for me to be here today, in this distinguished panel, to 
greet the start of the 2011 annual meeting of the European Fund for Southeast Europe, or 
EFSE  as  we  are  used  to  call  it.  More  than  four  years  ago,  I  was  invited  to  the  launching 
ceremony of this wonderful incentive here in Tirana. Two years ago, at its annual meeting 
that took place in Novi Sad, the Albanian government became a shareholder to the Fund. 
Today, we are gathered here again, in the capital city of Albania, to make the balance of this 
institution’s work.  
I  avail  myself  of  the  opportunity  to  thank  the  European  Fund  for  Southeast  Europe,  for  its 
contribution  to  our  region,  for  its  financial  support  and  expertise  provided  for  the  financial 
market  development,  without  leaving  behind  specifically  the  EFSE’s  assistance  to  Albania 
through  funding  business  projects  at  competitive  terms,  at  a  time  when  bank  lending  has 
posted slow paces of recovery. 
The grave financial crisis of modern times has induced much volatility in the global economy. 
Today,  the  situation  is  assessed  as  more  improved.  In  theoretical  and  scientific  debate 
round-tables,  efforts  have  been  focused  on  identifying  causes  and  taking  measures  to 
prevent  recurrence  of  such  events  in  the  future.  A  new  financial  infrastructure  is  being 
designed. This is the context of this annual meeting, on whose focus is the identification of 
post-crisis challenges our region is faced with.  
Allow me to briefly address two or three of my personal opinions about this situation.  
Before the impact of international financial crisis, all countries in the region were involved in 
important reforms aimed at increasing the economic growth. At this stage, through necessary 
legal  improvements  and  prudent  development  policies,  there  took  place  the  opening  of 
economies  and  the  development  of  trade,  increase  in  domestic  and  foreign  investments, 
overall  liberalization  of markets  and  promotion  of  financial  market  development,  to  provide 
more qualitative and sustainable financial services to businesses and households.  
From  the  macroeconomic  viewpoint,  fiscal  policies  in  the  region  are  aimed  at  fiscal 
consolidation  through  revenue  growth  and  greater  investment-oriented  public  spending. 
Monetary policies, thanks to different exchange rate regimes, have generally kept consumer 
price rise on track and interest rates have followed a downward trend. However, the global 
financial crisis has affected the countries in our region, due to some weaknesses that were 
present during the growth phase.  
First, the closeness of our countries and the concentration of trade with the European Union 
area,  as  well  as  migratory  movements,  have  brought  about  a  large  use  of  the  euro  in  the 
regional economies. Economic growth has been financed, to a significant extent, by foreign 
resources,  in  the  form  of  foreign-currency  borrowing  by  the  public  sector,  financial  sector, 
businesses  and  households.  A  substantial  share  of  the  bank’s  liabilities  and  of  the  loan 
portfolio is in foreign currency. Foreign-currency lending has been dominant and preferable 
by parties.  
This  was  due  to  a  combination  of  factors,  such  as  positive  exchange  rate  trend,  lower 
interest  rates  and  good  opportunities  of  the  banking  sector  to  fund  these  loans  in  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
wholesale markets. Foreign-currency lending to the private sector and households were used 
to a considerable extent for consumption.  
Foreign investments in the tradable goods sectors, which would contribute positively to trade 
balance, were less than those in the non-tradable goods sectors. This is the case of Albania, 
Bosnia-Herzegovina  or  Serbia.  It  is  estimated  that  in  terms  of  the  stock  of  foreign 
investments, at end-2008, the share of investments in the tradable goods sector ranged from 
15% in Albania to 35% in Serbia. Therefore, in the pre-crisis period, some of the countries 
posted steady and even upward trade balance deficits.  
Second,  notwithstanding  the  efforts  to  develop  the  financial  market,  the  banking  sector 
continued  to  dominate  the  financial  system  of  the  countries  in  our  region.  This  is  a 
phenomenon  of  developing  economies,  which  shows  the  great  dependence  of  economic 
development on the banking sector condition.  
The banking sector in some countries in the region is mostly owned by European banking 
groups. The financial crisis showed that the entry of foreign banking groups into a domestic 
market,  besides  advantages,  it  is  also  associated  with  elements  of  risk,  which  must  be 
addressed duly and timely.  
Third, the countries in our region have different needs for investments, highlighting those in 
road  infrastructure,  energy  and  health  care.  Also,  demographic  developments,  including 
migration, and slowing population growth trend, have brought about increased costs of public 
pension  schemes  and  other  elements  of  social  protection.  Therefore,  despite  fiscal 
consolidation efforts, budget deficits have been present and steady all the time.  
During  the  financial  crisis  period,  public  authorities  were  committed  to  overcoming  the 
situation.  Almost  all  governments  of  the  countries  in  the  region  were  committed  to 
implementing fiscal stimulus policies, aimed at increasing the support to the real economy 
and the financial system. Monetary policy followed an easing trend, cutting the interest rates 
and satisfying the interbank market needs for liquidity.  
Back  to  Albania’s  case,  I  would  like  to  emphasize  that  our  experience  in  absorbing  the 
impacts of the crisis proved successful.  
Albania, I think, is one of the countries that:  
 
 
Did not experience any bank failure or capital injection by the state;  
Courageously  withstood  the  crisis  of  confidence  in  the  banking  system,  where 
financial intermediation was never interrupted;  
The economy continued to grow in positive terms, albeit at a slower pace;  
Inflationary expectations remained anchored throughout all time.  
 
 
During  this  period,  the  Albanian  banking  sector  continued  to  increase  its  lending  to  the 
economy, albeit at lower paces. Difficulties added to the real sector of the economy and the 
exchange rate depreciation by about 12% in 2009 were followed by decreased credit quality 
and increased bank provisions to face the credit risk.  
Distinguished participants,  
The  pre-crisis  phenomena  and  those  that  occurred  in  2008–2010,  offer  a  valuable 
experience to economic actors and public authorities of each country in our region. Not to 
mention  all,  I  would  like  to  dwell  only  on  some  of  them,  which  I  consider  important  for 
enhancing the sustainability of our economy and of the financial system in the future.  
First, the region needs a better balance in the factors supporting the sustainable economic 
growth. I think that the public authorities should assign priority to increase in investments and 
implementation of stimulus policies for developing the competitive sectors. In this way, the 
country’s  export  capacity  would  grow  by  creating  better  conditions  for  a  sustainable 
improvement of the external balance of our economy.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Second,  closely  related  to  the  first  issue,  I  would  highlight  the  need  for  undertaking  and 
deepening the structural reforms. This strategic objective remains a constant priority for each 
of  our  economy.  Their  focus  should  be  comprehensive,  meaning  further  adaptation  of 
legislation, improvement of infrastructure, full privatization of public assets, improvement of 
the  business  climate,  deepening  and  broadening  of  the  financial  market,  comprehensive 
reform  in  pensions,  as  well  as  a  number  of  other  actions  which  I  can  not  mention  here 
because of objective reasons. I think that the inflow of foreign direct investments remains our 
major  target.  Without  them  the  region  would  remain  small,  fragmented,  with  a  low 
development, social and economic potential, with sporadic exports, with premature markets 
and high costs, or in other words, with a low productivity. Personally, I am of the opinion that 
each foreign investment means faster convergence to Europe.  
Third, the financial market should develop to create other alternatives for savings, financing 
and risk management of economic entities, as well as for improving the conditions of these 
activities. Besides the banking sector, the share of non-bank financial institutions should also 
be rapidly developed, to enable a greater involvement and access to financial services for 
entities that can not benefit enough from banking services.  
Furthermore,  I  think  that  it  is  important  to  pay  more  attention  to  development  of  capital 
markets, particularly those issuing and trading debt securities and equities by private entities.  
Fourth, the regulatory framework and supervisory practices should be completed with some 
important  elements  in  terms  of  prudential  measures  and  emergency  financial  situation 
management.  The  prudential  measures  framework  should  cautiously  treat  capital  and 
liquidity requests from banks, especially in the case of foreign currency. Simultaneously, it is 
necessary to assess the systemic risk in both, the financial system and the banking one, by 
constructing  special  indices  and  implementing  best  practices  in  stress-testing.  In  terms  of 
completing  the  framework  on  management  of  emergency  financial  situations,  importance 
should  be  given  to  the  legal  and  regulatory  reviewing  and  improvement  process,  the 
cooperation  between  public  authorities  and  timely  identification  of  various  problems, 
particularly in systemically important institutions. The Bank of Albania has already entered in 
this reviewing and improvement process of the regulatory framework, on the basis of several 
pre-set objectives.  
Concluding,  I  would  like  to  emphasize  that  the  countries  in  our  region  have  successfully 
overcome a difficult period as a consequence of the international financial crisis. However, 
there  are  numerous  challenges  ahead.  They  require  an  ongoing  commitment  of  all  the 
factors of the country’s economic and political life. The need for coordinating the actions both 
locally and regionally is an absolute priority.  
I think there are in place all the prerogatives for making this cooperation effective, honest and 
of mutual benefits to each country in the region. To this end, I think that the European Fund 
for  Southeast  Europe  will  continue  to  play  an  important  role,  which  once  again  I  take  this 
opportunity to congratulate for the work it has done and the commitments it has taken for the 
future.  
Thank you! 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
