Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Consumer protection and financial education 
Welcoming address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 
Financial Inclusion Policymakers Forum on “Consumer Protection and Financial Education”, 
Kuala Lumpur, 5 April 2011. 
 in  developing  new  research,  setting  standards  and  providing  a  platform 
It  is  my  great  pleasure  to  welcome  you  to  this  Financial  Inclusion  Policymakers  Forum  on 
“Consumer Protection and Financial Education”. Bank Negara Malaysia is most honoured to 
host this event that brings together senior officials from the regulatory community from this 
region and participants from agencies with an interest in developing more inclusive financial 
systems.  
Financial inclusion has now emerged as an important global agenda in ensuring sustainable 
long-term economic growth. The G20 summit in 2010 recognised financial inclusion as one 
of the main pillars of the global development agenda. This is a significant development as it 
reflects  the  global  recognition  and  importance  being  given  to  social  and  economic 
development  and  for  such  growth  to  be  inclusive  in  its  outreach.  Financial  inclusion  is  an 
integral  part  of  such  an  inclusive  growth  process.  A  high  degree  of  financial  inclusion  will 
allow  for  the  various  segments  of  the  economy,  regardless  of  income  levels,  economic 
activity  and  regions  to  have  access  to  financial  services.  At  its  most  basic  level,  financial 
inclusion provides the means and opportunity for undertaking essential financial transactions 
for savings and the accumulations of financial buffers and having access to financing. 
Promoting financial inclusion, however, remains a significant challenge. It is estimated that 
2.7 billion adults in the world economy are currently excluded from the financial system. In 
addition  to  the  G20  initiative,  there  are  other  global  institutions  such  as  the  Consultative 
Group to Assist the Poor (CGAP), Alliance for Financial Inclusion (AFI) and the International 
Finance Corporation (IFC) that have assumed an increasingly active role at the international 
level 
for 
policymakers to share experiences. This improved visibility of financial inclusion on the global 
agenda has lent significant support to the initiatives at the national level to promote greater 
financial inclusion. 
In this recent decade there has also been a growing body of research in the area of financial 
inclusion.  This  has  contributed  towards  enhancing  our  understanding  of  the  different 
approaches and policies that have been adopted and their relative successes in achieving 
greater access to financial services. This has also allowed for an enhanced appreciation of 
the issues that need to be addressed and on how sustainable financial inclusion might be 
achieved in our own countries. 
While  considerable  progress  has  been  made 
inclusion 
environment, the sheer numbers that remain excluded from the financial system suggest that 
much more needs to be done, both at the national and international level. Barriers to financial 
inclusion continue to exist in many countries. These barriers include problems that relate not 
only to the physical access to financial services but also the high costs of the services and 
conditions that deter such access that result in disengagement in using financial services.  
Policymakers  can  contribute  in  five  significant  areas  in  advancing  the  financial  inclusion 
agenda. The first is to give clarity to the financial inclusion agenda, in addition to driving the 
national  commitment  to  financial  inclusion.  This  includes  defining  the  goals  for  financial 
inclusion  that  needs  to  be  broad  based  and  comprehensive.  Universal  access  to  basic 
financial services is desirable, but this needs to be differentiated according to the different 
segments  within  the  economy.  At  one  end  of  the  spectrum,  this  may  include  those 
households  and  micro  enterprises  that  will  benefit  from  being  brought  into  the  economic 
mainstream  while  at  the  other  end  of  the  spectrum  are  those  households  and  small  and 
improving 
financial 
the 
in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
in 
that  are  already 
the  economic  mainstream  but  are 
medium  scale  enterprises 
disadvantaged  because  they  are  not  able  to  participate  effectively  in  the  financial  system. 
The goal should also be to achieve sustainable financial inclusion outcomes.  
Secondly,  policymakers  have  an  important  role  in  creating  the  right  incentives  and 
competitive environment for financial institutions to respond to the opportunities in financial 
inclusion. Interventions by the Government should not result in market distortions. As part of 
the regulatory regime is, however, the promotion of responsible behaviours to ensure access 
to  financial  services  will  be  fair  and  at  cost  effective  pricing.  Achieving  the  appropriate 
balance  between  these  objectives  can  often  be  challenging,  and  different  countries  have 
approached this in different ways, with varying degrees of success. Intervention needs to be 
consistent with competitiveness, stability and sustainability of the financial system.  
The  third  role  for  policymakers  is  to  provide  the  enabling  infrastructure  that  includes  the 
mechanisms,  systems,  technology  and  institutional  arrangements  that  will  enhance  the 
access  to  financial  services.  While  technological  advances  have  transformed  the  banking 
industry  from  a  traditional  “bricks-and-mortar”  infrastructure  to  a  system  supplemented  by 
electronic channels, the potential for greater use of technology to promote wider access to 
financial  services  still  remains  largely  untapped.  While  mobile  phone  banking  has  been 
successful in enhancing outreach, the further use of IT can substantially reduce the costs of 
extending  the  outreach  of  financial  services.  The  other  infrastructure  that  is  important  to 
support financial inclusion is having in place a sound payment and credit information system. 
The fourth is to evolve a comprehensive approach to consumer protection as an important 
complementary role to prudential regulation in mitigating risks. This includes putting in place 
a  conducive  regulatory  environment  in  terms  of  the  laws  and  regulations  that  protect 
consumers  and  undertaking  surveillance  and  supervision  to  ensure  the  responsible 
behaviour by financial institutions. The international community is giving greater attention to 
consumer protection issues given the potential for high charges for such financial services 
and  for  borrowers  to  become  over-indebted.  While  most  countries  have  leveraged  on  the 
existing legal or regulatory frameworks developed for consumer protection in general, there 
is a need to recognise the limitations of such general frameworks in addressing consumer 
protection  in  the  context  of  promoting  a  more  inclusive  financial  system.  A  consumer 
protection regime that relies on full disclosures may mean very little to consumers that have 
neither the capacity to understand the disclosures, nor the ability to exercise the appropriate 
choice  between  the  products  being  offered.  Existing  consumer  protection  frameworks  may 
need to be adapted to address the specific needs of the more vulnerable groups. 
Finally,  the  development  of  a  financial  education  programme  is  vital  to  enhance  financial 
capability for consumers to participate effectively in the financial system that is dynamic and 
fast  evolving.  We  are  now  in  an  environment  that  is  seeing  the  proliferation  of  financial 
products and services and the emergence of electronic finance. Greater financial literacy will 
also ensure that the financial industry will be responsive to the more  discerning demands. 
Being  ill  equipped  or  having  a  lack  of  understanding  of  the  nature  of  the  products  could 
increase vulnerability to misselling by financial institutions or to fraud and scams. Proficiency 
in financial knowledge will contribute towards greater empowerment and competent financial 
decisions.  Studies  have  shown  that  financial  education  that  is  made  available  at  an  early 
age, in the school education system, will strengthen this potential and enhance the greater 
financial inclusion.  
In  Malaysia,  the  commitment  to  the  financial  inclusion  agenda  is  legislated  under  the  new 
Central  Bank  of  Malaysia  Act  2009  which  provides  as  one  of  our  primary  functions  –  to 
promote the development of a sound, progressive and inclusive financial system. Malaysia’s 
financial inclusion agenda has been developed in concert with the development of the overall 
financial sector and encompasses the five broad strategies.  
Our blueprint for the development of the financial sector for the next decade will give special 
focus on financial inclusion and consumer protection. In the previous decade, the focus was 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
to enhance the access to financing, financial education and putting in place the supporting 
institutional  arrangements  to  enhance  financial  inclusion.  While  these  efforts  will  be 
intensified further in this next decade, greater leverage will be made on technology and on 
new institutional arrangements to extend the outreach to the range of users from households 
to  micro  enterprises  and  small  and  medium  scale  enterprises.  Also  important  is  the 
development of the enabling environment conducive for innovation of the range of financial 
products  and  services  needed  for  the  spectrum  of  society  and  businesses  and  for  cost 
effective pricing to take place. This will be reinforce by the supporting infrastructure for the 
effective  management  of  risks  by  financial  institutions;  strengthening  of  the  development 
financial institutions; and putting in place a comprehensive consumer protection, redress and 
education  framework.  These  strategies  are  pursued  under  a  collaborative  approach  that 
effectively combines with the efforts by the private sector.  
Let me conclude. Policymakers have a critical role and a distinct opportunity in these present 
times to effect significant and positive change in the development of more inclusive financial 
systems.  This  change  will  not  only  catalyze  progress  for  the  poorest  and  marginalized 
segments of society, but also uplift those groups that are already in the financial mainstream 
but  are  highly  challenged  by  the  environment.  This  will  ultimately  serve  to  achieve  truly 
inclusive  growth  and  development.  This  is  an  important  agenda,  and  our  efforts  must  be 
trained on interventions that will encourage competition, provide the right incentives to both 
financial service providers and individuals, and help overcome access barriers in ways that 
will contribute to growth and stability. While the challenges are significant, the prospects for 
improved living standards and hopes for the millions of people in poverty and the struggle for 
survival  should  encourage  us  to  persevere  and  advance  forward  with  greater  focus  and 
purpose.  
Before I end my remarks, allow me to express my appreciation to our key partners in making 
this forum a reality. I wish to record my appreciation to Her Royal Highness Princess Maxima 
for her support to this Forum in her capacity as United Nations Special Advocate for Inclusive 
Finance  for  Development.  The  Alliance  for  Financial  Inclusion,  the  Consultative  Group  to 
Assist the Poor and the OECD’s International Network on Financial Education have become 
important  collaborators  in  our  aspirations  to  promote  more  inclusive  financial  systems.  I 
would also like to thank representatives from Aflatoun and CentiQ in the Netherlands and all 
the policymakers who are participating as speakers and experts at this forum.  
On that note, I wish all of you a productive forum over the next two days.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
