Christian Noyer: The G20’s current challenges – combining new 
regulations and economic growth 
Introductory  remarks  by  Mr  Christian  Noyer,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France,  at  the  Paris 
EUROPLACE  Conference  “The  G20’s  current  challenges:  combining  new  regulations  and 
economic growth”, Paris, 5–6 July 2011. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is my great pleasure to take part in this Paris-Europlace conference and I warmly thank the 
organizers for their kind invitation. I am very glad to introduce this roundtable dedicated to a 
major  challenge,  regulators  and  policy  makers  are  facing  at  the  current  juncture,  that  is 
ensuring a smooth combination between new regulations and economic growth.  
The crisis has taught us that market economies may be intrinsically unstable. And the costs 
of this instability are considerable. Whether we look at unemployment, or public debts, it will 
take  many  years  to  deal  with  the  legacy  of  those  few  months  where  the  global  financial 
system was on the verge of collapse. Long term consequences still need to be assessed, 
and, as you know, there are questions about whether the crisis has – or not – permanently 
affected the growth potential of advanced economies.  
Therefore, curbing the tendency of our economies to alternate phases of booms and busts 
and reducing the procyclicality of our financial systems, are legitimate public policy priorities. 
Indeed, with a strong impulse from the G20 and the French Presidency, we have embarked 
into  an  ambitious  financial  reform  agenda  whose  explicit  objective  is  to  prevent  any 
recurrence of such intense episodes of financial turbulence and instability.  
On the other hand, growth cannot occur without efficient and developed financial systems to 
allocate  savings,  redistribute  risks,  and  provide  liquidity  to  the  economy.  There  is  ample 
evidence  that  financially  repressed  economies  are  penalized  in  terms  of  investment  and 
economic growth.  
The challenge, therefore, is to find the right balance, as suggested by the title of our session. 
Looking at our achievements to date, my sense is that we are definitely moving in the right 
direction.  But,  of  course,  this  is  still  work  in  progress:  regulators  and  policymakers  are 
constantly looking for additional evidence and insights on how to best reconcile stability and 
efficiency in the developments of our financial systems.  
The  thrust  of  our  efforts  has  been  to  increase  the  robustness  of  financial  institutions  and 
infrastructures. It is not in our power to eliminate financial shocks and volatility. It is our duty 
to  make  sure  that  they  can  be  absorbed  without  undue  consequences  for  the  institutions 
themselves  and  the  whole  economy.  Building  up  appropriate  cushions  was  therefore  a 
priority and a necessity to protect tax payers from the consequences of future turbulences. 
First  and  foremost,  a  robust  system  needs  strongly  capitalized  banks.  Basel  3  will  make 
essential  contributions in  this  regard,  by  increasing  both  the  quantity  and  quality  of  banks’ 
capital.  
Second,  progress  is  being  made  to  reduce  the  vulnerabilities  intrinsic  to  the  derivatives 
markets.  We,  regulators,  tend  to  think  that  clearing  and  settling  those  derivatives  through 
CCCPs  will  considerably  reduce  aggregate  counterparty  risk,  limit  the  contagion  channels, 
hence strengthening the whole financial system’s robustness. I am fully aware that there are 
doubts, in some parts of the financial community, on the opportunity of such an evolution. 
There are fears it will lead to greater standardization of derivative products and less flexible 
markets overall. This is clearly a case, where the optimum trade-off between efficiency and 
stability  is  different  according  to  the  market  and  regulator’s  point  of  view.  But,  of  course, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
the  economic  recovery  and,  more  generally, 
regulators’ views are naturally finding their way into legislation, especially on this issue, as 
you know, in the United States.  
More  generally,  when  any  new  financial  regulations  are  designed,  two  polar  views  were 
expressed.  
One view is that regulatory reforms will take a significant toll on the economy. The argument 
is because they would raise, in this case, the cost of funding for the economy. It is feared that 
financial institutions will then pass this cost on to the private sector through an increase in 
lending  rates  or  worse  abandon  certain  financing  segments.  This  would  in  turn  have  a 
negative effect on output growth.  
The other polar view is that a more stringent regulation will not have any negative impact on 
growth because it would essentially reduce the frequency of crisis, hence improving the long 
term performance of the economy.  
Both views are well-informed and of interest. They come from fairly different constituencies 
and  have  very  different  underpinnings.  Having  studied  carefully  all  the  arguments  made 
during  the  last  months,  let  me  give  you  my  personal  sense,  at  this  stage,  on  the  good 
regulatory equilibrium.  
First,  some  consequences  of  the  new  regulations  are  difficult  to  predict  and  should  be 
carefully observed. Quantifying precisely the effect of the reforms on the economy is not an 
easy task. The phasing-in period of Basel 3 has been specifically designed to be consistent 
with 
to  minimize  potential  adverse 
consequences on banks and the macro-economy.  
Second, we all know also that any regulation may have unintended consequences. One of 
those, of course, is to create incentives for regulatory arbitrage. It is therefore crucial that the 
reforms  be  applied  fully  and  consistently  across  jurisdictions.  It  is  also  important  to  make 
sure  that  a  significant  part  of  financial  intermediation  does  not  shift  to  the  unregulated 
(shadow) financing sector, as this would not help reduce the likelihood of disruptive financial 
crises.  
Finally, increasing robustness is a necessary but not sufficient condition to get safer financial 
systems. Another important element is to ensure that risk remains at acceptable levels and 
carefully managed. This is, so to speak, one specificity of our approach in this country. We 
believe  in  strong  and  efficient  supervision.  We  don’t  think  that  bigger  cushions  are  a 
substitute for competent supervisors. We are strong supporters, in our jargon, of the “Pillar 2” 
approach, whereby the supervisor is in charge, at any single moment, to check the adequacy 
of  capital  buffers  with  the  effective  level  of  risk  in  the  system.  Needless  to  say,  we  also 
strongly support the development of macro prudential tools allowing authorities to detect and 
prevent  systemic  risks.  Given  that  all  economic  cycles  are  not  simultaneous,  to  be  fully 
efficient,  those  tools  should  be  set  and  implemented  at  each  jurisdiction’s  level  and  not  a 
regional one, in order to take into account national cycles and the level of risks of individual 
economies.  
Overall, I can assure you we are very keen to monitor in real time the economic impact of 
financial regulation. For the first time, economic and systemic assessments have been made 
of  the  new  projected  Basel  3  framework.  We  will  continue  to  update  them  permanently.  A 
good  example  of  our  constant  vigilance  relates  to  projected  liquidity  ratios,  where  the 
systemic impact and implications for monetary policies are being thoroughly reviewed at this 
time.  
 To  conclude,  let  me  emphasize  that  policy  makers  are  fully  aware  of  possible  macro 
consequences of regulatory reforms and will be eager to limit the economic costs. Beyond 
broad effects on growth, it is also clear that the new regulations should neither derail financial 
systems nor favor some particular business models over others.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Yet, there was, and still is, a need to move from a financial world of excessive risk taking and 
heavy  regulatory  arbitrage  to  a  new  system  of  better  quality  capital  and  increased  risk 
capture. An implementation of the Basel III package endorsed by the G20 will provide the 
appropriate  foundations  for  such  a  system,  provided  that  phase-in  arrangements  are 
respected and implementation is coordinated globally.  
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
