Miguel  Fernández  Ordóñez:  Seeking  solutions  to  Spain’s  economic, 
financial and fiscal issues 
Address  by  Mr  Miguel  Fernández  Ordóñez,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain,  to  the  Annual 
Assembly of the Instituto de Empresa Familiar (IEF) Madrid, 23 May 2011. 
 Many thanks for inviting me to talk at your Assembly. And since one of the functions of your 
Institute is to seek solutions to the legal and institutional environment in which the company 
moves, I’ve decided to focus my address today on what I think about this matter.  
Resolving a country’s economic problems should be no different from what any individual or 
company does to improve its situation. First, acknowledge that we have problems; second, 
identify the changes needed; and third, apply them. I’ll try to apply these guidelines to what, 
in my view, are our main problems: the relatively low level of educational attainment of the 
labour force; the need to adjust the imbalances accumulated over the course of 14 years of 
expansion; massive unemployment; and, for a year now, the mistrust of the markets to which 
we have to resort for funding. Let’s begin by looking at two examples where problems were 
not properly identified. 
The first of these was thinking that the main source of our difficulties was the international 
financial  crisis  and  not  the  imbalances  accumulated  further  to  a  long  expansion  based  on 
indebtedness  and  the  deterioration  of  our  competitiveness.  Undeniably,  the  international 
crisis worsened our economy’s situation by prompting a worldwide recession and the closure 
of the funding markets. But, as we now fortunately acknowledge, in Spain we had our own 
problems that needed resolving.  
Another  example  of  not  realising  or  not  wishing  to  acknowledge  problems  can  be  seen  in 
those who claim that, to redress our high budget deficit, it is not vital to make spending cuts. 
It’s  not  right  to  say  that  spending  cuts,  appropriately  adopted  in  my  view  by  the  central 
government and by certain regional governments, were not needed. A responsible attitude 
should lead to recognition that it is not possible to reduce a deficit that had climbed to 11% to 
3% of GDP without making far-reaching cuts in public spending.  
As  to  the  second  task,  namely  the  search  for  solutions  to  resolve  our  problems,  our 
Parliament has correctly identified two of the changes needed to tackle the problems created 
by  the  imbalances  incubated  during  the  expansionary  phase:  the  reduction  of  the  budget 
deficit and the restructuring of part of our banking system. As regards fiscal consolidation, 
the Stability Programme that has targeted a deficit of 3% by 2013 is an ambitious plan. It has 
been recognised by the European Union and has been met in its first year. Accordingly, all 
tiers of government – central, regional and local alike – must rigorously fulfil the targets set 
for the current and coming years.  
Turning  to  the  identification  of  the  problems  posed  by  part  of  our  banking  system,  the 
government  and  Parliament  reacted  promptly.  As  early  as  2009  the  FROB  (Fund  for  the 
Orderly Restructuring of the Banking Sector) legislation was approved, allowing the start of 
the restructuring of an  extensive number of savings banks. And, whenever necessary, the 
government  and  Parliament  have  not  hesitated  to  adopt  further  legislation  so  as  to  speed 
through and conclude this process, as evidenced by the approval of the Savings Bank Law in 
2010 and, more recently, the passing of the Royal Decree-Law on the capitalisation of our 
credit institutions. The fact these regulations have been approved with an acceptable degree 
of Parliamentary consensus is most positive.  
In this case, as in that of cutting the deficit, it is expected that savings bank restructuring will 
be completed how and when the Parliament has decreed. Despite affecting a limited part of 
the  banking  system,  the  restructuring  has  generated  such  noise  that  the  doubts  as  to 
whether the legislator should have adopted more drastic solutions are understandable. But I 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
should  say  that  some  of  the  alternatives,  such  as  injecting  capital  into  the  savings  banks 
without  making  this  conditional  upon  their  restructuring  and  resizing,  might  have  entailed 
more  disadvantages  than  advantages,  compared  with  the  option  actually  chosen  by  the 
legislator. 
Unlike other countries which found that their major banks had collapsed practically from one 
day to the next, the problem of the Spanish banking system was confined to a part of the 
savings  bank  sector.  And  I  stress  “a  part”,  since  some  of  our  savings  banks  are  perfectly 
sound  when  set  against  the  commercial  banks.  However,  during  the  upturn  some  savings 
banks  had  pursued  a  model  centred  on  high  credit  growth  with  high  exposure  to  the  real 
estate development and construction sector. With the arrival of the crisis, the shortcomings of 
this  model  became  clearly  evident.  In  the  new  setting,  with  a  rapid  deterioration  in  asset 
quality, with margins diminishing and with business volume expectations much lower than in 
the past, it could be seen that it was essential to restructure balance sheets and reduce the 
sector’s capacity, which had expanded in prior years in parallel with the buoyancy of credit. 
Patently,  too,  these  institutions  were  excessively  fragmented,  which  increased  their 
difficulties in raising finance on the wholesale funding markets. Finally, the crisis also brought 
to light the obstacles arising from the corporate structure of savings banks, which prevented 
them from raising high-quality capital on the markets and which, frequently, did not provide 
sufficiently for best-practice governance arrangements.  
Had capital been injected into the savings banks without making such aid conditional upon 
what  is  inevitably  a  longer,  riskier  and  more  complex  process  of  restructuring  these 
institutions, that would have been of no use in resolving our main problems. Therefore, it was 
opted to establish this conditionality and to promote an integration process designed to bring 
about sizes that would enable the institutions to be more efficient and to more readily obtain 
funding from the markets; to implement capacity-reduction plans; to introduce management 
changes;  to  write  down  balance  sheets  with  a  charge  to  private  funds;  to  convert  savings 
banks  into  banks,  and  to  raise  capital  on  the  markets.  True,  a  plan  of  this  scale  and 
complexity  does  not  enable  difficulties  to  be  overcome  overnight.  Yet  it  is  not  an 
overstatement to say that, once the process has been concluded, it will have brought about a 
reform that should be valid for many years. 
Let’s now look at our economy’s biggest problem: the difficulties our legal and institutional 
framework poses for job creation and which mean that, even in good times, Spain is one of 
the  countries  with  the  highest  unemployment  rates  in  the  world.  Earlier  I  referred  to  the 
importance  of  identifying  and  acknowledging  problems.  It  suffices  to  look  at  the  figures 
available and, in particular, at our very high unemployment rate – at 21.3% – to see that we 
have  a  serious  home-grown  problem,  stemming  from  the  shortcomings  of  our  legal  and 
institutional framework. Pick up a copy of The Economist and go to the final pages, where 
there is a table with the economic data for the 40 biggest economies in the world. You’ll see 
that the vast majority of these countries have unemployment rates below 10% and that only 
two of them, Spain and South Africa, surpass the striking 20% threshold. Sometimes these 
high figures are attributed to other structural factors, such as the lower level of educational 
attainment and productivity. On other occasions, more conjunctural factors such as the real 
estate  bubble  are  mentioned.  But  if  we  compare  ourselves  with  other  countries,  the 
difference  is  a  legal  and  institutional  framework  that  seriously  hampers  labour  supply. 
Because,  as  you  can  see,  these  40  countries  include  the  developed  and  less  developed; 
some that have not had a real estate bubble and others that have, even bigger than Spain’s; 
some with a higher level of educational attainment than Spain, but many others far below us; 
countries with high productivity per employee, but others with much lower productivity than 
Spain. And yet, as I said, most of them have single-figure unemployment rates, at less than 
half the Spanish rate. 
But perhaps where it can be most clearly seen why our unemployment problem is caused by 
a singular institutional and legal framework that hampers employment is the performance of 
unemployment not at times of crisis as at present, but during boom periods. As you know, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the lowest unemployment rate we have achieved, namely 8% in mid-2007, is far higher than 
that in the other European economies when their growth was highest. 
This  is  why  it’s  crucial  to  eliminate  the  obstacles  to  offering  jobs  to  young  and  old,  to 
everybody in fact. With the right institutions in place, not only would entrepreneurs be able to 
offer a higher number of jobs that were profitable for their companies but, more importantly, 
workers would have the option to decide whether they wanted to accept these jobs or not. 
Because  the  problem  now  is  that,  with  no  jobs  being  offered,  they  do  not  even  have  the 
possibility of deciding. 
It is sometimes claimed that, whatever our legal and institutional framework, unemployment 
can  only  fall  if  we  manage  to  substantially  raise  the  GDP  growth  rate.  Admittedly,  past 
experience shows that, on average, the Spanish economy has created jobs when it has been 
able to grow at over 2%. But these relationships are not unmovable since they are precisely 
an  outcome  of  the  institutional  framework  in  place.  If  structural  changes  are  made  to 
eliminate the obstacles to offering jobs, lower unemployment rates with lower GDP growth 
rates may be attained.  
The reforms aimed at increasing the supply of jobs are, moreover, absolutely unavoidable 
now we are in the Monetary Union. And this should be stressed because, although I believe 
there  is  broad  consensus  on  the  need  to  adjust  our  economy,  there  is  still  not  sufficient 
recognition  that  this  adjustment  must  be  different  from  those  made  when  we  had  the 
possibility of devaluing our currency. Back then employment could be generated through the 
reduction  in  wage  costs  that  a  devaluation  entailed  and  thanks  to  the  improvement  in 
competitiveness  that  immediately  came  about  in  companies.  But  this  formula  is  no  longer 
viable,  and  thankfully  so,  because  the  benefits  for  Spain  of  being  part  of  the  euro  far 
outweigh those of retaining the peseta in the long run. But if we accept this constraint now 
upon us, we must be consistent and accept that this time we can no longer, as we did on 
several occasions in the past, adjust our competitiveness and, therefore, increase our growth 
rate without changing our singular institutional framework.  
And  in  this  forum  I  should  mention  the  responsibility  that  large  and  small  firms  alike  must 
embrace. With all due diligence they should adopt the organisational reforms and adapt their 
working  procedures  so  as  to  enable  them  to  use  as  soon  as  possible  all  the  changes 
introduced into our legal and institutional framework aimed at making hiring easier. 
Let me move on now to the problems I mentioned at the start of my address. These concern 
the markets’ doubts, reflected in the higher cost that the Kingdom of Spain has been paying 
for a year to raise funding. Blaming this on greedy or evil markets would be a waste of time, 
and  might  distract  us  from  the  fact  that  these  costs  can  only  be  reduced  if  we  adopt  the 
domestic measures and reforms needed as soon as possible. True, there are other external 
factors  that  generate  what  is  occasionally  unwarranted  mistrust  of  the  Kingdom  of  Spain. 
Undoubtedly, factors such as market irrationality, herding or procyclicality are significant, but 
they will not foreseeably change. There are also other factors, such as the mistakes made by 
European  Union  Member  States  when  attempting  to  resolve  their  problems,  that  are  no 
doubt also responsible for this higher cost, and the proof is that the sense of incapacity being 
conveyed to the markets does not only affect our country, as shown by the abnormally high 
level of most euro area countries’ CDSs. But it must also be accepted that the possibility of 
improving economic governance in Europe is in the hands of many other countries and not 
only Spain.  
This is why we should focus on easing the concerns of the markets, which do largely depend 
on us. These concerns are those that I have mentioned: there are doubts as to whether we 
will  be  capable  of  seeing  through  the  fiscal  adjustment,  concluding  the  restructuring  of 
savings banks and changing the institutional framework in a way conducive to job creation in 
Spain. As to the fiscal adjustment and to financial restructuring, I believe the means and the 
schedule set by Parliament are correct, and now it’s a question of complying. However, in the 
case  of  improving  the  supply  of  jobs  in  Spain,  there  must  be  an  urgent  recognition  of  our 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
problems  by  all,  and  reform  measures  should  be  adopted  as  soon  as  possible.  From 
December to March the markets acknowledged the last two measures adopted in the fiscal 
and financial field, namely pension reform and the Royal Decree-Law on recapitalisation. Yet 
the  figures  of  more  than  20%  for  total  unemployment  and  of  around  40%  for  youth 
unemployment continue to appear on all market screens, figures that investors consider to 
be a sign of inability to promptly attain close to potential growth.  
We  have  to  change  the  institutional  and  legal  framework  of  employment  not  because  the 
markets demand it, but because it is in our interest. All citizens want lower unemployment 
rates and higher wages in those industries or companies where productivity is growing more. 
But we must also be aware that if the obstacles to job creation are not lifted, the markets will 
ultimately perceive that the only way Spain can recover competitiveness within the Monetary 
Union will be by maintaining very low GDP growth rates over many years, as has occurred in 
other  countries.  The  solution  to  fiscal  problems,  no  matter  how  appropriate  the  policies 
adopted  are,  will  be  much  more  complicated  if  public  revenue  is  poor  or  if  we  carry  on 
spending 3% of GDP on transfers to the unemployed for any length of time. Likewise, in the 
case of the financial system, restructuring will be slower if low growth diminishes the volume 
of banking business and increases bad debts.  
 We should not accept having to pay a spread of around 200 basis points for much longer. 
This not only increases the portion of public spending set aside to pay interest but, above all, 
it  might  ultimately  hamper  business  financing,  reducing  the  supply  of  credit  and  raising  its 
cost.  To  date,  credit  figures  have  behaved  in  Spain  as  the  macroeconomic  models  might 
have  predicted.  After  a  long  phase  of  excessive  debt,  households  and  firms  must 
deleverage, and logically their demand for credit should be contained. And as was likewise to 
be expected, the reduction in credit is affecting those sectors such as construction and real 
estate more adversely than other sectors which are even recording positive growth in credit. 
Past experience also teaches us that we will only see an increase in the solvent demand for 
credit  that  is  higher  than  nominal  GDP  growth  when  sufficient  time  has  elapsed  since  the 
cyclical  trough  in  the  economy.  All  this  is  true  but,  if  we  do  not  sufficiently  narrow  the 
Kingdom  of  Spain’s  spread,  complying  with  our  fiscal  and  financial  commitments  and 
changing our institutional framework for employment, credit developments in Spain may be 
affected  not  only  by  the  lack  of  momentum  of  solvent  demand,  but  also  by  supply-side 
limitations. 
I would like to conclude on an optimistic note. I am convinced that, just as the need for fiscal 
consolidation or pension reform was ultimately recognised, so too will the unavoidable need 
to change our legal and institutional framework in such a way as to allow entrepreneurs to 
increase the supply of jobs and workers to decide whether to take them. In the past 50 years, 
Spain  has  made  numerous  reforms  across  its  economic  structure.  Tariffs  have  been  lifted 
and companies privatised, and competition has been fomented in many industries. Yet the 
institutional framework for employment has remained practically and essentially unchanged 
since the onset of democracy. Meanwhile, in recent decades, other economies, most notably 
the  Nordic  countries,  have  introduced  so-called  flexicurity,  i.e.  they  have  introduced  the 
flexibility needed to reduce the unemployment rate and to increase wages where productivity 
is  growing  most,  and  they  have  at  the  same  time  maintained  and  even  strengthened  the 
social protection which is a hallmark of our European model of society.  
Finally, the measures I have mentioned are not the only ones that should be adopted. The 
reform  agenda  is  an  extensive  one.  For  instance,  it  is  essential  to  reduce  administrative 
burdens, to simplify and coordinate economic regulation, and to alter oligopolistic structures, 
as  was  recently  recommended  by  the  Competition  Board  for  the  case  of  oil  products.  We 
could  draw  up  a  very  extensive  list  of  measures,  but  you  will  understand  –  and  I  hope 
appreciate – that, with limited time at my disposal, I have confined myself to what I consider 
most important and pressing. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
to  secondary  education.  Unfortunately, 
Given  the  importance  of  the  matter,  I  cannot  conclude  without  referring  to  our  level  of 
educational  attainment  and,  specifically, 
the 
measures  that  raise  educational  attainment  pose  a  problem;  unlike  the  reforms  we  have 
looked  at  today,  the  effects  of  potential  improvements  in  education  are  very  slow  and  this 
explains why the attention the subject requires is continuously put off. But this slowness in 
bearing fruit is precisely what justifies the need to undertake this task as soon as possible 
and, while waiting, we should reiterate that education is the most important problem facing 
our society and our economy in the medium term. 
 
Thank you very much.  
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
