Patrick Honohan: Publication of the Central Bank of Ireland Annual 
Report 2010 
Opening statement by Mr Patrick Honohan, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, at the 
publication of the Central Bank of Ireland Annual Report 2010, Dublin, 30 May 2011. 
 We  are  today  publishing  the  Central  Bank’s  2010  Annual  Report;  and  for  the  first  time  an 
Annual  Performance  Statement  on  our  financial  regulatory  work.  The  latter  is  a  new 
requirement under the Central Bank Reform Act of 2010. 
I  am  joined  today  by  my  colleagues,  Tony  Grimes,  Deputy  Governor  for  Central  Banking; 
Matthew  Elderfield,  Deputy  Governor  for  Financial  Regulation;  and  Gerry  Quinn,  Chief 
Operations Officer. 
Major challenges on several fronts engaged the Central Bank during 2010, and continue to 
do  so.  The  main  driving  force  remains  the  pressing  need  to  restore  stability  to  the  Irish 
banking  system.  The  Central  Bank  continues  to  work  with  the  ECB  to  ensure  that  the 
necessary  liquidity  is  available  to  allow  the  Irish  banking  sector  continue  to  function.  The 
Central  Bank  has  set  new,  tougher  capital  requirements  to  ensure  the  banks  are  strong 
enough to withstand future losses. We have brought in new consumer protection measures, 
not least in relation to the treatment of mortgage arrears. We have introduced new standards 
of corporate governance to the financial services industry and we have embarked on a major 
programme of enhancing supervision and enforcement. 
Over the past year, the Central Bank has continued to provide policy advice to Government 
on national economic issues, and to make public our views on current economic conditions 
and  broad  policy  options.  With  the  Government’s  access  to  market  funding  severely 
curtailed,  the  Central  Bank  did  not  hesitate  to  recommend  a  prompt  application  for 
assistance to the EU and IMF financial support facilities. It provides a window of time during 
which  the  Government  can  demonstrate  its  adherence  to  a  convergent  fiscal  strategy, 
thereby helping to rebuild market confidence. To date, the programme is firmly on track.  
Turning to our own financial accounts, the Central Bank’s profit for the year to 31 December 
2010 amounted to €840.9 million. After retained earnings, surplus income of €671 million will 
be  paid  to  the  Exchequer.  As  I  said,  are  also  publishing  today  an  Annual  Performance 
Statement (Financial Regulation) for 2010 and 2011. This comprises two main sections – a 
review of performance in 2010 and a regulatory performance plan for 2011.  
Our key priority remains the resolution of the banking crisis and helping to put the banking 
system on a sound footing. 
We are now at your disposal for questions.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
