Masaaki Shirakawa: Japan’s economy and monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Masaaki  Shirakawa,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  Kisaragi-kai 
Meeting, Tokyo, 25 July 2011. 
 Introduction 
I am privileged to have this opportunity to speak before such a large audience today. 
Four  and  a  half  months  have  passed  since  the  Great  East  Japan  Earthquake,  an 
unprecedented  tragic  event.  Immediately  after  the  earthquake,  production  plunged  mainly 
due  to  the  destruction  of  capital  equipment,  supply-chain  disruptions,  and  electric  power 
shortages.  After  passing  through  the  worst  period,  however,  production  activity  has  been 
recovering  at  a  faster-than-expected  pace  with  a  gradual  easing  of  various  supply-side 
constraints. At the same time, there is also the harsh reality that many still bear hardships 
that cause them restless days. The conduct of monetary policy is by nature mainly based on 
a  macroeconomic  analysis.  However,  we  recognize  that  the  damage  from  the  earthquake 
disaster  varies  by  area  and  industry.  I  myself  visited  the  disaster  areas  and  now  have  a 
greater  recognition  that  macroeconomic  perspectives  are  not  enough  to  fully  describe  the 
true state of our economy. Even from a macroeconomic perspective, although downside risk 
has been receding with respect to the supply-side constraints that emerged immediately after 
the earthquake, Japan’s economy is starting to confront another new problem of uncertainty 
regarding electric power supply in the long run. Even before the earthquake, our economy 
had faced various pressing structural problems, including the rapid aging of the population. 
So, this brings us to the end of a somewhat lengthy introduction. Today I will first describe 
the  current  state  of  Japan’s  economy  and  its  outlook.  After  illustrating  the  challenges 
confronting our economy, I will explain the Bank of Japan’s conduct of monetary policy. In my 
remarks, I would like to pay due attention to the time horizon by clearly delineating short-term 
and medium- to long-term periods. 
Developments in overseas economies 
I. 
I  will  begin  with  developments  in  overseas  economies,  which  form  the  basis  for  analyzing 
those in Japan’s economy. The impact of the recent earthquake has been enormous, and 
recent economic debate tends to focus on the effects of the disaster. Needless to say, the 
global economy and financial markets keep changing while we deal with the aftermath of the 
disaster. After all, when the supply-side constraints are resolved, developments in overseas 
economies will be the most significant driver of Japan’s economic activity in the short run. 
The  U.S.  economy  has  been  growing  at  a  slower  pace  since  this  spring.  This  is  partly 
because households’ real purchasing power has declined due to the rise in gasoline prices 
seen until around spring, and there have been difficulties in procuring automobile parts due 
to the disaster in Japan. It should be noted, however, that gasoline prices have fallen back 
somewhat  since  May  and  Japan-led  supply-chain  disruptions  have  started  to  be  resolved. 
Therefore, the view held by the U.S. authorities and economists is that the recent economic 
slowdown is generally transitory, and their baseline scenario is that the pace of growth will 
resume a recovery supported by the accommodative financial environment. Of course, such 
an  outlook  entails  uncertainties.  The  focal  point  is  on  how  to  assess  balance-sheet 
adjustment  pressure.  Recent  data  on  household  debt  and  housing  prices  indicate  that 
balance-sheet adjustment in the household sector is ongoing. The recovery in employment 
has also been disappointing. Just as in the case for Japan in the 1990s, after the bursting of 
the  large  credit  bubble,  the  economy  often  continues  to  face  a  low  growth  rate  for  a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
financial 
increases  and 
the  creditworthiness  of 
protracted period, although there are some short-term boosts reflecting the implementation of 
fiscal stimulus packages or accommodative monetary policies. Having said that, it might not 
be appropriate to conclude that the U.S. economy will follow a path similar to the one Japan 
once experienced, taking into account the U.S. economy’s distinctive flexibility and the fact 
that  it  is  a  commodity-exporting  country.  Careful  attention  should  be  paid  to  how  strongly 
balance-sheet adjustment pressure continues to constrain growth in the U.S. economy. 
The  European  economy  as  a  whole  continues  to  recover  moderately,  although  there  are 
large  differences  in  the  economic  growth  rates  between  the  euro  area’s  major  countries, 
such  as  Germany,  and  its  peripheral  countries,  including  Greece.  The  German  economy 
maintains  its  robustness;  for  example,  the  latest  unemployment  rate  is  7.0  percent,  the 
lowest level since the reunification of West and East Germany. On the other hand, peripheral 
countries  are  experiencing  a  tough  time,  as  witnessed  by  the  recent  Greek  growth  data, 
which showed an 8.1 percent decline on a year-on-year basis. Regarding prospects for the 
European economy, the focal point clearly is developments in the sovereign debt problem in 
peripheral countries. The essence of the problem is an adverse feedback loop among fiscal 
conditions, the financial system, and the real economy. This feedback loop works as follows. 
If  confidence  in  the  government  declines  due  to  the  expansion  of  fiscal  deficits,  the 
government  bond  rate 
institutions 
deteriorates.  An  overall  increase  in  interest  rates  could  cause  further  fiscal  deterioration 
because an associated economic downturn reduces tax revenue. As a result, interest rates, 
including  those  on  government  bonds,  could  increase  further.  Such  an  adverse  feedback 
loop  among  fiscal  conditions,  the  financial  system,  and  the  real  economy  is  the  inherent 
nature  of  the  sovereign  debt  problem.  If  the  sovereign  debt  problem  in  Europe  triggers 
instability in global financial markets, it will exert an adverse impact on the global economy 
as  a  whole.  To  address  the  problem,  further  efforts  in  the  following  two  areas  are 
indispensable. One is strenuous efforts by Greece and other problem-stricken countries to 
reduce their fiscal deficits and to advance a structural reform to strengthen competitiveness. 
The other is to “buy time.” The European Union (EU) and the International Monetary Fund 
(IMF)  need  to  work  together  to  provide  financial  support  to  the  problem-stricken  countries 
until those countries’ efforts produce noticeable outcomes.  In this regard, Greece, the EU, 
and the IMF have been taking necessary steps. The Bank has been monitoring the situation 
carefully. 
The growth rates in emerging and commodity-exporting economies are still at high levels, but 
these  have  recently  been  slowing  somewhat  mainly  due  to  the  heightened  inflationary 
pressures and associated monetary tightening. In China, the year-on-year rate of increase in 
the  consumer  price  index  (CPI)  was  6.4  percent  in  June  2011,  up  substantially  from  the 
2.9 percent  exhibited  a  year  ago.  In  response,  the  People’s  Bank  of  China  has  raised  the 
renminbi benchmark rates five times since October 2010. Other emerging economies have 
also raised interest rates, but in many cases the real short-term interest rate, which subtracts 
the inflation rate from the nominal interest rate, is significantly below the long-term trend of 
the economic growth rate. In any case, deceleration in growth is inevitable and necessary for 
emerging and commodity-exporting economies to achieve sustainable growth. Yet, there is a 
considerable  degree  of  uncertainty  as  to  whether  these economies  will  be  able  to  make  a 
soft landing by achieving price stability and economic growth at the same time. 
I have explained the current state of the economy, the baseline scenario of the outlook, and 
associated risks by region – namely, the United States, Europe, and emerging economies. 
The Bank projects that the global economy as a whole is likely to continue realizing relatively 
high growth led by growth in emerging and commodity-exporting economies. The forecasts 
by the IMF released in June represent an upbeat projection for the growth rate of the global 
economy,  with  growth  of  4.3  percent  in  2011  and  4.5  percent  in  2012.  For  reference,  the 
average  annual  growth  rate  of  the  global  economy  over  the  30  years  since  1980  was 
3.3 percent and that over the 10 years to 2007, which includes the period of the global credit 
bubble,  was  4.0  percent.  This  suggests  that  the  projected  growth  rates  this  year  and  next 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
year  are  at  a  historically  high  level.  Therefore,  the  global  economy  as  a  whole  is  likely  to 
continue realizing relatively high growth; however, as I mentioned earlier, when considered 
by region, such an outlook entails uncertainties and various risks warrant sustained attention. 
The current situation of Japan’s economy and the bank’s baseline scenario 
II. 
Based on the outlook for overseas economies, now I would like to explain the current state of 
and outlook for Japan’s economy. 
As I mentioned at the beginning, production plunged immediately after the earthquake as the 
economy abruptly faced supply-side constraints. Although the initial problem was supply-side 
constraints,  private  consumption  also  weakened  because  the  combination  of  increased 
uncertainties about the future and voluntary restraint by consumers led to a deterioration in 
household  sentiment.  As  a  result,  in  March,  industrial  production  registered  the  largest 
month-to-month  drop  on  record,  surpassing  the  decline  following  the  Lehman  shock.  It 
should be noted, however, that the economic plunge after the earthquake was different from 
the one following the Lehman shock. The recent plunge was mainly caused by the supply 
shock, while it was the “evaporation of demand” after the Lehman shock that took corporate 
activity  into  a  downward  spiral  of  contraction.  Therefore,  unlike  the  time  after  the  Lehman 
shock, we were able to make a reasonable projection at an early stage that production would 
recover once the supply-side constraints eased. 
In  fact,  production  is  recovering  quickly  as  progress  in  the  restoration  of  supply-chain 
disruptions  has  been  made  at  a  faster-than-expected  pace.  This  recovery  is  led  by  the 
automobile  industry,  which  experienced  an  especially  sharp  downturn.  At  least  for  this 
summer,  it  seems  the  electric  power  shortages  are  not  constraining  economic  activity  as 
significantly  as  projected  immediately  after  the  earthquake,  reflecting  a  strengthening  of 
supply capacity by electric power companies and successful efforts to conserve energy and 
level out demand. Based on an overall judgment, taking into account the information from our 
business contacts, production is expected to recover to the pre-earthquake level sometime 
during July to September. Household sentiment is also improving somewhat. With regard to 
business  sentiment,  we  are  carefully  monitoring  business  fixed  investment  plans.  In  this 
regard, business sentiment is becoming firm, as evidenced by the June Tankan (Short-Term 
Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan), in which business fixed investment plans were 
revised upward from the March Tankan. 
After  overcoming  the  supply-side  constraints,  which  has  been  the  most  serious  cause  of 
concern, 
for  Japan’s  economy  will  rely  on  demand-side 
developments.  In  this  regard,  there  are  two  important  factors.  First,  it  seems  that  the 
economy can count on exports, which are likely to continue increasing on the back of strong 
growth in overseas economies. Second, demand arising from the rebuilding of capital stock 
that was damaged by the earthquake, or the so-called “rebuilding demand,” is expected to 
increase gradually. Although we have seen only a limited amount of rebuilding demand so 
far, such demand will become more noticeable as we get a clear overall picture of rebuilding 
in the coming period. Furthermore, although it might be slightly different from the rebuilding 
demand, private consumption data in the Tohoku region shows that there has been a large 
increase  in  the  so-called  “rebuilding-related  consumption”  –  namely,  consumption  for  the 
purpose  of  rebuilding  daily  lives,  including  the  purchase  of  new  durable  consumer  goods 
such as cars and electrical appliances. 
Based on the various information as I just described, Japan’s economy is expected to return 
to  a  moderate  recovery  path  from  the  second  half  of  fiscal  2011.  The  Bank  published  the 
Outlook  for  Economic  Activity  and  Prices  (hereafter  the  Outlook  Report)  in  late  April  and 
made  an  interim  assessment  in  July.  Looking  at  the  median  of  individual  Policy  Board 
members’ forecasts in the interim assessment, the year-on-year rate of increase in real GDP 
for fiscal 2011 is 0.4 percent. The figure is somewhat of a downward revision from the April 
2011  Outlook  Report.  This  is  mainly  attributable  to  a  smaller  carry-over  effect  from  fiscal 
the  short-term  prospects 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
2010 on GDP growth for fiscal 2011, reflecting the fact that the earthquake disaster resulted 
in  significant  negative  growth  in  the  January-March  quarter  of  2011.  The  forecast  for  the 
year-on-year rate of increase in real GDP for fiscal 2012 is 2.9 percent, broadly unchanged 
from the relatively high growth projected in the April 2011 Outlook Report. 
Let me turn to price developments. The pace of decline in the CPI has moderated steadily 
reflecting the improvement in the aggregate supply and demand balance. In April 2011, the 
year-on-year rate of change in the CPI turned positive for the first time in two years and four 
months since December 2008, and in May of this year it marked an increase of 0.6 percent. 
With regard to the outlook for price developments, the projection of international commodity 
prices is one key factor. The Bank projects that international commodity prices will continue 
to increase moderately along with strong growth in emerging economies. Another key factor 
is medium- to long-term expected rates of inflation. Based on forecasts made by economists, 
such rates remain stable at around 1 percent. The Bank has released the “understanding of 
medium-  to  long-term  price  stability”  (hereafter  the  “understanding”)  –  that  is,  the  level  of 
inflation that each Policy Board member understands, when conducting monetary policy, as 
being consistent with price stability over the medium to long term. Members’ “understanding” 
centers at around 1 percent, which is the same as the medium- to long-term expected rates 
of inflation forecasted by economists. We expect that medium- to long-term expected rates of 
inflation are likely to remain stable going forward. In this situation, the year-on-year rate of 
change  in  the  CPI  is  expected  to  remain  slightly  positive  with  the  aggregate  supply  and 
demand  balance  improving  as  a  trend  amid  economic  recovery.  In  the  July  interim 
assessment  of  the  April  2011  Outlook  Report,  the  median  of  Policy  Board  members’  CPI 
forecasts was an increase of 0.7 percent both for fiscal 2011 and 2012. 
It  should  be  noted,  however,  that  the  base  year  of  the  CPI  is  revised  every  five  years  in 
Japan. As the Bank has explained on various occasions, there will be a downward revision to 
the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI to be released in mid-August this year, based on 
the new base year. While rather technical, based on the methodology currently employed to 
compile the CPI in Japan, the CPI basket that comprises the goods the consumers would 
purchase is fixed. Therefore, as a longer period of time has elapsed since the base year, it 
becomes  increasingly  difficult  for  the  CPI  to  fully  reflect  the  impact  of  substantial  price 
declines  for  some  goods  for  which  the  volume  of  purchases  has  increased  due  to  a  price 
decline. This is the so-called “Laspeyres bias.” Typical examples of such bias are found in 
the prices of goods such as personal computers and televisions. As a result, after almost five 
years  from  the  previous  base-year  revision,  the  recent  figures  for  the  year-on-year  rate  of 
increase  in  the  CPI  have  a  somewhat  large  upward  bias,  and  therefore  are  likely  to  be 
revised  downward  all  at  once  in  the  scheduled  base-year  revision.  Although  some 
economists make public their estimates, it is difficult to accurately project the specific degree 
of  downward  revision  in  advance.  This  is  because,  in  addition  to  the  easy-to-estimate 
Laspeyres  bias,  the  revision  will  be  affected  by  the  composition  of  a  new  basket  and  the 
methodology  of  measuring  prices  of  individual  items.  Firms  and  households  make  their 
day-to-day  decisions  on  production  and  spending  on  the  basis  of  the  observed  prices  of 
individual goods. Therefore, the underlying trend of prices and people’s economic activity will 
not be affected by the base-year change of the price index, which is a technical revision in 
statistics. Nevertheless, the Bank will examine how this revision will be made, as well as its 
implications. 
Risk factors for the outlook 
III. 
I have explained the baseline scenario of the outlook for economic activity and prices that the 
Bank  considers  most  likely.  As  the  outlook  is  always  subject  to  uncertainties,  we  should 
acknowledge the risk that the economy will deviate from the baseline scenario. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Risks regarding overseas economies 
The first risk factor concerns prospects for overseas economies. I will not go into detail on 
this point, as I already covered this earlier, but I emphasize that there are respective risks in 
the United States, Europe, and emerging and commodity-exporting economies. In relation to 
the risk regarding overseas economies, attention should also be paid to developments in the 
foreign  exchange  markets.  If  uncertainties  about  the  prospects  for  the  global  economy 
heighten,  investors  increasingly  become  risk  averse  and  upward  pressures  tend  to  be 
exerted to those currencies perceived as relatively safe. In terms of changes in the nominal 
effective exchange rate of advanced economies after the  earthquake, the Swiss franc has 
appreciated most followed by the Japanese yen. Although the appreciation of the yen has 
some  benefit  of  reducing  the  cost  of  imported  energy  and  raw  materials,  it  could  have 
adverse  effects  on  the  economy  as  a  whole  through  a  decline  in  exports  and  corporate 
profits, as well as a deterioration in business sentiment, when the appreciation is caused by 
increased  uncertainties  about  overseas  economies.  Careful  monitoring  is  warranted  in  this 
regard. 
Risks regarding the effects of the earthquake disaster 
The second risk factor regarding the outlook for economic activity and prices concerns the 
medium- to long-term effects stemming from the recent earthquake disaster. The focal point 
of the effects of the disaster keeps changing as time passes. The risks that became apparent 
immediately  after  the  earthquake  –  such  as  a  delay  in  the  restoration  of  supply-chain 
disruptions and electric power shortages in this summer – have receded. However, I must 
say  that  the  somewhat  improved  household  sentiment  is  still  weak  compared  with  the 
pre-earthquake  level,  and  recovery  in  some  components  of  private  consumption  such  as 
eating  out  and  travel  expenses  has  been  slow.  Therefore,  developments  in  private 
consumption for the time being warrant careful examination. 
Recently,  uncertainty  has  increased  with  regard  to  electricity  supply  constraints,  which  will 
occur  when  more  nuclear  power  plants  fail  to  resume  operations  following  their  regular 
inspections.  In  that  case,  it  will  probably  be  difficult  for  some  time  to  completely  cover  a 
reduction  in  electricity  supply  by  other  measures.  Even  if  various  efforts  are  made,  the 
economy will likely continue to suffer from electric power shortages, mainly in summer and 
winter, in the coming years. Moreover, we are likely to bear higher costs anyway, either when 
some  of  the  electricity  generated  through  nuclear  power  is  replaced  by  thermal  power,  or 
when the use of nuclear power plants is maintained after strengthening safety measures. In 
either  case,  a  rise  in  electricity  costs  will  oppress  corporate  profits  and  households’  real 
purchasing  power,  which  could  in  turn  restrain  business  fixed  investment  and  private 
consumption. Furthermore, from a longer-term perspective, we should recognize the risk that 
the  electricity  supply  problem  will  dampen  the  medium-  to  long-term  growth  potential  of 
Japan’s  economy.  The  recent  experience  of  supply-chain  disruptions  has  renewed 
awareness  that  domestic  production  is  exposed  to  the  risk  of  earthquake  disasters.  In 
addition, if high uncertainties continue with regard to electric power supply, both in terms of 
stability  and  costs,  we  cannot  ignore  the  risk  that  the  shift  to  overseas  production  will  be 
accelerated. 
IV. 
The strengthening of medium- to long-term growth potential of Japan’s 
economy 
I  have  discussed  the  outlook  for  Japan’s  economy  with  emphasis  on  the  impact  of  the 
earthquake and developments in overseas economies. After long deliberation on the issue of 
rebuilding the economy after the earthquake disaster, I am increasingly convinced that we 
need to make renewed decisive efforts to tackle the challenge of strengthening medium- to 
long-term growth potential, which Japan’s economy had faced even before the disaster. I will 
now describe measures to strengthen Japan’s growth potential. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Need to strengthen the growth potential 
In order to ascertain a specific prescription, we need to make an accurate assessment of the 
confronting  problems.  Although  political  and  social  difficulties  are  often  pointed  to  as 
obstacles,  I  think  that  implementation  of  the  correct  prescription  is  also  hampered  by 
insufficient recognition of the bottom line for Japan’s economic problems and the causes of 
declines in the growth rate. 
In the long run, Japan’s economic growth rate has been on a declining trend: the average 
annual  growth  rate  was  5  percent  in  the  1970s,  around  4.5  percent  in  the  1980s,  around 
1.5 percent in the 1990s, and less than 1 percent in the 2000s. After making a successful 
take-off to high growth, every economy will sooner or later shift into stable growth. Japan was 
no exception, but abruptly got trapped in the financial bubble that was formed in the process 
of shifting to stable growth. After declining sharply in the 1990s on the impact of the bursting 
of the bubble, we have not managed to change the declining trend of Japan’s growth rate. In 
the time horizon of two to three years, a growth rate is dominated by changes in demand, 
except in periods following supply-side shocks such as earthquakes. However, in terms of an 
average growth rate in the time horizon of 10 to 20 years – namely, the medium- to long-term 
growth potential – it is natural to consider that key determinants are supply-side factors. Real 
GDP can be expressed as a product of “the number of workers” and “real GDP per worker.” 
As  a  corollary,  the  real  GDP  growth  rate  can  be  understood  as  the  sum  of  the  rate  of 
increase in the number of workers and the labor productivity growth rate. Using these simple 
figures, I would like to highlight the following facts. 
The first is that the impact of declines in the number of workers on Japan’s growth rate has 
been  gradually  increasing  in  the  1990s  and  the  2000s.  After  peaking  around  1995,  the 
working-age population started to decline and the pace of decline accelerated in the 2000s. 
The working-age population plays a core role in production activity, and such a decline will 
constrain  economic  growth  from  the  supply  side  through  a  reduction  in  the  number  of 
workers.  The  working-age  population  is  also  a  major  driver  of  private  consumption  and 
significantly contributes to tax revenue. Therefore, even from the demand side, a decline in 
the working-age population will lower growth potential unless necessary measures are taken. 
Such measures include deregulation in the areas of health care and nursing care services for 
the elderly to meet rising demand from the aging population, as well as measures to offset a 
rising fiscal burden on the working-age population. 
The second fact is that, despite some declines in recent years, Japan is still in the group of 
advanced  countries  with  the  highest  labor  productivity  growth  rate,  along  with  the  United 
States. The labor productivity growth rate is an important determinant of growth potential of 
the economy. As I will explain later, I think it is necessary to continue making efforts to raise 
the labor productivity growth rate, and there are good prospects for such efforts to bear fruit. 
At the same time, it is not realistic to expect that the labor productivity growth rate, which has 
been at around 1 percent on average, will rise by 1 or 2 percentage points at once. There is 
no  significant  difference  in  the  productivity  growth  rate  among  countries  that  have  already 
gone through a high growth period. While we must make the utmost efforts, we also need to 
be  cool-headed  and  recognize  that  the  already  matured  economy  cannot  expect  to  see  a 
dramatic increase in its growth potential. 
So, what is the bottom line for Japan’s economic problems? In my view, the most serious 
problem is that, if we maintain the current situation, it becomes difficult for Japanese people 
to sustain the current relatively high level of living standards on an international comparison. 
Speaking of which, the level of real GDP per capita in Japan is still high on an international 
basis.  In  addition,  the  fact  that  the  average  lifespan  of  Japanese  people  is  extremely  long 
indicates  that  the  country  has  achieved  a  significantly  high  standard  of  health  on  an 
international comparison. Health is an important condition for people’s happiness and cannot 
be measured by GDP statistics. The question is whether our children and grandchildren can 
sustain such a high standard of living, and I am afraid it is not possible if we choose to keep 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the status quo. The key word is “sustainability.” We can make a simple interpretation of a 
country’s  economic  activity  as  follows.  The  working-age  population  earns  income  through 
production  activity  and  raises  their  children,  the  future  workforce.  The  elderly,  who  once 
earned  income  as  part  of  the  workforce,  now  make  their  living  by  relying  on  their 
accumulated savings and the social security system, which is supported by the working-age 
population.  In  this  way,  human  society  continues  to  raise  the  standard  of  living  through 
generational change. What is important here is a smooth transition to the next generations. 
In  this  regard,  unless  measures  are  taken  to  review  existing  institutions  and  customs  to 
adjust  to  objective  changes  in  the  environment  such  as  a  rapidly  aging  and  declining 
population, the sustainability of the economy will be threatened. In the following, I will explain 
the necessary measures to ensure sustainability. 
Encouraging labor participation 
First,  we  should  make  efforts  not  to  reduce  but  rather  increase  the  number  of  workers  by 
raising the labor participation rate of women. By age group, this rate displays an M-shaped 
curve,  with  a  dip  in  the  age  group  of  those  aged  in  their  30s.  This  feature  makes  Japan 
different  from  other  advanced  countries,  indicating  that  Japan  is  not  a  friendly  society  for 
working  women  raising  children.  Efforts  to  improve  the  environment  for  women,  such  that 
they  can  handle  both  a  career  and  raising  children,  are  meaningful  not  only  for  economic 
growth but for the society. Moreover, we should not overlook the fact that Japanese people 
are  living  longer  and  the  number  of  the  elderly  blessed  with  good  health  and  physical 
strength  is  increasing.  There  is  research  showing  that  the  physical  conditions  of  elderly 
people have improved and those who can work vigorously have increased. Building a society 
where  elderly  people  who  have  the  will  and  capability  to  work  are  able  to  actually  do  so, 
depending on their situation, will not only have a positive impact on economic growth but also 
lead to enriching people’s lives. 
Raising labor productivity 
Second,  efforts  are  needed  to  raise  labor  productivity.  The  phrase  “raising  productivity”  is 
often used to mean improving efficiency and streamlining. But I would like to emphasize the 
other aspect of higher productivity, which is that it leads to an expanded equilibrium, in that 
individual workers can generate higher added value. Added value is a source of funds that 
ultimately  will  be  allocated  as  corporate  profits  and  wages.  Therefore,  increasing  added 
value is the same as saying that firms boost profits while expanding wages to be paid. To 
this end, firms need to increase their profits by exploring new markets, not solely relying on 
cost reductions. In what follows, I will highlight three strategies for exploring new markets. 
First  of  all,  it  is  all  the  more  important  to  actively  capture  global  demand  amid  the  world 
economy’s continuing strong growth. In this regard, the expansion of firms’ overseas bases 
would likely have a positive impact on Japan’s economy if it is motivated by the aspiration for 
growth  to  strengthen  their  global  strategies,  instead  of  the  passive  choice  of  giving  up  on 
Japan. The share of Japanese firms’ overseas production, which is currently a little less than 
20 percent, has been increasing in inverse proportion to the gradual decline in Japan’s share 
in  global  GDP.  In  other  words,  as  emerging  economies  have  grown  and  Japan’s  relative 
share in global GDP has declined, overseas production by Japanese firms has expanded to 
capture the demand for the increasing consumption of locally made products. In the process 
of continuous expansion of overseas production, domestic offices and factories have always 
constituted  an  integral  part  of  international  division  of  labor  by  changing  their  role. 
Specifically, they have started to assume the function of a global headquarters and to focus 
on advanced research and development while increasing exports of intermediate goods to 
overseas bases. 
For  Japanese  firms  to  be  winners  in  the  rapidly  changing  global  markets,  mergers  and 
acquisitions  have  acquired  increasing  importance.  In  this  regard,  although  Japan  is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
experiencing  declining  growth  potential  in  terms  of  flow,  it  still  has  strengths  in  terms  of 
economic  stock,  such  as  abundant  financial  assets  and  technological  competitiveness.  In 
fact,  an  increasing  number  of  firms,  taking  advantage  of  their  ample  funds,  have  recently 
concluded vigorous investment deals to purchase overseas firms with growth potential. 
Capturing global demand is not limited to the areas of monozukuri, or manufacturing. Efforts 
to further enhance Japan’s attractiveness as a tourist destination will generate a significant 
outcome  in  the  medium  to  long  run.  As  I  have  illustrated,  Japan  should  pursue  global 
strategies in a wide range of areas and in a variety of ways. In order to make the best use of 
Japan’s potential, it is extremely important to steadily enhance the framework of free trade 
agreements and economic partnership agreements. 
To  raise  labor  productivity,  it  is  also  important  to  promote  technological  innovation  and 
explore  potential  demand  in  areas  related  to  the  natural  environment  and  energy.  The 
earthquake disaster is expected to further heighten the need for technological innovation in 
these areas. Having nurtured sophisticated technologies for years, Japan is well placed to 
raise its growth potential by pursuing the following three strategies together: “saving energy,” 
to conserve energy through the wider use of LED lighting; “creating energy,” through the use 
of  solar  power;  and  “storing  energy,”  through  the  improvement  of  batteries  in  terms  of 
efficiency and capacity. 
Furthermore, efforts are needed to further explore domestic markets and thereby generate 
added value by discovering potential demand. I often hear the pessimistic view that domestic 
markets will shrink steadily because of the declining and aging population. However, even in 
an  aging  society,  people’s  potential  needs  are  diverse  and  unlimited,  and  continuously 
exploring such needs is a significant source of added value. 
Efforts toward fiscal consolidation 
V. 
I  have  talked  about  efforts  to  encourage  labor  participation  and  raise  labor  productivity  as 
necessary  measures  to  ensure  the  sustainability  of  the  economy.  In  this  regard,  there  is 
another  policy  goal  of  extreme  importance  that  requires  further  efforts  –  namely,  fiscal 
consolidation. As government debt outstanding has already reached a tremendous level in 
Japan, an increasingly aging population will act to exert pressure to further deteriorate fiscal 
balance. Deterioration in fiscal balance has adverse effects on economic activity through two 
channels.  First,  an  increased  burden  on  the  part  of  the  working-age  population  would 
constrain consumer spending. Second, as I explained earlier by taking the example of the 
sovereign debt problem in Europe, if confidence in the government’s debt repayment ability 
is  undermined,  there  would  be  an  adverse  feedback  loop  among  fiscal  conditions,  the 
financial system, and the real economy. Of course, the strengthening of growth potential is 
necessary  in  terms  of  improving  fiscal  balance,  but  the  associated  natural  increase  of  tax 
revenue  alone  is  not  enough  to  ensure  fiscal  sustainability.  Overcoming  deflation  is  also 
important, but this has a limited effect on improving fiscal balance because past experience 
shows that rising inflation not only boosted revenues but also increased expenditures. This 
suggests  that  restructuring  of  revenues  and  expenditures  is  indeed  necessary  for  fiscal 
consolidation. 
Although  fiscal  balance  in  Japan  is  deteriorating,  yields  on  the  Japanese  long-term 
government bonds have maintained stability at the lowest level in the world. One  possible 
interpretation  of  this  phenomenon  is  the  market  participants’  view  that  the  current  fiscal 
conditions  will  not  remain  unaddressed  and  the  specific  measures  to  achieve  fiscal 
consolidation  will  be  implemented  in  due  course.  Another  possible  interpretation  is  the 
market participants’ vague expectation that the stability in interest rates that has continued to 
date will stay as it is for the time being. What is important is that, in either case, if any of the 
specific  measures  toward  fiscal  consolidation  are  not  actually  taken,  market  participants 
might suddenly change their views at some point. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Fiscal  consolidation  is currently  a  common  challenge  to  many  advanced  countries.  This  is 
because  these  countries  made  use  of  large-scale  fiscal  spending  following  the  Lehman 
shock  to  maintain  financial  system  stability  and  mitigate  the  adverse  effects  on  the  macro 
economy.  In  Europe,  fiscal  balance  is  deteriorating  not  only  in  those  countries  with  clear 
symptoms of the sovereign debt problem but also in many other countries. Also, in the United 
States, the situation remains tense as the government debt has almost reached the ceiling. 
In these circumstances, we need to recognize the possibility that some events could trigger a 
worldwide rise in government bond rates, which would have a significant impact particularly 
on  those  countries  with  poor  fiscal  management.  With  regard  to  fiscal  management,  the 
often-heard  policy  suggestions  after  the  earthquake  were  that  the  Bank  should  underwrite 
government  securities  or  conduct  outright  purchases  of  government  securities  to  fund 
expenses  for  rebuilding.  However,  if  the  view  is  taken  that  the  central  bank  conducts 
monetary  policy  with  the  aim  of  supporting  government  financing,  interest  rates  will  rise, 
putting adverse effects on Japan’s economy. Since the earthquake, there have been active 
discussions as to whether various risks were beyond expectations. The problem arising from 
the central bank’s underwriting, or outright purchases representing a virtual underwriting of 
government  securities,  is  not  beyond  expectations.  The  prospective  risks  involved  are 
sufficiently  predictable  at  the  moment.  In  order  to  reduce  the  risk  arising  from  fiscal 
deterioration, it is necessary to clearly present the path for achieving fiscal consolidation and 
implement specific measures. 
The bank’s conduct of monetary policy 
VI. 
Let  me  turn  finally  to  the  Bank’s  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  based  on  the  outlook  and 
medium- to long-term challenges for Japan’s economy. 
I  have  had  many  occasions  to  talk  about  the  Bank’s  response  immediately  after  the 
earthquake, so I will not go into detail on this today. It can be summarized as follows. The 
Bank, with  a view to preventing financial shocks from developing into economic instability, 
worked  to  provide  ample  funds  to  the  markets  and  ensure  the  functioning  of  settlement 
systems, which are the basis of people’s lives and economic activity. The Bank also decided 
to further enhance monetary easing. 
Let me explain the Bank’s basic policy stance in more detail. It has continued to consistently 
make  contributions  as  the  central  bank  through  the  three-pronged  approach  of  pursuing 
powerful monetary easing consisting of comprehensive monetary easing, ensuring financial 
market stability, and providing support to strengthen the foundations for economic growth.  
Comprehensive  monetary  easing,  which  was  introduced  in  October  2010,  has  three 
components.  First,  the  Bank  has  encouraged  the  policy  interest  rate  –  namely,  the 
uncollateralized  overnight  call  rate  – 
level  of  around 
0  to  0.1  percent.  Second,  the  Bank  has  made  clear  that  it  will  continue  this  virtually  zero 
policy interest rate level until it judges that price stability is in sight, with confirmation that the 
accumulation of financial imbalances is not identified. The Bank expresses its idea of price 
stability in the form of the “understanding,” and each Policy Board member’s “understanding” 
falls in a positive range of 2 percent or lower, centering around 1 percent. 
The third component of comprehensive monetary easing is the Bank’s establishment of the 
Asset  Purchase  Program  (hereafter  the  Program)  through  which  it  provides  longer-term 
funds at a fixed rate and purchases various financial assets – namely, government bonds, 
CP,  corporate  bonds,  exchange-traded  funds  (ETFs),  and  Japan  real  estate  investment 
trusts  (J-REITs).  The  Program  aims  at  enhancing  monetary  easing  effects  by  directly 
influencing longer-term market interest rates and various risk premiums in order to reinforce 
the  indirect  easing  effects  on  those  variables  from  the  policy  interest  rate.  The  Program 
started with a size of about 35 trillion yen in October 2010. At the Monetary Policy Meeting 
(MPM) immediately after the earthquake, when an economic downturn was concerned, the 
decision was made to increase the amount of asset purchases, mainly of risk assets, which 
to  remain  at 
the  very 
low 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
implementing 
to  Support  Strengthening 
the  Fund-Provisioning  Measure 
brought the total size of the Program to about 40 trillion yen. Following the decision on the 
total size of the Program, the Bank is steadily conducting asset purchases. 
The purpose of comprehensive monetary easing, which consists of the three components I 
have mentioned, is to support economic activity such that Japan’s economy will be able to 
achieve  sustainable  growth  with  price  stability.  As  I  noted  earlier,  the  most  fundamental 
challenge  Japan’s  economy  faces  is  the  decline  in  growth  potential,  and  the  so-called 
“deflation  issue”  is  a  manifestation  of  this  fundamental  problem.  Deflation  can  be 
metaphorically expressed as a decline in body temperature, and it should be addressed by 
the strengthening of growth potential, or basic physical fitness. In this regard, the Bank has 
been 
the 
Foundations for Economic Growth. Through the measure, the Bank provides long-term funds 
at a low interest rate to financial institutions that are making efforts in terms of investment 
and  lending  to  increase  the  growth  potential  of  Japan’s  economy.  The  funds  amount  to 
3 trillion yen in total and are provided against collateral deemed eligible by the Bank, such as 
government bonds. 
At the June MPM this year, the Bank decided to establish a 500 billion yen new line of credit 
for the measure. With regard to the new line of credit, the Bank decided to support financial 
institutions’ efforts, focusing on loans with equity-like features to firms with growth potential 
and lending without conventional collateral or guarantees. For the latter, the lending method 
that is considered most likely is asset-based lending (ABL). ABL takes firms’ assets that are 
closely tied to their businesses – such as their inventories, equipment, and machines, as well 
as accounts receivables – as collateral. ABL currently plays a limited role in Japan but is a 
quite  popular  lending  method  in  the  United  States.  The  greatest  merit  of  ABL  is  that  it 
enables  firms  that  do  not  have  sufficient  real  estate  collateral  or  corporate  managers’ 
personal assets to raise financial resources. For example, start-up firms tend to have a high 
ratio  of  accounts  receivables  to  total  assets.  They  will  be  able  to  raise  funds  for  business 
expansion more smoothly if they can make use of their accounts receivables as collateral. 
ABL is said to be more time-consuming compared with lending against real estate collateral. 
Viewed in another way, however, the process of utilizing ABL allows a borrower firm and a 
financial  institution  to  take  more  time  and  have  closer  communications  regarding  the 
characteristics and future vision of firms’ businesses. This will encourage a borrower firm to 
make  business  decisions  based  on  more  accurate  analysis  of  its  growth  potential  and 
profitability. 
Furthermore, the Bank has taken various measures in terms of supporting the disaster areas. 
One example is the funds-supplying operation that provides financial institutions in disaster 
areas  with  longer-term  funds  at  a  low  interest  rate,  with  the  aim  of  supporting  these 
institutions’  initial  efforts  to  meet  demand  for  funds  for  restoration  and  rebuilding.  Going 
forward, in the phase when demand for funds for the purpose of restoration and rebuilding 
becomes full-fledged, the Bank will examine how to provide additional support appropriately 
as the central bank, based on the specifics of such demand, measures by private financial 
institutions, and support from the government. 
In this manner, the Bank has continued to make various efforts on the monetary policy front, 
taking  into  account  the  time  horizon  of  short-term  and  medium-  to  long-term  periods.  The 
Bank will continue to carefully examine the outlook for economic activity and prices, and take 
appropriate actions as necessary. 
Concluding remarks 
I see I am running out of time, so I would like to conclude my remarks. The earthquake has 
posed  additional  challenges  to  Japan’s  economy,  which  had  already  faced  significant 
problems  to  tackle.  It  is  true  that  Japan’s  economy  is  facing  very  difficult  challenges. 
However, we should avoid falling into pessimism unnecessarily. In the past, for example, at 
the  time  of  oil  shocks,  Japan  became  an  energy-saving  society  through  acceleration  of 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
technological innovations. Moreover, the Japanese people’s outstanding ability to overcome 
problems is evident from the early restoration of supply chains following the disaster. 
In  the  process  of  such  restoration,  “competitiveness  at  worksites,”  or  genbaryoku,  and 
“knowledge at worksites,” or genbachi, both demonstrated by Japanese firms, have been in 
full  play.  Japan  also  has  a  certain  “soft  power”  that  elicits  confidence  and  empathy  from 
around  the  world,  as  exemplified  by  its  reputation  for  hospitality,  its  skill  at  generating 
intellectual property with originality, and the orderly and  mutual cooperative behavior of its 
people seen immediately after the earthquake. In the face of the global financial crisis and 
the recent earthquake disaster, Japan’s financial system has maintained stability. Japan also 
has a geographical advantage in that it is located in East Asia, which is currently the most 
dynamic region in the world. 
As I have illustrated, at present, Japan has many factors that could lead to a bright future. A 
sense of urgency is necessary, but pessimism is not. We should face up to the real problem 
and work on reforms with confidence in our potential. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
