Pentti Hakkarainen: Economic outlook – still uncharted waters ahead 
Speech by Mr Pentti Hakkarainen, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Finland, at the Norway-
Finland Trade Association, Helsinki, 11 April 2011. 
 The  world  economy  has  been  recovering  from  the  deep  financial  and  economic  crisis. 
Recently  the  rapid  increase  in  energy  prices,  the  natural  disaster  in  Japan,  and  the  once 
again heightened sovereign debt crisis have all casted a shadow over the global economic 
prospects.  
Should  we  be  optimistic  or  pessimistic  on  the  current  outlook?  As  Winston  Churchill  has 
stated, “A pessimist sees the difficulty in every opportunity; an optimist sees the opportunity 
in every difficulty.”  
Today, I’ve chosen to be on the positive side, trying to be still a realist.  
I’d like to briefly discuss the trends in the world economic outlook and the current situation in 
Europe. There are quite a number of positive signs. Thereafter I’d like to say a few words on 
the  long-term  fiscal  policy  challenges  that  the  recent  crisis  has  posed  to  most  advanced 
countries. Finally, I’ll present the Bank of Finland’s forecast of the Finnish economy. 
The global outlook 
The world economy has been recovering from the economic crisis during the latter part of 
2010 and early months of 2011. According to the Bank of Finland’s March 2011 forecast, the 
world economy and world trade will continue to grow at a brisk pace.  
However,  growth  has  remained  highly  divergent  in  different  regions,  with  the  emerging 
economies under China’s lead still firmly at the forefront. [Slide 2] Advanced economies, in 
turn,  have  witnessed  continued  slow  recovery  by  historical  standards,  and  unemployment 
has remained high.  
Recently, differences in growth have also started to appear across the advanced economies. 
While  the  economic  outlook  for  the  United  States  and  partly  for  Europe  has  improved, 
prospects have remained very weak for some European countries. 
The forecast was finalised before the latest increase of uncertainty: the rapid rise of oil price, 
the tsunami and the nuclear disaster in Japan, and the recent heightening of the sovereign 
debt crisis. It is still too early to say the full impact of these but the sign is clear: it is negative. 
Markets are relatively optimistic: stock indices outside Japan have rebounded [Slide 3]. On 
the other hand, the March PMI (survey) indices show some signs of taming. On balance, it 
currently looks that these shocks are not enough to derail the recovery of the world economy. 
The  sustained  robust  growth  in  emerging  economies  has  increased  the  demand  for  raw 
materials which has led to the elevation of their world market prices. This has fuelled inflation 
the world over. Domestically-generated inflationary pressures in advanced economies have 
so far been held in check by economic slack, as reflected, for example, in low employment 
and capacity utilisation rates. 
There are a variety of explanatory factors behind the rapid growth of emerging economies. 
Imports  of  more  sophisticated  technologies  and  better  models  of  production  have  boosted 
productivity growth. In addition, their economic policy institutions have been upgraded and 
economic policy has become more coherent. 
A strengthening of protectionism in different parts of the world, which was feared during the 
crisis,  remained  relatively  limited.  World  trade  has  expanded  rapidly  since  the  crisis,  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
volume already having reached the pre-crisis level. World trade growth is also expected to 
continue in the years to come, albeit at a more moderate pace than in 2010. 
More divergence in Europe 
A  large  part  of  Europe  continued  to  recover  last  year  despite  widely  reported  difficulties 
encountered  by  peripheral  European  countries,  [Slide  4].  The  divergence  in  economic 
performance between the countries became increasingly apparent. While Germany and its 
neighbouring  countries  experienced  robust  growth,  the  economies  suffering  from  the  debt 
crisis contracted or grew only very slowly.  
However,  the  growth  decelerated  towards  year-end  from  the  exceptionally  high  rates 
observed earlier in the year, as the temporary impetus from inventory replenishment, which 
had  fuelled  growth  in  the  early  part  of  2010,  began  to  recede.  Simultaneously,  the  strong 
export  growth  also  began  to  lose  momentum.  Nevertheless,  growth  in  new  export  orders 
picked up again in the last months of the year, and survey results point to firms’ expectations 
of a rebound in export growth in the early part of 2011. 
Consumption  growth  has  been  curtailed  by  high  unemployment.  Differences 
in 
unemployment  rates  between  the  countries  are  very  large:  in  the  Netherlands,  the 
unemployment rate is slightly over 4%, compared to more than 20% in Spain as the average 
of the euro area is slightly under 10%. 
Europe  will  continue  to  see  sluggish  economic  growth  in  the  coming  years,  as  most 
European  countries  have  to  reduce  their  public  deficits.  Underlying  the  robust  economic 
growth of the largest European economy, Germany, is the strong pull of exports, enabled by 
continued  strong  competitiveness,  which  has  lifted  business  confidence  indices  to  all-time 
highs.  Despite  expectations,  Germany’s  robust  growth  has  not  yet  spilled  over  to  private 
consumer demand, which has expanded only moderately. 
Like Germany, Finland experienced a strong rebound in 2010, although it started a little later 
than elsewhere in Europe, as global demand for capital goods increased. Finland’s economic 
outlook is discussed in greater detail in the following section. 
Recent crisis poses a long-term challenge to fiscal policy 
Debt problems have come to the fore especially in Europe [Slide 5], where in the past three 
years eight countries have already found it necessary to seek emergency funding from the 
International Monetary Fund.  
In 2010, emergency funding was also needed in euro area countries. Greece was the first to 
agree,  in  May,  with  the  International  Monetary  Fund  and  the  EU,  on  a  comprehensive 
financial support package, followed by Ireland in December.  
The  financial  assistance  packages  were  conditional  on  the  countries’  commitment  to 
economic programmes aimed at stabilising public finances. 
The outbreak of the government debt crisis led to efforts to strengthen European institutions 
so as to prevent crises from emerging and contribute to minimising the damages when they 
do occur. At the end of 2010, euro area governments agreed on the establishment in 2013 of 
a permanent crisis management framework, the European Stability Mechanism (ESM). 
Finland’s economic outlook 
The  Finnish  economy  recovered  strongly  in  2010,  with  growth  bolstered  by  both  domestic 
demand and exports [Slide 6]. The substantial increase in output over the course of 2010 will 
also  considerably  boost  the  average  growth  figures  for  2011.  Growth  will  continue  to  be 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
relatively brisk, but will slow noticeably towards the end of the forecast period. GDP will grow 
3.9% in 2011, 2.7% in 2012 and 2.5% in 2013.  
The  recession  has  caused  a  contraction  in  the  GDP  share  of  industry,  and  conversely  an 
increase  in  the  share  of  service  sectors,  which  are  characterised  by  slower  productivity 
growth.  Over  the  longer  term,  this  structural  shift  will  weaken  the  growth  potential  of  the 
economy.  Export  growth  will  be  bolstered  by  stronger  global  demand  for  capital  goods 
towards the end of the forecast period. 
The general government deficit will contract, but government debt will not. At the end of the 
forecast  period  the  general  government  deficit  will  be  0.8%  and  general  government  debt 
54.0% of GDP. The current account will continue in surplus. 
Recent  developments  in  the  Finnish  economy  have  been  mixed.  On  one  hand,  economic 
growth has strengthened and surveys indicate strongly improved confidence in the future. On 
the other hand, the rapid growth has touched only some sectors of the economy, and new 
areas of concern have emerged both internationally and domestically. [Slide 7] 
The  recovery  in  industrial  output  has  progressed  at  a  very  different  pace  in  different 
industries.  The  chemical  industry  appears  to  have  already  recovered  from  the  recession. 
Metal industry output, too, began to grow during the course of 2010, with particularly rapid 
growth in fabricated metals in response to export demand. There was only slow growth in 
electrical engineering and electronics, with output still almost 20 % below the level of 2008. 
There was brisk growth in forest industry output, but cuts in production capacity mean there 
is no imminent prospect of a rapid return to the pre-recession level of output. Industrial output 
as a whole grew rapidly, particularly in the second and fourth quarters of 2010. 
The  prominence  of  capital  goods  in  Finland’s  export  structure  meant  that  exports  did  not 
immediately respond to recovery in the export markets. The main drivers of Finnish exports 
in 2010 were forest and chemical industry products and fabricated metals.  
Consumer confidence levels recorded in Finland in 2010 reached a record high, even though 
the  euro  area  debt  crisis  did  at  times  cause  uncertainty  among  Finnish  consumers.  The 
stronger confidence and continuation of low interest rates continued to encourage the taking 
out of new housing loans. The pace of price rises eased in the second half of the year.  
The labour market situation has been improving, but rather slowly. Growth in the number of 
employed  was  slower  than  expected  at  the  end  of  2010,  and  the  unemployment  rate  has 
remained around 8% since last September. 
The key challenge for economic policy in Finland is to restore the sustainability of the public 
finances, weakened by the recession. The recession caused a deep reduction in both central 
and local government tax receipts and increased the level of government debt. In addition to 
the cost of servicing the debt, the general government balance will also be compromised in 
the future by increasing age-related expenditure. 
Conclusion 
Recent  months  have  seen  signs  of  a  renewed  pick-up  in  world  growth.  Despite  the 
heightened uncertainty and increased downside risks, stock prices and various confidence 
indicators are still at high levels. It thus looks that these shocks are not enough to derail the 
recovery of the world economy. However, uncertainty is exceptionally high, as highlighted by 
the recent developments in Portugal. 
Despite the brisk GDP growth numbers many advanced countries are still well below their 
pre-recession production levels. Looking forward, they are struggling with population ageing, 
structural problems, and the accumulation of public debt. 
All this is clearly visible in the public finances. Therefore for most advanced countries the key 
challenge is to restore the sustainability of the public finances, which were weakened by the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
deep recession. As regards this process, it is not at the end yet. The process is not even at 
the beginning of the end. But perhaps it is at end of the beginning (Churchill). 
What can we do in our own countries? We manage to navigate through unchartered waters 
by simply keeping our house in order; taking care of the competitiveness of our economies, 
not letting public finances deteriorate too much and by investing for the future. 
  4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   5
   6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  7
