Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview with Weser-Kurier 
Interview with Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, in Weser-
Kurier, Germany, conducted by Ms Annemarie Struß-von Poellnitz on 11 February 2011 and 
published on 13 February 2011. 
 Weser-Kurier: Is this your first time in Bremen? 
Trichet: Yes, indeed. I’ve been to Lübeck and Hamburg, but I’m really eager to get to know 
Bremen.  
Weser-Kurier: In 1978 Bremen was the setting for the launch of the virtual single currency, 
the ECU. We’ve now had the euro for 12 years. Although most Germans accept the euro, 
they don’t love it. Can you understand that? 
Trichet: It is important to look at facts and figures. The euro is a stable and credible currency, 
and the European Central Bank is here to ensure that our currency serves its purpose well  
– namely ensuring price stability – for the German people and the 331 million citizens of the 
euro area as a whole. The euro has held its value remarkably well in the 12 years since it 
was  launched,  with  an  average  annual  inflation  rate  of  below  2%  (1.97%  to  be  precise). 
That’s better than anything achieved by the national central banks before the introduction of 
the euro. Our primary mandate is to maintain price stability, which we have done.  
Weser-Kurier: But fears of inflation are currently increasing. According to the German figures 
for January, which have just been announced by the Federal Statistical Office, the inflation 
rate rose to 2%, compared with 1.7% in December. This worries people.  
Trichet: The average annual inflation rate in Germany in the last 12 years has been 1.5%, 
which  is  even  lower  than  the  euro  area  average.  I’ll  say  it  again:  that’s  better  than  in  the 
50 years before the introduction of the euro. Of course, we’re not the masters of the price of 
oil  or  other  commodities.  We’ve  also  witnessed  large  swings  in  the  price  of  oil  and  other 
commodities  in  the  past,  mainly  driven  by  strong  demand  from  emerging  economies.  But 
people  can  rest  assured  that  we’ll  continue  to  do  everything  in  our  power  to  avoid  the 
second-round effects of external shocks, thereby ensuring price stability in the medium term.  
Weser-Kurier:  It’s  not  just  commodity  prices,  but  also  high  debt  levels  in  some  euro  area 
countries that are stoking fears of rising inflation.  
Trichet:  The  ECB’s  job  is  always  to  guarantee  price  stability,  however  complex  the 
circumstances  are,  even  if  some  governments  don’t  behave  according  to  the  agreed 
framework.  That  being  said,  if  governments  behave  improperly,  they  put  their  own 
economies in danger, which could threaten financial stability. All governments must take their 
responsibilities  within  economic  and  monetary  union  seriously,  in  accordance  with  the 
Maastricht criteria and the Stability and Growth Pact. Some countries had probably forgotten 
this before the global crisis. In 2004 and 2005 Germany, as well as France and Italy, decided 
to weaken the rules. The Governing Council of the ECB fought against this weakening of the 
Pact. In the interest of the single currency, we need to insist on clear rules for the economic 
and fiscal policies of the individual countries in order to ensure the financial stability of the 
euro area as a whole. The bad experiences of the past demonstrate that we also need strict 
enforcement of the agreed rules.  
Weser-Kurier:  You  point  out  that  governments  have  committed  to  limiting  public  debt  to  a 
maximum  of  60%  of  GDP.  Germany  has  come  through  the  crisis  relatively  well. 
Nevertheless, the national debt was over 75% in 2010. I won’t even talk about Greece. Is 
60% a realistic target?  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Trichet: This requirement is not only in the Stability and Growth Pact, but also in the Treaty of 
Maastricht itself. We have to comply with the Treaty. Experience has shown how important it 
is that all euro area countries are creditworthy. This is why compliance with these criteria is 
essential in order to ensure sustainable growth and job creation. I’m not saying that’s easy, 
but it’s necessary in the long term.  
Weser-Kurier: Do we need to improve the existing conditions? 
Trichet: We need what we call a “quantum leap”, a decisive step forward. We called for this 
even before the current crisis. The experiences of the crisis make it even more imperative for 
us to monitor countries’ competitiveness and the correction of imbalances in the individual 
national economies.  
Weser-Kurier: You call for a higher authority, a new system of mutual checks. Are Angela 
Merkel and Nicolas Sarkozy on the right track with their call for an “economic government”?  
Trichet:  If  this  proposal  does  mean  that  there  is  a  strong  political  will  to  coordinate  and 
monitor economic policies in the euro area, I’ll firmly support it, because it’s in line with what 
the ECB’s Governing Council has consistently said. We’ll see the results of the consultations 
undertaken by EU Council President Herman van Rompuy. But I expect this new initiative to 
lead  to  a  strengthening  of  the  legislation  on  economic  governance  which  is  now  being 
examined by the European Parliament: we’re calling for a major improvement compared with 
the  governments’  previous  position,  which  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  regarded  as 
unsatisfactory.  
Weser-Kurier: Will there be a majority in favour of it?  
Trichet:  Our  message  is  crystal  clear:  we  call  on  all  those  concerned  to  exercise  their 
responsibility. And it’s not just about words, but also deeds. Therefore, our strong message 
to the European Union is that monetary union, based on the euro, is working. The currency is 
credible and has been proven to maintain price stability. It’s now time for economic union to 
work just as well. This wasn’t the case in the past. This is why we need to strengthen the 
surveillance of economic policies.  
Weser-Kurier:  You  recently  said  in  a  keynote  speech  in  Tutzing:  “Our  judgement  was 
sharpest at the height of the crisis.” Are we already on the way back to business as usual?  
Trichet:  This  is  no  time  for  complacency.  The  dangers  and  risks  are  permanent.  Central 
banks have avoided a depression by acting quickly to make difficult decisions. Governments 
in industrialised countries have also taken very difficult decisions. This prevented a disaster 
that would have been worse than the Great Depression in the 1930s. To continue as before 
would  be  a  great  folly.  I  don’t  accept  for  one  second  the  argument  that  we’re  back  to 
business as usual. We now know how vulnerable the financial system was, and we must do 
everything possible to strengthen this fragile system in such a way as to prevent such events 
from happening in the future.  
Weser-Kurier: You were awarded this year’s Charlemagne Prize of Aachen for outstanding 
service to European monetary union. What does Europe mean to you?  
Trichet:  I’ve  devoted  a  large  part  of  my  life  to  strengthening  European  unity,  not  least  by 
promoting a single currency. In 1978 I was an adviser to President Valéry Giscard d’Estaing, 
who,  together  with  the  then  German  Chancellor  Helmut  Schmidt,  made  the  decision  to 
launch  the  European  Monetary  System.  Since  then  I’ve  worked  in  different  ways  and  in 
different functions to realise the single currency, which is a milestone in the deepening of the 
European  Union.  As  a  result  of  these  functions,  I  had  the  great  privilege  to  contribute  at 
critical junctions. These historic, major efforts, which began shortly after the Second World 
War,  are  of  fundamental  significance  for  European  peace,  stability  and  prosperity.  I  was 
extremely touched to be told that I would be receiving this year’s Charlemagne Prize.  
Weser-Kurier: Is there a special relationship between Germany and France?  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Trichet: The friendship between Germany and France has played a historic role in creating a 
united Europe. This friendship needs to be put to the service of overall European unity, for all 
European  nations.  There  are  27  countries  in  the  European  Union  and  now  17  in  the  euro 
area.  
Weser-Kurier: You are about to enjoy cod and green cabbage at the Schaffermahl. Today is 
also  the  85th  birthday  of  Paul  Bocuse,  the  inventor  of  “nouvelle cuisine”.  What  does  good 
food mean to you? 
Trichet: I love good food and “nouvelle cuisine”. I always like to discover something new. I’m 
sure I’ll do just that at the Schaffermahl.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
