Barry Whiteside: Extending financial services outreach to the next level 
Opening speech by Mr Barry Whiteside, Acting Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, at the 
National  Microfinance  Workshop  on  Extending  Financial  Services  Outreach  to  the  Next 
Level, Suva, 4 March 2011. 
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen.  
 Introductory remarks  
Good  morning  and  bula  vinaka  to  you  all.  Thank  you  for  kindly  accepting  our  invitation  to 
participate in this one day workshop where we will be deliberating on how to take Financial 
Services Outreach to the Next Level.  
When  we  first  met  and  deliberated  on  the  whole  financial  services  outreach  topic  in 
November  2009,  we  had  set  ourselves  medium  term  strategies  to  drive  financial  inclusion 
and  microfinance  in  our  country.  A  governing  committee,  the  National  Financial  Inclusion 
Task Force (NFIT), initially chaired by the former Governor, Mr. Sada Reddy, was formed to 
monitor the overall implementation and progress of financial inclusion in Fiji. Three working 
groups:  financial  literacy;  statistics,  and  microfinance,  each  comprising  key  stakeholder 
representatives, were set up to implement the strategy and action plans which came out of 
the first workshop. I am delighted to say, fourteen months on, that we can clearly witness the 
good progress in financial inclusion and microfinance efforts across Fiji. This is no doubt due 
to the passion and efforts of many of you here today. The clear challenge for us is not to lose 
that passion and to keep the momentum going.  
I wish to extend my sincere thanks to the Government, donors, civil societies and the private 
sector  for  their  respective  contributions  in  the  development  of  microfinance  and  financial 
inclusion.  In  particular  I  wish  to  thank  commercial  banks  and  the  mobile  phone  network 
operators  for  actively  taking  lead  roles  in  spearheading  initiatives  that  we  now  see  taking 
shape across our economy today.  
Let me also acknowledge the on-going support of the Pacific Financial Inclusion Programme 
(PFIP) who were there from the word go when we first started this partnership in November 
2009 and again, now, as co-host for this second microfinance workshop.  
Progress of microfinance in Fiji  
As we all know, microfinance has been recognized in many developing countries around the 
world as a means to alleviate poverty and generate employment. Microfinance contributes to 
the empowerment of individuals, the development of communities and of the economy. It is 
for  this  reason  that  we  have  all  become  so  passionate  about  financial  inclusion  and 
microfinance. We clearly realize the benefits these bring to the welfare of our unbanked, low 
income and poor people, as well as the overall benefits to the communities and the economy 
of Fiji.  
At this workshop, the Chairpersons of the respective Working Groups will fully enlighten you 
on progress being made in their areas. However, let me share with you some of the exciting 
developments over the past fourteen months.  
The  commercial  banks  have  now  fully  established  and  integrated  microfinance  into  their 
operations  and  are  conducting  microfinance  and  financial  literacy  services  in  villages  and 
communities in the rural and remote areas, as well as in the urban and semi-urban areas. Their 
momentum is being driven by highly capable senior staff, appointed especially for the job.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
In  2010  the  banks  also  joined  the  RBF,  micro  finance  institutions,  Government  ministries, 
PFIP and other stakeholders in three very successful expos held in Ba, Labasa and Suva. It 
was extremely pleasing to see so many people moving through the various tents and also 
some  of  our  micro  finance  entrepreneurs  being  given  the  opportunity  to  show  off  and  sell 
some of their wares. We will continue the expos through 2011.  
While on the subject of financial literacy, we were all delighted with the recent launch by the 
Ministry of  Education of their FinED Programme, which  will see the integration of financial 
education into the school curriculum from class one to form seven by 2012.  
Not  to  be  outdone  in  all  of  this,  the  two  major  mobile  phone  network  operators  also 
successfully launched their mobile phone money services in Fiji in the middle of last year. 
We are proud to say that these initiatives are the first of their kind in the Pacific region. Our 
example is now being used to launch similar services elsewhere. Clearly the mobile money 
platform can be built on and taken to the next level insofar as banking is concerned. I look 
forward to these developments.  
At least one bank has introduced SMS banking for its customers, while internet banking, an 
ever-expanding  ATM  network  and  EFTPOS  interchange  developments,  now  allow  many 
more  banking  options  over  a  wider  area  of  the  country.  There  will  definitely  be  some 
innovative  options  available  as  this  technology  spreads  across  Fiji.  The  opening  of  nearly 
17000  accounts  by  one  bank  for  social  welfare  recipients  has  been  another  important 
inclusion  milestone  in  2010,  enabling  participants  to  access  their  funds  electronically  with 
much greater convenience.  
I  also  acknowledge  the  current  efforts  by  our  Microfinance  institutions  to  restructure  and 
reposition  themselves  on  stronger  platforms  which  will  enable  them  to  effectively  and 
efficiently reach out to their clients and the unbanked.  
Investors  and  institutions  have  shown  keen  interest  in  setting  up  and  conducting 
microfinance services in Fiji. I am pleased to note that one such operator with an established 
presence on other Pacific island countries did set up business here in 2010. Donors have 
also  indicated  their  intentions  to  assist  the  country  to  establish  the  necessary  support 
structures and institutions to develop our microfinance sector.  
All these are interesting financial sector developments and I would like to acknowledge all 
our stakeholders for their efforts.  
Challenges in microfinance  
Let me touch briefly on some of the challenges that we face in pursuing the development of 
financial inclusion and microfinance.  
Institutions conducting financial inclusion and microfinance activities in Fiji can face a variety 
of obstacles in providing effective services to the unbanked. Some of these challenges are 
macro  in  nature,  such  as  prohibitive  economic  and  investment  policies  and  poor 
infrastructure.  Others  are  more  micro  and  may  revolve  around  the  institutions  themselves, 
their approaches towards microfinance and the way they conduct their business.  
Typical  challenges  institutions  may  face  in  extending  financial  services  into  the  rural  and 
maritime  areas  in  Fiji  are  poor  infrastructure,  technology  reach  and  transportation.  Basic 
things  such  as  proper  roads,  shipping  routes,  power,  and  communication  towers  may  be 
lacking. These are needed by institutions in order to extend innovative financial services like 
rural mobile banking, mobile phone money services and EFTPOS banking into the unbanked 
areas. TIN requirements for all persons will need to be better coordinated so as to ensure the 
unbanked are conveniently able to open bank accounts.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Developing  and  extending  appropriate  and  sustainable  financial  services  for  clients  in  this 
sector can go a long way towards building strong relationships, and instilling brand image in 
the communities, which could reap enormous returns in the long term.  
Objective of the workshop  
Ladies and gentlemen, the theme of the workshop this year is “Extending Financial Services 
Outreach to the Next Level”. While we may say that much has been achieved over the last 
fourteen months in the area of financial inclusion and microfinance in Fiji, there is still room to 
do more.  
We have been clearly thrown a challenge by our theme.  
As key stakeholders, we want you to realistically review what has been achieved so far, by 
the National Financial Inclusion Taskforce, the three Working Groups and by yourselves, that 
have contributed to this development.  
By the end of this workshop, we need to come up with recommendations of things that can 
be taken up in the next phase, by developing strategies and action plans, and agreeing on 
the  institutions,  and  timelines  in  which,  to  implement  them.  Again  we  require  your  active 
involvement, commitment and ownership of the strategies and action plans that we will set 
out here today, to take financial inclusion and microfinance to the next level in Fiji.  
The next level for microfinance – change, innovation and new initiatives  
This workshop is also an opportunity for us to change, improve, be innovative and come up 
with new approaches and initiatives that will further extend financial services to the unbanked 
in  the  rural,  remote  and  maritime  areas,  including  the  unbanked  in  urban  and  semi-urban 
areas. I certainly look forward to seeing the action plans and innovative strategies that will 
come out of this workshop. Our action plans should be measurable and achievable and most 
importantly they should be implemented with commitment.  
There are many microfinance initiatives we can explore and apply in the local context. I know 
that  some  of  you  already  have  innovative  plans  in  the  pipeline  to  take  financial  services 
outreach to the next level. I look forward to seeing their introduction in the market.  
May I also add that whilst considering microfinance initiatives, it is also important that thought 
be given to consumer protection of the poor and the unbanked. Bad experiences can often 
deter the very ones that we are trying to help.  
Concluding remarks  
In closing, it is my hope that we all continue to be passionate in our drive towards greater 
financial  inclusion.  When  success  is  achieved,  it  is  something  we  can  look  back  on  with 
satisfaction,  knowing  that  we  have  contributed  to  the  development  of  our  people’s  welfare 
and our country.  
We need to work together to develop strategies in Extending Financial Services Outreach to 
the  Next  Level.  I  am  hopeful  that  we  can  set  the  agenda  for  scaling-up  and  accelerating 
financial inclusion and microfinance. As part of the process, I also call on all the participants 
of this workshop to set and commit to your own targets, develop your own objectives, and 
allocate a certain budget for financial inclusion and microfinance.  
The  less  fortunate  in  our  society  deserve  an  opportunity  to  pull  themselves  out  of  poverty 
through empowerment.  
With these words I wish this meeting every success.  
Vinaka 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
