Axel A Weber: Heterogeneities within the euro area – a problem for the 
single monetary policy? 
Speech by Professor Axel A Weber, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the Society 
of Business Economists annual dinner, London, 9 March 2011. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
First of all, I would like to thank you for inviting me to give the dinner speech tonight. I would 
like to use this occasion to talk about heterogeneities within the euro area. Obviously, there 
are  several  dimensions  of  heterogeneity  to  consider,  say,  in  terms  of  growth,  inflation  or 
market interest rates. With respect to economic growth, which usually receives a particular 
amount  of  intention,  we  are  seeing  a  strong  economic  recovery  in  some  countries, 
particularly  in  Germany.  By  contrast,  some  countries  at  the  geographical  periphery  of  the 
euro  area  are  suffering  from  persistent  structural  problems.  Whether  or  not  this  poses  a 
problem  for  the  ECB  Governing  Council  is  something  I  shall  discuss  later  on.  But  firstly  I 
would  like  to  take  a  look  at  the  German  economy  and  the  economic  conditions  in  the 
economies at the periphery of the euro area. 
Germany: strong economic recovery 
2. 
Germany was among the countries that suffered most from the economic crisis. In 2009, its 
economy shrank by 4.7%. This has to be borne in mind when considering last year’s growth 
figure of 3.6%, which was one of the highest both in the euro area and within the group of the 
major  advanced  economies.  Even  so,  the  strong  rebound  in  2010  came  as  a  surprise  to 
many observers.  
GDP growth went down slightly to 0.4% in the final quarter of 2010, after 0.7% in the third 
quarter and an exceptional second-quarter figure of 2.2%. Even so, the cyclical upswing is 
still  intact.  The  most  recent  figure  is  biased  to  some  extent  by  the  heavy  snowfalls  and 
extremely  cold  weather  in  December.  In  line  with  this  picture  of  a  stronger  underlying 
dynamic, leading indicators suggest a rather favourable outcome for the first quarter of 2011. 
Moreover, the upswing has recently gained in breadth. The previous economic upswing was 
driven  mainly  by  strong  external  demand,  but  ended  incomplete.  Unlike  then,  external 
impulses are now exerting a greater impact on domestic activity. Corporate investment has 
increased significantly. Capacity utilisation is continuing to rise and is now back at its long-
term  average.  As  a  result,  firms  are  becoming  more  and  more  willing  to  expand  their 
capacities rather than just replace existing equipment. Housing construction is expected to 
go on benefiting from historically low funding costs, whereas public investment is expected to 
drop sharply given the phasing-out of stimulus programmes and the considerable need for 
consolidation. 
Even private consumption is providing us with some good news. Having been sluggish in the 
past upswing and resilient during the crisis, it showed perceptible growth of 0.4% in 2010. 
The  very  positive  household  sentiment  indicates  that  the  upward  trend  will  become  even 
stronger  both  this  year  and  next.  What  underlies  this  remarkably  positive  household 
sentiment?  Quite  obviously,  it  is  the  improved  labour  market  situation  and,  hence,  higher 
labour income expectations.  
Consumption activity might suffer, however, from the significantly gloomier price climate that 
will probably continue over the next few months. According to the flash estimate, the annual 
inflation  rate  (HICP)  rose  to  2.2%  in  February.  Even  though  this  is  clearly  lower  than  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
current UK inflation rates, it is the highest figure since autumn 2008. The price climate has 
therefore deteriorated, although it should not be forgotten that, up to now, this has been due 
mostly to exogenous shocks, particularly from energy prices. 
We expect the German economy to grow on average in 2011 considerably faster than the 
2%  we  projected  in  early  December:  2½%  should  be  a  realistic  figure  as  things  stand  at 
present. As a result, the German economy should regain its crisis-related losses in output by 
about the end of this year. 
There will be a further decline in unemployment owing to companies’ marked willingness to 
recruit new staff. The fall in unemployment in Germany is not just cyclical, however. Germany 
is currently reaping the benefits of the sometimes painful reforms introduced over the past 
decade.  This  teaches  us  the  important  lesson  that  reforms  pay  off.  Furthermore,  robust 
employment  during  the  crisis  was  the  dividend  of  greater  flexibility  in  German  wage 
agreements and was also supported by temporary government measures such as the short-
time  working,  which  proved  to  be  an  attractive  option.  This  is  not  to  deny  that  major 
challenges  remain:  The  reforms  have  tended  to  reinforce  the  segmentation  of  the  labour 
market,  and  unemployment  among  the  low-skilled  as  well  as  long-term  unemployment 
remain at a high level. Nevertheless, current data are impressive: at a rate of 7.3%, German 
unemployment  is  now  below  its  pre-crisis  level,  and  the  average  number  of  employed 
persons was at its highest ever in 2010. 
Public  finances  in  Germany  are  benefiting  from  the  economic  upswing,  too.  Following  a 
reversal from a roughly balanced budget before the crisis to a 3.0% deficit ratio in 2009, the 
3.3%  deficit  ratio  in  2010  was  considerably  lower  than  originally  expected.  For  the  current 
year, we consider it feasible that there will be a further decline in the deficit ratio in the order 
of 2%, provided that fiscal policy stays committed to consolidation. This relatively favourable 
– or, perhaps, this rather less serious – state of public finances allowed Germany to act as 
an  anchor  during  the  crisis.  Still,  the  deficit  has  exceeded  the  Maastricht  threshold  in 
Germany, too, and, even more importantly, the structural deficit is higher than it was before 
the crisis. Developments which are better than expected should therefore be used for more 
ambitious  deficit  reduction  rather  than  for  expenditure  increases.  The  objective  of  a 
structurally almost balanced budget, which is mandated by both European and national law, 
calls for considerable further efforts in consolidation. 
To  sum  up,  Germany  can  serve  in  various  respects  as  a  role  model  for  other  euro-area 
member states, particularly those affected by the current sovereign debt crisis and faced with 
structural adjustment needs. This leads me from the brighter side of recent developments in 
the euro area to their gloomier aspects. 
3. 
Euro area periphery: persistent structural problems 
The broadly based economic upswing in Germany is also benefiting its EU partner countries. 
However, rather low cyclical volatility in the peripheral countries’ export sectors, such as food 
or  tourism,  and  –  with  the  exception  of  Ireland  –  a  rather  small  degree  of  economic 
interdependence  with  Germany  mean  that  positive  spill-over  effects  are  limited.  Strong 
German import demand is therefore insufficient to compensate for the structural problems in 
the countries concerned, where painful adjustment processes have to take place. 
The sovereign debt crisis in some euro-area countries is, at present, the major challenge for 
economic and monetary union. However, I am deliberately not talking of a euro crisis, since 
the  continuity  of  the  single  currency  is  not  at  risk.  Publishing  obituaries  of  the  euro  −  as 
Anglo-Saxon  observers,  in  particular,  have  done  −  was  definitely  premature.  European 
leaders  have  demonstrated  their  firm  determination  to  ensure  the  financial  stability  of  the 
euro area. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The euro-area debt crisis has become the third phase of the global financial crisis. It would 
be wrong, however, to blame the markets or the financial crisis for the debt problems that 
exist  in  peripheral  countries.  Rather,  I  would  say  that  the  financial  crisis  has  revealed 
unfavourable and, ultimately, unsustainable developments which were already in existence 
before the crisis and which had been carelessly neglected, not least by the markets  − too 
much  public  spending,  oversized  construction  and  banking  sectors, 
in 
competitiveness, to name just the most important shortcomings. 
losses 
The financial crisis, however, changed investors’ perception of sovereign risk and triggered a 
loss of confidence in the troubled countries’ ability to repay their debt. This loss of confidence 
led Greece to the brink of illiquidity and put the euro area’s financial system under severe 
strain.  Consequently,  ensuring  financial  stability  in  the  euro  area  justified  the  fiscal 
stabilisation measures that were implemented in May 2010. Financial assistance to Ireland 
was  justifiable,  too,  taking  into  account  the  spill-over  risks  to  financial  stability  in  the 
European Union. 
The stabilisation measures have nevertheless shaken the foundations of EMU. It is therefore 
vital that European leaders take the right decisions during the next few weeks when it comes 
to overhauling the governance of the European monetary union. The final package should 
not fall short of what was agreed by policymakers at the end of last year. 
In addition, it is imperative that member states continue to consolidate their public budgets 
and  to  initiate  comprehensive  reforms  in  order  to  address  the  structural  problems  in  their 
economies. I know that the necessary measures are painful, but they are also unavoidable. 
Financial assistance has bought time for smoothing the adjustment process and for regaining 
credibility. I firmly believe that the countries in trouble will return to growth if the necessary 
measures are taken within an appropriate timeframe.  
Implications for monetary policy 
4. 
Ongoing  recessions  or  weak  growth  in  peripheral  countries  and  strong  growth  figures  in 
Germany  and  some  other  euro  area  countries  have  raised  the  question  of  whether  such 
heterogeneity  poses  a  problem  for  the  single  monetary  policy.  I  would  like  to  make  three 
comments to put this perceived problem into perspective. 
Firstly, current euro-area heterogeneity with regard to growth rates is not significantly greater 
than in the first years of EMU. The weighted standard deviations of quarterly growth rates are 
only slightly higher than in the years before. What has changed significantly is the national 
ranking of GDP growth. While the former “sick man of Europe”, Germany, has emerged as 
one of the fastest-growing economies in the euro area, countries that were growing quickly 
earlier still haven’t emerged from recession. With regard to inflation variance, we see larger 
standard deviations than in the middle of the past decade but lower values than in the first 
years of EMU. 
Secondly,  it  has  to  be  stressed  that  the  monetary  policy  decisions  of  the  ECB  Governing 
Council are focused on the euro area as a whole and not on the specific needs of individual 
member  states, 
funding  problems.  Consequently, 
developments in individual member countries are relevant to monetary policy only insofar as 
they have an impact on price stability in the euro area as a whole; this can occur directly via 
their  impact  on  aggregate  inflation,  but  also  indirectly,  say,  if  the  monetary  policy 
transmission process is affected. 
Finally, heterogeneity is not a problem per se, that is to say it is a problem neither for the 
single  monetary  policy  nor  for  the  individual  member  states:  Persistent  heterogeneity  in 
growth rates might simply reflect differences in potential output growth caused, for example, 
by differing demographic developments or the catch-up processes in some member states. 
Rather, what we should be concerned about is heterogeneity in terms of the member states’ 
individual  banks  with 
let  alone 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
ability  to  cope  with  −  and  to  live  up  to  −  the  challenges  of  a  common  monetary  policy. 
However, in such cases, policies other than monetary policy are required to remove existing 
deficiencies and to ensure the ability of member states to respond to asymmetric shocks: In 
particular, I would like to mention fiscal consolidation to restore confidence in public finances, 
thereby  creating  fiscal  room  for  manoeuvre;  structural  reforms  to  improve  the  flexibility  of 
product  and  labour  markets;  and  better  financial  regulation  to  enhance  the  resilience  of 
financial systems. 
5. 
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen 
There are considerable heterogeneities within the euro area. Nevertheless, it can be argued 
that disparities are more likely to narrow than widen over the medium term. Some euro-area 
countries,  including  Germany,  have  recovered  very  dynamically  from  the  economic  crisis. 
Other countries, particularly those at the periphery, are persistently suffering from structural 
adjustment  requirements  and  are  constantly  under  the  scrutiny  of  financial  markets. 
Nevertheless, the implementation of necessary reforms and adjustment processes is the only 
viable  way  of  returning  to  a  sustainable  growth  path.  On  the  other  hand,  we  should  not 
overestimate Germany’s economic strength over the medium term. The economic crisis has 
subdued the potential growth of the German economy. We assume that potential growth will 
go up again slightly to no more than 1% by 2012. 
Heterogeneity in the euro area does not constrain the conduct of a stability-oriented single 
monetary  policy.  Nevertheless,  its  full  benefits  will  materialise  only  if  the  member  states’ 
economic policies and economic structures are sufficiently flexible and adaptable. A reform 
of  euro-area  economic governance  that  reinforces  individual  responsibilities,  and structural 
reforms in the member states themselves are key to ensuring this. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
