Anand Sinha: Technology in banking – in pursuit of excellence 
Address by Shri Anand Sinha, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the IDRBT 
(Institute  for  Development  and  Reasearch  in  Banking  Technology)  Banking  Technology 
Awards, Hyderabad, 4 August 2011. 
 Inputs provided by Shri P K Chophla and Smt. Nikhila Koduri are gratefully acknowledged.  
Director IDRBT, Shri B Sambamurthy, faculty members and officers of IDRBT, officials from 
banks, members of the selection panel, my colleagues from Reserve Bank and all the other 
participants. It is indeed my privilege to be present here today to honour the recipients of the 
banking  technology  awards  and  deliver  the  key  note  address  for  the  7th  edition  of  the 
awards. I am grateful to IDRBT for giving me this opportunity. My heartiest congratulations to 
all the winners.  
This is a special moment for me to be presenting the awards to banks for their contribution 
towards adoption and implementation of technology in different domains of their businesses. 
As I look at this, I feel both humble and inspired. Humble, because I can honestly say that, a 
decade  ago,  I  could  not  have  imagined  or  predicted  the  impact  of  technology  that  is  so 
overwhelmingly  prevalent  today.  Inspired,  because  banks  have  employed  the  present  day 
technology very successfully and have pushed the right levers to bring about a tremendous 
impact to their business potential. The role of IDRBT in this long and interesting journey has 
been commendable. It has essayed, to perfection, its role as a service provider and also as 
an “incubator” for research and development activities in the area of banking technology. 
My remarks today are divided into two main parts. In the first part, I would be touching upon 
the contribution of technology to the Indian banking industry, the role played by IDRBT and 
the significance of banking technology awards, in fostering the technological developments 
of banks. In the second part, I would be delving into a few issues in the area of business-
technology alignment that are critical in fully leveraging the benefits of technology by banks. 
Contribution of technology in changing the face of banking 
I. 
Technology  adoption  has  changed  the  face  of  banking  in  India.  What  started  as  a  mere 
automation  of  some  routine  work  processes  in  banks  in  the  mid  80’s  has  moved  on  to 
become  business  process  re-engineering  which  has  resulted  in  making  banking  services 
branchless, anytime and anywhere; facilitated new product development and, enabled near 
real  time  service  delivery.  Technology  has  helped  banks  to  reach  the  doorsteps  of  the 
customer by overcoming the limitations on geographical/ physical reach in branch banking 
and easing the resource and volume constraints posed by the brick and mortar model. All the 
stakeholders  have  benefitted  from  the  expansion  of  delivery  channels,  product  innovation 
and  efficiency  enhancement  which  have  been  facilitated  by  technology  adoption.  Banks, 
however,  need  to  guard  against  losing  personal  touch  with  their  customers  in  such 
technology  driven  environment  as  this  would  result  in  their  losing  valuable  information 
needed for their business. Overall, technology that began its journey in Indian banking as an 
enabler,  has  now  become  a  business  driver,  and  is  poised  to  be  an  inseparable  part  of 
banking business process. This journey has come to the present stage by virtue of the push 
given by the Reserve Bank and the whole hearted co-operation by Industry participants. 
Reserve bank and banking technology 
Reserve  Bank  of  India  started  this  push  with  the  Rangarajan  Committee  Report  I  &  II  on 
Computerization in Banks, followed by Saraf and Vasudevan Committee Reports. Some of 
the  significant  developments  during  this  journey  have  been  introduction  of  MICR  based 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
cheque clearing, automation of bank branches, computerization of Govt. business, setting up 
of  IDRBT,  commissioning  of  INFINET,  launching  of  IT  based  delivery  channels,  providing 
guidelines for internet banking, implementation of NFS etc. The role played by the Reserve 
Bank continues. 
As you all know, RBI has recently released an IT vision document 2011–17, which identifies 
the key focus areas for banks in India. The document indicates the significance to be accorded 
to the enhanced use of IT in areas like MIS, regulatory reporting, financial inclusion along with 
the  need  for  appropriate  risk  mitigation  measures  and  business  continuity  management.  It 
envisages  banks  to  work  towards  utilising  technology  for  cost  reduction  of  small  value 
transactions,  improved  customer  services  and  effective  flow  of  information  within  the  banks 
and  to  the  regulator.  The  document  emphasizes  the  need  to  move  towards  integrated  IT 
environment for tapping the synergistic benefits of holistic system implementation. 
Setting up of IDRBT – contribution in banking technology & research 
Setting up of the Institute for Development and Research in Banking Technology (IDRBT), 
Hyderabad in the mid nineties, as a research and technology centre for the banking sector 
was a major step to facilitate and support the “technological revolution” in banking. It was set 
up in the year 1994 as an apex level institute for spearheading technology absorption in the 
Indian Banking and the financial sector. It focuses on the training, research and development 
activities  in  the  field  of  information  technology.  The  commissioning  of  INFINET  as  the 
backbone for financial communication has been a major achievement for IDRBT. IDRBT also 
acts  as  a  Certifying  Authority  (CA)  for  issuance  of  digital  certificates  for  players  in  the 
banking and financial sector. Structured Financial Messaging System (SFMS), a secure and 
common  domestic  financial  messaging  solution  for  intra-bank  and  interbank  applications, 
developed on the lines of SWIFT was the brainchild of IDRBT. IDRBT has also been active in 
dynamically assessing the needs of the banking community and in organizing trainings and 
workshops  in  relevant  IT  related  areas  to  address  such  needs.  It  has  been  performing  its 
designated role as an important component of RBI’s banking technology push and continues 
with its endeavor. 
Reaching for the skies – banking technology excellence awards 
Institution  of  the  excellence  awards  is  a  step  in  the  direction  of  encouraging  effective 
adoption  of technology by  banks.  Instituted in the  year  2001,  with  the  primary  objective  of 
encouraging and recognizing excellence in implementation of Technology for better customer 
service, operational efficiency and expansion of banking services to the hitherto uncovered 
sections  of  society,  the  category  of  awards  has  been  changing  with  the  change  in  the 
technology deployment focus from time to time. This year, banks have been divided into two 
categories – large and small, to enhance the spirit of “sporting competition” amongst banks 
by ensuring a level playing field. 
Alignment of technology and business objectives – critical issues 
II. 
Having given the background of the role of technology in banking development and the role 
essayed by Reserve Bank and IDRBT, I would now like to touch upon a few focus areas in 
the business-technology alignment which could become critical in our journey in  pursuit of 
technological excellence.  
Leveraging technology for financial inclusion – the journey so far, introspection and 
way ahead 
Banking,  as  all  of  us  know,  is  an  industry  that  provides  vital  service  and  support  to  the 
economic  and  financial  sectors.  As  such,  it  has  to  cater  to  all  the  diverse  segments  of 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
society.  However,  more  than  50  per  cent  of  the  adult  population  in  our  country  is  still 
excluded from the financial sector. It is not just people in the rural areas; many of the lower 
income categories of the urban population are also excluded from the banking fold. This is 
largely because of the way the supply of such services is organized. Our existing banking 
business  model  has  done  laudable  work  in  some  of  the  areas,  but  has  not  been  able  to 
adequately  address  these  specific  challenges.  For  instance,  transaction  costs  of  financial 
services to the poor are much larger in comparison to their revenue generation potential in 
the short term. From the demand side too, there is financial illiteracy and the consequent fear 
of approaching formal institutions. With this huge chunk of our populace being deprived of 
basic  economic  facilitators,  or  alternatively  seen,  with  this  huge  resource  base  remaining 
untapped, it would not be feasible to achieve our growth potential.  
Technology has the potential to influence financial inclusion in a big way and help resolve 
many  of  the  above  problems.  The  use  of  technology  in  extending  banking  outreach  is  an 
area  of  contemporary  focus  in  India.  Thanks  to  the  versatility  of  information  technology, 
innovation  is  giving  us  the  hope  that  new  business  models  like  Banking  Correspondents 
(BCs), innovative payment devices, Unique Identification number allocation etc. will enable 
us  to  achieve  financial  inclusion,  while  addressing  some  of  the  cost  and  beneficiary 
identification  issues.  Ultimately,  the  objective  is  to  lower  the  operating  costs  through 
technological  innovations  whereby,  financial  inclusion  becomes  a  profitable  business.  This 
will  result  in  a  huge  upside  to  the  bank  in  the  form  of  stable  deposits.  Financial  inclusion 
would be a catalyst to growth and would also contribute indirectly to financial stability. 
We hope that the initiatives in this space, encouraged by Government as well as Reserve 
Bank,  shall  get  enthusiastic  support  from  the  banking  fraternity  and  help  us  achieve  the 
dream of inclusive growth, which can catapult India into the next orbit of development in the 
foreseeable future. 
Wings of change – mobile banking 
Over the last few years, the mobile and wireless market has been one of the fastest growing 
in  the  world.  Mobile  phones  have  become  an  essential  as  well  as  conveniently  available 
communication tool for almost every individual. Using this technology for funds transfers as 
well  as  retail  payments  holds  a  huge  potential.  As  such,  mobile  banking  is  the  most 
happening area of development in the banking sector and is expected to complement, and to 
an  extent  replace,  the  credit/debit  card  system  in  future.  While  it  has  the  potential  to 
overcome issues relating to cost, infrastructure and resources; it does pose some new issues 
of its own. The main amongst these pertain to the dependence on service providers, network 
availability  and  security.  It  would  also  require  deep  appreciation  of  management  aspects 
which relate not only to appropriate technology deployment and performance at backend but 
also to issues such as front end contact with the customer to provide necessary confidence 
and convenience. All these issues are receiving due attention for prioritized resolution. RBI 
has  also  established  National  Payment  Corporation  of  India  for  focused  attention  on 
development  and  implementation  of  requisite  technologies  for  enabling  new  modes  of 
delivery. 
Electronic payment systems 
One of the areas where technology has facilitated significant revolution is payment systems. 
It started with the mechanization/ automation of certain processes by introduction of cheque 
sorters  and  readers,  MICR  based  clearing  etc.  and  has  moved  on  to  use  information 
technology for efficient funds transfer mechanisms such as ECS, NEFT, CTS, RTGS. The 
focus  has  shifted  from  the  initial  needs  of  capacity  management  for  handling  increasing 
volumes, to efficiency enhancement in transaction processing for the benefit of businesses, 
markets as well as retail customers. We are witnessing increasing utilization of these delivery 
mechanisms and have to think about the next higher level of technology and sophistication to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
meet  the  rising  expectations  of  the  market  participants.  RBI  has  already  initiated  work 
towards introduction of new generation RTGS, which will be able to handle rising volumes, 
provide better functionalities and has better technological adaptability. Our journey towards 
leveraging technology for making our payment systems at par with the best in the world will 
continue with appropriate contributions from all concerned. 
Another  important  benefit  derived  from  information  technology  deployment  is  the  ability  of 
banks to provide innovative delivery channels. Online banking, debit & credit card payments, 
ATM access to other bank customers, Point of Sales terminals etc. have all changed the way 
bank customers are able to transact for their day to day needs, thereby creating a huge eco 
system  of  convenient  banking  facilities  which  substantially  reduces  the  need  for  physical 
proximity  and  handling  of  cash.  It  also  provides  access  to  a  large  number  of  global  retail 
markets to our citizens. 
Use of IT for improving internal effectiveness – significance and benefits 
Focus of technology in Indian banking, so far, has, mainly, been on transaction processing, 
data  storage,  service  delivery,  and  rightly  so.  These  were  our  priorities  to  make  banking 
better, convenient and more accessible. Now, that our banking has reached a stage where 
many  of  such  services  are  running  on  tech  enabled  processes,  we  can  look  forward  to 
improving other areas which were not, hitherto, focus of our attention and have huge scope 
for  improvement,  such  as  internal  management  and  back  end  processes.  Currently,  while 
data  storage  and  retrieval  are  on  computerized  systems,  the  administrative  processes  are 
largely manual, warranting huge resource deployment. This adds to costs, impacts efficiency 
and  reduces  effectiveness  of  internal  controls.  Further,  in  the  existing  models  followed  in 
many work areas in banks, data flows and reporting for MIS as well as external filings require 
manual  interventions  and  multiple  database  access/  sourcing.  This  not  only  affects  the 
timeliness  of  data  submission  but  also  the  quality  thereof.  Errors  in  submitted  data  and, 
sometimes,  subjective  interpretations  of  data  submission  requirements  lead  to  wrong 
decisions  and,  may  be,  serious  consequences.  RBI  has  taken  the  initiative  in  the  form  of 
automated data flow project, through which an attempt is being made to ensure that all banks 
start furnishing reports to RBI by means of straight through/ automated processes which do 
not  require  manual  intervention.  This  will  ensure  that  reporting  is  error  free,  direct  from 
business data and timely. I hope, all of you will whole heartedly co-operate and ensure early 
implementation of this initiative. 
Challenges in IT usage – costs and risks 
Wide spread technology deployment in the banking business has brought to the fore some 
new issues and challenges. These can be broadly divided into two categories – Costs and 
Risks.  Costs  –  in  terms  of  increasing  expenditure  on  IT  deployment  and,  risks  –  resulting 
from – reliance on IT systems without necessary safeguards. Cost aspects can be addressed 
by  synergizing  IT  deployment  objectives  with  the  broader,  strategic  business  objectives  to 
ensure  adequate  operational  and  management  controls  over  purchase  as  well  as 
maintenance  of  appropriate  technology  solutions.  Oversight  and  Governance  mechanisms 
have  to  be  strengthened  to  ensure  that  costs  involved  in  IT  management  are  properly 
evaluated  and  controlled,  technology  deployment  decisions  are  based  on  holistic  and 
considered  evaluation,  the  solutions  /  process  changes  have  customer  in  focus  and  that 
banking  organizations  do  not  end  up  investing  in  technology  which  hampers  customer 
interests. The second aspect relating to IT risks is a very critical issue. With the increased 
use of IT, there are attendant risks posed to the banks as well as their customers in terms of 
monetary  loss,  data  theft,  breach  of  privacy  and  banks  need  to  be  extremely  cognizant  of 
such risks.  
Another  significant  aspect  of  banking  business  is  regulatory  and  supervisory  compliance. 
With the growth and globalization of markets in general and in the aftermath of recent crisis 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
in  particular,  number  of  such  compliance  requirements  is  increasing.  Basel  II  &  III 
implementation brings in huge challenges. It requires enormous amount of continuous data 
capturing for analysis, risk measurement and provisioning, as also validation of models and 
processes  deployed  for  such  assessments.  All  this  has  to  be  essentially  carried  out  using 
technology  based  applications.  However,  these  requirements  will  entail  some  costs  and 
banks will have to see as to how appropriate technology usage can help them reduce the 
costs of compliance process, at least in terms of operational efficiency. At the same time, IT 
risk itself shall form a large part of the operational risk and shall require focused attention. 
Within  the  boundaries  of  permissible  action,  some  banks  may  find  innovative  solutions  to 
shore up asset or liability management efficiency to counterbalance some of the costs. But, 
again,  Governance  mechanism  shall  have  to  be  alert  and  appropriate  to  ensure  that  cost 
considerations do not lead to “shortcuts” in compliance. IDRBT has collated and published 
some useful information on their website regarding IT Governance, which is appreciable. 
Conclusion 
Technology has revolutionized the way banking is looked at and the way it is conducted in 
our  country.  It  is  growing  in  stature  from  a  business  enabler  to  becoming  a  part  of  the 
business  process  itself.  It  has  opened  new  avenues  for  the  industry  in  terms  of  business 
opportunities as well as their role in supporting inclusive growth for the Indian economy.  
Here I am inspired by a quotation by Carly Fiorina, former CEO of Hewlett Packard (HP) and 
I quote: 
 
“I  believe  we  are  now  entering  the  Renaissance  phase  of  the  Information  Age, 
where creativity and ideas are the new currency, and innovation is a primary virtue, 
where technology truly has the power to transform lives, not just businesses, where 
technology can help us solve fundamental problems.”  
I  complement  all  the  participants  for  their  sincere  efforts  to  fruitfully  deploy  technology, 
congratulate  the  winners  of  awards  for  the  year  and  hope  that  this  journey  towards 
excellence shall continue, with IDRBT continuing the good work it’s doing and each one of 
the banks chipping in with their best.  
Thank you.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
