Luc Coene: Challenges for euro area monetary policy going forward 
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Luc  Coene,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Belgium,  at  the 
29th SUERF Colloquium, Brussels, 10 May 2011. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen  
This week marks the first “anniversary” – if I may say so – of the sovereign debt crisis. 
Indeed,  the  first  week  of  May  last  year  was  characterised  by  extreme  turmoil  on  financial 
markets and on the markets for public debt of some European countries in particular. That 
forced  the  Eurosystem  to  announce  a  set  of  measures  on  Monday  10th  of  May  2010, 
including a programme to intervene on markets for debt instruments. One year after that very 
turbulent period, I think it is a good time to take a look at what challenges are ahead of us. I 
will  focus  my  remarks  on  monetary  policy  in  the  euro  area,  and  in  particular  on  the 
challenges posed by the current macroeconomic outlook and how the sovereign debt turmoil 
has an impact on euro area monetary policy decisions.  
Let’s first go back to the early days of May 2010. What we witnessed those days, was a full-
blown panic on financial markets after tensions on some government debt markets had been 
mounting  since  the  fall  of  2009  as  investors  increasingly  cast  doubts  on  the  capacity  of 
Greece  to  repay  its  public  debts. The  turmoil  in  May  not  only  led  to  very  high  spreads  on 
Greek  paper,  but  also  affected  other  countries’  sovereign  debt  markets,  led  to  extremely 
volatile equity and foreign exchange markets and brought about a new freeze in interbank 
trading  as  banks  again  became  reluctant  to  lend  each  other  in  a  context  of  uncertainties 
regarding  exposure  to  the  countries  concerned.  Therefore,  the  Governing  Council  of  the 
Eurosystem  decided  on  a  package  of  measures.  First,  a  programme  to  intervene  on  the 
secondary markets for private and public debt securities was set up in order to restore the 
smooth  functioning  of  securities  markets,  a  key  link  in  the  monetary  transmission  chain. 
Second,  it  was  decided  to  organise  again  all  Eurosystem  liquidity  providing  operations  as 
fixed-rate full allotment tenders, which allows banks to obtain all liquidity they need at a fixed 
rate, of course against the pledge of appropriate collateral. Finally, banks could again obtain 
US dollar liquidity through a swap line with the US Federal Reserve.  
Since these early May days one year ago, the economic outlook has improved, both on 
the  global  level  and  at  the  euro  area  level.  Yet,  in  my  view,  the  economic  environment  is 
characterised by some divergences. I see two types of divergences. At the global level, we 
currently  experience  what  the  IMF  in  its  latest  World  Economic  Outlook  calls  a  two-speed 
recovery. Indeed, the recovery is led in particular by the emerging market economies while 
the advanced economies are still characterised by rather low growth and excess capacity. 
The resource-intensive growth of the emerging economies does put severe upward pressure 
on  commodity  prices,  which  are  now  standing  at  levels  close  to  those  seen  before  the 
financial  crisis  erupted in  2008.  Of  course,  not  only  the  fast  economic  growth  in  emerging 
economies pushed up commodity prices, also tensions in the Middle East and North Africa 
and  the  Japanese  disaster  led  to  higher  prices.  At  the  euro  area  level  too,  we  see 
divergences.  The  rather  solid  recovery  for  the  euro  area  as  a  whole  does,  indeed,  hide 
significant heterogeneity as the so-called “core countries” are posting nice growth numbers 
while the countries most affected by the sovereign and banking crisis are lagging behind. 
This  all  means  that,  when  doing  our  job  –  which  is  to  maintain  price  stability  –,  the 
Governing  Council  faces  a  number  of  challenges.  First  and  foremost,  the  Governing 
Council identifies clear upside risks to price stability which do require close monitoring. At 
the same time, I must admit that the sovereign debt crisis and – in some cases mutually 
related  to  that  –  the  still  fragile  euro  area  banking  sector  do  complicate  the  Governing 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Council’s task as it threatens the good functioning of the monetary transmission mechanism. 
I will look at each challenge in turn.  
Risks to the inflation outlook have shifted to the upside: the euro area recovery is now 
gaining a good footing and commodity prices have posted large gains. These higher prices 
push up inflation: according to Eurostat’s flash estimate, headline inflation stood at 2.8% in 
April, clearly above the ECB’s quantitative definition of price stability. On top, we see a lot of 
price  pressures  in  the  pipeline  which  implies  that  the  risk  of  second-round  effects  is 
non-negligible today, in the context of a continuing recovery and given the likely persistent 
nature  of  the  raw  materials  price  increases.  Therefore,  the  Governing  Council  decided  to 
raise the key ECB interest rate in April to 1.25%, up from the 1%-level at which it stood 
since May 2009. That interest rate rise – which was widely anticipated by financial markets – 
indeed aims at avoiding that the first-round effects of higher commodity prices which we see 
in  today’s  inflation  figures  translate  into  second-round  effects  and  would  hence  entail  a 
prolonged  period  of  high  inflation.  The  higher  commodity  prices  –  which,  as  I  said  earlier, 
mainly  reflect  the  good  performance  of  emerging  economies  and  are  therefore,  at  least  in 
that sense, a blessing – are a real impoverishment for the euro area economy which cannot 
be  avoided.  Higher  wage  claims  or  price  increases  seeking  compensation  for  such  a 
deterioration in the terms of trade only postpone necessary adjustments and only lead to a 
longer  period  of  higher  inflation  without  any  longer-run  real  benefits.  Therefore,  a  solid 
anchoring of inflation expectations is essential and the Governing Council will do whatever is 
necessary to maintain price stability over the medium term.  
The Governing Council acknowledged that the current monetary policy stance does remain 
accommodative. “Is this increase the first in a series of interest rate rises?”, is therefore 
a  question  which  observers  have  often  raised  over  the  past  month.  As  you  all  know,  the 
Governing Council never pre-commits but at the same time, I think our strategy is very clear 
and markets and observers alike do realise that we will do whatever is necessary to ensure 
price  stability  will  be  maintained.  Markets  currently  anticipate  a  gradual  withdrawal  of 
monetary accommodation and I personally think that is no unreasonable assumption, given 
the  clear  upside  risks  to  price  stability  I  mentioned  earlier.  Needless  to  say,  it  is  incoming 
data and our assessment of the economic outlook that will ultimately determine our course of 
action and the pace at which monetary accommodation will be withdrawn.  
Another question people often raise is how such an increase in interest rates squares to the 
ongoing sovereign debt turmoil, which brings me the second challenge I want to discuss. I 
see  two  ways  in  which  the  sovereign  debt  turmoil  enters  our  discussion.  First,  the  turmoil 
does have important bearings on the transmission of monetary policy. Indeed, that was 
the  very  motivation  for  setting-up  the  Securities  Market  Programme  in  May  2010  and  for 
re-introducing the regime of fixed-rate full allotment for longer-term operations, which is still 
in place at the current juncture. It will be maintained for as long as necessary, and at least 
until July 2011. That should avoid that banks in need of short-term funds are being cut-off 
from liquidity in case banks with excess funds are no longer willing to lend to them because 
of uncertainty on counterparties’ exposure to sovereign debt. 
At the current juncture, we deem these non-standard measures an essential part of our 
monetary policy toolkit as they help to maintain financial stability and hence a good 
functioning of the monetary transmission mechanism, an essential condition for being 
able to deliver price stability. At the same time, I would like to stress that these measures 
are temporary in nature. Indeed, they are not without drawbacks. The regime of fixed-rate full 
allotment discourages interbank trading because the Eurosystem in fact puts itself between 
banks with excess liquidity and those in need of liquidity. That is not a sustainable situation 
and it does not fit in the ECB’s view of a market-oriented implementation of monetary policy. 
Moreover, the non-standard measures may lessen the incentive for banks to regain access 
to  market  funding,  for  instance  through  recapitalisation  –  possibly  with  the  help  of  public 
funds –, balance sheet restructuring or a change in their business model. These are the only 
structural  and  long-run  solutions  for  the  banks  concerned.  The  current  non-standard 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
measures  –  which  will  be  phased-out  when  appropriate  –  help  to  make  the  transition  as 
smooth as possible but are no substitute for concrete actions on the part of the banks.  
Another way through which the sovereign debt problems enter our discussion is through 
their impact on the economic outlook and the outlook for price stability in particular. 
The considerable fiscal consolidation efforts already undertaken and those still to come, are 
of course indispensable to secure sustainable public finances over the longer term, but they 
do weigh on domestic demand in the short-run. Moreover, we continue to see the sovereign 
debt  turmoil  and  its  possible  fall-out  to  the  financial  sector  and  the  real  economy  as  a 
downside  risk  to  the  economic  outlook.  These  developments  are  therefore  duly  taken  into 
account when deciding on monetary policy in the months ahead.  
To  conclude,  I  would  like  to  touch  upon  two  issues  which  often  raise  questions  with 
observers.  The  first  concerns  the  role  of  heterogeneity  in  the  euro  area  and  the  second 
concerns  today’s  policy  constellation  in  which  we  raise  interest  rates  but  maintain  very 
flexible liquidity provision policies.  
As  regards  heterogeneity  across  euro  area  countries,  I  do  not  consider  this  as  such  a 
phenomenon  which  greatly  complicates  our  task.  It  is  the  outlook  for  the  euro  area  as  a 
whole that determines the course of our actions: there simply is no other option with a single 
monetary  policy.  Moreover,  I  tend  to  see  the  current  heterogeneity  as  being  part  of  a 
necessary – but, admittedly, painful – process of adjustment through which some countries 
have to go in order to regain competitiveness and to repair their balance sheets. Besides, 
being part of a monetary union will help them – rather than make it more difficult – to do so, 
because the greater trade links they have, allow them to benefit from faster growth in well 
performing  member  countries.  Although  monetary  policy  cannot  be  tailored  towards  the 
needs of specific countries or regions, national developments are to some extent taken into 
account when deciding on monetary policy measures. That is, for instance, the case when 
the  Governing  Council  decides  on  its  non-standard  measures.  Indeed,  the  monetary 
transmission impairments we observe are located mostly in those countries most affected by 
the sovereign and banking crisis. It is therefore no coincidence that we kept these measures 
in place, although we raised interest rates. 
In that respect, some people ask me whether I see any conflict between raising interest 
rates and maintaining such flexibility in liquidity allotment modes. The answer is “No”: 
both  conceptually  and  technically,  I  see  no  problems  in  raising  rates  while  at  the  same 
continuing to provide banks with unlimited liquidity.  
From a conceptual point of view I want to underscore that these two types of measures are 
geared  towards  different,  but  complementary,  goals.  The  monetary  policy  stance  is 
signaled by our key interest rates and is set as a function of the outlook for price stability. 
The non-standard measures, in contrast, are designed to ensure that the transmission of the 
monetary policy stance to the rest of the economy happens as smooth as possible, which 
should in turn allow the Governing  Council to  deliver price stability over the medium term. 
Hence, these measures are complementary to each other, rather than conflicting. 
Let  me  conclude.  The  Governing  Council  has  shown  it  will  do  whatever  is  necessary  to 
deliver  price  stability,  which  means  taking  the  necessary  measures  to  avoid  a  “Great 
Depression”-scenario as we did in 2008, but also to raise interest rates if upside risks to price 
stability threaten to materialise. We do have the will and the tools – including non-standard 
ones  –  to  cope  with  the  challenges  in  front  of  us.  The  flexibility  of  our  framework  should, 
however, be no excuse to postpone necessary adjustments, both in the financial and non-
financial  sector.  And  although  we  see  encouraging  signs  –  for  instance  in  terms  of 
competitive adjustment in some countries –, I think there is still a lot of work to do. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
