Ben S Bernanke: The Dodd-Frank Act 
Testimony  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal 
Reserve System, before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, US Senate, 
Washington DC, 21 July 2011. 
 the  Dodd-Frank  Act  and 
Chairman Johnson, Ranking Member Shelby, and other members of the Committee, thank 
you  for  the  opportunity  to  testify  on  the  first  anniversary  of  the  Dodd-Frank  Wall  Street 
Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 (Dodd-Frank Act).1  
On this anniversary, it is worth reminding ourselves of why the Congress passed sweeping 
financial reforms a year ago. The financial crisis of 2008–09 was unprecedented in its scope 
and severity. Some of the world’s largest financial firms collapsed or nearly did so, sending 
shock  waves  through  the  highly  interconnected  global  financial  system.  Critical  financial 
markets  came  under  enormous  stress.  Asset  prices  fell  sharply  and  flows  of  credit  to 
American families and businesses were disrupted. The crisis, in turn, wreaked havoc on the 
U.S.  and  global  economies,  causing  sharp  declines  in  production  and  trade  and  putting 
millions  out  of  work.  Extraordinary  actions  by  authorities  around  the  world  helped  stabilize 
the situation, but, nearly three years later, the recovery from the crisis in the United States 
and in many other countries remains far from complete.  
In response to the crisis, we have seen a comprehensive re-thinking and reform of financial 
regulation,  both  in  the  United  States  and  around  the  world.  Among  the  core  objectives  of 
both 
the  global  regulatory  reform  effort  are:  enhancing 
regulators’ ability to monitor and address threats to financial stability, strengthening both the 
prudential  oversight  and  resolvability  of  systemically  important  financial  institutions  (SIFIs), 
and improving the capacity of financial markets and infrastructures to absorb shocks. I will 
briefly discuss each of these objectives.  
First,  to  help  regulators  better  anticipate  and  prepare  for  threats  to  financial  stability, 
legislatures in both the United States and other developed economies have instructed central 
banks and regulatory agencies to adopt what has been called a macroprudential approach to 
supervision  and  regulation  –  that  is,  an  approach  that  supplements  traditional  supervision 
and  regulation  of  individual  firms  or  markets  with  explicit  consideration  of  threats  to  the 
stability  of  the  financial  system  as  a  whole.  Under  a  macroprudential approach,  regulators 
are enjoined not only to look for emerging financial risks but also to try to identify structural 
weaknesses or gaps in the regulatory system, thereby helping the regulatory framework keep 
pace with financial innovation and other market developments.  
As  you  know,  the  Dodd-Frank  Act  created  a  council  of  regulators,  the  Financial  Stability 
Oversight  Council,  to  coordinate  efforts  to  identify  and  mitigate  threats  to  U.S.  financial 
stability across a range of institutions and markets. The Council’s monitoring efforts are well 
under  way,  and  this  new  organization  has  contributed  to  what  has  been  a  very  positive 
atmosphere  of  consultation  and  coordination  among  its  member  agencies.  The  Council  is 
also moving forward with its rulemaking responsibilities, including rules under which it will be 
able to designate systemically important nonbank financial institutions and financial market 
utilities  for  additional  supervisory  oversight,  including  by  the  Federal  Reserve.  For  its  part, 
the  Federal  Reserve  has  also  made  organizational  changes  to  promote  a  macroprudential 
approach 
the  establishment  of  high-level, 
multidisciplinary working groups to oversee the supervision of large, complex banking firms 
to  regulation.  Among 
these  changes 
is 
                                                 
1  An  appendix  to  this  testimony  provides  details  on  the  Federal  Reserve's  progress  in  meeting  its 
responsibilities under the Dodd-Frank Act. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
and financial market utilities, with a strong focus on developments that have implications for 
financial stability. We have also created an Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research 
to help coordinate our efforts to identify and analyze potential risks to the broader financial 
system and to serve as liaison with the Council.  
A  second  major  objective  of  financial  reform  is  to  mitigate  the  threats  to  financial  stability 
posed  by  the  too-big-to-fail  problem.  Here  the  Dodd-Frank  Act  takes  a  two-pronged 
approach.  The  first  prong  empowers  the  Federal  Reserve  to  reduce  a  SIFI’s  probability  of 
failure through tougher prudential regulation and supervision, including enhanced risk-based 
capital  and  leverage  requirements,  liquidity  requirements,  single-counterparty  credit  limits, 
stress testing, an early remediation regime, and activities restrictions. The Federal Reserve 
and  other  agencies  face  the  ongoing  challenge  of  aligning  domestic  regulations  with 
international  agreements,  including  the  Basel  III  requirements  for  globally  active  banks. 
These efforts are going well; in particular, the Federal Reserve expects to issue proposed 
rules on the oversight of SIFIs later this summer and, working with other banking agencies, is 
on schedule to implement Basel III.  
Ending too-big-to-fail also requires allowing a SIFI to fail if it cannot meet its obligations – and 
to do so without inflicting serious damage on the broader financial system. Thus, the second 
prong  of  the  Dodd-Frank  Act’s  effort  to  end  too-big-to-fail  empowers  the  Federal  Reserve 
and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) to reduce the effect on the system in 
the event of a SIFI’s failure through tools such as the new orderly liquidation authority and 
improved resolution planning by firms and supervisors. In particular, the Federal Reserve is 
working with the FDIC to require SIFIs to better prepare for their own resolution by adopting 
so-called living wills. A joint final rule on living wills is expected later this summer.  
Reducing the likelihood of a severe financial crisis also requires strengthening the resilience 
of our financial markets and infrastructure – a third major objective of the Dodd-Frank Act. 
Toward  that  end,  provisions  of  the  act  improve  the  transparency  and  stability  of  the 
over-the-counter derivatives markets and strengthen the oversight of financial market utilities 
and other critical parts of our financial infrastructure. We and our colleagues at the Securities 
and  Exchange  Commission,  the  Commodity  Futures  Trading  Commission,  and  other 
agencies are moving this work forward, in consultation as appropriate with foreign regulators 
and international bodies. The U.S. agencies are also working together to address structural 
weaknesses in areas not specifically addressed by the Dodd-Frank Act, such as the triparty 
repo market and the money market mutual fund industry.  
To be sure, any sweeping reform comes with costs and uncertainties. In implementing the 
statute, the Federal Reserve is committed to the promulgation of rules that are economically 
sensible, appropriately weigh costs and benefits, protect smaller community institutions, and, 
most important, promote the sound extension of credit in the service of economic growth and 
development.  A  full  transition  to  the  new  system  will  require  much  more  work  by  both  the 
public and private sectors, and no doubt we will learn lessons along the way. However, as 
we work together to implement financial reform, we must not lose sight of the reason that we 
began this process: ensuring that events like those of 2008 and 2009 are not repeated. Our 
long-term economic health requires that we do everything possible to achieve that goal.  
Thank you. I would be pleased to take your questions.  
 2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
