Gill Marcus: Perspectives on recent global economic developments 
Address  by  Ms  Gill  Marcus,  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  to  the 
US Chamber of Commerce in South Africa, Johannesburg, 23 August 2011. 
 Good morning and thank you for the invitation to address this meeting of the US Chamber of 
Commerce in South Africa. We meet at a challenging time, with the global economy moving 
perilously close towards a precipice, as the financial crisis moves into its fifth year. Recent 
developments underline just how central the role of the US economy in the global economy 
remains.  The  current  global  outlook  is  therefore  highly  dependent  on  the  health  of  the  US 
economy, which is also important from a local perspective as the US is one of South Africa’s 
main trading partners, with a positive trade balance in South Africa’s favour. In 2010, almost 
9 per cent of our total exports, totaling R52 billion, went to the US, while around 7 per cent of 
our imports, valued at R42 billion were sourced in the US. 
A  number  of  recent  developments  have  resulted  in  a  high  degree  of  market  turbulence  in 
recent  weeks.  These  include  the  realisation  that  the  outlook  for  US  growth  is  not  as 
favourable as previously believed, the damaging US debt ceiling debate and the consequent 
ratings downgrade of US debt, and the further deterioration of the European sovereign debt 
crisis which has now spread from the periphery to the core, and potentially to the European 
banking system.  
What started in 2007 as a banking crisis related to the US housing market has turned into a 
sovereign debt crisis, and recent events in the US and Europe illustrate how quickly the crisis 
can mutate. At the heart of the problem is a lack of strong unified and credible leadership, 
leading to a loss of confidence and trust in this leadership and potentially in the system as a 
whole. Behind the statistics are real people who find their lives in turmoil and livelihoods and 
future ambitions at risk. And in these circumstances those presenting easy answers to what 
are very complex and difficult issues can readily gain support.  
Given  the  backdrop  against  which we  are  meeting,  it  would  be  appropriate  to  make  some 
comments about the current global developments and their possible implications for Africa in 
general  and  South  Africa  in  particular.  It  would  also  be  useful  to  draw  out  some  of  the 
lessons for Africa from the problems being faced by the Eurozone.  
What  we  are  witnessing  currently  is  not  a  new  crisis,  nor  is  it  part  of  a  normal  economic 
cycle. We can learn a lot from the work of Reinhart and Rogoff who have shown that unlike 
normal  economic  cycles  or  recessions,  financial  crises  are  protracted  affairs.  According  to 
their  research,  conventional  recessions  involve  a  relatively  quick  return  to  normalcy,  and 
generally the economy makes up the lost output and resumes its pre-recession growth trend 
within  a  year.  A  recession  involving  a  financial  crisis  involves  not  only  loss  of  output  and 
employment  but  applies  to  debt,  credit  and  the  deleveraging,  which  takes  much  longer  to 
work  through.  Their  work  shows  that  the  aftermath  of  severe  financial  crises  share  three 
main characteristics: that asset market collapses are deep and prolonged; that such crises 
are  associated  with  profound  declines  in  output  and  employment,  with  the  latter  being 
particularly protracted; and the real value of government debt tends to explode, on average 
almost doubling over a short period. This debt increase is apart from possible banking bailout 
costs,  and  is  a  result  of  an  inevitable  collapse  in  tax  revenues  as  well  as  countercyclical 
expenditure policies. Their findings also not only show that banking crises do not discriminate 
between emerging markets and developed markets – leading them to label such crises as 
equal opportunity menaces – but developed countries generally take much longer to recover 
than emerging markets, possibly due to greater wage flexibility in (some) emerging markets. 
Normal cyclical downturns are often reinforced by tight monetary policies in response to an 
overheating  economy  and  inflationary  pressures,  and  the  downturn  can  be  effectively 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
moderated by a reversal of the monetary policy stance. Unfortunately we are not in a normal 
cyclical  downturn,  and  the  crisis  cannot  be  solved  through  monetary  policy  alone. 
Households in the advanced economies are still in the process of deleveraging and repairing 
their impaired balance sheets, and monetary policy can only help to a certain extent. In the 
context  of  low  and  falling  house  prices,  declining  equity  prices  and  stubbornly  high 
unemployment, rebuilding of household balance sheets may take a protracted period. 
The  problem  facing  the  US  currently  is  this  uncertainty  relating  to  the  self-sustainability  of 
private  sector  consumption  expenditure.  At  the  start  of  the  crisis,  the  gap  left  by  the 
consumer,  usually  the  main  driver  of  growth,  was  filled  in  part  by  increased  government 
expenditure.  By  the  beginning  of  2010  the  recovery  appeared  to  be  underway  and  the 
consensus  view  was  that  by  mid-2010,  the  US  economy  would  be  on  a  self-sustaining 
recovery path, and the focus then was on exit strategies or normalization of both monetary 
and  fiscal  policies.  By  mid-2010  it  had  become  apparent  that  this  positive  outlook  was 
misplaced, and an additional fiscal stimulus, in the form of the extension of the Bush-era tax 
cuts followed, along with a further round of quantitative easing. The result of this, however, 
was a further build-up of public leverage. 
There were concerns, however, that the impact of this additional stimulus would disappear by 
the  middle  of  this  year,  and  that  consumption  expenditure  would  not  yet  be  on  a  self-
sustaining  path.  The  slowdown  in  the  US  economy  in  the  first  half  of  the  year  was  widely 
interpreted as a temporary soft patch, attributed in the main to supply chain issues relating to 
the  disasters  in  Japan.  There  is  now  a  more  general  recognition  that  the  US  economic 
recovery is weaker than anticipated, and fears of a possible return to recession have replaced 
the earlier confidence. This is particularly the case after the significant downward revision of 
US  growth  performance  in  the  first  quarter  of  2011  from  1,8  per  cent  to  0,4  per  cent.  The 
announcement by the FOMC that the policy rate in the US is likely to remain accommodative 
until  mid-2013  is  more  a  statement  about  the  weak  outlook  for  the  US  economy,  and  the 
structural nature of this weakness, rather than a commitment about interest rates. 
Unfortunately the outlook is no better in the UK and the Eurozone. For some time the focus 
has been primarily on the sovereign debt problems of the peripheral European economies. 
As suggested by Reinhart and Rogoff, there has indeed been a spiraling of indebtedness of 
many Eurozone economies. For example, the debt to GDP ratio in Spain is expected to have 
increased from 40 per cent in 2008 to an estimated 75 per cent in 2012, while that of Greece 
from  105  per  cent  to  166  per  cent  over  the  same  period.  Fears  of  default  abound  as  the 
different  European  countries  failed  to  make  the  difficult  decisions  about  burden  sharing 
between  countries  and  the  private  sector.  Policy  pronouncements  and  packages  have  not 
been fully followed through, or have generally disappointed the market in their failure to fully 
deal  with  the  problems.  Countries  such  as  Greece  have  been  forced  into  austerity 
programmes which are likely to be either politically unsustainable, or if they do manage to 
achieve  the  proposed  expenditure  reductions,  may  result  in  declines  in  real  growth  rates 
which  would  then  reinforce  the  negative  debt  dynamics.  The  recent  announcement  by  the 
Greek  Finance  Minister  that  Greece  is  expected  to  contract  at  a  worse-than-expected 
4,5 per cent  or  above  in  2011  is  a  case  in  point.  Debt  sustainability  is,  after  all,  partly  a 
function of both the cost of servicing the debt as well as the real growth rate of the economy. 
As  the  markets  reassessed  the  ability  of  a  number  of  countries  to  consolidate  their  fiscal 
positions,  the  spreads  on  sovereign  debt  increased,  which  in  turn  undermined  the 
sustainability criteria.  
The  failure  of  the  Eurozone  economies  to  deal  decisively  with  the  issue  has  resulted  in  a 
spill-over to the broader region, with the focus leap-frogging firstly Spain and then both Spain 
and Italy, and on to France, where the markets are now questioning the sustainability of the 
country’s  AAA  rating.  The  interconnected  nature  of  these  economies  is  reinforced  by  the 
exposure  of  the  banks  in  France  and  Germany  in  particular  to  the  debt  of  the  peripheral 
European  economies.  The  IMF  estimates  that  the  European  banks’  exposure  to  the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
European periphery constitutes around 10 per cent of Europe’s GDP and about 80 per cent 
of the capital of European banks. 
In effect we have seen a banking crisis turning into a sovereign debt crisis, which in turn has 
the  potential  to  undermine  the  banking  sector  recovery  in  Europe.  In  recent  weeks  there 
have been reports of US money market funds reducing their exposures to European banks. 
Bank  equity  prices  have  come  under  pressure,  and  interbank  rates  have  also  widened 
somewhat.  Banking  systems  rely  on  confidence,  and  a  collapse  of  confidence  relating  to 
counter-party  risk  can  easily  cause  a  liquidity  crisis  to  translate  into  a  solvency  crisis  with 
negative feedback effects to the real sector of the economy. For this reason it is important for 
central  banks  to  stand  ready  to  support  their  banking  systems  by  providing  appropriate 
liquidity  support  if  and  when  required.  Fortunately,  central  banks  are  probably  better 
prepared for such actions than was the case in 2008. 
As the financial crisis gathered momentum in 2008, a feature that was widely recognised was 
the synchronised nature of the downturn. Current developments are disturbingly similar, with 
evidence of a synchronised downturn in many of the advanced economy. It is unclear at this 
stage if a reversion to recessionary conditions is likely, but at best the advanced economies 
appear to be in a stalled state. Even Germany, which until recently had been the powerhouse 
of Europe, only managed growth of 0,1 per cent in the second quarter of this year, while the 
Eurozone  as  a  whole  averaged  0,2  per  cent.  Growth  in  the  UK  is  also  expected  to  be 
0,2 per cent, and 4 per cent below the pre-crisis peak. This raises serious concerns for two 
main  reasons.  First,  there  will  inevitably  be  an  impact  on  growth  in  the  rest  of  the  world. 
In 2008  the  hopes  of  decoupling  by  emerging  markets  proved  to  be  vain  ones,  and  while 
there does appear to be an increased amount of intraregional trade, in Asia in particular, it is 
almost  inevitable  that  the  rest  of  the  world  will  not  escape  unscathed.  Second,  a  general 
growth  slowdown  will  exacerbate  the  debt  dynamics  in  many  of  these  countries,  and  may 
indeed reinforce these negative dynamics if further fiscal stimulus is provided. 
So  what  can  be  done?  The  cumulative  nature  of  this  crisis  means  that  many  parts  of  the 
world  have  reached  this  stage  having  sold  off  most  of  the  family  silver.  In  2008,  the 
coordinated  response  by  many  countries  resulted  in  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  reactions 
which are simply not possible this time round. The response at this stage has been limited as 
governments generally face fiscal consolidation, and their room for manoeuver appears to be 
constrained.  
In  most  of 
remains  extraordinarily 
accommodative. As interest rates in many of these countries are close to the zero bound, the 
scope  for  further  reductions  is  limited  apart  from  further  quantitative  easing  and  actions  to 
provide liquidity or support to dysfunctional segments of the financial markets. There is no 
doubt that the burden of the policy response will fall disproportionately on monetary policy, 
but it is unclear if such actions will be effective in providing additional stimulus as opposed to 
simply facilitating the functioning of markets.  
The lack of fiscal space creates a real policy dilemma. On the one hand countries require a 
fiscal  stimulus  to  try  and  counteract  the  slowdown,  while  on  the  other  hand  the  inevitable 
further build-up of debt means that sustainability issues become paramount. So there is the 
conflict between short term exigencies and longer term sustainability issues. Ultimately the 
policy focus has to be on growth, which will help with fiscal sustainability, rather than on debt 
reduction in the short run. There needs to be a clear distinction between short and medium 
term needs, with a clear commitment to medium and long term fiscal sustainability. The focus 
should  also  be  on  fiscal  initiatives  that  have  a  durable  growth-enhancing  capacity  and 
structural reform, and not simply fiscal impulses for their own sake. 
Unfortunately this is easier said than done. In order to avoid a replay of 2008, there needs to 
be  a  cohesive  understanding  of  the  situation,  and  a  unity  of  purpose  at  the  global  and 
national levels. An effective response requires confidence and trust in leadership, and this 
appears  to  be  lacking.  The  fractious  nature  of  political  processes  seems  to  be  making  it 
the  advanced  economies,  monetary  policy 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
difficult to have the level of coordinated and purposeful responses that the crisis demands. 
This is well illustrated by the debt-ceiling debacle in the United States, where some factions 
were willing to take the country and indeed the world over the brink. Similarly, the inability of 
the leadership on the Eurozone economies to agree on a credible and durable solution for 
the region has undermined support not only for the leadership but for the whole Eurozone 
project.  
Until now, there have been piecemeal responses to the European crisis, which have merely 
delayed  the  need  for  a  credible  solution.  There  are  no  easy  or  painless  solutions,  but  the 
longer they are delayed, the more difficult and painful the outcome will be. It is not just the 
markets that have lost confidence, it is the ordinary people who are bearing the brunt of the 
consequences  of  the  crisis.  These  social  and  the  social  consequences  are  becoming 
increasingly  apparent  and  disturbing  with  a  growing  structural  unemployment  problem, 
particularly amongst the youth in some countries, and in a number of instances, increased 
civil unrest.  
The South African economy will not be immune to these developments. The economy has 
made a fragile and uneven recovery from the recession, but the future growth prospects will 
be  affected  significantly  by  global  developments.  Favourable  growth  outcomes  were 
achieved in the final quarter of 2010 and the first quarter of 2011, when annualised growth 
rates  of  4,5  per  cent  and  4,8  per  cent  respectively  were  recorded.  However  the  second 
quarter performance had been disappointing, with both the manufacturing and mining sectors 
likely to have subtracted from growth. The main driver of growth over the past quarters has 
been growth in household consumption expenditure, which has averaged around 5 per cent 
since  late  2009.  However,  for  some  time  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  of  the  Bank  has 
questioned the sustainability of this consumption growth given the slow pace of employment 
growth, high levels of consumer indebtedness, low levels of bank credit extension as well as 
negative wealth effects emanating mainly from the weak housing market. Recent retail sales 
developments  indicate  that  there  may  be  some  slowdown  in  the  growth  of  household 
consumption expenditure. 
A worrying feature of the domestic recovery has been the slow growth of gross fixed capital 
formation,  particularly  by  the  private  sector.  This  may  be  due  in  part  to  the  relatively  low 
levels  of  capacity  utilisation  in  manufacturing,  and  the  unfavourable  export  climate,  due  in 
part  to  slow  growth  in  Europe,  and  declining  competitiveness  due  to  a  relatively  strong 
exchange  rate  and  high  rates  of  domestic  input  cost  increases  (including  wages  and 
electricity). South Africa’s export recovery has not been as robust as that in other emerging 
markets, and much of the increase in export values has been due to higher global commodity 
prices. The main destination for South Africa’s manufactured goods remains Europe and the 
United States, so a prolonged slowdown in these regions will have negative implications for 
the  country’s  exports.  Should  a  more  generalised  slowdown  transpire,  we  could  see  a 
decline in commodity prices as well.  
The low interest rate environment in the advanced economies has resulted in elevated levels 
of capital flows to emerging markets, in search of higher yields, with consequences for both 
the level and volatility of the rand exchange rate. There has, however, been a change in the 
pattern of these flows, which are now predominantly into bond markets rather than into equity 
markets. In South Africa, for example, since the beginning of 2011, non-residents have been 
net purchasers of bonds to the value of R51 billion, but have been net sellers of equities to 
the value of R8 billion. Given the prospects for a protracted period of low interest rates in the 
advanced economies, these flows are expected to continue, although are likely to become 
more volatile and uncertain during episodes of heightened risk aversion.  
Monetary policy has remained relatively accommodative in response to these developments. 
The policy rate, at 5,5 per cent, is at its lowest levels in 30 years, and the real policy rate is 
around zero. Inflation has been within the target range since March 2010, but is currently on 
an  upward  trend,  mainly  as  a  result  of  food  and  energy  price  pressures,  with  few  obvious 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
signs of excess demand pressures. In the event of a significant global downturn, monetary 
policy will react appropriately. 
The policy room available on the fiscal side is more limited, as there is now less fiscal space 
than  was  the  case  at  the  onset  of  the  crisis.  In  2008  South  African  was  running  a  small 
budget  surplus  and  the  debt/GDP  ratio  stood  at  27  per  cent.  Since  the  crisis,  government 
spending  levels  have  been  elevated  in  historical  terms,  and  although  the  deficit  before 
borrowing has declined from a high of 6,6 per cent in 2009/10 to an estimated 5,3 per cent 
for  the  current  fiscal  year,  the  debt/GDP  ratio  has  increased  to  40,3  per  cent,  one  of  the 
largest percentage increases when compared to other countries over the same period. 
A domestic growth slowdown would reduce tax revenues, and there are limits to which the 
debt/GDP ratio can expand without bringing its sustainability into question. Any further fiscal 
stimuli would therefore need to ensure a focus on growth-enhancing expenditure. 
The weakness in South Africa’s traditional trading partners underlines the need to seek new 
markets for manufactured exports in Asia, and more particularly in Africa. According to the 
IMF,  African  economies,  with  the  notable  exception  of  South  Africa,  displayed  remarkable 
resilience  during  the  crisis.  Although  most  countries  experienced  lower  growth,  mainly  a 
result of lower global commodity prices, in general they managed to avoid recession. Unlike 
South  Africa,  the  trade  channel  was  less  important  because  of  the  predominance  of 
intraregional  trade,  and  the  stronger  trade  links  with  Asia.  Since  then,  most  sub-Saharan 
African countries have returned pre-crisis growth rates, in line with those in developing Asia. 
The IMF estimates growth in SSA to average 5,5 per cent in 2011 and 6 per cent in 2012. In 
addition  to  the  above,  a  further  reason  for  these  positive  outcomes  is  a  recovery  in 
commodity prices as well as improved policy environments 
Recent developments in Europe have important lessons for future moves towards economic 
integration  in  Africa.  Following  the  European  experience  in  its  40  year  move  towards 
monetary integration, it became conventional wisdom that the appropriate sequencing was 
for full trade integration to precede monetary integration. Africa still has a multiplicity of, and 
in  some  instances  overlapping  regional  trade  blocs,  and  has  some  way  to  go  to  full  trade 
integration. At the same time, African monetary integration initiatives are still going ahead in 
various forums, for example initiatives by SADC and the AU, with different and overlapping 
timetables,  and  with  inordinate  haste  in  some  instances.  Unfortunately  the  thinking  behind 
these  initiatives  ignores  the  criteria  for  optimal  currency  areas,  and  focuses  primarily  on 
macroeconomic convergence criteria.  
An  important  lesson  of  the  European  crisis  is  that  macroeconomic  convergence  is  not 
enough. It is not sufficient for countries to comply with the initial conditions. It is now clear 
that  necessary  conditions  include  the  need  for  institutions  to  ensure  that  these  initial 
conditions are maintained. It is one thing to require countries to achieve certain debt ratios 
and  fiscal  deficit  ceilings,  for  example,  but  are  there  appropriate  mechanisms  for  ensuring 
that these guidelines or limits are adhered to?  
While  the  need  for  harmonised  fiscal  policies  was  recognised  by  the  architects  of  the 
Eurozone, the issue was dealt with through the Stability and Growth Pact, which has turned 
out to be a loose, often ignored and unenforceable agreement that countries would abide by 
certain  fiscal  guidelines.  We  have  seen  the  implications  of  the  lack  of  a  centralised  fiscal 
authority,  or  fiscal  counterpart  to  the  ECB.  Reaching  agreement  on,  and  implementing 
monetary  policy  is  difficult  enough.  Fiscal  policy  is  far  more  complex  and  political,  as  it 
involves  policy  levers  that  have  more  pervasive  distributional  impacts.  It  involves  for 
example,  decisions  relating  to  tax policies,  expenditure  policies,  and deciding  on  politically 
sensitive social and economic priorities. But ignoring the need for such an institution can lead 
to the difficulties currently being faced by the Eurozone. 
That is not to say that regional integration should no longer be a goal in Africa. If anything, 
the  importance  of  trade  diversification  has  been  reinforced  by  the  crisis,  and  further  trade 
integration  in  Africa  should  be  pursued  more  purposefully.  But  the  excessive  focus  on 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
monetary integration is misplaced and premature. South Africa’s trade links to the advanced 
economies  makes  it  particularly  vulnerable  to  slowdowns  in  those  regions,  and  more 
attention should be given to encouraging regional trade and investment flows. 
In conclusion, we are living in difficult times. The global economy is on the brink of falling 
back into what could be a prolonged recession unless purposeful and coordinated action is 
taken.  There  are  no  easy  or  automatic  solutions,  but  to  date  policy  responses  have  been 
incomplete and irresolute. This has led to a loss of confidence and a lack of trust. It is not just 
the markets that have lost confidence, it is the ordinary people behind the statistics. And as 
austerity programmes bite further, we are likely to see more scenes similar to those that were 
recently played out in London and Athens. The challenge for leadership is to rebuild this trust 
and confidence. It can’t be through more talk. There has to be action, but the room for action 
is  limited.  Any  measures  taken  are  likely  to  entail  significant  financial  commitments,  and 
these need to be big enough to put a stake in the ground. Such costs should not be looked at 
in isolation, but in relation to the costs already incurred, and the costs of not resolving the 
crisis. There is a long, painful path ahead for all of us.  
Unless there is a cohesive understanding of who does what, and what is likely to succeed, 
then we will not rebuild confidence. Not only can it be done, it has to be done.  
Thank you.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
