Jean-Claude Trichet: Short address in honour of Axel Weber 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
Deutsche Bundesbank Festakt, Frankfurt am Main, 2 May 2011. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
ich  freue  mich  sehr,  heute  bei  Ihnen  zu  sein.  Ich  möchte  im  Namen  des  EZB-Rats 
Axel Weber  für  seinen  Beitrag  über  die  vergangenen  sieben  Jahren  danken  und  Jens 
Weidmann als neues Ratsmitglied begrüßen.  
The  Eurosystem  is  a  large  team,  and  it  is  a  cohesive  one,  with  a  variety  of  perspectives 
linked by a common purpose. The Eurosystem is also a very successful team. Ever since the 
introduction  of  the  euro  we  have  been  fully  faithful  to  our  mandate  of  maintaining  price 
stability over the medium term, defined as medium-term inflation at “below, but close to 2%”.  
As you know, the average annual inflation rate in the euro area over the past twelve years 
has been 1.97%.  
This  is  a  remarkable  achievement,  also  considering  that  the  economic  environment  during 
those 12 years can hardly be described as benign. The beginnings were marked by a severe 
oil price shock, which compounded the cost pressure and inflation implications of a secular 
decline in European productivity trends. Due to these adverse supply side adjustments, the 
bursting  of  the  dot-com  bubble  brought  a  downswing  with  no  disinflation.  Later,  over  the 
recovery  that  followed  –  Axel  remembers  –  there  was  no  time  or  disposition  within  the 
Governing Council for complacency, as we were all too concerned about insistent signs of 
excessive credit market euphoria, about – once more – strong pressures on commodity and 
food prices and – ultimately – about the global imbalances that such a combination of forces 
were causing worldwide. Axel became member of the Governing Council in 2004, at a time 
when  many  voices,  including  in  the  executive  branches  and  in  the  international  financial 
institutions were calling for looser monetary policy. We rightly resisted these calls based on 
our own assessment of the risks to price stability. Back then and throughout the past seven 
years  Axel  has  made  influential  contributions  to  the  discussions  shaping  the  view  of  the 
Governing Council on the appropriate monetary policy stance. 
The fact that we have been able to solidly anchor inflation expectations in the euro area at a 
level consistent with price stability throughout all these phases has bolstered our credibility. 
The  Eurosystem  clearly  stands  in  the  tradition  of  best  practice  in  central  banking  –  as 
exemplified by the Bundesbank prior to the introduction of the euro. The Eurosystem’s two-
pillar  monetary  policy  strategy  inherited  the  concept  of  the  Bundesbank  monetary  pillar  – 
which my own previous institution, the Banque de France had also chosen in January 1994 
as  soon  as  it  became  independent.  The  Eurosystem’s  two  pillar  strategy  is  built  on  the 
conviction  that,  in  the  medium  to  long  term,  inflation  is  a  monetary  phenomenon  and  that 
independent central banks have the strategy and the instruments to achieve price stability. 
The Eurosystem’s track record proves that this important insight translates one for one to the 
monetary union context. 
I would like to take this opportunity to also express my gratitude, not only to Axel Weber but 
also  to  all  Bundesbank  staff,  for  the  commitment  shown  on  a  daily  basis  during  the  past 
twelve years and in particular during the financial crisis. The Governing Council of the ECB 
knows and highly appreciates the crucial contribution of national central banks to the smooth 
functioning of monetary union. The financial crisis has made more visible to a broader public 
the essential tasks that national central banks carry out day by day within the Eurosystem.  
For the sake of brevity allow me to focus here on two such activities, and I am fully aware 
that  there  are  many  other  tasks  that  equally  deserve  our  full  recognition.  On  both 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
dimensions, the Eurosystem benefited enormously from the Bundesbank’s dedication to our 
common cause, and on both dimensions the Bundesbank contribution found in Axel its voice. 
The first task is financial supervision, the importance of which cannot be underestimated. For 
one  thing,  the  information  gathered  in  supervision  has  been  particularly  useful  in  the 
preparation of monetary policy decisions during the financial crisis. This has been especially 
true when and since the Governing Council of the ECB decided to introduce non-standard 
monetary policy measures to ensure the proper transmission of the monetary policy stance. 
The information also helps the Governing Council of the ECB assess the interconnectedness 
of national financial systems and vulnerabilities threatening financial stability in the euro area 
as a whole. 
In  this  context  the  Bundesbank  has  done  a  crucial  job  in  containing  the  fallout  from  the 
financial crisis. After the collapse of Lehman Brothers immediate and determined action was 
crucial  to  avoid  a  meltdown  of  the  financial  system  in  Germany  and  the  other  euro  area 
countries. The Bundesbank under the leadership of Axel offered the best possible diagnosis 
to protect the stability of the German banking sector at the height of the crisis.  
Nonetheless,  the  financial  crisis  has  revealed  serious  weaknesses  in  existing  supervisory 
arrangements both at the national and euro area level. In response to these shortcomings, 
the  EU  among  other  initiatives  has  created  the  macro-prudential  European  Systemic  Risk 
Board  (ESRB)  in  which  the  Eurosystem  is  very  actively  involved.  Axel  has  generously 
devoted his time to the Steering Committee of the ESRB as he has done for the Financial 
Stability Board at the international level.  
The second task for which the Eurosystem has to rely critically on the support of the national 
central banks is the implementation of monetary policy. This role comprises the conduct of 
monetary policy operations, the design and operation of payment systems and the provision 
of banknotes and coins. At several points in time the efficient and effective functioning of the 
infrastructure has been absolutely essential to the success of the euro. This was true in the 
very beginnings in 1999, it was true at the moment of the cash changeover in 2002 and it has 
been true most recently during the financial crisis. The Eurosystem infrastructure has been 
exposed to a formidable stress test and it has proved its robustness throughout. 
Again, Bundesbank expertise proved immensely valuable, for example in the design of our 
new payment system TARGET2 but also in the design of our non-standard monetary policy 
measures, most notably our covered bonds purchase programme, which as you know are a 
German  innovation  dating  back  to  the  time  of  Friedrich  des  Großen.  Their  success  over 
hundreds of years shows that asset-backed securities need not be toxic. Pfandbriefe are a 
prime  example  of  finance  at  the  service  of  people’s  well-being.  Therefore  the  Governing 
Council in May 2009 decided to lend its support to this asset class, following Axel’s advice. 
Damit komme ich zum Schluss. Beruht der Erfolg des Euro nur auf Glück? Erlauben Sie mir, 
darauf  mit  einem  Zitat  zu  antworten,  das  Axel  Weber  in  anderem  Kontext  zugeschrieben 
wird:  „Nicht  Glück  –  Können!”1  „Und  Beharrlichkeit”  würde  ich  in  unserem  Kontext 
hinzufügen. Das Eurosystem ist für die Zukunft sehr gut gerüstet. 
Lieber Axel, ich wünsche Dir alles Gute für Deine Zukunft!  
Lieber Jens, as you know, we are still living in a very demanding environment. The crisis is 
not over. The responsibilities of the private sector and public authorities are as important as 
ever  during  the  last  three  years.  The  Eurosystem  has  kept  and  will  keep  its  sense  of 
direction, strictly separating the standard measures, designed to deliver price stability, from 
the  non-standard  measures,  designed  to  help  restore  a  more  correct  monetary  policy 
transmission  mechanism.  We  shall  never  forget  that  we  are  issuing  a  single  currency  for 
                                                 
1   See  the  article  “Axel  Weber  –  ein  Porträt:  ‘Nicht  Glück  –  Können!’“,  authored  by  Marc  Neller  and  Marietta 
Kurm-Engels, published in the Handelsblatt of 16–17 July 2010. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
17 sovereign countries and 331 million citizens. This is a situation which has no equivalent in 
the  world.  More  than  ever,  the  unity  of  the  Eurosystem  and  the  unity  of  the  Governing 
Council is of the essence. 
Lieber Jens, herzlich willkommen im Eurosystem! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
