Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: The challenges facing monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, at Prometeia, Bologna, 27 January 2011. 
 Introduction 
From  the  start  of  the  crisis  in  summer  2007,  monetary  policy  has  faced  a  number  of 
challenges,  linked  particularly  to  the  interaction  between  the  development  of  the  real 
economy  and  the  turbulence  in  the  financial  markets.  This  has  forced  central  banks  to 
operate not only by way of conventional measures, in particular the key interest rate at which 
liquidity  is  injected  into  the  system,  but  also  via  unconventional  measures,  designed  to 
bypass the malfunctioning that has arisen in the financial system. The combination of these 
measures depends on the intensity of the crisis and on the ways it has developed in both the 
real and financial world.  
At a time of general uncertainty, central banks have had not only to try to anticipate events 
but also to use a more efficient combination of instruments to respond to those events. This 
challenge  remains  unchanged,  even  when  looking  ahead,  given  the  persistent  uncertainty 
about  the  gradual  recovery  in  economic  activity  in  advanced  countries,  including  the  euro 
area,  and  the  situation  on  financial  markets  particularly  in  the  markets  for  government 
securities. 
I  would  like  to  consider  some  of  the  challenges  that  central  banks  face  at  a  time  like  the 
present,  also  drawing  on  the  experience  that  we  have  gained  in  respect  of  similar  cyclical 
phases.  It  should  however  be  noted  that  this  crisis,  although  it  presents  features  that  are 
similar  to  those  in  the  past,  is  much  greater  in  its  nature  and  intensity.  In  terms  of  falling 
output  and  rising  unemployment,  it  represents  for  many  countries  the  most  serious  crisis 
since  the  war.  As  for  the  impacts  on  the  banking  system  and  on  the  risk  for  sovereign 
debtors, the industrial countries are confronted with a new situation. This obviously makes 
the conduct of monetary policy more complicated.  
I  wish  to  emphasise  that  these  remarks  of  mine  should  not  be  interpreted  as  specific 
indicators  of  the  direction  of  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  in  the  coming weeks  and months. 
The  monthly  meeting  of  the  ECB’s  Governing  Council  takes  place  next  Thursday,  and 
therefore I will stick to the statements made public at the previous meeting. I would like to 
develop  some  conceptual  aspects  that  characterise  the  analytical  framework  and  the 
continuously  updated  flow  of  information  underlying  the  monetary  policy  decisions.  I  will 
focus on four elements of this framework. 
Assessing the economic situation 
The  first  aspect  concerns  an  assessment  of  the  economic  situation  in  the  period  in  which 
monetary policy has its effects, which is approximately 18–24 months. Making projections is 
always difficult, but especially so in a period of economic recovery after a crisis like the one 
we  have  just  passed  through.  These  estimates  are  based  on  economic  models  that  were 
mainly drawn up with pre-crisis data, so it is unclear if the parameters and correlations are 
still valid. I’ll try to give some examples, without going into detail. 
An initial element of uncertainty is the productive potential, both in terms of level and growth. 
Can it be assumed that a crisis like the one we have been through had no effects on the 
potential level of economic activity and the growth rate? The implications for monetary policy 
are  very  different  depending  on  the  answer  given  to  this  question.  The  economic  policy 
mistakes that risk being made if a wrong answer is given also differ.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
For example, if it is considered that the crisis has had a limited effect on both the level and 
potential growth rate of the economy, the output gap will be estimated to be very large and 
the  risks  of  deflation  may  be  considerable.  This  hypothesis  justifies  a  very  expansive 
monetary policy and fiscal policy, in order to fill the output gap as quickly as possible, with 
few risks that could have inflationary effects. In other words, the wider the estimated gap, the 
more  reason  for  keeping  the  interest  rate  at  very  low  levels,  even  close  to  zero,  for  an 
extended period of time, until the economic system returns to levels close to full employment.  
If the crisis had the effect of reducing economic potential in terms of level and growth, the 
accumulated gap is less than when compared with the previous case and will tend to fill up 
more quickly. In this case, if monetary policy remains accommodative for too long and does 
not adjust in advance, it risks being late and not countering inflationary pressures in time. If 
this delay materialises, the central bank then has to raise interest rates to a greater extent, 
with potentially recessionary effects. 
An overestimation of the potential growth rate of the economy also affects the ability of the 
central  bank  to  properly  calibrate  the  setting  of  its  policy.  In  principle,  as  the  economy 
gradually  starts  to  grow  above  potential,  and  closes  the  output  gap,  the  monetary  stance 
should be gradually adjusted through a progressive increase in the interest rate, taking into 
account the lags with which monetary policy affects inflation and growth. Otherwise, with the 
same interest rate, an increase in the rate of growth in economic activity implies an easing of 
monetary conditions. This creates distortions in the allocation of resources, tends to inflate 
financial  asset  prices  and  create  imbalances  which  are  very  difficult  to  put  right  once 
inflationary pressures emerge.  
As  you  can  see,  the  setting  of  monetary  policy  after  a  serious  crisis  depends  on  the 
assessment of the crisis itself, of the cyclical and structural components and of the output 
gap. Currently, the estimates of the size of the output gap vary widely among the forecasting 
institutions,  market  participants  and  central  banks.  For  example,  the  US  Federal  Reserve 
tends to see the crisis as having resulted in a reduction of the economic growth potential of 
the US, but not of its level, so that it estimates the gap to be significant. As far as we are 
concerned,  however,  we  consider  that  both  the  level  and  pace  of  economic  growth  in  the 
euro area have suffered from the crisis and the gap is contained. Our assessment is shared 
by most research institutions. 
Since  the  output  gap  cannot  be  measured,  it  can  be  estimated  by  various  statistical  and 
econometric techniques or by using various indicators to try to understand how big the output 
gap is. 
One  such  indicator  is  the  unemployment  rate.  In  economic  models  the  level  and  rate  of 
potential  growth  correspond  to  an  equilibrium  unemployment  rate.  Given  the  difficulty  of 
measuring the output gap, some economists have proposed replacing it with a measure of 
the  employment  or  unemployment  gap.  An  expansionary  monetary  policy  would  be  thus 
justified as long as unemployment did not begin to decline significantly toward its long-run 
level.  
However, this approach is not without risks. First, the unemployment rate depends not only 
on the economic growth rate but also on the characteristics of the labour market. Also, if the 
economic system suffers a real and permanent shock of a structural kind unemployment may 
remain  high  for  a  prolonged  period,  regardless  of  the  development  of  economic  activity. 
There is a risk in this case of linking monetary policy to labour market objectives that depend 
on other factors and other policies.  
Another  indicator  that  is  used  to  calibrate  monetary  policy  in  the  light  of  economic 
development  concerns  money  and  credit.  An  acceleration  of  these  financial  variables  may 
show that monetary conditions are particularly accommodative. The ECB attaches to these 
variables an important signalling value that in the past have made it possible to anticipate the 
trends underlying the economy, particularly as regards inflation.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
In  summary,  a  major  challenge  for  central  banks  concerns  the  assessment  of  the  current 
economic situation, in terms of the relative strength of the recovery and the horizon within 
which this recovery may cause inflationary pressures. Examining the forecasting errors made 
by the main bodies in the past decade, the tendency to overestimate the growth gap and to 
underestimate  inflation  is  notable.  Such  errors  encourage  the  maintenance  of  very 
accommodative monetary conditions even when the economy starts to grow again. This was 
the case after the oil crisis in the mid-1970s, and during the past decade, in 2002–2004, as 
can be seen by comparing the estimates made for the output gap in those years and those 
reconsidered with hindsight. In particular if the real-time output gap estimate in 2002–2004 is 
compared  with  that  carried  out  after  several  years  we  realise  that  it  was  initially 
overestimated, just as the deflation risks were overestimated, giving rise to an excessively 
accommodative monetary policy.  
Forecasting inflationary pressures 
The  second  challenge,  related  to  the  first,  concerns  the  difficulty  in  estimating  inflationary 
pressures and in forecasting them. In addition to the factors highlighted before, a new aspect 
has emerged in recent years, linked to the increasing importance of global inflation, tied to 
the  commodity  markets  and  products  imported  from  emerging  countries.  The  dimension 
attained by the emerging countries means that this phenomenon can no longer be ignored. 
Furthermore, the impact of inflation imported from these countries is likely to be of a different 
nature than in the past.  
In conceptual terms, inflation caused by imported products, especially commodities, can be 
ignored under three conditions. The first is that the increases are temporary. The second is 
that  the  imported  price  increases  do  not  cause  dragging  effects  on  the  price  dynamics  of 
domestic products. The third is that such increases do not have any effects on the inflation 
expectations of market participants.  
In the recovery phase in the 2000s, only the third condition was maintained, in part. Contrary 
to what was initially thought, commodity prices have steadily increased, not only in terms of 
their level but also in terms of growth rates. Domestic wages and prices of domestic products 
have not increased systematically, but this was partly the result of a reduction in the prices of 
manufactured goods imported from emerging countries related to the competitiveness gains 
in those countries and fixed exchange rates. Inflation expectations have remained anchored, 
but  this  required  in  the  most  acute  phase  of  inflationary  pressures,  an  adjustment  in  the 
interest rates.  
Looking  ahead,  the  maintained  dynamic  in  the  emerging  countries  poses  even  greater 
challenges.  We  can  expect  that  commodity,  energy  and  food,  will  continue  to  grow  in  line 
with  global  demand,  unless  technological  innovations  are  such  that  they  lead  to  changes 
which offset the quotations. Unlike the previous decade, the process of reducing the prices of 
manufactured goods imported from developing countries seems to have ended, particularly 
in respect of products imported from China. The gradual appreciation of the exchange rates 
of  these  countries  should  further  affect  the  prices  of  products  imported  from  advanced 
countries.  
In summary, to a greater extent than in the previous decade, the strong dynamics of the rest 
of  the  world  are  likely  to  result  in  a  higher  inflation  rate  for  imported  goods,  whether 
commodities or manufactured goods and services. This effect can be partly mitigated by the 
ability to shift the production of imported goods to new countries with lower labour costs, or 
even  to  bring  production  back  to  the  advanced  countries  that  have  regained  productivity, 
provided they manage to contain their cost dynamics.  
In any case, a permanent and repeated increase in the prices of imported products will tend 
to impact on inflation in the advanced countries, including the euro area. This effect occurs 
through two channels. The first is simply mechanical, by the weight of imported goods in the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
basket  of  goods  and  services  purchased  by  households.  For  example,  food  and  energy 
account  for  about  30%  of  the  average  shopping  basket  in  the  euro  area.  Assuming  an 
average increase of these products by 4% a year, more or less in line with the rate of growth 
of the world economy (or long-term interest rates, according to the Hotelling rule), average 
prices in the euro area will increase by 1.2% only because of the effect of these products. It 
is therefore not a component that can be ignored, as it would be if core inflation were used as 
a reference. This concept is obviously losing its relevance in a global world.  
The second effect concerns the implications for prices of other products, making up 70% of 
the  basket,  and  which  include  manufactured  goods  and  services,  some  of  which  are 
imported  and  others  are  produced  domestically.  Assume,  for  simplicity’s  sake,  that  these 
goods are only produced domestically. If the prices of these products grow at a rate of 2% 
per year, overall average inflation is 2.6%, exceeding the 2% objective of most central banks 
in advanced countries, including the ECB, which aims for inflation of below but close to 2% 
over the medium term.  
The central bank is therefore faced with two alternatives. The first is to revise the inflation 
rate objective upwards, taking account of imported inflation, or only to look at non-imported 
inflation and to ignore the rest. This strategy is complex because first and foremost it is not 
clear  how  much  the  imported  inflation  rate  will  be  going  forward,  which  is  not  under  the 
control of the central bank. In addition, an upward revision risks bringing a loss of credibility 
and  of  being  interpreted  as  a  change  in  strategy.  Moreover,  a  higher  inflation  objective 
implies an increase in inflation expectations, and thus of long-term interest rates, which must 
sooner or later be accompanied by an increase in short-term rates. Finally, if the inflation rate 
objective  is  increased  it  will  not  be  easy  to  convince  national  market  participants  not  to 
include  this  increase  in  their  behaviour,  including  in  wage  demands.  In  a  situation  of  high 
unemployment, this risk is limited, but gradually as the economic recovery gets under way 
the risk of second-round effects increases.  
Alternatively, the central bank may  decide to maintain the inflation objective unchanged at 
2% (or less). In this case, since the contribution of imported inflation is 1.2%, this means that 
domestic  products  must  not  increase  by  more  than  1%  per  year.  In  other  words,  to  be 
consistent with inflation at 2%, core inflation, or excluding food and energy, should be 1%. 
How do you get this result? By focusing monetary policy on domestic inflation of 1%. This 
can be accomplished through a moderation in costs and prices by producers. This does not 
necessarily mean a loss of purchasing power, if productivity increases at a pace comparable 
with  imported  inflation.  However,  if  this  does  not  happen,  the  only  way  of  ensuring  price 
stability is to restrict the purchasing power of wages. This requires that price increases for 
imported goods do not feed into wages and domestic prices. 
The numbers I have used are of course by way of illustration and should not be related to the 
current  ones.  The  point  I  want  to  make  is  that  if  the  growth  gap  continues  between  the 
developed  and  emerging  markets,  inflation  imported  from  the  latter  cannot  be  ignored. 
Normally, higher inflation in the rest of the world should be compensated for by an exchange 
rate  appreciation  of  the  domestic  currency  vis-à-vis  the  rest  of  the  world.  But  this  only 
happens  in  the  case  of  countries  with  comparable  economic  structures.  In  this  case, 
however, the exchange rates of the advanced countries tend to fall compared with those of 
emerging  countries,  because  of  higher  productivity  growth  in  the  latter  group.  These  two 
effects, higher external inflation and depreciation, accumulate and lead to a loss in the terms 
of trade for the advanced countries. To avoid the second-round effects, it is necessary for the 
dynamics of costs and prices in advanced countries, including those in the euro area, to be 
significantly  more  contained  than  those  of  emerging  countries.  This  factor  should  be 
incorporated into the conduct of businesses, trade unions, public authorities. Only by having 
domestic inflation significantly lower than 2% is it possible to avoid second-round effects on 
expectations  and  to  maintain  an  economic  growth  rate  in  line  with  potential.  Otherwise, 
monetary  policy  has  to  become  more  restrictive  than  it  should  be,  which  leads  to  slower 
growth, until the behaviours conform to the new standard.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Fragility of financial markets 
The third challenge faced by central banks of developed countries concerns the fragility of 
the financial system as it goes through a shake-out and an overall reduction in its leverage. 
The  financial  crisis  has  emerged  due  to  the  excessive  financial  leverage  that  has  fuelled 
excessive consumption and speculative bubbles on different markets, particularly real estate. 
The return to a sustainable equilibrium depends on the restructuring of these excesses. This 
restructuring cannot be immediate, nor should it last too long.  
The  adjustment  cannot  be  immediate  because  a  too  rapid  reduction  in  the  leverage  risks 
causing an excessive contraction of the assets and liabilities of financial institutions, with an 
impact on real activity. In other words, a credit crunch. However, the adjustment should not 
be  too  slow  either,  because  prolonging  an  excessive  level  of  leverage  risks  creating  new 
imbalances and inducing financial institutions to take excessive risks again.  
In this adjustment process, monetary policy plays a decisive role, via conventional measures 
and  exceptional  ones.  For  example,  the  offer  of  unlimited  liquidity  through  refinancing 
operations  with  the  central  bank  has  been  essential  to  favour  access  to  liquidity  by  many 
banks at a time when the money markets have not functioned properly. However if it lasts for 
extended  periods, it  may  delay  the  necessary  adjustments  that  should  be  implemented  by 
the  banks  themselves,  particularly  by  reducing  their  financial  leverage  and  strengthening 
their  capital.  These  delays  could  exacerbate  the  fragility  of  the  sector  itself.  As  for  the 
traditional policies, we should not forget that the interest rates decided by the central banks 
affect,  among  other  things,  the  value  of  the  assets  of  financial  institutions  and  their 
(re-)financing costs, and in particular the spreads that prevail in the money markets. In other 
words, the monetary authorities need to pay attention with their actions so that certain risks, 
such  as  liquidity  risk,  are  not  excessively  compressed.  Or  so  as  not  to  induce  financial 
institutions to take new excessive risks (risk-taking channel).  
It  is  also  true,  however,  that  an  abrupt  withdrawal  of  the  liquidity  support  measures  could 
cause  excessive  or  too  rapid  adjustments  by  financial  institutions.  For  example,  sound 
financial  institutions  might  have  to  sell  significant  parts  of  their  assets  in  a  relatively  short 
time. This, in turn, could lead to an excessive depression of prices of financial assets (fire 
sales), resulting in a chain reaction on the budgets of other institutions that would see the 
value of their own assets diminished. As the recent financial crisis has taught us, a fall in the 
prices of financial assets could also create liquidity supply difficulties in the markets. 
The  third  challenge  of  monetary  policy  lies  in  the  proper  assessment  of  the  adjustment 
process (de-leveraging) by financial institutions and the impact that the change in monetary 
policy  may  have  on  restructuring  the  imbalances.  This  challenge  is  even  important  for  the 
maintenance of price stability, the ultimate objective of the European Central Bank. Do not 
forget,  in  fact,  the  essential  role  that  the  financial  system  plays  in  the  transmission  of 
monetary policy, which brings me to the fourth challenge. 
The monetary policy transmission mechanism 
The  fourth  challenge  concerns  the  effectiveness  of  the  monetary  policy  transmission 
mechanism in the face of financial turmoil, particularly with regard to sovereign debts. This 
challenge is particularly acute in the euro area, where, unlike in the rest of the world, money 
is separate from public budgets. In the euro area, the public debt problems created by the 
crisis cannot be inflated away. The Treaty rules it out. The conduct of the ECB rules it out.  
The other method of adjustment is the consolidation of public finances via a primary budget 
surplus that helps stabilise and then reduce the weight of public debt on GDP. In all countries 
this objective must be achieved, not only in the euro area. 
Financial markets assess the risks associated with such adjustments to public finances, and 
the possibility that governments fail to implement them. In this case, a credit risk is taken into 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
account,  which  directly  affects  the  yields  on  government  securities.  Given  the  key  role  of 
government  securities  in  the  financial  systems  of  different  countries,  the  uncertainty  and 
volatility related to these securities affects the respective economies. This is easily seen by 
examining the correlation between the risk premia on government bonds with those of banks 
and of non-financial companies in those countries. The differences in risk premia imply that 
monetary policy is not transmitted uniformly across the euro area. 
Monetary policy impulses are transmitted along the yield curve, up to higher maturities. This 
transmission  is  susceptible  to  disruption  if  a  segment  of  the  yield  curve  is  not  working 
properly. Moreover, government bonds can be used as collateral to obtain liquidity in money 
markets. The availability of collateral and the perception of market participants of the quality 
of  the  collateral  itself  influence  the  spreads  prevailing  in  money  markets,  beyond  the 
overnight rate at which central banks lend funds to the banking system. The money markets 
and their spreads are in turn crucial in determining whether the monetary policy impulses can 
be transmitted easily or not, and whether the transactions in money markets are surrounded 
by uncertainty or take place smoothly.  
It  is  in  this  context  that  the  Securities  Markets  Programme  (SMP)  implemented  by  the 
European Central Bank has to be assessed. In May 2010, the tensions to which the Greek 
government  bonds  were  subject  generated  uncertainty  and  a  loss  of  confidence  that  has 
spread to the government bond markets of various jurisdictions in the euro area, almost to 
the  point  of  paralysing  them.  The  purchase  of  government  securities  by  the  European 
Central  Bank  aims  to  safeguard  the  monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism,  by  giving 
support to the market segments considered as crucial for the financing of the financial sector 
and  banks  in  particular.  In  this  regard  it  is  important  to  highlight  how  this  differs  from  the 
purchase of government securities made in other circumstances, especially by some central 
banks in jurisdictions outside the euro area. For example, one of the objectives pursued by 
the Federal Reserve when implementing its quantitative easing programmes is to decrease 
long-term  interest  rates.  In  the  case  of  the  ECB,  the  effects  of  interventions  on  overall 
liquidity are sterilised. 
The SMP is one of those non-conventional instruments adopted in recent years, along with 
others such as those related to its fixed-rate refinancing operations of unlimited amounts for 
the  banking  system.  Again,  the  goal  is  to  remedy  the  malfunctioning  of  the  money  market 
connected  to  the  increase  in  the  counterparty  risk  premium  that  has  led  to  a  substantial 
decrease in volume and liquidity.  
The  implementation  of  these  non-standard  measures,  aimed  at  resolving  the  problems 
arising  from  the  monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism,  presents  at  least  two  types  of 
challenge.  
The  first  is  the  distinction  that  has  to  be  made  clearly  between  the  adoption  of  these 
measures  and  the  monetary  policy  stance,  which  must  be  determined  on  the  basis  of  the 
price stability objective. This distinction is necessary to avoid “polluting” the overall setting of 
monetary  policy,  which  could  affect  the  central  bank’s  credibility  and,  ultimately,  inflation 
expectations.  The  types  of  non-conventional  operation  implemented  by  the  ECB  allow  an 
amendment  to  the  monetary  policy  stance,  in  particular  through  a  change  in  the  interest 
rates, regardless of the non-conventional operations that are used. In other words, decisions 
about interest rates can be disconnected from the non-conventional measures.  
The  final  challenge  is  to  prevent  any  non-standard  measures  which  seek  to  remedy 
distortions emerging in financial markets from creating in turn further distortions, affecting in 
particular the behaviour of market participants. 
Let  me  offer  a  couple  of  examples  related  to  what  I  mentioned  earlier.  The  first  concerns 
fixed-rate  refinancing  operations  of  unlimited  amounts.  As  I  said  before,  these  operations 
enable  the  remedying  of  problems  related  to  increased  counterparty  risk,  affecting  in 
particular weaker institutions. These steps provide liquidity to the markets, but do not solve 
the problem at its origin, which concerns the solidity of banks’ capital, on which the regulatory 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
authorities must be vigilant. If refinancing operations are conducted over an extended period, 
there is a risk that the central bank would replace the market and the consolidation process 
of the system is delayed. In other words, some banks may become addicted to the liquidity 
provided  by  the  central  bank  and  have  no  incentive  to  sort  out  their  own  accounts  and  to 
recapitalise. In some countries this dependency can affect the entire banking system, whose 
difficulties reflect those of the sovereign issuer. To avoid this dependency we have to create 
disincentives for market participants to refinance excessively only from the Eurosystem, and 
incentives to return gradually to the market at competitive interest rates.  
The  second  example  concerns  the  risk  that  the  purchase  of  government  securities  on  the 
secondary market under the SMP may create an incentive for the authorities of the interested 
countries to postpone the adoption of the measures necessary for fiscal consolidation or for 
the restructuring of the financial system. The experience of recent months has shown that 
governments tend to take unpopular decisions only under pressure from the markets. Action 
by 
that  would  eliminate  such  pressures  would  risk  becoming 
counterproductive and creating moral hazard. Thus, there is a fine line between the goal of 
maintaining sufficient pressure on the authorities of the Member States and that of avoiding 
destabilising market dynamics that ultimately hinder the conduct of monetary policy.  
the  central  bank 
Conclusions 
In conclusion, the three-year-old crisis has posed new challenges to monetary policy, in all 
countries, including the euro area. The best way to tackle it is to make use of the policy’s 
independence to pursue the goal, accounting for its actions in a transparent manner. Never 
have  central  banks  been  subject  to  such  close  scrutiny  as  now  by  the  public  and  the 
markets. There’s a reason. Too often in the past money was used to redistribute wealth and 
to  make  the  weakest  taxpayers  pay  an  unfair  tax,  that  of  inflation.  This  must  not  happen 
again. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
