Ben S Bernanke: Semiannual Monetary Policy Report to the Congress 
Testimony  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal 
Reserve System, before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, US Senate, 
Washington DC, 1 March 2011. 
 Chairman  Johnson,  Ranking  Member  Shelby,  and  other  members  of  the  Committee,  I  am 
pleased  to  present  the  Federal  Reserve’s  semiannual  Monetary  Policy  Report  to  the 
Congress.  I  will  begin  with  a  discussion  of  economic  conditions  and  the  outlook  before 
turning to monetary policy.  
The economic outlook 
Following the stabilization of economic activity in mid-2009, the U.S. economy is now in its 
seventh quarter of growth; last quarter, for the first time in this expansion, our nation’s real 
gross domestic product (GDP) matched its pre-crisis peak. Nevertheless, job growth remains 
relatively weak and the unemployment rate is still high.  
In its early stages, the economic recovery was largely attributable to the stabilization of the 
financial system, the effects of expansionary monetary and fiscal policies, and a strong boost 
to production from businesses rebuilding their depleted inventories. Economic growth slowed 
significantly in the spring and early summer of 2010, as the impetus from inventory building 
and fiscal stimulus diminished and as Europe’s debt problems roiled global financial markets. 
More recently, however, we have seen increased evidence that a self-sustaining recovery in 
consumer and business spending may be taking hold. Notably, real consumer spending has 
grown at a solid pace since last fall, and business investment in new equipment and software 
has  continued  to  expand.  Stronger  demand,  both  domestic  and  foreign,  has  supported 
steady gains in U.S. manufacturing output.  
The  combination  of  rising  household  and  business  confidence,  accommodative  monetary 
policy, and improving credit conditions seems likely to lead to a somewhat more rapid pace 
of economic recovery in 2011 than we saw last year. The most recent economic projections 
by Federal Reserve Board members and Reserve Bank presidents, prepared in conjunction 
with the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting in late January, are for real GDP 
to  increase  3-1/2  to  4  percent  in  2011,  about  one-half  percentage  point  higher  than  our 
projections  made  in  November.1  Private  forecasters’  projections  for  2011  are  broadly 
consistent with those of the FOMC participants and have also moved up in recent months.2 
While  indicators  of  spending  and  production  have  been  encouraging  on  balance,  the  job 
market  has improved  only  slowly.  Following  the  loss  of  about  8-3/4  million jobs  from  early 
                                                 
1   Forecast ranges here and below refer to the central tendencies of the projections of FOMC participants, as 
presented  in  the  “Summary  of  Economic  Projections”  released  with  the  minutes  of  the  January  FOMC 
meeting. 
2   For example, both the Survey of Professional Forecasters (see the first quarter 2011 survey released by the 
Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Philadelphia  on  February  11)  and  the  Blue  Chip  forecasting  panel  (see  the 
February 10, 2010, issue of Blue Chip Economic Indicators (New York: Aspen Publishers)) now project real 
GDP growth of about 3-1/2 percent from the fourth quarter of 2010 to the fourth quarter of 2011, about one-
half percentage point higher than the corresponding projections made in August. Looking further ahead, most 
FOMC participants project that economic growth will pick up a bit more in 2012 and 2013, whereas private 
forecasters  tend  to  see  the  expansion  proceeding  fairly  steadily  over  the  next  few  years.  (Note:  Blue  Chip 
Economic  Indicators  and  Blue  Chip  Financial  Forecasts  are  publications  owned  by  Aspen  Publishers. 
Copyright © 2009 by Aspen Publishers, Inc. All rights reserved; www.aspenpublishers.com.) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
2008 through 2009, private-sector employment expanded by only a little more than 1 million 
during  2010,  a  gain  barely  sufficient  to  accommodate  the  inflow  of  recent  graduates  and 
other entrants to the labor force. We do see some grounds for optimism about the job market 
over the next few quarters, including notable declines in the unemployment rate in December 
and  January,  a  drop  in  new  claims  for  unemployment  insurance,  and  an  improvement  in 
firms’ hiring plans. Even so, if the rate of economic growth remains moderate, as projected, it 
could be several years before the unemployment rate has returned to a more normal level. 
Indeed, FOMC participants generally see the unemployment rate still in the range of 7-1/2 to 
8 percent at the end of 2012. Until we see a sustained period of stronger job creation, we 
cannot consider the recovery to be truly established.  
Likewise,  the  housing  sector  remains  exceptionally  weak.  The  overhang  of  vacant  and 
foreclosed houses is still weighing heavily on prices of new and existing homes, and sales 
and construction of new single-family homes remain depressed. Although mortgage rates are 
low and house prices have reached more affordable levels, many potential homebuyers are 
still  finding  mortgages  difficult  to  obtain  and  remain  concerned  about  possible  further 
declines in home values.  
Inflation has declined, on balance, since the onset of the financial crisis, reflecting high levels 
of resource slack and stable longer-term inflation expectations. Indeed, over the 12 months 
ending  in  January,  prices  for  all  of  the  goods  and  services  consumed  by  households  (as 
measured  by  the  price  index  for  personal  consumption  expenditures  (PCE))  increased  by 
only 1.2 percent, down from 2.5 percent in the year-earlier period. Wage growth has slowed 
as  well,  with  average  hourly  earnings  increasing  only  1.9  percent  over  the  year  ending  in 
January. In combination with productivity increases, slow wage growth has implied very tight 
restraint on labor costs per unit of output.  
FOMC participants see inflation remaining low; most project that overall inflation will be about 
1-1/4 to 1-3/4 percent this year and in the range of 1 to 2 percent next year and in 2013. 
Private-sector  forecasters  generally  also  anticipate  subdued  inflation  over  the  next  few 
years.3  Measures  of  medium-  and  long-term  inflation  compensation  derived  from  inflation-
indexed  Treasury  bonds  appear  broadly  consistent  with  these  forecasts.  Surveys  of 
households suggest that the public’s longer-term inflation expectations also remain stable.  
Although overall inflation is low, since summer we have seen significant increases in some 
highly visible prices, including those of gasoline and other commodities. Notably, in the past 
few  weeks,  concerns  about  unrest  in  the  Middle  East  and  North  Africa  and  the  possible 
effects on global oil supplies have led oil and gasoline prices to rise further. More broadly, 
the  increases  in  commodity  prices  in  recent  months  have  largely  reflected  rising  global 
demand  for  raw  materials,  particularly  in  some  fast-growing  emerging  market  economies, 
coupled  with  constraints  on  global  supply  in  some  cases.  Commodity  prices  have  risen 
significantly in terms of all major currencies, suggesting that changes in the foreign exchange 
value  of  the  dollar  are  unlikely  to  have  been  an  important  driver  of  the  increases  seen  in 
recent months.  
The rate of pass-through from commodity price increases to broad indexes of U.S. consumer 
prices has been quite low in recent decades, partly reflecting the relatively small weight of 
materials  inputs  in  total  production  costs  as  well  as  the  stability  of  longer-term  inflation 
expectations.  Currently,  the  cost  pressures  from  higher  commodity  prices  are  also  being 
offset by the stability in unit labor costs. Thus, the most likely outcome is that the recent rise 
                                                 
3   The Survey of Professional Forecasters projects PCE inflation to run at about 1-1/2 percent in 2011 and to 
subsequently rise gradually to nearly 2 percent by  2013. The corresponding projections from the Survey of 
Professional Forecasters for Consumer Price Index (CPI) inflation are about 1-3/4 percent this year and about 
2 percent next year and in 2013. Blue Chip forecasts for CPI inflation stand at about 2 percent for both 2011 
and 2012. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
in commodity prices will lead to, at most, a temporary and relatively modest increase in U.S. 
consumer  price  inflation  –  an  outlook  consistent  with  the  projections  of  both  FOMC 
participants  and  most  private  forecasters.  That  said,  sustained  rises  in  the  prices  of  oil  or 
other  commodities  would  represent  a  threat  both  to  economic  growth  and  to  overall  price 
stability,  particularly  if  they  were  to  cause  inflation  expectations  to  become  less  well 
anchored.  We  will  continue  to  monitor  these  developments  closely  and  are  prepared  to 
respond as necessary to best support the ongoing recovery in a context of price stability.  
Monetary policy 
As I noted earlier, the pace of recovery slowed last spring – to a rate that, if sustained, would 
have been insufficient to make meaningful progress against unemployment. With job creation 
stalling,  concerns  about  the  sustainability  of  the  recovery  increased.  At  the  same  time, 
inflation  –  already  at  very  low  levels  –  continued  to  drift  downward,  and  market-based 
measures  of  inflation  compensation  moved  lower  as  investors  appeared  to  become  more 
concerned about the possibility of deflation, or falling prices.4 
Under  such  conditions,  the  Federal  Reserve  would  normally  ease  monetary  policy  by 
reducing the target for its short-term policy interest rate, the federal funds rate. However, the 
target range for the federal funds rate has been near zero since December 2008, and the 
Federal  Reserve  has  indicated  that  economic  conditions  are  likely  to  warrant  an 
exceptionally  low  target  rate  for  an  extended  period.  Consequently,  another  means  of 
providing monetary accommodation has been necessary since that time. In particular, over 
the  past  two  years  the  Federal  Reserve  has  eased  monetary  conditions  by  purchasing 
longer-term  Treasury  securities,  agency  debt,  and  agency  mortgage-backed  securities 
(MBS) on the open market. The largest program of purchases, which lasted from December 
2008  through  March  2010,  appears  to  have  contributed  to  an  improvement  in  financial 
conditions  and  a  strengthening  of  the  recovery.  Notably,  the  substantial  expansion  of  the 
program announced in March 2009 was followed by financial and economic stabilization and 
a significant pickup in the growth of economic activity in the second half of that year.  
In August 2010, in response to the already-mentioned concerns about the sustainability of 
the recovery and the continuing declines in inflation to very low levels, the FOMC authorized 
a policy of reinvesting principal payments on our holdings of agency debt and agency MBS 
into  longer-term  Treasury  securities.  By  reinvesting  agency  securities, rather  than  allowing 
them to continue to run off as our previous policy had dictated, the FOMC ensured that a 
high  level  of  monetary  accommodation  would  be  maintained.  Over  subsequent  weeks, 
Federal  Reserve  officials  noted  in  public  remarks  that  we  were  considering  providing 
additional  monetary  accommodation  through  further  asset  purchases.  In  November,  the 
Committee announced that it intended to purchase an additional $600 billion in longer-term 
Treasury securities by the middle of this year.  
Large-scale  purchases  of  longer-term  securities  are  a  less  familiar  means  of  providing 
monetary policy stimulus than reducing the federal funds rate, but the two approaches affect 
the economy in similar ways. Conventional monetary policy easing works by lowering market 
expectations  for  the  future  path  of  short-term  interest  rates,  which,  in  turn,  reduces  the 
current level of longer-term interest rates and contributes to both lower borrowing costs and 
higher  asset  prices.  This  easing  in  financial  conditions  bolsters  household  and  business 
spending  and  thus  increases  economic  activity.  By  comparison,  the  Federal  Reserve’s 
purchases  of  longer-term  securities,  by  lowering  term  premiums,  put  downward  pressure 
directly  on  longer-term  interest  rates.  By  easing  conditions  in  credit  and  financial  markets, 
                                                 
4   For  example,  deflation  probabilities  inferred  from  prices  of  certain  inflation-indexed  bonds  increased  during 
this period. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
these  actions  encourage  spending  by  households  and  businesses  through  essentially  the 
same channels as conventional monetary policy.  
A  wide  range  of  market  indicators  supports  the  view  that  the  Federal  Reserve’s  recent 
actions have been effective. For example, since August, when we announced our policy of 
reinvesting principal payments on agency debt and agency MBS and indicated that we were 
considering more securities purchases, equity prices have risen significantly, volatility in the 
equity market has fallen, corporate bond spreads have narrowed, and inflation compensation 
as  measured  in  the  market  for  inflation-indexed  securities  has  risen  to  historically  more 
normal levels. Yields on 5- to 10-year nominal Treasury securities initially declined markedly 
as markets priced in prospective Fed purchases; these yields subsequently rose, however, 
as  investors  became  more  optimistic  about  economic  growth  and  as  traders  scaled  back 
their  expectations  of  future  securities  purchases.  All  of  these  developments  are  what  one 
would expect to see when monetary policy becomes more accommodative, whether through 
conventional or less conventional means. Interestingly, these market responses are almost 
identical  to  those  that  occurred  during  the  earlier  episode  of  policy  easing,  notably  in  the 
months  following  our  March  2009  announcement.  In  addition,  as  I  already  noted,  most 
forecasters  see  the  economic  outlook  as  having  improved  since  our  actions  in  August; 
downside risks to the recovery have receded, and the risk of deflation has become negligible. 
Of  course,  it  is  too  early  to  make  any  firm  judgment  about  how  much  of  the  recent 
improvement in the outlook can be attributed to monetary policy, but these developments are 
consistent with it having had a beneficial effect.  
My  colleagues  and  I  continue  to  regularly  review  the  asset  purchase  program  in  light  of 
incoming  information,  and  we  will  adjust  it  as  needed  to  promote  the  achievement  of  our 
mandate from the Congress of maximum employment and stable prices. We also continue to 
plan  for  the  eventual  exit  from  unusually  accommodative  monetary  policies  and  the 
normalization  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s  balance  sheet.  We  have  all  the  tools  we  need  to 
achieve a smooth and effective exit at the appropriate time. Currently, because the Federal 
Reserve’s  asset  purchases  are  settled  through  the  banking  system,  depository  institutions 
hold a very high level of reserve balances with the Federal Reserve. Even if bank reserves 
remain  high,  however,  our  ability  to  pay  interest  on  reserve  balances  will  allow  us  to  put 
upward  pressure  on  short-term  market  interest  rates  and  thus  to  tighten  monetary  policy 
when required. Moreover, we have developed and tested additional tools that will allow us to 
drain or immobilize bank reserves to the extent needed to tighten the relationship between 
the  interest  rate  paid  on  reserves  and  other  short-term  interest  rates.5  If  necessary,  the 
Federal Reserve can also drain reserves by ceasing the reinvestment of principal payments 
on  the  securities  it  holds  or  by  selling  some  of  those  securities  in  the  open  market.  The 
FOMC  remains  unwaveringly  committed  to  price  stability  and,  in  particular,  to  achieving  a 
rate of inflation in the medium term that is consistent with the Federal Reserve’s mandate.  
Federal Reserve transparency 
The  Congress  established  the  Federal  Reserve,  set  its  monetary  policy  objectives,  and 
provided it with operational independence to pursue those objectives. The Federal Reserve’s 
operational  independence  is  critical,  as  it  allows  the  FOMC  to  make  monetary  policy 
decisions based solely on the longer-term needs of the economy, not in response to short-
                                                 
5   These tools include the ability to execute term reverse repurchase agreements with the primary dealers and 
other counterparties,  which drains reserves  from the banking system; and the issuance of term deposits to 
depository institutions, which immobilizes bank reserves for the period of the deposit. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
term  political  pressures.  Considerable  evidence  supports  the  view  that  countries  with 
independent central banks enjoy better economic performance over time.6 
However,  in  our  democratic  society,  the  Federal  Reserve’s  independence  brings  with  it  the 
obligation to be accountable and transparent. The Congress and the public must have all the 
information needed to understand our decisions, to be assured of the integrity of our operations, 
and to be confident that our actions are consistent with the mandate given to us by the Congress.  
On matters related to the conduct of monetary policy, the Federal Reserve is one of the most 
transparent central banks in the world, making available extensive records and materials to 
explain its policy decisions. For example, beyond the semiannual Monetary Policy Report I 
am  presenting  today,  the  FOMC  provides  a  post-meeting  statement,  a  detailed  set  of 
minutes three weeks after each policy meeting, quarterly economic projections together with 
an  accompanying  narrative,  and,  with  a  five-year  lag,  a  transcript  of  each  meeting  and  its 
supporting  materials.  In  addition,  FOMC  participants  often  discuss  the  economy  and 
monetary policy in public forums, and Board members testify frequently before the Congress.  
In  recent  years  the  Federal  Reserve  has  also  substantially  increased  the  information  it 
provides about its operations and its balance sheet. In particular, for some time the Federal 
Reserve  has  been  voluntarily  providing  extensive  financial  and  operational  information 
regarding  the  special  credit  and  liquidity  facilities  put  in  place  during  the  financial  crisis, 
including  full  descriptions  of  the  terms  and  conditions  of  each  facility;  monthly  reports  on, 
among  other  things,  the  types  of  collateral  posted  and  the  mix  of  participants  using  each 
facility; weekly updates about borrowings and repayments at each facility; and many other 
details.7  Further,  on  December  1,  as  provided  by  the  Dodd-Frank  Wall Street  Reform  and 
Consumer Protection Act of 2010, the Federal Reserve Board posted on its public website 
the details of more than 21,000 individual credit and other transactions conducted to stabilize 
markets  and  support  the  economic  recovery  during  the  crisis.  This  transaction-level 
information  demonstrated  the  breadth  of  these  operations  and  the  care  that  was  taken  to 
protect the interests of the taxpayer; indeed, despite the scope of these actions, the Federal 
Reserve has incurred no credit losses to date on any of the programs and expects no credit 
losses in any of the few programs that still have loans outstanding. Moreover, we are fully 
confident that independent assessments of these programs will show that they were highly 
effective in helping to stabilize financial markets, thus strengthening the economy. Overall, 
the  operational  effectiveness  of  the  programs  was  recently  supported  as  part  of  a 
comprehensive review of six lending facilities by the Board’s independent Office of Inspector 
General.8  In  addition,  we  have  been  working  closely  with  the  Government  Accountability 
Office, the Office of the Special Inspector General for the Troubled Asset Relief Program, the 
Congressional  Oversight  Panel,  the  Congress,  and  private-sector  auditors  on  reviews  of 
these facilities as well as a range of matters relating to the Federal Reserve’s operations and 
governance.  We  will  continue  to  seek  ways  of  enhancing  our  transparency  without 
compromising our ability to conduct policy in the public interest.  
Thank you. I would be pleased to take your questions.  
 
                                                
6   See,  for  example,  Alberto  Alesina  and  Lawrence  H.  Summers  (1993),  “Central  Bank  Independence  and 
Macroeconomic Performance: Some Comparative Evidence,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 25 
(May),  pp.  151–62;  or,  more  recently,  Christopher  Crowe  and  Ellen  E.  Meade  (2008),  “Central  Bank 
Independence and Transparency: Evolution and Effectiveness,” European Journal of Political Economy, vol. 
24 (December), pp. 763–77. See Ben S. Bernanke (2010), “Central Bank Independence, Transparency, and 
Accountability,” at the Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies International Conference, Bank of Japan, 
Tokyo (May 25), for further discussion and references. 
7   See the reports available on the Board’s webpage, “Credit and Liquidity Programs and the Balance Sheet.” 
8   See  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System,  Office  of  Inspector  General  (2010),  The  Federal 
Reserve’s  Section  13(3)  Lending  Facilities  to  Support  Overall  Market  Liquidity:  Function,  Status,  and  Risk 
Management (1.5 MB PDF) (Washington: Board of Governors OIG, November). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
