Ardian Fullani: Analysis of economic and financial developments in 
Albania 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  24th  Conference  of 
Banking Supervisors from Central and Eastern Europe, Tirana, 12 April 2011. 
 Distinguished ladies and gentlemen, 
Allow me to first wish you a warm welcome in the 24th conference of banking supervisors 
from  Central  and  Eastern  Europe,  which  this  time  is  taking  place  in  Tirana.  The  Bank  of 
Albania  considers  this  forum  as  very  important  and  a  platform  where  participants  may 
exchange their institutions experiences with each-other. This forum is a modern highway that 
allows for a rapid convergence of our supervision practices with the best standards.  
Let me now continue with a summarised analysis of economic and financial developments in 
Albania over the last two years, focusing on some concrete issues requiring more attention 
by the banking industry and the supervisory authority in the future. 
The  Albanian  economy  was  characterised  by  positive  developments  during  the  pre-crisis 
period. Annual economic growth was on average 6 per cent, with admirable and stable core 
macroeconomic  indicators.  Growth  relied  on  a  firm  strengthening  of  internal  demand 
components while funded by internal resources, mainly through rapidly increasing loans to 
the private sector and loans for investments.  
The banking sector, which dominates the domestic financial system, has also undergone a 
significant  transformation  in  recent  years.  This  is  due  to  the  entrance  in  the  market  of 
renowned  European  banking  groups,  expansion  of  banking  infrastructure  and  upgrade  of 
customer services. Financial performance has been good, recording average levels of return 
on equity and on assets, respectively over 20 per cent and 1.5 per cent. Over the years, the 
banking system has chosen to capitalise the majority of its profit in order to best support its 
activity with liquidity and capital.  
During  this  period  of  a  rapid  and  qualitatively  better  expansion  of  the  banking  activity,  the 
Bank of Albania found it necessary to revise the supervision philosophy. The main ambition 
was its orientation towards sources of risk, in other words to strengthen control over banking 
activity. For that reason, at the end of 2006 a new law “On Banks” was adopted. This law 
imposed,  on  the  banking  industry,  more  contemporary  standards  as  regards  realisation, 
direction, and control of the banking activity.  
The main concerns consisted in high crediting levels, significant concentration of crediting in 
foreign  currency,  and  the  absence  of  sectorial  diversification.  Consequently,  at  the  end  of 
2006, the Bank of Albania introduced a number of regulatory amendments aiming at slowing 
down  crediting  growth  levels,  through  imposing  higher  capital  requirements  on  more 
aggressive  banks.  These  measures  were  further  supplemented  in  2008,  targeting  more 
directly cases when borrowers had no income in foreign currency.  
Another  strategic  move  during  this  period  was  integration  of  banking  supervision  and 
financial  stability  with  monetary  policy  decision-making.  This  action  is  as  bold  as  it  is 
innovative  in  establishing  more  optimum  equilibriums  between  our  function  of  drafting  and 
implementing  the  monetary  policy  and  that  of  maintaining  the  system’s  financial  stability. 
From that moment on, the Financial Stability report would not be merely another book 
in the library shelves of the Bank of Albania, but a valuable input to policy decision-
making.  Therefore,  information  becomes  more  complete,  including  the  assessment  of 
banking  activity  risks  performance.  This  would  mean  that  our  philosophy  becomes  more 
preventive and more farsighted, because the collected information is used to minimise future 
risks.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
We  believe  that  these  actions  were  the  right  therapy  to  buffer  the  effects  of  the  global 
economic and financial crisis on the domestic banking sector and economy that appeared at 
the  end  of  2008.  The  shocks  in  the  global  financial  system  transmitted  insecurity  to  the 
Albanian  public  and,  subsequently,  huge  amount  of  deposits  were  withdrawn  from  the 
banking system.  
Additional  need  for  liquidity  as  well  as  contraction  of  crediting  during  this  period  had  a 
negative effect on the situation of financial resources, revenues and capital of the banking 
sector.  
Under these circumstances, public authorities undertook a series of actions to support the 
banking sector, in particular the following:  
 
 
Approval of a law which increased the insured amount of public deposits; 
Decisions of the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania to limit bank exposure 
against their foreign bank owner groups and suspend the distribution of dividend for 
banks during 2008 and 2009;  
Implementation  of  a  number  of  other  decisions  taken  by  the  Bank  of  Albania  in 
relation  to  the  establishment  of  more  easing  conditions  to  provide  liquidity  in  the 
inter-bank market; and 
Further improvement of the regulatory supervisory framework, aiming at maintaining 
banking activity stability. 
  Overall,  during  this  stage,  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  played  an  essential  role  for  the 
identification of short-term problems of the banking sector and their immediate addressing. 
This process was necessary to identify later longer-term implications on the banking activity 
performance and further alignment of the supervisory framework. 
Banking  activity  performance  over  the  past  two  years,  has  shown  that  these  measures 
proved to be effective and the Albanian banking system overcame with success the global 
crisis effects. The withdrawal of publics deposits from the banking sector was staunched at 
the end of 2009 Q1 and, from that moment, their return to the banks continues consistently. 
The  current  financial  situation  continues  to  be  stable,  overall,  compared  with  previous 
periods, with a firm public confidence and satisfactory condition of liquidity and capitalisation. 
The  stress  tests  of  the  banking  sector  against  unfavourable  potential  developments 
 – economic and financial ones – indicate that the banking system is capable of coping with 
them.  
Banking activity performance during this period has reflected the overall performance of the 
economy. During the last two years, albeit a negative output gap, the country’s economy has 
continued  its  positive  growth  in  the  range  of  3.5–4.5  per  cent.  Other  macroeconomic 
indicators have ranged within admissible and expectable values.  
We  believe  that  this  financial  and  macroeconomic  stability  reflects  the  commitment  and 
coordination of core economic policies, the monetary and fiscal policies, over the time. They 
will continue to support the solid economic growth further on, in light of the world’s economy 
resurgence. 
Dear participants, ladies and gentlemen, 
The  world’s  financial  system  faced  an  extraordinary  crisis.  Equally  extraordinary  were  the 
measures  that  were  taken.  Naturally,  its  effects  will  continue  to  be  present  in  the  global 
economy,  while  decisionmakers,  experts  and  scholars  will  continue  to  analyse  the  causes 
and lessons that may be drawn from it. Taking advantage of being present in this panel of 
supervisors, I would like to list some of our conclusions: 
 
Macroprudential  supervision  policies  constitute  an  essential  argument  of  recent 
discussions. The role of the central bank is a part of them, especially in terms of its 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
to  adapt 
independence 
them  continuously  with  markets  development.  Taking 
preventive  role.  Randall  Kroszner,  in  his  recent  document  “Challenges  for  Macro-
Prudential  Supervision”  says:  “...  central  banks  should  move  from  their  traditional 
role  of  the  fire  extinguisher  (which  means  that  if  something  goes  wrong,  central 
banks  will  intervene  in  the  market  and  provide  liquidity  to  extinguish  the  fire  or 
prevent  its  expansion)  to  the  role  of  the  smoke  detector  (which  means  to  try  and 
prevent  the  fire)...”  More  specifically  this  implies  the  identification  of  a  group  of 
measurable indicators, which together create warning systems for macro prudential 
problems. Stress tests are necessary and they should be more frequent, real, and 
transparent  and  shared  with  supervisory  authorities  of  other  countries.  Equally 
indispensable  are 
that  should 
integrity,  professionalism  and 
characterise the activity of each banking supervisor.  
Macroprudential  supervisory  policies,  post-crisis,  despite  the  progress  made 
recently,  need  further  regulation.  For  that  purpose,  specialised  international 
institutions  need  to  concentrate  on  a  more  detailed  definition  and  cooperation  in 
order 
into 
consideration regional, demographic, historic and cultural specific characteristics is 
also important.  
The banking system needs to represent a culture based on best values of ethics, 
service  and  integrity.  This  should  be  the  primary  objective  of  all  banking  system 
managing  structures,  which  will  in  turn  lead  to  enhanced  responsibility  in  banking 
institutions management. Bank managing structures are responsible for a balanced 
management  of  their  institution,  where  the  objective  for  profit  should  serve  to 
identify, analyse and professionally assess risks that accompany relevant actions. In 
addition, banking institutions and their staff need to reflect, in their public relations, 
the  highest  standards  of  security,  communication  and  transparency,  care  and 
support so that this relationship of trust and confidence becomes a characteristic of 
mutual  developments.  The  supervisory  regulatory  framework  is  being  completed 
with a view to take these developments even further. 
Banking  supervisors,  in  turn,  need  to  pay  more  attention  to  examinations  and 
reports  they  prepare,  integrity  and  behaviour  that  characterises  the  work  of  each 
bank. 
Another  great  lesson  we  may  draw  from  the  crisis  is  to  avoid  at  any  cost  huge 
concentrations and dependency on short-term financial funds. A top priority remains 
the adoption of prudent practices on risk management.  
Composition and capacities of banks managing structures is another challenge for 
the banking industry in the future. The last crisis showed that in many cases, board 
members represented only short-term interests of shareholders, at the expense of 
other  interests  of  the  group.  Likewise,  their  expertise  and  knowledge  should  be 
closely connected to specific activities of the bank.  
The  market  and  innovation  move  faster  than  the  supervisor  does.  Therefore,  any 
innovation  or  new  banking  product,  prior  to  being  marketed,  needs  to  be  tested 
responsibly, assessing carefully all potential accompanying risks. 
      In a more national context, it is necessary and actually completely possible for the banking 
sector to accelerate the process of crediting revitalisation, a development that supports not 
only the economy and the clients, but also the banks.  
Crediting should be supported better through a solid growth of funding sources, especially 
deposits.  In  crediting,  it  is  necessary  to  have  a  better  sectorial  distribution  and  a  more 
reasonable balance among public and private investment projects, Albanian Lek or foreign 
currency  denominated  credits,  therefore  orienting  crediting  towards  supporting  the national 
economy.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
In  this  context,  there  is  sufficient  room  for  banks  to  support  more  crediting  to  small  and 
medium  enterprises  and  provide  more  opportunities  in  Lek  crediting.  In  any  case,  the 
process  of  analysis,  assessment,  follow  up  and  evidencing  the  credit  quality  should  be 
pivotal to relevant structures in banks and should be carried out with maximum seriousness 
and commitment, conform to supervisory requirements. 
In  this  process,  cooperation  is  needed  with  clients  that  are  facing  temporary  difficulties. 
However, in the case of non-performing loans, it is necessary to undertake envisaged and 
timely  actions  to  execute  the  guarantees  and  other  forms  of  collateral,  in  order  to  recover 
maximum values.  
These actions are important while the Bank of Albania deems that the crediting activity of the 
banking sector will continue to face a challenging environment and targeted improvements 
for the credit quality will require more time to be realised.  
In  conclusion,  let  me  underline  that,  movement  in  the  above-mentioned  directions  make  a 
complex process which requires a two-way commitment and cooperation. It is with pleasure 
that I find that cooperation between us and the banking sector is seeing progress, both in 
field of supervision and monetary policy implementation. 
I  believe  this  cooperation  will  grow  among  supervisors  in  the  South  Eastern  Europe.  On 
behalf of the Bank of Albania I would like to assure you that we will offer full cooperation in 
this regard. 
Taking advantage of this opportunity, I would like to underscore that the Bank of Albania will 
always respect the public expectations and will fulfil, on time, its legal responsibilities in terms 
of maintaining the banking system and price stability. I thank You for your attention and wish 
you success! 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
