Durmuş Yilmaz: Financial education and awareness – challenges, 
opportunities and strategies 
Speech by Mr Durmuş Yilmaz, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, at 
the International Conference on Financial Education and Financial Awareness: Challenges, 
Opportunities and Strategies, Istanbul, 10 March 2011. 
 Distinguished Minister, Esteemed Participants, Esteemed Guests and Members of the 
Press,  
Welcome to our conference on financial education and financial awareness. As you know, 
these concepts have progressively come into prominence in both developed and developing 
countries in recent years. After a brief conceptual introduction, I will continue my speech by 
talking about the financial education in Turkey and efforts of the Central Bank in this respect. 
Distinguished Participants, 
Financial education has always been an important concept in terms of allowing individuals to 
manage  their  budgets,  arrange  incomes  and  expenditures,  manage  their  investments  and 
savings effectively, and protect themselves from possible losses. With the increased variety 
and  complexity  of  financial  products  in  today’s  world,  this  issue  is  becoming  even  more 
important  for  both  individuals  and  the  financial  system.  On  the  back  of  globalization,  the 
liberalization trend in economies, the easing of restrictive regulations in the financial sector 
and the liberalization of capital flows at international level since the early 1980s, more and 
more individuals participate in financial markets as investors in many countries, primarily in 
developing ones. In this framework, financial education assumes greater importance in terms 
of minimizing financial risks for those who do not have sufficient experience of capital market 
instruments. 
Financial  awareness  supports  a  more  rational  decision-making  process  for  individuals  by 
improving their literacy against financial risks. Increasing financial literacy will contribute to 
the  more  efficient  functioning  of  financial  markets,  enhancement  of  financial  stability  and 
consequently the social welfare by increasing productivity in the overall economy. Therefore, 
financial education assumes importance not only for individuals but also for giving depth to 
the financial system and improving market efficiency. Parallel to increased financial literacy, 
the volume and variety of information sought by individuals from financial institutions will also 
increase.  This  will,  in  turn,  lead  to  more  transparency  in  financial  markets.  Besides, 
consumers’  demands  for  products  and  services  that  meet  their  needs  will  enable  the 
development  of  creative,  innovative  and  competitive  financial  products  and  services  in 
financial  markets.  Moreover,  financial  education  will  lead  to  an  increase  in  the  individuals’ 
propensity to save and create a more efficient social security system. Higher rates of savings 
will  have  favorable  effects  on  investment  and  growth  and  contribute  to  economic 
development and financial stability. 
I would like to especially underline that financial education is not an abstract concept. As a 
matter of fact, we clearly witnessed the close relationship between financial education and 
financial stability in the recent global crisis. I believe that the awareness created by this crisis 
can be interpreted as an opportunity, as highlighting financial education will be beneficial for 
policy-makers, individuals and financial markets. 
In Turkey, many institutions carry out projects with regard to financial education as a part of 
their responsibilities. In order to get the expected benefit from financial education programs, 
individuals’ financial education needs that arise in different phases of their lives should be 
well  identified.  It  is  of  great  importance  that financial  education  programs  are  devised  in  a 
way to meet these needs; and the effects of these education programs are assessed in order 
to reshape future needs accordingly. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Due  to  the  relationship  between  financial  stability  and  financial  education  I  have  just 
mentioned, the Central Bank of Turkey attaches special importance to the issue of financial 
education as other central banks do. As you all know, the CBT Law lays down the primary 
objective  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Turkey  as  maintaining  price  stability;  whereas  taking 
measures to ensure stability in the financial system are stated among the main duties. In this 
respect, the CBT considers financial education from the viewpoint of financial stability. With 
our biannual Financial Stability Report and other studies and announcements that we share 
with  the  public,  we  strive  to  raise  awareness  as  regards  the  financial  risks  borne  by 
households. 
Meanwhile, we have recently accelerated our efforts on the international platform regarding 
this issue. The CBT is a member of the International Network on Financial Education (INFE) 
established  under  the  auspices  of  the  Organization  for  Economic  Cooperation  and 
Development  (OECD),  one  of  the  leading  organizations  for  financial  education.  Within  the 
scope of this platform, the CBT became one of the fifteen members of the National Strategy 
on Financial Education subgroup, which was established in 2009. Similarly, the CBT applied 
to  join  the  studies  of  the  Financial  Inclusion  subgroup  under  this  platform  (established  in 
February  2011)  and  also  for  membership  in  the  Task  Force  on  Financial  Consumer 
Protection that was established at the OECD. 
The Central Bank of Turkey also contributes, via data collection and surveys, to international 
studies on financial access. Within this framework, the CBT supports studies carried out by 
the Consultative Group to Assist the Poor (CGAP) conducted in collaboration with the World 
Bank. Moreover, the CBT – along with other related public institutions – contributes to the 
efforts  of  the  Global  Partnership  for  Financial  Inclusion  (GPFI)  initiated  by  the  G-20  to 
enhance the exchange of information and cooperation regarding financial access. 
Having said these, I believe that the CBT study entitled “Access to Financial Services and 
Financial  Education  in  Turkey  and  Around  the  World”  will  become  an  important  reference 
regarding  this  issue.  The  booklet  is  now  accessible  on  the  CBT  website  as  well  as  in  the 
Conference CD and is will be in print soon.  
In the last part of my speech, I would like to mention some specific points regarding financial 
education within the framework of this Conference. 
In the first session, we will discuss the relationship between financial education and financial 
stability  and  contribution  of  financial  education  to  the  functioning  of  the  financial  system. 
Then we will move on to the impact of the recent global financial crisis on the rising issue of 
financial education and financial awareness. Taking into account the importance of benefiting 
from  other  countries’  experiences  while  formulating  national  financial  education  strategies 
and programs, in the second session we will focus on financial education practices around 
the world. I believe that this session will yield very useful inferences. In the third session, we 
will listen to experiences of those countries that have made significant progress in designing 
their national financial education strategies and we will learn their methods, challenges and 
suggestions for solutions as well as the outcomes they obtained. On the second day of the 
Conference,  we  will  elaborate  the  current  efforts  on  financial  education  in  Turkey  and  the 
roles and responsibilities of all relevant stakeholders. At this point, the cooperation between 
institutions will play an instrumental role in designing national strategies. The implementation 
of  education  programs  is  as  important  as  designing  financial  education  strategies  and  this 
issue will be thoroughly discussed in the sixth and last session of the Conference. 
As the Central Bank of Turkey, we strongly believe that the significance of financial education 
is far beyond its conceptual meaning and we attach great importance to collaborating with 
national and international institutions in this area. We believe that this Conference with the 
valuable contribution of the Capital Markets Board will be a milestone. 
I wish the Conference every success and thank everyone who has made a contribution. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
