Paul Tucker: Building resilient financial systems – macroprudential 
regimes and securities market regulation 
Speech by Mr Paul Tucker, Deputy Governor for Financial Stability at the Bank of England, 
at the International Council of Securities Associations, London, 23 May 2011. 
 My  thanks  to,  amongst  others,  to  Svein  Andresen  (Financial  Stability  Board),  Alastair  Clark,  Michael  Cohrs, 
Dilwyn Griffiths (FSA), Andy Haldane, Edwin Latter, Pippa Lowe, Graham Nicholson, Sarah Casey Otte (FSB), 
Hector Sants, Victoria Saporta, Philip Thorpe, Martin Wheatley (Hong Kong SFC) and Andrew Whittaker (FSA). 
These  remarks  do  not  necessarily  represent  the  positions  of  the  Bank  of  England  or  of  its  Financial  Policy 
Committee. 
Thank you very much indeed for inviting me to join you today. I am especially grateful as it 
gives  me  an  opportunity  to  air  some  thoughts  about  how  the  regulation  of  our  securities 
markets fits into the development of macroprudential regimes for preserving stability in the 
future. In a debate often dominated by concerns about banks, the vital importance of resilient 
and effective capital markets is easily neglected. This is not at all to diminish the vital lessons 
from  the  crisis  for  banking  supervisors  around  the  world,  many  of  whom  had  lost  their 
traditional  system-oriented  perspective.1  But  the  rules  of  the  game  set  by  securities 
regulators  provide  a  framework  for  the  functioning  of  markets  that  is  as  important  to  the 
operation of the financial system as the regime for banks. 
This  is  especially  important  for  the  UK  authorities  because  London  hosts  the  most 
international capital markets and yet the City is not a hermetically sealed entrepôt. It is bolted 
into our real economy. And it is especially important for the Bank of England as we establish 
the  new  Financial  Policy  Committee,  the  UK’s  new  macroprudential  committee.  But  my 
remarks today are a contribution to the international reform agenda rather than for the UK 
specifically. 
The importance of capital markets 
I  am  guided  by  my  working  definition  of  financial  stability.  That  is  that  financial  stability 
prevails where the financial system is sufficiently resilient that worries about bad states of the 
world do not undermine confidence in the ability of the system to deliver its core services to 
the rest of the economy2. 
As  the  Bank  has  set  out  in  its  strategy  for  financial  stability3,  the  core  services  are  the 
transfer of payments; the provision of credit and equity; and risk transfer or insurance. 
It  is  obvious  that  the  resilience  of  firms  matters  hugely.  But  that  cannot  be  all.  Firms  are 
linked  by  markets  and  infrastructure  though  a  network  of  contracts  covering  derivatives; 
repos and securities lending; correspondent banking, clearing and prime brokerage services 
etc. Moreover, some markets bring end users together. A financial-stability policy regime that 
focused  solely  on  the  financial  soundness  of  a  few  firms  would,  therefore,  be  myopic.  But 
while nearly all markets are subject to regulation, relatively little thought has been given over 
the past decade to how different markets matter to stability and, hence, about the role of the 
authorities in this area. 
                                                 
1  On  that,  see  the  Bank  of  England/FSA  paper  released  last  week  on  how  banking  supervision  is  being 
reformed in the UK in preparation for the establishment of the new Prudential Regulatory Authority.  
2  See Tucker P M W “Macroprudential Policy: Building Financial Stability Institutions”, 2011 for a discussion of 
macroprudential regimes. 
3  Bank of England Annual Report and Accounts 2010 pp 26–27. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Markets matter to stability in different ways 
As a provisional attempt at this, I think it might be helpful to distinguish between three types 
of market: infrastructural markets, intra-financial-system markets, and end-user markets.  
The  first  type  is  those  markets  that  provide  essential,  quasi-infrastructural  support  to 
banking.  The  obvious  example  is  the  overnight  wholesale  money  markets.  They  are 
effectively  part  of  the  payments  system  infrastructure.  Banking,  which  is  integral  to  the 
provision of all three core financial services, simply could not operate without these markets. 
They have long been, and will remain, of concern to central banks. I will not return to them 
today. 
The  second  category  is  intra-financial  system  markets  (a  slightly  broader  concept  than 
inter-dealer  markets).  These  markets  determine  the  interlinkages  amongst  financial  firms. 
They matter because banks, dealers and funds rely on them in order to provide services to 
the rest of the economy, and also because they can increase fragilities in the system. They 
are perhaps represented best by what have become known as the “financing markets”: repo, 
securities lending, certificates of deposit etc – the markets that financial firms use to access 
short-term wholesale funding. The authorities’ engagement with them is, frankly, patchy. At 
one end of the spectrum, central bankers in particular have a good track record of ensuring 
the  professionalism  of  core  government-bond  repo  markets.  That  was  not  without  good 
cause.  When  the  US  Treasury  repo  markets  started  in  the  mid-to-late  1970s,  there  was  a 
string of scandals4. When the UK authorities opened up the way to a gilt repo market in the 
early-90s,  therefore,  we  worked  with  the  industry  on  the  supporting  hard  and  soft 
infrastructure,  including  a  Code  drawn  up  by  the  Stock  Lending  and  Repo  Committee,  to 
avoid a repetition in London of Wall Street’s experience. It would be hard for the authorities 
to claim the same foresight concerning the wider securities lending or repo markets in recent 
years.  The  employment  by  securities  lenders  of  cash  collateral  became  a  core  but  hugely 
opaque financing market in the run up to the latest crisis5. The run on repo, documented by 
Gary Gorton6, was how the US securities dealers unravelled. The authorities need to develop 
policies  for  monitoring  and,  where  necessary,  controlling  these  markets  for  providing 
leverage and maturity transformation. I believe that central banks can play a special role in 
this area. 
Important  “intra-financial  system  markets”  are  not  restricted  to  banking.  The  reinsurance 
markets, and the mechanisms for sharing risks in Lloyd’s of London, are other examples. As 
are  the  inter-dealer  markets  in  derivatives,  which  have  traditionally  employed  different 
protocols  (notably  collateralisation,  under  Credit-Support  Annexes)  than  get  used  in 
transactions with end users. Away from banks, these Over the Counter derivative markets 
have been the principal focus of policy. They are being rethought, under a mandate from the 
G20 Leaders7.  
The third category of markets is those that matter directly in their own right to end users. 
Notably  the  primary  markets  in  equity  and  debt.  These  markets  and  the  associated 
secondary markets often rely on “market makers” for liquidity, but they are not the marginal 
source of financing or risk management for banks and dealers. In the past, they have often 
                                                 
4  Drysdale, Lombard Wall, and so on. 
5  See Tucker P M W (2010), “Shadow Banking, Financing Markets and Financial Stability”, January 2010. 
6  See Gary Gorton “Securitized Banking and the Run on Repo”. 
7 
In  September  2009,  G-20  Leaders  agreed  in  Pittsburgh  that:  “All  standardised  OTC  derivative  contracts 
should be traded on exchanges or electronic trading platforms, where appropriate, and cleared through central 
counterparties by end-2012 at the latest. OTC derivative contracts should be reported to trade repositories. 
Non-centrally  cleared  contracts  should  be  subject  to  higher  capital  requirements.  We  ask  the  FSB  and  its 
relevant members to assess regularly implementation and whether it is sufficient to improve transparency in 
the derivatives markets, mitigate systemic risk, and protect against market abuse.” 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
been distant from the attention of the financial stability authorities, but their integrity has long 
been a focus for securities regulators. They are especially important in economies where a 
significant proportion of the intermediation of savings/investment occurs via capital markets 
rather than via bank balance sheets. If those core capital markets are not resilient to shocks 
and, crucially, if substitutes are not readily available, disruptions could materially impair the 
supply  of  credit  and  risk-capital  to  the  economy,  with  macroeconomic  and  other  welfare 
costs. Equity and high-grade corporate bond markets probably pass that test in a number of 
developed  economies.  In  the  USA  at  least,  some  securitisation  markets  were  probably 
significant too. When the securitisation markets closed, they had become so big in the USA 
that  it  was  not  realistic  for  that  part  of  the  credit  system  to  be  reintermediated  by  the  US 
banking system in short order. Even if the banks had been strong, they would have needed 
to raise a lot more capital to expand their balance sheets.  
It is, of course, natural that policy has focused on those markets – securitisation and some 
OTC  derivatives  –  that  featured  prominently  in  the  crisis.  But  we  do  need  to  develop  a 
framework for identifying more generally which markets really matter to stability. That means 
being  attentive  to  exchange-traded  derivatives  and  to  cash  markets,  whether  on  or 
off-exchange, and perhaps especially to the short-term financing markets.  
Where  firms  are  concerned,  we  have  learned  to  focus  on  maturity  transformation  and 
leverage.  For  markets,  it  is,  perhaps,  not  quite  so  straightforward.  In  the  case  of  intra-
financial system markets, we are interested in whether they produce chains of cumulative 
maturity transformation and leverage, and how transparent that is. With end-user markets, 
we are also interested in whether they are driven by strongly procyclical forces; whether they 
are  especially  liable  to  generate  assets  whose  risks  are  mispriced  or  obscure;  whether 
demand is dominated by leveraged investors and traders. We are interested in whether they 
can crater – becoming illiquid or even closing – under stress. And in whether there are ready 
substitutes. If not, intermediation can become impeded and end-users deprived of valuable 
services.  Across  all  of  these  concerns,  the  underlying  factors  may  be  either  structural  or 
cyclical. And they go wider than the traditional focus of securities regulators on the integrity 
of transactions in public “end user” markets. 
In practice, the components of individual markets give us a list of things to focus on. A list 
that goes well beyond firms: products and their distribution in primary markets; the rules of 
the  game  and  infrastructure  for  trading,  including  the  role  of  market  makers;  the 
infrastructure for post-trade clearing and settlement; and asset management practices.  
Especially  for  “end-user  markets”,  these  are  subjects  typically  associated  with  securities 
market regulation not with mainstream microprudential supervision. I want to bring out that 
they  are,  nevertheless,  integral  to  financial  stability  authorities.  Under  each  of  those 
headings, I shall raise a few points that have not featured prominently in recent debates. To 
be clear, I shall not attempt to cover all important markets. And I shall not address important 
questions  about  the  role  of  securities  regulators  in  crisis  management,  circuit-breakers,  or 
counter-cyclical  policies  such  as  varying  minimum  margin  requirements  as  conditions 
change. Moreover, I must stress that I speak only for myself. 
The issuance and distribution of securities  
Toxic  ABS  and  CDOs  –  cash  as  well  as  “synthetic”  or  derivative  versions  –  were  at  the 
centre of the crisis. They were not toxic for the financial system because they were risky or, 
indeed, because many underlying household and business borrowers became overindebted. 
Markets  can  price  (and  ration)  risk  they  comprehend  (if  appropriate  requiring  yields  that 
inhibit issuance). They were toxic because they were mispriced; and they were mispriced in 
part  because  they  were  misunderstood.  Through  the  consequent  enticements  to  leverage, 
that misunderstanding engulfed banks, asset managers, credit insurers and, eventually, the 
authorities. Both dealer-financing markets and end-user markets closed.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Listing authorities and securities regulation  
And yet all of those securities were issued and/or distributed under the securities laws and 
policies  of  developed  countries  or  financial  centres  with  elaborate  securities  market 
regulation.  Prospectuses  or  other  documentation  had  to  meet  regulatory  or  listing 
requirements. Those requirements were meant to be exacting if the securities were issued 
onto the public markets. In Europe, it seems most issuers of ABS and CDOs chose to list 
them in Ireland or Luxembourg. In many jurisdictions, including the USA, the requirements 
were  deliberately  less  exacting  if  the  securities  were  distributed  solely  via  the  “private 
markets” to wholesale or sophisticated investors. 
This prompts two thoughts.  
First, with hindsight, could Listing Authorities and securities regulators8 do more in the future 
to ensure that the disclosure around complex securities are comprehensible, coherent and, 
crucially,  simple  and  short  enough  to  be  capable  of  being  absorbed?  And  should  Listing 
Authorities  be  more  willing  to  step  in  and  require  changes  to  the  structure  of  complex 
securities where they conclude that the disclosure is inadequate and just cannot realistically 
be made adequate? Have “risk factors” become so numerous, wordy and wide-ranging that 
they  lose  their  impact?  In  their  understandable  desire  to  avoid  validating  products  and 
securities,  have  securities  regulators  retreated  too  far  towards  simply  checking  that  the 
required boxes have been ticked? Perhaps I am imagining it, but I recollect a period in which 
Listing Authorities were guardians of the integrity of primary markets. That over time came to 
rely  upon  disclosure.  And  that  ended  up  meaning  accepting  documents  that  were 
comprehensive rather than comprehensible. Where something is incomprehensible, and has 
reached a scale where it could even jeopardise stability, the relevant authority should say so. 
Where it can be made comprehensible via a succinct piece of analysis in the introduction of a 
Prospectus, the Authority could require that.  
What  I  am  suggesting  would  entail  Listing  Authorities  and  securities  regulators  more 
generally  thinking  about  themselves  somewhat  differently  and,  if  I  may  say  so,  being 
somewhat  less  bound  by  the  traditions  of  public  equity  markets.  This  seems  unavoidable 
given the growth in private offerings of complex securities and the involvement of banks in 
securities-market  intermediation.  It  might  require  legislation  in  some  jurisdictions  to  entitle 
securities regulators to take into account financial stability9. Prior to the crisis, that had hardly 
been debated anywhere, but IOSCO’s principles of securities regulation have recently been 
revised  to  identify  reducing  systemic  risk  as  one  of  the  three  objectives  of  securities 
regulation.10 That innovation is big, but it needs to be incorporated into national regimes and 
practices. 
Second,  is  it  always  right  to  make  a  clear  distinction  between  laws  and  rules  governing 
“public” issues and private placements? Viewed against the historical objectives of securities 
regulation  –  fairness,  transparency,  and  investor  protection  –  the  public  market  v.  private-
transaction  distinction  does  indeed  seem  valid.  But  we  need  to  debate  whether  the 
separation  is  so  neat  when  the  public  policy  objective  of  financial  stability  is  taken  into 
account.  That  is  because  the  creation  and  private  placement  of  very  large  amounts  of 
particular  types  of  security  can  affect  the  amount  of  risk  being  borne  by  the  system  as  a 
                                                 
8  Confusingly, the language and structures vary considerably across countries. In some jurisdictions, such as 
the  UK,  the  securities  regulator  is  the  listing  authority.  In  others,  such  as  the  US,  listing  documentation  is 
approved by exchanges, with minimum disclosure requirements set by the securities regulator. This is tied up 
with whether regimes retain an element of Self-Regulatory Organisations. 
In the UK, although the FSA was given a “financial stability” objective in 2010, it did not apply to its functions 
as  UK  Listing  Authority.  The  proposed  objectives  of  the  planned  new  securities  and  conduct  regulator,  the 
FCA, are intended to apply to the UKLA.  
9 
10  IOSCO Objectives and Principles of Securities Regulation (2010). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
whole  in  ways  that  are  opaque  to  everyone.  For  example,  in  the  USA,  as  the  SEC  has 
commented, a lot of structured-finance products, including pretty well all CDOs and Asset-
Backed  CP,  were  issued  privately  and  so  were  exempt  from  a  panoply  of  disclosure 
requirements that apply to “registered” offerings.11 Reducing that opacity, and ensuring the 
integrity of these market mechanisms, could well be in the interests of investors in private 
placements themselves.  
This issue is not easy. On the one hand, it is reasonable for the regulatory regime to make 
allowance  for  private  transactions  amongst  “consenting  adults”.  And  the  issuance  of  small 
amounts of any type of security cannot possibly jeopardise stability. On the other hand, it is 
reasonable for public policy regimes to address the externalities – in this case, the potential 
systemic effects – of thousands of large private transactions that take place away from public 
markets. My concern is not that sophisticated investors cannot fend for themselves. And I do 
not want to deny that private transactions can aid stability, as indeed has been the case with 
much recent private-market debt issuance by banks. But nobody can assess the risks they 
are incurring in some transactions without much more information about the totality of risks 
out  there  and  the  network  of  exposures  within  the  financial  system.  At  the  least,  good 
aggregate information is needed about patterns of issuance in private markets.12  
Product gatekeepers: securities regulators  
These  questions  of  how  securities  regulators  should  respond  to  the  possible  effects  of 
innovations on the stability of the system are not limited to their listing-authority function. The 
rules for collective-investment schemes matter too.  
A  good  example,  highlighted  recently  by  the  G20  Financial  Stability  Board,  is  the 
development  of  the  Exchange-Traded  Fund  markets  to  include  synthetic  structures, 
leveraged  funds,  less  liquid  underlyings,  and  all  three  combined.13  Remind  you  of  how 
securitisations ended up in CDO² and CPDOs? In the EU, ETFs are subject to the UCITs 
rules for what are in effect mutual funds available to retail investors.  
Securities  regulators  need  to  think  about  how  to  avoid  mechanically  applying  a  regime  for 
vanilla  investment  schemes  to  the  structuring  and  distribution  of  much  more  complex  and 
sophisticated products. 
In  the  same  spirit,  recent  ETFs  innovations  underline  the  need  for  securities  regulators  to 
work closely with bank supervisors and macroprudential authorities on shadow banking and 
what  I  earlier  called  “financing  markets”.  For  both  physical  and  synthetic  funds,  the 
underlying collateral pools are being swapped to provide financing for dealers and banks. It 
is  not clear whether  bank  supervisors  have  caught  up  with  this,  or  whether  the  risk  of  the 
collateral  swaps  being  called  is  treated  appropriately  in  regulatory  maturity-mismatch 
ladders.  Who  would  have  guessed  that  vanilla  collective  investment  schemes,  could  be 
turned to this purpose? The truth is that any pool of assets can be. 
While the FSB has already called for authorities to act to keep the evolution of ETFs on a 
sustainable path, the broader lesson is that securities regulators need to be alive to the need 
                                                 
11  Securities and Exchange Commission, Release No. 33-9117, Asset-Backed Securities (April 7, 2010). 
12  The FSB took a small step towards addressing this issue in its March 2011 publication, “Thematic Review on 
Risk Disclosures Practices: Peer Review Report”. This did not get much traction at the time, but the FSB’s 
Vulnerabilities Group, chaired by Jaime Caruana and on which I sit, plans to draw on that Review in its own 
work programme. In the US, as noted, the SEC has begun to grapple with this set of issues. Its April 2010 
notice proposed enhanced disclosures requirements for asset-backed securities sold privately as well as via 
the public (registered) transactions.  
13  “Potential financial stability issues arising from recent trends in Exchange-Traded Funds (ETFs)”, published by 
the  Financial  Stability  Board,  12  April  2011.  The  Bank  of  England  covered  similar  issues  in  its  June  2010 
Financial Stability Report, pages 40–41. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
to keep up with innovations and, like bank supervisors, they need to be ready to accept an 
occasional steer from macroprudential authorities. 
Product “gatekeepers”: Credit Rating Agencies  
It  would  be  hard  to  talk  about  the  issue  and  distribution  of  securities  without  mentioning 
Credit Rating Agencies. It is important to reduce the significance of CRA ratings in our capital 
markets. Pervasive mechanistic reliance on ratings is by no means mainly the fault of the 
Rating Agencies themselves or of financial firms, although many of the latter have acted – 
and probably continue to act – foolishly. The extent to which ratings have been bolted into 
regulatory regimes – by securities regulators and prudential supervisors – has plainly been a 
great mistake. And it is one of those mistakes whose effects have become so woven into the 
fabric of “modern” finance that it is going to take an extraordinary act of will (and patience) to 
undo it. Yes, we do have asset managers (and banks) who might not be able to evaluate 
some securities on their own if they were not permitted, by official regimes, to rely on CRA 
ratings.  But  what  on  earth  are  we  doing  not  only  tolerating  but  effectively  encouraging  a 
financial  system  in  which  asset  managers  and  banks  can’t  always  understand  their 
portfolios? 
It is therefore vital that, together with the Basel Supervisors Committee, securities regulators 
around the world actively implement the FSB’s Principles for reducing mechanistic reliance 
on CRA ratings.14 In the US, the SEC is embarked on that. But I worry that others, including 
prudential  supervisors,  might  not  grapple  with  this  admittedly  difficult  exercise  in  a 
determined way. The enhanced (meaning better not longer) disclosure by issuers I discussed 
earlier could make the standard-setters’ task somewhat less difficult.  
Infrastructure 
One  of  the  wonderful  things  about  capitalism  is  innovation.  It  helps  to  drive  technical 
progress  and  higher-living  standards.  Open  economies  allow  those  innovations  to  spread 
across  the  world.  Freely  flowing  capital  is  essential  for  this  to  work  in  my  view.  But 
innovations  can  take  a  nasty  turn  in  financial  markets  when  they  outgrow  their  supporting 
infrastructure. 
This is an area where the authorities can do good, because there is often a collective action 
problem. For example, the recent crisis would have been much worse if the authorities, led 
by  the  New  York  Fed,  had  not  “asked”  the  dealer  and  fund  community  to  clean  up  the 
problem of assignments in credit-default-swap markets in the early years of the last decade. 
But  we  need  to  remember  to  be  ready  to  step  in.  The  OTC  derivative  markets  are  an 
example where the authorities have had to chase after events. The cash ABS markets are 
another, with central banks now taking a lead by introducing standards for transparency and 
the structure of the securities we are prepared to take as collateral.  
Trading platforms and exchanges  
Currently, a key area of reform is the infrastructure for the main over-the-counter derivative 
markets. 
In  the  trading  area,  there  is  a  debate  about  how  far  to  unravel  the  predominantly  bilateral 
mechanics of OTC derivatives markets and how far to move towards exchanges. Perhaps to 
                                                 
14  I should disclose that I chaired the FSB working group that drew up the Principles. But they belong to the FSB, 
endorsed by its Plenary, rather than to the working group. “Principles for Reducing Reliance on CRA Ratings”, 
Financial Stability Board, 27 October 2010. 
  Available at http://www.financialstabilityboard.org/publications/r_101027.pdf  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
different  degrees  in  the  US  and  the  EU,  there  is  an  unresolved  issue  about  whether  all 
standardized derivative products should be traded via Multi-Dealer Platforms, which are a bit 
like exchanges, or whether to allow Single-Dealer Platforms through which a broker-dealer 
sets  up  its  own  quasi-exchange.  A  preliminary  study  by  IOSCO  did  not  reach  a  clear 
conclusion given the dispersion of views.15  
I want to inject one thought from a financial stability perspective into this debate. So far as we 
can see, the debate has been cast pretty much entirely in terms of market integrity (honesty 
and  fairness),  transparency  and  the  efficiency  of  price  discovery  –  the  core  concerns  of  a 
securities  regulator.  The  missing  word  is  “liquidity”.  And  the  question  is  whether  or  not 
liquidity  would  be  more  resilient  under  stress  depending  on  whether  an  asset  class  was 
traded on MDPs or SDPs.  
The  question  of  resilient  liquidity  matters  enormously.  As  the  crisis  in  2007  reminded 
everyone,  the  liquidity  of  markets  can  evaporate,  causing  liquidity  premia  to  soar, 
undermining the net worth of those intermediaries and investors who mark to market, feeding 
back  into  market  dynamics  in  a  vicious  circle.  As  well  as  controlling  leverage,  prudential 
standard setters can help here by ensuring that bank and dealer intermediaries carry capital 
to  cover  the  risk  of  swings  in  liquidity  premia  and  against  the  pervasive  basis  risk 
warehoused by “market makers” in illiquid or non-standard products. The Basel Supervisors 
Committee  is  working  on  that  in  its  Fundamental  Review  of  Trading  Book  Capital 
Requirements. 
But, surely, the design of the market microstructure also matters. In that sphere, might the 
choice between MDPs and SDPs also make a difference? It is hard to know. There is some 
evidence  from  the  fx  markets  that,  during  the  crisis,  volumes  shifted  to  single-dealer 
platforms.  One  possible  explanation  for  that  would  be  the  incentive  of  individual  firms  to 
make  clear  to  their  customers  that  they  provided  a  liquidity  service  during  thick  and  thin, 
expecting to be rewarded with more business as normality returns. But I must stress that I do 
not  have  a  position  on  this.  Rather,  my  point  is  that  this  very  important  issue  has  been 
debated without the liquidity dimension being explicitly considered. Following discussion at 
FSB, that gap in the analysis is now being addressed by the IOSCO leadership.  
Post-trade infrastructure: CCPs as risk managers  
The other big area of reform is, of course, around central counterparties. Clearing more OTC 
products; being more resilient; revisiting criteria for access to CCPs, and so on. You don’t 
need me to rehearse all of that for you. 
But I would note that this is not just about derivatives markets. LCH’s move to clear repos in 
Spanish government bonds helped that market stay open during some dark days. 
And I do want to make one very important general point about the role of CCPs and their 
management.  
CCPs  simplify  the  complex  web  of  counterparty  exposures  through  multilateral  netting  – 
precisely what the US authorities contemplated trying to achieve ad hoc towards the end of a 
weekend when Lehman was unravelling. They act as a central market authority for valuing 
positions and setting minimum margin levels. Having centralised risk upon themselves, they 
redistribute  it  to  their  clearing  members  through  a  clear  waterfall.  They  are,  in  effect, 
systemic risk managers. They absolutely must think of themselves as that. Their job is not 
just to deliver ever greater operational and capital efficiency for their clearing members. Too 
many senior executives at CCPs I have met over the past decade or so have seemed to fall 
into that trap – a trap encouraged by some being for-profit organisations. I fear that what I am 
                                                 
15  Report of the Technical Committee of IOSCO on Trading of OTC Derivatives (2011). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
saying will seem novel. In fact, this emphasis on their role as systemic risk managers was a 
clear lesson from the very few instances of clearing houses failing over past decades.16 If I 
may quote from the post-87 crash Report of the Hong Kong Securities Review Committee:  
“When  everything  else  is  stripped  away,  the  most  pressing  issue  is  the 
management  of  risk.  The  focus  of  this  is  ......increasingly,  the  central  clearing 
houses  –  indeed  [their] prudent  operation  is  perhaps  the  single  most  important 
objective for the market authorities and regulators.17” 
What does this mean in practice? My personal view is that, amongst other things, it means 
that CCPs should not outsource their core risk management functions; they should monitor 
the robustness of their clearing members; and they should monitor risks from the business 
that  their  clearing  members  are  bringing  to  them  as  an  indication  of  incipient  fragility. 
Amongst  other  things,  that  means  collecting  and  analysing  information  from  clearing 
members on large positions taken by their customers. In 1987, it was the long positions of a 
trader that bankrupted the Hong Kong clearing house. 
Some elements of the clearing house regime are clearly for the authorities to determine. One 
important one, which is implicitly being debated in some jurisdictions but not in a way noticed 
by  anyone  other  than  specialists,  is  whether  clearing  houses  should  adopt  what  is  called 
Gross Margining rather than Net Margining. What this means is that a clearing member – ie a 
dealer – could not net off positions of their various customers and their own house position 
when the amount of margin they have to hold with the clearing house is determined. That 
would  affect  the  incentives  of  clearing  members  to  collect  minimum  margin  amounts  from 
their customers. And, more generally, it would probably reduce the amount of leverage in the 
system and simplify the chain of credit. Again, my point is not at all to advocate a position on 
this one way or another. It is to note that this is about more than investor protection through 
the segregation of client moneys, and so needs to be debated against the goal of preserving 
stability without impairing efficiency. 
Post-trade infrastructures: trade repositories 
Moving  on  from  CCPs,  a  quick  appeal  –  in  fact,  two  if  I  may  –  to  the  securities  regulator 
community on Trade Repositories. 
They  are  one  of  the  most  interesting  innovations  brought  forth  by  the  crisis.  They  are 
expected to house information, on a trade-by-trade basis, on the type of contract, notional 
value, currency, maturity, counterparties of derivative transactions. This needs somehow to 
extend to valuation(s) and collateral terms.  
My appeal to the US, EU and Asian authorities is twofold. First, should we not have a Trade 
Repository  covering  securities  lending  –  a  cash  market  –  including  the  way  collateral  is 
employed? We surely need to do something to lift the veil on this vital financing market and, 
probably, on the collateral swap market more generally. 
Second, we need to think carefully about the purposes for which the information in TRs is 
collected,  and  thus  how  it  is  stored.  As  well  as  helping  to  identify  market  abuse,  which  of 
course  is  a  core  mission  of  securities  regulators,  we  need  to  use  the  information  to  track 
more  generally  what  is  going  on  in  markets  to  help  us  spot  incipient,  often  slow-moving 
threats  to  stability.  And  even  though  individual  Trade  Repositories  are  being  set  up  to 
handle  specific  markets  (credit-default  swaps,  interest-rate  swaps  etc),  it  needs  to  be 
possible to see the pattern of risk and flows across markets and products. Recognising that, 
                                                 
16  Paris in 1974, Kuala Lumpur in 1983 and, most dramatically, the Hong Kong futures clearing house in 1987. 
17  Paragraph 3.21, Report of the Hong Kong Securities Review Committee, 1988. I should disclose that I was an 
Advisor to the SRC and drafted much of the text submitted to the committee. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the FSB has called for the relevant authorities, liaising with the BIS Committee of the Global 
Financial System, to set requirements for reporting of transactions to trade repositories that 
meet the needs of financial stability analysis.18 This work needs a higher profile.   
Firms 
Markets are places where end-users and intermediaries meet. Securities regulation affects 
financial  firms  –  traders  and  asset  managers  –  as  both  intermediaries  and  as  users.  It  is 
important this gives proper weight to financial stability. Three broad thoughts on that. 
Regulated banks: provisions and disclosure 
Everybody in this room and outside knows, or should know, that for much of the past quarter 
of a century there was a stand off between bank supervisors and securities regulators over 
provisioning  policy.  On  the  one  hand,  until  they  gave  up  in  exhaustion,  many  bank 
supervisors wanted banks to set aside (general) provisions against losses that were implicit 
in portfolios but not yet manifest in arrears or other concrete measures of impairment. Today 
we  would  call  this  forward-looking  or  expected-loss  or  dynamic  provisioning.  On  the  other 
hand, securities regulators typically opposed this because they feared, no doubt with some 
reason, that it could be used to smooth profits in a misleading way. There were some famous 
stand  offs.  I  do  not  doubt  the  sincerity  of  the  securities  regulators’  concerns.  And  no-one 
could ignore the constraints that, as the years passed, were codified into accounting policy. 
But the stand off across the supervisor/market regulator divide was a problem. Progress is 
now  being  made  by  the  IASB  and  FASB  on  developing  more  forward-looking  impairment 
standards.  The  key  to  progress  was  the  joint  recognition  by  market  regulators  and 
supervisors  that  earlier  identification  of  credit  losses  is  consistent  both  with  financial 
statement  users’  needs  for  transparency  regarding  changes  in  credit  trends  and  with  the 
prudential objective of safety and soundness.19 
In the other direction, bank supervisors have typically insisted on the vital confidentiality of 
the information they receive, while securities regulators emphasise transparency. One could 
argue that, in many countries, the bank supervisors have done too well in this debate. That 
was  brought  home  to  me  some  years  ago  when,  in  a  previous  existence  at  the  Bank  of 
England, my then team realised that we could analyse large and complex firms most easily 
using  disclosures  made  under  SEC  rules.  As  announced  last  week  in  the  joint  Bank  of 
England/FSA  document  on  how  the  future  Prudential  Regulation  Authority  will  approach 
banking supervision, we plan in the future to publish prudential returns to the extent possible.  
Shadow banking and the prudential perimeter 
My second point about firms concerns shadow banking, defined to mean non-bank firms or 
structures that replicate the monetary and/or credit services of banks in some way, involving 
maturity transformation and/or leverage20. 
                                                 
18  See  Recommendation  19,  FSB  Report  on  Implementing  OTC  Derivatives  Reforms  (2010);  and  the 
recommendations of the FSB’s Data Gaps and Systemic Linkages Group. The Basel Committee on Payment 
and Settlement Systems has published revised draft Principles for market infrastructures, including (Principle 
24) that “A Trade Repository should provide timely and accurate data to relevant authorities and the public in 
line with their respective needs”. 
19  See recommendations on bank provisioning in Chapter IV of FSB (2009), “Report of the FSB on Addressing 
Procyclicality in the Financial System”.   
  Available at http://www.financialstabilityboard.org/publications/r_0904a.pdf  
20  See Tucker P M W (2010), “Shadow Banking, Financing Markets and Financial Stability”, January 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
In a world in which regulatory arbitrage is endemic, it is a fact of life that the re-regulation of 
banks will set up incentives to build banking-like functions in other forms. 
The import of this for my remarks today is that securities market regulators (and insurance 
regulators)  need  either  to  be  relaxed  about  the  supervision  of  shadow  banks  being 
transferred to banking supervisors or, alternatively, vigilant about maintaining regimes that do 
not permit systemic risk to accumulate beyond the perimeter of the banking system. In the 
UK’s planned new regulatory framework, the Financial Policy Committee will be responsible 
for recommending to the Treasury when prudential supervision of a type of firm should shift 
from the securities regulator to the prudential regulator (and vice versa); and it will be able to 
advise the FCA on when it needs to revise its rulebook in the interests of stability. Different 
jurisdictions will come up with different arrangements to address this issue, but I would say 
that every jurisdiction is going to need its own solution. And, perhaps for the first time, that 
has highlighted the need for some international co-ordination of policies on shadow banks. 
The FSB is just starting to explore this virgin territory.21  
Asset managers and incentives  
The vast majority of the asset management world is not engaged in shadow banking and, 
more important, does not of itself jeopardise the stability of the system directly if it gets into 
trouble. The taking and absorption of risk by unlevered funds is a fundamentally healthy part 
of the system.  
But financial stability authorities cannot be indifferent to this industry. By investing in the debt 
and equity of banks, it is a vital part of market discipline. We do not want – and cannot have – 
a system where the first line of defence after the management of banks themselves is the 
cadre of official sector supervisors. For the system to be healthy, we need boards, auditors, 
equity  investors  and  debt  holders  to  play  a  big  part,  and  for  investment  decisions  to  be 
subject  to  constructive  incentives.  Yet,  there  is  relatively  little  debate  about  whether  the 
incentives of asset managers made the system more prone to crisis.  
Although not a subject for today, an important part of this is the drive to develop resolution 
regimes  that  entail  debt  holders  taking  losses  on  their  exposures  to  distressed  banks  and 
dealers. That will create an incentive to price risk.  
We also need to be alive to artificial but potent incentives to take too much risk. What I have 
in  mind  here,  for  example,  are  the  regimes  or  practices  under  which  long-term  asset 
managers (life companies and pension funds) end up targeting or even guaranteeing high 
nominal returns or, a separable issue, investing as herds.  
For example, it is said that public sector pension funds in the USA aim to achieve returns of 
around 8%.22 This kind of thing, which I would guess has global effects, distorts the appetite 
for risk in our capital markets, especially when current and expected policy rates are low. We 
need to get to the bottom of whether this materially fuels the Search for Yield, which is being 
talked  about  again  by  market  participants  in  ways  that  remind  me  of  2003/04,  when  the 
markets reignited astonishingly quickly after the dotcom and telco debt blood bath.  
Separately,  we  need  to  have  a  richer  understanding  of  the  effects  of  relative-return 
performance measures on the dynamics of crucial debt and equity markets.  
These seem like badly neglected issues, of little interest to microregulators of fund managers 
or securities markets but, possibly of profound system-wide significance. My objective today 
is no more than to call for research on this.  
                                                 
21  See FSB (2011) “Shadow Banking: Scoping the Issues. A Background Note of the Financial Stability Board.” 
22  The Widening Gap: The Great Recession’s Impact on State Pension and Retiree Health Care Systems’, Pew 
Centre of The States, April 2011. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Summary and conclusions 
The international reform agenda to make firms more resilient, and especially to address the 
Too Big To Fail problem, is absolutely essential, the number one priority. But we should take 
care not to neglect the importance of the rules of the game for capital markets.  
Once upon a time banks extended and held illiquid loans, overseen by banking supervisors. 
And  in  a  largely  separate  universe,  securities  regulators  policed  the  integrity  of  individual 
transactions  and  offerings  on  public  exchanges  served  by  specialist  intermediaries.  The 
growth of private markets, over the counter markets, derivatives, securitization, and banks as 
intermediaries in capital markets has changed all that, as the crisis cruelly exposed. Banking 
supervisors  are  having  to  recover  their  historic  mission  for  systemic  stability,  but  this  time 
round that calls for greater attention to markets and, in particular, not simply assuming that 
what’s in a bank’s trading portfolio and warehouse must be liquid. Securities regulators are 
having to look well beyond their roots, accepting that their rules and policies influence the 
resilience of the system. And financial stability authorities, including central banks, have to 
become as comfortable debating the (hard and soft) infrastructure of core capital markets as 
they are with, say, the intricacies of the capital structure of banks. All of that is essential if we 
are  to  make  progress  with  comprehending  the  network  characteristics  of  the  financial 
system. Securities regulators and financial stability authorities will have to meet half way.  
In  that  spirit,  today  I  have  posed  questions  about  the  perspective  and  responsibilities  of 
Listing Authorities; whether the distinction between public and private market transactions is 
as relevant for financial stability as it is for some other public policy objectives; how securities 
regulators  need  to  be  alert  to  innovations  outstripping  their  regimes;  how  to  factor  the 
importance  of  resilient  liquidity  into  the  debate  about  trading  platforms;  the  importance  of 
CCPs  as  system  risk  managers,  collecting  large-position  data,  and  whether  they  should 
apply gross margining; the case for a Trade Repository for securities lending and collateral 
swaps;  the  need  for  securities  regulators  and  accounting  standard  setters  to  relax  about 
forward-looking  provisions,  and  for  banking  supervisors  to  relax  about  publishing  some 
regulatory returns; the need for reform of the regulatory regime for some types of shadow 
banking;  and  the  need  for  a  review  of  the  regulatory  and  other  incentives  prompting  long-
term asset managers to target minimum nominal returns.  
If that is a longish list, it is because there has still been little public debate in this area.  
My  review  of  the  overlap  of  interest  between  securities  regulators  and  financial  stability 
authorities enters  familiar  territory  when  it  gets  to  CCPs,  shadow  banking  and  banks’  own 
disclosure practices. But I hope I have persuaded you that the regimes for the issuance and 
distribution of securities, for trading platforms, and for asset management can also matter to 
the resilience of the financial system. I hope that there may be some agreement that, from a 
financial stability perspective, policies might sometimes more appropriately be cast in terms 
of  inter-dealer  (or  “intra-financial  system”)  markets  and  “end  user  markets”  rather  than  in 
terms of public markets and private transactions. And I hope that there can be a consensus 
that  central  banks  can  play  a  useful  role  in  monitoring  and  fostering  robust  practices  and 
infrastructure in the short-term financing markets. 
The co-incidence of interests between macroprudential authorities and securities regulators 
is  beginning  to  be  recognised.  At  a  global  level,  IOSCO  is  represented  on  the  FSB  and, 
perhaps encouraged by that experience, earlier this year, it published its report on “Mitigating 
Systemic Risk”23. In Europe, the European Securities Markets Authority is on the Systemic 
Risk Board. In the USA, CFTC and SEC are on the Financial Stability Oversight Council. 
                                                 
23  IOSCO  (2011),  Mitigating  Systemic  Risk:  A  Role  for  Securities  Regulators.  IOSCO  has  added  to  its  Core 
Principles two  new  principles on how securities regulators should seek to contribute to containing systemic 
risk.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
What I have been discussing is especially important for the UK. London’s capital markets are 
so  international  that  threats  to  stability  from  any  corner  of  the  globe  ricochet  through  our 
system. We cannot afford to ignore capital markets if we are to restore and preserve stability 
in the UK. The UK’s new macroprudential regime recognises this. The CEO of the planned 
new  market  regulator,  the  Financial  Conduct  Authority,  will  sit  on  the  Financial  Policy 
Committee once it is placed on a statutory footing. And the government proposes that the 
FPC be given power by Parliament to give Recommendations and Directions to FCA where it 
could develop its policies and rules in the interests of stability.  
Domestically,  internationally,  financial  stability  is  a  shared  endeavour.  I  am  therefore 
especially  grateful  for  being  invited  to  join  you,  the  securities  market  community,  today  in 
what can only sensibly be the beginning of a collective process.  
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
