George A Provopoulos: The adjustment process of the Greek economy 
at a decisive juncture – critical challenges for economic policy 
Speech by Mr George A Provopoulos, Governor of the Bank of Greece, at the 78th Annual 
Meeting of Shareholders, Athens, 18 April 2011. 
 The Bank of Greece stressed from the start that the financial support agreement would play 
an important role in addressing the crisis, by securing the necessary funding at a time when 
Greece  was  virtually  excluded  from  the  markets,  imposing  disciplined  adherence  to 
timetables, offering economic policy expertise and facilitating fiscal consolidation.  
The financial support agreement averted bankruptcy and imposed a reorientation of 
economic policy  
Indeed,  the  financial  support  agreement  has  not  only  secured  the  necessary  funding,  but 
also  acted  as  a  catalyst  for  a  fundamental  reorientation  of  economic  policy  in  two  main 
directions:  rapid  fiscal  consolidation  and  the  implementation  of  structural  reforms.  This 
reorientation  should  of  course  have  taken  place  years  ago,  when  conditions  were  more 
favourable. By April 2010, all room for procrastination had been exhausted and the change in 
direction  was  imperative.  The  policy  package  that  began  to  be  implemented  was  the  only 
way to halt the country’s marginalisation, the only hope of creating the conditions to proceed 
down a new path in an orderly manner and as soon as possible.  
The interventions of the ECB and the liquidity support measures averted a credit 
crunch  
During that same period, when the downgrades of the credit ratings of the Greek sovereign 
led to the downgrading of Greek banks, normal liquidity conditions were secured thanks to 
the  policy  and  interventions  of  the  Eurosystem.  With  interest  rates  kept  at  low  levels,  the 
stance of monetary policy remained accommodative. Meanwhile, the Eurosystem continued 
to  use  non-standard  monetary  policy  measures,  which  improved  the  liquidity  position  of 
banks  and  the  economy  at  a  time  when  Greece  was  facing  extremely  adverse  conditions. 
Most  importantly,  the  Eurosystem  took  the  very  important  decision  to  provide  funding  to 
Greek  banks  against  collateral  of  debt  securities  issued  or  guaranteed  by  the  Greek 
government, irrespective of their credit ratings.  
Businesses have, of course, been facing difficulties in their access to credit. One need only 
consider, however, the insurmountable obstacles that would have arisen, in the absence of 
these rescue measures, which indeed averted a credit crunch.  
Adjustment began in 2010 with tangible results on the fiscal front  
The  effort  to  turn  developments  around  began  with  interventions  in  several  areas  and 
produced  tangible  results,  mainly  on  the  fiscal  front.  The  general  government  deficit  as  a 
percentage  of  GDP  was  reduced  by  approximately  5  percentage  points.  The  European 
Commission  and  the  IMF,  in  three  successive  reviews,  acknowledged  the  progress  made, 
rendering possible the smooth inflow of funding under the financial support agreement. This 
averted the disastrous developments that seemed inevitable one year ago and a time margin 
was  given  to  carry  out  the  changes  in  the  economy  that,  in  any  case,  would  have  to  be 
implemented, with or without the Memorandum of Understanding.  
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
      Delays, but also objective difficulties, continue to feed market uncertainty  
Within the past year, a lot has been achieved. However, in spite of the positive results and 
the  great  effort,  the  factors  that  generate  uncertainty  and  feed  the  markets'  wait-and-see 
attitude remain strong.  
 
First,  the  debt  dynamics  remain  unfavourable,  because  of  the  size  of  the 
accumulated imbalances and because progress in adjustment has so far not been 
fast enough in order to reverse these dynamics quickly and decisively.  
Second, competitiveness has improved slightly, mainly as a result of decreases in 
production  costs.  However,  structural  competitiveness,  which  is  linked  to  the 
creation  of  a  business-friendly  environment,  has  not.  Furthermore,  cost 
competitiveness gains in 2010 were small compared to the cumulative losses of the 
past decade.  
Third,  in  spite  of  reforms  to  the  functioning  of  the  public  sector,  substantial 
improvement has yet to be made in the areas where deficits are initially generated 
i.e. public administration, numerous agencies, local government – or in the efficiency 
of tax collection. Thus, fiscal adjustment, after getting off to a strong start, by early 
2011  is  already  showing  signs  of  fatigue  and  deviating  from  targets.  In  2010, 
although  there  was  a  large  reduction  of  the  deficit,  the  initial  target  was  missed. 
Deviation from targets has also been recorded in the first quarter of 2011.  
Fourth, in the area of structural changes, important legislation has been passed on 
the  pension  system,  healthcare,  closed-shop  professions  and  the  labour  market, 
and  in  several  cases  there  has  been  progress.  In  certain  cases,  however,  the 
reforms  do  not  go  deep  enough  and  their  implementation  is  often  delayed,  either 
because of administrative inefficiencies or because of a reluctance to push ahead, in 
the face of opposition.  
Fifth, the real economy performed worse than expected. GDP in 2010 contracted 
by 4.5%, due to a decline in private consumption by 4.5%, in public consumption by 
6.5% and in gross fixed capital formation by 16.5%. However, the recession would 
have been milder, if the reforms to improve the business environment, the utilisation 
of Community funds under the National Strategic Reference Framework (NSRF) and 
improving the efficiency of public spending had all progressed faster.  
Sixth, the recession has led to job losses across all sectors of the economy and to 
a  rise  in  unemployment.  In  the  last  quarter  of  2010,  employment  fell  4%  
year-on-year,  which 
the  rate  of 
unemployment  reached  14.2%  of  the  workforce.  The  average  annual  decrease  in 
employment (–2.7%) was smaller than the decline in GDP, causing productivity to 
fall (by 1.8%).  
Finally, information and public debate on the causes of the crisis, the actual state 
of the economy and, especially, the objective circumstances that make this policy 
package  imperative  have  been  fragmented  and  incomplete.  The  Memorandum  of 
Understanding is often seen as responsible for the symptoms of the crisis and not 
as  an  inevitable  response  to  the  crisis.  Furthermore,  it  has  not  been  sufficiently 
explained that the Memorandum has actually mitigated the symptoms of the crisis, 
which would have been far more acute without it. The backing of reforms in several 
cases has proved timid, while in the public debate the symptoms of the crisis are 
blown out of proportion, without any mention of the reasons that make the changes 
imperative.  
into  180,000 
lost,  while 
translates 
jobs 
As a result of this information deficit, a section of public opinion remains perplexed and 
reserved in the face of the unfolding changes, as the new policy package calls into question 
certainties long considered unchallengeable, while a convincing case has not been made for 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the proposed way-out. The resulting uncertainty has kept social forces from actively joining 
together  in  support  of  the  effort.  Of  course,  there  have  also  been  reactions  which  seek  to 
avert change and return to practices of the past.  
The projections for 2011 leave no room for complacency  
The projections for 2011, in spite of some positive signs, leave no room for complacency.  
 
The recession will continue. GDP is projected to decline by 3%, and a slightly larger 
decline cannot be ruled out.  
Unemployment will continue to rise and will exceed 15%.  
Average annual inflation will slow down significantly compared with 2010, but will 
be close to 3¼%.  
The annual rate of credit expansion to the private sector, already negative in the 
first two months of the year, is expected to remain negative throughout 2011.  
Competitiveness will continue to improve in 2011, as unit labour costs continue to 
decline and inflation recedes.  
The  current  account  deficit  will  narrow  to  below  9%  of  GDP,  as  a  result  of  the 
recovery of exports and receipts from tourism and the continuing fall of consumer 
good imports.  
    The old is on its way out, but the new is not yet here  
Today  we  find  ourselves  at  a  critical  crossroads.  On  the  one  hand,  the  old  growth  model, 
dominant for so long, is collapsing. On the other hand, the new practices, new institutions 
and  new  mentalities  that  will  revitalise  the  economy  have  not  begun  to  emerge.  The  key 
desideratum would be a rapid transition from an unsustainable growth model to a new one 
capable of instilling confidence in a positive outlook for the economy, mobilising productive 
forces, restoring market trust and improving the overall climate.  
This is a crisis of the growth model, not of the Memorandum of Understanding  
The growth model that has exhausted its limits relied on domestic consumption, both public 
and private, and was fuelled by borrowing. The business sector did not manage to sufficiently 
tap  into  the  opportunities  opened  up  by  Greece’s  participation  in  the  euro  area,  while  the 
boost  in  households’  expectations  generated  by  this  participation  and  the  swelling  of  the 
public sector encouraged consumerism. This led to negative net national saving from 2002 to 
the  present  and  to  a  continuous  transfer  of  resources  from  the  business  sector  to  the 
oversized,  low-productivity  public  sector.  This  model  favoured  present  consumption  at  the 
expense of the future and was underpinned by the illusion that growth could be driven by the 
public  sector  ad  infinitum.  The  rise  in  consumption,  characterised  by  a  high  propensity  to 
consume 
“shallow”  domestic 
entrepreneurship, focused on the distribution sector and the final consumer. However, as the 
factors  that  previously  underpinned  consumption  have  now  been  eliminated,  this  type  of 
business  activity  has  inevitably  suffered  a  serious  blow.  At  the  same  time,  the  necessary 
conditions to foster a new type of entrepreneurship have not yet been created. The current 
crisis of the economy is the crisis of a growth model that could no longer be sustained. The 
cost that society is summoned to pay today is also due to the delay in moving to the new 
model.  
imported  goods,  encouraged  and 
supported  a 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Focusing on the future: A new growth model  
The  new  growth  model  that  Greece  needs  implies  a  shift  of  focus  from  consumption  to 
saving,  investment  and  exports,  from  statism  and  the  perpetuation  of  privileges  to 
competition and business initiative. In other words, it means a new model of consumption, 
entrepreneurship and public administration; it means increasing the share of investment and 
exports in GDP; reducing the share of private and public consumption; giving a substantial 
boost to saving; shifting entrepreneurial initiative to the competitive sector of production and 
orienting it towards the international markets; ensuring that public administration functions in 
a way that does not discourage investment and does not tolerate tax evasion.  
A dynamic re-launch of our efforts is needed in order to give new impetus to reform 
policies  
Today, the Greek economy is at a watershed. Progress with adjustment has been made but 
is  still  slow  if  debt  dynamics  are  taken  into  account.  What  is  now  needed  is  a  strong  
re-launch of our efforts, to make up for the delays and give fresh impetus to reform policies. 
The key prerequisites for this to happen are:  
 
To  demonstrate  in  practice  that  the  government  is  firmly  committed  to  moving 
forward, without ambivalence and without hesitation, on the difficult path that it has 
mapped out.  
To inform the public regularly about where the economy stands, which policy goals 
are  being  pursued,  what  difficulties  and  risks  are  present,  how  much  ground  still 
needs to be covered, what the ultimate goal is and what the consequences of failure 
would be.  
To highlight clearly the  benefits of the reforms, which are  not only necessary, but 
also morally right, abolishing privileges and aiming at equal and better opportunities 
for all.  
Τo  reach  a minimum  of  consensus  among  the  political  and  social  forces  so  as  to 
ensure continued adjustment, the duration of which will extend well beyond any one 
government’s term.  
   Priorities of economic policy  
Stabilisation through measures for structural adjustment  
a) 
There is absolutely no doubt that speeding up the recovery and economic growth will be key 
to success in the years ahead. However, there will not be any recovery, if we do not address 
the fundamental causes that led us into the crisis: the huge swelling of public deficits and 
debts and the serious erosion of the country’s competitive position. Therefore the first step 
towards economic growth is to stabilise the economy. As international experience has also 
shown, large public deficits and debts cannot foster growth; on the contrary, they undermine 
it.  
Speeding-up reforms in the public sector  
The stabilisation process has entered its second and most difficult phase. Following across-
the-board wage cuts and tax increases, it must now focus with determination on structural 
reforms  in  the  public  sector,  so  as  to  permanently  reduce  spending  which  stems  from  its 
inefficient operation.  
There is actually ample room for such changes. At the same time, we must seize two crucial 
opportunities, present today, which could act as a catalyst for re-launching the reform effort.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  First, the Medium-Term Fiscal Strategy Framework provides the chance to follow 
a fiscal policy with clear objectives, well-specified measures and a definite timetable, 
rather than piecemeal interventions and stop-gap measures. If the objectives of this 
Framework are to be achieved, the factors generating the deficit must be eliminated 
– most importantly, spending must be cut.  
Second,  the  Privatisation  and  Public  Property  Development  Programme,  if 
boldly  and  rapidly  implemented,  could  contribute  to  a  substantial  reduction  of  the 
debt and encourage the inflow of foreign direct investment.  
Mitigating the impact of the recession and speeding up recovery  
b) 
Economic policy, without concessions in terms of fiscal adjustment, must aim simultaneously 
to mitigate the effects of the recession and to bring GDP growth back to positive territory as 
soon as possible.  
 
To start with, any further increase in the tax burden of those businesses, workers 
and  pensioners  who  pay  their  taxes  regularly  must  be  avoided;  instead,  tangible 
progress  must  be  made  in  the  fight  against  tax  and  social-security  contribution 
evasion.  This  is  also  crucial  for  bolstering  a  sense  of  equity  and  increasing 
consensus for the adjustment programme.  
At the same time, all possibilities must be exhausted to:  
– 
cut  spending  by  eliminating  the  squandering  of  public  funds  and  merging  or 
eliminating public-sector entities that are unproductive;  
re-allocate total expenditure towards growth-enhancing and socially beneficial 
uses and increase the efficiency of public spending.  
 These actions will make it possible to support the more vulnerable groups of society, 
to  facilitate  labour  mobility  across  sectors  and  jobs  and  to  increase  the  share  of 
public funds allocated to investment.  
The EU funds that are at the country’s disposal need to be absorbed at a quicker 
pace, by using the instruments introduced by the new development law and by fully 
activating  the  National  Hellenic  Fund  for  Entrepreneurship  and  Development 
(ETEAN).  
Finally,  the  implementation  of  structural  reforms  that  entail  zero  or  low  budgetary 
costs  but  which  can  yield  quick  results  must  begin  immediately;  such  reforms 
include those that reduce red-tape, tackle corruption and remove product and labour 
market rigidities.  
   Attracting foreign investment  
c) 
Given  that  domestic  resources  available  for  financing  growth  are  currently  very  limited, 
imported saving, in the form of foreign direct investment, must be encouraged. It is true that 
conditions  are  unfavourable,  as  the  climate  is  negative  and  large  uncertainties  prevail. 
However, some positive side effects can be expected from the Privatisation Programme and, 
of course, from all the urgently-needed measures to upgrade the business environment.  
Improving competitiveness by speeding-up reforms  
d) 
Growth  hinges  upon  a  rapid  improvement  in  competitiveness.  This  means  fostering  new 
competitive  enterprises  that  are  oriented  towards  the  international  markets.  Growth  also 
hinges upon a radical change in the business climate, to be brought about by creating an 
environment friendly to initiatives in the areas of production and investment. A much faster 
pace is now needed for structural change in markets and especially in the public sector – i.e. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
for reforms  that, apart from recouping the losses in international cost competitiveness, will 
improve structural competitiveness as well.  
The main lines of reform – several of which are already in progress – should include:  
 
 
 
Bolstering competition in markets for goods and services.  
Enhancing flexibility and mobility in the labour market.  
Improving 
investment and enhancing the export orientation of the economy.  
Increasing  the  effectiveness  of  education  at  all  levels  and  encouraging  innovation 
and R&D.  
Changing the present patterns of energy production and consumption.  
the  absorption  of  Community 
funds,  encouraging  and 
facilitating 
  Tapping into the growth potential  
e) 
The main sources of growth are:  
 
 
   Large investments in the energy sector;  
Upgrading  tourism,  by  attracting  higher-income  visitors,  encouraging  well-off 
pensioners and active professionals from other countries to take up permanent or 
seasonal residence in Greece, promoting convention tourism, facilitating cruises and 
attracting foreign visitors to Greece’s mainland and mountain areas.  
The further development of the merchant shipping industry.  
The  expansion  of  those  manufacturing  industries  that  have  shown  noteworthy 
export  dynamism,  as  well  the  performance  of  many  dynamic  businesses  in  all 
sectors.  
Taking full advantage of agricultural production, with the processing of farming 
and livestock products.  
Turning Greece into a major hub for the transit of goods through, for example, 
the  country’s  ports,  as  well  as  the  provision  of  high  quality  healthcare  and 
education services to consumers from the wider Balkan and Eastern Mediterranean 
region. The development of these service activities could avert an exodus of trained 
scientists and at the same time encourage Greek scientists working abroad to return 
home.  
 The banking system up against serious challenges  
Liquidity support through the government guarantee scheme remains necessary  
It is a well-known fact that Greek banks did not cause the crisis, contrary to what happened 
in other countries, but suffered the consequences of the fiscal derailment. The downgrading 
of  banks’  credit  ratings,  consequent  on  the  downgrading  of  the  country,  meant  that  banks 
were  shut  out  from  the  markets,  while  they  also  lost  a  significant  proportion  of  deposits. 
Against this background and in order to meet their liquidity needs, banks had recourse to the 
liquidity  support  measures  adopted  by  the  Greek  government  including  a  State  guarantee 
scheme. Such measures had been adopted by all EU countries in 2008 at the height of the 
global financial crisis.  
It should be recalled that under this scheme the State, for a fee, guarantees debt securities 
issued  by  banks;  it  does  not  provide  banks  with  cash.  These  guarantees  enable  banks  to 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
obtain liquidity from the Eurosystem by providing them with eligible collateral. It should also 
be noted that, because of the haircuts applied, the liquidity that credit institutions can obtain 
using government-guaranteed securities as collateral falls significantly short of the nominal 
value of such collateral.  
The  ability  of  banks  to  raise  liquidity  from  the  Eurosystem  by  making  use  of  government 
guarantees  has  averted  a  credit  crunch.  Although  nominal  GDP  fell  by  2.1%  in  2010,  the 
outstanding  amount  of  bank  credit  to  the  private  sector  in  December  2010  remained 
unchanged  year-on-year.  Given  the  financial  environment,  without  the  extraordinary 
provision of liquidity by the Eurosystem the banks would have been forced to expedite the 
collection of their claims, cut back on loan rescheduling and reject applications for new loans 
even from creditworthy customers.  
However, the extraordinary liquidity support measures taken by the ECB and the government 
are temporary in nature. They aim to give banks time to adjust their business model to the 
new circumstances. This adjustment must be performed in an orderly manner, so as not to 
further aggravate the current economic downturn nor dampen the recovery, once it begins. In 
other  words,  banks  must,  as  soon  as  possible,  be  in  a  position  to  intermediate  between 
savers and investors relying on their own resources, rather than on the extraordinary support 
provided by the ECB or the State.  
The new conditions make it imperative for the banking sector to change its business 
model  
The  banking  sector,  just  like  the  economy  as  a  whole,  has  found  itself  up  against 
unprecedented challenges and has had to deal with a number of factors that have affected 
its performance and generated conditions of uncertainty.  
Today’s reality is a given and, with regard to the future, the message is clear as to the basic 
parameters of the economic environment and the regulatory framework. Banks will therefore 
have 
forces. 
Reorganisation and alliances are most successful when they are carried out with foresight 
and are the outcome of informed decisions and friendly negotiation.  
The  reorganisation  of  the  banking  sector  will  considerably  enhance  its  contribution  to  the 
growth process, once the economy begins to recover. It will also support financial stability, on 
condition of course that the primary factor for stability is in place, i.e. that the confidence of 
economic agents, markets and the international community is restored and consolidated. No 
reorganisation  of  the  financial  system  can  substitute  for  the  need  to  pursue  fiscal 
consolidation and speed up structural reforms in the public sector and the economy at large.  
their  business  models  accordingly,  by  mustering  all 
to  adjust 
their 
 Creative adjustment to the European and international environment  
As  Greeks,  we  often  interpret  prevailing  international  conditions  subjectively,  with  a 
perspective that places Greece at the centre of things.  
However, if we accept the fact that the international environment shapes an objective reality 
that cannot be overturned just because that is  our wish,  we will realise that our prospects 
ultimately depend on the consistency with which we adjust to this reality. This is especially 
true  of  our  relations  with  the  European  Union  and  the  euro  area,  which  are  governed  by 
explicit  rules  that  have  been  formulated  with  our  participation.  In  fact,  these  rules  are 
currently being modified as the EU and the euro area work towards new terms of economic 
governance  that  would  avert  a  recurrence  of  crises  and  develop  new  mechanisms  for 
intervention.  The  European  Stability  Mechanism  and  the  “Euro  Plus  Pact”,  the  main 
principles of which were recently decided, will create a new framework requiring all Member 
States to make long-term commitments, in particular in the areas of fiscal discipline and the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
focus of their economic policies on improving competitiveness – i.e. precisely the two major 
challenges that Greece has to face one way or another.  
Therefore, the developments under way in the EU and the euro area support and reinforce 
the conclusion that we need to intensify our efforts for fiscal consolidation and a substantial 
improvement in competitiveness.  
Adhering to these guidelines would also be the best answer to the often-repeated scenaria 
surrounding debt restructuring. Since last October the Bank of Greece has clearly explained 
that such an option is neither necessary nor desirable. It is not necessary, because we can 
achieve our goals if we properly implement the policies outlined above. Nor is it desirable, 
because  it  would  have  disastrous  consequences  for  the  access  of  the  government  and  of 
Greek enterprises to international financial markets, as well as very negative effects on the 
assets of pension funds, banks and individuals holding Greek government securities.  
 Today,  we  are  at  the  start  of  a  long  course  of  reconstruction  of  the  economy,  a  path  with 
many obstacles and risks, but also opportunities that we need to exploit. The mobilisation of 
all of the country’s political and social forces is imperative for this effort to succeed. The final 
outcome will depend on:  
 
 
 
our collective will and determination;  
our foresight and long-term perspective;  
the ability to work out a well-coordinated and coherent plan of the necessary actions 
and to implement it quickly and efficiently.  
All  of  the  above  presuppose  strict  adherence  to  the  final  goal:  to  transform  Greece 
into a modern European country with economic prosperity and social cohesion.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
