Christian Noyer: Regulation in the face of global imbalances 
Opening speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France and Chairman of the 
Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  the  VIth  International 
Symposium of the Banque de France on “Which regulation for global imbalances?”, Paris, 
4 March 2011. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen 
I  am  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  here  in  Paris  to  the  International  Symposium  of  the 
Banque  de  France.  As  you  may  know,  this  symposium  is  a  recurrent  event  –  this  is  the 
6th edition – but this year it has taken a particular significance as it coincides with the French 
Presidency of the G-20.  
This presidency occurs at a key moment of the reform of governance and regulation of the 
global economy. Hence, today’s topic “Regulation in the face of global imbalances” was not 
chosen  at  random.  However,  beyond  this  proximity  with  the  work  of  the  G-20,  I  hope  this 
symposium will also provide an excellent opportunity for extending discussions beyond this 
institutional forum, for strengthening relations between central bankers (there are more than 
100  in  this  room),  government  officials,  business  managers  and  leading  academics  from 
around  the  globe  who  honour  us  with  their  presence  today  and  to  whom  I  would  like  to 
extend my warmest thanks. 
The world economy has experienced major developments over the last two decades. These 
changes have brought progress – strong growth, low inflation, less poverty – but they have 
also  led  to  crises.  Indeed,  the  acceleration  in  globalisation  in  the  1990s  and  2000s  was 
accompanied by steady growth in world imbalances. Even though the role played by these 
imbalances in the triggering of the last crisis is still a matter of debate, their coincidence with 
the rise in financial imbalances in several economies, such as the credit and securitisation 
boom, the sharp increase in asset prices, government deficits, etc., is striking. In short, the 
issue of global imbalances and that of regulation in a global economy are undeniably closely 
linked. 
Two major topics appear particularly relevant to our discussions today.  
The  first  focuses  on  the  developments  in  the  international  monetary  and  financial  system. 
The  financing  of  current  account  imbalances  has  been  facilitated  by  the  liberalisation  of 
capital movements that occurred in a large number of countries in the 1990s; international 
capital flows thus increased seven-fold between 1990 and 2010. These flows clearly had a 
positive effect, in particular for emerging countries which require capital to develop. However, 
the  rapid  increase  in  the  volume  of  financial  flows  was  accompanied  by  a  rise  in  their 
volatility,  which  represents  a  new  source  of  risk.  The  sudden  withdrawals  of  international 
capital  have  played  a  major  role  in  triggering  and  spreading  financial  crises  over  the  past 
fifteen years. This is the main concern of the French Presidency of the G-20 and it appears 
crucial  to  me  to  examine  it,  not  only  from  the  narrow  perspective  of  the  management  of 
capital flows, but also from the wider perspective of global liquidity. 
Indeed,  the  increase  in  global  imbalances  is  not  confined  to  current  account  positions.  In 
addition to the growth in net international capital flows, the very sharp rise in gross positions 
in  international  portfolios,  not  exclusively  but  largely  linked  to  the  accumulation  of  foreign 
exchange  reserves  by  the  major  emerging  economies,  is  one  of  the  most  significant 
developments  of  the  past  few  years.  The  striking  synchronisation  of  the  recent  economic 
crisis across the major economies is certainly in large part a result of this. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
In any case, the issue of the appropriate level for the supply of safe and liquid international 
assets and the international monetary and financial system best able to provide this has yet 
to be resolved. As you know, this issue is at the heart of France’s presidency of the G-20. 
The second major topic is international economic and financial coordination and I will briefly 
touch on its two main components. 
The first component concerns the Framework for Strong, Sustainable and Balanced Growth. 
This initiative has been given wide media coverage since its adoption at the G-20 summit in 
Pittsburgh in September 2009. However, I am inclined to think that it has sometimes been 
distorted and that its scope has been underestimated. This initiative is indeed a promising 
and  ambitious  one:  promising  as  it  could  be  the  impetus  for  genuinely  enhancing 
international  economic  cooperation  through  the  combination  of  economic  policies  taking 
greater account of externalities and structural reforms, in order to achieve the jointly defined 
global objectives. Ambitious, of course, as it involves countries making explicit commitments 
on measures to be taken and discussing the outcomes with their peers, as part of what is 
known  in  G-20  jargon  as  the  Mutual  Assessment  Process  (MAP).  Under  the  Korean 
presidency, whose efficacy and vision I would like to praise, an initial exercise resulted, in 
late  2010  in  Seoul,  in  the  adoption  of  a  detailed  country-by-country  action  plan  and  the 
commitment  to  tackle  more  specifically  the  global  imbalances  identified  by  the  indicative 
guidelines.  Far  from  me  the  idea  of  underplaying  the  difficulty  of  the  exercise  but  the 
progress made so far is not inconsiderable and in this regard I am happy that the Ministers 
and Governors meeting in February in Paris resulted in agreement on a set of benchmark 
indicators. 
The second component concerns financial regulation. It is very clear that, in this area, we are 
past  the  stage  of  proposals  and  are  now  mainly  concerned  with  consolidating  the 
agreements  approved  by  the  Heads  of  State  and  Government  in  Seoul,  especially  the 
Basel III framework. The agreement that we achieved in 2010 made it possible to reconcile 
the need for far-reaching reforms with the need to reduce uncertainty relating to regulatory 
changes.  Implementing  these  reforms  in  a  harmonised  framework  capable  of  ensuring  a 
genuine  level  playing  field  is  now  the  crucial  challenge,  both  from  the  point  of  view  of  our 
collective credibility and the overall effectiveness of the new mechanism. This very significant 
advance in terms of financial regulation should not obscure the progress that still needs to be 
made  regarding  the  work  underway,  especially  in  the  areas  of  market  infrastructures 
(including  for  commodity  markets),  tighter  regulation  of  activities  included  under  the 
designation the “shadow banking system” and the behaviour of market players themselves. 
Once again, I underscore our collective responsibility, which is to ensure that all of the G-20 
countries  and,  more  widely,  the  international  community  as  a  whole  apply  international 
standards. 
Today’s discussions will be divided into four sessions. The first, chaired by Axel Weber, will 
examine  the  notion  of  disequilibrium  after  the  crisis  and  will  allow  us  to  discuss  the 
unpredictable  evolution  of  global  imbalances  in  the  medium  term,  in  the  light  of  different 
assumptions concerning economic growth and savings trends in the different zones. 
Mario Draghi has agreed to chair the second session that will focus on questions related to 
supervision and coordination. As I have already said, the current context is characterised by 
the  reform  of  global  governance  and  regulation,  a  process  given  impetus  by  the  G-20. 
Therefore, at this stage, it seems appropriate to explore topics such as the evolution of the 
role  of  international  financial  institutions  and  the  accomplishments  and  future  progress  in 
harmonising global financial regulations. 
The third session, chaired by Michel Camdessus, should help us to gain further insight on 
what could, or should, be the role of central banks in a post-crisis environment. For example, 
should central banks more explicitly incorporate considerations of financial stability into their 
policies than they do today? If so, how? To what extent would the extension of their roles be 
compatible with their independence or even with their mandates to ensure price stability?  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The reform of the international monetary system will be the central theme of the last session 
that will take the form of a roundtable chaired by Martin Wolf.  
I am particularly grateful to Bill White for accepting the difficult task of drawing a summary of 
our symposium which is bound to be both dense and captivating. I would like to hand the 
floor to Axel Weber to chair the first session, and, once again, I would like to thank all the 
eminent personalities who have agreed to participate in this symposium.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
