Axel A Weber: The euro – opportunities and challenges 
Speech by Professor Axel A Weber, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the Ragnar 
Nurkse-Lecture, Tallinn, 7 February 2011. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
First,  I  would  like  to  thank  you  for  giving  me  the  opportunity  to  speak  here  today.  It  is  a 
pleasure  and  a  privilege  to  visit  Estonia,  which  not  only  provides  one  of  the  European 
Capitals  of  Culture  in  2011  but  is  also  the  newest  member  of  the  euro  area.  I  am  also 
honoured to deliver this lecture dedicated to Ragnar Nurkse. Apart from being an outstanding 
economist of international renown, he was undoubtedly a true citizen of Europe. Not only is 
he said to have spoken seven European languages, including Estonian, Swedish, German, 
English  and  French,  he  also  lived  and  worked  in  a  number  of  European  countries  before 
eventually emigrating to the United States. 
With  that  in  mind,  the  obvious  topic  for  today’s  lecture  is  Europe  and  its  single  currency. 
There  is  little  doubt  that  Estonia  has  joined  the  euro  area  in  turbulent  times.  Not  only  is 
Estonia, as a new member of the club, facing a number of challenges; the euro area itself 
has  undergone  considerable  stress  over  the  past  months  and  requires  an  overhaul  of  its 
foundations.  Nevertheless,  before  reflecting  on  the  existing  challenges,  we  should  briefly 
take stock of the benefits that arise from our single European currency. 
The benefits of a single currency and their preconditions 
2. 
Currencies have always been an important symbol of national identity – the Estonian people 
know this all too well. Consequently, the euro has been a key element of European political 
integration.  Moreover,  a  single  currency  also  offers  plain  economic  benefits.  The  most 
obvious of these is the absence of exchange rate movements and, hence, of exchange rate 
risk. This facilitates international trade and investment, which is especially important for small 
open  economies.  Looking  beyond  exchange  rate  movements,  the  existence  of  a  single 
medium  of  payment  also  enhances  transparency  regarding  price  differentials  across 
countries. The result is increased competition, a more efficient allocation of resources and, 
eventually, stronger economic growth. At the same time, a single currency also facilitates the 
integration of financial markets, again promoting an efficient allocation of resources. 
However, it has been clear from the beginning that a single currency will not function on its 
own. With the introduction of the euro, a gap opened up between monetary policy, which is 
conducted for the euro area as a whole, and other areas of economic policy, which lie in the 
hands of what are now 17 national governments. Thus, to be efficient in maintaining price 
stability,  the  single  monetary  policy  requires  that  member  states  be  able  cope  with 
asymmetric  shocks  to  which  a  common  monetary  policy  cannot  respond.  This  has  been 
acknowledged right from the outset, and a number of criteria were introduced that countries 
had  to  meet  prior  to  entering  the  euro  area.  These  convergence  criteria  comprise  low 
inflation, adequately moderate interest rates, stable exchange rates and sound fiscal policies. 
As the newest member of the euro area, Estonia was no exception to this requirement and 
succeeded in fulfilling all the necessary conditions – a remarkable achievement in the face of 
a  global  financial  crisis  and  the  severe  contraction  in  output  that  Estonia  experienced  in 
2009. Public deficits and debt levels were, in fact, outstandingly low, particularly in the light of 
developments in most other EU member countries. 
In  the  1990s,  the  need  to  meet  the  convergence  criteria  also  served  as  a  catalyst  for 
economic policy reform in what were later to become the member states. However, as the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
years following the launch of monetary union have taught us, becoming fit to join a monetary 
union is not a one-off task that ends after becoming a member of the club. Rather, fulfilling 
the economic requirements that go along with monetary union also has to continue guiding 
economic  policy  afterwards  in  order  to  guarantee  the  functioning  of  the  monetary  union. 
Unfortunately, this has not always been the case in the first decade of EMU, a fact that has 
been ruthlessly revealed by the financial crisis. The deficiencies include misguided policies in 
a number of member states, as well as structural shortcomings in the institutional framework 
of monetary union. 
The euro and the financial crisis – discovering deficiencies 
3. 
The  visible  outcome  of  such  misguided  policies  and  institutional  deficiencies  were  large 
government  deficits  in  some  member  states  as  well  as  persistent  current  account 
divergencies  between  member  states.  While  some  countries,  such  as  Germany  or  the 
Netherlands, had been recording persistent current account surpluses, other countries such 
as Greece, Ireland, Spain or Portugal, had been posting persistent deficits. In principle, this 
should not have been a cause for concern. It makes economic sense that capital flows from 
developed countries to countries that are still catching-up and thus offer ample investment 
opportunities. 
The problem with this development was that the deficit countries had not always used the 
inflowing capital in an efficient way. Instead of financing investments to increase productivity 
and to raise potential output, government and private consumption were propped up while, in 
some instances, capital imports helped to fuel bubbles on domestic real estate markets. The 
surge  in  demand,  combined  with  inflexible  labour  and  product  markets,  reduced  the  price 
competitiveness  of  the  countries  in  question.  As  a  result,  current  account  deficits  became 
entrenched or widened even more. Although these macroeconomic imbalances are domestic 
in  origin,  the  associated  problems  are  not  confined  to  the  national  level.  Given  spillover 
effects in the closely integrated euro-area financial markets, macroeconomic imbalances in 
some  member  states  can  easily  turn  into  a  problem  for  the  rest  of  the  monetary  union, 
especially if they are accompanied by a poor state of public finances. 
Sustainable public finances are indeed essential for the functioning of a monetary union, both 
to be able to react to asymmetric shocks and to safeguard the independence of monetary 
policy. The main challenge in the pursuit of sound fiscal policy is that national governments 
have  an  incentive  to  enjoy  the  benefits  of  public  debt,  while  its  burden  is  borne  by  all 
members of the monetary union. A public deficit in one country boosts demand there but, at 
the  same  time,  puts  pressure  on  the  interest  rates  in  the  whole  monetary  union,  reducing 
economic growth in all member states. In extreme cases, such a free-rider policy not only 
puts  pressure  on  the  interest  rates  but  might  also  affect  the  credibility  and  stability  of  the 
monetary union as a whole – as has been demonstrated by the debt crisis. 
To ensure that sustainable public finances are regarded not just as an entry requirement for 
monetary union but also as an ongoing task, a strong institutional framework is needed; a set 
of rules that aligns the interests of national fiscal policymakers with the rest of the monetary 
union and bridges the gap between national fiscal policies and a union-wide monetary policy. 
This led to the creation of the Stability and Growth Pact (SGP). In essence, the SGP requires 
governments to keep their budget deficits within clearly defined limits. However, since its very 
inception,  the  SGP  has  been  subject  to  political  tactics  which  have  greatly  reduced  its 
effectiveness. This problem reached its peak in 2005 when Germany and France insisted on 
a reform of the SGP that, all in all, softened the provisions of the Pact. 
As  a  result,  many  governments  did  not  seize  the  opportunity  to  consolidate  their  budgets 
during  the  ensuing  economic  upswing.  Thus,  when  the  financial  crisis  hit,  a  number  of 
countries  already  had  weak  public  finances.  The  subsequent  expenditures  to  support  the 
financial system and the economy did not improve the situation. And when, in the spring of 
2010,  sovereign  risk  came  to  the  fore,  it  turned  into  a  major  downside  risk  for  recovery  in 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Europe. Within a short period of time, fiscal problems in Greece and other member states 
turned into an imminent danger to the stability of the financial system and the monetary union 
as a whole. Thus, European institutions decided to implement far-reaching fiscal measures to 
support the countries in question. These measures were justifiable given the risks associated 
with  inaction.  Nevertheless,  they  still  placed  a  serious  strain  on  the  foundations  of  the 
monetary  union.  Consequently,  we  now  have  to  strengthen  these  foundations  again  and 
create an institutional framework that supports a stable monetary union. 
The challenge of creating an adequate institutional framework 
4. 
As  I  have  just  pointed  out,  the  crisis  revealed  two  basic  problems  within  the  European 
Monetary  Union:  macroeconomic  imbalances  and  excessive  public  deficits.  Both  problems 
have their roots within the individual member states. Consequently, it is first and foremost the 
responsibility  of  national  governments  to  act  by  consolidating  their  budgets  swiftly  and 
ambitiously and by implementing comprehensive structural reforms. 
Nevertheless, reforms also have to be undertaken at the level of the monetary union. As a 
first  step,  the  institutional  framework  has  to  be  enhanced  to  prevent  the  occurrence  of 
harmful  macroeconomic  imbalances  or  excessive  public  deficits.  This  requires  a  twofold 
approach:  first,  strengthening  the  SGP  to  guarantee  sustainable  public  finances,  and, 
second, implementing macroeconomic surveillance to detect structural developments within 
member states that might be harmful for the rest of the monetary union. Furthermore, as it 
will never be possible to prevent crises entirely, a third element should be a mechanism to 
solve  potential  crises  in  an  orderly  fashion  –  but  without  thwarting  the  stability-enhancing 
incentives set by the SGP and the surveillance mechanism. Let us now take a quick look at 
how far we have come in turning this approach into reality. 
Given  its  track  record  before  the  crisis,  it  can  no  longer  be  denied  that  there  is  an  urgent 
need  to  strengthen  the  SGP:  more  emphasis  should  be  given  to  the  debt  criterion,  while 
earlier  and  more  consistent  sanctions  have  to  be  placed  on  any  breach  of  the  rules.  The 
reform measures that have been agreed so far do indeed entail a number of improvements. 
However, the measures lack the ambition to fully redress past failings and to bring about a 
fundamental improvement. The major shortcoming of the envisaged reform is that relevant 
decisions on sanctions are still to be taken at a political level by the European Council. This 
leaves too much room for discretion in interpreting and applying the rules of the SGP. 
With  regard  to  macroeconomic  imbalances,  I  have  mentioned  the  need  to  enhance 
macroeconomic surveillance in the euro area. Nevertheless, to make one thing clear from the 
outset:  the  objective  of  such  an  endeavour  should  not  be  to  coordinate  or  fine-tune 
macroeconomic  policies  –  member  states  have  to  remain  responsible  for  their  national 
economic  policies.  Rather,  the  objective  should  be  to  detect  and  address  macroeconomic 
developments  that  might  have  serious  negative  spillovers  on  other  member  states  or  the 
euro area as a whole. Against this backdrop, the actual proposals that have been put forward 
are a step in the right direction. However, detecting such possibly harmful macroeconomic 
developments  ex  ante  is  notoriously  difficult  and  some  details  still  have  to  be  discussed. 
Thus,  even  though  enhanced  macroeconomic  surveillance  is  indispensable,  its  actual 
implementation  might  prove  difficult and  could  easily  lend  itself  to  discussions  that distract 
from  the  real  challenges  –  past  demands  on  Germany  to  implement  a  more  expansionary 
wage policy and to set more fiscal stimuli being a case in point. 
Having  an eye  on  macroeconomic developments  and  placing  limits  on  budget  deficits and 
public debt by means of an enhanced SGP will certainly help to make the euro area more 
stable. Nevertheless, the occurrence of crises can never be ruled out. For that reason, it is 
necessary to have a crisis-resolution mechanism in place. As the current European Financial 
Stabilisation  Facility  (ESFS)  and  the  European  Financial  Stabilisation  Mechanism  (EFSM) 
will expire in 2013, the European Council has decided on the main features of a European 
Stability Mechanism (ESM), which will then replace the EFSF and the EFSM. The “no bail 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
out”  clause  has  been  affirmed  as  an  essential  element  of  the  ESM:  no  member  state  is 
responsible for the debt of other member states. This certainly helps to maintain incentives 
for  sound  fiscal  policy.  Incentives  are  further  strengthened  by  provisions  that  allow  for  a 
restructuring of private sector debt in case of insolvency. Faced with the prospect of losing 
money, financial markets should penalise unsound fiscal policies at an early stage and thus 
prevent the build-up of excessive deficits. In the further negotiations, it will be important that 
these basic features of the ESM are maintained. 
5. 
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen 
The euro is probably the single most important European project from an economic as well 
as a political perspective. And history has shown that the promised benefits were not mere 
theoretical  concepts  but  have  indeed  materialised  over  the  past  12  years.  Altogether,  the 
euro has definitely been a success – and the financial crisis has not proven otherwise. On 
the  contrary:  throughout  the  crisis,  the  euro  had  a  stabilising  effect  and  the  Eurosystem 
demonstrated its ability to conduct an effective crisis management. Nevertheless, it cannot 
be denied that the crisis revealed a number of structural deficiencies which require further 
reflection. 
In my speech, I have outlined the reforms that are necessary to strengthen the institutional 
foundation of the euro area. Nevertheless, it is ultimately in the responsibility of the member 
states  to  act  in  a  way  that  guarantees  the  stability  of  the  monetary  union.  Here,  it  is 
indispensable  that  all  member  states  acknowledge  the  economic  preconditions  that  were 
identified as essential for the functioning of the monetary union and that are embodied in the 
convergence criteria applied to prospective members. Estonia has set an example that it is 
possible to muster the will to fulfil these criteria even in the midst of a global financial crisis. It 
is  all  the  more  the  case  that  it  should  be  possible  to  live  up  to  the  requirements  of  the 
monetary  union  after  having  joined  –  and  that  applies  not  only  to  Estonia,  but  to  all  its 
members. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
