Andrew Sentance: Key issues for UK monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Andrew Sentance, Member of the Monetary Policy Committee of the Bank of 
England, at pro.manchester members’ lunch, Manchester, 26 April 2011. 
 I would like to thank Tomasz Wieladek and Adrian Chiu for research assistance and I am also grateful for helpful 
comments from other colleagues. The views expressed are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the 
Bank of England or other members of the Monetary Policy Committee. 
It is a great pleasure to be giving this speech here in Manchester, ahead of my last meeting 
as a member of the Monetary Policy Committee, and I am very grateful to Pro-Manchester 
for hosting this event. Manchester is one of Britain’s great industrial cities and it also played a 
key role in the development of economic thinking in the 19th Century, as the centre of the 
“Manchester  School”  of  political  and  economic  activists  who  promoted  the  virtues  of  Free 
Trade.  The  process  of  reducing  barriers  to  trade  and  the  development  of  an  open  trading 
system has been a key factor underpinning the unprecedented period of economic growth 
and rising prosperity enjoyed by many economies around the world since the middle of the 
19th  century.  And  over  the  past  two  decades,  the  global  trading  system  has  expanded  to 
include China and India with their vast populations, as well as many other developing and 
emerging market economies. The rapid economic development of these economies as they 
have integrated into the global economic system has created a major engine of growth for 
the world economy. 
However, this period of intense globalisation has not been without its downsides. Over my 
time  on  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  since  October  2006,  we  have  seen  how  a  highly 
integrated  economic  and  financial  system  can  also  generate  instabilities  and  transmit 
economic shocks rapidly around the world. The debates and the decisions of the MPC while I 
have been a member of the Committee have been dominated by the impact on the UK of the 
turbulence created by a global financial crisis, a major world recession and the inflationary 
impact of movements in globally traded energy and commodity prices. 
There was very little inkling of the turmoil to come when I joined the Committee in October 
2006. My time on the MPC started towards the end of its first decade, which was a period of 
relatively stable economic conditions – steady growth and low inflation, with unemployment 
around 5% of the labour force. For me, however, this honeymoon period did not last long. 
Less than a year after I joined the Committee, over the summer of 2007, we saw the first 
tremors of the financial crisis. And by the autumn of 2008 it was clear we were heading into a 
major  world  recession.  In  response  to  these  shock  waves  from  the  global  economic  and 
financial system, the MPC cut the official Bank Rate to 0.5% – the lowest level in over 300 
years of the history of the Bank of England – followed by direct injections of money through 
the programme of Quantitative Easing. 
These  policies,  accompanied  by  similar  measures  around  the  world  and  government 
interventions to stabilise the financial system, succeeded in arresting the sharp downturn in 
demand in late 2008 and early 2009 and a recovery has been underway here in the UK and 
in  other  major  economies  since  the  second  half  of  2009.  The  bounceback  in  the  global 
economy  since  the  middle  of  2009  has  been  particularly  impressive,  supported  by  strong 
growth  in  Asia  and  emerging  markets,  and  stimulatory  economic  policies  across  the  world 
economy. World GDP growth last year was 5% according to the IMF, well above the long-
term average and much stronger than most forecasts were suggesting in early 2009 at the 
trough of the recession, when the IMF itself was forecasting that world growth would be less 
than 2% in 2010.  
Here in the UK, we have also seen the economy begin to recover from recession over the 
last eighteen months or so. As is the case with all economic recoveries, growth has not been 
even  from  quarter  to  quarter  or  across  sectors  of  the  economy.  For  example,  we  saw  a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
strong period of growth in the middle of 2010, followed by softer indicators towards the end of 
last  year,  with  the  bad  weather  making  it  particularly  difficult  to  interpret  the  trend  in 
economic activity over the winter. And it is not surprising to see a softening in indicators of 
consumer spending in the early months of this year in response to the recent rise in VAT and 
other inflationary pressures which have squeezed real incomes.  
Despite these pressures, however, recent business surveys and employment data suggest 
that  the  UK’s  economic  recovery  has  continued  in  the  early  months  of  this  year  after  a 
disappointing  fourth  quarter  affected  by  snow.  The  indicators  from  manufacturing  industry 
continue to show strong growth on the back of buoyant export markets and activity is also 
expanding  in  the  services  sector,  albeit  at  a  relatively  modest  pace.  Meanwhile,  the  latest 
Labour Force Survey estimates show that employment growth is picking up again, driven by 
private sector job creation. Looking back over the past twelve months, nearly 400,000 jobs 
have been created across the economy as a whole – which compares very favourably with 
the rate of job creation in the decade before the recession.1  
Chart 1 
UK employment in recessions and recoveries 
Numbers employed rebased to 100 at cycle peak 
1977 Q4 - 1983 Q4
1988 Q2 - 1994 Q4
2006 Q2 - 2011 Q1 *
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Number of quarters from cyclical peak
102
101
100
99
98
97
96
95
94
93
92
 *: Numbers employed for Q1 2011 proxied by that between Dec 2010 and Feb 2011. 
Source: ONS Labour Force Survey 
As Chart 1 shows, the performance of UK employment has been much stronger through the 
recent  economic  cycle  than  we  saw  in  the  early  1980s  and  early  1990s  –  reflecting  the 
flexibility  of  the  labour  market,  the  resilience  of  businesses  through  the  recession  and  the 
impact  of  the  recovery  in  demand  over  the  past  eighteen  months.  According  to  the  latest 
estimates,  UK  employment  is  about  one  per  cent  down  on  its  peak  level  in  early  2008, 
compared  to  a  reduction  of  5–6%  at  the  equivalent  stage  of  the  previous  two  economic 
cycles. Unemployment appears to have peaked at just below 8% of the labour force whereas 
                                                 
1  Total employment grew by 1.4% in the year to Dec-Feb 2011, according to the latest Labour Force Survey, while private 
sector employment is estimated to have risen by 1.9% over the course of 2010. This compares with average employment 
growth of around 1% per annum between 1997 and 2007. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
it rose to over 10% following the early 1980s and early 1990s recessions. And I am pleased 
to note that despite the recession, the number of people employed in the UK is now back 
above the level recorded when I joined the MPC in October 2006.2 
For  me,  it  is  not  the  growth  or  employment  performance  of  the  UK  which  has  been 
disappointing  over  the  period  of  economic  recovery,  but  the  persistence  of  relatively  high 
inflation.  The  primary  responsibility  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  within  our  current 
policy  framework  is  to  maintain  price  stability  –  defined  in  terms  of  a  2%  target  for  CPI 
inflation. Yet the current level of inflation is 4% and the most likely scenario is that it will rise 
further  as  we  move  through  this  year.  And  this  is  not  just  a  one-off  episode.  Over  the 
55 months I have spent so far as a member of the Monetary Policy Committee, inflation has 
been above target more than five times as often as it has been below – 46 months compared 
to  9  months.  Indeed,  for  the  majority  of  my  time  on  the  Committee  –  in  28  of  the  past 
55 months, CPI inflation has been 3% or more. 
The official commentary of the MPC on this inflation over-run has been to emphasise one-off 
factors pushing up inflation, such as oil and commodity prices and the recent rise in VAT. 
Such factors do clearly contribute to the volatility of inflation, but they do not tell the whole 
story. Oil and commodity prices have similar effects across a wide range of countries which 
have  a  similar  economic  structure  to  the  UK.  But  when  we  compare  our  recent  inflation 
performance to other European economies – whether they are part of the euro area, or have 
independent monetary policies, as Sweden and Switzerland do, the UK’s inflation experience 
looks noticeably higher through the recession and into the recovery. 
Chart 2 
Inflation in selected European economies 
Annual percentage change in consumer prices 
UK
Euro-Area
Sweden
Switzerland
2007-08 average
2009-10 average
Latest
Source: Thompson Datastream 
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
 As Chart 2 shows, our consumer price inflation has been around 1.5–2.5% above our peer 
group of European economies through the recessionary period and this gap appears to be 
persisting into the recovery. The recent VAT increase cannot account for this inflation gap, 
                                                 
2  Total UK employment according to the latest Labour Force Survey was 29.23 millions compared with 29.07 millions in the 
third quarter of 2006. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
which  emerged  before  VAT  was  raised  to  20%  in  the  UK.  Indeed,  the  UK  is  not  alone  in 
raising  indirect  taxes  to  reduce  its  public  sector  deficit  and  VAT  rates  have  been  rising  in 
other European countries as well.3  
In  addition  to  this  contrast  with  other  European  countries,  our  experience  of  rising  UK 
inflation has been at odds with the standard “output gap” model used by many central banks 
and economic forecasters to project inflation. The impact of depressed demand and spare 
capacity created by the recession should mean that inflation falls in a recession and the early 
phase of an economic recovery – and this was indeed the expectation of the MPC and other 
forecasters in 2009 and early 2010. As Chart 3 shows, the forecasts published in the Bank of 
England Inflation Report at that time were for CPI inflation to be around 1% or below in the 
first  quarter  of  this  year,  whereas  in  fact  the  out-turn  is  above  4%.  Short-term  inflation 
forecasts have had to be radically altered as evidence of higher inflation has accumulated. 
And  yet  the  settings  of  UK  monetary  policy  have  not  changed  at  all  in  the  light  of  this 
experience of much stronger inflation. The view that spare capacity and weak demand will 
bear down on inflation in the future still underpins the majority view on the MPC, despite the 
evidence that this is not what has happened over the recession and the early phases of the 
recovery. 
Chart 3  
Changing inflation outlook for 2011 
Bank of England mean forecasts for CPI inflation in Q1 2011 
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
 Feb-09 May-09 Aug-09 Nov-09 Feb-10 May-10 Aug-10 Nov-10 Feb-11 Outturn
Source: ONS and Bank of England 
In my time on the Monetary Policy Committee I have earned myself a reputation as a “hawk” 
or  even  an “uber-hawk”  because  of  my  stance on  interest  rates.  This  reputation  has  been 
reinforced by my consistent minority votes since June last year to raise the UK Bank Rate. 
But I acquired my hawkish mantle much earlier, in my first year on the MPC, when I voted in 
                                                 
3  According to monitoring by TMF, an international tax consultancy, eight other European countries raised VAT rates at the 
beginning  of  2011,  including  Switzerland,  from  7.6%  to  8%;  Portugal,  from  21%  to  23%;  Poland,  from  22%  to  23%  and 
Slovakia,  from  19%  to  20%. Spain and Portugal also  raised  rates  last  year,  along  with Finland.  In  addition,  the  ONS 
estimate that UK CPI rose by 0.76% in January 2011 in response to the rise in VAT, whereas the difference between UK 
and  euro  area  inflation  in  that  month  was  1.7%,  and  the  gap  with  Swedish  and  Swiss  inflation  was  1.9%  and  3.7% 
respectively. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
a minority on a number of occasions to raise interest rates in response to the relatively strong 
growth and rising inflation we were experiencing before the financial crisis. Those minority 
votes,  however,  were  the  expression  of  modest  differences  in  the  timing  of  interest  rate 
changes. The MPC was tightening policy over that period – from the summer of 2006 to the 
summer of 2007 – and I was in support of the broad strategy of gradual tightening that was 
being  pursued.  And  I  continued  to  support  the  broad  strategy  of  the  majority  of  the 
Committee as we relaxed policy – gradually at first, and then more dramatically from October 
2008 onwards. So until I started to express my dissenting votes to raise rates last summer, I 
felt that my views were relatively close to the majority on the Committee and differences of 
view were mainly tactical – relating to the timing of Bank Rate changes. 
I now feel somewhat differently about my position relative to the policy which the majority of 
the MPC has supported over the past year. Even though my position on interest rates has 
gathered support in recent months, it is nearly a year since I started to vote for a gradual rise 
in the UK Bank Rate, in response to a recovering economy and rising inflation. I don’t think 
such a persistent difference of view with the majority on the Committee can be described as 
tactical. It reflects significantly different views on the outlook for inflation and growth in the UK 
and how we should respond as a monetary authority. 
In the debates we have had within the MPC over the past year, there appear to be four key 
areas where these differences of judgement arise, and which – so far at least – have led me 
to a different conclusion on monetary policy from the majority on the Committee. These are 
not  new  issues  in  that  they  have  featured  throughout  my  time  on  the  MPC  and  in  many 
earlier debates on UK monetary policy. But the current economic situation has brought them 
into sharper focus. 
Issue 1: The powerful influence of the global economy 
The first of these key issues I would highlight is the way in which the MPC takes into account 
the powerful influence of global economic trends and their impact on the UK economy. The 
way in which the global economy affects the economic outlook for the UK has been a major 
theme  of  my  speeches  and  interviews  since  my  very  earliest  days  on  the  MPC.  The  UK 
economy is very open to international trade, with imports and exports combined accounting 
for over 60% of GDP. We are also the second most important global economy after the US in 
terms  of  flows  of  international  direct  investment.  The  UK  is  home  to  one  of  the  most 
important global financial centres in the world – London. And we have a very international 
business community, reflecting the UK’s position as a major trading and commercial centre 
dating back to the late 17th century, when the Bank of England was founded, and the leading 
role that Britain played as the pre-eminent industrial power in the 18th and 19th centuries. 
When I joined the Committee in 2006, it struck me that most of the shocks and disturbances 
that the MPC had had to deal with – even in the less turbulent times of its first decade – had 
emanated  from  the  global  economy.  The  MPC  came  into  being  in  1997  just  as  the  Asian 
crisis was unfolding, and the response to that period of global turbulence was a key issue 
dominating the first two years’ of the Committee’s life. Then followed the dotcom boom and 
bust  centred  on  the  US  economy  and  the  global  political  turbulence  following  the 
9/11 attacks,  including  the  effects  of  war  in  Afghanistan  and  Iraq.  Then,  as  the  global 
economy  recovered  in  2003/4,  the  emerging  issue  was  the  upward  pressure  on  oil  and 
commodity prices and these global inflationary forces were a major preoccupation until the 
middle  of  2008  and  have  re-emerged  as  a  serious  concern  as  the  world  economy  has 
recovered from recession. 
The  global  financial  crisis  from  2007  to  2009  was  the  most  extreme  of  these  international 
economic shocks affecting the UK economy. It had an impact on the UK through a number of 
different  channels  –  global  financial  markets,  the  financial  health  of  our  banks  and  other 
financial institutions, world trade and economic activity, and through business and consumer 
confidence. Because the shock was much bigger than earlier shocks the MPC had faced, the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
policy response was more dramatic, featuring deep cuts in interest rates and direct injections 
of money into the economy through Quantitative Easing. In my view, this was entirely right 
and appropriate given the risks of a deepening recession and deflationary pressures.  
 
Chart 4 
Strong emerging market growth to continue 
Annual percentage growth rates of real GDP 
Advanced Economies *
Emerging & Developing 
Economies *
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
*:  2011 and 2012 growth rates are IMF forecasts. 
Source: IMF World Economic Outlook 
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
 However,  the  trends  in  the  global  economy  have  now  turned  around.  As  Chart  4  shows, 
global  growth  in  both  the  advanced  economies  and  emerging  and  developing  market 
economies  –  dominated  by  Asia  –  has  recovered  to  rates  very  similar  to  our  experience 
before the recession. And the upward pressure on global energy and commodity prices we 
saw  before  the  recession  have  resumed.  According  to  the  forecasts  produced  by  the  IMF 
and  other  major  forecasting  organisations,  this  relatively  strong  growth  is  set  to  continue 
through 2011 and 2012 and the Bank of England’s own Inflation Report forecasts also reflect 
the pattern of continuing strong world growth. 
Against this background, it seems to me likely that the upward pressure we are seeing from 
global  inflationary  pressures  is  likely  to  continue  for  some  time.  Rises  in  energy  and 
commodity  prices  are  clearly  part  of  this  pattern,  and  they  may  continue.  An  oil  price  of 
$150 barrel and perhaps higher is quite conceivable.4 And we should not be surprised to see 
these  inflationary  pressures  transferred  to  more  general  increases  in  the  prices  of 
manufactured goods imported into the UK. In China and other Asian economies which are 
key producers of manufactured goods, domestic inflation and the pressure of demand from 
global  markets  is  putting  upward  pressure  on  wages  and  the  cost  of  production.  This 
prolonged period of upward pressure on inflation from the global economy can be seen as 
the mirror image of the “China effect” which helped to hold down inflation in the UK and other 
western economies in the late 1990s and the first half of the 2000s. 
                                                 
4  Between last autumn and this spring, the price of Brent crude rose from around $80/ barrel to over $120/barrel in the space 
of just six months. A continuing rise at just half this pace would take the price to $150/barrel by the autumn of 2011. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
These inflationary pressures from the global economy are closely linked to the strong growth 
in  Asia  and  other  emerging  markets,  which  is  projected  to  continue  for  some  time.  This 
means we cannot simply regard them as one-off shocks which will fade away. And just as 
the MPC has adjusted to changes in global growth and inflation in the past, we need to be 
prepared to do so now – in a gradual and measured way. The argument that these recent 
developments  in  the  global  economy  can  be  ignored  by  monetary  policy  because  they 
emanate overseas is not consistent with the previous responses of the MPC to changes in 
the global growth and inflation climate. That includes the dramatic monetary policy relaxation 
in late 2008 and 2009 in response to the global recession triggered by the financial crisis. 
Issue 2: The role of sterling in UK monetary policy 
One obvious way in which a tightening in UK monetary policy might affect our exposure to 
imported inflationary pressures is through its impact on the value of the pound. And this is 
the second key area where I see my view diverging from the majority of MPC members at 
present. In my view, the external value of the pound is a key channel of UK monetary policy 
and  I  would  have  expected  the  policy  that  I  have  been  advocating  –  of  gradually  raising 
interest  rates  –  to  exert  some  upward  pressure  on  the  value  of  sterling  on  the  foreign 
exchanges.  That,  in  turn,  would  have  provided  some  offset  to  the  global  inflationary 
pressures we have been experiencing over the past year. Instead, as Chart 5 shows, sterling 
has remained relatively weak, both against the full trade-weighted basket of the currencies of 
our trading partners, and particularly against the euro – which is the most important currency 
for UK trade, with the euro area accounting for around half of our total exports and close to 
half of total UK imports. 
Chart 5 
Sterling depreciation since 2007 
Rebased to 100 in January 2005 
110
105
100
95
90
85
80
75
70
 Euro-Sterling exchange rate
Sterling EER *
Average EER *, 97-07
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
*: Effective exchange rate 
Source: Thompson Datastream and Bank for International Settlements 
This weakness of sterling is one of the key reasons why UK inflation has been much higher 
than  our  peer  group  of  European  economies.  As  Chart  6  shows,  the  differential  between 
inflation  in  the  euro  area  and  the  UK  is  closely  associated  with  the  relative  strength  and 
weakness of the sterling/euro exchange rate. And there are good reasons for this. While the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
UK has an independent monetary policy, it is a member of the Single European Market which 
covers  all  European  Union  economies.  The  benchmark  prices  of  traded  goods  in  the 
European market will be set in terms of euros, reflecting the fact that this is the currency in 
which most European producers will have their costs and revenues denominated. So when 
the pound falls against the euro, producers will tend to raise their prices in sterling terms to 
maintain  euro  revenues,  creating  a  positive  UK-euro  area  inflation  differential,  as  we  have 
seen recently. By the same token, the weakness of the euro against the pound in the first 
half of the last decade created a negative UK-euro area differential with UK inflation running 
below continental European countries. 
Euro-Area/UK inflation differential and exchange rate 
Chart 6  
Euro/ sterling
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
-0.1
-0.2
-0.3
Euro-area/UK CPI differential (RHS) *
Euro-Sterling exchange rate (LHS) **
%
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
-0.5
-1.0
-1.5
-2.0
-2.5
-3.0
-0.4
1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2011
*: Euro-area CPI minus UK CPI. A negative differential implies higher UK inflation. 
**: Expressed as the deviation from its average over the same period. 
Source: Thompson Datastream 
 Chart 6 suggests that this inflation differential can be quite persistent as it takes time for prices 
to adjust. That is not surprising, as companies know that foreign exchange markets are volatile 
and so the initial response of prices to an exchange rate change is likely to be relatively small. 
But  the  longer  it  persists,  the  more  likely  it  is  that  sterling  prices  will  adjust  to  euro  prices, 
creating the potential for quite long term impacts on UK inflation relative to the euro area. That 
is what we appear to be seeing at the moment, with the historic relationship shown in Chart 6 
suggesting that UK inflation could run 1 to 2 percentage points above euro area inflation for a 
considerable while unless there is some noticeable appreciation in the value of the pound. 
The  counterargument  to  this  view  is  that  the  recent  substantial  depreciation  of  the  pound 
against the euro and other currencies is needed to support a rebalancing of the UK economy 
and sustain the growth of UK manufacturing and other internationally competitive sectors of 
the  economy.  But  the  extent  of  the  depreciation  of  sterling  since  2007  has  been  much 
greater than we have seen in previous rebalancing episodes, such as the mid-1990s – which 
raises the question whether sterling has fallen much further than needed.5 And it is not clear 
                                                 
5  See Sentance (2011) for a comparison of the recent fall in sterling with previous episodes. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
that the export-based manufacturing activities which could benefit from a large depreciation 
have the capability to respond quickly by scaling up output – particularly when their demand 
is already being boosted by a recovery in global demand. 
Chart 7 
Manufacturing output in UK, Euro-Area and Sweden 
Rebased to 100 in 2007 
105
100
95
90
85
80
75
70
 115
110
105
100
95
90
85
80
75
70
UK
Euro-Area
Sweden
2007
2008
2009
2010
Source: Eurostat and Thompson Datastream 
 Chart 8 
Goods exports from UK, Euro-Area and Sweden 
Rebased to 100 in 2007 
UK
Euro-Area
Sweden
2007
2008
2009
2010
Source: Eurostat and Thompson Datastream 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
The  performance  of  UK  manufacturing  output  and  exports  relative  to  other  regions  and 
countries which have maintained stronger currencies – such as the euro area and Sweden –
supports  this  view.  Chart  7  shows  that  there  is  very  little  difference  in  the  current  level  of 
output relative to its pre-recession level in the UK, Sweden and the euro area – though the 
depreciation  in  the  pound  may  have  helped  shield  manufacturers  from  a  bigger  decline  in 
output  during  the  recession.  Chart  8  shows  broadly  the  same  picture  for  the  exports  of 
goods, which are dominated by trade in manufactured products. 
This  picture  is  perhaps  not  that  surprising  when  we  think  about  the  characteristics  of  the 
modern  UK  manufacturing  base.  Many  UK  manufacturers  are  niche  producers  linked  into 
highly integrated global supply chains. Their products are not highly price sensitive, as they 
reflect  the  innovative  capabilities,  technical  know-how  and  high  level  of  skills  which  are 
needed  to  operate  a  successful  manufacturing  business  in  the  UK  or  any  other  advanced 
economy where labour costs are high by global standards. In the short-term therefore there 
is  limited  scope  for  an  expansion  of  UK  manufacturing  output  without  major  investment  in 
skills  and  capacity  –  which  is  consistent  with  the  picture  shown  by  business  surveys  of 
capacity  utilisation  in  manufacturing  such  as  the  CBI’s  Industrial  Trends  Survey  released 
today.6  
This suggests that an expansion of the UK manufacturing base – along with other tradable 
activities – can only be achieved over a period of time with investment in skills and capacity. 
A  relatively  competitive  exchange  rate  can  help  support  that  process, but  the  value  of  the 
pound also has other important macroeconomic effects which need to be taken into account 
by  the  MPC.  Sterling’s  depreciation  since  2007  has  added  significantly  to  imported 
inflationary pressures in the UK economy and this is particularly unhelpful at present when 
we are seeing a renewed surge of energy and commodity price inflation. And the resulting 
squeeze  on  disposable  incomes  is  clearly  a  factor  holding  back  the  growth  of  consumer 
spending in the short-term, offsetting the boost to growth we might be seeing from improved 
trade performance. 
Throughout  the  postwar  history  of  the  UK  economy,  policy-makers  have  had  to  strike  a 
balance between the impact of the external value of the currency on the competitiveness of 
exports and its potential effect on inflation through import costs and the pricing climate. In my 
view,  we  have  allowed  the  pound  to  depreciate  more  than  is  necessary  or  desirable  to 
support the growth of manufacturing and exports. For example, allowing sterling to rise by 
about  10%  from  its  current  level  against  the  euro  (£1  =  €1.13)  would  still  leave  it  at  a 
relatively  competitive  level  by  historical  standards  (£1  =  €1.25).  The  very  significant  fall  in 
sterling from mid-2007 to early 2009 probably helped to support manufacturing industry and 
exports and hence stabilise the economy in the depths of the recession. But now the world 
economy is recovering, exports and manufacturing activity are being strongly boosted by the 
growth of world trade. Meanwhile, worries about deflation have been replaced by the concern 
that  the  UK  economy  now  faces  a  sustained  period  of  relatively  high  inflation  which  is 
endangering our track record of price stability. In these circumstances, our approach to the 
value of sterling needs to strike a different balance from the view we took in the depths of 
recession.  
Issue 3: The “output gap” and inflation  
Alongside the influence of the international economy and our approach to the value of the 
pound,  the  third  issue  where  I  have  found  myself  at  odds  with  the  majority  view  on  the 
Monetary Policy Committee is on the influence of the “output gap” and spare capacity on the 
rate of inflation here in the UK. As I mentioned earlier on in this speech, the view that spare 
                                                 
6  The latest (April 2011) CBI Industrial Trends Survey shows 55% of companies reporting below capacity working, lower than 
the historic average of 59%. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
capacity and the weakness of demand would push down on prices and costs underpinned 
forecasts that inflation would fall sharply in the wake of the recession. That has not happened 
in a world where other powerful influences on inflation – from the international economy, the 
value of the pound and the general pricing climate have operated in a much more inflationary 
direction.  Yet  the  narrative  adopted  to  support  the  policy  position  of  the  MPC,  in  the 
Committee’s  minutes  and  in  recent  editions  of  the  Inflation  Report,  continues  to  put 
considerable weight on the downward influence of spare capacity and the “output gap”. 
Estimates  of  the  “output  gap”  generally  rely  on  an  assessment  of  the  level  of  economic 
activity, normally measured by GDP, in relation to a longer run trend which aims to capture 
the capacity of the economy. That immediately highlights two major problems of using this 
concept  in  real  time:  GDP  figures  are  frequently  revised;  and  our  view  of  the  economy’s 
capacity and its trend rate of growth has to be estimated as it cannot be measured directly. 
Both  of  these  problems  are  particularly  acute  in  the  aftermath  of  a  recession,  when  early 
estimates  of  GDP  may  be  less  reliable  than  normal  and  when  we  are  more  likely  to  see 
structural changes in the economy which may change our view of the level of capacity in the 
economy and its growth rate.  
On the question of GDP data revisions, I well remember the experience of the early 1990s 
recovery,  when  I  was  working  as  Economics  Director  at  the  CBI.  Initial  estimates  of  GDP 
growth were much weaker than the picture that we now have of that recovery. And we have 
already  started  to  see  something  similar  happening  over  this  recovery  too.  The  first  GDP 
growth  estimate  which  signalled  the  economy  was  coming  out  of  recession  –  for  the  final 
quarter of 2009 – has already been revised up from 0.1% to 0.5%. For this reason, I would 
caution  against  putting  too  much  weight  on  the  initial  estimate  of  GDP  growth  for  the  first 
quarter of this year which we will receive tomorrow. Such early estimates of GDP need to be 
interpreted  alongside  the  other  evidence  we  already  have  about  the  performance  of  the 
economy – including business surveys and employment data. 
Chart 9 
OECD measure of UK output gap 
Output gap as percentage of potential output 
Real-time estimate
Latest estimate
1991
1993
1995
1997
1999
2001
2003
2005
2007
*: Positive numbers indicate above-potential levels of GDP. 
Source: OECD 
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4
-5
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
The  combined  impact  of  data  revisions  and  reassessments  of  the  trend  in  underlying 
capacity  can  be  seen  in  the  way  estimates  of  the  “output  gap”  change  over  time.  Chart  9 
shows how the OECD’s estimate of the UK output gap has changed over the 1990s and in 
the 2000s prior to the recession. In general, the revisions have indicated that there was much 
less  spare  capacity  in  the  economy  than  originally  thought.  The  persistent  “output  gap”  of 
spare capacity which was believed to exist in the mid-1990s has been revised away. And the 
OECD’s current estimate is that the UK economy was operating much further above capacity 
before the recession than thought at the time. 
These difficulties in measuring or estimating the margin of spare capacity can be remedied to 
some extent by looking at direct measures of spare capacity in firms from business surveys 
and indicators of labour market slack from employment data. However, as I have argued in a 
number of recent speeches, these business survey indicators do not support the view that 
firms  currently  have  a  significant  margin  of  spare  capacity  –  particularly  in  manufacturing 
industry.7 And there also appears to be less slack in the labour market than we saw in the 
aftermath of the recessions of the early 1980s and early 1990s, as I noted earlier.  
Changes  in  demand  conditions  clearly  do  affect  inflationary  pressures.  In  a  climate  of 
stronger demand, firms will expect price increases to stick more readily than in weak demand 
conditions when discounting will be much more prevalent. But this pressure of demand is not 
well  captured  by  simple  “output  gap”  type  measures  which  are  too  crude  and  prone  to 
measurement error. Indicators of the growth of demand or changes in employment may be 
more  useful,  as  they  remove  the  need  to  make  judgements  about  the  sustainable  level  of 
economic activity.8 But it is probably unrealistic to try and capture the pressure of demand on 
inflation in any one single measure, particularly in an open economy like the UK where both 
domestic and international factors have a bearing on the rate of increase in costs and prices. 
Chart 10 
Survey measure of businesses’ price expectations 
Balance of respondents expecting higher prices, BCC Survey 
Manufacturing
Services
1997
1999
2001
2003
2005
2007
2009
2011
Source: British Chamber of Commerce 
50
40
30
20
10
0
-10
-20
-30
                                                  
7  See Sentance (2011) for example. 
8  For  example,  Orphanides  and  Williams  (2005)  argue  that  changes  in  the  unemployment  rate  provide  a  better  guide  to 
demand pressure than the level of unemployment because of uncertainty about the equilibrium rate of unemployment. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
What we can observe more clearly is how the pricing intentions of businesses and the rate of 
price increases they are able to secure are responding to changes in the demand climate. 
And this evidence does not seem to support the view that the pressure of demand is bearing 
down  heavily  on  inflation  at  present  in  the  UK,  even  when  allowance  is  made  for  cost 
increases. Chart 10 shows a survey-based measure of pricing intentions from the surveys 
conducted  by  Chambers  of  Commerce  around  the  UK.  This  shows  that  expected  price 
increases are currently running at relatively high levels in both manufacturing and services, 
and that there has been a significant turnaround in the pricing climate since the trough of the 
recession in 2009.  
Another  indicator  which  suggests  that  domestic  demand  pressures  are  exerting  limited 
downward  pressure  on  inflation  at  present  is  the  rate  of  inflation  in  the  services  sector.  In 
contrast  to  goods  –  which  tend  to  be  traded  internationally  –  the  services  sector  is  more 
heavily oriented towards the domestic market. So if the margin of domestic spare capacity or 
weak demand in the UK economy is pushing down on inflation, we should see this reflected 
more clearly in measures of services sector inflation. 
Chart 11 
Resilient services inflation in UK 
Annual percentage change in consumer and producer prices 
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
 Consumer prices
Producer prices
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
Source: ONS 
Instead, as Chart 11 shows, services inflation – whether measured by the prices charged by 
firms or the prices faced by consumers – has been remarkably resilient. After a short dip in 
the aftermath of the recession, price increases – whether measured by consumer prices or 
producer prices have returned relatively quickly to the levels we saw in the mid-2000s. And if 
we  look  at  the  services  component  of  the  consumer  prices  index,  this  3–4%  level  rate  of 
inflation has been a fairly consistent feature in the decade prior to the recession. There is not 
much evidence here of spare capacity and weak demand pushing down on services inflation. 
And whereas relatively high services inflation in the late 1990s and early 2000s was offset by 
flat or falling goods prices, this is no longer the case. So if services prices continue to rise at 
a  3–4%  rate,  and  goods  prices  continue  to  be  pushed  up  by  external  factors  and  the 
weakness of the pound, it is very difficult to see how the MPC will be able to return inflation 
to the 2% target, even over a number of years. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
As a counter to these arguments, it is frequently suggested that a low rate of pay increases 
will help deliver low UK inflation, and pay freezes and low pay settlements negotiated during 
the recession may be a helpful factor in helping businesses to contain cost increases in the 
short-term. But I question how long we can sustain low pay settlements in the medium term 
when headline measures of inflation continue to run at such a high level and companies find 
that  they  can  pass  through  cost  increases  to  the  consumer  fairly  readily.  The  most  recent 
report from Income Data Services indicated that pay settlements had risen from 1.3% to 3% 
over  the  past  year.  And  while  pay  increases  are  being  held  back  in  the  public  sector,  the 
trend in the private sector is in an upward direction. If the private sector continues to grow – 
in line with the latest business survey evidence – and headline inflation remains high, it is 
hard  to  see  why  private  sector  pay  settlements  should  not  return  to  their  pre-recession 
average of around 3.5% and possibly move higher.9 
Issue 4: Inflation expectations and credibility 
That  brings  me  to  my  final  key  issue  –  the  role  of  expectations  and  credibility  in  the 
framework for monetary policy. Chart 12 shows a diagram which I have used in a number of 
speeches now and which I believe sums up well the challenge that the MPC faces in trying to 
stabilise  UK  inflation  in  a  potentially  volatile  global  economy.  The  global  economy  affects 
inflation  in  the  UK  through  the  cost  of  imports,  the  impact  of  world  demand  on  the  UK 
economy and through the way in which international businesses perceive the pricing climate 
changing on global markets – which will have an impact on their pricing strategies here in the 
UK.  All  these  factors  can  affect  UK  inflation  –  but  monetary  policy  has  three  powerful 
counter-influences: the influence of monetary conditions on the exchange rate and the level 
of domestic demand, and the ability of the monetary authorities to anchor price expectations 
through their commitment to the inflation target or some other monetary anchor. 
Chart 12  
Monetary policy, the global economy and inflation 
Cost of imports
Impact of monetary policy
Exchange rate
Global economy
Demand
Domestic demand
UK inflation
Pricing climate
Expectations and 
credibility
The world I have described in this speech is one where UK inflation has been pushed up by 
global  factors  and  the  very  substantial  depreciation  of  sterling.  And  there  is  not  much 
evidence that the margin of spare capacity is creating much countervailing pressure, partly 
because the margin is not very large, but also because the way in which prices respond to 
demand pressures is much more complex than the simple “output gap” model suggests. 
                                                 
9  The Bank of England databank of pay settlements shows that private sector pay settlements averaged 3.5% in the period 
2005 to 2008. 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
In  these  circumstances,  the  case  for  not  adjusting  monetary  policy  rests  heavily  on  well-
anchored  expectations  of  inflation  and  the  credibility  associated  with  the  Bank’s  inflation 
target  remaining  intact.  The  MPC  entered  the  global  financial  crisis  with  a  high  stock  of 
credibility  reflecting  the  inflation  performance  of  the  previous  decade.  In  2007/8,  we  could 
reasonably  assume  that  inflation  expectations  would  remain  well  anchored  at  close  to  the 
target. And that gave the Committee freedom of manoeuvre to act with some unprecedented 
policy changes which have been effective in heading off the risk of deepening recession and 
a persistent deflation. 
We now face a different set of circumstances in which inflation has been persistently high 
relative to the target, and is set to remain so for some time. There are clearly upside risks to 
the  expectation  of  low  and  stable  inflation  in  this  environment,  and  this  is  beginning  to  be 
reflected  in  surveys  of  households  and  businesses  and  in  the  expectations  of  financial 
market  participants.  Unlike  the  period  before  the  recession,  individuals  and  firms  can  no 
longer  look  back  with  so  much  confidence  on  a  track  record  of  inflation  close  to  the  2% 
target. And so a large burden of weight is being placed on the view that the Bank of England 
will  return  inflation  to  target  before  too  long,  despite  not  having  delivered  on  promises  to 
achieve just that over the past couple of years. 
In  my  view,  this  policy  would  be  much  more  credible  and  we  would  have  a  much  better 
chance of anchoring inflation expectations if the MPC was willing to act to steer the economy 
in the direction of a low inflation trajectory. By adopting a very relaxed monetary policy in the 
recession and allowing a large depreciation of the pound, the MPC has sent the signal to the 
private  sector  that  it  has  been  prepared  to  accommodate  price  increases  as  the  economy 
adjusts from recession to recovery. But the longer this process of accommodation goes on, 
the greater the risk that it becomes ingrained in expectations of relatively high future inflation 
and then credibility needs to be re-established with more abrupt interest rate changes and 
tighter policies in the future. 
It may be that indicators of an upward drift in inflation expectations are only flashing amber at 
present. But if the MPC waits until they are flashing red, and if other pressures continue to 
push up UK inflation in the meantime, the Committee could face a very difficult situation later 
this year or next. A well-conducted monetary policy should aim to move policy in anticipation 
of  events  and  in  a  smooth  and  orderly  way  if  possible.  And  as  I  prepare  to  leave  the 
Committee at the end of next month, I do worry that the MPC’s credibility and commitment to 
the  inflation  target  may  already  have  been  eroded  by  not  adjusting  policy  settings  soon 
enough  –  as  the  challenge  for  monetary  policy  has  shifted  from  preventing  deflation  to 
curbing inflation and from halting recession to managing the recovery. 
Concluding remarks 
I started studying economics in the mid-1970s and my career as a working economist began 
in the mid-1980s. Throughout this time as a student and practitioner of economic analysis, 
we have seen UK monetary frameworks come and go, generally in the midst of an economic 
crisis. Since the Bretton Woods system of exchange rates collapsed about 40 years ago, the 
UK struggled to sustain a stable monetary policy framework for any substantial period. But in 
the mid-1990s, that changed. The UK established an inflation target framework in late 1992 
which has evolved with time and proved remarkably durable. The relative success of inflation 
targeting  in  the  mid-1990s  paved  the  way  for  the  Bank  of  England  to  take  independent 
control  of  UK  monetary  policy  with  the  MPC  as  the  key  decision-making  body  with  the 
objective of maintaining price stability. 
The MPC is now approaching its fifteenth year and has provided the UK with its most durable 
framework  for  monetary  policy  since  the  1950s  and  1960s.  And  it  is  a  great  credit  to  our 
current  system  that  it  has  shown  that  it  is  capable  of  dealing  with  some  formidable 
challenges.  In  my  time  on  the  Committee  I  believe  our  most  significant  achievement  has 
been  to  help  to  stabilise  the  UK  economy  in  the  wake  of  the  global  financial  crisis  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15
provide a platform for economic recovery. I am very proud to have been able to contribute to 
the  policy  discussions  and  decisions  which  led  to  that  outcome.  But  the  rapidly  changing 
world  economy  we  now  inhabit  is  always  throwing  up  new  challenges.  And  now  the  MPC 
faces the task of bringing inflation back to target in the face of continuing global inflationary 
pressures,  with  the  recent  experience  of  persistent  above-target  inflation  providing  an 
unhelpful backdrop. 
A great strength of the MPC is that its members can honestly express differences of view in 
an  open  and  transparent  way,  and  that  means  we  are  not  forced  to  agree  and  minority 
opinions are respected. Over time, that should make for a better decision-making process. 
So while I have not been in agreement with the majority view on the Committee over the past 
year, I hope that the arguments I have made have not been in vain. And I suspect the issues 
I have raised in today’s speech – the impact of the global economy and the pound, the role of 
the “output gap” and the importance of expectations and credibility – will continue to be key 
issues  for  the  MPC  over  the  years  ahead,  as  the  Committee  continues  in  its  vital  role  of 
maintaining monetary stability in the United Kingdom.  
References 
Orphanides,  A.  and  Williams,  J.C.  (2005)  “Monetary  Policy  with  Imperfect  Knowledge”. 
No. 2005-51, Finance and Economics Discussion Series, Board of Governors of the Federal 
Reserve System (U.S.) 
Sentance, A. (2011) “The UK’s inflation problem: Selling England by the Pound?” Speech at 
the IEA State of the Economy Conference 17 February 2011. 
16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
