Prasarn Trairatvorakul: Managing emerging market challenges – Thailand’s 
and Asian perspectives 
Remarks by Dr Prasarn Trairatvorakul, Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the reception of 
the 2011 Emerging Markets Central Bank Governor of the Year Award for Asia, Emerging 
Markets, Washington DC, 24 September 2011. 
 Distinguished Ministers and Governors, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is my great honor to receive this prestigious award, and I would like to thank the Emerging 
Markets for your kind recognition. In fact, such recognition is unexpected as I simply fulfill my 
obligations as central bank governor. To be awarded for doing your job, I guess the job must 
be quite difficult or challenging. More importantly, I consider this award a recognition of the 
dedication of the staff of the Bank of Thailand, who have worked hard to ensure Thailand’s 
sustainable economic and financial stability over the years. 
As the Bank of Thailand enters its seventieth anniversary next year, our institution is faced 
with  a  great  challenge  to  maintain  price  stability  while  sustaining  growth  in  the  midst  of 
heightened global economic and financial risks. We have no luxury of taking a wait-and-see 
approach  but  to  continue  our  best  efforts  to  better  manage  the  external  spillovers  on  our 
economy  and  financial  system.  With  continued  volatile  global  capital  movements,  central 
banks in emerging markets need to ensure that our financial institutions and markets remain 
robust; that they can safely and efficiently manage foreign capital inflows as well as outflows, 
without disrupting the real economy. 
Thus, emerging market central banks must be prepared for policy contingencies ahead. At 
the core, monetary policy must continue to safeguard price stability, while taking into account 
concerns about economic growth and financial stability. The Bank of Thailand, on our part, 
will  do  our  best  to  steer  the  Thai  economy  and  financial  system  through  the  global 
turbulences, to ensure the continued well-being of the Thai people in years ahead. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
