Kiyohiko G Nishimura: This time may truly be different – balance sheet 
adjustment under population ageing 
Speech by  Mr Kiyohiko G  Nishimura, Deputy  Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the 2011 
American  Economic  Association  Annual  Meeting,  panel  “The  Future  of  Monetary  Policy”, 
Denver, 7 January 2011. 
 Introduction: population ageing 
1.  
This panel’s topic “The Future of Monetary Policy” is doubly opportune. Firstly, more than two 
years have past since the immediate fallout of the Lehman Brothers’ collapse, giving us time 
both to look back and to look forward. Secondly, we are not yet out of the woods and are still 
in  the  process  of  soul-searching;  pursuing  a  better  understanding  of  our  economic 
environment and the appropriate monetary policy responses.  
In  this  presentation,  I  will  give  a  perspective  that  may  be  different  from  other  panelists: 
longer-run, more qualitative than quantitative. Specifically, to contemplate the future, I start 
from  the  fact  that  we  are  in  the  midst  of  a  balance  sheet  adjustment  process  after  the 
financial bubble burst, at a time when the population is ageing. This is not the simple balance 
sheet adjustment of the past, which took place with a growing young population. This is an 
acute balance sheet adjustment when the composition of the nation’s population is rapidly 
tilting toward the old. This is unprecedented in our modern history of economic growth. This 
ageing  population  is  the  result  of  people’s  choices  made  many  years  ago  when,  after  the 
Second  World  War,  birth  control  became  possible  and  substantial  medical  improvements 
were  reducing  child  mortality  and  increasing  longevity.  These  medical  advances  and  the 
baby  boom  after  the  war,  together  with  longer  life  expectancy,  are  true  blessings  for 
economic  growth,  bringing  what  are  often  called  population  dividends,  with  many  young 
workers producing and few old people being supported. However, at some point in time, the 
trend  had  to  be  reversed.  The  significant  point  for  us  here  is  that  the  bubble  we  have 
experienced has coincided closely with the turning point in these demographic dynamics. 
Population ageing: inverse dependency ratio 
Let me show you some telling figures on the inverse dependency ratio, which indicates how 
many  people  of  working  age  it  takes  to  provide  for  one  dependent  person.  The  Japanese 
ratio peaked around 1990, and it was in the very next year, 1991, that the Japanese Bubble 
peaked.  The  peak  of  the  US  ratio  was  between  2005  and  2010,  and  the  peak  of  the 
US Subprime  Bubble  was  2007  (Fig.  1.1).  The  economically  troubled  countries  of  the 
eurozone  have  a  similar  pattern  to  Japan  and  the  United  States.  The  ratios  for  Greece, 
Portugal  and  Spain  have  almost  the  same  time  profile,  and  all  of  them  peaked  around  
2000–2005. The peak of the Spanish property boom was just after the ratio’s peak, and the 
Financial problems of Greece also started at the same time. A particularly interesting case is 
Ireland, which showed a sharp rise in the ratio until around 2005. The bust of the country’s 
property market bubble was just a few years around the corner (Fig. 1.2). Incidentally, for the 
sake of completeness, I have included the figures for China (Fig. 1.3), whose ratio seems still 
to be rising rapidly, but will peak a bit later than in Euro-American countries. The peak will be 
around  2010–15,  after  which  it  will  go  down  as  rapidly  as  it  is  now  going  up.  The  inverse 
dependency ratios of many other Asian countries have a quite similar time profile to that of 
China. 
I  am  not  suggesting  any  causality  here,  but  simply  pointing  out  the  balance  sheet 
adjustments after the bubble burst in Japan, United States and the eurozone, whether private 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
or public, must be carried out as the population is ageing. I believe this fact has an important 
bearing on the future of monetary policy, especially unconventional monetary policy. 
In Section 2, I first examine the process of balance sheet adjustment after the bursting of a 
bubble and when the population is ageing, juxtaposing Japan in the 1990s and the United 
States in the 2000s. Then, in Section 3, I summarize the consequences of severe, prolonged 
balance sheet adjustment, as seen in Japan in the 2000s. Finally in Section 4, I identify the 
multi-faceted challenges central banks may face as a consequence of carrying out balance 
sheet  adjustments  under  population  ageing,  and  I  explain  the  Bank  of  Japan’s  policies  to 
tackle these problems. 
2.  
Balance sheet adjustment and the breakdown of the transmission mechanism 
Who leveraged during the bubble period? Japan and the United Sates 
In order to find out the effect of balance sheet adjustments after the bursting of a bubble, let 
me  first  clarify  who  leveraged  during  the  bubble  periods.  In  Japan,  it  was  the  corporate 
sector, especially small to medium-sized firms, which for the first time gained access to large 
banks  after  the  so-called  financial  liberalization  (Fig.  2.1).  The  corporate  sector’s  loan-to-
GDP  ratio  increased  by  29  percentage  points  in  the  ten  years  before  the  Bubble  burst  in 
1991. In the United States, it was the household sector that leveraged, especially in housing. 
The household sector’s housing loans-to-disposable income ratio jumped by 39 percentage 
points in the ten years before the bubble burst in 2007.  
Breakdown of the monetary transmission mechanism 
These  sectors  were  interest-sensitive  and  thus  constituted  the  “transmission  gears”  of  the 
ordinary monetary transmission mechanism in the periods before the bubbles burst. That is, 
these  leveraged  sectors  had  been  sensitive  to  policy  rate  reduction  in  business  cycles. 
However, after the bubbles burst, these leveraged sectors became insensitive to policy rate 
reduction, because of the acute balance sheet adjustments. Large legacy shortfalls must be 
compensated for by current profit or income, period by period, and this process is slow and 
painful.  This  leads  to  a  breakdown  in  the  ordinary  monetary  transmission  mechanism  of 
policy rate change. 
To  see  this,  let  me  first  consider  corporate  investment  in  Japan.  Figure  3.1  depicts 
manufacturing investment by the corporate sector. The shaded areas indicate recession, the 
black line is manufacturing investment in real terms, and the blue line shows the time profile 
of the policy rate. This figure shows that the policy rate cut prevented investment from falling 
sizably in the three business cycles before the bubble. In contrast, after the bubble burst, a 
sharp  decline  in  the  policy  rate  clearly  failed  to  prevent  a  sharp  decline  in  investment. 
Basically, the same picture is found in the corporate sector’s non-manufacturing investment 
(Fig. 3.2). 
In the United States, the household sector is the leveraged sector. Its most interest-sensitive 
demand components are demand for new homes and new automobiles. In Figure 3.3, again, 
the shaded areas depict recession, the black line is new home sales, and the blue line is the 
federal fund target rate. This figure shows that policy rate cuts at least prevented new home 
sales from falling further, and that they helped sales to pick up in the three business cycles 
before the bubble. However, a sharp decline in the policy rate after the bubble burst failed to 
prevent a sharp decline in new home sales. Qualitatively quite similar observations apply to 
new automotive sales (Fig. 3.4).  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Ageing population and property prices 
As suggested in the Introduction, Japan was faced with a rapidly ageing population after the 
bubble  burst  of  1991,  while  the  United  States  is  about  to  face  its  own  version  with  a 
somewhat  milder  population  ageing.  There  are  many  consequences  of  population  ageing, 
such  as  differences  in  consumer  preferences  and  technological  adaptability  between  the 
young and the old, but I will concentrate on one particular issue that is pertinent to balance 
sheet adjustments, namely, the possible effects of population ageing on property prices.  
In Figure 4.1, the real land price (national average, for all purposes) is juxtaposed with the 
inverse  dependency  ratio  from  1955  to  date.  This  figure  shows,  firstly,  that  the  relative 
abundance  of  young  people  coincided  with  sharply  higher  property  prices.  Secondly,  in 
contrast, the relative abundance of old people seems to be leading to lower property prices. 
It should be noted here that declining property prices greatly aggravated the balance sheet 
adjustments of Japanese corporations. The US case is illustrated in Figure 4.2. In the United 
States  also,  an  increasing  reverse  dependency  ratio  seemed  to  coincide  with  the  property 
bubble. After the bubble burst of 2007, property prices seem to have followed the long run 
movement  of  the  inverse  dependency  ratio,  although  it  would  be  premature  to  draw  any 
conclusions from this at the moment. 
3.  
Prolonged balance sheet adjustment under population ageing: consequences 
What then are the consequences of severe and prolonged balance sheet adjustment under 
population ageing? Three adverse consequences can be identified.  
Declining mobility 
First,  mobility  declines,  or  in  other  words,  the  economy  becomes  “inflexible”.  Since 
de-leveraging firms or households have to pay back all their debts before “moving” from their 
current  position,  they  are  often  stuck  with  an  “underwater”  property.  Population  ageing 
strengthens this tendency. In the case of Japan, de-leveraging took place in the corporate 
sector,  and  thus  firms  became  less  mobile  between  industries  and  regions.  In  the  United 
States,  the  household  sector  is  de-leveraging,  and  thus  household  mobility  has  been 
reduced. 
Figure 5.1 depicts declining entrepreneurial mobility in Japan. This figure shows the creation 
and destruction of enterprises between pre-bubble (1981–1986), Bubble (1987–1991), and 
post-bubble (1992–1996). It can be seen in this figure that, after the bubble burst of 1991, 
creation  of  enterprises  was  sharply  reduced.  In  contrast,  the  increase  in  the  rate  of 
destruction was relatively mild. These two imply a “sticky industry structure,” a tendency to 
hang on to the past.  
Declining  mobility  is  found  in  the  household sector  in  the United  States.  Figure  5.2  shows 
changes in the householder mobility rate between 2005 and 2009. A sharp decline is found 
across all age groups. Since there is no such change in renters, this sharp decline suggests 
that the housing crash reduced householder mobility rates.  
Loss of non-tangible/human capital 
The second consequence of severe and prolonged balance sheet adjustment is the loss of 
non-tangible  or  human  capital.  De-leveraging  firms  and  households  suffering  long  under-
utilization or under-employment tend to lose their non-tangible or human capital. In Japan, 
this  has  been  observed  especially 
loss  of 
entrepreneurship,  loss  of  human  networks  in  skilled  manufacturing,  and  loss  of  access  to 
technological advances. In the United States, the long-term unemployed or underemployed 
risk losing their human capital.. 
to  medium-sized  enterprises: 
in  small 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Problems in financial intermediation 
The  third  consequence  of  severe  and  prolonged  balance  sheet  adjustment  is  the 
deterioration in financial institutions’ efficient functioning as financial intermediaries. This was 
most acutely observed in Japan during the several years after the bubble burst: a pile-up of 
non-performing loans seemed to lead to a breakdown in the “market Selection mechanism” 
around 1997. 
Figure 6 shows the result of a large-scale panel analysis of Japanese firms, in which the total 
factor productivity of exiting and surviving firms is compared. Survival of the fittest is a basic 
premise of the natural selection mechanism. Thus, if the market Mechanism works well, the 
productivity of successful and surviving firms should be higher than that of failing and hence 
exiting firms, at least on the average.  
In this figure, the shaded areas show cases where the productivity of failing and thus exiting 
firms is higher than that of surviving firms, which is an anomaly. In fact, the shaded areas are 
rather exceptional most of the time. However, if we look at the period 1996–97, the period of 
the  financial  crisis,  we  see  many  shaded  areas  indicating  that  more  productive  firms  were 
exiting  in  many  industries.  This  strongly  suggests  a  breakdown  in  the  natural  selection 
mechanism. 
Results of acute B/S adjustment under population ageing: Japan in the 2000s 
So, what are the end results of acute balance sheet adjustment under Population Ageing? 
Some of these consequences can be seen in the Japanese situation in the 2000s.  
First, growth prospects declined. The average real GDP growth fell from 5% to 4 % in the 
70s and 80s to around 1% in the 90s and 2000s. This implies the expected rate of return on 
investment  in  the  2000s  is  low,  especially  for  small  to  medium-sized  firms  depending  on 
domestic  demand.  In  contrast,  money  (bank  deposits)  becomes  relatively  attractive  as  a 
store of value, given the price-stability pledge of the central bank. Ironically, this leads to an 
apparent  breakdown  of  the  historically-proven  quantity-theoretic  relationship  between  real 
activity and money stock. Moreover, not only is the policy rate very low, but so too are longer 
risk-free  rates,  judged  by  historical  standards.  Conventional  Monetary  Policy  through  the 
overnight  policy  rate  is  not  as  effective  as  before,  and  this  means  the  economy  is  more 
vulnerable to a downside shock. 
Second, there are signs of coordination failure. Banks’ lending is sluggish, partly because of 
their inadequate functioning as an expert relationship banker. Here a vicious circle seems to 
be working. To begin with, banks lack expertise to assess investment in new fields, suffering 
as  they  are  from  problems  with  non-performing  loans  and  under-investment  in  their  loan 
officers’ human capital. Consequently banks do not lend. This means that new investments 
and new enterprises cannot get funding, and thus new markets falter. Then, banks miss the 
opportunities to accumulate new expertise, bringing them right back to the starting point of 
this vicious circle. 
Another  coordination  failure  is  found  in  capital  markets,  in  the  form  of  “excessive”  risk 
aversion.  Fearing  unknown  unknowns,  investors  shun  investing  in  riskier  securities.  Their 
market  then  becomes  thin  and  vulnerable  to  non-fundamental  shocks.  This  means  they 
themselves become prone to turning into unknown unknowns, thus the original fear is self-
fulfilling.  These  two  types  of  coordination  failure  in  financial  markets  result  in  an  apparent 
lack of “animal spirits”. 
Third, we see a piling-up of government debt. This is partly the result of the substitution of 
public debt for private debt in the process of balance sheet adjustment, and partly due to the 
substitution  of  public  demand  for  private  demand  during  this  period  of  declining  growth. 
According to the OECD’s Economic Outlook, Japan’s General Government Gross Financial 
Liability-to-GDP Ratio in 2010 was 198%, compared with 93% in the United States. However, 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
it  should  also  be  noted  that,  because  of  low  long-term  rates,  the  Government  Net  Debt 
Interest Payments-to-GDP is 1.2% in Japan, compared with 1.7% in the United States. 
Multi-faceted challenges and unconventional monetary policy 
4. 
The consequences of Japan’s prolonged balance sheet adjustment under Population Ageing 
described so far lead us to a number of multi-faceted challenges.  
The first challenge is that of cyclical-stabilization: ensuring a return to sustainable growth with 
price stability, when the policy rate is near zero and longer-term risk-free rates are also very 
low. In Japan’s case, this also means overcoming deflationary pressures.  
The  second  challenge  is  to  enhance  the  growth  trend,  or  strengthen  the  foundations  for 
growth.  In  other  words,  the  challenge  is  to  raise  long-term  growth  prospects,  especially  in 
domestically-oriented  growth.  This  should  be  done  by  solving  the  coordination  failure  in 
banking and capital markets described above. 
The third challenge is to avoid causing problems in national debt management. We should 
design  and  execute  carefully  measures  to  cope  with  the  first  and  the  second  challenge, 
taking appropriate account of the current national debt situation as explained before, as well 
as general economic conditions. 
To  tackle  the  first  and  the  second  challenges,  the  Bank  of  Japan  instituted  its  Growth 
Foundation Strengthening Facility (GFSF) in June of last year and adopted Comprehensive 
Monetary Easing (CME) in October. 
To  meet  the  challenge  of  “cyclical-stabilization”,  the  first  part  of  the  CME  changed  the 
guidance for the policy rate from 0.1% to the range between 0 and 0.1%, making clear the 
Bank’s Virtually Zero-Interest Rate Policy (VZIRP). For the second part of the CME, the Bank 
clarified its policy duration commitment: the Bank will continue its VZIRP until it judges price 
stability  to  be  in  sight  on  the  basis  of  the  Policy  Board  members’  understanding  of  price 
stability.  With  Policy  Board  members’  announced  forecasts  for  two  years  ahead,  this  is 
similar to “forecast targeting” though not specific in numbers. The third part of the CME is the 
Asset Purchase Program, which is also designed to meet the cyclical-stabilization challenge. 
Its  aim  is  to  influence  downward  longer-term  rates.  The  outright  purchase  of  JGBs  with 
remaining maturity of 1–2 years and T-bills is to reduce the term-premiums of risk-free rates, 
and the purchase of CPs and Corporate Bonds is to reduce both term-premiums and risk-
premiums. The scheme to provide 3-month funds at the overnight rate already instituted was 
aimed at lowering rates longer than the overnight rate, and has been continued and included 
in this program.  
Moreover, the Asset Purchase Program is aimed at breaking another vicious circle in capital 
markets, that caused by “excessive” risk aversion. In this Asset Purchase Program, the Bank 
purchases riskier assets than it bought before: BBB-rated corporate bonds, and a-2 CPs. It 
also purchases ETFs and J-REITs directly from the market. The purchase is designed to act 
as a catalyst to induce investment in riskier assets, and thus help solving the coordination 
failure. 
To tackle the second, “trend-enhancement” challenge, or strengthening growth potential, the 
Bank  instituted  its  Growth  Foundation  Strengthening  Facility  (GFSF)  in  the  form  of 
preferential  fund-provisioning  to  support  financial  institutions’  own  initiatives  in  lending  and 
investing in new growth areas. It should be made clear here that it is not the Bank of Japan 
but  participating  financial  institutions  that  determine  which  investment  projects  should  be 
funded using this GFSF. Thus, the GFSF is designed to be a catalyst to induce banks to find 
new firms or new investment projects in their perceived growth areas. In this way, the GFSF 
is targeted at breaking the vicious circle of no lending resulting in no new markets and thus 
no demand for lending to start with.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
When  implementing  these  measures  to  cope  with  cyclical-stability  and  trend-enhancing 
challenges,  it  is  very  important  to  take  appropriate  account  of  the  third  challenge,  that  of 
avoiding  causing  problems  in  national  debt  management.  Specifically,  it  is  crucial  to  avoid 
creating an impression of the “monetization” of government debts. Otherwise, the large scale 
purchase  of  JGBs  may  lead  to  a  substantial  and  lasting  ratcheting  up  of  long-term  rates, 
which would pose a serious problem for economic recovery and the financial position of the 
government. Taking this point into consideration, the Bank of Japan has already purchased 
about  22  trillion  yen  in  JGBs  annually,  beside  the  Asset  Purchase  Program.  By  the  same 
token,  we  should  be  very  careful  about  the  possibility  that  asset  purchases  may  lead  to 
capital losses, which could tarnish the credibility of the central bank. 
In  the  bubble  years,  we  often  heard  talk  of  this  being  the  beginning  of  a  new  age  of 
prosperity and that, as the title of the popular book says, “this time is different”. Since the 
bubble burst, people have tended to think the collapse was simply a fleeting nightmare and 
that we will eventually be back to the old normal, just as before. That may be true. However, 
if  we  recognize  the  problems  arising  from  acute  balance  sheet  adjustments  when  the 
population is ageing, there is the distinct possibility that this time may truly be different. 
 
  6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  7
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  9
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  11
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  13
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  15
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  16 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
  17
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  18 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
  19
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   20 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
