Ravi Menon: Singapore’s approach to the regulation of capital markets 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Ravi  Menon,  Managing  Director  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of 
Singapore,  at  the  Thomson  Reuters  2nd  Pan-Asian  Regulatory  Summit,  Singapore, 
28 September 2011. 
 What do capital markets do? 
Distinguished  guests,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  good  morning.  And  to  all  our  guests  from 
abroad, welcome to Singapore. 
Two  thousand  years  ago,  in  ancient  Rome,  enterprises  contracted  with  the  government  to 
build temples and collect taxes. The enterprises funded these ventures by selling ownership 
or equity stakes in the form of shares which were readily transferable among the Romans. 
Later,  the  Italian  city  states  sourced  for  funds  from  their  citizens  in  the  form  of  bonds  to 
finance wars, while merchants sought financing from individuals to procure better vessels for 
sailing over ever increasing distances. Over time, a market developed to enable holders of 
bonds and equities to sell their holdings to other interested buyers. Thus was born – what we 
now call – capital markets. 
Since those early days in Imperial Rome, capital markets have spread far and wide across 
the  globe.  But  the  fundamental  function  of  capital  markets  has  remained  unchanged  –  to 
allocate capital to those who need it and transfer risk to those who are able to bear it. It is the 
ability of capital markets to efficiently mobilise financial resources that has made possible the 
large  investments  needed  for  the  Industrial  Revolution  of  the  18th  century,  and  the  risk 
capital that funded the global Internet Revolution more recently. 
Like other markets, capital markets are prone to volatility as demand and supply fluctuate. 
But unlike other markets, turbulence in capital markets can have far wider consequences on 
the rest of the economy. From the Wall Street Crash of 1929 to the Global Financial Crisis of 
2008,  we  have  seen  how  dislocations  in  capital  markets  can  have  devastating  effects  on 
financial stability, economic growth, and the welfare of citizens. 
Capital markets must therefore be regulated, but in a way that does not unduly undermine 
their efficiency and effectiveness. 
This  morning,  I  want  to  share  with  you  Singapore’s  approach  to  the  regulation  of  capital 
markets.  
Why we regulate capital markets 
We can think of the capital market as an ecosystem comprising four key components: 
 
 
 
one, issuers – those who issue securities to raise capital; 
two, investors – those who invest in these securities; 
three,  intermediaries  –  those  who  advise  issuers  or  investors  and  facilitate  the 
trading of securities; 
 
four, infrastructure – the platforms or systems through which securities are traded. 
Each component of this ecosystem is prone to market failure – hence the need to regulate.  
 
First, there is information asymmetry between issuers/intermediaries and investors, 
and investors may be unable to make informed judgments about financial products. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
   Second,  there  is  a  principal-agent  problem,  and  intermediaries  may  not  act  in  the 
best interests of their clients, be they investors or issuers.  
Third,  investors  are  sometimes  prone  to  herding  behavior,  exaggerating  price 
movements and thereby precipitating market instability.  
Fourth,  if  issuers  and  intermediaries  take  on  too  much  risk  or  liability  that  they 
cannot manage, there will be loss of confidence and market instability.  
Fifth, critical infrastructure may fail, again leading to market instability. 
 
The purpose of regulating capital markets is to safeguard the interests of investors, ensure 
that  risks  are  kept  to  an  acceptable  level,  promote  efficient  price  discovery,  and  maintain 
confidence in the market.  
In Singapore, the regulatory framework for capital markets is underpinned by the Securities 
and  Futures  Act  (SFA)  and  the  Financial  Advisers  Act  (FAA).  Consumers  who  invest  in 
products  or  deal  with  entities  that  are  regulated  under  this  framework  will  enjoy  the 
safeguards provided under these laws. Together, the SFA and FAA cover each of the four 
components in the capital markets ecosystem. 
Issuers – dissemination of material information 
Let me begin with issuers. 
A key tenet of capital market regulation is that relevant information is transmitted efficiently 
for  price  formation  and  discovery.  Like  most  reputable  regulators,  MAS  imposes  stringent 
rules requiring issuers of securities to disclose and disseminate all material information. We 
conduct  ongoing  surveillance  of  market  practices  and  undertake  rigorous  enforcement 
actions to ensure compliance.  
Disclosure 
The  SFA  requires  exchanges  to  develop  rules  for  reliable  and  unhindered  price  formation 
and discovery. First, disclosure must be ongoing. Post-listing, material information likely to 
affect market prices must be disseminated in a timely and organised manner. For example, a 
company  that  makes  an  acquisition  which  is  likely  to  have  a  material  impact  on  its  share 
price  must  immediately  announce  it  on  the  website  of  the  Singapore  Exchange.  Second, 
disclosure must be accessible to all. Listed companies are prohibited from disclosing material 
information on an individual or selective basis. These disclosure requirements complement 
Singapore’s statutory provisions on market manipulation and insider trading. 
Enforcement …. and its limitations 
Issuers and investors alike must have confidence that the ground rules are adhered to when 
they  transact  in  our  markets.  Constant  surveillance  and  strict  enforcement  are  therefore 
critical. MAS takes a serious view of any false statement or omission of material information 
that misleads the market. We will not hesitate to impose stiff penalties on issuers who have 
made misleading statements in initial public offerings, or IPOs. 
But no regulator can totally prevent fraud or misconduct. Take for instance our experience 
with  S-chips,  or  Chinese  companies  listed  on  the  SGX.  Many  of  them  are  reputable 
companies and add breadth to our equity capital market. But some of them are not. Since 
2006, accounting irregularities or outright frauds have been discovered in 14 such companies 
listed  on  the  SGX.  Most  of  these  cases  came  to  light  when  the  auditors  were  unable  to 
confirm  the  companies’  cash  and  account  receivables.  The  counters  were  suspended 
pending  investigations  by  special  auditors,  and  investors  had  to  bear  the  losses.  I  still  get 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
letters  from  investors  who  had  lost  money  in  these  shares.  I  can  understand  their 
frustrations. 
Many  have  asked  MAS  to  do  more  to  bring  the  full  force  of  our  law  to  bear  on  the 
wrongdoers. Let me state the position categorically: MAS will leave no stone unturned to take 
rigorous  action  against  those  who  break  our laws.  But  there  are  real  challenges  when  the 
fraud  is  perpetrated  by  parties  outside  our  jurisdiction.  Cross-border  investigations  and 
enforcement are intrinsically difficult.  
Singapore is not alone in facing challenges with international listings. Co-operation among 
securities regulators and enforcement agencies in different jurisdictions is therefore critical. 
We cannot eliminate fraud. But we can and must ensure that companies that are brought to 
the market are of good quality. SGX must be rigorous in evaluating the suitability of listing 
applicants before admitting them. Other stakeholders must play their part too. 
 
First, directors of the company seeking a listing must exercise adequate oversight of 
internal controls and ensure the veracity of information disclosed. 
Second, IPO advisers have a legal and professional responsibility to conduct proper 
due diligence when bringing companies public. They must have a healthy dose of 
skepticism,  and  never  place  their  commercial  interests  above  the  need  to  ensure 
that a company is suitable for a public listing. MAS will not hesitate to take advisers 
to task for poor due diligence work.  
 If the regulators, issuers, and advisers each do their jobs well, we can reduce the likelihood 
of poor quality companies gaining access to our markets. 
Investors – safeguarding their interests 
This brings me to the second component of the capital market ecosystem – investors. 
Well-informed and empowered investors are at the core of a well functioning capital market. 
Investors will lose confidence in a market where disclosure is misleading and where selling 
practices are irresponsible.  
Safeguarding the interests of investors, particularly retail investors, is therefore a key focus of 
MAS regulation. But this objective has to be balanced against the need for investors to take 
ownership  of  their  investment  decisions.    A  regulatory  approach  that  requires  issuers  or 
intermediaries to bear all the risks and losses will not work. If investors expect their losses to 
be always made good, there will be moral hazard and it will encourage reckless investing. 
MAS safeguards the interests of investors in five ways: 
 
 
 
First, we demand stringent disclosure of information by issuers; 
Second, we require transparency in the information disclosed; 
Third, we set standards for intermediaries who sell investment products to provide 
quality financial advice; 
Fourth, we promote investor education, so that investors are empowered to make 
informed decisions. 
Fifth,  we  provide  affordable  and  accessible  dispute  resolution  mechanisms  for 
investors who feel aggrieved by the investment process. 
  Let me take each of these aspects in turn. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Disclosure 
There is nothing like disclosure to instill market discipline. In the words of US Supreme Court 
Justice Louis Brandeis, “Sunlight is said to be the best of disinfectants; electric light the most 
efficient  policeman”.  Disclosure  is  about  shining  that  light  so  that  all  can  see  and  make 
informed decisions.  
Investors are entitled to accurate and timely disclosure of material information so that they 
can  assess  the  risks  and  rewards  of  their  investment.  Disclosure  works  not  because  all 
investors  understand  every  word  that  is  disclosed.  Disclosure  works  because  it  facilitates 
scrutiny  by  experts  in  the  market;  it  is  this  professional  scrutiny  that  acts  as  a  check  on 
issuers and helps to inform the broader investor base. 
Take  for  example  an  IPO  prospectus.  It  can  typically  run  into  hundreds  of  pages,  with 
detailed descriptions about the company’s business operations, its competitive environment, 
governance practices, and risk exposures, not to mention a full set of financial statements. 
Most  retail  investors  cannot  easily  digest  all  this  information.  But  the  scrutiny  of  the 
prospectus  by  analysts  and  institutional  investors  helps  to  bring  to  light  any  significant 
weakness in the company. 
Having said that, I must acknowledge that greater disclosure does not always improve our 
understanding  of  investment  products.  While  all  material  and  relevant  information  must  be 
disclosed, there is a tendency for disclosure to be voluminous and legalistic – often made for 
the purpose of limiting legal liability rather than facilitating understanding by retail investors. 
MAS  therefore  seeks  to  ensure  that  information  disclosed  is  not  only  adequate  but  also 
transparent. 
Transparency 
MAS  has  sharpened  the  focus  on  providing  investors  information  in  a  clear  and  concise 
manner to aid understanding.  Earlier this year, we introduced a new regulatory requirement 
for a Product Highlights Sheet to accompany offers of investment products that come with 
prospectuses. Its purpose is to convey key risks and product information in plain language 
and  in  a  simple  question-and-answer  format.  Let  me  give  an  example.  In  one  recent 
prospectus,  the  right  of  the  investors  to  cancel  their  subscription  within  seven  days  was 
spelled  out  in  two  rather  technical  paragraphs  using  a  total  of  170  words.  In  the  Product 
Highlights Sheet, the same point was made in two simple sentences. 
Financial advice 
The  third  aspect  of  investor  protection  is  the  provision  of  sound  financial  advice  by 
intermediaries  when  they  sell  investment  products.  The  Fair  Dealing  Guidelines  issued  by 
MAS require intermediaries to conduct their own internal assessment to ensure that a new 
product being launched for sale is suitable for its targeted investor base. Intermediaries must 
also ensure that their representatives have the competencies to understand and explain the 
product features to their customers. 
MAS  has  introduced  new  rules  requiring  intermediaries  to  assess  their  customers’ 
investment  knowledge  or  experience  before  investing  in  complex  products.  The  rules  will 
come  into  effect  in  January  2012.  Where  an  investor  does  not  possess  the  requisite 
knowledge  or  experience,  intermediaries  must  provide  appropriate  advice.  Investors  who 
choose not to heed their advice or insist on buying a product which has been assessed to be 
unsuitable for them must take responsibility for their decision. This approach recognises that 
investors’ capacity to understand complex products is uneven, while respecting their right to 
invest as they see fit. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Over  the  last  two  years,  MAS  has  conducted  surveys  and  inspections  to  assess 
intermediaries’ delivery of these fair dealing outcomes. We will use our findings to fine-tune 
the Guidelines on Fair Dealing. 
While MAS has taken these steps to ensure that the financial advisory industry is able to help 
investors  make  informed  decisions,  the  best  way  to  instill  discipline  on  the  industry  is  for 
investors  to  demand  good  advice.  Singapore’s  investing  public  should  seek  good  financial 
advisers who are prepared to even advise them against buying an unsuitable product. They 
should be prepared to pay a fee for such advice. 
Investor education 
Even with the best of disclosure and transparency, investors can make informed decisions 
only  if  they  have  the  knowledge  and  skills  to  do  so.  This  brings  me  to  the  fourth  area  of 
investor protection – education. 
The  centerpiece  of  Singapore’s  investor  education  efforts  is  the  MoneySENSE  national 
financial  programme.  It  was  launched  in  2003  to  raise  consumer  understanding  of  basic 
money management, financial planning, and investment products. Through various seminars 
and media initiatives, MoneySENSE has reached a large segment of the population since its 
launch.  In  the  last  year  alone,  MoneySENSE  events  attracted  close  to  100,000  attendees 
while media initiatives reached more than two million people. These events are conducted by 
industry  practitioners,  academics,  and  investor  advocates.    To-date,  Money  SENSE  has 
published more than 230 educational articles on its website and in the media. More than 30 
consumer guides have been issued and are available online. 
While  we  have  made  steady  progress,  much  more  needs  to  be  done.  Most  Singaporeans 
have sound savings habits and are generally responsible in managing credit, but many still 
do  not  have  a  good  understanding  of  common  investment  products.  Every  month,  MAS 
receives, on average, about 10 complaints from the public involving the sale of investment 
products.  
I  read  many  of  these  letters.  Sure  enough,  there  are  indeed  a  few  cases  of  inadequate 
disclosure or mis-selling, which the financial institution concerned should remedy. But there 
are others where the customer has failed to exercise basic due diligence. These are the most 
painful letters to read: 
 
of investors who were attracted by headline returns and purchased products without 
reading any of the product documentation; 
of investors who willingly signed blank sheets of product assessment forms without 
realising what they were buying; and 
of investors who insisted on buying risky products even though they were advised 
that the products were not suitable for them.  
  It is very difficult to help in cases like these. 
MAS will continue to explore ways to equip investors with core financial capabilities. We are 
currently  studying  the  feasibility  of  establishing  a  financial  literacy  institute  to  complement 
existing MoneySENSE initiatives through talks and workshops to reach a larger segment of 
the population.  
We  are  also  reaching  out  more  to  students,  through  the  schools.  The  objective  is  not  so 
much to instill technical expertise in investment products, but to inculcate good money habits 
from a young age – being prudent, being alert to risks, being clear about the objectives of 
investing. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Dispute resolution 
Even  with  well-informed  consumers,  occasional  disputes  with  those  who  sell  investment 
products  will  be  inevitable.  Hence  the  final  area  of  investor  protection  is  to  provide  an 
affordable and accessible dispute resolution mechanism for aggrieved investors.  
MAS has set clear expectations that financial institutions must establish a robust process to 
resolve  customer  grievances  independently,  effectively,  and  promptly.  We  also  expect 
financial institutions to investigate and rectify issues related to any widespread complaints on 
a particular product or selling practice.  
This dispute resolution mechanism within financial institutions can be effective only if parties 
to  a  dispute  act  fairly.  Financial  institutions  must  police  their  relationship  managers  and 
enforce internal guidelines. Recently, we were alerted to a case where a financial institution 
tried to salvage its reputation by denying that its relationship manager had recommended a 
highly  risky  investment  product  to  an  elderly  retiree  with  a  low  risk  tolerance.  This  is  not 
acceptable. MAS will take firm action against financial institutions for such behaviour.  
On the other hand, investors should not make unreasonable demands and expect financial 
institutions to accede to them. For instance, a consumer demanded that her bank accept her 
mobile text instruction to reverse a transaction when the message was sent a day after the 
transaction was executed. 
Where  disputes  cannot  be  resolved  through  the  financial  institution’s  internal  processes, 
investors  can  approach  the  independent  Financial  Industry  Dispute  Resolution  Centre 
(“FIDReC”).  FIDReC  provides  access  to  an  independent  and  affordable  dispute  resolution 
process through mediation or adjudication. This provides the consumer a low-cost alternative 
to  litigation.  FIDReC  awards  are  binding  on  the  financial  institution,  but  the  investor  can 
choose to reject the award and pursue other options for recourse.  
Intermediaries – safety and market conduct 
I turn now to the next key component in the capital markets ecosystem – intermediaries. The 
objective  of  regulation  with  respect  to  capital  market  intermediaries  is  twofold:  their  safety 
and soundness, and market conduct. 
Safety and soundness 
We want intermediaries to be safe and sound, in the interest of preserving systemic stability. 
Intermediaries  connect  the  various  parts  of  the  capital  market  ecosystem.  They  stand 
between  buyers  and  sellers,  underwrite  risks,  act  as  counterparties  in  risk  transfers,  and 
participate as members of clearing houses. The failure of a major intermediary can transmit 
risks across the system, causing severe market disruption and undermining confidence. Lest 
we forget, Lehman Brothers was principally a securities firm, not a bank.  
MAS regulation cannot rule out the failure of an intermediary. But we can seek to ensure an 
orderly winding-down process. 
The segregation of customers’ funds from the intermediary’s own funds is a key feature of 
our regulatory regime. Unlike banks which can freely deploy the deposits they collect, capital 
market intermediaries are required to segregate customers’ assets from their own monies. 
This acts as a safeguard for customers’ funds should the intermediary fail. Fund managers 
are required to appoint independent custodians and fund valuation firms, and be subject to 
regular audits. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Market conduct 
The second regulatory outcome we expect from intermediaries is fair conduct. Trades that 
give a false or misleading appearance of market activity, actions to rig the prices of securities 
or futures, are all prohibited under our law and severely dealt with. 
MAS  works  closely  with  the  Commercial  Affairs  Department  to  take  enforcement  actions 
ranging  from  civil  penalties  to  criminal  action.  Last  year  saw  the  fruition  of  MAS’  first  civil 
penalty court action. We secured civil penalties against a fund manager who was found by 
the High Court to have window-dressed his portfolio by creating a false appearance relating 
to the price of one of the component shares. The fund manager and its CEO were ordered to 
pay  a  civil  penalty  of  S$250,000  each  to  MAS,  as  well  as  costs  of  the  court  action.  The 
decision was upheld by the Court of Appeal. 
The assistance that we sought, and obtained, from our foreign counterparts was vital to our 
success in this case. Similarly, MAS stands ready to assist our international counterparts in 
their enforcement efforts. Earlier this year, the Australian authorities successfully prosecuted 
a former fund manager of an Australian bank for insider trading. MAS had referred this case 
to  the  Australian  Securities  and  Investment  Commission  (ASIC)  and  provided  ongoing 
assistance during ASIC’s investigations. 
Infrastructure – sound and stable 
The final component of the capital market ecosystem is the infrastructure that supports the 
trading  of  securities  and  futures.  Capital  market  participants  trade  either  on  a  multilateral 
basis through organised exchanges, or bilaterally with each other over-the-counter or OTC.  
Exchanges 
The Singapore Exchange and the Singapore Mercantile Exchange operate the systemically-
important securities and futures markets in Singapore. They constitute critical infrastructure 
that  must  function  properly  to  preserve  stability  and  efficiency.  Our  laws  require  the 
exchanges to maintain sufficient financial, human and system resources, have frameworks 
and processes to manage their risks, and to regulate and supervise their participants. 
OTC derivatives 
The  OTC  derivatives  space  has  traditionally  been  the  preserve  of  sophisticated  financial 
institutions which are well placed to assess and negotiate trades among themselves. These 
financial  institutions  are  regulated  by  MAS  and  the  risks  associated  with  their  OTC 
derivatives positions are taken into account under the respective regulatory frameworks for 
these institutions.  
OTC  derivatives,  unlike  their  more  standardised  counterparts  on  futures  markets,  enable 
customised  hedging  of  risks.  Properly  employed,  they  confer  significant  benefits  to  the 
financial  intermediation  process  and  hence  the  wider  economy.  For  example,  interest  rate 
swaps enable companies to convert floating rate loans to fixed-rate loans. Companies with 
large  capital  investments  over  a  long  horizon,  such  as  airlines,  shipping  companies  and 
infrastructure builders, rely on interest rate hedging tools to manage their financial risks.  
But with the rapid growth of OTC derivatives globally, weaknesses in the market structure 
can contribute to a build-up of systemic risk. We saw this during the global financial crisis. 
The interconnectedness of OTC derivatives market participants and the limited transparency 
on counterparty risks can trigger rapid contagion. Under stressed market conditions, this can 
potentially threaten the stability of the financial system. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
for  OTC  derivatives,  covering  derivatives  contracts 
The  G20  has  called  for  changes  to  improve  transparency  and  mitigate  risks  in  OTC 
derivatives  markets.  The  Financial  Stability  Board  has  made  recommendations  under  four 
key thrusts. Singapore is fully committed to implementing these recommendations. 
The  first  thrust  is  to  standardise  derivative  contracts.  MAS  is  working  with  the  Singapore 
Foreign Exchange Markets Committee to encourage standardisation of derivative products. 
The Committee will formulate a code of conduct for financial institutions operating in the OTC 
market. 
The second thrust of the reforms is to mandate central clearing of all standardised contracts. 
Central  clearing  mitigates  systemic  risk  through  multilateral  netting  and  ensures  that  the 
failure  of  a  counterparty  does  not  affect  other  participants.  Since  2006,  the  SGX  has 
operated  a  clearing  facility 
for 
commodities,  energy  and  freight.  It  started  clearing  interest  rate  swaps  in  November  last 
year, and will clear foreign exchange forwards by the end of this year. 
But comprehensive implementation of central clearing is not without challenge. We need to 
determine carefully the products for mandatory central clearing, particularly those employed 
by commercial end-users. The cost of clearing can potentially increase their hedging cost, 
causing  a  cut-back  on  needed  investment  or  an  increase  in  unhedged  positions.  We  also 
need  to  be  mindful  that  while  central  clearing  removes  counter-party  risks,  it  adds  to 
concentration risks. It is therefore critical that central clearing platforms be subject to robust 
supervision  to  ensure  that  they  manage  their  risks  effectively.  To  the  extent  that  these 
platforms  operate  across  geographical  borders,  appropriate  arrangements  for  cooperation 
among national supervisors must be in place.  
The third thrust is to move derivatives trading to platforms where appropriate. This will help to 
improve price transparency. Singapore is a major centre for exchange-traded derivatives in 
Asia.  We  are  well  placed  to  move  more  derivatives  trades  to  organised  platforms,  but  the 
extent would have to take into account the local context, such as product characteristics and 
participant profiles.  
The  fourth  thrust  is  to  report  trades.  Mandatory  trade  reporting  enhances  supervision  of 
derivatives markets by addressing information gaps. For this to be effective, regulators need 
timely  access  to  relevant  data  that  can  be  aggregated.  This  requires  cross-border 
supervisory  cooperation  on  data  access  and  harmonisation  of  reporting  requirements  and 
standards. But  national  concerns  have  led  to  some  jurisdictions  setting  up  their  own  trade 
repositories,  which  could  make  data  aggregation  more  challenging.  MAS  is  assessing  the 
need for a local repository and the appropriate regulatory regime to avoid duplication. 
In recent months, there has been a notion in some quarters that as tighter regulations are 
proposed for OTC derivatives in the US and EU, activity will flow to centres in Asia that are 
purportedly less tightly regulated. This is mistaken. Leading centres in Asia – like Singapore, 
Hong Kong, and Australia – are very much part of the G20 initiative and there is no room for 
regulatory  arbitrage.  MAS  is  fully  engaged  in  the  OTC  work  of  the  FSB,  the  International 
Organisation  of  Securities  Commissions,  and  the  Committee  on  Payment  Systems  and 
Settlements. We will fully implement the OTC derivatives reform agenda.  
There  must  be  consistency  in  implementation  across  jurisdictions,  but  there  cannot  be 
precise  equivalence.  The  OTC  derivatives  landscape  in  Asia  and  Singapore  differs 
considerably from that in the US and Europe. We have smaller markets and less complex 
derivative instruments. We have to consider how to implement the G20 reforms effectively 
while taking into account enforcement issues and the characteristics of our markets. MAS will 
consult the industry on its proposals for OTC derivatives market reforms by the end of this 
year. We aim to meet the G20 target to implement the reforms by end-2012. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Conclusion – shared responsibility 
Let me conclude. 
In regulating capital markets, we are not dealing with a particular industry or a particular type 
of institution. We are trying to create the conditions within what is essentially an ecosystem, 
so that its risks are managed and its economic benefits sustained.  
But these benefits cannot be achieved by regulation alone. As Winston Churchill puts it, “If 
you have ten thousand regulations you destroy all respect for the law”. There is a limit to how 
far  regulation  can  go  without  undermining  compliance,  not  to  mention  efficiency  and 
innovation.  
All  components  of  the  capital  market  ecosystem  must  play  their  part.  A  well-functioning 
capital market is a shared responsibility. If all stakeholders do their part well, not only will we 
have fair and efficient capital markets that everyone has confidence in, but we will also make 
Singapore a competitive and vibrant financial hub in Asia. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
