Erdem Başçi: Commodity price volatility 
Speech by Mr Erdem Başçi, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, at the 
“G-20 Commodity Price Volatility Conference”, Istanbul, 13 September 2011. 
 Dear Colleagues and Distinguished Guests,  
Today  I  will  discuss  commodity  price  volatility,  a  topic  which  has  vital  importance  for  the 
global economy and thus for policy makers. In my speech, I would first like to discuss the 
possible sources of commodity price movements and then elaborate on the approach of the 
Central Bank of Turkey in dealing with commodity price changes in the past few years.  
Commodity markets cover a wide range of raw materials such as oil, metal and agricultural 
products. These commodities have different characteristics not only in terms of trade volume, 
supply  and  demand  structure  but  also  in  terms  of  their  exposure  to  financial  market 
transactions. Understanding the sources of the volatility in prices is essential in order to give 
appropriate  policy  response.  The  challenges  posed  by  high  and  volatile  commodity  prices 
are important worldwide, yet they are more immediate for emerging markets. For instance, 
the  share  of  food  in  the  typical  consumption  basket  is  higher  in  these  economies  than  in 
advanced economies. The average weights of food in the consumer price index in emerging 
market countries and in developed countries are around 30% and 13% respectively. Besides, 
especially for the net importers of commodities, high and volatile prices pose significant risks 
on balance of payments and sustainability of growth in developing countries. 
There  are  nominal  and  real  factors  that  affect  commodity  price  developments.  The  most 
important real factor is due to the low price elasticity of not only supply of but also demand 
for these items. Because of low elasticity, a minor change in supply has the potential to affect 
market prices significantly. Likewise, a minor change in future real growth prospects has the 
effect of shifting the demand with a potential of large market price changes. This explains the 
real  sources  of  commodity  price  volatility  which  is  recently  observed.  Regarding  nominal 
sources of volatility, most commonly cited explanations are related to monetary policies of 
major central banks and the structure of financial markets in commodities.  
I will elaborate more on real factors that is the lack of sufficient real supply increase in order 
to  meet  booming  real  demand  from  the  developing  world.  The  high  growth  potential  in 
developing  countries  suggests  that  demand  pressures  are  likely  to  stay  with  us  over  the 
years to come. Combined with the massive financial flows fueled by the exceptionally loose 
monetary policies, commodity price volatility will probably remain as a major challenge in the 
years ahead. I believe the key solution here lies in productivity increases in agriculture and 
energy  in  the  medium  term.  Regarding  agriculture,  this  necessity  is  much  more  evident  in 
emerging  markets  –  in  order  to  keep  up  with  the  demand  growth,  considering  the  higher 
share  of  food  in  the  consumption  basket.  Rapid  employment  shift  from  agriculture  to 
manufacturing  &  services,  and  the  labor-intensive  structure  of  production  necessitates  a 
reformation in this sector. 
Likewise,  a  similar  productivity  improvement  is  inevitable  for  energy  both  in  emerging  and 
developed economies. However, given the limited supply of resources, efficient energy use 
gains  a  crucial  role  at  this  point.  According  to  the  International  Energy  Agency,  improved 
energy  efficiency  in  buildings,  industrial  processes  and  transportation  could  reduce  the 
world’s energy needs in 2050 by one third (Sophie Hebden: “Invest in clean technology says 
IEA report”, 2006). In this context, energy efficiency together with renewable energy, energy 
obtained from natural resources, are said to be the twin pillars of sustainable energy policy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Dear participants, 
Against  this  backdrop,  in  the  remaining  part  of  my  speech,  I  would  like  to  share  our 
experience in dealing with commodity price  volatility, especially in the context of  monetary 
and  fiscal  policy.  Volatility  in  oil  and  other  commodity  prices  has  both  direct  and  indirect 
effects on inflation. In this manner, there is a debate in the literature on how a central bank 
should respond to the changes in commodity prices. Since oil and other commodity-based 
products are an important component of consumption basket, it is impossible to avoid the so 
called  “firstround  effects”  of  commodity  prices,  which  in  turn  translates  itself  into  inflation 
volatility.  However,  temporary  movements  in  commodity  prices  do  not  affect  the  medium-
term inflation trend, as long as they do not disrupt the general pricing behavior. Therefore, 
central  banks  acting  on  a  medium-term  perspective,  typically  do  not  give  sharp  policy 
responses  to  these  primary  effects  as  doing  so  may  have  strong  negative  impacts  on  the 
social welfare. 
On the other hand, a persistent increase in commodity prices may adversely affect inflation 
expectations and therefore pricing behavior of economic agents. This may entail prolonged 
increases  in  general  price  level  and,  accordingly,  high  costs  associated  with  increasing 
inflation. Therefore, it is important for central banks to pay close attention to the evolution of 
inflation  and  inflation  expectations  in  order  to  contain  the  second-round  effects  of  the 
increases in commodity prices. At the Central Bank of Turkey, we frequently state that we will 
not  react  to  the  first  round  effects  of  the  increases  in  oil  and  other  commodity  prices. 
However,  it  is  emphasized  that  second  round  effects  will  be  closely  monitored  and 
deterioration in inflation outlook will not be tolerated. 
At this point, I would like to share our experiences in coping with global inflationary pressures 
in 2007–2008 period when commodity prices were increasing at a rapid pace. During 2007, 
there  was  a  marked  increase  in  inflation  across  the  world,  including  Turkey.  The  sharp 
surges  in  oil  and  other  international  commodity  prices  were  the  major  factors  driving 
inflationary pressures. 
During  this  episode,  our  first  line  of  defense  was  to  pursue  an  effective  communication 
strategy  by  underscoring  core  inflation  indicators.  Accordingly,  we  emphasized  that  there 
was  no  significant  pressure  on  core  indicators  and  overall  pricing  behavior,  despite  the 
upward  trend  in  headline  inflation.  Initially,  this  strategy  worked  well  and  medium  term 
inflation expectations were anchored despite the surge in headline inflation. Later, however, 
the uptrend in commodity prices turned out to be more persistent than anticipated, leading 
inflation to exceed the targets for two consecutive years by a significant margin, primarily due 
to the sharp increases in commodity prices. 
In response, we decided to set the inflation targets by mid-2008 for the following three years 
on a declining path. In this context, the inflation targets were set as 7.5, 6.5, and 5.5 percent, 
for the years 2009, 2010, and 2011 respectively. Later on, the inflation target for year 2012 
was set at 5% in year 2009 and was kept at 5% for the following year 2013. 
These  targets  allowed  us  to  accommodate  relative  price  changes  driven  by  global 
developments, which itself is the optimal response from a welfare perspective. Second, we 
wanted  to  anchor  inflation  expectations  by  setting  a  feasible  and  credible  path  for  the 
medium  term  rather  than  leaving  this  job  to  central  bankers’  own  inflation  forecasts  in  the 
interim period. The plan worked reasonably well. The deterioration in inflation expectations 
stopped  right  after  announcing  these  targets  and  the  targets  were  undershot  in  2009  and 
2010.  During  this  period,  many  other  central  banks  opted  for  changing  their  forecasts 
significantly above their target for a prolonged period of time. We believe that our approach 
of setting the targets and forecasts rather than forecasts alone on a declining path involves a 
firmer commitment on behalf of the central bank; therefore it is more transparent and more 
effective in anchoring inflation expectations. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Dear guests,  
Being a central banker, I have mostly focused on inflation and monetary policy dimension of 
commodity  price  movements.  Needless  to  say,  the  course  of  commodity  prices  has 
implications on many other key macro variables. For example, as a net energy-commodity 
importer, Turkey’s dependence on energy imports makes the current account balance more 
sensitive to volatility in commodity prices. Recent uncertainty surrounding the energy market 
is not comparable to any other period in the near history. Moreover, there is a significant risk 
that commodity prices stay  volatile due to uncertainties regarding global economy and the 
exceptionally loose monetary policies across the globe. Therefore, medium-term outlook for 
commodity prices is unusually hard to predict. 
In  the  long  term,  supply  conditions  and  structural  policies  should  adjust  to  stabilize  the 
energy and other commodity prices. The recent concrete steps as part of the medium term 
programs  in  Turkey,  aiming  at  curtailing  the  dependence  on  energy  imports  by  switching 
towards domestically produced and renewable energy sources, have important implications 
also  for  decreasing  the  sensitivity  of  current  account  balances  to  international  price 
movements. 
The key question here is how to smooth out the impact of the volatility in energy and other 
commodity  prices  on  the  domestic  economy  in  the  short  to  medium  term,  while  there  is  a 
heightened  degree  of  uncertainty  regarding  financial  and  real  factors.  Introducing  a  fixed 
element into the sales tax on gasoline or other energy prices might be an effective method in 
dealing with this issue. In the case of Turkey, for example, there are two types of taxes on 
the retail gasoline prices. The first one is the VAT that is proportional to the price; the second 
one is the Special Consumption Tax (SCT) that is a fixed tax. The SCT forms a significant 
portion of the retail gasoline prices and attenuate the volatility of final prices that consumers 
face, since it is not a proportional tax. This tax structure not only smooths out the fluctuations 
in  retail  gasoline  prices  but  also  avoids  the  need  for  subsidies,  discretionary  choices  and 
associated fiscal costs. This conference serves as a perfect platform to discuss alternative 
methodologies on these issues.  
Once again I would like to welcome you all to Istanbul and hope that we will address some of 
the challenges regarding commodity prices and the global economy in this meeting.  
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
