Jean-Claude Trichet: Competitiveness and the smooth functioning of the 
Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
University of Liège, Liège, 23 February 2011. 
 Introduction 
I. 
What  should  we  understand  by  the  concept  of  competitiveness,  what  does  it  mean  in 
particular  for  the  euro  area  –  and  how  should  we  act  upon  it?  These  are  the  questions  I 
would like to explore with you today. They are questions I have been contemplating all my 
life as an economic policy-maker.1 And they are questions that are central to the future of the 
national economies of Europe – and of particular importance among those that constitute our 
Economic and Monetary Union. 
Competitiveness  is  a  difficult  idea  to  nail  down  decisively  and  is  commonly  used  to  depict 
very  different  things  –  from  securing  export  market  shares,  through  taxation  of  corporate 
profits, indexation of wages and investment in high-tech, to boosting productivity growth.  
In  my  view,  the  appropriate  definition  of  competitiveness  is  a  country’s  ability  to  achieve 
sustainable  improvements  in  the  economic  living  standards  and  job  opportunities  of  its 
citizens  in  an  open  economy.  Therefore,  competitiveness  is  about  the  entirety  of  our 
economic lives in a time of globalisation.  
It  is  obvious  that  being  successful  in  terms  of  price  and  cost  competitiveness  is  one  key 
condition  for  enhancing  living  standards  and  job  creation  in  open  economies.  Exports  are 
naturally  an  important  part  of  the  picture.  But  all  sectors  of  our  economies  are  involved  in 
competitiveness.  Public  goods  and  services  –  and  private  goods  and  services.  Tradable 
goods and services – and non-tradable goods and services. Financial services firms – firms 
active in all parts of the real economy – and households and governments.  
As  diverse and  multifaceted  as  our  countries  are,  as  manifold  are  the means  of  achieving 
sustainable long-term economic growth and job creation.  
The  objective  of  achieving  sustainable  long-term  growth  in  an  open  economy  is  both 
European and global. It has to do with the thriving of nations within Europe, as well as within 
the global economy that is undergoing very rapid structural changes.  
The European Union is the world’s largest economy and trading partner. It is therefore very 
appropriate  that  it  has  designed  its  own  strategy  of  developing  its  growth  potential  in 
tomorrow’s  global  economy.  This  strategy,  called  Europe  2020,  is  focusing  on  three  main 
areas:  education,  research  and  innovation;  resource  efficiency;  and  high  employment  and 
social  cohesion.  These  elements  are  all  relevant  for  Europe’s  competitiveness  in  a  global 
economy, and the ECB fully supports the Europe 2020 strategy.  
Today,  I  would  like  to  focus  on  the  aspect  of  competitiveness  that  is  internal  to  Europe’s 
Economic and Monetary Union, i.e. the euro area. In such a union, competitiveness must be 
examined at national levels, with a view to take into account in particular the very high level 
of  interdependence  between  economies  created  by  the  single  currency.  Therefore, 
competitiveness  is  not  only  about  raising  our  economic  living  standards:  it  is  also  about 
strengthening the cohesion of the economic union. I will therefore focus my remarks on what 
arrangements of competitiveness surveillance we need in the euro area, and how this could 
                                                 
1  See Trichet (1992) for an analysis of the strategy of competitive disinflation in France at the time. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
be further enshrined in the current economic governance framework that is examined by the 
EU Council and the European Parliament.  
In an economic and monetary union, it is of the essence, by implementing sound economic 
and fiscal policies, to avoid too large and too sustained divergences. That is why the Treaty 
devotes an entire chapter to the “economic policies” of the union, with a particular focus on 
countries that have adopted the single currency.  
In an economic and monetary union, the Member States must develop and share a common 
economic  understanding  of  mutual  surveillance.  This  common  understanding  of  the 
implications of being members of a currency union should ensure that structural features of 
the  economies  help  them  to  preserve  their  relative  competitive  position  in  an  open 
environment  while  ensuring  collective  stability.  Such  collective  stability,  as  opposed  to 
sustained and large imbalances, implies in particular that macroeconomic policies need to be 
fully consistent with a stability-oriented monetary policy.  
I  should  emphasise  that  this  in  no  way  means  that  competitiveness  or  avoiding  internal 
imbalances is about making everybody look the same. The economic diversity that we enjoy 
in Europe is an asset that we should seek to strengthen rather than dissipate.  
What matters, however, is that diversity does not lead to large, persistent divergences. To 
prevent such divergences from arising, we need a common framework that ensures that all 
Member  States  –  within  their  specific  national  settings  –  stay  committed  to  regain,  when 
necessary, consolidate and preserve their relative competitiveness. 
Misguided  national  economic  policies  can 
the  emergence  of  excessive 
competitiveness gaps between the members of the currency union. The primary symptoms 
of  such  competitive  gaps  are  usually  mounting  current  account  deficits,  significant 
accumulated  differences  in  indicators  of  price  and  cost  competitiveness,  leading,  in 
particular, to inflation rates persistently above the euro area common objective.  
Such  developments  are  also  associated  with  tensions,  painful  adjustment  processes  and 
spillovers for other members.  
It is for these reasons that the European Central Bank (ECB) regularly provides analysis and 
insight into the importance of competitiveness for Economic and Monetary Union.  
Indeed,  it  is  now  five  and  a  half  years  since  the  ECB  injected  an  analysis  of  relative 
competitiveness into the European policy surveillance.  
When, around 2005, the signs of imbalances and divergences in key nominal developments, 
in  particular  in  prices,  costs  and  wages,  started  to  accumulate  significantly,  the  Governing 
Council  sent  the  first  analysis  to  the  Eurogroup.  The  focus  was  on  price  and  cost 
developments  in  individual  countries;  the  message  was  one  of  divergence  that  warranted 
interpretation, assessment and policy action. At the same time, an ESCB Task Force was set 
up to look more deeply into competitiveness issues of the individual euro area countries.2 
Ever since, the ECB has provided updates of the analysis to the Eurogroup. The information 
on  unit  labour  costs,  productivity  and  sectoral  wage  developments  in  euro  area  countries 
have become a recurrent theme distributed at these meetings.  
Since  2007,  the  ECB  has  undertaken  regular,  comprehensive  competitiveness  reviews  of 
developments in individual euro area countries. And in 2010, the ECB provided  a detailed 
outline of how the Governing Council envisages a competitiveness framework for the euro 
area.  
lead 
to 
                                                 
2  Task Force of the Monetary Policy Committee of the ESCB, “Competitiveness and the export performance of 
the euro area”, Occasional Paper Series, No 30, ECB, Frankfurt am Main, 2005. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
In  my  remarks  tonight,  I  would  like  to  focus  on  the  main  issues  at  stake  –  for  national 
economies in general and for members of the euro area in particular.  
I will begin by reminding you of some of the stylised facts that have characterised economic 
developments in the euro area over the past 12 years, as well as some of the fallacies about 
competitiveness that I have encountered over the years. 
I  will  then  outline  the  key  elements  of  a  framework  for  analysis  and  action  on 
competitiveness, and subsequently discuss the implications for the current proposals on the 
strengthening of macroeconomic surveillance from a euro area perspective.  
Some empirical evidence  
II. 
Let me give you some stylised facts about macroeconomic developments in the euro area 
over the past decade or so. For now, I will just provide you with the data, without going into 
their causes and policy implications.3  
1. 
Between  1999  and  2009,  nominal  unit  labour  costs  grew  by  24%  in  cumulative 
terms in the euro area as a whole. In Austria and Germany they grew by 13% and 
8%, respectively; in Greece and Ireland, they grew by 34% and 38%, respectively.  
Between  1999  and  2009,  public  sector  wages  in  the  euro  area  grew  by  close  to 
40%. In Germany, they grew by 19%; in Ireland and in Greece, they grew by more 
than 100%, roughly 50 percentage points more than private sector wages.  
Between  1999  and  2007,  residential  property  prices  in  the  euro  area  rose  on 
average  by  around  6%  per  year.  In  Greece  they  rose  on  average  by  9.5%  each 
year; in Ireland they rose each year by almost 12%.  
Household indebtedness in the euro area average rose from about 50% of GDP in 
1999 to about 65% of GDP in 2009, an increase of about 30% over the period. It 
doubled in the economies with the highest increase.  
2. 
3. 
4. 
These are some illustrative facts. Let me now turn to some fallacies that I hear sometimes 
when discussing these and similar facts.  
Fallacies on competitiveness  
III. 
Discussions on competitiveness often reveal misconceptions or fallacies that, in my view, are 
wrongly guiding the debate.  
Fallacy No 1: “Only the tradable sector matters for competitiveness”, some say. “There is no 
problem  with  the  competitiveness  of  our  economy:  companies  in  the  exporting  sector  are 
doing well, prices are low and profits are good.”  
Fallacy  No  2:  “Public  wage  developments  do  not  affect  an  economy’s  competitiveness”, 
some say. “Since the public sector is sheltered from international competition, developments 
in public sector pay have little connection with the private sector and certainly not with the 
international competitiveness of companies.”  
Fallacy No 3: “Let’s discount wage and cost developments with the (relatively) high current 
domestic inflation rate and we get a benign picture”, some say. “Our wage increases of 6% 
                                                 
3  Unit labour costs are computed for the whole economy based on Eurostat data. Public sector wages refers to 
total compensation per government employee based on the OECD Economic Outlook database. The property 
prices  are obtained from national sources  as computed  by the ECB. The coverage  definition differs  across 
countries. Household indebtedness is the sum of short and long-term loans to residents. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
are  fully  justified  because  we  have  2%  productivity  and  4%  inflation; moreover,  the  higher 
inflation rate is purely a catching-up phenomenon because we are growing so fast.”  
Fallacy  No  4:  “Intra-euro  area  current  accounts  don’t  matter”,  some  say.  “The  current 
account  balance  reflects  inter-temporal  optimisation  of  savers  and  investors;  moreover, 
current account deficits are good as they reflect capital inflows, attracted by higher returns.”  
Fallacy  No  5:  “Fiscal  consolidation  can  harm  competitiveness”,  some  say.  “Fiscal 
consolidation 
to  have  dampening  effects  on  growth  and  can  weaken 
competitiveness, which requires substantial government expenditure.”  
is  going 
Key elements of a competitiveness strategy  
IV. 
So if these points are fallacies, what is the right strategy for economies in general and the 
euro area in particular? Let me share with you my reflections on five key elements of what I 
think is the correct diagnosis:  
1. 
First, the non-tradable sector is essential for the competitiveness of an economy. 
Hence, we must look at all sectors when assessing competitiveness.  
Second, wage developments in the public sector are much more important than 
is generally realised. Therefore, the public sector must set its compensation levels 
with  the  implications  for  the  whole  economy  in  mind;  it  must  be  aware  of  its  role 
model.  
Third, less than 2% but close to 2% over the medium term – namely the level of 
medium-term inflation that is ensured as an average in the euro area by the ECB – 
is the right benchmark to use for all countries to calculate competitiveness indicators 
in real terms. Hence, one must not be misled into price-wage spirals by temporary 
inflation differentials.  
Fourth, the current account balance is an important summary indicator that may 
signal  losses  of  competitiveness  and  emerging  imbalances.  As  a  result,  policy-
makers should monitor this balance closely, and especially the related external debt 
accumulation.  
And 
competitiveness. This is yet a further reason for fiscal solidity.  
finances  are  a  pre-condition 
finally,  sound  public 
for  sustained 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
Let me elaborate on each of these elements.  
The non-tradable sector is essential for the competitiveness of an economy 
1. 
There  are  two  main  reasons  why  the  non-tradable  sector  is  essential  for  an  economy’s 
competitiveness. First, non-tradable goods and non-tradable services are important inputs for 
the  production  of  tradable  goods.  Hence,  rising  prices  in  the  non-tradable  sector  push  up 
costs in the tradable sector. Second, price and unit labour cost increases in the non-tradable 
sector  will  ultimately  lead  to  upward  pressure  on  unit  labour  costs  in  the  tradable  sector 
(López-Salido  et  al.,  2005).  This  second-round  effect  pushes  up  the  productions  costs  of 
tradable goods and reduces the competitiveness of the tradable sector.  
There is some recent evidence that those countries with higher growth of unit labour costs in 
services and construction than in industry and manufacturing have experienced a worsening 
of their current accounts (see, for example, Zemanek et al., 2010).  
If unit labour costs in the non-tradable sector persistently exceed those in the tradable sector, 
firms in export industries may see themselves forced to squeeze their profit margins because 
they are unable to pass on higher input prices to world prices. Price and cost pressures from 
an expanding non-tradable sector induce exporters to reduce their margins. Thus, at first, the 
exporting industry might not be doing too badly and export prices remain unaffected. But the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
industry  is  gradually  getting  squeezed,  rather  than  expanding.  This  not  only  reduces  the 
relative weight of exporters in the economy, but also the overall growth potential.  
2. 
Public sector wages are much more important for competitiveness than is 
generally realised 
In the euro area, the government wage bill accounts, on average, for more than 10% of GDP 
and  more  than  20%  of  the  total  compensation  of  employees.  It  is  already  clear  from  the 
sheer  size  of  this  sector  that  public  wage  increases  can  have  a  very  important  signalling 
effect for private sector wage negotiations.  
The larger the public sector is, compared with the tradable sector, the stronger will be the 
signal for wages in the private sector, and therefore the influence on the unit labour costs in 
the  private  sector,  taking  due  account  of  productivity  developments.  Hence,  the  larger  the 
public  sector,  the  more  important,  and  the  more  challenging,  will  be  its  role  in  the  overall 
evolution of cost competitiveness.  
Evidence reveals an important influence from public sector wages to private wages in many 
euro area countries. Public wage spillovers seem to be particularly important in countries that 
have experienced high and volatile public wage growth. Thus, rapid increases in unit labour 
costs  and  severe  losses  in  intra-euro  area  competitiveness  do  not  come  as  a  surprise  in 
these countries (Pérez and Sanchez, 2010 and Holm-Hadulla et al., 2010).  
3. 
Less than 2% but close to 2% over the medium term is the right benchmark to 
use for euro area countries to calculate competitiveness indicators in real 
terms. 
In  the  euro  area,  the  average  annual  inflation  rate  over  the  first  12  years  of  the  euro  was 
1.97%. This outcome is in line with the ECB’s definition of price stability of below, but close 
to,  2%.  This  definition  is  deeply  entrenched  in  medium  to  long-term  inflation  expectations, 
which confirms the ECB’s credibility and the public’s confidence in the ECB’s ability to deliver 
price  stability  over  the  medium  term.  The  ECB  therefore  provides  the  nominal  anchor  for 
future price developments in the euro area as a whole.  
Now,  in  a  currency  union,  it  is  a  natural  phenomenon  that  Member  States,  at  times,  have 
different inflation rates. These differences can result from some differences in the economic 
development level of Member States, their position in the business cycle or their dependence 
on trade and hence global developments.  
So temporary deviations from the euro area-wide inflation average should not be a matter of 
concern. Indeed, they constitute an important potential adjustment channel within a currency 
union  where  exchange  rates  are  fixed.  But  inflation  differentials  can  turn  into  a  source  of 
concern when they become large and persistent.  
For a significant period of time, persistent above area-wide inflation rates in some Member 
States had been regarded by some as justified on the grounds of catching-up effects. The 
argument  is  that  lower-income  countries  usually  import  productivity  gains  in  the  tradable 
sector, which in turn leads to higher economy-wide inflation due to the adjustment of nominal 
wages across sectors. This is the Balassa-Samuelson effect.  
But increasingly evidence suggests that this effect has been overstressed as an explanation 
for inflation differentials in the euro area. In some cases, these differentials were not driven 
by healthy catching-up effects, but were largely the outcome of inappropriate macroeconomic 
policies and debt-financed booms in domestic demand.  
Thus  a  medium-term  inflation  rate  of  somewhat  below  2%  over  the  medium  term  is  the 
appropriate  benchmark  also  at  the  national  level.  Unit  labour  costs,  and  therefore  wage 
developments, after having taken due account of the labour productivity increases, need to 
be consistent with this.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Moreover, using contemporaneous (or lagged) inflation as a benchmark for wages can lead 
to a nominal persistent spiralling of both wages and inflation over and above the average of 
the  euro  area.  This  would  lead  to  a  progressive  loss  of  cost  competitiveness.  This  is  why 
central bankers are against wage indexation, particularly in a single currency area.  
4. 
The current account balance is an important summary indicator that may 
signal emerging imbalances and losses of competitiveness.  
For the record, let me first stress that a current account deficit, just like a current account 
surplus, does not necessarily point to economic malfunctioning. Indeed, it can be optimal for 
a country, given the macroeconomic conditions. This is also true in a monetary union, where 
some differences in national current account balances are a normal feature.  
Capital  flows,  for  example,  may  be  favouring  Member  States  with  better  growth  prospects 
and  higher  expected  returns,  related  to  catching-up  processes  and  successful  structural 
reforms, and current account balances may diverge across countries as a natural result of 
responses to asymmetric shocks.  
Increasingly, however, larger current account deficits, in combination with significant losses 
in competitiveness, high levels of private and public indebtedness and overheating in non-
tradable  sectors,  may  signal  domestic  macroeconomic  imbalances  and  deeper  structural 
problems.  
Countries  with  large  current  account  deficits  or  worsening  current  account  balances,  for 
example,  often  exhibit  cumulated  losses  in  price  competitiveness,  and  vice  versa,  which 
again,  in  turn  may  be  related  to  price  and  cost  developments  that  are  not  economically 
justified. Rather than financing productive investment in the tradable sector and fostering the 
export performance, capital inflows in deficit countries might fuel asset prices and household 
and corporate debt.  
Hence, even if inter-euro area current account balances do not matter because of the same 
currency  and  will  not  trigger  exchange  rate  crises,  at  the  euro  area  level,  internal  current 
account  imbalances  are  relevant  for  policy-makers,  as  one  of  the  major  indicators  of  the 
fundamental functioning of their economies.  
Sound fiscal policy is a pre-condition for sustained competitiveness  
5. 
Some observers are concerned that fiscal consolidation at the current juncture might dampen 
economic growth and also provide negative externalities by constraining demand for trading 
partners.  I  disagree  with  this  view.4  On  the  contrary,  I  see  three  main  reasons  for  fiscal 
consolidation  being  presently  positive 
for  medium-term  economic  growth  and 
competitiveness.  
First,  experience  from  past  episodes  of  fiscal  consolidation  suggests  that,  in  a  situation  of 
sizeable  fiscal  imbalances,  short-term  costs  of  fiscal  adjustment  in  terms  of  forgone 
economic growth tend to be contained or very limited, provided that consolidation is pursued 
as part of a comprehensive reform strategy. Experience also suggests that the success of a 
fiscal  consolidation  strategy  strongly  depends  on  its  design.  Adjustment  on  the  spending 
side, accompanied by structural reforms to promote long-term growth, has typically been the 
best  strategy,  especially  when  combined  with  a  credible  long-term  commitment  to  fiscal 
consolidation.  
Second,  in  a  situation  where  fiscal  sustainability  is  being  questioned,  consolidation  boosts 
confidence,  which  is  a  pre-condition  for  the  consolidation  of  the  present  recovery  and  for 
sustainable medium-term growth.  
                                                 
4  See also Trichet (2010). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Third, public authorities need to preserve the ultimate capacity of public finances to intervene 
in  difficult  circumstances.  This  is  already  true  when  our  economies  are  going  through  the 
usual business cycle. The reconstitution of fiscal buffers is always necessary. It is even more 
necessary  when  our  economies  are  coping  with  exceptional  circumstances,  such  as  the 
recovery  from  the  deepest  economic  crisis  in  over  60  years.  The  soundness  of  public 
finances  and  the  creditworthiness  of  the  sovereign  signatures  are  therefore  a  decisive 
component of economic and financial stability in a medium and long-term perspective.  
Implications for the reform of the European surveillance framework  
V. 
Let  me  now  discuss  what  the  implications  of  these  insights  are  for  the  surveillance  of 
economic  policies  in  Europe,  and  in  particular  how  the  above  five  elements  should  be 
reflected best in the existing European framework of macroeconomic surveillance and in the 
envisaged new elements of this framework.  
Within  an  economic  and  monetary  union,  national  economies  form  an  interdependent 
system,  in  which  spillovers  are  important  for  the  cohesion  of  the  union.  It  is  not 
straightforward for countries to take account of these spillovers sufficiently on their own. This 
is  the  reason  why  strengthened  surveillance  at  the  euro  area  level  is  needed  to  prevent 
economies  from  falling  behind  by  losing  competitiveness  and  becoming  subject  to 
macroeconomic imbalances.  
I have already mentioned developments in prices, costs and wages, current account deficits 
and indicators of private and public sector indebtedness as well as countries’ external debt 
position.  
For many years, I have strongly advocated in various European fora that the accumulation of 
substantial  losses  of  competitiveness,  as  revealed  by  developments  in  unit  labour  costs 
among  other  indicators  was  not  sustainable.  Therefore,  I  trust  that  this  is  where  a 
surveillance framework aimed at preventing and correcting macroeconomic imbalances has 
to start. 
Of course, these elements are not the only ones we have to analyse carefully. As I have said 
before,  economic  reality  is  much  more  complex  than  just  a  pure  set  of  indicators. 
Nevertheless such basic indicators are central for starting the analysis and for understanding 
the policy considerations.  
Let me therefore briefly sketch out the key indicators that ECB staff have been selecting after 
reviewing  and  assessing  the  relevance  of  a  much  wider  set  of  variables.  These  indicators 
shall  provide  early  warning  signals  when  macroeconomic  imbalances  emerge  and  when 
countries  are  experiencing  significant  losses  in  competitiveness,  or  when  there  are  risks 
thereof. The seven key indicators in the view of ECB staff are as follows:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
These variables are all common economic indicators, they are easily available from official 
statistics and they are broad based. They have been selected to keep the first diagnosis as 
simple as possible, while still covering the most relevant dimensions of economic fitness.  
a long-term measure of the growth of unit labour costs;  
the stock of a country’s net external debt as a ratio to GDP;  
the national inflation rate;  
the current account deficit as a ratio to GDP;  
the private and government debt ratios; 
and the stock of private sector credit. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Such a scoreboard of indicators can help focus our attention on the key issues and trigger 
more detailed surveillance procedures in cases in which indicators rise beyond certain pre-
defined threshold levels.  
The  European  Commission  and  the  related  Council  working  group  have  been  working 
intensively on such a framework, including an alert mechanism on the basis of a limited set 
of macroeconomic indicators – similar to those I have just presented – which would initiate 
more detailed surveillance procedures.  
The current discussions are based on the Commission’s proposal for a new framework that 
will apply to all 27 EU Member States with a preventive and a corrective arm.  
Without  going  into  all  the  technical  details,  let  me  make  very  clear  once  again  which 
fundamental  elements  in  its  design  should  be  improved.  The  ECB’s  Governing  Council, 
being responsible for ensuring price stability, has a major interest in the smooth functioning 
of  the  euro area  economy.  In  this  respect,  the ECB  considers  it  fundamental  to  set  up  an 
effective  surveillance  mechanism  in  the  euro  area  that  avoids  the  challenges  that  some 
countries  are  currently  facing.  The  ECB  published  yesterday  its  opinion  on  the  proposals 
made by the European Commission (ECB, 2011). It regards these proposals as appropriate 
for the Single Market, but considers that they need to be strengthened as regards the euro 
area.  With  respect  to  the  new  macroeconomic  surveillance  framework,  the  ECB  calls,  in 
particular, for the following specific measures to strengthen the framework for the euro area: 
First,  the  specific  nature  of  membership  of  a  monetary  union  should  be  indicated  more 
explicitly.  This  should  be  reflected  in  differentiated  indicators  and  thresholds  of  the 
scoreboard for the members of the euro area, in comparison with the other members of the 
European  Union.  Tighter  thresholds  for  competitiveness  indicators  in  the  scoreboard  are 
required for the euro area countries. The set of indicators for the euro area countries should 
focus  on  the  detection  of  macroeconomic  imbalances,  and  therefore  they  should  refer  to 
losses  of  price  competitiveness,  private  and  public  sector  indebtedness  and  external 
indebtedness indicators. They differ by nature from the much wider set of indicators reviewed 
to  assess  progress  in  structural  reforms  in  the  context  of  the  Europe  2020  strategy  to 
enhance  sustainable  growth  and  employment  in  Europe.  These  are  the  concepts  that  will 
address  the  “thriving  of  nations  in  the  dynamic  global  economy”  which  I  alluded  to  at  the 
outset.  
Second, a clear focus of the surveillance framework can be maintained best if only cases of 
macroeconomic  imbalances  that  hamper  the  smooth  functioning  of  monetary  union  are 
addressed. The framework proposed by the European Commission is symmetric with respect 
to  detecting,  preventing  and  correcting  both  excessive  losses  as  well  as  gains  in 
competitiveness.  I  think  that  a  totally  symmetric  approach  misses  an  important  point:  the 
European  Union  and  the  euro  area  are  not  closed  economies.  On  the  contrary,  they  are 
amongst the most open economies in the world. Gaining more competitiveness through the 
improvements  in  one  particular  economy  is  a  win-win  game  for  all  members:  we  are  not 
playing  a  zero  sum  game.  Therefore,  a  totally  symmetric  approach  runs  the  risk  that  the 
surveillance  lacks  focus  and  becomes  distracted  from  the  most  serious  challenges  to  the 
monetary union, which are significant losses of competitiveness, persistent current account 
deficits,  unsustainable  increases  in  asset  prices,  including  real  estate  prices,  and  high 
external  and  internal  levels  of  indebtedness.  Given  the  magnitude  of  the  imbalances 
accumulated, the required policy action is urgent in some Member States. 
Third, a much greater degree of automatism should be introduced into the macroeconomic 
surveillance  framework.  A  substantial  discretionary  power  puts  the  credibility  of  the 
macroeconomic surveillance mechanism at risk, if the rules and enforcement measures are 
not  consistently  applied.  Therefore,  the  possibility  of  derogation  from  the  imposition  of 
sanctions  on  the  grounds  of  exceptional  economic  circumstances  or  at  the  request  of  a 
Member State should be avoided. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Fourth, in the same vein as the reforms introduced in the Stability and Growth Pact, financial 
sanctions  in  the  macroeconomic  surveillance  framework  need  to  be  applied  at  an  earlier 
stage and gradually, to provide Member States with the right incentives to comply with the 
policy recommendations. This implies that financial incentives – such as an interest bearing 
deposit – should be applied after the first instance of non-compliance or non-cooperation by 
a Member State, while the current proposals foresee fines only after a repeated failure of a 
Member State to comply with Council recommendations. 
I  am  convinced  that  the  European  Parliament,  with  its  co-decision  power,  will  improve  the 
framework very significantly and trust that the proposals above are helpful in this respect.  
Conclusion 
VI. 
Let me draw to a conclusion. Competitiveness improvements will enhance a country’s ability 
to achieve sustainable improvements in the economic living standards and job opportunities 
of its citizens.  
Europe’s 2020 strategy is fully part of the overall concept of competitiveness. It is, in a way, 
the “external” angle of competitiveness in the global economy. Today, I focused more on the 
“internal” angle of competitiveness, to strengthen the economic management of the Single 
Market and, more specifically, of the euro area.  
When  the  data  are  analysed  within  an  appropriately  comprehensive  framework,  several 
fallacies  become  evident.  We  know  that  we  must  look  carefully  at  the  non-tradable  sector 
when assessing competitiveness. We must monitor public wage developments very closely. 
We also understand – and this is absolutely fundamental – that a euro-wide price perspective 
must  dominate  over  national  computations  when  discounting  nominal  evolutions  including 
revenues  and  wages.  We  see  that  the  current  account  provides  an  important  summary 
indicator. And finally, we trust that appropriate fiscal consolidation will lay the foundations for 
sustained competitiveness of our economies.  
Figuratively  speaking,  competitiveness  is  not  about  becoming  athletes  in  a  world  sprint 
competition.  It  is  about  staying  fit  and  thriving  for  the  long  term.  It  is  also  about  avoiding 
falling behind and ultimately becoming more dependent on others.  
Because  the  community  benefits,  competitiveness  is  not  about  becoming  richer  at  the 
expense  of  others  –  the  infamous  beggar-thy-neighbour  philosophy.  Competitiveness  is 
about individual and collective health, with the two of them being mutually reinforcing.  
We also need a commitment to sound and sustainable public finances and sound national 
economic policies. Both must be monitored by a rigorous, credible and focused surveillance 
framework. 
A  rigorously  implemented  Europe  2020  strategy,  coupled  with  a  reinforcement  of  the 
governance framework before the European Parliament that we are calling for, will pave the 
way for prosperity and stability of the EU and the euro area in tomorrow’s global economy.  
The  contribution  of  the  single  monetary  policy  to  this  process  is  clear.  Monetary  policy 
provides  a  reliable  nominal  anchor  for  households,  enterprises,  savers  and  investors  that 
euro area-wide consumer prices will increase, as in the past 12 years, in line with the ECB’s 
definition of price stability over the medium term.  
Our  331  million  fellow  citizens  can rest  assured  that  the  ECB  is  fully  faithful  to its  primary 
mandate.  By  maintaining  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  and  by  solidly  anchoring 
inflation expectations at a level consistent with our definition of price stability, monetary policy 
can make the best contribution to the achievement of sustainable long-term economic growth 
and job creation. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
References 
Afonso,  A.  and  P.  Gomes  (2008),  “Interactions  between  private  and  public  sector  wages”, 
ECB Working Paper no. 971, November. 
Bernard, A. B., Jensen, J. B., Redding, S. J. and P. K. Schott (2007), “Firms in international 
trade”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21, 3, pp. 106–130. 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2010), “The cyclical effects of concurrent fiscal consolidation with the 
euro area”, Monthly Report, July, pp. 30–31. 
Di Mauro, F. and K. Forster (2008), “Globalisation and the competitiveness of the euro area”, 
ECB Occasional Paper No. 97, September. 
European  Central  Bank  (2011),  “Opinion  of  the  European  Central  Bank  on  economic 
governance reform in the European Union”, CON/2011/13, February 2011 (Legal framework) 
Estrada,  J.  and  M.  de  Molina  (2009),  “The  Spanish  economy  in  EMU:  the  first  ten  years”, 
Banco de España Occasional Paper 0901. 
Hofmann,  B.  and  H.  Remsperger  (2005),  “Inflation  differentials  among  the  euro  area 
countries:  potential  causes  and  consequences”,  conference  paper  presented  at  the  ASSA 
annual meeting 2005. 
Holm-Hadulla,  F.,  Kamath,  K.,  Lamo,  A.,  Pérez,  J.  J.  and  L.  Schuknecht  (2010),  “Public 
wages in the euro area – towards securing stability and competitiveness”, ECB Occasional 
Paper no. 112, June.  
Katsimi  (2004),  “Inflation  divergence  in  the  euro  area:  the  Balassa-Samuelson  effect”, 
Applied Economics Letters, 11, pp. 329–332. 
Lamo,  A.,  J.  J.  Pérez  and  L.  Schuhknecht  (2008),  “Public  and  private  sector  wages  –  co-
movement and causality”, ECB Working Paper no. 963, November. 
Laubach, T. (2009), “New evidence on the interest rate impacts of budget deficits and debt”, 
Journal of the European Economic Association, 7 (4), pp. 858–885. 
Lommatzsch,  K.  and  S.  Tober  (2006),  “Euro  area  inflation:  does  the  Balassa-Samuelson 
effect matter?”, International Economic Policy, pp. 105–136. 
Lopéz-Salido,  D.  J.,  Restoy,  F.  and  J.  Vallés  (2005),  “Inflation  differentials  in  EMU:  the 
Spanish case”, Banco de Espana Working Paper 514. 
Melitz,  M.  and  G.  Ottaviano  (2008),  “Market  size,  trade  and  productivity”,  Review  of 
Economic Studies, 75, 295–316. 
Ottaviano,  G.,  Taglioni,  D.  and  F.  di  Mauro  (2009),  “The  euro  and  the  competitiveness  of 
European firms”, Economic Policy, January, pp. 5–53. 
Pérez, J. J. and A. J. Sanchez (2010), “Is there a signalling role for public wages? Evidence 
for  the  euro  area  based  on  macro  data”,  ECB  Working  Paper  No  1148.  Forthcoming  in 
Empirical Economics. 
Rabanal,  P.  (2009),  “Inflation  differentials  between  Spain and  EMU:  a  DSGE  perspective”, 
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 27, pp. 975–984. 
Rother,  P.,  Schuhknecht,  L.  and  J.  Stark  (2010),  “The  benefits  of  fiscal  consolidation  in 
unchartered waters”, ECB Occasional Paper Series no. 121, November. 
Task Force of the Monetary Policy Committee of the ESCB (2005) “Competitiveness and the 
export performance of the euro area”, ECB Occasional Paper no. 30.  
Trichet,  Jean-Claude  (1992),  “Dix  ans  de  disinflation  competitive”,  Les  notes  bleues  de 
Bercy, p. 1–12. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Trichet, Jean-Claude (2010), “Stimulate no more – it is now time for all to tighten”, Financial 
Times, 22 July. 
Wagner,  M.  (2005),  “The  Balassa-Samuelson-effect  in  East  and  West,  differences  and 
similarities”, Reihe Ökonomie, no. 180, Institute for Advanced Studies, Wien. 
Zemanek,  H.,  Belke,  A.  and  G.  Schnabl  (2010),  “Current  account  balances  and  structural 
adjustment in the euro area”, International Economic Policy, 7, pp. 83–127. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
