Jens Weidmann: Fiscal and monetary policy challenges in the short and 
long run 
Concluding remarks by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the 
Bank  of  France/Deutsche  Bundesbank  Spring  Conference  on  “Fiscal  and  Monetary  Policy 
Challenges in the Short and Long Run”, Hamburg, 20 May 2011. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Before this spring conference on “Fiscal and Monetary Policy Challenges in the Short and 
Long  Run”  comes  to  an  end,  I  would  like  to  congratulate  and  thank  you  all  for  your 
contributions, your stimulating papers and the intense discussions on a highly relevant topic. 
For central banks, sound scientific research forms the basis for good-decision making in a 
very  complex  setting  and  as  such  also  lends  weight  to  the  voices  of  central  banks  in  the 
public  discourse  as  well  as  in  the  various  decision-making  bodies  they  belong  to.  The 
importance we attach to research is also underlined by the fact that this conference has been 
hosted by two central banks, and I would like to thank the Banque de France for the excellent 
cooperation and for making this event possible. 
The topic of this conference “Fiscal and Monetary Policy Challenges in the Short and Long 
Run”  is  an  evergreen.  But  this  time  it  was  particularly  well  chosen:  the  recent  crisis  has 
brought  monetary  and  fiscal  policy  to  the  centre  of  attention.  It  has  become  apparent  that 
they can be important instruments to contain a crisis. However, we have also seen that fiscal 
and monetary policy may be at least partly responsible for the emergence of a crisis. 
Speaking in general terms, both fields of policy are faced with complex problems. The effects 
of  the  various  measures  are  uncertain;  and  as  the  title  of  this  conference  correctly 
emphasises, it is important to take into account the short term but at the same time essential 
not to lose sight of long-term effects. Stabilisation is of particular concern during a crisis, yet 
allocation and the preservation of appropriate incentives in a market economy are crucial. It 
might  be  necessary  to  bear  costs  now  to  prevent  even  higher  costs  from  emerging  in  the 
future. Hence, when evaluating policy measures we have to make a clear distinction between 
the actual crisis and its aftermath. 
The  financial  crisis  was  caused  by  a  cocktail  of  shortcomings  in  different  areas,  such  as 
regulatory loopholes, monetary and fiscal policy mistakes, macroeconomic imbalances and 
insufficient risk management practices in systemic financial institutions in an environment of 
dynamic  financial  innovations.  Thus,  I  would  be  very  sceptical  regarding  overly  simplistic 
explanations for the crisis. But all these deficiencies led to exaggerations in different sectors 
and countries. When these exaggerations suddenly reversed themselves, the crisis emerged 
and affected the world economy in a way not observed in post-war years. During the crisis, 
fiscal and monetary policy both played a decisive role in stabilising the financial markets and 
the real economy. The challenge now is to turn back to normal mode. This is a particularly 
demanding  task  in  a  volatile  and  erratic  environment.  However,  overdoing  expansionary 
policies will rather start a new and probably even worse crisis instead of bringing the current 
crisis to an end. 
Thus,  it  is  imperative  to  learn  from  the  current  crisis  and  to  improve  and  strengthen  the 
existing  framework  in  order  to  minimise  the  likelihood  of  crises:  we  need  new  rules  for 
financial  markets  in  general,  for  banks  in  particular  and  for  public  finances.  We  have  to 
analyse  more  intensively  the  emergence  of  macroeconomic  imbalances  and  scrutinise 
structural  deficiencies.  Finally,  monetary  policy 
integrate 
macroprudential  aspects.  Nevertheless,  in  all  areas  we  have  to  resist  the  temptation  of 
frameworks  will  have 
to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
regulatory  and  macroeconomic  fine-tuning.  Markets  have  to  remain  the  main  tool  for 
coordination  and  we  should  not  attempt  to  eliminate  all  risks.  Risks  and  uncertainty  are 
essential elements of a market economy. 
At the end, of course, it is imperative that the economic and political framework is broadly 
supported by the public – and this is especially true for the European Union and European 
monetary union. It is necessary to ensure that current measures to contain the debt crisis do 
not  cause  a  longer-term  problem  of  general  acceptance.  The  current  framework  includes 
largely decentralised responsibility for fiscal policy and an independent monetary policy that 
focuses  on  price  stability.  This  framework  sets  the  range  of  measures  that  monetary  and 
fiscal policy can and should take – barring a fundamental revision. 
Against this general backdrop, let us now take a look at some specific monetary and fiscal 
policy issues which were discussed at this conference. 
Monetary and fiscal policy during the financial crisis 
2. 
For any institution that attempts to stabilise the economy and the financial system during a 
crisis,  two  things  are  particularly  important:  credibility  and  room  for  manoeuvre.  Central 
banks  certainly  had  both.  Thus,  when  liquidity  dried  up  on  financial  markets  and  systemic 
breakdown  became  a  real  threat,  monetary  policy  acted  as  an  important  instrument  of 
stabilisation. By applying a number of non-standard measures, central banks took over the 
role of the money market and supplied the financial system with ample liquidity. Despite the 
success of this policy in preventing a systemic breakdown, one should not forget the risk of 
adverse side effects in the long term. Sticking to non-standard policy measures for too long 
will not only change the perception of risk in financial markets in an undesired manner but 
will also preserve inefficient banking structures. History tells us this has been a key mistake 
in the aftermath of past financial crises. Consequently, the question is not whether an exit 
from non-standard monetary policy is necessary, but when it will take place. 
Fiscal policy, too, contributed significantly to preventing a downward spiral at the height of 
the  crisis.  It  helped  shore  up  the  financial  sector  through  guarantees,  recapitalisation 
schemes  and  the  set-up  of  bad  banks  to  relieve  banks’  balance  sheets,  and  it  supported 
aggregate  demand  through  automatic  stabilisers  as  well  as  discretionary  measures.  How 
effective  have  these  discretionary  measures  been?  During  this  conference  Walker  and 
others argued that the presence of a fiscal multiplier larger than one is far from certain. Other 
papers presented during the conference clarified the conditions under which fiscal multipliers 
may be large. One key aspect is the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates, which may 
amplify the effects of fiscal policy, at least in the short run. 
Let me add something on a personal note: What I learned during my years in government is 
that in normal times discretionary fiscal policy is surely not an advisable tool of stabilisation. 
Far too many lags exist that reduce the effectiveness of expansionary measures. Moreover, 
looking at the long term, we have to bear in mind that political economy mechanisms bias 
fiscal  policy  towards  incurring  deficits.  However,  in  an  exceptional  crisis  things  are  slightly 
different and it cannot be denied that discretionary fiscal policy had a stabilising effect. In this 
connection the zero lower bound is certainly a critical aspect, although its relevance might be 
larger for the United States: Eurosystem experience shows that the lower bound rendering 
monetary policy ineffective might be less of an issue than commonly believed in the pre-crisis 
mainstream  view.  At  least,  non-standard  measures  seem  to  have  prevented  a  given 
monetary policy stance – set by traditional interest rate instruments – from becoming overly 
restrictive during the crisis. 
The  sovereign  debt  crisis  strongly  reminded  us  that,  in  the  long  run,  only  sound  public 
finances provide the necessary room for manoeuvre when a major shock occurs. And, even 
more  importantly,  only  sound  public  finances  generate  the  credibility  that  is  necessary  for 
discretionary measures to be effective. Once credibility is lost, fiscal multipliers become zero 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
or might even turn negative. Furthermore, as long as structural problems exist, stabilisation 
cannot be a substitute for reforms. In this regard, the experience of past crises teaches us 
another lesson: more often than not, structural deficiencies are wrongly interpreted as a lack 
in  aggregate  demand,  leading  to  an  overstimulation  of  the  economy  that  may  well  lay  the 
basis for the next crisis. 
As both fiscal policy and monetary policy have to find an exit strategy, the question arises of 
how the respective exits should be sequenced, given the interactions between the two policy 
areas. Angeloni, Faia, and Winkler took such a perspective in their policy-oriented paper that 
simulates  different  exit  scenarios.  They  make  clear  that  in  returning  to  normal  conditions, 
fiscal and monetary policy should work together. An interesting result of the simulations is 
that rapid consolidation by the fiscal sector is preferable to gradual approaches. At the same 
time, spending-based consolidation is preferable to revenue-based consolidation. Regarding 
the sequence of fiscal and monetary policy exits, Angelonie, Faia and Winkler find that fiscal 
policy should exit first. 
In Europe, we see a situation in which in some countries confidence in public finances has 
eroded massively, which in turn complicates matters for monetary policy. While this problem 
is most pressing in the euro area, it is also relevant for other countries; fiscal dominance is 
no  longer  a  mere  theoretical  notion  but  a  real  threat.  This  was  forgotten  during  the  Great 
Moderation but has now become a highly relevant issue. 
The  world  over,  awareness  of  the  urgent  need  for  fiscal  consolidation  has  increased. 
However,  confidence  in  the  sustainability  of  public  debt  will  only  stay  firm,  let  alone  be 
restored where it is at stake, if this awareness quickly translates into credible and ambitious 
steps  to  cut  expenditure  or  raise  revenue.  Otherwise,  it  will  be  increasingly  difficult  to 
convince  investors  and  the  public  that  the  alternatives  to  consolidation,  namely  sovereign 
default or a debt-reducing inflation, can be ruled out. The serious risks emanating from these 
alternatives  are  discussed  in  three  papers.  Krause  and  Moyen  highlight  the  quantitative 
effects of an increase in inflation targets in the United States aimed at reducing the real value 
of  outstanding  obligations,  as  discussed  by  Blanchard,  Rogoff  and  others  at  various 
occasions.  The  applied  model  combines  forward-looking  interest  rate  determination  in  the 
presence of long-run debt and shows that short-term manipulations of the inflation rate are 
not very effective in reducing the real value of government debt. Rather, in addition to a high 
average maturity of outstanding government debt it would take a persistent increase in the 
expected inflation target to achieve a sizable reduction in the real debt burden. Such a policy 
is definitely not advisable: Apart from the costs associated with higher inflation, central bank 
credibility,  established  in  past  decades  at  great  costs  and  now  one  of  our  most  important 
assets, would be seriously or even critically damaged. 
The papers by Adam and Grill, as well as Uhlig, investigate the alternative, that is, disruptive 
means  of  reducing  public  debt:  sovereign  default.  It  is  easily  overlooked  that  in  advanced 
economies,  sovereign  default  is  usually  a  political  decision  rather  than  an  economic 
necessity. Hence, understanding the reasons why governments decide to default on parts of 
their  debt  is  crucial  for  developing  strategies  on  how  to  avoid  such  situations  in  the  first 
place.  Adam  and  Grill  address  this  fundamental  question,  and  show  the  conditions  under 
which it is optimal for a country to occasionally default on its debt after large shocks. Defaults 
are  rare  events  if  they  are  costly  for  a  country.  However,  this  result  applies  to  a  model 
without contagion across countries and perfectly insured international investors. Uhlig tackles 
these issues in the setting of a currency union, taking into account many of the additional 
aspects that complicate the situation we face now. In his model, membership in a monetary 
union and the resulting prospect of financial assistance to counter the risks of contagion can 
extend a country’s borrowing constraint and weaken the incentive to consolidate. In the end, 
there is certainly a non-negligible risk of only delaying, rather than averting, a default. 
Because of this mechanism and the large risks borne by the tax-payers of countries granting 
financial  support,  conditionality  has  to  be  a  core  principle  of  such  support  programmes  – 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
including  those  launched  in  the  European  debt  crisis.  Conditionality  has  two  dimensions: 
Ex ante, countries have to commit to a credible and frontloaded adjustment programme in 
order  to  get  access  to  financial  support,  a  programme  that  is  suitable  to  restore  the 
sustainability  of,  and  thus  confidence,  in  public  debt.  Ex  post,  once  financial  support  has 
started  to  flow,  compliance  with  the  programme  has  to  be  monitored  continuously,  and 
deviations  from  the  programme  have  to  be  corrected  swiftly  and  convincingly.  If  a  country 
fails to do so, further support should no longer be taken for granted and the country should 
be  prepared  to  bear  the  severe  consequences  that  are  likely  to  ensue  once  financial 
assistance is withdrawn. It is true that in such a case the other member countries and their 
financial system would suffer as well – being tough on violations of conditionality does come 
at a price. But these costs have to be weighed against the damage to long-term stability of 
monetary  union  that  would  result  if  the  binding  force  of  support  programmes  and  the 
no-bail-out principle were ultimately eroded. Shifting burdens to other member countries’ tax 
payers should not be permitted to appear to be a viable and attractive option. 
Against  this  background,  current  events  in  Greece  have  brought  the  euro  area  to  a 
crossroads: the future character of European monetary union will be determined by the way 
in which this situation is handled. There can be no doubt that it is first and foremost up to 
Greece  itself  to  take  appropriate  additional  steps  should  it  turn  out  that  the  adjustment 
programme  is  not  on  track.  It  is  surely  the  case  that  the  consolidation  efforts  and  the 
structural  reforms  are  far  from  easy  to  implement,  entailing  many  hardships  on  the  Greek 
economy and the population. But these measures are inevitable to restore the soundness of 
public finances, and without financial support from other member countries, the EU and the 
IMF, the immediately necessary adjustment would be much more severe. 
Conversely, “reprofiling” Greek bond maturities cannot substitute for fulfilling the adjustment 
programme. The sustainability of public finances would hardly change, since a prolongation 
would do nothing to improve the other factors that determine the sustainability of the current 
debt level: growth prospects and the primary surplus. Furthermore, a prolongation of Greek 
government bonds in an environment of prevailing strong doubts about the sustainability of 
public  finances  would  make  it  impossible  to  accept  them  as  collateral  for  refinancing 
operations  under  the  existing  rules  of  the  Eurosystem’s  collateral  framework,  and 
consequently  large  parts  of  the  Greek  financial  sector  would  be  cut  off  from  funding.  In 
addition, the risks for contagion to other countries would significantly rise. Hence, proposals 
for such a step seem to assume implicitly that the Eurosystem would provide financial means 
against  insufficient  collateral.  But  such  a  monetisation  of  public  debt  cannot  be  tolerated. 
Instead of blurring the responsibilities of monetary and fiscal policy even further, fiscal policy 
must take up its responsibility in fighting the sovereign debt crisis in the respective countries 
and at the European level. 
Measures to prevent future crises 
3. 
Dealing with the imminent challenges of the current crisis, however, should not let us lose 
sight  of  the  efforts  to  prevent  future  crises.  Even  when  proper  fiscal  consolidation  has 
brought public debt back to sustainable levels, this alone offers no guarantee against fiscal 
policy  getting  off  track  again  in  the  future.  History  tells  us  that  maintaining  sound  public 
finances  is  a  notoriously  difficult  task.  Against  this  backdrop,  Auerbach  has  discussed  the 
usefulness  of  an  independent  fiscal  entity  which  would  to  a  certain  degree  mirror  the 
independent role of central banks. It is also reminiscent of a proposal made by Leeper for an 
“office of independent thinking”. Long-term government commitments are usually not a topic 
of public debate, and if they are, the discussion is often not based on sound facts or analysis. 
Thus, better information and a debate at a higher level would allow the public to make an 
informed judgment and put pressure on politicians. 
Alas, I am somewhat sceptical of this proposal – both in terms of political viability and with 
regard  to  the  extent  that  the  budget  authority  of  elected  parliaments  can  legitimately  be 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
constrained  to  such  an  extent.  The  independence  of  monetary  policy  from  the  immediate 
influence  of  parliament  and  government  seems  to  be  rather  the  exception  that  proves  the 
rule  than  a suitable  recipe  for  reining  in  other  fields  of  economic  policy,  in  particular  fiscal 
policy. 
In my view, however, the financial markets are fundamentally better at exerting discipline on 
policy  makers.  Investors  are  less  subject  to  the  problems  of  moral  hazard  and  time 
inconsistency  that  we  usually  run  into  when  relying  on  policymakers  to  ensure  fiscal 
soundness. This confidence in financial markets may come as a surprise, given their recent 
track record in identifying risks early on. To act as more reliable correctives for fiscal policy, 
market  participants  have  to  assess  risks  timely  and  correctly  and  factor  them  into  their 
investment  decisions.  The  experience  of  the  crisis  has  already  led  to  a  fundamental 
assessment  of  risks  associated  with  various  assets.  To  ensure  that  markets  effectively 
discipline fiscal policy it is equally important that investors themselves can expect to bear the 
consequences  of  their  investment  decisions,  that  is  to  say,  both  profits  and  losses.  This 
requires  a  stronger  institutional  framework  and  an  overhaul  of  financial  market  regulation 
which  is  currently  under  way.  Relevant  aspects  have  been  discussed  in  some  papers 
presented  at  this  conference.  Cooper  and  Kempf  as  well  as  Cukierman  and  Izhakian,  for 
instance,  have  discussed  the  problem  of  bailouts  with  regard  to  their  potential  costs  and 
benefits or their impact on risk assessments. 
Markets  are  a  powerful  complement  in  disciplining  fiscal  policy,  but  we  should  not  rely  on 
them  alone.  Especially  a  monetary  union  with  decentralised  fiscal  policy  needs  a  strong 
regulatory  framework  to  prevent  excessive  deficits  in  individual  member  states  that  might 
spill over negatively to the rest of the union. With regard to European monetary union, the 
crisis has revealed that the existing framework is not strong enough and hence needs to be 
strengthened and broadened. 
Relevant reforms have already been agreed upon. They include a strengthened Growth and 
Stability Pact, a new mechanism for macroeconomic surveillance and a new mechanism to 
deal with actual crises. In principle, the envisaged reforms aim in the right direction but are 
far too timid in some parts and of a flawed design in others – the Bundesbank has on various 
occasions  raised  more  detailed  criticisms.  Nevertheless,  to  make  a  rather  general  point: 
Incentives  for  sound  public  finances  and  responsible  investment  decisions  must  be 
strengthened not weakened. Especially with regard to public finances, it is often overlooked 
that  fiscal  soundness  is  not  an  end  in  itself.  Instead,  it  is  a  precondition  –  albeit  an 
indispensable one – for the continued success of the euro, the single most important project 
of united Europe. We must not forget that the euro has delivered enormous benefits so far. 
The euro is a stable currency both externally and internally – inflation has been historically 
low since its introduction – and during the financial crisis, the common currency proved to be 
a very important stabilising element. 
Conclusion 
4. 
Ladies and gentlemen, you have dealt with highly relevant but also very complex issues at 
this conference. Although research has made progress, the relevant questions are far from 
being resolved, and I am sure that there is scope for many further conferences. Seen in this 
light,  times  have  seldom  been  as  exciting  for  economic  research  as  they  are  right  now.  I 
encourage you to continue with your work and wish you every success. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
