Jürgen Stark: The global financial crisis and the role of central banking 
Speech by Mr Jürgen Stark, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at 
a meeting hosted by the Institute of Regulation & Risk, North Asia, Hong Kong, 12 April 2011. 
 It is a pleasure for me to address this distinguished audience. In my remarks today, I would 
like to share some thoughts with you on how the global financial crisis could shape central 
banking in the future.  
Crises are often associated with deep-seated changes in both the mandates and functions of 
central  banks  –  this  is  a  well-established  regularity  in  contemporary  economic  history.  For 
example,  central  bank  inaction  was  widely  held  responsible  for  worsening  the  economic 
downturn during the Great Depression of the 1930s. The result was that monetary policy was 
placed under the control of fiscal authorities for nearly two decades afterwards. 
The  Great  Inflation  of  the  1970s  had  the  opposite  effect.  The  failure  of  weak  monetary 
regimes to reign in high inflation led to the establishment, in the early  1980s, of monetary 
policy  frameworks  solidly  anchored  by  price  stability  mandates,  and  safeguarded  by 
independent and autonomous central bankers.  
Will this crisis – which is still ongoing – have any implications for the tasks of central banks in 
the future?  
To  shed  light  on  this  question,  I  will,  first  of  all,  look  back  on  the  salient  features  of  the 
monetary policy paradigm prevailing before the crisis. Then I will review how central banks 
responded in practice to the crisis, focusing on the ECB’s policy actions in this regard. And 
finally, I will discuss whether certain aspects of the pre-crisis monetary policy paradigm need 
to be reassessed on the basis of the recent experience, and outline the likely challenges for 
central banks that lie ahead. 
 The monetary policy paradigm before the crisis 
1.  
We do not know yet to what extent the pre-crisis consensus macroeconomic framework has 
been  de-constructed  by  the  crisis.  But  we  do  know  that  the  “hubris”  of  the  intellectual 
paradigm on which that framework was erected has completely vanished. 
Some aspects of the framework, in my view, will undoubtedly survive the crisis. One is the 
great  and  increasingly  shared  emphasis  on  central  bank  independence.  Another  is  the 
centrality  of  price  stability  for  monetary  policy.  These  were  the  twin  foundations  of  the 
dominant  monetary  policy  paradigm  before  the  crisis,  and  the  crisis has  not  challenged  or 
discredited either of them. I will return to the issue of price stability towards the end of my 
remarks. 
Beyond these considerations, other aspects of the international consensus framework merit 
some careful re-evaluation. In particular, I will take this opportunity to share my thoughts on 
two salient features of the monetary policy paradigm as described in a number of pre-crisis 
studies1.  
                                                 
1   See, for example, Goodfriend, M. (2007) How the World Achieved Consensus on Monetary Policy, Journal of 
Economic  Perspectives  21  (4),  pp.  47–68;  and  Woodford,  M.  (2008),  Convergence  in  Macroeconomics: 
Elements of the New Synthesis, paper presented in the session “Convergence in Macroeconomics?”, annual 
meeting of the American Economic Association, January 2008. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
One  was  complacency.  The  “great  moderation”  of  the  1990s  appeared  to  have  inflation 
permanently under control and conveyed the impression that the monetary policy battles of 
yesteryear had been won once and for all. This sense of security was highly consequential. 
Some  observers  thought  that  monetary  policy  had  a  greater  freedom  to  turn  to  other 
purposes, notably short-term demand management.  
Policy practitioners of this view referred to this as “fine-tuning”2. The theoretical counterpart 
to  this  was  a  form  of  “flexible  inflation  targeting”  with  an  added  emphasis  on  output 
stabilisation beyond inflation stabilisation.  
Simplifying, one can express the inflation targeting policy advice in two main precepts. First, 
look at inflation and output gap forecasts as summary statistics of the state of the economy. 
Second, fine-tune the policy instrument so that inflation forecasts – whatever the nature of 
the shocks that might have caused them – are stabilised, and output volatility is minimised, at 
a pre-set horizon through a given interest rate path.  
It  is  easy  to  conceive  of  economic  conditions  in  which  these  prescriptions  induce 
destabilising  action  on  the  side  of  monetary  policy.  Indeed,  limiting  the  information  set  to 
inflation and output gap forecasts can be highly misleading. One reason for this has been 
known for a long time: output gaps are ill-defined objects and are subject to a great deal of 
measurement error. An imperfectly understood concept which – in addition – is statistically 
very imprecisely measured is not a reliable indicator for guiding policy. 
Paradoxically, with its focus on the output gap, pre-crisis consensus macroeconomics ran full 
circle back to the intellectual climate of the 1970s, the same climate that had favoured the 
Great  Inflation.  The  major  policy  failures  of  the  1970s  were  largely  due  to  policymakers’ 
exaggerated real-time measures of economic slack.  
The  second  distinctive  feature  of  the  pre-crisis monetary  policy  paradigm  stemmed  from  a 
complete  under-appreciation  of  the  role  of  money  and  credit  indicators  in  the  conduct  of 
monetary policy. Liquidity and money lie at the core of the ECB’s second pillar. But they were 
at  best  ignored,  at  worst  “derided”,  as  redundant  and  unnecessary  complications  by 
mainstream modellers before 2007.  
The crisis has shown that liquidity and various definitions of money are critical links in the 
transmission  mechanism.  Far  from  showing  a  lack  of  theoretical  foundations  in  the  ECB’s 
strategy, the crisis has exposed the incompleteness of the transmission mechanism in the 
reference model.  
But disregard for monetary and financial phenomena had another implication. It found a clear 
counterpart  and  theoretical  underpinning  in  the  risk  management  approach  to  asset  price 
trends.  The  consensus  view  in  pre-crisis  times  was  that  the  best  thing  that  central  banks 
could  do  was  to  “clean-up”  following  the  bursting  of  a  bubble  by  loosening  the  monetary 
policy stance.  
I do not need to underline how this approach can turn into a formidable multiplier of market 
turbulence. The expectation that the central bank will aggressively protect the markets from 
“tail  events”  in  bad  times  can  encourage  –  and  did  encourage,  in  my  view  –  markets’ 
tendency to opt for risky strategies, over-exposures and exuberance. 
In summary, there was an inherent contradiction in some of the salient features of the pre-
crisis monetary policy paradigm. On the one hand, central bank policy “activism” was seen 
as justified in order to help with short-term output stabilisation purposes. Yet activism did not 
apply to financial risks except in an entirely ex post fashion: proponents of policy “activism” 
                                                 
2   See Blinder, A.S. and Reis, R. (2005), Economic Performance in the Greenspan Era: The Evolution of Events 
and  Ideas,  paper  presented  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City  Symposium  on  “Rethinking 
Stabilization Policy”, Jackson Hole, Wyoming. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
saw  no  merit  in  a  central  bank’s  ex  ante  intervention  to  stem  asset  price  developments, 
arguing that the policy interest rate was too blunt a tool to contain potential bubbles.  
Central bank response to the crisis and “the new normal” 
2.  
The  central  bank  response  to  the  crisis,  by  any  metric,  has  been  unprecedented.  When 
tensions in the interbank market emerged in the euro area and elsewhere in August 2007, 
the ECB reacted swiftly by providing de facto unlimited overnight liquidity to limit euro area 
banks’ liquidity risk.  
As the tensions morphed into a large-scale crisis of confidence in October 2008, the ECB 
responded  with  a  mix  of  standard  and  non-standard  monetary  policy  actions  to  foster 
financing conditions and enhance its credit support to the euro area economy, all with a view 
to maintaining price stability.  
The standard measures essentially entailed a steep reduction of the main refinancing rate to 
a historical low of 1% over a seven-month period (October 2008 – May 2009). This was done 
in  reaction  to  the  weak  economic  environment  and  the  associated  change  in  the  inflation 
outlook.  
The  non-standard  measures  included  granting  banks  unlimited  access  to  central  bank 
liquidity  against  an  extended  range  of  collateral  with  the  possibility  for  banks  to  borrow 
liquidity at a broader spectrum of maturities, of up to 12 months. The ECB also intervened 
directly  in  some  market  segments  that  were  dysfunctional,  namely  the  covered  bonds 
market. This was deemed important for the long-term financing of banks.  
In  May  2010  the  financial  crisis  took  a  different  direction;  markets  started  to  question  the 
sustainability of public finances in parts of the euro area. In response, the ECB intervened in 
some  debt  securities  markets,  in  order  to  prevent  large  and  important  segments  of  the 
securitised  credit  market  seizing  up  and  obstructing  monetary  policy  transmission.  These 
interventions have been limited in size, and their impact on liquidity creation has been fully 
sterilised.  
Overall,  the  non-standard  measures  have  been  adopted  with  a  view  to  ensuring  the 
transmission of low policy rates to the euro area economy. They have been tailored to the 
specific financial structure of the euro area economy, whose financing to a large extent relies 
on banks. These measures are fully in line with the ECB’s price stability objective. 
In this regard, the approach chosen by the ECB and the Eurosystem differs from that of other 
major  central  banks  which  embarked  on  large-scale  unconventional  measures  to  replace, 
rather  than  complement,  standard  actions,  after  those  standard  actions  –  changes  in  the 
policy interest rate – had reached their lower limit. In this respect, the ECB’s non-standard 
response does not qualify as a form of quantitative easing or credit easing. 
Non-standard  monetary  policy  measures  are  an  extraordinary  response  to  exceptional 
circumstances. They are, by construction, temporary in nature. Looking ahead, a return to a 
more  normal  liquidity  management  and  to  a  more  moderate  scale  of  central  bank 
intermediation  is  warranted  to  avoid  distortions  in  financial  incentives  with  longer-term 
adverse consequences for the economy. The ECB started in fact to phase out a number of 
non-standard measures back in late 2009. 
The  maintenance  of  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  guides  all  monetary  policy 
decisions.  In  this  respect,  the  macroeconomic  and  financial  landscape  has  fundamentally 
changed and the monetary policy stance has become more accommodative than at the peak 
of the crisis.  
As with the phasing-in of non-standard measures, there are no pre-defined steps between 
phasing them out and exiting from very low policy interest rates. Non-standard measures can 
in fact co-exist with any interest rate level. The ECB will adjust its policy interest rates and its 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
provision of liquidity at a pace and to a degree commensurate with the evolution of risks to 
price  stability  and  as  appropriate  to  maintain  an  orderly  and  functional  monetary  policy 
transmission.  
A number of key principles, which served the ECB well both before and during the crisis, will 
continue to underlie the post-crisis “steady state” design of the ECB’s operational framework. 
These  principles  are:  operational  efficiency,  a  strong  market  orientation,  simplicity  and 
transparency, and equal treatment of our counterparties. 
[In  line  with  these  principles,  the  ECB  equipped  itself  with  a  broad  operational  framework 
from the outset, including the eligibility of a large number of counterparties and a wide set of 
collateral in refinancing operations. At the same time, the post-crisis operational framework 
also  needs  to  be  designed  in  a  way  that  contributes  to  shaping  a  healthy  banking  sector, 
even if proper incentives should essentially come from sound regulation and supervision]. 
together  with 
independence  under  a  specific  mandate 
The future of central banking and main challenges ahead 
3.  
What are the desirable features of a post-crisis “steady state” monetary policy framework? 
On this subject, I would like to make a number of points. 
As I mentioned already, the “core” elements of the monetary policy paradigm have emerged 
from  the  crisis  unscathed.  I  firmly  believe  that  price  stability  is  the  best  contribution  that 
monetary authorities can make to overall economic welfare. Price stability should remain the 
primary task and the key “deliverable” for central banks in the period ahead.  
If anything, the crisis has reaffirmed the importance of having a clearly defined objective for 
price  stability,  not  least  by  contributing  to  the  anchoring  of  expectations  during  periods  of 
turbulence, when otherwise the private sector would become disoriented.  
Central  bank 
transparent 
communication  policies  will  continue  to  be  instrumental  in  the  pursuit  of  price  stability  by 
monetary authorities. 
Other aspects of the pre-crisis monetary policy paradigm need to be carefully re-examined.  
The  crisis  should  mark  a  clean  break  with  short-termism  and  “fine-tuning”  demand 
management  by  monetary  authorities.  An  insufficient  medium-term  orientation  and  a 
systematic asymmetry in responding to shocks – with downside risks to the economy always 
receiving a greater weight in central bankers’ “policy preferences” than upside risks to price 
stability  –  all  of  this  contributed  to  the  build-up  of  financial  imbalances  in  some  advanced 
economies.  
The sudden unwinding of these imbalances set in motion the chain of events which we now 
call “the crisis”. Greater medium-term orientation in monetary policy frameworks would have 
made the events which followed less severe.  
Monetary  data  are  critical  as  indicators  of  risks  that  are  slow  to  appear  elsewhere,  for 
example, in inflation forecasts or in measures of output gaps. Monetary analysis at the ECB 
has  consistently  sent  early  signals  that  risk  was  broadly  under-priced,  when  inflation  was 
quiescent and measures of slack were moderate.  
Incorporating  monetary  phenomena  in  the  policy  framework  inspires  a  sort  of  “leaning-
against-the wind” stance which can help smooth financial cycles and stabilise the economy in 
the medium term. Coupled with the inescapable fact that inflation is a monetary phenomenon 
in the long term, this is a powerful reason to redress the under-appreciation of monetary and 
credit variables in policy frameworks characteristic of the policy paradigm in the run-up to the 
crisis. 
The  crisis  has  shown  that  central  banks  have  powerful  instruments  at  their  disposal  to 
effectively respond to extraordinary situations without compromising their ultimate objective.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
However, this does not mean that monetary policy is liable to be subordinated to financial 
stability  concerns.  The  ECB  is  well  aware  of  the  possibility  of  monetary  policy  being 
“contaminated” by financial stability considerations. Monetary policy – even in crises and, I 
would say, particularly in crises – is about lending temporarily to solvent institutions. Lending 
to  institutions  which  have  long-lasting,  structural  funding  and  equity  problems  is  the 
responsibility of the fiscal authority.  
The  limits  to  what  monetary  policy  could  and  should  credibly  do  are  both  conceptual  and 
practical: monetary authorities cannot be expected to solve issues which lie well outside their 
official remit.  
There are two sides to this simple truth, one concerning financial regulation and one broad 
economic management.  
On the financial side, the ECB has a major stake in the quest for financial stability – but the 
authority lies elsewhere. Basel III is a very important step in the right direction, as it should 
provide  for  higher  minimum  capital  requirements  and  better  risk  capture  by  financial 
institutions. But in addition to the progressive roll-out of this framework and its incorporation 
into  domestic  law,  the  treatment  of  systemically  important  financial  institutions  and  risk 
capture by the shadow banking sector remains to be addressed. It is important to achieve a 
level  playing  field  in  these  areas  and  that  bodies  such  as  the  Financial  Stability  Board 
continue to work to accomplish such an objective. Market regulation on, for example, over-
the-counter  instruments,  alternative  investment  vehicles  and  ratings  agencies  is  also  an 
issue in this context. 
On the economic side, at the European level, the key challenge is to bring the “economic” 
part  of  E-M-U  up  to  speed  with  the “monetary”  part.  The  crisis has shown  that  the overall 
system of economic governance was in need of fundamental reform.  
Pro-cyclicality  was  not  confined  to  monetary  policy  before  the  crisis.  Actually,  too  many 
economies in the euro area entered the acute phase of the financial crisis with insufficient 
room for manoeuvre, because they had not behaved counter-cyclically before. Policy hyper-
activism  was  another  feature  of  fiscal  policy  management  before  the  crisis,  and  the  crisis 
exposed it in a spectacular way.  
European  leaders  have  responded  by  taking  a  number  of  important  steps  to  remedy  the 
situation,  including  measures  to  improve  economic  policy  coordination  in  budgetary 
decisions, such as the so-called “European Semester”. A new macroeconomic surveillance 
framework  will  be  established  in  order  to  check  deviant  behaviour  at  an  early  stage.  The 
Stability and Growth Pact (SGP) will also be reformed to enhance the surveillance of fiscal 
policies and apply enforcement measures at an early stage.  
In addition to these EU-wide proposals at the legislative level, a separate pact (the Euro Plus 
Pact) has been drawn up by the euro area countries and several other EU Member States in 
order  to  redress  competitiveness  differences,  thereby  further  strengthening  the  economic 
pillar of EMU.  
These measures, once fully operational, would certainly improve the economic governance 
of  the  euro  area.  But  strict  implementation  is  key,  so  that  the  concept  of  “effective  peer 
review” in the Union regains credibility among market participants and the public.  
The  ECB  regards  the  reforms  made  to  the  macroeconomic  and  budgetary  surveillance 
framework  as  not  ambitious  enough:  they  appear  to  leave  room  for  discretion  by  Member 
States to escape sanctions in the event of non-compliance. More automaticity in this regard 
would be preferable.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Conclusion 
4.  
In conclusion, I believe that the crisis has exposed a couple of shortcomings in the monetary 
policy paradigm: policy frameworks are insufficiently medium term-oriented, and the role of 
monetary variables in this context is underappreciated.  
But  the  core  elements  of  the  paradigm,  including  central  bank  independence  and  policies 
decisively oriented towards the maintenance of price stability, remain pertinent for the period 
ahead.  
Central banks have taken unprecedented steps to safeguard this overriding objective during 
the  crisis.  Looking  ahead,  it  is  up  to  other  key  stakeholders  in  the  global  financial  and 
economic system to live up to their collective responsibilities and mandates in order to avoid 
any repetition of past mistakes. 
 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
