Anand Sinha: Reflections on regulatory challenges and dilemmas 
Address  by  Mr  Anand  Sinha,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
FICCI-IBA  (Federation  of  Indian  Chambers  of  Commerce  &  Industry  –  Indian  Banks’ 
Association) Conference on “Global Banking: Paradigm Shift”, Mumbai, 24 August 2011. 
 Inputs provided by Rajinder Kumar are gratefully acknowledged. 
Good  Morning.  It  is  indeed  my  privilege  to  be  addressing  you  today  in  this  Conference  in 
which officials from industry and banking sector are participating. Today, I want to reflect on 
some of the challenges and dilemmas that we face as regulators of the banking system. A 
few of these challenges and dilemmas are in the context of the rapidly evolving regulatory 
landscape in the aftermath of the crisis, very aptly reflected in the theme of this Conference 
“Global banking- Paradigm shift”. 
It  has  become  almost  inevitable  these  days  that  the  speeches  start  off  referring  to  the 
financial crisis and, I wish to make no exception today. I would briefly allude to the crisis to 
provide a context for some of the issues I would be touching upon. I recall a quip, “Just when 
we thought we knew all the answers, someone changed the questions” and I think that the 
saying best describes what the crisis has done to the hitherto accepted regulators’ wisdom. 
The role of regulators has always been very challenging, as they need to keep running just to 
stay put in a fast evolving financial landscape and have to run harder and faster, to be ahead 
of the curve. If anything, the crisis has made their role that much harder. 
There are many reasons attributed to the outbreak of crisis and the most notable ones are: 
inadequate quantity and quality of capital, insufficient liquidity buffers, excessively leveraged 
financial  institutions,  inadequate  coverage  of  certain  risks,  absence  of  a  regulatory 
framework  for  addressing  systemic  risks,  proliferation  of  opaque  and  poorly  understood 
financial  products  in  search  of  yields  in  the  backdrop  of  an  era  of  “great  moderation”, 
perverse incentive structure in securitisation process, lack of transparency in OTC markets 
particularly 
regulation  and  supervision,  and  a  burgeoning 
under/unregulated shadow banking system. 
The  most  glaring  inadequacy  has been  the  absence  of  a  framework  to  deal  with systemic 
risk. There has been an underlying assumption that strong institutions make a strong system. 
This has been proved to be fallacious as legitimate actions taken by individual institutions for 
self preservation can destabilise the system. It will be useful to dwell a bit on the notion of 
systemic risk.  
Systemic risk is the risk of disruptions to financial services that is caused by an impairment of 
all or parts of the financial system, and can have serious negative consequences for the real 
economy1. Systemic risk has two facets. One is in terms of its distribution within the system 
at  any  given  point  in  time  and  another  is  its  evolution  with  time.  The  cross-sectional 
dimension is how risk is distributed within the system at any given point in time. Systemic risk 
in  this  dimension  arises  due  to  the  inter-connectedness  of  institutions,  balance  sheet 
entanglements,  common  exposures  and,  sometimes,  even  common  business  models  of 
financial institutions. The time dimension, on the other hand, deals with how aggregate risks 
in the financial system evolve over time – the procyclicality issues. 
Basel III has been designed to address all the shortcomings that have surfaced in the wake 
of the crisis including the very important issue of systemic risk. Many measures have been 
inadequate 
the  CDS, 
                                                 
1 
IMF-BIS-FSB (2009) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
proposed as part of Basel III framework which raise a lot of implementation issues. Let me 
dwell on some of the issues which pose major regulatory challenges and dilemmas. 
I. 
Implementation of Basel III 
Capital: 
a) 
In terms of Basel III guidelines, the capital required, and, particularly, the equity component 
has  become  much  larger.  While  the  minimum  CRAR  remains  at  8  per  cent,  the  equity 
component has been raised from 2 per cent to 4.5 per cent. In addition, there is a capital 
conservation  buffer  of  2.5  per  cent  composed  of  equity.  Effectively,  therefore,  the  equity 
component  in  capital  stands  raised  from  2  per  cent  to  7  per  cent.  In  addition,  two  more 
capital  components,  fully  composed  of  equity,  have  also  been  prescribed    –  (a)  Counter 
Cyclical  capital  within  a  range  of  0–2.5  per  cent  and  (b)  capital  surcharge  on  Global 
Systemically  Important  Financial  Institutions  (G-SIFIs)  within  a  range  of  1–2.5  per  cent. 
Indian banks will not be subject to capital surcharge on G-SIFIs at least for quite some time 
and  the  countercyclical  capital  is  not  required  on  a  continuous  basis.  Therefore,  the 
immediate  concern  is  of  meeting  a  much  higher  level  of  equity  component  i.e.  7  per  cent 
which, in effect, translates to a higher figure on account of the requirement under Basel III 
that all deductions are to be adjusted against equity which hitherto were distributed equally 
between Tier I and II. 
The  Quantitative  Impact  Study  published  in  December  2010  by  BCBS  of  91  large  banks 
(including  3  from  India)  showed  a  shortfall  of  Euro  165  bn  and  Euro  577  bn  in  equity 
component  vis-à-vis  4.5  per  cent  and  7  per  cent  ratios,  respectively.  This  is  one  of  the 
reasons for an extended timeframe for implementation of Basel III from January 1, 2013 to 
January 1, 2019. The other reason is to cushion the slowdown in the GDP growth during the 
transition  period  on  account  of  much  larger  capital  requirements.  According  to  a  study 
conducted by the Macroeconomic Assessment Group (MAG), a group of modelling experts 
formed by the FSB and BCBS, while banks may attempt to raise lending rates and reduce 
credit growth during transition to higher capital levels, this is likely to have a modest impact 
on  the  real  economy.  The  maximum  decline  in  GDP  over  baseline  forecast  would  be 
0.22 per cent after 35 quarters (0.03 per cent per annum while the additional capital is being 
built up) followed by GDP recovery towards trend path. Longer transition period would result 
in lower costs because, banks will get longer time to build up capital from internal generation 
and thus there will be a less need to cut back on lending or to raise fresh capital from the 
market.  The  private  sector  estimate  done  by  Institute  of  International  Finance  (IIF)  is, 
however, much higher. 
As  regards  India,  our  estimate  is  that  transition  at  system  level  would  not  be  much  of  an 
issue as all capital ratios currently are above the minimum requirement of Basel III though a 
few  banks  may  come  under  pressure.  Moreover,  the  capital  requirement  on  account  of 
increased  coverage  of  risks  would  not  be  so  material  for  Indian  banks  as  either  those 
activities are not allowed (i.e. resecuritisation), or their magnitude is quite small (i.e. trading 
book).  The  stress  point,  however,  would  be  that  banks  will  be  required  to  adjust  the 
unamortised portion of Pension and Gratuity liabilities in the opening balance sheet on April 
1,  2013  on  transition  to  IFRS.  However,  going  forward,  the  capital  requirements  including 
equity are likely to be substantial for supporting the high GDP growth and the fact that Credit 
to  GDP  ratio,  which  is  currently  quite  modest  at  about  55  per  cent,  is  bound  to  increase 
substantially  on  account  of  structural  changes  in  the  economy  i.e.,  Financial  Inclusion 
program,  increase  in  loan  requirements  from  more  credit  intensive  sectors  such  as 
manufacturing and infrastructure, etc. 
RBI  and  banks  would  be  estimating  the  capital  requirements  under  Basel  III  once  our 
guidelines  for  implementation  of  Basel  III  are  finalised.  As  the  capital  requirements,  both 
equity and non equity, are likely to be substantial, there will, likely, be pressure on financial 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
markets,  increasing  the  cost  of  capital  and  lowering  RoE.  Government  will  have  to  find 
resources to infuse capital in the Public Sector Banks. There is a line of argument that Basel 
III  may  make  raising  of  capital  costlier/difficult  for  banks  due  to  lower  RoE  and  render 
banking  sector  unattractive  for  investors.  This, in  my  view,  is  not  entirely  correct  because, 
investors will eventually recognise that well capitalised banks are less risky and hence will be 
willing  to  settle  for  a  lower  RoE.  Nevertheless,  the  pressure  on  RoE  should  bring  about  a 
greater  sense  of  urgency  among  banks  to  improve  their  efficiency  by  increasing  the 
productivity  of 
technology.  While 
implementing Basel III, our dilemma is (a) where our capital regulations are more stringent, 
should we continue with this? (b) should we adhere to the extended timetable or step up the 
implementation schedule, given the fact that the banking system would be comfortable at the 
starting point, i.e. at transition? 
resources  and 
their  human 
leveraging 
through 
Countercyclical capital: 
(b) 
Regulators  may  have  to  contend  with  situations  which  have  no  precedents  and  where 
enough data and analytics are not available and yet the cost of inaction may be high. This 
requires taking a judgment call and respond with policy measures whose outcome may not 
be known with a great degree of certainty. One such example is when RBI had to raise the 
capital  requirements  and  provisioning  on  standard  assets  for  banks’  exposure  to  certain 
segments  (Commercial  real  estate,  Capital  markets,  Housing,  Non  Banking  Financial 
Companies (NBFCs) and Retail segment) during the period September 2004 to August 2008. 
The excessive credit growth in these segments, in conjunction with sharp rise in asset prices 
on the back of high GDP growth, was causing apprehensions of potential buildup of systemic 
risk  and  asset  bubbles.  These  policies,  today  known  as  Countercyclical  policies  or 
Macroprudential policies in a broader context, were not much known or practised then. We 
are asked as to how did we choose the instruments i.e. risk weights and provisioning and the 
measure  in  which  these  were  applied.  The  fact  is  that  RBI’s  methodology  has  not  been 
based on extensive statistical analysis or modelling or on determination of build-up of asset 
bubbles.  It  is  largely  judgmental,  based  on  trends  in  aggregate  credit  and  sectoral  credit 
growth in the macro-economic settings. For this reason, it has not been rule bound which will 
require either some model or at least some measurement of systemic risk and its sensitivity 
to the prudential parameters. 
While the objective of the countercyclical policies is to increase the resilience of the system 
by  building  buffers  to  withstand  shocks  during  downturns,  the  broader  objective  is  to  lean 
against the wind during the boom phase to dampen the credit and asset price boom. A more 
ambitious objective would be to ensure stable credit supply through the cycle-through booms 
and busts. However, our limited experience shows that the countercyclical measures appear 
to be more effective in moderating the credit supply during the upturn than in increasing the 
credit  supply  during  the  downturn.  During  the  upturn  in  the  economy,  the  countercyclically 
raising of capital and/or provisioning for standard assets would moderate the flow of credit by 
raising  the  cost  and  thereby  impacting  the  demand.  However,  during  the  downturn,  the 
increase in credit  supply  on  release  of  buffers  does  not  seem  as  plausible.  The economic 
agents  whose  balance  sheets  are  affected  due  to  the  downturn  would  be  risk  averse  as 
would  be  the  banks  who  would  be  excessively  cautious  thus  restricting  credit  supply.  The 
behaviour of economic agents during both booms and busts seems to be a case of “disaster 
myopia”. The likely asymmetric impact of countercyclical measures is another challenge for 
regulators to revive the economy during downturns. 
Today,  the  choice  of  instruments  for  conducting  countercyclical  policies  and  their  relative 
effectiveness  as  also  the  interaction  of  these  policies  with  other  policies,  particularly  the 
monetary  policy,  is  a  major  area  of  research.  While  in  our  case,  the  monetary  and 
countercyclical policies have been in the same direction so far, it appears to us, that varying 
the  provisioning  requirements  may  have  been  more  effective  than  varying  risk  weights  in 
moderating  credit  flow  to  the  specific  sectors.  This  is  because,  since  the  average  capital 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
there 
is  no  agreement  on  whether 
adequacy ratio of banks operating in India has been well above 12 per cent for the last many 
years  (as  on  December  2010,  it  was  above  14  per  cent),  risk  weights  may  not  always  be 
effective in dampening the growth of credit as banks can continue to finance riskier sectors 
yielding higher returns by allowing their capital adequacy ratios to fall by a few basis points 
and  still  remain  much  above  the  regulatory  requirements  and  continue  to  meet  market 
expectation.  To  the  extent  higher  risk  weights  translate  into  increase  in  interest  rates, 
demand for credit may come down. On the other hand, varying provisioning requirement may 
be potentially more effective as it would impact the Profit and Loss account of banks to which 
banks are more sensitive. However, there is no international consensus on these issues. For 
example, while it is acknowledged that dynamic provisioning which was pioneered by Spain, 
helped  Spanish  banks  withstand  the  financial  crisis  better  than  banks  in  other  advanced 
industrialised  countries, 
this  measure  reduced 
procyclicality. While some hold that dynamic provision did not discourage credit growth nor 
prevented housing bubble in Spain, a recent study by Jimenez et al2, concludes that dynamic 
provision did help mitigate procyclicality in Spain. 
The BCBS framework uses the metric “Credit to GDP ratio” and its upward deviation from the 
long term trend to signal the need to build up countercyclical capital buffer. This metric is not 
suitable  for  Indian  economy  and  other  EMEs,  as  was  also  pointed  out  in  the  Financial 
Stability Report (FSR) of June 2011, due to structural changes taking place in the economy 
on  account  of  high  growth  rate  and  financial  inclusion  etc.  We  have  been  using  sectoral 
approach  to  deal  with  systemic  risk  on  account  of  procyclicality  which  we  may  have  to 
continue  with.  The  BCBS  framework  is  a  “comply  or  explain”  framework.  While  this 
framework  gives  us  the  freedom  to  deviate  from  the  BCBS  methodology,  the  dilemma  is 
whether  the  explanation  provided  for  deviation  from  the  BCBS  framework  would  be 
perceived in proper light by the markets or whether it will be interpreted as non-compliance 
with the international standards, in which case, it will be disadvantageous to Indian banks. In 
any  case,  the  macro  prudential  authorities  will  have  to  make  determined  efforts  at 
communicating the rationale of their policies and actions taken thereunder much as Central 
Banks  have  sharpened 
the  art  of  communication  of  monetary  policy.  Focussed 
communication may improve the understanding of these policies by markets and thus make 
the actions taken more effective. Such a communication may also help in making the effect 
of macroprudential policy more symmetric in booms and busts. 
Countercyclical provisions:  
c) 
In  addition  to  countercyclical  capital  buffers,  Basel  III  also  envisages  countercyclical 
provisions.  BCBS  is  working  on  an  expected  loss-based  countercyclical  provisioning 
methodology  in  consultation  with  IASB.  This  is  likely  to  take  time.  In  India,  banks  have  a 
stock of floating provisions which we have not permitted to be used, except under a situation 
of  systemic  stress.  While  the  floating  provisions  may  serve  the  purpose  of  countercyclical 
provision,  a  framework  is  necessary  for  allowing  its  use.  As  an  interim  measure,  we  have 
been trying to develop a methodology based on the Spanish dynamic provisioning system. 
This,  however,  has  not  been  easy  given  the  lack  of  required  data  and  analytics  with  the 
banks. Efforts are underway and we are planning to put a discussion paper in public domain 
based on the limited data available. 
Leverage 
d) 
Basel III prescribes a leverage ratio (ratio of Tier I capital to book value of assets including 
off-balance sheet items) as backstop arrangement to supplement the capital adequacy ratio. 
                                                 
2 
IMF Working paper WP/11/159, “Policy Instruments to lean against the wind in Latin America”, July 2011 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Our view has been that since, for Indian banks, the SLR3 requirements are substantial and 
carry  little  risks,  these  should  be  kept  out  of  the  leverage  ratio.  However,  this  was  not 
accepted  by  BCBS.  But  the  comforting  news  is  that  the  leverage  ratio  of  Indian  banks  is 
modest compared to the levels being contemplated. 
Liquidity  
e) 
Basel III requires a high level of liquidity to be maintained through a pool of liquid assets. The 
definition of liquid assets is very stringent including the requirement that they should be freely 
available.  While  the  Indian  banks  maintain  a  large  pool  of  liquid  assets  through  SLR 
requirement, strictly speaking, these may not qualify as liquid assets under Basel III because 
SLR requirement, being mandatory, needs to complied with at all times. Our dilemma is that 
asking  banks  to  maintain  more  liquid  assets  in  addition  to  SLR  would  put  them  in  a 
competitively  disadvantageous  position.  We  have,  therefore,  to  consider  as  to  what  extent 
the SLR can be reckoned towards Basel III requirements for holding liquid assets. 
Implementation of advanced approaches under Basel II 
II. 
Commercial banks in India have already adopted standardised approaches under Basel II. 
While the schedule for migration to advanced approaches has been issued some time back, 
we  have  not  received  encouraging  response  from  banks  so  far.  Migration  to  advanced 
approaches  is  important  from  two  perspectives.  Advanced  approaches  involve  adoption  of 
sophisticated risk management systems well integrated into the banks’ business processes, 
the  prerequisites  of  which  are  upgradation  of  technological  systems  and  availability  of 
appropriate skill sets. Further, non-adoption of advanced approaches may have reputational 
issues for larger banks. Therefore, it is time for larger banks to seriously consider upgrading 
their  systems  and  migrating  to  advanced  approaches.  As  regards  technology,  the 
implementation  of  Core  Banking  Solutions  (CBS)  provides  a  platform  for  augmenting 
technology  to  enable  real  time  MIS  and  data  analytics.  The  Reserve  Bank’s  IT  vision 
document for the period 2011–17, sets the goal and path towards these, among others.  
Adoption of advanced approaches requires simultaneous use of the underlying processes in 
the day-to-day risk management of banks. As regards skills, public sector banks may find it 
particularly challenging to recruit/hire highly skilled people from outside or to retain their own 
officers who become highly skilled through training. Skill requirements present another set of 
challenges:  since  the  high  end  skills  would  remain  confined  to  a  small  number  of  people 
(quants,  as  they  are  called),  if  the  senior  management  and/or  the  Board  are  totally 
unequipped, there would be inadequate oversight and the institutions may end up carrying 
higher  risks.  Our  dilemma  is  whether  to  let  the  larger  banks  first  develop  the  required 
systems at their own pace or to nudge them by moral suasion or regulatory mandate which 
will  require  them  to  move  to  more  robust  technology  and  risk  management  systems  at  a 
faster pace and facilitate their early adoption of advanced approaches. 
Information asymmetry 
III. 
Information  asymmetry  between  banks  and  borrowers  is  an  accepted  fact.  This  problem 
becomes  more  acute  in  a  multiple  banking  scenario.  The  way  out  is  a  robust  system  of 
pooling  and  exchanging  of  credit  information  through  the  mechanism  of  Credit  Information 
Companies (CICs). Lack of full information about a borrower can lead to over-financing and 
                                                 
3  Statutory  Liquidity  Ratio  (SLR)  is  the  requirement  on  the  banks  in  India  to  maintain  a  stipulated  proportion 
(currently  24  per  cent)  of  their  total  net  demand  and  time  liabilities  in  assets  such  as  cash,  gold  or 
unencumbered, specified Government securities 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
diversion  of  funds,  etc.  having  implications  for  asset  quality.  In  fact,  this  was  one  of  the 
issues in the recent past in the context of forex derivative transactions. Till recently, we had 
only  Credit  Information  Bureau  (India)  Limited  (CIBIL),  but  the  information  asymmetry  has 
continued on account of banks not transmitting data accurately and in time though there is 
steady improvement in this regard. RBI has granted Certificate of Registration to three more 
entities to set up CICs who have since commenced operations. As an interim measure, we 
had  instituted  a  format  for  exchange  of  information  among  banks  in  a  multiple  banking 
scenario. However, this has not functioned smoothly. Hopefully, in the near future, when the 
new CICs stabilise their operations, this critical gap in our infrastructure would be bridged.  
Stress testing 
IV. 
In a world which is getting increasingly interconnected and complex due to innovation, risks 
have  grown  manifold,  albeit,  along  with  the  business  opportunities.  Badly  managed  risks 
could  lead  to  failure  of  institutions  and  can  quickly  transform  into  a  systemic  crisis  as  the 
recent  crisis  has  emphatically  demonstrated.  The  damage  due  to  the  crisis  and  the 
reconstruction costs are quite huge. The quantitative risk management models, however, do 
not completely reflect the risks in the real world and it is in this context that the stress testing 
assumes  criticality.  It  is  now  accepted  that  it  is  difficult  to  accurately  model  the  financial 
markets,  as  against  modelling  the  physical  world  as  done  by  physicists.  This  is  because 
models  are  an  abstraction  from  reality  and  the  reality  in  finance  is  far  more  complex  and 
unpredictable. The statistical relationships of the past do not necessarily extrapolate to the 
future,  essentially,  due  to  the  actions  of  the  human  mind  which  shape  the  results  in  the 
financial markets. I would like to quote Emanuel Derman, a leading quant in this context- “It’s 
not that physics is better, but rather that finance is harder. In physics you are playing against 
the  God,  and  he  doesn’t  change  His  laws  very  often.  In  finance,  you  are  playing  against 
God’s creatures, agents who value assets based on their ephemeral opinions”. 
Stress tests, therefore, have to be an integral part of risk management. The FSR has been 
reporting on stress tests carried out under various scenarios. One of the issues that we face 
in introducing appropriate stress testing scenarios for Indian banks is the absence of severe 
stress faced by the Indian banking system in the past unlike many countries. For example, 
45 countries during 1980s and 63 countries during 1990s faced systemic banking crises. The 
reconstruction costs were high to the tune of 55 per cent of GDP for Argentina, 42 per cent of 
GDP for Thailand and about 35 per cent of GDP in the case of Korea. In an ironic sense, our 
good fortune of not witnessing any severe stress in the past has made the task of specifying 
stress  scenarios  for  Indian  banks  rather  difficult.  An  alternative  is  to  apply  the  stress 
scenarios observed in the rest of the world but that raises the issue of relevance to Indian 
banking system. The dilemma, therefore, is in choosing the appropriate extreme scenario for 
Indian banks. 
Migration to IFRS 
V. 
The  Indian  banking  system  will  need  to  address  certain  issues  in  implementing  the 
convergence with the IFRS. First, the very crucial IFRS 9 relating to financial instruments, is 
still evolving and the final standard is unlikely to be available soon. Thereafter, the Institute 
for Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI) will need to promulgate the converged standard for 
India. This presents a moving target, given short time available for convergence with IFRS. 
Converging  to  the  standards  would  present  challenges  in  terms  of  considerable  skill 
upgradation and modification in the IT systems of banks. RBI has been undertaking efforts to 
create awareness and is also undertaking training programmes.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Asset quality 
VI. 
While  the  Gross  NPAs,  in  percentage  terms,  have  declined  sharply  and  steadily  from 
15.70 per cent at end March 1997 to 2.24 per cent at end March 2011, this does not fully 
reveal  the  underlying  realities  and  some  trends  are  a  matter  of  concern  which  could  put 
pressure on asset quality of banks in future. The aggressive lending during the high credit 
growth  phase  followed  by  the  crisis,  resulted  in  slippage  ratio4  steadily  rising  from 
1.81 per cent at end March 2008 to 2.21 per cent at end March 2010, followed by a slight 
moderation to 2.01 per cent in 2011. The concern is that the recoveries have not kept pace 
with  slippages  since  2007–08  and  despite  write-offs,  the  Gross  NPAs  increased  to 
2.39 per cent at end March 2010 from 2.26 per cent at end March 2008 (partly also due to 
slowdown in credit growth). All these are reflected in rising stock of NPAs which is a reversal 
of an earlier trend (Gross NPAs rose by Rs. 44,828 crore5 (86.3 per cent) from end March 
2006 to end March 2011). Rising interest rates and substantial amount of restructuring done 
during the crisis period, if not done with due care, are likely to put further pressure on asset 
quality  of  banks.  Therefore,  there  is  a  need  for  banks  to  step  up  efforts  to  resolve  their 
existing NPAs and tighten their credit risk management systems. 
Infrastructure financing 
VII. 
Given the large requirements for financing infrastructure development in India, expectations 
from banks to play a leading role in extending financial assistance to infrastructure projects 
are substantial. During the last few years the share of infrastructure finance in the total credit 
portfolio of banks has risen significantly posing challenges for management of asset liability 
mismatches. Bank financed infrastructure already enjoys considerable amount of regulatory 
dispensation. This makes the issue, of finding alternative sources of finance for infrastructure 
projects,  critical.  RBI  has  already  taken  a  number  of  measures  in  this  regard  including 
permitting  higher  exposure  limits  for  infrastructure,  introducing  repos  in  corporate  bonds, 
permitting CDS for corporate bonds, creating a separate category of NBFCs (NBFC-IFCs), 
etc.  The  Government  has  recently  come  out  with  a  broad  structure  of  Infrastructure  Debt 
Funds (IDFs) which, when set up, might also provide an alternate source of financing. 
Legislative reforms 
VIII. 
Sound  and  unambiguous  legislative  framework  is  a  prerequisite  for  an  efficient  regulatory 
system.  At  present,  in  India,  there  are  about  60  Acts  and  multiple  rules  and  regulations, 
many  of  which  are  archaic  and  the  large  number  of  amendments  have  made  the  laws 
ambiguous and complex. Government of India has constituted a Financial Sector Legislative 
Reforms Commission (FSLRC) to rewrite and streamline the financial sector laws, rules and 
regulations to bring them in harmony with India’s fast growing financial sector. 
Product innovation 
IX. 
While RBI  welcomes product innovation, the concern is whether the  products are properly 
understood  and  backed  by  robust  risk  management  systems  and  whether  there  is  a 
framework regarding suitability and appropriateness to prevent mis-selling. These concerns 
shape  RBI’s  regulatory  guidelines  for  products,  either  already  in  the  financial  markets  or 
                                                 
4  Slippage ratio is the ratio of NPAs generated in a year to the outstanding stock of “standard assets” at the 
beginning of the year. 
5  1 Crore = 10 million 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
being  permitted  by  RBI.  Designing  such  regulatory  policies  is  always  challenging  as  it 
requires balancing innovation with prudence. Some of the examples are  
 
RBI  set  out  securitisation  guidelines  in  2006  after  the  securitisation  market  had 
developed  but  was  not  functioning  in  a  prudentially  sound  manner.  Among  other 
things,  the  guidelines  stipulated  amortising  the  profit  earned  on  securitisation 
transactions over the period of securitisation which prevented the development of an 
“originate  to  distribute”  model  that  was  at  the  heart  of  misaligned  incentives  in 
securitisation process in the advanced economies particularly, USA. 
In  the  forex  derivative  segment,  there  were  several  cases  of  mis-selling  despite 
detailed guidelines on suitability and appropriateness. These guidelines have been 
further modified recently in the light of experience gained. One of the important new 
regulations  is  that  banks  including  foreign  banks  cannot  deal  with  any  derivative 
product which they cannot price independently (locally in the case of foreign banks). 
The issue of wealth management practices came to the fore in the light of a major 
fraud. We are currently studying the wealth management practices in the banking 
system as well as in the international jurisdictions. The main challenge is to put in 
place a set of regulations from the perspective of suitability and appropriateness. 
Keeping in view our objectives, we have introduced, to begin with, single name plain 
vanilla CDS on corporate bonds permitting only regulated entities to act as market 
makers. 
Considering that guaranteeing of corporate bonds by banks would not be conducive 
to the development of corporate bond market, we have not permitted this despite a 
strong body of opinion supporting bank guarantees. The experience of some of the 
countries (China, South Korea etc.) in this regard, validates our apprehension. 
    Regulation and supervision of non-banking segment 
X. 
One  of  the  causes  behind  the  global  crisis  was  the  rapid  growth  of  the  shadow  banking 
system which also undertakes credit intermediation function involving liquidity and maturity 
transformation  and  often  with  some  degree  of  leverage.  Its  rapid  growth  was  due  to 
regulatory arbitrage as the sector was un/under regulated. In many cases banks had parked 
their riskier activities in vehicles or structures that were not consolidated with them but when 
the crunch came, banks had to take these risks on their balance sheets. As the height of the 
credit boom, the size of the shadow banking system in USA was roughly twice as large as 
the  banking  sector  and  is  still  25  per  cent  larger.  In  several  other  advanced  countries 
including  Canada,  the  sector  is  at  least  as  large  as  the  banking  sector.  Therefore,  the 
oversight and regulation of this segment has acquired urgency and currently is an important 
international agenda. The basic tenet is that no systemically important entity should escape 
regulation  or  oversight.  While  in  US,  under  the  Dodd-Frank  Act,  all  systemically  important 
financial institutions would come under the purview of Fed, this is not necessarily the position 
in other jurisdictions. The regulatory challenge would be to devise a framework for identifying 
systemically important non-banking financial institutions, markets and products, and evolve a 
framework,  for  the  oversight  and,  if  need  be,  prudential  regulation.  While  this  issue  is 
important for regulated financial groups, it is of greater significance where such entities are 
not part of regulated financial groups. 
The  current  evolving  approach  is  a  three  stage  process:  (i)  Scanning  and  mapping  of  the 
overall shadow banking system, (ii) Identification of the aspects of shadow banking system 
which  may  pose  systemic  risk  or  regulatory  arbitrage  concerns  on  account  of  maturity 
transformation,  credit  risk  transfer  or  leverage,  etc.,  and  (iii)  Detailed  assessment  of  the 
shadow banking system raising systemic risk and/or regulatory arbitrage concerns leading to 
deeper analysis of the entities, markets and instruments that are giving rise to concerns. The 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
oversight of the shadow banking system would also involve indirect regulation by regulating 
of banks’ interactions with shadow banking entities as well as strengthening of regulation of 
money market funds, repo markets and other shadow banking entities. 
In India, these issues were recognised by RBI much earlier. RBI had put in place, as far back 
as  2006,  a  calibrated  regulatory  framework  for  Systemically  Important  Non-Deposit  taking 
NBFCs,  which  hitherto  were  very  lightly  regulated,  to  address  the  issue  of  regulatory 
arbitrage and systemic risk.,. The components of the framework included prudential capital 
requirements,  exposure  norms,  liquidity  management,  reporting  requirements,  corporate 
governance and disclosure norms. There was also an institutional mechanism in the form of 
the  High  Level  Coordination  Committee  on  Financial  Markets  (HLCCFM)  now  replaced  by 
the Financial Stability Development Council (FSDC) for coordination among financial sector 
regulators and with Government. 
Despite an extensive regulatory framework for NBFCs, many gaps still remain. As pointed 
out  in  the  FSR  (June  2011),  differences  in  regulations  for  NBFCs  vis-a-vis  banks  and 
between  NBFCs  under  the  purview  of  different  regulators  add  to  the  scope  for  regulatory 
arbitrage. There are gaps and weaknesses in the regulatory perimeter-wealth management 
activities, structured products, hedge funds, private equity funds etc., need to be addressed. 
The systemic importance of the Government owned NBFCs has grown over the years and 
the regulatory framework for such entities need to be re-examined. A Committee (Chair: Smt. 
Usha Thorat, ex Deputy Governor, RBI) is looking into some of these issues i.e. definition of 
NBFCs, regulatory gaps and regulatory arbitrage, corporate governance and supervision etc. 
While  dealing  with  the shadow  banking  system,  the  challenge  lies in evolving  a  prudential 
framework  which,  while  recognising  the  difference  of  this  segment  from  banks,  deals 
effectively with the potential of creating systemic risk and regulatory arbitrage. Implementing 
the international agenda in this regard would be very challenging. 
XI. 
Introduction of holding company structure for financial conglomerates in India 
At present, most of the financial groups in India are led by banks and organised under the 
Bank  Subsidiary  model.  This  model  puts  the  onus  on  the  parent  bank  for  corporate 
governance,  performance  and  capital  requirement  of  the  subsidiaries.  Besides,  the  parent 
carries  very  substantial  reputational  risk.  The  Working  Group  on  “Introduction  of  Holding 
Company  structure  in  India  for  banks”  has  recommended  migration  of  major  financial 
conglomerates to the holding company structure to address these limitations to some extent. 
The main challenges in implementing the recommendations include, formulating a new law 
governing functioning of financial holding companies, providing right incentives to the existing 
Financial  Conglomerates  through  appropriate  tax  treatment  and  resolution  of  strategic  and 
public policy issues by the Government in the case of Public Sector Banks. 
In the end, let me congratulate FICCI and IBA for organizing this intellectually stimulating and 
educating  conference.  Let  me  also  thank  you  for  your  patient  hearing  of  the  regulatory 
dilemmas  and  the  challenges  facing  regulators  in  the  world  that  is  becoming  increasingly 
uncertain. I am sure conferences of this kind which provide a forum for exchange of ideas 
between  regulators,  policy  makers  and  the  market  participants  would  certainly  help  in 
reducing the uncertainty and make the task easier. 
References: 
Admati,  Anat  R.,  DeMarzo,  Peter  M.,  Hellwig,  Martin  F.,  Pfleiderer,  Paul  P.,  March  2011, 
“Fallacies,  Irrelevant  Facts,  and  Myths  in  the  Discussion  of  Capital  Regulation:  Why  Bank 
Equity is Not Expensive” 
Bank  for  International  Settlements,  December  2010,  Results  of  the  comprehensive 
quantitative impact study 
Caruana, Jaime, July 2011, “Regulatory reform: remaining challenges”, Luxembourg 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
International  Monetary  Fund,  July  2011,  “Policy  Instruments  to  Lean  Against  the  Wind  in 
Latin America”, Working Paper WP/11/159 
Macklem, Tiff, July 2011, “Global Financial Reform: Maintaining the Momentum”, remarks at 
G-20 workshop, Paris 
Mohan,  Rakesh,  Dec  2007,  “India’s  Financial  Sector  Reforms:  Fostering  Growth  while 
Containing Risk”, Speech, Reserve Bank of India 
Reserve Bank of India, 2010–2011, Financial Stability Reports 
----, May 2011, Report of the Working Group on Introduction of Financial Holding Company 
Structure in India, 
Sinha,  Anand,  June  2011,  “Macroprudential  Policies  –  Indian  Experience”,  address  at 
Eleventh  Annual  International  Seminar  on  Policy  Challenges  for  the  Financial  Sector, 
co-hosted  by  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System,  the  International 
Monetary Fund and the World Bank, Washington DC 
Wellink,  Nout,  April  2011,  “Basel  III  and  the  impact  on  financial  markets”  speech  at  ING 
Basel III Financing Conference, Amsterdam 
Fernandez de Lis, Santiago, Garcia-Herrero, Alicia, May 2010, “Dynamic Provisioning: Some 
Lessons from Existing Experiences”, ADBI Working Paper Series No. 218 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
