Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Financial stability – regional and global cooperation 
Speech by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 8th Islamic 
Financial  Services  Board  Summit  Luxembourg,  Panel  Session  2  “Financial  Stability: 
Regional and Global Cooperation”, Luxembourg, 12 May 2011. 
 It  is  now  more  than  three  years  since  the  onset  of  the  global  financial  crisis.  Yet,  its 
repercussions continue to reverberate across the world. Efforts to return the global economy 
on  a  sustainable  growth  trajectory  have  been  challenged  by  risks  and  uncertainties  that 
continue to prevail in many parts of the world. Most of all, this crisis has demonstrated the 
greater  degree  of  international  interdependence  arising  from  the  increased  international 
financial and economic integration. Global financial stability has therefore become a shared 
responsibility.  In  today’s  more  interconnected  financial  systems  and  stronger  economic 
interlinkages, the enormous challenge in securing effective and efficient functioning financial 
systems  and  financial  stability  will  demand  for  unprecedented  collective  action  and 
international cooperation. 
It  is  my  pleasure  to  be  here  in  Luxembourg  on  this  occasion  of  the  8th  IFSB  Summit  on 
“Enhancing  Global  Financial  Stability:  Challenges  and  Opportunities  for  Islamic  Finance”. I 
am honoured to speak on the scope for international collaboration and cooperation in Islamic 
finance in our collective endeavor to safeguard financial stability. 
The internationalisation of Islamic finance and its increased role in the international 
financial system 
Since the turn of the millennium, the internationalisation of Islamic finance has accelerated. 
Its  internationalisation  is  manifested  by  the  increased  presence  of  Islamic  financial 
institutions  in  new  jurisdictions,  the  increased  international  participation  in  Islamic  financial 
markets and the increased cross border flows that are Shariah compliant. Today, there are 
more than 600 Islamic financial institutions that operate in more than 75 countries. The sukuk 
market in particular, has evolved as a major contributing factor driving the internationalization 
of  Islamic  finance.  It  has  become  an  important  avenue  for  international  fund  raising  and 
investment  activities,  generating  significant  cross-border  flows.  Following  the  return  of 
investor confidence reflected by the strong performance of financial markets in 2010, activity 
in the sukuk market also gained momentum. Islamic finance has become the fastest growing 
segment in the international financial system. Moving forward, the international dimension of 
Islamic finance is set to become even more pronounced in this post crisis-era. 
With the intensification of this globalization process, we need to be mindful of the important 
lessons from the recent global financial crisis of ensuring the quality and soundness of the 
financial  integration  process.  Whilst  the  growing  internationalization  of  Islamic  finance 
essentially reflects its ability to be competitive and its ability to meet the changing demands 
of  businesses,  its  resilience  has  been  important  in  supporting  this  trend.  This  resilience  is 
essentially underpinned by two inherent strengths of Islamic finance. First, is its strength that 
is  derived  from  the  emphasis  on  having  a  close  linkage  between  Islamic  financial 
transactions  and  economic  activity  and  from  having  built-in  checks  and  balances  which 
inherently make Islamic finance a stable form of intermediation. Second, are the initiatives 
that  have  been  taken  to  strengthen  the  international  infrastructure  of  Islamic  finance  to 
promote the sound and orderly development of Islamic finance. Importantly, these initiatives 
are being taken while the Islamic financial institutions and Islamic financial markets are still at 
a relatively early stage of development. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
With its internationalization, Islamic finance will contribute to the more efficient mobilization 
and  allocation  of  funds  across  regions.  This  trend  will  also  strengthen  the  international 
financial  and  economic  interlinkages  between  jurisdictions,  bringing  with  it  mutually 
reinforcing gains. It also influenced the patterns of global financial and economic integration, 
in particular, facilitating the revival of financial and economic integration between Asia and 
the  Middle  East  and  between  emerging  economies  and  the  more  established  financial 
markets, thereby contributing towards a more balanced growth in the global economy. 
Initiatives to strengthen the cross-border financial stability framework 
As  Islamic  finance  increasingly  expands  beyond  national  boundaries,  it  has  called  for 
developing  the  framework  for  cross-border  financial  stability  to  further  strengthen  the 
resilience of Islamic financial system and to address cross-border challenges in an integrated 
manner.  This  recent  decade  has  seen  such  international  cooperation  and  collaboration  to 
safeguard  financial  stability  in  the  international  Islamic  financial  system  be  taken  to  a  new 
level.  This  is  to  ensure  its  orderly  evolution  as  an  integral  component  of  the  international 
financial system.  
Strengthening international financial infrastructure 
The focus of cooperation has been particularly significant in the area of the development of 
the international financial infrastructure relating to financial stability. A key development since 
the setting up of the Accounting and Auditing Organisation for Islamic Financial Institutions 
(AAOIFI) in 1990 has been the establishment of the Islamic Financial Services Board (IFSB) 
as the international prudential standard setting body for the Islamic financial services industry 
in  2002.  The  important  goal  of  strengthening  the  foundation  of  the  global  Islamic  financial 
system was recently reinforced further following the recent global financial crisis, through the 
work  of  the  IFSB-IDB  Task  Force  of  Islamic  Finance  and  Global  Financial  Stability.  In  its 
report  that  was  released  in  2010,  eight  building  blocks  were  identified  to  deal  with  the 
potential  risks  and  vulnerabilities  to  the  Islamic  system  in  this  now  more  challenging 
international  financial  environment.  These  include  steps  that  need  to  be  taken  for  the 
implementation  of  the  prudential  standards;  the  development  of  a  liquidity  management 
infrastructure; the introduction of strong financial safety nets; the development of an effective 
crisis  management  and  resolution  framework;  the  development  and  implementation  of 
accounting,  auditing  and  disclosure  standards;  the  formulation  of  an  effective  macro 
prudential  framework;  the  development  of  credible  credit  rating  institutions  and  processes; 
and finally, to strengthen efforts for capacity building and talent development for the Islamic 
financial services industry. Given the global dimension of these building blocks, international 
cooperation and collaboration is significantly vital to advance these important agendas. 
Regulatory harmonization 
Commanding  the  highest  level  of  international  cooperation  is  particularly  vital  in  the 
implementation  of  common  prudential  standards  to  safeguard  the  stability  of  the  Islamic 
financial  system.  This  will  contribute  towards  the  harmonization  of  the  regulatory  and 
supervisory  framework  in  Islamic  financial  systems  across  borders.  Of  importance  is 
advancing the international standards and best practices that takes into account the distinct 
characteristics of Islamic finance. Such prudential regulation that considers the unique mix of 
risks associated with Shariah-compliant financial business would enhance the effectiveness 
of the regulatory outcomes intended for Islamic finance. 
Much  progress  has  already  been  made  by  the  IFSB  in  promulgating  an  extensive  set  of 
prudential  standards  for  the  Islamic  financial  services  industry  since  its  establishment  in 
2002. The IFSB has already introduced standards for capital adequacy, risk management, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
corporate governance and Shariah governance. This important work has been significant in 
promoting international uniformity of regulatory frameworks and international best practices 
for the Islamic financial system in different jurisdictions. Its significant progress has benefited 
from  the  strong  international  cooperation  and  collective  support  from  its  member  countries 
and  global  institutions.  Indeed,  as  an  evolving  global  industry  with  varying  stages  of 
development across borders and various business structures and operating models used in 
the different markets, this close engagement has also allowed for the attainment of balanced 
views. 
Whilst  Islamic  finance  has  demonstrated  resilience  during  the  recent  crisis,  the  IFSB  has 
moved  quickly  to  review  its  existing  capital  standards  for  possible  enhancements  and  to 
incorporate new liquidity measures in its ongoing work in developing liquidity standards for 
Islamic  banking.  This  work  is  currently  being  addressed  through  the  Working  Groups  for 
Capital Adequacy Standards and for Liquidity Risk Management. The overarching objective 
is  to  ensure  that  the  salient  features  of  Islamic  finance  are  effectively  and  adequately 
addressed  while  taking  into  account  the  issues  that  had  surfaced  in  the  crisis  in  the 
conventional financial system. 
The next stage is the implementation of these standards in the different jurisdictions, 
which is just as important as the development of the standards itself. This is an area in which 
global  cooperation  and  collaborative  action  is  critical  so  as  to  ensure  the  consistent 
implementation  of  the  regulatory  framework.  The  full  adoption  of  IFSB  standards  will 
eliminate  the  opportunity  for  regulatory  arbitrage,  in  particular,  regulatory  arbitrage  due  to 
cross-sectoral  differences,  cross-border  differences  and 
the  differences  between 
conventional  and  Islamic  finance.  The  more  consistent  implementation  of  these  standards 
will also ensure greater certainty in the regulatory treatment of Islamic financial transactions, 
thereby  enabling  comparability  among  institutions  as  well  as  surveillance  by  regulatory 
authorities. This harmonization will not only contribute towards global financial stability, but 
will also promote greater transparency across borders. 
The  application  and  enforcement  of  the  international  prudential  standards  promulgated  by 
the  IFSB  will  contribute  towards  achieving  these  objectives.  Technical  cooperation 
programmes can be developed and designed for both ex-ante and ex-post implementation of 
the IFSB standards. In the pre-implementation period, structured technical programmes can 
be  tailored  to  individual  countries  to  enhance  jurisdictional  preparedness  in  adopting  the 
standards  if  so  required.  Similarly  in  the  post-implementation  period,  a  framework  for  self-
assessment  can  be  developed  to  assess  jurisdictional  effectiveness  in  implementing  the 
IFSB  standards.  These  developments  would  potentially  lead  to  the  inclusion  of  the  IFSB 
standards  and  rules  for  adherence  and  implementation  across  jurisdictions,  along  with  the 
core principles and standards of the Basel Committee, IAIS and IOSCO within the context of 
the  IMF-World  Bank  Financial  Sector  Assessment  Program.  This  would  further  contribute 
towards the efforts of achieving global financial stability in the international financial system. 
Cross-border supervisory cooperation 
The increasing internationalisation of Islamic finance has a significant extent been facilitated 
by  the  expansion  of  the  operations  of  Islamic  financial  institutions  beyond  their  domestic 
borders, motivated by the search for new growth opportunities. In addition to the increased 
interconnectedness  of  Islamic  financial  markets,  this  trend  calls  for  greater  cooperation 
among  supervisors  to  ensure  financial  stability  of  the  Islamic  financial  system.  The  recent 
global  financial  crisis  has  in  fact  put  to  a  test  the  strength  of  cross  border  supervisory 
cooperation. Challenged by information asymmetries due in part to the lack of arrangements 
for  cooperation,  supervisors  faced  the  challenging  task  of  understanding  the  extent  of  the 
systemic risk and its contagion across borders. 
In the rapidly evolving world of Islamic finance, supervisors are also confronted with an even 
greater  task,  of  keeping  abreast  with  the  pace  of  innovation,  taking  into  account  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
institutions 
is  already 
taking  place 
uniqueness of Islamic financial contracts in addition to the universal scope of Islamic banking 
business. This warrants supervisors to recognise the different aspects of risk management in 
Islamic  finance.  Islamic  financial  institutions  in  most  jurisdictions  have  evolved  within  the 
confines  of  the  conventional  system  and  have  been  accustomed  to  business  practices  in 
their respective jurisdictions. This could result in distinctly different business and risk taking 
activities. Collaboration among supervisory authorities of such internationally active Islamic 
financial institutions thus needs to become part of the overall supervisory framework. 
These efforts would require regular engagement between home and host supervisors to 
ensure alignment of the supervisory oversight. This will allow for a more holistic evaluation of 
risks and vulnerabilities for Islamic finance businesses that operate across borders. Effective 
sharing of surveillance information and assessments of other supervisory issues on Islamic 
financial 
through  bilateral  cooperation  between 
supervisory authorities and other informal arrangements. Going forward, a more structured 
framework  for  collaboration  among  supervisors  is  needed  so  as  to  enhance  supervisory 
informational  efficiencies,  and  ultimately,  contribute  to  an  effective  assessment  and  early 
detection of any cross-border risk-transmissions from the  group-wide activities. The home-
host information sharing can be facilitated through the supervisory college arrangement as 
an institutionalised mechanism for greater cooperation. 
The recent financial crisis has also revealed the failure to understand the inter-relationship 
between financial and the broader sector, particularly in understanding the potential spill-over 
and second-round effects that are transmitted between sectors. Post-crisis regulatory efforts 
have  focused  on  macro-prudential  measures  to  complement  micro-surveillance  and 
supervision.  This  entails  horizontal  assessment  of  risks  across  institutions,  sectors  and 
national borders, as well as risks in asset markets across time. This is particularly relevant 
for the Islamic financial services sector. Given the close ties of Islamic finance with the 
real economic sector through the various modes of Islamic financing contracts, a complete 
understanding of the entire risk spectrum often encounters much difficulties. It is therefore 
important  for  the  regulators  to  also  establish  an  integrated  framework  of  macro 
surveillance  for  Islamic  financial  activities  across  jurisdictions.  The  global  database  for 
prudential Islamic finance statistics to be initiated by the IFSB, would therefore need to go far 
beyond  ensuring  standardised  data  collection  among  jurisdictions,  but  also  to  enable  the 
generation of various macro and financial indicators, and global sharing of best practices in 
macro  surveillance.  The  engagement  by  supervisors  would  also  contribute  towards  the 
understanding  of  the  systemic  risk  and  its  origins  and  would  support  the  maintenance  of 
timely and accurate economic and financial data. This would in turn contribute towards more 
effective surveillance and management of financial stability issues.  
Indeed, developing an integrated surveillance mechanism, identification and prevention 
of  emerging  risks  in  the  Islamic  financial  system,  as  well  as  the  establishment  of  an 
integrated crisis management and resolution framework, are crucial to the maintenance 
of  financial  stability  in  the  global  Islamic  financial  system.  This  would  allow  for  a 
comprehensive and prompt response to a financial stress, and thus increase the prospects 
for  an  early  recovery.  This  was  the  basis  behind  the  setting  up  of  the  Islamic  Financial 
Stability Forum (IFSF) in 2010, as a platform to build closer cooperation among regulatory 
authorities.  More  specifically,  the  IFSF  carries  the  mandate  of  promoting  international 
dialogue,  engagement  and  cooperation  in  the  area  of  financial  stability.  It  also  aims  to 
broaden  the  understanding  on  the  external  repercussions  of  policy  action  or  inaction  in  a 
given country on other national financial systems, and in considering the merits for collective 
action.  Whilst  effective 
for  shared 
commitments, important in this process is the recognition of the remits of national autonomy 
given that financial regulation and intervention are subject to country-specific circumstances. 
This  arrangement  can  contribute  towards  enhancing  mutual  understanding  and  prevent 
dilution of the commitment towards common objectives. 
international  cooperation  requires  a 
framework 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
financial 
important 
international 
A  concrete  advancement  in  cooperation  and  collaboration  that  has  paved  the  way  for  the 
development  of  yet  another 
the 
establishment of the International Islamic Liquidity Management Corporation (IILM), in 2010. 
This  landmark  collaboration  between  12  central  banks  and  two  multilateral  development 
institutions represents a major breakthrough in strengthening the liquidity arrangements for 
the international Islamic financial system. This liquidity infrastructure is vital for the efficient 
and well-functioning of the Islamic financial system. The creation of IILM with the mandate to 
issue Shariah compliant liquid instruments is  an important  step forward in promoting more 
efficient cross-border liquidity management by Islamic financial institutions. The IILM will also 
be well-equipped to serve as a platform of global engagement on liquidity management in the 
Islamic financial system and on addressing cross-border systemic liquidity issues.  
infrastructure 
is 
important 
international 
the  development  of 
rapid  global  expansion  and 
It  has  been  characterized  by 
tremendous  achievements  have  been 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude my remarks. This decade has been a defining era in the evolution of Islamic 
finance. 
increased 
internationalisation.  Of  importance  is  that  these  trends  have  been  supported  by  significant 
actions  taken  to  strengthen  the  foundations  of  the  international  Islamic  financial  system 
institutional  arrangements  and 
involving 
mechanisms.  These 
the  outcome  of  strong 
cooperation and collaboration among the Central Banking community from both Islamic and 
non-Islamic countries. 
Moving  forward,  it  is  essential  for  this  strong  cooperation  to  continue  given  the  dynamic 
nature of the industry. In addition, the pace of internationalization can be expected to gain 
further momentum. As the international integration of Islamic finance intensifies, cross border 
financial  flows  and  its  associated  challenges  will  also  increase.  This  will  call  for  an  even 
greater degree of international cooperation and coordination. While this new decade beckons 
the prospect of immense opportunities in Islamic finance, our ability to realize this potential 
will  be  determined  by  the  ability  to  recognize  the  shared  responsibility  it  demands  and  to 
collectively  advance  forward  the  agenda  of  financial  stability  and  resilience  to  achieve  our 
ultimate goal of a shared prosperity. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
