Miguel Fernández Ordóñez: Presentation of the 2010 Annual Report 
Testimony  of  Mr  Miguel  Fernández  Ordóñez,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain,  to  the 
Parliamentary  Committee  on  Economic  and  Financial  Affairs,  on  the  occasion  of  the 
presentation of the 2010 Annual Report, Madrid, 21 June 2011. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I appear before you today on the occasion of the presentation of the 2010 Annual Report. As 
was  the  case  last  year  when  I  gave  testimony,  the  circumstances  surrounding  us  remain 
complicated. It would not be overstating the case to say we are at a crucial crossroads for 
the  future  of  the  economic  and  monetary  union  and  for  the  anchoring  of  the  recovery  in 
Spain. 
The crisis that broke in the summer of 2007 has gone through various phases and is bringing 
major consequences to bear. A year back, before this Committee, I spoke of the events that 
had shaken the euro area in the spring of 2010, with the emergence of the sovereign debt 
crisis,  the  response  of  the  authorities  with  the  approval  of  the  financial  assistance 
programme for Greece, and the first steps towards the reform of the euro area governance 
mechanisms.  The  effects  of  the  crisis  on  the  Spanish  economy  were  very  serious,  but 
economic  policy  responded  with  an  ambitious  fiscal  adjustment  plan,  fresh  impetus  to  the 
financial  restructuring  process  and  the  launch  of  structural  reforms  in  various  fields.  Set 
against the serious circumstances then facing Spain, it may be said that the right approach 
was  chosen,  and  the  initiatives  adopted  helped  mitigate  the  risks  that  had  materialised. 
Despite this favourable change of course, the situation twelve months on remains complex, 
both  from  the  European  perspective  and  from  the  domestic  standpoint  of  the  Spanish 
economy. 
The  European  sovereign  debt  crisis  is  the  most  serious  episode  to  impact  the  euro  area 
since the single currency was founded. Its very nature and the difficulties in tackling it have, 
moreover,  highlighted  the  shortcomings  of  the  institutional  framework  of  the  euro.  These 
include most notably the insufficient degree of fiscal discipline imposed by the Stability and 
Growth  Pact,  the  absence  of  mechanisms  to  check  the  build-up  of  macroeconomic 
imbalances  and  the  lack  of  tools  with  which  to  manage  crisis  situations  such  as  those 
witnessed. 
Yet we must also acknowledge that there has been significant progress in recent months in 
these three areas. There have been various legislative initiatives to reinforce the Stability and 
Growth Pact, to establish arrangements for the prevention and correction of macroeconomic 
(other  than  fiscal)  imbalances  and,  finally,  to  address  crisis  situations  with  the  so-called 
European Stability Mechanism.  
But  beyond  the  necessary  reform  of  the  economic  governance  of  the  euro,  the  difficult 
position  of  the  Irish,  Portuguese  and,  above  all,  Greek  economies  must  be  redressed. 
Tensions  are  at  a  peak  and  the  outcome  of  the  situation  may  have  very  important 
consequences for the euro area as a whole. 
It  is  often  acknowledged  that  European  construction  has  been  forged  through  the 
overcoming  of  recurrent  episodes  of  crisis,  from  which  the  project  has  always  emerged 
strengthened. Let us hope this is true this time and that the European authorities’ decisions 
will rise to the challenge. 
The Spanish economy was particularly affected by the sovereign debt crisis when the Greek 
and Irish economies had to resort to adjustment programmes. Conversely, when the same 
happened with Portugal in April this year, the impact was less, despite our closer economic, 
trade and financial ties with this country. This was due to the set of measures that had been 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
adopted  previously  to  speed  the  approval  of  some  reforms  and  thus  tackle  confidence 
problems.  In  any  event,  the  Spanish  economy  remains  under  the  scrutiny  of  the  markets, 
which continue to demand an unjustifiably high level of sovereign risk premia. In past weeks 
we have witnessed the effect caused by the recent discussions in Europe on the potential 
participation  of  the  private  sector  in  the  bail-out  of  the  Greek  economy,  while  doubts 
resurfaced  over  the  seriousness  of  Spain’s  commitment  to  pushing  through  outstanding 
reforms. 
The spread of the sovereign debt crisis to Spain was ultimately due to the presence in our 
country of certain factors of vulnerability as a result of the imbalances that had built up during 
the previous upturn. And these were compounded by the factors that had emerged during 
the crisis, such as the high unemployment rate and the burgeoning budget deficit. 
The main imbalances accumulated in the phase of strong growth were attributable to a sharp 
expansion in demand that gave rise to a substantial increase in private-sector debt, excesses 
in  the  real  estate  sector,  and  price  and  cost  increases  that  tended  to  crowd  out  domestic 
output in favour of imports, systematically raising the external deficit.  
The unfolding of the economic crisis further complicated the situation. Firstly, because it gave 
rise  to  severe  job  destruction,  as  a  result  of  shortcomings  in  the  workings  of  the  labour 
market.  At  21%,  the  unemployment  level  has  not  only  highlighted  the  need  to  reform  the 
institutional  framework  of  this  market;  the  figure  also  raises  doubts  about  the  Spanish 
economy’s capacity to restore its potential growth and ensure the sustainability of its public 
finances. 
In this respect, the rapid fiscal deterioration has been one of the factors that has increased 
our country’s exposure to the euro area debt crisis. Our starting point was a healthy one, with 
a budget surplus in 2007 and a low public debt ratio. But the deterioration was so sharp that, 
in the space of scarcely two years, the deficit climbed above 11% of GDP and debt moved 
into a delicate dynamic just as the financial markets began to worry about the expansionary 
deviation of public finances in other countries. In this climate of nervousness, the high levels 
of private-sector debt, the need for balance-sheet write-downs in the financial sector and the 
difficulty  the  economy  faced  in  growing  at  a  sufficiently  high  level  all  weighed  on  the 
perception of the sustainability of our public finances.  
Moreover,  the  banking  system,  which  had  negotiated  the  first  wave  of  the  international 
financial crisis without excessive difficulties, came up against bigger problems when the main 
elements of the underlying macroeconomic crisis began to be felt at banks. Combining with 
this was the tightening of financing conditions for credit institutions raising funds abroad, as a 
result of the prevailing instability on financial markets. 
Faced with all these circumstances, it was vital to firmly show that matters could be turned 
around and that Spain was not bound to follow the path of instability of other countries. To do 
this, the change in economic policy stance last spring was essential, since it demonstrated a 
willingness to react to and redress the imbalances.  
Given the source of the tensions, the priority was to right the trajectory of public finances. To 
this  end,  an  ambitious  fiscal  consolidation  plan  was  approved  in  May  last  year.  It  brought 
forward the bulk of the adjustment to be made to the years 2010 and 2011. In parallel, there 
was  a  patent  and  pressing  need  to  tackle  the  labour  market  shortcomings  that  were 
hampering  the  absorption  of  unemployment  and  the  adjustment  of  the  economy.  Hence  a 
labour market reform was launched. Finally, in the financial field, the restructuring initiated a 
year earlier was accelerated to overhaul the savings bank sector. 
Thanks  to  these  measures,  the  recovery  of  the  Spanish  economy  remained  on  track, 
although  it  continued  at  a  slow  pace,  due  to  the  very  need  to  undertake  unavoidable 
adjustments. In this respect, the weight of real estate activity in output continued to decline 
and  the  external  deficit  was  also  further  corrected.  There  was  no  significant  progress  in 
inflation, but this was due to the influence of temporary factors, such as the rise in VAT in 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
July  last  year  and  the  hike  in  oil  and  other  commodities  prices.  Once  these  effects  have 
worked through, inflation should fall again in the coming months, although for this to happen 
it  will  be  vital  no  second-round  effects  should  come  about,  as  these  would  harm  the 
economy’s competitiveness.  
Write-downs  of  the  balance  sheets  of  non-financial  corporations  and  households  have 
continued, with a slight decline in the outstanding balance of credit extended to these agents. 
In  the  case  of  non-financial  corporations,  behaviour  has  differed  across  the  productive 
sectors,  with  modest  increases  in  financing  to  companies  other  than  those  in  real  estate 
development  and  construction.  In  the  case  of  households,  deleveraging  will  no  doubt  be 
slower,  insofar  as  the  bulk  of  household  debts  are  in  mortgage  loans  extended  over  long 
terms, whereby repayment will be gradual.  
Adjustment of the imbalances in the economy is vital in order to soundly underpin medium 
and  long-term  growth,  although  in  the  short  run,  balance-sheet  write-downs  in  the  general 
government sector, at credit institutions and in households and firms may check any take-off 
in  spending.  Fortunately,  the  sluggishness  of  domestic  demand  is  being  offset  by  the 
buoyancy  of  external  demand.  The  thrust  of  exports  has  been  substantial  and  should 
continue to be so, whereby attaining further gains in competitiveness will be vital. This is the 
key  variable  for  making  the  adjustment  of  the  imbalances  compatible  with  the  firming  of  a 
more dynamic recovery.  
If  this  combination  of  adjustment  and  growth  were  to  successfully  take  root,  the  Spanish 
economy  could  see  private-sector  deleveraging,  the  stabilising  of  public  finances  and  the 
restructuring  of  the  banking  system  lead  to  an  increase  in  confidence,  softer  financial 
conditions  and,  in  sum,  an  improved  economic  outlook  that  would  boost  investment  and 
employment. 
The role of economic policy remains pivotal for steering the adjustment process. In the case 
of fiscal policy, the measures adopted last spring marked the starting point. But substantial 
challenges lie ahead and determination will be required to define and specify the measures 
that allow public finances to resume a stable path. In the short run, the deficit target for 2011 
is ambitious, as it entails a reduction of more than 3 pp of GDP to 6%. But, at the same time, 
compliance  is  crucial  in  view  of  the  financial  markets’  extreme  sensitivity  to  the  course  of 
public  finances.  A  great  effort  is  needed  but,  as  we  have  so  much  at  stake,  it  is  vital  to 
prevent  deviations  from  these  targets  from  arising  and,  should  they  do  so,  the  necessary 
measures  must  immediately  be  implemented  to  correct  them,  as  the  government  has 
undertaken to do. 
To  see  this  task  through,  all  levels  of  government  must  be  involved.  This  begins  with  the 
regional governments, who must firmly redress their budgetary positions, in which connection 
the  strict  arrangements  for  the  authorisation  of  indebtedness  may  prove  helpful.  Another 
confidence-building factor would be greater transparency of regional government budgetary 
information.  True,  significant  headway  has  recently  been  made  in  this  area.  But,  to  dispel 
doubts  about  the  state  of  regional  finances,  it  would  be  very  important  to  see  the  regular 
publication of figures for the regional governments as a whole and for each particular region, 
with the same periodicity, degree of detail, lag and accessibility as State figures. 
The  heavy  deterioration  in  the  general  government  deficit  in  this  crisis  advises,  moreover, 
adopting measures to achieve a more balanced budgetary performance both in upturns and 
in recessions. Here, the government announcement to include in the Budgetary Stability Law 
a rule whereby general government spending may not exceed the medium-term growth rate 
of  the  Spanish  economy  is  most  positive.  This  rule  would  be  immediately  applicable  to 
central and to local government, but its adoption by the regional governments would also be 
pursued.  
Fiscal sustainability also needs the economy to swiftly restore its dynamism and to achieve a 
high  potential  rate,  since  this  is  a  fundamental  means  of  financing  the  public  spending 
increases  to  which  population  ageing  is  inevitably  going  to  lead.  The  proposed  pension 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
system reform submitted by the government in January this year is also a key step towards 
curbing  these  costs.  The  financial  markets  have  understood  that  this  reform  strengthens 
fiscal  sustainability,  so  it  would  be  advisable  to  set  this  proposal  down  in  the  form  of 
legislation as soon as possible. Further, the sustainability to which the reform refers should 
be specified, so that a procedure is in place to ensure at all times that pensions growth is on 
a sustainable path.  
On the financial front, further headway in restructuring the banking sector has been made in 
2010  and  in  2011  to  date.  The  most  significant  regulatory  step  here  was  the  creation,  in 
2009, of the Fund for the Orderly Restructuring of the Banking Sector (FROB). The FROB 
has  proven  most  useful  in  paving  the  way  for  merger  and  integration  processes  in  the 
savings bank sector, which was highly fragmented. As a result, the number of institutions in 
the sector has fallen relatively quickly from 45 to 18. In those operations that received funds 
from  the  FROB,  the  institutions  concerned  submitted  restructuring  plans  that  envisage 
reductions in the number of offices and in other operating expenses.  
Other major steps in banking system restructuring have been the reform of the legal regime 
governing savings banks, approved last summer. And more recently, in February this year, 
Royal Decree-Law 2/2011 was enacted. This raised the minimum required level of top-quality 
capital for all credit institutions. It encourages tapping the markets for funds, either through 
market launches or through the entry of new investors, although the FROB is authorised to 
inject the capital needed in those cases in which banks cannot meet the new requirements 
through resort to the markets. This recapitalisation strategy encouraging the entry of private 
investors  into  savings  banks  requires  time  and  effort  by  all  concerned.  But  it  offers  clear 
advantages in the medium and long term as regards the cost to taxpayers and, above all, the 
soundness and durability of new projects, compared with the nationalisations used in other 
countries, where problems differed and it was not necessary to pursue beforehand a strategy 
based on the rationalisation of the weakest institutions to attain gains in efficiency, size and 
governance. 
Recapitalisation is moving ahead under the terms and timeframe envisaged in Royal Decree-
Law  2/2011.  On  11  March,  the  Banco  de  España  published  the  capital  needed  by  all 
institutions  to  comply  with  this  legislation.  Most  commercial  banks  and half  of  the Spanish 
savings  banks  met  the  requirements  laid  down.  Following  the  collapse  of  one  of  the 
integration  projects,  13  institutions  –  commercial  banks  and  savings  banks  –  needed  to 
increase  their  capital.  On  14  April,  the  Banco  de  España  approved  the  strategies  and 
timeframes submitted by these 13 institutions. Two of them were the subsidiaries of foreign 
banks  that  are  being  recapitalised  by  their  parents.  A  further  two  Spanish  banks  opted  to 
reinforce  their  capital  by  tapping  the  market.  Of  the  remaining  institutions,  namely  nine 
savings banks or groups of savings banks. four opted as a primary alternative to increase 
their  capital  resorting  to  the  markets,  and,  as  a  second  option,  resorting  to  the  FROB. 
Another  savings  bank  decided  to  participate  in  an  integration  process  with  a  better 
capitalised  institution.  Finally,  the  remaining  four  savings  banks  that  had  to  increase  their 
capital to meet the new requirements chose the FROB as their primary option.  
The institutions opting to tap the markets, whether through IPOs or through private investors 
taking  a  stake  in  their  capital,  are  currently  immersed  in  the  process  associated  with  this 
strategy. In the case of savings banks that have resorted to the FROB to recapitalise, the 
business  and  recapitalisation  plans  are  being  analysed,  and  the  valuation  of  these 
institutions by independent experts is under way. Accordingly, the entire process is moving 
ahead as scheduled in the legislation, which stipulates that the new requirements shall be 
met by 30 September this year, although institutions opting for private investment may apply 
for  a  three-month  extension,  extendible  to  six  months  in  the  case  of  market  listings. 
Significantly,  the  recapitalisation  process  has  been  accompanied  by  the  transformation  of 
most  savings  banks  into  banks,  a  move  that  has  gone  outside  and  beyond  the  group  of 
institutions that had to increase their capital to meet the new requirements.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The Banco de España considers that the capital requirements laid down by Royal Decree-
Law 2/2011 are sufficient to ensure the soundness of the Spanish banking system, not only 
under  the  most  likely  macroeconomic  scenario,  but  also  under  harsher  scenarios  that  are 
most unlikely to occur. As is known, some analysts estimated that the capital needs of our 
banking system may be greater in the future, under assumptions of a strong deterioration in 
the Spanish economy. In this respect, the stress tests being conducted at the European level 
will  show  to  what  extent  banks  need  more  capital  to  withstand  the  extreme  scenarios 
envisaged  in  these  tests.  If,  as  a  result  of  these  tests,  certain  Spanish  banks  were  to 
evidence additional capital needs that could not be covered by the banks themselves through 
resort  to  the  markets  or  to  other  means,  the  FROB  would  provide  the  funds  required,  as 
envisaged in the Royal Decree. In any event, even under highly pessimistic scenarios about 
the Spanish economy, the use of public funds to recapitalise institutions would entail only a 
relatively moderate increase in the outstanding balance of Spanish public debt. 
The  restructuring  and  recapitalisation  of  the  banking  system  has  been  accompanied  by  a 
significant drive to write down the balance sheets of Spanish deposit institutions which, since 
January 2008, have recognised and assumed asset impairment losses totalling €96 billion, 
equivalent to 9% of GDP. 
Lastly, I should like to stress the progress made in transparency and the significant role this 
tool has played. In particular, I should remind you that the Europe-wide coordinated stress 
tests conducted last year were subject in Spain to substantially higher coverage than in other 
countries.  Indeed,  the  results  of  all  savings  banks  and  all  listed  commercial  banks  were 
published. Consequently, analysts and the public at large have all the information they need 
to  evaluate  and  assess  the  situation  of  even  the  smallest  Spanish  institutions,  something 
which  cannot  be  done  in  other  countries.  Moreover,  the  Banco  de  España  required  all 
institutions to publish in detail their exposures to the most troubled assets, along with their 
volumes of wholesale funding and their liquidity situation. Lastly, another area in which the 
degree of transparency in Spain is comparatively greater is that relating to provisioning since, 
unlike  standard  practice  in  other  countries,  the  methodologies  for  provision-measurement 
and provisioning requirements are public.  
Transparency is a most useful tool in financial system restructuring because it helps dispel 
doubts about the soundness of the Spanish banking sector, it enables public opinion to better 
understand the need to overhaul the savings banks sector, and it encourages managers and 
the attendant authorities to promptly undertake the necessary restructuring process.  
The Spanish economy faces considerable challenges, which I have reviewed today. But the 
most  pressing  task  undoubtedly  lies  in  our  labour  market,  the  workings  of  which  evidence 
singular traits compared with those of other countries. In times of crisis such as the present, 
these  traits  lead  to  the  adjustment  coming  about  essentially  through  job  destruction  and, 
even in boom times, the unemployment rate holds at an unjustifiably high level. To reduce 
such high unemployment and to rapidly generate jobs again, we must draw our institutional 
and legal framework closer to the models of the other developed countries, which allow for 
greater flexibility in the use of the labour factor with a greater degree of worker protection. In 
fact,  within  the  euro,  the  key  variable  for  the  recovery  of  the  Spanish  economy  is 
competitiveness. And without a far-reaching reform of these institutions, it will be very difficult 
for the Spanish economy to promptly attain a reasonable rate of sustained growth.  
On 10 June the government approved a Decree-Law providing for some improvement to the 
regulation of collective bargaining. Foreseeably, in its passage through Parliament, greater 
powers will be extended to workers and employers so that, in mutual agreement, they may 
decide what they believe is most suitable to enhance the productivity and competitiveness of 
their companies. The positive effects of this greater flexibility in the labour market would be 
reinforced  if,  moreover,  measures  were  taken  to  increase  competition  in  the  markets  for 
goods and services. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
In  sum,  we  are  at  a  juncture  where  achieving  the  right  monetary  and  fiscal  stance  and 
successfully managing economic policy will be pivotal for the future of the Spanish economy. 
The  course  the  European  sovereign  debt  crisis  takes  will  be  a  determinant  of  paramount 
importance.  But  whatever  the  scenario  the  role  of  our  economic  policy  will  remain 
fundamental  for  overcoming  the  inefficiencies  highlighted,  for  redressing  the  lack  of 
confidence hampering and raising the cost of external funding, and for keeping the Spanish 
economy safe from any incident that might occur in the European arena. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
