Njuguna Ndung’u: Microfinance development in Kenya 
Remarks by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the launch of 
the  Small  and  Micro  Enterprises  Programme  Deposit  Taking  Microfinance  Limited 
(SMEP DTM Ltd), Nairobi, 5 April 2011. 
 Mr. Gabriel Kivuti, Chairman, SMEP DTM Ltd;  
Board of Directors, Management and Staff of SMEP DTM Ltd; 
Representatives from National Council of Churches of Kenya here present; 
Distinguished Guests; 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  be  here  today  to  witness  the  launch  of  the  Small  and  Micro 
Enterprises Programme Deposit Taking Microfinance Limited (SMEP DTM Ltd). I join you in 
celebrating  this  milestone  that  SMEP  DTM  Ltd  has  achieved  by  being  the  fourth  deposit 
taking  microfinance  institution  to  be  licensed  by  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya  under  the 
Microfinance  Act.  It  is  important  to  note  that  the  Central  Bank  has  to  date  licensed  five 
deposit taking microfinance institutions; approved 26 business names; and is processing six 
applications for licence which are at various stages of review. The launch today provides us 
with an opportune moment to review the progress made since the operationalisation of the 
Microfinance Act in 2008. More specifically, today’s launch is a great achievement for SMEP 
DTM Ltd and provides an opportunity for the institution to provide to its clientele more diverse 
financial products, including savings. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: The SMEP DTM’s commitment to offering financial services to the 
unbanked  populace  dates  back  to  1975  when  it  started  as  a  small  project  of  the  National 
Council  of  Churches  of  Kenya  (NCCK)  under  the  name  Small  Scale  Business  Enterprise 
(SSBE). The project was aimed at providing the poor in a number of slum areas with food 
and later small business grants. The project was then modified, developed and evolved into 
a  microcredit  company  that  was  registered  as  a  company  limited  by  guarantee  in  1999. 
Today,  the  institution  boasts  of  87,500  clients  and  an  outstanding  loan  balance  of 
approximately  Ksh.1.1  billion.  The  transformation  into  a  deposit-taking  microfinance 
institution will enable SMEP DTM offer savings products to its clients in addition to the loan 
products as well as enlarge its resource base due to the build up of deposits base. This will 
undoubtedly  position  SMEP  DTM  Ltd  to  enhance  financial  outreach  towards  becoming  a 
major player in the microfinance sub-sector in the years ahead.  
The  microfinance  sub-sector  has  achieved  rapid  growth.  The  sector  has  opened  a  branch 
network  of  44  branches  which  had  mobilised  0.8  million  deposit  accounts  valued  at 
Ksh.8.59 billion and advanced loans amounting to Ksh.16.6 billion as at 28th February 2011. 
The licensing of SMEP DTM is therefore another milestone towards the development of an 
all  inclusive  financial  system  in  Kenya  as  envisaged  by  Kenya’s  economic  blue  print 
Vision 2030. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: Over the past few years, the Central Bank of Kenya in addition to 
licensing  and  regulating  Deposit  Taking  Microfinance  Institutions  has  embraced  policy 
reforms  to  build  an  adequate  financial  infrastructure  to  support  the  development  and 
deepening  of  the  financial  sector.  Innovative  models  such  as  agent  banking  and  credit 
information sharing aimed at scaling up financial inclusion are some recent examples. These 
initiatives are guided by CBK’s resolve as a regulator to advise, form partnerships, develop 
and  regulate  the  market  with  an  aim  of  enhancing  access  and  reducing  the  cost  of  doing 
business in financial services. 
I  am  happy  to  note  that  according  to  the  FinAccess  Report  of  2009,  access  to  financial 
services improved with access to MFIs service doubling from 1.7% in 2006 to 3.4% in 2009, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
the  picture  has  changed  drastically  by  now.  These  improvements,  however  small,  are  an 
indication that financial sector transformations and reforms being undertaken based on the 
three pillars of stability, efficiency and access are translating into increased financial inclusion 
and consequently spreading financial services to the poor. Financial inclusion actors globally, 
like CBK, believe that poverty can be reduced sustainably and consistently with access to 
finance. Access to finance allows the poor to develop a savings base and enlarge their asset 
base that supports them to ride over shocks and escape poverty.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  The  licensing  of  SMEP  DTM  progresses  the  financial  inclusion 
initiatives. The Central Bank is focused on addressing entry barriers for unbanked and under-
banked Kenyans to access financial services. It is our belief that we will scale up financial 
inclusion  through  reducing  barriers  to  entry  and  lowering  transaction  costs  through  these 
initiatives. In turn, these initiatives continue to support a rolling out of financial services and 
products  as  well  as  increasing  the  delivery  channels.  It  is  expected  that  Microfinance 
Institutions  will  address  any  entry  barriers  by  focusing  on  areas  that  have  not  been  well 
served  by  mainstream  financial  institutions  by  offering  demand-driven,  affordable  and 
convenient products. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  I  am  happy  to  assure  the  microfinance  industry  that  the  Central 
Bank will continue to initiate key reforms and structural changes that are necessary in the 
sector’s legal, regulatory and supervisory frameworks. As you are aware, key among these 
legislative changes was the specific amendment to the Microfinance Act in January 2011 that 
introduced agency definition. The amendment anchored agency business in the law and, the 
Central Bank is in the process of designing guidelines to facilitate the contracting of agents to 
provide financial services on behalf of deposit taking microfinance institutions. The move will 
undoubtedly  allow  microfinance 
leverage  on  additional  cost  effective 
distribution  channels  to  offer  financial  services.  This  initiative  is  informed  by  the  need  to 
leapfrog access to financial services to Kenya’s bankable who remain totally outside the orbit 
of these services at affordable cost. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: Another remarkable initiative in the pipeline is in the area of credit 
information sharing (CIS) for Microfinance Institutions. As you are aware, the CIS mechanism 
is already in place for commercial banks. The Central Bank is currently working on modalities 
of  incorporating  the  Deposit  Taking  Microfinance  Institutions  into  the  CIS  mechanism. 
Indeed,  it  is  the  Government’s  intention  to  create  a  framework  whereby  all  financial 
institutions  such  as  banks,  Deposit-Taking  Microfinance  Institutions,  SACCO’s  and  other 
licensed  credit  providers  will  have  access  to  and  exchange  credit  information  across  the 
board.  It  is  hoped  that  the  merging  of  credit  information  from  these  various  players  will 
provide for a stronger credit market that will improve the pool of credible borrowers, decrease 
defaults, reduce credit costs and ultimately result in a stable financial sector.  
Before I conclude, Ladies and Gentlemen, I would like to once again congratulate SMEP 
DTM for its achievement as a Deposit Taking Microfinance Institution. On its part, the Central 
Bank would like to assure SMEP and the industry and all the stakeholders of its continued 
support  in  the  development  of  the  Microfinance  Industry  and  look  forward  to  working 
collaboratively with the market to increase access to financial services in the country. The 
Central Bank is out to create strong financial institutions. Indeed, the New Constitution has 
provided us the wonderful space to create strong institutions. Strong institutions both from 
the regulator and the regulated will support the market, define appropriate incentives (and for 
a  regulator,  define  appropriate  penalties  as  well)  to  encourage  prudent  behavior  in  the 
market. That is the way we can develop and deepen the financial market. 
With  those  few  remarks,  Ladies and Gentlemen,  it  is  now  my  pleasure  to  declare  SMEP 
DTM Limited officially launched. 
Thank you. 
institutions  to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
