Ardian Fullani: From coins to e-money – Albanian national currency 
exhibition 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  opening  of  the 
exhibition  marking  the  85th  Anniversary  of  the  National  Currency,  National  Historical 
Museum, Tirana, 31 March 2011. 
 It  is  my  pleasure  to  open  the  proceedings  of  the  activities  that  the  Bank  of  Albania  has 
organized  to  commemorate  the  85th  anniversary  of  the  national  currency  issue.  When  we 
decided  to  open  today’s  exhibition,  I  was  personally  attracted  by  another  dimension:  the 
history of the Albanian monetary system development. The first Albanian coins found date 
back to the 2nd century B.C. All these bronze coins feature on one side the portrait of 
King  Gent,  the  last  ruler  of  Illyria.  As  in  all  other  countries  of  the  ancient 
Mediterranean,  in  Illyria,  this  powerful  man  set  an  unbreakable  link  between  money 
and  the  state,  not  only  to  promote  economic  activity  at  home,  but  also  gain  its 
benefits.  
Today’s activity aims to capture and convey to the visitors the artistic and numismatic values, 
and  the  historical  development  of  our  national  currency.  While  viewing  the  evolution  of 
nominal values, we are able to create a vision of: 
 
 
 
the performance of the national economy over the course of years; 
the purchasing power of money; and 
the history of the Albanian people through the portrayed entities and the depicted 
themes; the cultural and social sensations through artistic elements of design.  
A country’s monetary and financial system does not only put across the sovereignty of the 
state economic policies, but it also enables the country’s economic and social development.  
The issue of the national currency in the form of banknotes and coins undoubtedly plays a 
unique role in this regard. Historically, money was born as a response to the social needs for 
economic development and progress. Its three functions as a medium of exchange, store of 
value and unit of account, allow for greater economic sophistication. 
These  three  roles  were  soon  grasped  by  the  ancient  rulers,  who  were  the  first  issuers  of 
money in its classical forms. By acknowledging the role and power of money, these princes, 
kings  and  emperors  sealed  them  with  their  portraits  as  a  final  expression  of  political  and 
economic power.  
This  is  very  well  described  by  Mayer  Rothschild,  the  founder  of  the  famous  Rothschild 
dynasty, when he quotes: “...Give me control of a nation’s money and I care not who makes 
the  laws...”  Indeed,  even  a  surreal  world  as  that  of  the  famous  Harry  Potter  cannot  exist 
without Gringotts Bank, which J. K. Rowling describes as a multiple story white building with 
underground vaults that stretch to an unknown depth below the earth.  
Economic  and  social  development  has  constantly  introduced  innovations  in  the  area  of 
monetary  systems,  and  also  of  banknotes  and  coins.  The  first  banknotes  were  born  as 
identical  counter-values  of  the  amounts  of  precious  metals,  mainly  of  gold,  and  they  were 
explicitly guaranteed by the states and sovereigns for their gold parity. This characteristic is 
also found in the banknotes of the first period of the Albanian state. The banknotes issued 
during this period are designated as “gold franc” implying their coverage with physical gold at 
a fixed and invariable rate. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The further evolution of human societies and their economic and political systems introduced 
great  innovations  in  the  monetary  area.  The  development  of  commercial  banks,  the  credit 
system and central banks were crucial moments in the economic progress.  
Central banks, as public institutions mandated to issue and circulate the currency, originate 
from  earlier  times.  The  first  examples  of  central  banks,  closer  to  today’s  perception  of  the 
central bank, date back to the 17th century in England or Sweden.  
These  institutions,  originally  with  a  clear  commerce  orientation,  were  responsible  for  the 
issue of currency and servicing the state needs with loans or lending for different purposes. 
The  modern  central  bank  originates  from  the  20th  century,  and  the  US  Fed  served  as  a 
model for a number of other central banks.  
The  attribution  of  the  supervisory  and  regulatory  functions  of  the  banking  system  and  the 
orientation of the central banks’ mission in terms of economic objectives, like low inflation or 
stable economic growth, marks the starting point of central banks at their present form. The 
latter have played a primary role in the further progress of monetary systems.  
Fixed-rate  convertibility  to  physical  metals  was  found  problematic  in  the  economic  and 
monetary management. The great economic depression of 1929–1932 clearly showed that 
monetary  policy,  designed  as  an  opportunity  for  public  authorities  to  affect  the  amount  of 
money in circulation and its price, or the interest rates, is a valuable instrument to mitigate 
economic fluctuations. 
Beginning from the 20th century, the issued banknotes and coins lost their convertibility into 
gold at fixed and invariable rates. The issued currency, from this moment on also referred to 
as fiat money, derives its value from the state’s obligatory force. 
However, this is only half of the picture. The most important aspect determining the value of 
the currency is now on public confidence in it. The preservation of such confidence requires 
above all accountable institutions and transparent and reliable economic governance. 
The modern role of central banks as independent institutions, exclusively in charge of issuing 
the  currency  and  legally  mandated  to  control  its  value  in  time,  or  in  other  words  its 
purchasing power, or put even simpler, price stability, originates under the same context.  
The  development  of  monetary  systems  has  not  had  its  final  say  yet;  by  contrast,  the  last 
decades have marked its highest rapid period. The origination of accounting currency in the 
form  of  savings  deposits,  current  accounts,  cheques  and  bills  of  exchange  have  stretched 
the classical definition of money further. 
Electronic  money  in  the  form  of  debit  and  credit  cards,  payment  orders  initiated  via  the 
internet  or  mobile  phone,  or  the  movement  of  funds  through  electronic  platforms  of 
international  financial  markets,  are  great  innovations.  Important  challenges  for  central 
bankers and other supervisory institutions lie ahead in terms of their management.  
The foregoing developments, with some clear deviation during the communist regime, have 
also been reflected in the history of the Albanian monetary system. In what follows, I would 
like to point out the main stages our monetary system has been through. I will try to be brief 
and provide the essence of each stage in few lines. 
When Albania gained its independence from the Ottoman Empire in 1912, the currencies of 
France,  Italy,  Greece,  Austria-Hungary  and  the  Kingdom  of  Serbs,  Croats  and  Slovenians 
began to circulate in place of the Ottoman Lira. Albania did not possess a national monetary 
system.  
The most widely used currency in Albania was that of the Latin Monetary Union – the gold 
franc  –,  which  constituted  Albania’s  de  facto  currency.  Having  no  possession  of  any  legal 
tender  currencies,  Albania  applied  the  gold  standard  at  which  the  silver  and  paper  money 
values were fixed. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Albania was thus one of the few European countries to have a stable currency as a medium 
of  exchange  and  treasury.  The  main  duty  for  the  Albanian  authorities  was  to  codify  the 
monetary  system  by  declaring  the  gold  franc  as  the  national  monetary  unit.  This  brought 
about the need to set up an issuing bank, one that would be able to fix the legal exchange 
rate  for  the  issued  banknotes,  thus  gradually  removing  the  foreign  paper  money  from 
circulation. 
In 1922, Prof. Albert Calmes, Member of the League of Nations Commission of Inquiry into 
Albanian  Affairs,  noted  that:  “...  as  the  Albanian  lives  very  simply,  in  many  cases  under 
conditions  of  great  poverty,  he  is  able  to  save,  despite  the  small  output  produced  by  his 
methods of working, and he does save, for he is very thrifty. Capital is hoarded in gold. As a 
result, Albania possesses a large stock of precious metals valued at 100 million gold francs. 
But this capital, which, if put to use, would suffice to place economic life in Albania on the 
road to progress, is hidden.  
Credit and credit organizations do not exist in Albania. Rates of interest at 30% are by no 
means rare. The reason for this is the lack of confidence. The Albanian’s belief in the stability 
of the Government is not firm enough for him to risk his money in financial enterprises. In 
order to bring capital forth out of the hiding places in which it lies unproductive, confidence 
must be created...”  
The  best  means  to  this  end  was  the  establishment  of  a  national  bank,  an  institution  that 
Albania  needed  greatly  at  that  period.  Its  establishment  was  urgently  needed,  for  it  alone 
could awaken Albania to the conditions of modern economic life. Its principal mission was to 
create confidence, and hence credit and the spirit of enterprise in Albanians.  
The Albanian National Bank was established in 1925 as an Albanian-Italian joint-stock bank. 
It had the exclusive right of issuing the currency – in metallic coins (gold, silver and bronze) 
and banknotes – and determining its legal tender. The amount of banknotes the Bank put in 
circulation had gold or silver coverage.  
The Bank gave Albania the first national currency – the gold franc – thus, going back 
to  the  gold-banknote  monetary  parity.  The  Bank’s  greatest  achievement  was  the 
establishment of a sound monetary system that successfully weathered the difficulties 
of the global monetary system during the 1930s’ global economic crisis. The Albanian 
currency remained faithful to the gold-banknote parity until April 1939.  
Being based on gold bars, the Albanian banknotes were accepted at sight in all main bank 
counters globally. The Albanian franc was one of the strongest European currencies in the 
period between the two world wars.  
The  period  between  1926  and  1939  corresponds  to  the  establishment  of  a  genuine 
banking  system  according  to  the  market  economy-based  system  and  the  banking 
traditions of that period. In the philosophy characterizing that system and time, which 
is basically similar to the current one, money played the main functions of the medium 
of exchange, store of value and unit of account.  
This  is  clearly  evidenced  in  the  press  of  that  time.  In  his  inauguration  speech  as  the 
President of the National Bank, Mr. Mosconi noted that: “Our wish is to bring here the same 
value  of  money  as  in  the  neighbouring  Italy,  and  many  big  steps  have  been  taken  in  this 
regard.  So  we  are  reaching  our  goal,  as  during  our  short  period  of  existence,  the  official 
discount rate, which forms the underlying rate, has decreased from 12 to 6%.” ( An excerpt 
from the speech of the President of the Albanian National Bank, Mr. Mosconi, held on the 
occasion of the inauguration of the Bank’s headquarters, published in Drita Newspaper on 
1 November 1938). 
In  the  aftermath  of  war,  Albania  entered  the  orbit  of  countries  with  centrally  planned 
economies and the Albanian National Bank changed into the State Bank of Albania. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
The first attempts to discipline monetary circulation to some extent affected the stabilization 
of the value of the Albanian currency, as now on termed the Lek. 
Originally  designed  to  operate  as  a  capitalistically  organized  central  bank,  the  Bank  soon 
transformed into an ordinary state administration institution, lacking all prerogatives required 
for  a  central  bank,  hence  losing  all  its  autonomy.  The  Bank  lost  the  traditional  right  of 
conducting  monetary  policy,  thus  transforming  into  the  state’s  cash  office.  The  communist 
monetary and financial system, adopted in practice during 1945–1991, recognized the three 
main functions of money, but it did not entirely acknowledge the role and importance of the 
credit  system.  Furthermore,  the  analysis  of  banknotes  and  coins  of  that  time  provides 
evidence for a clearly socialist realism-oriented artistic spirit. 
Only after 1992, the State Bank of Albania transformed into a modern central bank having as 
a primary mission the maintenance of Lek’s purchasing power. 
In achieving this mission, our compass remains oriented towards the membership into 
the European Union through an unstoppable progress towards economic and legal EU 
convergence.  To  this  end,  strengthening  Bank  of  Albania’s  functional,  institutional, 
personal and financial independence, and particularly, ensuring price stability as the 
primary objective of monetary policy, will remain the main focus of our activity.  
Money and sovereignty are destined to be interwoven. Just as the Illyrian coins used 
the sovereign’s portrait as a means to encourage public confidence, the best way for 
the  Bank  of  Albania  to  accomplish  its  mission  to  the  public  is  to  acknowledge  and 
have  confidence  in  the  national  currency.  A  strong  and  sound  currency  will  be  an 
inseparable companion along our path towards Brussels and Frankfurt gates.  
Let me conclude this opening address with some personal anticipation.  
The banknote and coin, as classical symbols of the medium of exchange, but also as objects 
that stylishly represent the historical and artistic values of the time, will continue to be part of 
economic reality for the future generations as well. The Albanian people have written poems 
about  money.  In  his  “Autobiography  of  the  People  in  Verses”,  Kadare  writes:  “Holding  the 
horse  reins/breastfeeding  the  son/the  gold  pouring  over  the  forehead.  Holding  the  mule 
rein/breastfeeding the daughter, the gold pouring over the neck.” The currency museum we 
are initiating today will not only preserve this historical memory, but it will continue to enrich 
in  the  future  as  well.  This  is  the  beginning  of  the  national  museum  of  monetary  and 
numismatic values that the Bank of Albania will soon offer to the public in its reconstructed 
headquarters, and present the added historical values of our nation.  
In  conclusion,  let  me  thank  the  Albanian  and  foreign  collectors  and  the  National  Historical 
Museum for their cooperation in organizing this exhibition. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
