Jean-Claude Trichet: Economic and Monetary Union – what we have 
achieved and what we must do next 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
Klausurtagung der CSU Landesgruppe, Wildbad Kreuth, Germany, 7 January 2011. 
Note for the readers: The speech begins with a summary in German. The full text in English starts on page 2.  
 ihre  eindeutige  Ausrichtung  auf  Preisstabilität.  Preisstabilität 
Sehr geehrte Damen und Herren, 
ich danke Ihnen sehr herzlich für die Einladung zu Ihrer Klausurtagung in Wildbad Kreuth. 
Ich wünsche Ihnen und Ihren Angehörigen ein gesundes und friedvolles Jahr 2011.  
Das vergangene Jahr hat uns alle vor besondere Herausforderungen gestellt, und ich freue 
mich, mit Ihnen über die Herausforderungen im laufenden Jahr zu sprechen.  
Lassen  Sie mich  vorab  meine  zentrale  Botschaft  wie  folgt zusammenfassen.  Wir haben  in 
der EU eine Wirtschafts- und Währungsunion. Wie dieser Name besagt, beruht die Union auf 
zwei Säulen: einer wirtschaftspolitischen Säule und einer währungspolitischen Säule.  
Für die währungspolitische Säule stehen die Europäische Zentralbank, ihre Unabhängigkeit 
und 
im  Sinne  einer 
durchschnittlichen  jährlichen  Inflationsrate  auf  mittlere  Frist  von  knapp  unter  2%  ist 
gewährleistet.  
Der  Euro  ist  eine  stabile  Währung,  so  stabil  wie  seine  stabilsten  Vorgängerwährungen, 
einschließlich der D-Mark. Und dies gilt für ein Währungsgebiet, das nunmehr 331 Millionen 
Menschen umfasst. Preisstabilität für diesen großen Währungsraum gesichert zu haben, und 
sie allen Indikatoren entsprechend auch für die absehbare Zukunft gesichert zu wissen – das 
ist die entscheidende Errungenschaft der währungspolitischen Säule in der Wirtschafts- und 
Währungsunion.  
Die  zweite  Säule  ist  die  Wirtschaftspolitik.  Für  diese  Säule  stehen  der  Stabilitäts-  und 
Wachstumspakt,  die  Ausrichtung  der  allgemeinen  Wirtschaftspolitik  und  die  effektive 
gegenseitige Überwachung der Finanz- und Wirtschaftspolitik.  
Leider  hat  diese  zweite  Säule  erhebliche  Defizite  offenbart.  Der  Stabilitäts-  und 
Wachstumspakt  ist  zunächst  aufgeweicht  und  dann  verletzt  worden,  die  allgemeine 
Wirtschaftspolitik  ist  nicht  in  allen  Ländern  auf  Stabilität  ausgerichtet  gewesen,  und  die 
gegenseitige Überwachung war oftmals nicht effektiv.  
Die  Entwicklungen 
letzten  Jahr  sind  eng  mit  den  Schwachstellen  der 
wirtschaftspolitischen  Säule  verzahnt.  Daher  ist  die  grundlegende  Herausforderung  für 
dieses Jahr, die wirtschafts- und finanzpolitische Säule so zu stärken, dass sie trägt. Dies 
erfordert einen Quantensprung in der Gestaltung und Implementierung des Stabilitäts- und 
Wachstumspakts,  und  eine  stabilitätsorientierte  allgemeine  Wirtschaftspolitik  aller  Länder. 
Wirtschaftliche Schwächen und Wettbewerbsverluste müssen rechtzeitig korrigiert werden.  
Dazu  müssen  die  Mitgliedstaaten  erkennen,  dass  der  Euro  nicht  nur  eine  gemeinsame 
Geldpolitik  bedeutet,  sondern  auch  eine  stabilitätsorientierte  Ausrichtung  der  jeweiligen, 
nationalen Finanz- und Wirtschaftspolitik erfordert. Diese Erkenntnis muss konsequent in der 
Praxis umgesetzt werden. Die derzeitigen Vorschläge dazu gehen nach Auffassung der EZB 
nicht weit genug und ein ambitionierteres Vorgehen ist hier angemessen.  
Soweit die Zusammenfassung meiner Botschaft heute.  
Ich bitte Sie, mir zu gestatten in Englisch fortzufahren.  
im 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Behind us lies a year of remarkable changes, but also remarkable achievements. After the 
worst  recession  in  decades,  economic  growth  has  resumed  in  Europe.  The  German 
economy,  in  particular,  has  fared  much  better  than  many  had  anticipated.  And  with  more 
than  60%  of  German  exports  staying  within  the  EU,  rising  demand  from  other  European 
countries has made a significant contribution to that recovery. 
But 2010 was also a year of great challenges. The euro area economy was severely tested 
by  developments  related  to  the  weakened  standing  of  several  sovereigns.  In  response, 
Europe’s leaders chose to take some tough and courageous decisions. None were easy, but 
they were necessary and they are beginning to pay off.  
In  2011  we  must  strengthen  our  efforts  even  more.  We  need  to  see  further  significant 
progress on the reduction of excessive fiscal deficits. And we have to build and implement an 
effective rigorous framework for economic governance in the euro area.  
Current  proposals  go  some  way  towards  repairing  the  institutional  shortcomings  that  the 
recent past has exposed. Vulnerabilities will be detected and made public earlier. There will 
be less discretion in applying and enforcing macroeconomic and fiscal discipline in Member 
States.  
But Europe cannot afford to rest halfway – we need to be more ambitious. The proposals that 
we have seen in Brussels do not go far enough in the ECB’s view. As I have said before, we 
need to make a quantum leap in our economic governance. We must achieve a framework 
where  each  and  every  country  respects  the  principle  that  a  successful  economic  and 
monetary union is based on sound macro policies. There must be a binding code of conduct 
for all parties concerned.  
* * * 
Today  I  would  like  to  share  with  you  my  views  on  how,  together,  we  can  fulfil  that  duty, 
building on the notable achievements and stable foundations of our single monetary policy.  
The credibility of the ECB rests on its independence, the transparency of its strategy and the 
consistency of its words and actions. I will also argue that the euro area’s new surveillance 
framework  should  be  built  on  these  three  principles  –  of  independence,  transparency  and 
consistency of words and deeds. 
The achievement of price stability in the euro area 
The Treaty assigns to the European Central Bank (ECB) the single objective of price stability. 
The ECB has provided a clear definition of this objective, as annual inflation in the euro area 
of below 2%, but close to 2%, over the medium term.  
Since  its  establishment  in  the  summer  of  1998  the  ECB  has  worked  hard  to  fulfil  this 
objective. The results are very clear. We have seen 12 years of low inflation and low interest 
rates. The average annual inflation rate in the euro area has been 1.97%. It is the best result 
in terms of price stability for any large euro area country over the past 50 years.  
So the ECB has performed its duty. As a result, millions of European citizens have seen their 
purchasing power and the value of their savings preserved.  
Speaking  before  the  CSU,  I  would  like  to  recall  the  concern  expressed  by  Franz-Josef 
Strauss back in 1978. In connection with the establishment of a European Monetary System, 
he  had  warned  “Europa  darf  keine  Inflationsgemeinschaft  werden!”  Ich  sage  Ihnen  heute: 
Europa ist keine Inflationsgemeinschaft geworden. Und wird es nicht werden.  
Indeed, in Germany, the inflation rate has been even lower than the euro area average over 
the past 12 years: 1.5% per year on average between 1999 and 2010. By comparison, the 
average annual rate of inflation in Germany in the 1990s prior to the introduction of the euro 
was 2.2%. In the 1980s, it was 2.8% and in the 1970s, 4.9%.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The steady course of monetary policy in the euro area has also contributed substantially to 
stabilising medium to long-term inflation expectations at a level consistent with price stability. 
This is a remarkable accomplishment, especially given the numerous economic and financial 
shocks we have had to face since the ECB came into being.  
These achievements have not come at the expense of employment. On the contrary, since 
Economic  and  Monetary  Union  began,  employment  in  the  euro  area  has  risen  by  over 
14 million,  compared  with  close  to  8  million  in  the  United  States.  And  these  achievements 
have not come at the expense of growth either. Adjusted for population growth differences, 
growth  in  the  euro  area  has  been  almost  the  same  as  in  the  United  States  over  the  past 
decade, at about 1% per year in terms of GDP per capita growth. 
The euro is now well established as a credible currency, of which citizens can be proud. This 
is important for all the Member States of our union, both individually and collectively, as we 
together face the challenges of the global economy. 
Responding to the crisis: bold actions in line with steadfast policy orientation  
None of these achievements happened by accident. They were only possible because our 
actions were enshrined in our medium-term oriented monetary policy strategy. 
The financial crisis has changed neither our strategy, nor our objective. The ECB’s response 
to the crisis has always been in line with both our strategy and our medium-term objective of 
price stability.  
But we did broaden the range of our tools to adapt monetary policy to the challenges of the 
crisis.  What  we  did  was  to  insure  euro  area  banks  against  present  and  future  liquidity 
shortfalls. Banks are the backbone of our financial system. 70% of firms’ external financing 
comes  from  banks.  They  finance  a  very  large  share  of  the  investments  made  in  Europe. 
Jeopardising banks’ ability to lend to companies would have meant jeopardising the jobs of 
millions of Europeans.  
Because of the crucial role of banks in the real economy, we decided to provide liquidity in 
unlimited volumes and with longer maturities to banks. In parallel, we reduced the interest 
rate at which they can borrow to a historical low of 1%.  
And  we  launched  a  programme  to  purchase  euro-denominated  covered  bonds,  i.e. 
Pfandbriefe,  issued  in  the  euro  area.  The  aim  was  to  jump-start  this  market,  which  had 
suffered  considerably  in  the  crisis  and  which  is  so  important  for  Europe.  Overall,  the 
Eurosystem  –  the  ECB  and  the  national  central  banks  –  purchased  EUR  60  billion  of 
Pfandbriefe across the euro area. This has provided an important contribution to revitalising 
this  market  after  the  crisis.  We  will  hold  the  bonds  to  maturity  and  the  profits  will  be 
distributed to our shareholders.  
Because of these and a number of other important steps, fears of a “Kreditklemme” have not 
materialised.  Our  bank  lending  surveys  show  that  lending  in  the  euro  area  –  even  in  the 
middle of the crisis – was not significantly constrained by supply-side factors.  
That  being  said,  monetary  policy  responsibility  can  not  substitute 
for  government 
irresponsibility. Excessive government borrowing by some Member States led to a seizing-up 
of the market for government paper. This market plays a central role in our financial system 
and constitutes a crucial element in the transmission of monetary policy to the real economy. 
Fire sales of government bonds imply a sharp deterioration in banks’ funding conditions.  
Confronted  with  a  serious  dysfunction  in  important  segments  of  financial  markets,  the 
Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  decided  to  intervene.  The  reason  for  the  decision  was 
certainly  not 
to  address  some  severe 
malfunctioning of markets, so as to help ensure a better functioning of the transmission of 
finance  debt-laden  Member  States,  but 
to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
monetary policy to all euro area economies. Let me stress solemnly that our monetary policy 
stance is itself designed to deliver price stability over the medium term.  
In any case, we told all governments that they had to correct drastically their fiscal policies. 
This was not new. It has been our constant message to executive branches: governments 
must  restore  fiscal  sustainability  without  delay.  This  brings  me  to  the  second  part  of  my 
remarks.  
Sound fiscal policies: a pre-condition for monetary union 
After one of the most difficult years for our still young common currency, it is time to turn the 
page. It is time for each and every Member State to live up to its responsibilities. And it is 
time  to  strengthen  the code  of  conduct  for  national  governments,  notably  the  Stability  and 
Growth Pact, of which I will not hesitate to say that Theo Waigel is the founding father. 
We  know  that  for  several  years  fiscal  policies  in  some  countries  have  breached  both  the 
letter and the spirit of the Pact. The problems that hit some European bond markets last year 
were a visible and tangible testimony of fiscal misconduct.  
The  watering-down  of  the  Pact  in  2004  and  2005  by  Europe’s  largest  economies  was  a 
quieter event, but it was no less grave. In that period, Member States chose to change the 
rules rather than their policies. The ECB voiced its “grave concerns” at the time.  
Today, governments have no choice but to change their policies. And they must substantially 
reinforce the Stability and Growth Pact.  
And  it  is  not  only  fiscal  policies  that  need  to  be  brought  back  onto  the  path  of  virtue.  In 
several  countries,  macroeconomic  policies  more  generally  need  to  be  aligned  with  best 
practice.  
Germany went through some painful years of macroeconomic adjustment. Not so long ago it 
was  called  the  sick  man  of  Europe.  Since  then,  relative  unit  labour  costs  have  been 
improved, labour market barriers have been lowered and employment has risen.  
Today,  the  German  economy  is  highly  competitive  with  increasing  domestic  demand.  But 
because  some  economies  were  less  courageous  in  pushing  forward  necessary  structural 
reforms, the competitive gap between countries in the euro area has widened.  
The  primary  symptoms  of  a  widening  competitive  gap  are  unit  labour  costs,  inflation 
differentials and mounting current account imbalances. Their long-term damage could take 
the form of persistent differentials in output growth, income and welfare.  
We can see the primary symptoms. We are now poised to avert the long-term damage and 
ensure a smooth long-term functioning of the euro area.  
The need for a rigorous and credible surveillance framework 
So the period ahead is about two things: fiscal consolidation and measures to strengthen the 
growth  potential  of  our  economies.  Both  must  be  monitored  by  a  rigorous  and  credible 
surveillance framework.  
Currently there is an open and frank exchange of views about the concrete design of the new 
surveillance framework.  
Let me give you a little more detail about the ECB’s views on such a framework.  
For fiscal policies three elements are indispensable:  
• 
• 
shorter deadlines under excessive deficit procedures; 
quasi-automatic application of sanctions; 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 and  ambitious  targets  for  the  reduction  of  public  debt  towards  the  60%  of  GDP 
ceiling. 
The severity of the breach should determine the severity of the sanction. Country missions, 
fines, reduced access to EU funds, and other pecuniary consequences are necessary.  
We should be inflexible in applying sanctions if rules are breached. In limiting the power of 
discretion,  we  will  strengthen  the  power  of  the  Pact.  Decisions  are  what  we  need  for 
sanctions to be credible. Only then will they give national policy-makers the right incentives. 
This is why we are calling for quasi-automaticity.  
There  should  be  greater  focus  than  before  on  government  debt  levels,  more  automaticity, 
along with improved national fiscal rules and better statistical data. 
The second area of policy slippage concerns macroeconomic policies. In a monetary union, 
national developments in prices and costs have to take account of the fact that it is a union of 
monetary  stability.  Therefore,  national  price  and  cost  developments  that  are  significantly 
higher than the union average entail significant losses over time in competitiveness.  
Competitiveness  losses  cannot  be  sustained  forever,  and  adjustments  in  unsustainable 
economic  policies  have  to  be  made.  Fiscal  and  structural  policies  need  to  keep  domestic 
demand in line with rates of sustainable growth and price stability.  
For  monitoring  macroeconomic  policies  we  have  to  build  a  new  framework  from  scratch. 
Here is what we propose: 
• 
a  limited  number  of  clearly  defined  quantitative  indicators  to  identify  undesirable 
developments; 
transparency about the procedures and the sanctions; 
and  a  set  of  reliable  statistical  data,  interpreted  and  acted  on  by  independent 
arbiters.  
 We have advocated that a specific scoreboard should be designed for euro area countries. A 
detailed and self-contained scoreboard offers a concrete basis for assessment.  
Credibility of our analysis is key. But credibility is not a right, it has to be earned.  
The credibility of the ECB rests on our independence, the transparency of our strategy and 
the  consistency  of  our  words  and  deeds.  Likewise,  Europe’s  new  surveillance  framework 
should be built on these three principles – of independence in the assessment of the fiscal 
situation  as  well  as  of  the  soundness  of  macroeconomic  policies;  transparency  of  the 
procedures; and consistency of words and deeds.  
Conclusions 
Let me draw to a close with a few words on the ECB’s role in the crisis. As I have explained, 
the institutional model of the ECB has proved its worth by delivering price stability over the 
first 12 years of the euro’s existence. This is fully in line with our primary mandate according 
to the Maastricht Treaty. 
As  I  frequently  said,  all  institutions,  whether  European  or  national,  must  be  up  to  their 
responsibilities.  The  ECB  is  responsible  for  monetary  union,  in  full  independence.  The 
national governments, individually and collectively, duly enlightened by the Commission, are 
responsible for the Economic Union. The European governments have to fulfil their duties in 
full. They must face up with the present difficulties by implementing rigorously their national 
adjustment  programmes  and  by  considerably  reinforcing  their  collective  governance  of 
Economic  Union.  We  all  have  to  be  guided  by  a  clear  sense  of  direction  towards  the 
consolidation  of  EMU  and  the  strengthening  of  European  unity.  In  an  international 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
environment  which  comprehends  so  many  hard  challenges  and  so  many  opportunities 
Europe must be ahead of the curve and not behind the curve.  
Europa heute steht für Frieden, Freiheit und Wohlstand. Die Gründerväter der Europäischen 
Union wären zu Recht stolz auf die Errungenschaften, die gemeinsam in den vergangenen 
60 Jahren erreicht worden sind. Lassen Sie uns auf diesen Errungenschaften aufbauen.  
Ich danke Ihnen für Ihre Aufmerksamkeit.  
Thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
