Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: Policy rules and institutions in times of crisis 
Speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank,  at  the  “Forum  for  EU-US  Legal-Economic  Affairs”  organised  by  the  Mentor  Group, 
Rome, 15 September 2011. 
 The economic and financial crisis we are experiencing – the worst since the war, let’s not 
forget – has called for economic policy responses that are unprecedented in their importance 
and  in  their  nature.  The  central  banks,  in  particular,  have  taken  so-called  unconventional 
measures to try to improve, and even to restore, the effectiveness of monetary policy in a 
context of financial instability. The fiscal authorities too have had to deal with new problems 
arising from excessive public debt and in some cases from a loss of confidence by financial 
markets.  
These new circumstances have exposed a series of institutional problems related to the roles 
and  responsibilities  of  various  authorities  at  national  and  supranational  level,  a  question 
which I would like consider today. One of the most discussed issues in recent months has 
been  the  risk  of  a  confusion  of  roles,  which  may  generate  moral  hazard  and  ultimately 
delegitimise the institutions and undermine their credibility. 
In the European context, the question is posed in two specific dimensions. The first concerns 
the  relationship  between  monetary  policy  and  fiscal  policy.  The  second  concerns  the 
relationship between the European and national institutions, specifically in respect of fiscal 
policy.  Over  the  past  18  months  we  have  been  witnessing  two  important  developments  in 
Europe as a result of the crisis, involving both monetary policy and fiscal policy. The first one 
is the purchase of government bonds by the Eurosystem (the ECB and the national central 
banks) – the Securities Markets Programme (SMP) – and the second one is the European 
Financial Stability Facility (EFSF), which will become the European Stabilisation Mechanism 
(ESM) after the Treaty has been amended. 
Before explaining these two new resources, we need to take a step back and remember the 
two  basic  premises  of  monetary  union.  The  first  is  monetary  stability,  defined  as  price 
stability.  The  second  is  the  stability  of  public  finances.  The  European  Central  Bank,  an 
independent  institution  capable  of  deciding  on  a  single  monetary  policy  for  the  euro  area, 
was  created  to  achieve  the  first  goal.  The  second  goal  however  is  based  on  two 
mechanisms:  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  which  binds  the  public  finances  of  member 
countries; and the discipline imposed by the financial markets. 
On paper, the framework seems almost perfect. A complete separation of monetary powers 
from fiscal powers creates the right incentives, so that each authority may effectively pursue 
its respective objective. The surveillance of fiscal policies ensures that these remain within 
predefined  parameters,  and  if  this  does  not  happen  sanctions  are  envisaged  by  the  EU 
institutions and financial markets. 
In  reality,  the  framework  is  not  perfect.  The  reason  is  that  it  relies  on  some  simplifying 
assumptions,  dear 
those 
assumptions do not always match the reality. Let me briefly illustrate two. 
The  first  assumption  concerns  the  deterministic  nature  of  the  framework,  which  does  not 
consider the possibility of shocks, of forecast errors, of disruptive elements, all of which can 
cause crises, in particular public finance crises. In other words, the assumption was made  
– largely theoretical – that there would be no crises. Experience, both before and after the 
birth of the euro, however, shows that public finance problems may occur every so often, for 
various reasons. They could result from the infringement of established rules and inadequate 
supervision  by  multilateral  institutions,  as  in  the  case  of  Greece.  Or  from  the  build-up  of 
imbalances in the private sector, particularly banking, which become unsustainable and turn 
to  economists,  and  perhaps  even 
lawyers.  However, 
to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
into public debt, as in the case of Ireland. Or lastly, they could even result from relatively low 
economic growth that, after a recession, reduces the room for manoeuvre for public finances 
and makes the debt dynamics unstable, as in the case of Portugal. 
There  are  remedies  for  these  construction  defects,  such  as  the  strengthening  of  fiscal 
discipline and a better oversight of private debt – perhaps with more centralised powers for 
supervising  the  financial  system,  such  as  those  that  were  recently  adopted  at  European 
level. The initiatives that have been taken so far and are currently under discussion between 
the European Commission, the Council and Parliament are going in the right direction. They 
can  be  further  strengthened.  However,  the  possibility  of  a  crisis  and  of  a  country  losing 
access  to  financial  markets  can  never  be  completely  ruled  out,  especially  in  a  context  of 
global  instability  like  the  current  one.  We  must  not  repeat  the  mistake  of  assuming  that 
thanks to some “magic” Europe is immune to any crisis. 
The second simplifying assumption that was made by the founding fathers is that markets 
work perfectly and can assess the various risks at any time, including those arising from an 
excessive accumulation of public debt. The experience of recent years has shown that this is 
not the case. For a long period – from approximately the start of the euro until about 2007 – 
markets  assessed  the  credit  risk  of  the  various  sovereign  issuers  in  the  euro  area  to  be 
largely similar. Once the crisis broke out however, the assessment of the creditworthiness of 
European countries by the markets underwent a dramatic reversal and became for the euro 
area  countries  even  worse  than  those  of  many  emerging  economies.  Just  to  give  an 
example, in early September, the CDS on the sovereign debt – which, by and large, measure 
the insurance cost against credit risk on sovereign bonds – of Italy and Spain were higher 
than  those  of  Egypt,  Lebanon,  Vietnam  and  Romania.  This  result  is  not  in  line  with  the 
analysis  of  the  fundamentals  of  various  countries,  as  shown,  for  example,  by  the 
assessments,  although  questionable,  of  the  rating  agencies.  Italy  and  Spain  are  A-rated, 
while Egypt, Lebanon and Vietnam are B-rated. Looking at the fiscal position of euro area 
members, it can easily be seen that the situation is much more favourable than several other 
advanced economies (see Table 1). Why is there such a dichotomy between fundamentals 
and market assessment? 
Consolidation requirements to stabilise debt over the long-term 
Table 1:  
2 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
We  know  that  assessing  sovereign  credit  risk  is  particularly  difficult.  It  is  a  matter  of 
evaluating, not only from an economic but also from a political perspective, the capacity and 
determination  of  a  country  to  attain  and  maintain  a  primary  budget  surplus  necessary  to 
stabilise the debt-to-GDP ratio. One important factor is also the capacity to sell other financial 
and real estate assets in order to reduce the debt level. Moreover, there is limited post-war 
experience of debt problems in the advanced countries, and the cases of restructuring and 
default in recent years have only involved emerging countries. 
We  also  know  from  numerous  theoretical  and  empirical  studies  that  when  conditions  are 
fraught with uncertainty or there are crises of confidence markets behave in unstable ways 
and  fail  to  assess  the  fundamentals  correctly  and  to  price  risk  appropriately.  We  saw  this 
after the US sub-prime crisis, when the values of some financial assets fell to ridiculously low 
levels, not justified by the fundamentals: the markets were unable to accurately assess the 
credit  risk  using  the  models  and  information  available.  The  Federal  Reserve  bought 
securities with depressed values, which subsequently recovered, and it made a profit. There 
is extensive literature showing that in some circumstances the markets are subject to crises 
of  confidence  and  self-fulfilling  dynamics,  worsening  the  instability.  When  a  country  loses 
access to the financial markets, it manages to regain it only after a relatively long period of 
time,  even  when  it  takes  corrective  measures  agreed  with  the  international  institutions.  In 
other words, even when a country is solvent and follows an appropriate fiscal policy it may 
not be able to borrow on the markets.  
What  I  have  just  described  does  not  however  explain  the  paradox  according  to  which 
six euro  area  countries  are  now  being  regarded  as  among  the  20  riskiest  countries 
worldwide. There are at least three other factors to bear in mind. 
The  creation  of  the  single  currency  has  led  to  an  entirely  new  situation  on  the  financial 
markets, one which has perhaps been underestimated not only by policy-makers but also by 
the economic literature. The euro area is in fact the only area in the world where monetary 
and fiscal institutions are completely separate, in which the fiscal authority cannot count on 
the monetary authority, not only to prevent a solvency problem, but also a liquidity problem. 
The  implications  of  such  a  separation  have  not  been  studied  thoroughly  in  the  economic 
literature and further studies are surely desirable.1 
On the one hand, such a separation is very healthy because it pushes the fiscal authorities to 
take all the necessary measures to ensure solvency. The framework works well but only to 
the extent that markets can properly assess the solvency of a country and calculate the risk 
premium,  distinguishing  solvency  problems  from  liquidity  problems.  In  other  words,  market 
discipline is effective and creates the right incentives if markets function properly. 
But when markets do not work properly, because of the high level of uncertainty, because 
there is contagion or a general fear of systemic risk, market participants are no longer able to 
properly  assess  the  risks  and  distinguish  between  them.  Expected  difficulties,  even 
temporary  ones,  in  meeting  a  borrower’s  (sovereign’s)  financing  needs  can  cause 
expectations of a liquidity crisis and then create a perceived risk which may be reflected in 
the  uncertainty  about  the  price  at  which  to  sell  a  particular  security,  notably  government 
bonds. Such a development, especially if it is prolonged, can degenerate into a solvency risk 
which jeopardises the economic and financial stability of the country and the whole area. In 
these circumstances there is a risk that conditions may arise that economists call “multiple 
equilibria”,  in  which  the  price  does  not  necessarily  reflect  economic  fundamentals.  The 
transition  from  one  equilibrium  to  the  other  is  unpredictable  and  may  be  caused  by 
speculative behaviours, which tend to be self-fulfilling. This phenomenon has been examined 
in  the  economic  literature  on  the  debt  crisis  inspired  in  turn  by  the  analysis  of  the  role  of 
                                                 
1  See,  for  example,  P.  De  Grauwe,  May  2011  “The  Governance  of  a  Fragile  Eurozone”,  CEPS  Working 
Document, No. 346. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
instability in the expectations relating to the bank crisis and bank runs originating from the 
famous  work  by  Diamond  and  Dybvig  in  1983  (Bank  runs,  deposit  insurance  and liquidity, 
Journal of Political Economy).2 
When there is one fiscal authority and one monetary authority, it is more difficult for this type 
of instability to occur. Through its open market operations, the central bank in fact helps to 
keep  markets  liquid  –  starting  with  that  of  government  securities,  which  represents  the 
linchpin of the financial system and therefore of the monetary policy transmission mechanism 
– and thereby allows the market to price the various risks in line with the fundamentals and to 
transmit the monetary policy impulses to the economic system.  
The second reason that may explain the assessment of excessive credit risk of the euro area 
countries is the own goal that European countries scored when they embraced the concept 
of private sector involvement in October 2010. I won’t go into detail, but in essence European 
countries  have  sought  to  deviate  from  the  practice  followed  so  far  and,  inspired  by  some 
academics  and  commentators,  have  tried  to  define  an  arrangement  according  to  which  a 
country must renegotiate with its creditors the conditions under which public debt securities 
were issued. This is another case in which the theory can deviate greatly from the practice 
and – especially in a context of general instability on the markets – intensify the crisis. The 
fact is that since last autumn euro area countries have been paying a specific risk premium 
which effectively penalises them. 
Charts  1  and  2  seem  to  suggest  that  the  concept  of  private  sector  involvement  has 
introduced  a  sovereign  risk  premium  specific  to  the  euro  area.  On  21  July  this  year,  the 
heads of state and government recognised that the case of Greece is special and that the 
modalitities to resolve the crisis will not be repeated. The fact the markets do not seem to 
believe  it  should  induce  the  euro  area  authorities  to  be  more  convincing  about  such  a 
statement. 
                                                 
2  See,  inter  alia,  Calvo  (1988),  Servicing  the  Public  Debt:  The  Role  of  Expectations,  American  Economic 
Review;  Alesina,  Prati  and  Tabellini  (1989),  Public  Confidence  and  Debt  Management,  and  Giavazzi  and 
Pagano  (1989),  Confidence  Crises  and  Public  Debt  Management  (1989),  both  in  Dornbusch  and  Draghi 
(Eds.), Public debt Management: Theory and History, Cambridge University Press. 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 When  a  crisis  like  the  one  we  have  been  facing  for  several  months  occurs,  it  poses  two 
problems of an institutional nature. The first concerns the relationship between the European 
authorities  and  the  national  ones.  The  second  is  about  the  relationship  between  the 
monetary and the fiscal authorities. In the European context, two innovative tools have been 
introduced in the last 16 months in Europe: the EFSF and the purchase of securities by the 
ECB,  which  may  raise  the  question  of  the  trade-off  between  moral  hazard,  i.e.  the  risk  of 
encouraging opportunistic behaviour, and the need to keep the system stable. It is not a new 
dilemma,  but  in  the  context  of  the  euro  it  takes  on  an  unprecedented  connotation  which 
merits closer attention. 
Let’s  start  with  the  relationship  between  the  national  fiscal  authorities  and  the  European 
authorities. It’s relevant to consider the case of a country that is solvent – i.e. is able and 
willing to take the necessary steps to generate a primary surplus, which helps to stabilise and 
reduce  the  debt-to-GDP  ratio  –  but  that  has  lost  the  confidence  of  the  markets  and  has 
experienced difficulties to refinance itself. Let us look at the two extreme solutions first. 
The first solution is to provide the country with  full funding indefinitely and unconditionally. 
One  way  to  do  so  is  via  the  so-called  eurobonds,  which  allow  the  country  that  has  lost 
access to the market to continue to borrow at an interest rate near to or even equal to that of 
the  most  “virtuous”  countries.  Without  stringent  constraints,  the  eurobonds  risk  favouring 
fiscal policies that, on average, are more expansionary, and a higher debt, whose cost is also 
shared among the more disciplined countries. The experience of other countries, both federal 
and non-federal, outside the euro area, however, shows that a single federal budget is not 
necessarily more virtuous. On the contrary. 
The other extreme solution is not to provide any financial aid, and to let the country to take 
the necessary measures to regain access to financial markets by itself. This solution, which 
is based on a blind faith in the ability of markets to discipline government budgets, may in 
some  cases  heighten  the  crisis  of  confidence  and  cause  too  drastic  adjustments,  which 
heighten the financial instability and cause contagion in other countries and markets. 
Finding  the  right  balance  between  the  two  extremes  is  not  easy.  The  last  16  months  of 
discussions  among  the  euro  area  countries  have  shown  the  difficulty  of  creating  a 
disciplinary  framework  that  includes  support  mechanisms  which  avoid  exacerbating  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
instability  on  the  one  hand  and  avoid  moral  hazard  on  the  other  hand.  I  do  not  want  to 
reopen all the issues of this debate here. In reality, there was at global level an easy example 
to follow: the International Monetary Fund. The IMF provides financial assistance to countries 
in difficulty against strong conditionality, which obliges them to implement serious adjustment 
policies. The Fund’s assessment of a country’s solvency is based on independent analysis 
and  decisions  are  made  quickly.  The  proof  that  this  system  does  not  encourage  moral 
hazard lies in the fact that countries in distress wait until the last moment before subjecting 
themselves to the Fund’s conditionality. In short, if you want to find the right balance between 
extreme solutions, you have to set up an institutional mechanism with some basic features  
– independence, accountability, operational effectiveness and decision-making capacity. 
The  EFSF  is  an  attempt  to  create  an  institution  with  these  characteristics.  European 
countries  have,  however,  had  the  ambition  to  improve  the  existing  model  of  the  IMF,  with 
disappointing results, so much so that some changes were needed after less than a year. 
The decisions of 21 July this year are a move in the right direction and have to be quickly 
ratified  by  all  the  countries.  In  the  future,  further  adjustments  will  probably  be  needed 
because the EFSF still contains some imperfections compared with the IMF. 
The first problem concerns the decision-making mechanism. Currently it requires the consent 
of all members, a situation which allows each representative of the 13 countries (excluding 
Greece, Ireland and Portugal) to block or delay the timing of a decision. This does not seem 
very  effective  in  order  to  intervene  in  a  timely  fashion  in  the  markets.  A  second  issue  is 
flexibility. To be able to intervene on the primary and secondary markets, the procedures and 
methods  must  be  flexible,  in  line  with  market  developments.  It  takes  all  the  safeguards  of 
course – in terms of analysis, accountability and decision-making independence – to ensure 
that interventions do not create distortions on the markets. 
I would now like to turn to the second demarcation line that is being discussed in this crisis, 
that  between  monetary  policy  and  fiscal  policy.  In  a  financial  crisis  which  is  partly  derived 
from  excessive  public  debt,  monetary  policy  should  avoid  covering  the  liabilities  of  fiscal 
policy and printing money to finance the public debt, thereby coming to the aid of the fiscal 
authorities and allowing them to postpone the adjustment – again a problem of moral hazard. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  monetary  authority  must  avoid  that  liquidity  problems  in  the 
government debt market will turn into solvency problems hindering the conduct of monetary 
policy itself. 
An  extreme  situation  is  one  in  which  the  central  bank  intervenes  directly  in  the market  for 
government  securities and  seeks  to  systematically  influence  yields.  In  this  way  the  central 
bank actually takes away from the market the ability to assess the credit risk of public debt, 
turning it into an inflation risk. In a situation of low growth and low inflation, this risk tends to 
be undervalued by the markets. The budgetary authorities may in turn be led to believe that 
there  is  no  problem  of  sustainability  of  public  debt  and  no  urgent  need  to  take  corrective 
measures. In fact, monetary policy takes the place of fiscal policy and over time part of the 
adjustment takes place through the inflation tax. The more active the central bank is in trying 
to influence bond yields, the less the incentive for the political authorities to take corrective 
budgetary measures – a sort of moral hazard in this case as well. 
At the other extreme is the situation in which monetary policy never intervenes in the market 
for government securities, even when this is subject to instability. In other words, a situation 
arises that is similar to that in which public debt is fully denominated in foreign currency and 
national  authorities  have  no  chance  to  influence  the  conditions  of  the  issuance.  This  is  a 
rather unique situation, in which euro area countries find themselves. 
The separation between fiscal and monetary authorities is optimal if the fiscal authorities are 
credible  and  if  markets  work  perfectly  and  are  able  to  accurately  assess  the  credit  risk  of 
each issuer. In this case the market exercises a disciplinary constraint on the public issuers, 
which  have  to  come  to  terms  with  market  conditions  and  contain  the  debt.  There  are  no 
problems of moral hazard. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The management of this rather unique system, like that which occurs in the euro area, must 
take into account two important aspects that distinguish theory from practice. The first is that 
conditions can be found in which markets do not work as the theory predicts. The second is 
that in advanced countries such as those in the euro area, the government securities market 
plays a central role in the functioning of the financial markets, and therefore the monetary 
policy transmission mechanism. I would like to make a brief reference to these two points. 
First  of  all,  we  know  that  in  reality  markets  rarely  function  as  the  theory  predicts.  This 
depends  on  several  conditions  which  are  generally  considered  valid  in  finance  textbooks. 
Consider, for example, a simple model for valuing the bonds (which includes the valuation of 
government securities), based on the present value of future cash flows. In such a model, the 
cash flow, i.e. the coupon payments and the payments of the nominal value, is “discounted” 
using a risk-adjusted yield. This method permits a correct valuation of the price of a security 
only if some key assumptions are respected. Let me remind you of them briefly: 
 
perfect  markets,  without  friction,  and  especially  with  the  absence  of  collusion  and 
market power of the participants; 
sufficiently liquid markets to ensure that investors can extract the appropriate, risk-
adjusted yields from available market quotes and to guarantee that prices obtained 
from the model are indeed achievable in the market, should investors need to buy or 
sell the securities being priced. 
the validity of the models relating to the term structure of interest rates;3 
full availability of information; 
the rationality of behaviour; 
no arbitrage opportunities, so that the prices of all assets are priced fairly relative to 
each other, and under any circumstance. 
  As you can see, the situations in which markets are able to correctly assess prices may be 
the exception rather than the rule, particularly in times of financial stress.  
This does not mean that markets should be abolished or that one should not take them into 
account. Rather, it means that we should be aware that there are situations in which markets 
are characterised by great instability and uncertainty, and cannot be entirely relied upon. One 
example involves situations in which there may be insufficient liquidity, so that it would not be 
possible for the main investors, individually, to sell or buy securities without greatly affecting 
their price. The fear of not being able to sell without making a loss may drive many market 
participants to rush the decision to sell, even suffering losses. In these cases, the perceived 
liquidity risk may result in a credit risk and can trigger price dynamics that are self-fulfilling. 
Since government bonds are one of the most important market segments for the economic 
and financial system, their impact on the real economy and financial stability in general can 
be significant. 
If we recognise that markets do not always work perfectly, the following considerations must 
be inferred. First, it is not correct to subject only to the judgement of the market the suitability 
of  the  economic  policy  of  a  country,  especially  when  this  may  involve  highly  destabilising 
effects for millions of people. I am not arguing that we should ignore market valuations, but 
we should be aware of the conditions in which such assessments are made; these valuations 
cannot be the sole reference parameter, at least for those who are responsible for the public 
good. 
Second,  faced  with  the  imperfections  of  the  market,  intervention  by  an  economic  policy 
authority  may  be  justified.  This  applies  particularly  when  markets  are  subject  to  high 
                                                 
3  For example, C. Nelson and A. Siegel, 1987, Parsimonious modelling of yield curve, Journal of Business. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
uncertainty and the time horizon of market participants is getting shorter, making necessary a 
participant with a longer time horizon to counter market malfunctions. Even Milton Friedman 
recognised that in some circumstances the intervention of a public authority such as a central 
bank could be necessary to stabilise financial markets.4 
The monetary authority tends to intervene to a limited extent in issues related to liquidity and 
the smooth functioning of markets, which influence the effectiveness of monetary policy itself. 
Given  the  importance  of  the  government  securities  market  in  the  financial  system,  its 
malfunctioning has a direct impact on the monetary policy transmission mechanism. This is 
done through three main channels: i) the influence that the interest rates on public debt have 
on the rates that banks pay on their liabilities, and then pass on to households and firms,  
ii) the effect of changes in the prices of government securities on the accounts of financial 
intermediaries, which in turn affects the ability of banks to provide credit to the real economy, 
iii) the ability to use government securities as collateral for refinancing in the money market 
or from the central bank, which influences the liquidity of the banking system. 
Here I would like to refer to the second factor relating to the importance of the government 
securities  market  to  the  good  functioning  of  monetary  policy.  In  any  basic  textbook  of 
macroeconomics – from Burda and Wyplosz to Mankiw – the operations of the central bank 
aimed  at  regulating  the  amount  of  liquidity  in  the  system  –  the  so-called  open  market 
operations – are essentially characterised by purchases and sales of government securities 
or  the  re-financing  of  the  banking  system  against  collateral  (which  often  consists  of 
government securities). The effectiveness of the various instruments depends largely on the 
structure  of  the  financial  market.  In  Anglo-Saxon  countries,  liquidity  management  typically 
occur  through  open  market  operations  via  the  sale  or  purchase  of  government  securities. 
This  contributes  to  a  correct  price-setting  mechanism  in  these  markets.  However,  in 
countries where the banking system plays a dominant role and where there is no centralised 
market for government securities, such as the euro area countries, the injection or restriction 
of liquidity is done via repurchase agreements with the banks against collateral. 
According to economic analysis the one kind of operation is not necessarily better than the 
other, and neither by itself can generate higher or lower inflation. It ultimately depends on the 
characteristics of the economic and financial system and on the impact on the total amount 
of money in circulation. The fact that in the past, whether recent or more distant, inflation has 
been created – notoriously in Germany – via outright financing of public debt does not mean 
that  this  type  of  open  market  operation  is  always  inflationary,  as  the  experience  of  many 
other countries shows, nor that other techniques permit an avoidance of inflation in any case. 
When  the  government  securities  market  is  not  working  well,  the  monetary  policy  impulse, 
which comes from the short-term interest rate, is not properly transmitted to all other sectors 
of the financial system and then to the real economy. Non-conventional measures become 
necessary to try to circumvent bottlenecks in the system. 
This is the spirit in which almost all central banks have adopted specific, and in many cases 
new, measures in recent months, demanded by the situation in which we find ourselves and 
adapted to the reality of the developed markets of our times.  
The ECB in particular has adopted three specific measures, which are worth noting: 
 
the  refinancing  of  the  banking  system  at  different  maturities,  at  fixed  rate  and  full 
allotment  against  collateral.  The  European  banking  system  has  however  ample 
collateral – more than €13 trillion – to be able to finance itself from the central bank; 
                                                 
4  Friedman and Schwartz (1963) have claimed that during the Great Depression many bank failures resulted 
from an “unjustified” panic and that many banks failed more because of liquidity problems than because of real 
insolvency.  This  is  a  typical  case  in  which  the  intervention  of  the  monetary  authority,  aiming  to  provide 
liquidity, can make a difference and save the real economy from a deep recession. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  the purchase of banks’ covered bonds to promote their liquidity at a time of market 
malfunction; 
the  purchase  of  government  bonds  of  countries  where  the  markets  were  seeing 
evident malfunctions that prevented a proper transmission of monetary policy. 
The last type of intervention here has been the subject of much public discussion. In fact, 
intervening with purchases on the secondary market may influence the financing conditions 
of public budgets, and therefore this risks interfering with fiscal policy. It is interesting to note 
that the other two measures that directly relate to the financing of the banking system have 
not  led  to  as  many  discussions,  even  though  they  also  involve  a  risk  of  interference, 
specifically  with  the  prudential  supervisory  authorities.  Whenever  the  central  bank  issues 
liquidity via an operation which buys, for a specific time, a banking asset or a government 
security, it risks creating distortions in the relative prices of various financial assets. For this, 
procedures  and  safeguard  mechanisms  are  needed.  In  the  case  of  a  loan  to  the  banking 
system  the  banks  need  to  be  deemed  healthy  and  operations  need  to  be  carried  out  in 
exchange for adequate collateral. In the case of purchases of securities, public or private, the 
underlying situation of the issuer has to be considered as healthy and the debt sustainable. 
Not  only  the  ECB,  but  all  the  central  banks  of  developed  countries  have  implemented 
measures geared to the difficulty of the situation. I would point to the extraordinary decision 
of the Swiss National Bank to set a minimum exchange rate for the Swiss franc vis-à-vis the 
euro,  making  massive  euro  purchases.  It  is  worth  mentioning  that  since  2007  the  balance 
sheet of the Federal Reserve has increased by 229%, the Bank of England by 193%, the 
Swiss National Bank by 128%; the balance sheet of the Eurosystem has risen by 71%. 
In  conclusion,  if  in  normal  times  it  is  possible  –  even  easy  –  for  the  various  institutions  to 
follow  simple  rules  of  behaviour  and  to  draw  clear  demarcation  lines,  within  countries  and 
between countries and at European level, in times of crisis the situation is more complex. On 
the one hand, we must avoid doing the job of others, taking away their incentive to adopt 
measures  within  their  competence,  thus  creating  moral  hazard.  On  the  other  hand,  we 
cannot hide behind principles and rules designed for a theoretical situation which no longer 
corresponds  to  the  reality,  and  cannot  give  up  fulfilling  our  responsibilities  to  avoid  much 
worse situations. In crises, extreme solutions – activism with full discretion on the one hand, 
and  total  lack  of  action  on  the  other  –  may  seem  easy  to  some,  but  such  solutions  are 
mistaken. A central bank buying government securities non-stop might appear to be useful, 
especially  for  the  public  finance  authority,  but  it  merely  postpones  the  problem  and  may 
create inflation. A central bank that instead washes its hands of what is happening on the 
markets  can  be  useful  to  others,  perhaps  for  those  who  succeed  in  profiting  from  market 
instability, but it risks compromising the objective of price stability.  
To  allow  each  institution  to  operate  in  a  balanced  way,  within  its  own  responsibility  and 
without exceeding it, it has to be assigned a precise task, given the independence to pursue 
it, and the obligation to account for its actions. This means that the institution must have the 
operational  capacity  and  necessary  autonomy  to  achieve  its  goals.  Its  actions  must  be 
subjected to scrutiny and even to criticism. But such criticism must check the consistency of 
its  actions  against  the  stipulated  objective.  To  expatiate  on the  modi  operandi  of  a central 
bank when it intervenes in times of crisis like the current one reminds me of the person who 
looks at the wise man’s finger, rather than what it is pointing to – according to an old Chinese 
proverb.5 
As regards the European Central Bank, there is no doubt that it acts in full independence, 
with a clear primary objective, which is price stability in the euro area as a whole. In recent 
months,  as 
independently  –  measures 
in  previous  years, 
the  ECB  has 
taken  – 
                                                 
5 
“When the wise man points to the moon, the fool looks at his finger.” 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
commensurate with the gravity of the situation with the intent of pursuing the objective that it 
has been assigned. We are fully aware of the risks, related to a possible excess of activism 
on the one hand and benign neglect on the other. We have assumed our responsibilities in 
full,  and  seek  to  remind  other  institutions  of  theirs.  We  have  explained  the  reason  for  our 
actions, the impact they have on market conditions and liquidity and its aims. We are subject 
to scrutiny by the public and the markets. 
Anyone who thinks that the ECB has been excessively active on the market, for example on 
the market for government securities, or the opposite, must first of all demonstrate that such 
actions have not enabled the ECB to achieve its goal. I do not think there is any indicator  
–  based  on  market  expectations,  those  of  professional  forecasters  and  other  indicators  – 
which shows that any of the interventions implemented have undermined the ability of the 
ECB to maintain price stability in the euro area in the years to come. So I regard many of the 
criticisms  of  the  ECB  to  be  the  result  of  inadequate  economic  analysis,  of  insufficient 
knowledge of the crisis in which we find ourselves and of anxiety resulting from experiences 
in the distant past that are not relevant to the current situation. 
There is no doubt that we are going through a difficult period for the economic and financial 
stability  of  the  euro  area.  The  will  to  act  in  order  to  defend  what  we  have  gained  is  not 
enough; drawing up plans for the long term is not enough either. Rapid action is needed by 
various  policy-makers,  with  each  living  up  to  his  own  responsibilities.  The  consolidation  of 
public finances and the restoration of competitiveness at a global level are the top priority. 
This result is not possible in many countries without calling into question prerogatives and 
rights that until now were regarded as acquired, which nobody wants to give up, but which in 
the current situation means rent positions, privileges, preferential treatment. 
There is no upcoming generation to whom we can pass the burden of adjustment. It’s up to 
this generation – in other words, us – to shoulder our own responsibilities. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
