Mark Carney: The paradigm shifts – global imbalances, policy, and Latin 
America 
Remarks  by  Mr  Mark  Carney,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  the  Inter-American 
Development Bank, Calgary, 26 March 2011. 
 Introduction 
Globalization is the opportunity and the challenge of our age. It has the potential to lift billions 
out of poverty, vastly expand economic prospects, and develop a more diverse and resilient 
global economy. However, globalization also brings stresses, so policy-makers will need both 
discipline and new frameworks to realise its promise. 
The  financial  crisis  has  accelerated  the  shift  in  the  world’s  economic  centre  of  gravity. 
Emerging-market  economies  (EMEs)  now  account  for  almost  three-quarters  of  global 
growth – up from just one-third at the turn of the millennium.  
Although  this  paradigm  shift  to  a  multipolar  world  is  fundamentally  positive,  it  is  also 
disruptive. Labour, capital and commodity markets are changing rapidly. The effective global 
labour supply quadrupled between 1980 and 2005 and may double again by 2050.1 Cross-
border capital flows have exploded, growing at a rate almost seven times the peak during the 
last wave of globalization.2 Commodity markets are in the midst of a supercycle.  
Large  imbalances  are  a  natural  consequence  of  globalization.  These  imbalances  can  be 
good  or  bad.  Good  imbalances  are  the  product  of  capital  moving  to  where  it  can  be  best 
used,  production  being  reoriented  and  expanded,  and  the  economic  cycle  becoming  more 
commodity intensive.  
Bad  imbalances  arise  when  countries  resist  or  misread  the  consequences  of  this  shift  of 
activity and demand from advanced to emerging economies.  
Indeed,  the  response  to  such  pressures  will  influence  the  resiliency  of  the  globalization 
process  itself.  In  the  run-up  to  the  crisis,  poor  policy  choices  reinforced  vulnerabilities. 
Countries  frustrated  exchange  rate  adjustment,  and  the  recipients  of  large  capital  inflows 
squandered them. Price stability was achieved, but financial stability was forfeited. The result 
was unbalanced, unsustainable growth, culminating in economic catastrophe. 
It is not clear that the commitment to open markets will withstand a repeat of such mistakes. 
Today,  I  will  concentrate  on  two  current  policy  challenges  for  our  region  that  could  prove 
decisive:  
1) 
2) 
In  each  case,  there  is  a  risk  that  policy-makers  downplay  longer-term  forces  when  setting 
short-term policy. As a consequence, destabilizing global imbalances could re-emerge and 
undermine the globalization process itself. 
maintaining price stability in the face of a major commodity shock, and 
maximizing the return to large, volatile capital flows. 
                                                 
1   Adjusted for the percentage of the population in the traded-goods sector. See M. Carney, “The Implications of 
Globalization  for  the  Economy  and  Public  Policy,”  speech  delivered  to  the  British  Columbia  Chamber  of 
Commerce and the Business Council of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, 18 February 2008. 
2   Cross-border capital flows were roughly 20 per cent of global GDP before the crisis, compared with 3 per cent 
at the turn of the last century. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Commodities 
Major commodity exporters, including Canada and much of Latin America, are experiencing 
a large, positive terms-of-trade shock (see Appendix, Chart 1). Real prices for energy and 
metals have been well above their long-term averages for more than five years, and real food 
prices are now at their highest levels in twenty years (Chart 2).3  
The question is whether such strength will persist.  
From a policy perspective, it matters whether prices are being primarily driven by demand, 
supply or speculation. In general, supply shocks and speculative overshoots tend to be short 
lived and can be looked through. Demand shocks are different. 
While  there  have  been  supply  disruptions  due  to  geopolitical  unrest  and  natural  disasters, 
and while speculative pressures have reinforced, on occasion, the direction of fundamentally 
driven  price  moves,  the  Bank’s  view  is  that  a  large,  sustained  increase  in  demand  is  the 
primary driver of this boom. The breadth and durability of the commodity rally underscores 
this conclusion.  
This surge in demand is the result of rapid growth in the emerging world, particularly in Asia 
(Chart  3).  With  convergence  still  a  long  way  off,  the  demand  for  commodities  can  be 
expected to remain robust for some time. Based on the experiences of Japan in the 1960s 
and  Korea  in  the  1980s,  emerging  Asia’s  energy  and  metals  intensities  should  gain 
momentum.4  
Rapid urbanization underpins this growth. Since 1990, the number of people living in cities in 
China  and  India  has  risen  by  nearly  500  million,  the  equivalent  of  housing  the  entire 
population of Canada 15 times over (Chart 4). This process can be expected to continue for 
decades, since urbanization rates in China and India are currently 30 to 50 percentage points 
below those in Brazil, Mexico and Canada.  
In parallel, a massive new middle class is being formed. The world’s middle class is growing 
by 70 million people each year and will double to 40 per cent of the global population by the 
end of this decade.5 The ramifications will be considerable for a wide range of commodities, 
through  higher  protein  diets,  refrigeration  and  travel.  Whether  it  is  cars,  airports  or  meat, 
consumption  and  development  levels  in  major  emerging  markets  are  currently  fractions  of 
those in advanced economies (Table 1). 
Even though history teaches that all booms are finite, this one could go on for some time.  
With the demand story intact, the profile of commodity prices will turn on supply. Time will tell 
whether  new  supply  will  be  sufficient,  and  whether  consumption  converges  at  current 
Western levels or whether price signals and serious attempts at reducing carbon intensity will 
ultimately force a more sustainable equilibrium. 
The  fundamental  issue  is  that  the  relationship  between  U.S.  economic  activity  and 
commodity  prices  has  changed,  and  that  this  is  complicating  the  policy  response  for 
exporters and importers alike (Chart 5). 
In all, 18 of 23 commodities in the Bank of Canada’s commodity index are above their long-term average. 
                                                 
3  
4   Current  per  capita  income  is  between  $5,000–$10,000  per  capita  for  China,  Thailand,  and  Malaysia. 
Commodity  demand  should  continue  to  grow  rapidly  before  slowing  once  income  levels  reach  about  
$15,000–$20,000  per  capita.  See  C.  Cheung  and  S.  Morin,  “The  Impact  of  Emerging  Asia  on  Commodity 
Prices,” Bank of Canada Working Paper 2007-55. Adding to the potential momentum is the fact that per capita 
income levels remain below $5,000 in India, Indonesia and the Philippines. 
5   McKinsey & Company, “The Great Rebalancing,” June 2010. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Policy implications  
All  IDB  member  countries  are  currently  facing  some  similar  challenges,  which  are  best 
addressed with an eye to these longer-term trends. 
First,  large  and  persistent  changes  in  relative  prices  will  encourage  substantial  structural 
adjustment in all of our economies. In past decades, commodity-price increases were often 
driven  by  strong  growth  in  the  G-3  economies.  More  recently,  however,  higher  commodity 
prices  have  been  generated,  in  large  part,  from  strong  growth  in  emerging  markets, 
particularly in China (Chart 6). Consequently, commodity importers in our region have had to 
face the adverse implications of higher commodity prices, without the cushion of a demand 
boost  from  stronger  growth  in  G-3  economies.  Similarly,  there  is  greater  pressure  on  the 
manufacturing  sectors of  commodity  exporters  coming  from  the  strength  in  their exchange 
rates, again in the absence of traditional demand from the G-3. 
Adjustment is inevitable – and it will be substantial. In general, such changes should not be 
frustrated, but rather facilitated by policies that enhance economic flexibility.  
Second, all countries need to maintain price stability in an environment where G-3 monetary 
policy  cannot  be  expected  to  lead  the  global  cycle.  As  I  will  discuss  in  a  moment,  a  key 
mistake would be to let fears of capital inflows and exchange rate pressures dominate the 
imperative of domestic price stability.  
It  is  paramount  that  monetary  policy  everywhere  acts  to  ensure  that  inflation  expectations 
remain  in  line  with  medium-term  policy  objectives.  Everything  else  being  equal,  higher 
commodity prices usually necessitate higher policy interest rates. The degree of the policy 
response  depends  on  many  factors,  including  the  reasons  behind  the  price  increases,  the 
expected persistence of the shock, and whether a country is a net exporter. Policy-makers 
also need to weigh the importance of commodities in the consumption basket (Chart 7), the 
historic  experience  with  price  pass-through,  and  how  well  anchored  are 
inflation 
expectations.  
It bears consideration that the terms-of-trade shock could be even more disruptive. Most of 
us  have  become  heavily  reliant  on  manufactured  goods  and  components  from  China 
(Table 2). For example, in Canada, partly as a consequence of Chinese trade, goods price 
inflation has run about 1 per cent for the past decade. However, with commodity prices rising 
sharply in China, second-round effects on manufactured goods pricing are possible, due to 
rising wages and input costs and, potentially, exchange rate appreciation. Finally, it has to be 
considered that the process of globalization, with its large-scale displacement, may actually 
reduce potential growth in advanced economies during the adjustment phase.6  
Canada has learned through long experience that the role of the exchange rate is crucial. For 
commodity exporters, improvements in the terms of trade tend to put upward pressure on the 
exchange rate. When such movements in the nominal exchange rate are limited, wages and 
a range of other prices respond. This is a more disruptive form of adjustment that can have 
profound  implications  for  employment,  financial  stability  and  competitiveness  –  the  very 
objectives exchange rate management seeks to protect.  
Recent experience suggests that many emerging economies are taking the real adjustment 
through higher domestic inflation (Chart 8), in part because of concerns over capital inflows. 
To  the  extent  that  the  nominal  exchange  rate  responds,  it  helps  offset  the  expansionary 
effect  of  the  increase  in  investment,  and  gives  price  signals  to  the  production  sector  for 
labour and capital to shift to the areas of higher return. 
                                                 
6   L.  Bini  Smaghi,  “The  Challenges  of  Surveillance  and  Coordination,”  speech  delivered  at  the  International 
Symposium of the Banque de France, Paris, 4 March 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Capital  flows  will  move  to  hasten  that  adjustment,  which  leads  to  the  second  policy 
challenge.  
Capital flows  
Capital can be expected to flow, on a net basis, from advanced economies towards higher 
expected risk-adjusted returns in emerging-market economies. Such was the case during the 
last  wave  of  globalization  at  the  turn  of  the  twentieth  century  when  Canada,  then  an 
emerging  economy,  ran  current  account  deficits  averaging  7  per  cent  of  GDP  over  three 
decades. 
The  scale  of  the  potential  reallocation  today  is  significant.  Investors  from  advanced 
economies are substantially overweight their home markets: advanced economies represent 
half of current global GDP, but their equity market capitalization is nearly three-quarters of 
the  global  capital  market.7  A  reallocation  of  5  per  cent  of  advanced  economy  portfolios  to 
emerging  markets  translates  into  a  potential  flow  of  $2  trillion  or  $400  billion  to  Latin 
America.8 This is eight times current annual flows to Latin America.9  
Paradoxically,  despite  these  secular  forces,  emerging  markets  are  currently  net  capital 
exporters (Chart 9). In effect, there is a large recycling of capital: private capital flows from 
advanced to emerging economies are being more than offset by official outflows.10 Central 
banks now hold more than 40 per cent of U.S. Treasuries, which delays adjustment at home 
and abroad by muting price signals in both locations. 
Two  dynamics  are  particularly  important.  First,  the  expansion  of  gross  capital  flows  has 
dwarfed that of net flows. For example, since the 1990s the increase in gross flows into and 
out  of  the  United  States  has  expanded  three  times  more  rapidly  than  the  increase  in  net 
flows.11  Emerging  economies  are  having  difficulties  absorbing  large  private  flows,  while 
advanced economies have often misallocated the surge in yield-insensitive gross claims. In 
both  cases,  the  scale  of  movements  and  the  impact  of  any  reversal  have  important 
ramifications for financial stability. 
Second,  in  the  face  of  stimulative  G-3  monetary  policy  and  limited  nominal  exchange  rate 
appreciation  by  China,  many  emerging  markets  are  trying  to  forestall  capital  inflows  and 
delay necessary monetary tightening. This in turn is feeding domestic demand, which drives 
commodity prices up further and leads to more generalized overheating. Third-best policies, 
including  capital  controls  under  the  trendy  guise  of  macroprudential  policy,  are  being 
pursued. 
Arguably, Latin America is the region most affected by these pressures and, therefore, it has 
the greatest interest in durable solutions. 
                                                 
7   Advanced  economies  represent  half  of  current  global  GDP  on  a  purchasing-power-parity  basis.  Advanced 
equity  market  capitalization  should  be  somewhat  overweight  in  its  GDP  representation,  given  the  large 
exposure of global companies to emerging-market growth. 
8   These  calculations  assume  that  emerging-market  investors  hold  only  a  fraction  of  existing  market 
capitalization in advanced economies. 
9   The conundrum for EMEs is that the more they reform, the more they encourage these inflows. 
10   Supplemented by EME private diversification flows. 
11   J. Caruana, “Capital Flows to the Emerging Market Economies: A Perspective on Policy Challenges,” speech 
delivered at the SEACEN Governors’ Conference, Colombo, Sri Lanka, 24–26 February 2011. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
G-20 initiatives 
Two related G-20 initiatives can help spring this trap: the Mutual Assessment Process (MAP) 
and the reform of the international monetary system. 
The MAP process stresses countries’ shared responsibility to ensure that their policies are 
consistent  domestically  and  globally.  This  process  will  establish  indicative  guidelines  and 
benchmarks to identify instances of external imbalances. Then, using these guidelines, G-20 
members  will  undertake  a  mutual  assessment  of  their  monetary,  exchange  rate,  fiscal, 
financial and structural policies.  
The immediate focus is to identify short-term policy measures to address global imbalances. 
These will likely include:  
 
 
 
 
financial sector repair and reform; 
timely fiscal consolidation; 
structural reforms to enhance growth; and 
more market-determined exchange rates over time. 
Transition to a new international monetary system  
The G-20’s second imperative is the refounding of the international monetary system, which 
has degenerated into an increasingly dysfunctional hybrid of fixed and floating regimes.  
There are two options for redress. The first is to enforce the current rules of the game – as 
codified  in  the  articles  of  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  and  World  Trade 
Organization  (WTO).  While  this  is  possible,  enforcing  behaviour  through  trade  sanction  is 
obviously extremely divisive and runs the risk of reversing the globalization process itself. 
A more constructive approach – favoured by Canada – is to renew the rules of the game so 
that  country  actions  are  both  predictable  and  mutually  consistent.  Given  the  scale  of 
transition under way, in our view, it makes sense to agree to the long-term objective and then 
implement short-term measures consistent with a transition to it.  
Our  long-term  objective  should  be  a  well-functioning  international  monetary  system  that 
delivers  sufficient  nominal  stability  in  exchange  rates  and  domestic  prices,  with  timely 
adjustment to shocks and structural change. 
All countries should accept their responsibilities for promoting an open, flexible and resilient 
system.  This  responsibility  includes  recognizing  the  spillovers  between  economies  and 
financial systems and working to mitigate them. Fundamentally, it means adopting coherent 
macro policies and allowing real exchange rates to adjust to achieve external balance over 
time.  Indeed,  in  a  multipolar  world  of  global  capital  and  trade,  all  systemically  important 
countries  and  common  economic  areas  should  move  towards  flexible  market-based 
exchange rates.  
These objectives will not be realised overnight. However, informal commitments to improve 
the  functioning  of  the  current  system  could  be  implemented  to  guide  current  policy  while 
maintaining momentum towards the longer-term vision. 
Short-term measures  
First,  as  Bob  Zoellick  has  suggested,  major  advanced  economies  should  reaffirm  the  G-7 
norm for flexible exchange rates without intervention, unless special circumstances warrant 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
and  the  action  is  agreed.12  The  reality  is  that  unilateral  intervention  seldom  is  effective 
without surrendering monetary sovereignty and control over domestic prices. By reaffirming 
this  principle,  advanced  economies  could  set  the  stage  for  a  broader  accord  among  all 
systemically important economies. 
Last  week’s  concerted  intervention  by  the  G-7  provides  an  example  of  these  principles  in 
action.  The  circumstances  were  clearly  exceptional:  movements  in  the  yen  had  become 
disorderly,  volatility  was  excessive,  and  there  were  potential  adverse  implications  for 
economic and financial stability. To address these problems and in response to a request of 
the Japanese authorities, the G-7 acted in concert in foreign exchange markets for the first 
time since 2000. 
Second, the Bank believes there could be value in agreeing to an informal code of conduct 
for  capital  flows  as  a  precursor  to  renewing  the  more  formal  Articles  of  Agreement  of  the 
IMF.13 Certain guidelines – in the form of a notional checklist or decision tree – could prove 
useful  to  maximize  the  cost-benefit  of  capital  controls,  from  both  national  and  global 
perspectives.  
Capital  controls  may  be  appropriate  in  certain circumstances.  Sudden  capital  inflows  raise 
legitimate  concerns  about  currency  overvaluation,  overheating  and,  conversely, 
the 
consequences  of  sudden  stops.  This  is  especially  true  for  countries  with  less-developed 
capital  markets  and  weak  institutional  infrastructures,  where  the  capacities  to  absorb  and 
benefit from large inflows are limited. 
However,  we  should  all  recognise  that  short-term  expediency  could  take  precedence,  and 
eventually turn back the clock on an open, flexible system. This risk grows more tangible as 
emerging economies become more systemically important. 
A  Code  of  Conduct  for  Capital  Flows  could  include  the  following  four  elements  to  guide 
countries during the transition to the long-term system: 
1. 
A  clear  objective  to  promote  a  sustainable  and  effective  flow  of  private  capital 
between  economies  in  order  to  facilitate  economic  growth  and  prosperity  through 
the efficient allocation of resources, specialization in production, and diversification 
of risk. 
A  decision  framework  that  recognizes  that  capital  controls  should  not  be  the  first 
option. They are a complement to, not a substitute for, macro and macroprudential 
policies.  Consideration  should  always  be  given  to  adjusting  monetary,  exchange 
rate and fiscal policy, consistent with budgetary and inflation conditions.  
Principles to guide the design of measures:  
a) 
Temporary.  Time-limiting  measures  recognize  that  capital  controls  create 
distortions, adverse market reactions and negative externalities, as well as the 
reality  that,  over  time,  controls  are  often  evaded.  This  principle  is  also 
consistent with the positive longer-term fundamentals that are driving capital 
flows to emerging market economies. 
Targeted.  Measures  should  address  specific  vulnerabilities,  such  as  Korea’s 
restrictions on foreign exchange derivative contracts. 
b) 
2. 
3. 
                                                 
12   R. Zoellick, “A Monetary Regime for a Multipolar World,” Financial Times, 17 February 2011. 
13   Specifically, Articles IV and VIII should be clarified with respect to country responsibilities for exchange rate 
adjustment.  The  Fund’s  role  in  the  surveillance  of  the  capital  account  and  members’  obligations  in  the 
surveillance process could also be better specified and resourced. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
4. 
c) 
Transparent.  An  example  is  Chile’s  pre-announced  buildup  of  foreign 
exchange  reserves.  Measures  should  be  consistent  with  the  principles  and 
should be peer reviewed.  
Recognition of the responsibilities of capital-exporting countries to monitor the risks 
run by host institutions with respect to currency mismatches, maturity transformation 
and leverage. The Financial Stability Board’s current initiatives for both the formal 
and shadow banking sectors are central in these regards. 
Conclusion  
The shift to a multipolar economy is having a profound impact on capital flows and a broad 
range of relative prices, including commodities.  
Imbalances  are  the  result  of  advanced  and  emerging  economies  not  recognising  this  new 
paradigm.  Some  countries  are  postponing  monetary  tightening  in  the  hope  that  old 
relationships reassert. Others are resisting capital inflows by misreading the secular for the 
cyclical. All appear to be underestimating the scale of what is happening.  
Therein lies the risk of another crisis. Avoiding it requires leadership, purpose and legitimacy.  
The  G-20  is  well  suited  to  building  global  economic  co-operation,  as  the  response  to  the 
crisis  demonstrated.  Resolving  global  imbalances  is  a  much  more  complicated  challenge. 
Countries will need to draw on a sense of common analysis and shared destiny to strike what 
Mervyn King has termed a “Grand Bargain” across a host of policies.  
The  G-20  cannot,  however,  relaunch  the  global  monetary  system  by  itself.  The  G-20  can 
create momentum: it can take important interim steps; but ultimately, to be legitimate, a new 
system will require the concurrence of all IMF member countries. Thus, the perspectives of 
member countries of the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) on the appropriate code of 
conduct for capital flows and on financial reforms are essential. 
The stakes are very high. The current dynamics of commodity prices and capital flows create 
major  risks  to  financial  stability  and  sustainable  growth  across  our  region.  When  large 
economies with undervalued exchange rates keep their currencies from appreciating, others 
feel pressured to follow. Over time, macro policy becomes contorted: exchange rates more 
inflexible,  monetary  policy  more  hesitant,  and  economic  controls  more  prevalent.  The 
collective impact of this behaviour risks inflation and asset bubbles in emerging economies 
and, over time, subpar global growth.  
Neither outcome is in the global interest. Neither is consistent with IDB principles.  
IDB  countries  can  help  lead  a  co-operative  approach  by  their  example  and  influence.  The 
transformation  of  Latin  America  during  the  past  decade  has  been  nothing  short  of 
remarkable.  Greater  reliance  on  policy  frameworks,  enhanced  economic  flexibility  and 
decisive action have fed superior macroeconomic outcomes and economic resilience. During 
coming challenges, others would do well to draw on the lessons so evident in this room of 
the virtues of openness and sound domestic policies. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Appendix 
8 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  9
  10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  11
  12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
