Emsley Tromp: The state of Curaçao’s economy – developments and 
vulnerabilities 
Speech by Dr Emsley Tromp, President of the Central Bank of Curacao and Sint Maarten, on 
the occasion of the opening of the LB Smith Luncheon of the VBC, Willemstad, 20 May 2011. 
Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen, 
 Introduction 
It has already been seven months since Curaçao became an autonomous country within the 
Dutch Kingdom. The new country status brought with it a reminder that the world in which we 
are living is complex and constantly changing. Change brings uncertainty. At the same time, 
we have to recognize that in uncertainty and change lies opportunity and hope. The question, 
therefore,  becomes:  What  will  be  the  overarching  strategy  of  the  newly  formed  country 
Curacao  to  advance  the  hopes  and  aspirations  of  its  people?  Where  are  we  going  in  the 
world? How can we get there? What are the guiding stars that will illuminate our path? We 
need a strategy that will transcend our political divisions, orient us as one country, and give 
us both a common direction and the confidence and commitment to get to our destination.  
As I have stated on several occasions, the new constitutional status by itself does not lead to 
a higher level of sustainable economic growth and prosperity. To achieve sustained growth 
and  prosperity  today  requires  a  new  set  of  strategies  because  of  the  universal  awareness 
that we are living through a time of rapid and universal change. The assumptions of the past 
make  little  sense  because  the  Curacao  with  thriving  offshore,  transportation,  refining,  and 
tourism sectors are as distant to the young generation today as the autonomy of 1954 was to 
those who designed the new constitutional arrangement. Moreover, Curacao is experiencing 
its latest round of decline: the certainty that we are losing all the things that once made us a 
great island. We are living on the labor of the past. Our crumbling roads reflect a crumbling 
self-confidence.  Our  education  reformers  often  seem  to  despair  that  we  can  ever  educate 
new generations effectively for today’s economy. Our health care system lags increasingly 
behind those of other nations.  
It  is  against  this  backdrop,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  that  I  consider  this  a  propitious  time  to 
discuss what to me are the most important challenges facing us. The risks that emanate from 
this  interdependent  world  pose  perhaps  the  greatest  threat  to  our  economic  growth  and 
prosperity. I will review recent economic developments in the context of those vulnerabilities 
and  then  conclude  with  some  policy  prescriptions  that  should  be  on  the  national  policy 
agenda  to  strengthen  and  underpin  the  resilience  of  the  Curaçao  economy  towards 
sustainable prosperity.  
Recent economic developments 
Preliminary  data  indicate  that  the  economy  of  Curaçao  grew  an  estimated  0.2%  in  2010, 
compared to a contraction of 0.5% in 2009. Meanwhile, consumer price inflation accelerated 
to 2.8% in 2010, up from 1.6% in 2009. The anemic economic expansion was due mainly to 
an  upturn  in  the  wholesale  &  retail  trade  and  financial  services  sectors  and  in  the  public 
sector. The upturn in the public sector can be attributed to larger outlays on wages & salaries 
and  goods  &  services.  These  gains  were  the  result  of  salary  adjustments,  additions  to 
payrolls,  and  expenses  for  technical  assistance.  Activities  in  the  wholesale  &  retail  trade 
sector  rose,  matching  gains  in  domestic  spending  and  tourist  spending.  By  contrast, 
decreases  in  the  manufacturing,  construction,  and  transport,  storage  &  communication 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
sectors  mitigated  the  upturn  in  the  wholesale  &  retail  trade  and  financial  services  sectors. 
The unfavorable development in manufacturing was due mainly to a drop in value added by 
the Isla refinery caused by the prolonged shutdown of the refinery from March till December 
2010  because  of  problems  in  the  BOO  plant.  Also,  activities  in  the  ship  repair  industry 
shrank.  Meanwhile,  construction  investment  activities  were  down  in  2010,  but  less  than  in 
2009.  
Ladies and gentlemen, you are what you owe. Our history speaks unnervingly on this matter. 
Curacao’s  deficit  spending  since  the  mid-eighties  led  to  a  debt  build-up  that  resulted  in  a 
debt-to-GDP ratio that virtually rendered the government function as one of keeping creditors 
happy.  This  situation  drove  home  that  unfettered  debt  build-up  can  quickly  compromise  a 
country’s autonomy. But, thanks to the debt relief program that was an integral part of the 
constitutional  reform,  the  Netherlands  Antilles  was  able  to  reduce  its  debt-to-GDP  ratio  to 
approximately 32% on October 9, 2010 <Graph debt-to-GDP ratio, Netherlands Antilles, 
Curaçao and St. Maarten>. This is a substantial improvement over the 82.2% registered at 
the end of 2008, just prior to the initiation of the debt relief program in January 2009.  
The  debt  relief  program  allowed  Curaçao  and  Sint  Maarten  to  start  their  new  status  as 
autonomous countries with sound public finances and with budgetary rules and procedures 
in place to keep their finances in check. The estimated debt-to-GDP ratio of Curaçao at the 
end of October 2010 was 35%, while that of Sint Maarten was about 24%. These ratios can 
be categorized as sound according to international standards.  
Looking  ahead,  the  question  remains  whether  the  fiscal  policy  now  being  pursued  is 
consistent with sustainable fiscal balances given the overconfidence in the soundness and 
resiliency of the economy that is the banner message of the current administration. To be 
sustainable,  economic  growth  has  to  be  consistently  higher  than  projected,  and  fiscal 
discipline has to underpin government policies.  
Ladies and gentlemen, another mounting risk is the widening deficit on the current account of 
our balance of payments. This deficit widened in 2010 compared to 2009, largely due to a 
decline  in  the  net  exports  of  goods  and  services  <Graph  Balance  of  Payments 
Developments>. The latter decline resulted from an increase in imports accompanied by a 
decline  in  exports.  The  growth  in  imports  can  be  ascribed  to  increased  international  oil 
prices. In contrast, exports shrank as a result of a contraction in re-exports by the free-zone 
companies. This contraction in re-exports was related to, among other things, lower demand 
from  Venezuela  due  to  the  devaluation  of  the  Bolivar,  and  the  tightened  foreign exchange 
controls by the Venezuelan authorities. The fee received for oil refining contracted due to the 
temporary  shutdown  of  the  refinery.  Furthermore,  oil  storage  fees  received  from  abroad 
declined as a result of a drop in oil storage activities. The decline in exports was mitigated by 
increased  foreign  exchange  revenues  from  bunkering  activities,  related  to  the  higher 
international  average  oil  prices.  Foreign  exchange  earnings  from  the  tourism  industry  also 
rose in both Curaçao and Sint Maarten. This deficit on the current account of our balance of 
payments  has  been  financed  by  the  inflow  of  funds  to  finance  the  debt  relief  and  by  the 
surpluses on the capital account. As a result, we have been recording overall surpluses on 
our balance of payments.  
Needless to say, this situation is unsustainable in the medium term. The sense of urgency to 
address this risk or possible severe adverse outcomes does not seem to be widely shared. 
The  insufficient  attention  being  paid  to  this  factor,  caused by  a  high  degree  of  group-think 
and  the  lack  of  incentives  to  raise  contrarian  views,  severely  undermines  our  ability  to 
discern risks and vulnerabilities associated with impending crisis before its outbreak. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  with  the  relatively  slow  recovery  in  the  advanced  economies, 
Curacao’s real GDP is projected to grow by a mere 0.3% in 2011, not much more than the 
estimated 0.2% in 2010. The 2011 growth will be backed by domestic demand resulting from 
gains  in  private  demand  and  public  investment.  Meanwhile,  the  decline  in  net  foreign 
demand  will  moderate  the  increase  in  domestic  spending.  Accompanying  this  slight 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
economic growth will be a higher inflation of 4.8% due to higher world food prices and the 
pass-through of higher international oil prices in domestic gasoline and utility prices.  
<Graph GDP growth and inflation Curaçao> An analysis of the growth and inflation figures 
of Curaçao over the period 2005 to 2011 shows an economic performance averaging one 
percent. Our headline inflation peaked in 2008 due mainly to the increased international oil 
and food prices. It should be noted, however, that the impact of the international financial and 
economic crisis on the Curaçao economy was relatively moderate, in contrast to its effect on 
most countries in the region. Curacao emerged relatively unscathed mainly because of the 
implementation of the debt relief program and the socioeconomic initiatives. Moving forward, 
however,  inflation  is  bound  to  increase  due  to  rising  commodities  prices.  To  insulate  the 
domestic  economy  from  this  risk  requires  a  different  approach  to  problem-solving  than  we 
are  currently  pursuing.  We  need  to  leverage  all  our  strength  to  achieve  this  goal  by 
developing  a  plan  for  sustainable  access  to  the  resources  we  need  for  our  continued 
well-being, prosperity, and economic growth. 
<Graph  unemployment  rate  Curaçao>  Ladies  and  gentlemen,  economic  growth  in 
Curaçao  has  not  been  robust  enough  to  make  substantial  progress  toward  lowering  the 
socially  unacceptable  high  unemployment  rate.  Unemployment  is  not  only  destroying  the 
lives of many, it is undermining Curacao’s future. The longer this goes on, the more workers 
will  find  it  impossible  ever  to  return  to  employment,  the  more  young  people  will  find  their 
prospects destroyed because they cannot find a decent starting job. The unemployment is 
eating away at our society. We seem to have developed a strange apprehension about our 
ability to create an investment climate conducive to sustainable high growth to address the 
issue of high unemployment and social exclusion. We need a credible macroeconomic policy 
mix. Such a mix cannot be won through intimidation and threat, and it cannot be sustained 
through  exclusion.  It  requires  a  commitment  and  investment  in  the  future.  Our  investment 
priority, therefore, must be intellectual capital and a sustainable infrastructure of education, 
health,  and  social  services  to  provide  for  the  continuing  development  and  growth  of 
Curacao’s youth. 
So,  the  question  becomes:  What  has  kept  us  from  achieving  a  higher  level  of  sustainable 
economic growth?  
In my opinion, ladies and gentlemen, our weak economic performance is the result of, among 
other things, lack of resiliency to external shocks. Small economies like ours are susceptible 
to  these  external  shocks  because  of  their  openness,  size  of  domestic  markets,  lack  of 
economic diversification, and the high dependence on strategic imports such as food and oil.  
Some of these shocks are caused by Nature, and little can be done to insulate us from their 
consequences.  But  some  of  these  shocks  are  related  to  trade  and  exchange,  such  as  a 
contraction in external demand and increased international oil and food prices. These types 
of shocks have a direct impact on our balance of payments and domestic consumption and 
investment. In the past couple of years, our balance of payments increasingly has become 
affected by this category of shocks because of, among other things, increased international 
oil and food prices with far-reaching implications for the real economy. The rapidly expanding 
current  account  deficit  during  the  last  few  years,  financed  by  capital  inflows  from  abroad, 
exposes an increasing external vulnerability, which has been masked by the inflows of funds 
for  the  debt  relief  program.  A  sudden  reversal  of  capital  flows  could  deplete  our  foreign 
exchange  reserves  quickly,  undermining  confidence  in  our  currency.  A  third  category  of 
shocks  includes  those  that  result  from  our  own  policy  mistakes.  Hence,  these  types  of 
shocks are more endogenous and reflect our own political choices.  
Ladies and gentlemen, to achieve higher levels of sustainable growth, our priority must be to 
pursue policies that strengthen our ability to weather those storms and policies to foster rapid 
growth. Therefore, our policy agenda needs to address three crucial areas.  
The first item on the national policy agenda to achieve the mentioned objectives should be 
macro-economic  stability.  To  mitigate  the  adverse  impact  of  shocks,  fiscal  and  monetary 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
policies  should  be  able  to  respond  quickly  by  mobilizing  resources  to  address  these 
imbalances. Sound fiscal balances as measured by a low debt-to-GDP ratio are crucial. A 
low debt-to-GDP ratio provides authorities with room to maneuver and hence increases their 
choices  of  which  policy  instruments  to  use  to  address  the  crisis.  Thanks  to  the 
implementation  of  the  debt  relief  program,  the  debt-to-GDP  ratio  of  Curaçao  is  currently 
sound. Curaçao was required to meet several conditions to qualify for debt relief. The main 
requirement  was  financial  supervision  by  an  independent  board,  the  College  Financieel 
Toezicht  (CFT),  established  to  temporarily  assess  and  monitor  the  public  finances  of  the 
countries.  Other  conditions  included  the  strengthening  of  financial  management  and 
adherence to a balanced budget rule and an interest burden rule. The interest burden rule 
stipulates  a  yearly  interest  ceiling  of  5%  of  government  revenues.  These  conditions  are 
designed to prevent the uncontrolled build-up of debt in the future and hence, contribute to 
macroeconomic stability.  
With regard to Curacao’s monetary policy, since 2009 I have been advocating the following 
policy  response:  rather  than  focusing  all  our  attention  on  specific  threats  and  risks,  as  we 
have  in  the  past,  we  should  evaluate  the  possibility  of  removing  the  constraints  and  seek 
opportunities  to  credibly  influence  these  risks  to  our  advantage.  To  that  end,  I  have 
advocated  a  new  foreign  exchange  arrangement.  Having  the  US  dollar  as  legal  tender 
removes the risk of exchange rate adjustments. Hence, an economic downturn or reversal of 
capital  flows  would  not  turn  into  a  currency  crisis.  In  addition,  dollarization  has  other 
advantages, including lower transaction costs, the promotion of financial sector soundness, 
and the integration of the domestic financial system with the rest of the world.  
The second area to be addressed in terms of a national policy agenda is the functioning of 
markets. Ladies and gentlemen, in the case of adverse shocks, resources will be reallocated 
rapidly  through  the  price  mechanism  in  markets  that  are  functioning  efficiently,  freely,  and 
competitively. Hence, market efficiency will enable us to cope better with economic shocks. 
One of the most important markets we should address is our labor market. Tight labor market 
regulations  have  adverse  effects  on  economic  performance  because  they  allow  vacancies 
and unemployment to coexist, contributing to high overall unemployment rates. To improve 
our  competitiveness,  we  must  be  able  to  deploy  labor  in  a  more  flexible  way,  as  long  as 
individual protection against abuse is preserved. Competition is what has driven nations to 
achieve greatness.  
The  efficient  functioning  of  markets  also  is  affected  by  bureaucracy  and  administrative 
barriers. One of the most common complaints from the business sector is the number and 
complexity of government formalities and paperwork that frustrate new investment initiatives 
and, hence, the opportunity for stronger economic growth. The elimination of the double layer 
of government on the island is certainly a step in the right direction. However, this change 
should be complemented by streamlining administrative procedures aimed at eliminating all 
unnecessary  bureaucracy  and  simplifying  the  procedures  for  obtaining  business  and  work 
permits and business visas.  
A third important topic for our national policy agenda is good governance. Good governance 
ensures  that  resources  are  allocated  to  those  who  will  use  them  most  effectively  and 
efficiently.  Therefore,  good  governance  enhances  both  productivity  and  growth.  We  can 
distinguish  between  public  governance  and  corporate  governance.  Public  governance  is 
defined  as  the  traditions  and  institutions  that  determine  how  authority  is  exercised  in  a 
particular country. It includes the capacity of the government to manage resources efficiently 
and to formulate, implement, and enforce sound policies and regulations.  
Public  governance  is  good  when  quality  resources  are  managed  and  provided  efficiently. 
Predictability, accountability, transparency, and participation are key factors for good public 
governance.  Government  decisions  must  be  based  on  the  rule  of  law,  and  firms  and 
individuals must be protected from arbitrary decisions. Good public governance requires an 
effective  and  impartial  legal  system.  Segregation  of  powers,  and  a  system  of  checks  and 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
balances  must  be  at  the  core  of  the  political  system.  Good  governance  rests  on  the 
establishment  of  criteria  for  evaluating  the  performance  of  public  sector  institutions. 
Institutions  such  as  the  Court  of  Audit  or  Rekenkamer  and  the  Ombudsmen  are  crucial  to 
strengthen the accountability of the government.  
The  general  public  will  be  able  to  ascertain  the  government’s  adherence  to  law  and 
regulations  and  evaluate  its  performance  only  if  information  about  government  activities  is 
available,  timely,  and  clear.  Therefore,  transparency  is  imperative  for  predictability  and 
accountability.  Finally,  participation  refers  to  the  engagement  of  citizens  in  the  decision 
making  related  to  government  plans  and  budgeting.  By  encouraging  the  participation  of 
citizens,  the  government  can  have  better  insight  into  their  needs  and  priorities.  Public 
participation can be achieved through public consultation, hearings, and referenda.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  although  corporate  governance  and  public  governance  have 
similarities,  differences  also  exist.  Corporate  governance  refers  to  the  rules  and  practices 
that govern the relationship between the managers and shareholders of corporations, as well 
as  stakeholders.  A  good  system  of  corporate  governance  contributes  to  sustainable 
economic  development  as  it  promotes  market  confidence,  facilitates  long-term  capital 
funding, and stimulates market discipline through appropriate disclosure and transparency. 
Also,  corporate  governance  helps  to  ensure  that  the  corporation  takes  into  account  the 
interests  of  a  wide  range  of  stakeholders.  Good  corporate  governance  is  based  on 
responsibility, accountability, fairness, and transparency, and promotes diversity of rules and 
regulations.  
The  autonomy  of  Curacao  was  based  on  the  core  values  and  principles  that  served  the 
Netherlands Antilles as anchor and compass for more than  fifty years.  Our values  defined 
our national character, and they are our source of credibility and legitimacy in everything we 
do.  When  these  values  are  no  longer  sustainable,  we  have  failed  as  a  nation,  because 
without these values, we do not have credibility. Today, we find ourselves in a very different 
environment.  The  challenges  and  opportunities  facing  us  are  far  more  complex  than  we 
could have imagined in 1954. Therefore, we must recognize the need to take a hard look at 
the  governance  of  state-owned  enterprises.  Governance  impediments  and  an  institutional 
culture  that  discourages  contrarian  views  risk  triggering  an  environment  not  conducive  to 
growth and prosperity. 
In  Curaçao,  state-owned  enterprises  are  prevalent  in  several  key  sectors,  including  the 
utilities  and  telecommunication  sectors.  The  governance  of  these  companies  is  critical  to 
ensure 
to  Curacao’s  overall  economic  performance  and 
competitiveness.  The  OECD  has  defined  some  key  guidelines  for  the  governance  of 
state-owned enterprises. 
First,  to  avoid  market  distortions,  the  legal  and  regulatory  framework  for  state-owned 
enterprises should ensure a level-playing field in markets where state-owned enterprises and 
private sector companies compete. Second, the government should act as an informed and 
active  owner  and  establish  a  clear  and  consistent  ownership  policy  ensuring  that  the 
governance of the state-owned enterprises is carried out in a transparent and accountable 
way,  with  the  necessary  degree  of  professionalism  and  effectiveness.  Therefore,  the 
government should develop and issue an ownership policy that defines the overall objectives 
of  state  ownership,  the  state’s  role  in  the  corporate  governance  of  the  state-owned 
enterprises, and how the state will implement its ownership policy. Moreover, the government 
should not be involved in the day-to-day management of state-owned enterprises and should 
allow them full operational autonomy to achieve the agreed-upon objectives. In addition, the 
state  should  let  the  executive  and  supervisory  boards  of  state-owned  enterprises  exercise 
their  responsibilities  in  freedom  and  respect  their  independence.  In  other  words,  the 
shareholder should not be sitting in the chair of the director or supervisory director. 
Third, the state and state-owned enterprises should recognize the rights of all shareholders 
and in accordance with the OECD Principles of Corporate Governance ensure their equitable 
their  positive  contribution 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
treatment and equal access to corporate information. Fourth, state-owned enterprises should 
observe  high  standards  of  transparency  in  accordance  with  the  OECD  Principles  of 
Corporate  Governance.  And  finally,  the  supervisory  boards  of  state-owned  enterprises 
should have the necessary authority, competencies, and objectivity to carry out their function 
of strategic guidance and monitoring of management. They should act with integrity and be 
held accountable for their actions.  
The  recent  experience  in  Curaçao  has  underscored  the  importance  of  these  principles  to 
promote market confidence in and attract long-term capital for state-owned enterprises. The 
exuberance in the preparation of the new constitutional arrangement led to a situation where 
the attention paid to these issues apparently was insufficient. The failure to segregate duties 
and responsibilities in the governance structure and unfettered interference of shareholders 
and  supervisory  directors  in  the  day-to-day  affairs  of  these  enterprises  have  created 
incentive  structures  not  well  aligned  to  foster  the  candid  exchange  of  ideas  necessary  for 
transparency. This situation is bound to lead to lapses in oversight and weak accountability 
and ultimately undermine economic growth. 
Concluding remarks 
Ladies and gentlemen, I have been asked to give an assessment of the current state of the 
Curacao  economy  and  the  risks  associated  with  the  build-up  of  vulnerabilities  associated 
with the economic shocks that Curaçao is susceptible to as a small and open economy. This 
assessment has been made in the context of the new constitutional arrangement, which went 
into  effect  on  the  10th  of  October  last  year.  As  I  have  mentioned  on  several  occasions, 
Curacao’s new status as a country is not an end in itself. Rather, it is a means to achieve a 
better tomorrow.  
My  assessment  has  made  it  abundantly  clear  that  we  need  a  strong,  effective,  and 
well-equipped  government  to  face  the  many  economic  and  financial  challenges  that  lie 
ahead.  Yet  the  problems  uncovered  by  this  assessment  are  long-standing  and  difficult  to 
solve:  addressing  them  will  require  close  collaboration  between  authorities  and  social 
partners. To achieve this collaboration, we need to create an environment that encourages 
candor  and  considers  dissenting  views.  We  need  to  modify  incentives  to  speak  truth  to 
power.  We  need  to  pursue  sustainable  macroeconomic  policies  consistent  with  the  global 
outlook and risks. We need to overcome the insular culture.  
Ladies and gentlemen, to achieve this better tomorrow, we need a vision, a national strategy 
that  embraces  these  issues.  Without  doubt,  our  greatest  resource  is  Curacao’s  young 
people, who will have to shape and execute the vision needed to take this island forward into 
an uncertain future. A reawakening of some sort may be required. Perhaps because we have 
been  so  blessed  over  time,  many  of  us  have  forgotten  that  rewards  must  be  earned,  that 
there is no such thing as a free lunch. Fair competition and hard work bring with them a true 
sense  of  accomplishment.  We  can  no  longer  expect  the  generosity  of  the  Kingdom  or  the 
ingenuity and labor of the past generations to sustain our growth as a nation for generations 
to come. We must embrace the reality that with opportunity comes challenge, and that for us 
to succeed as an autonomous nation, requires a commitment and investment in the future. 
Our vulnerabilities have restrained us from achieving a higher level of sustainable economic 
growth and, hence, prosperity for us all. Therefore, through strengthening of our economic 
resilience  based  on  policies  aimed  at  a  stable  macroeconomic  environment, 
efficient-functioning markets, and good governance, we will be able to break with the past 
and provide our new country with a bright future. 
I thank you for your attention.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
 8 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
