Prasarn Trairatvorakul: Global challenges, global solutions – IMFC 
issues 
Statement  by  Dr  Prasarn  Trairatvorakul,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the 
International Monetary and Financial Committee (IMFC) Twenty-Third Meeting, International 
Monetary Fund, Washington DC, 16 April 2011. 
 On behalf of Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Fiji, Indonesia, Lao P.D.R., Malaysia, Myanmar, Nepal, Philippines, 
Singapore, Thailand, Tonga and Vietnam. 
Introduction 
1. 
We thank Mr. Youssef Boutros-Ghali for his contributions to the IMFC, especially his 
leadership in completing the 2010 Quota and Governance reform. We congratulate Minister 
Tharman  Shanmugaratnam  on  his  appointment  as  the  new  Chairman.  With  his  rich 
experience in understanding the interests of advanced and emerging market countries, we 
have  full  confidence  that  Minister  Tharman  will  be  able  to  make  significant  progress  in 
fostering a global consensus on many challenging policy issues. 
2. 
Although the global recovery has gained strength since the last IMFC meeting, its 
prospect  remains  fragile  as  several  downside  risks  continue  to  prevail.  Having  been 
successful  in  coordinating  policies  to  contain  the  catastrophic  damage  from  the  global 
financial crisis, policymakers are now facing a more difficult task in forging a consensus on 
multilateral  commitments  for  countries  to  take  into  account  the  impact  of  their  policies  on 
other members and the international monetary system (IMS). Such an agreement will not be 
easy  to  reach  against  the  current  backdrop  of  a  multi-speed  recovery  and  asymmetry  in 
domestic policy requirements. Nevertheless, it should be stressed that the need for such a 
consensus is as great as before, since the reliance on accommodative policies of advanced 
countries  has  reduced  their  urgency  for  structural  reforms  and  complicated  the  conduct  of 
policies in emerging market economies. If the  current stalemate were allowed to  continue, 
there is a risk that the global recovery would not be sustained and the functioning of the IMS 
could  become  disorderly.  In  this  context,  the  theme  for  this  year’s  IMFC  Plenary,  “Global 
Challenges, Global Solutions” holds special significance. 
Fund surveillance 
3. 
We  look  forward  to  the  upcoming  2011  Triennial  Surveillance  Review  (TSR).  To 
avoid duplication, an independent opinion of the gaps in the Fund’s surveillance framework 
can already be found in the IEO report on the Fund’s performance in the run-up to the crisis. 
The  IEO  has  identified  several  weaknesses  in  the  Fund’s  culture  that  impedes  effective 
oversight, such as a silo mentality amongst departments, fear of reprisals that inhibit candid 
views, and a lack of evenhandedness in the treatment of members. Instead of searching for 
a new legal framework for surveillance, the Fund should concentrate its efforts on how best 
to implement the IEO recommendations. While the IEO report focuses on dealing with risks 
in the financial sector, we wish to highlight that surveillance should also focus on fiscal and/or 
debt  sustainability  problems, 
the  next  crisis  could  emanate.  A  more 
comprehensive consideration of the gaps in the Fund’s surveillance framework is necessary 
to strengthen the effectiveness of the Fund’s bilateral and multilateral surveillance.  
4. 
Given its universal membership and deep technical expertise, the Fund is uniquely 
placed to identify global challenges, facilitate dialogue and propose policy adjustments. To 
leverage  on  such  unique  strengths,  the  Fund must  earn  the  trust  of  its  entire  membership 
that its policy advice is formulated in an evenhanded manner. In this respect, the forthcoming 
from  which 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
spillover  reports  will  be  another  important  test  of  the  Fund’s  commitment  to  this  principle. 
Therefore,  we  hope  that  such  reports  will  be  written  in  a  balanced  manner  without 
concentrating  the  burden  of  policy  adjustment  needs  on  any  particular  country  or  region. 
Lastly, these expanded exercises should not neglect bilateral surveillance exercises, as they 
remain the  cornerstone of Fund surveillance, offering the safe haven of confidentiality that 
encourages candid discussions between Fund staff and country authorities. 
International Monetary System reform 
5. 
The  arguments  relating  to  the  deficiencies  of  the  IMS  are  by  now  well-rehearsed. 
Yet,  a  consensus  on  what  the  most  critical  problems  –  let  alone  solutions  –  are,  remains 
elusive. For emerging market countries, resurgent capital inflows have complicated the task 
of policymakers, especially as policy settings are being normalized to manage inflation risk. 
While capital inflows are by and large beneficial in promoting growth and investment, large 
and  volatile  episodes  can  pose  significant  challenges  and  overwhelm  some  recipient 
countries’  ability  to  respond.  Given  their  sometimes  rapid  and  dynamic  nature  and  the 
difficulty in differentiating between temporary and structural flows, it is difficult to envisage a 
determinate response path at the outset. Hence, the policy toolkit ought to entail a range of 
measures,  not  precluding  any  one  option  ex  ante,  with  the  flexibility  to  make  adjustments 
over time. Recent experiences of emerging market economies – including several members 
of our region – attest to the capacity for policymakers to respond in a pragmatic and timely 
rather than strictly rules-based and sequential manner.   
6. 
In this connection, the Fund’s framework for managing inflows should serve only as 
an  empirical  study  on  country  experiences  in  using  capital  flow  management  measures.  It 
should  not  become  an  obligation  for  member  countries  as  was  the  case  with  the  2007 
Decision  on  exchange  rate  surveillance;  otherwise  the  Fund  will  risk  straining  its  relations 
with  the  membership.  We  also  note  that  the  above  framework  is  part  of  a  broader  reform 
agenda on capital flows, which would entail examining both push and pull factors, as well as 
both  source  and  recipient  dimensions  of  flows.  Moreover,  the  longer-term  solution  to 
managing  capital  inflows  lies  in  developing  deeper  and  broader  financial  markets,  which 
would enhance absorptive capacity and facilitate efficient use of capital. We therefore call on 
the Fund to further study this aspect to help members develop their capital markets. 
7. 
We thank the Fund for its analytical work on assessing reserve adequacy, but we 
would  like  to  stress  that  reserve  holdings  are  not  an  economic  policy  goal,  nor  are  they 
driven  primarily  by  precautionary  self-insurance  motives,  but  are  the  outcome  of  a  larger 
policy  strategy  for  macroeconomic  and  financial  stability.  Thus,  we  view  that  the  Fund’s 
emphasis on assessing reserve adequacy might be misplaced and would add little value to 
policy  dialogue  in  the  Fund’s  surveillance  process,  the  focus  of  which  should  be  on  the 
broader  macro-policy  mix  in  relation  to  economic  policy  objectives.  Moreover,  assessing 
reserve  adequacy  remains  an  inexact  science,  with  theoretical  underpinnings  yet  to  be 
concretely  established.  The  Fund’s  recent  exercise  may  therefore  be  best  viewed  as  an 
addition to ongoing research on this issue, which would help clarify expectations about what 
the new metric can and cannot achieve. 
8. 
The Fund cannot hope to establish confidence in the IMS without building adequate 
financial  safety  nets  to  ensure  the  necessary  backstops  in  the  event  of  global  systemic 
crises. We therefore call on the Fund to strengthen its financing toolkit, including the possible 
inclusion of a short-term liquidity line, taking into account reinforcing relationships with Fund 
facilities and other regional financing arrangements. 
9. 
Over the long term, the eventual choice of a global reserve currency, or currencies, 
needs to reflect evolving international trade and investment flows and be widely accepted by 
the market. In this regard, we see potential value for the use of the SDR in enhancing the 
provision of global liquidity and asset diversification. We are also open to reflect in its basket 
the rising role of major emerging market economies.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Low-income countries 
10. 
We  welcome  the  work  underway  to  develop  an  analytical  framework  for  a 
Vulnerability Exercise for Low-Income Countries (LICs) as they are particularly vulnerable to 
sharp  swings  in  commodity  prices,  natural  disasters,  and  volatile  external  financing 
conditions.  Due  to  LICs’  greater  vulnerabilities  and  the  limited  available  counter-balancing 
analysis,  the  outcomes  of  this  exercise  should  be  treated  with  a  higher  level  of  care  and 
confidentiality.  Ongoing  work  on  improving  the  debt  sustainability  analysis  framework,  to 
more  accurately  assess  available  fiscal  space  for  growth-enhancing  public  investments,  is 
also welcome. 
Governance 
11. 
Since  we  last  met  in  October  2010,  the  Board  of  Governors  has  approved  far-
reaching reforms on quotas and governance and the 2008 Quota and Voice reforms have 
entered  into  force.  These  meaningful  steps  will  undoubtedly  strengthen  the  credibility, 
legitimacy and effectiveness of the Fund. However, we are still a long way from the desired 
outcomes  and  need  to  proceed  further  to  transform  the  Fund  into  a  truly  representative 
institution aligned with global economic realities. Further, we reiterate our call to reform the 
selection process of the IMF Managing Director and Deputy Managing Directors. The new 
selection  process  should  be  transparent  and  take  into  account  the  Fund’s  move  towards 
diversity. 
Conclusion 
12. 
While all of us agree that crisis resolution is much more costly than crisis prevention, 
it is easier for the international community to come to a consensus on what needs to be done 
to resolve the crisis. At the current juncture, policymakers seem to have some policy space 
as the global recovery has gained traction. But we are not completely out of the woods yet as 
there are so many uncertainties along the way. Therefore, this is an important moment for 
the  Fund  to  take  the  initiative  to  bring  all  stakeholders  together  and  adopt  a  common 
understanding  on  what  needs  to  be  done.  To  do  so,  the  Fund  needs  to  approach  these 
challenges in a balanced manner, by candidly identifying the sources of vulnerabilities and 
fairly assessing the capacity of member countries to make policy adjustments.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
