Jean-Claude Trichet: The euro, its central bank and economic governance 
Text of the Stamp Memorial Lecture by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European 
Central Bank, at the London School of Economics and Political Science, London, 13 June 
2011. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great honour for me to speak here at the London School of Economics and Political 
Science today.  
The euro and its central bank, the ECB, are unique. The European single currency is the only 
major currency not issued by a single sovereign state, but by a union of sovereign states.  
Indeed, the European Treaties specify a clear division of responsibilities between European-
level policy-making and national policy-making. For countries that have adopted the euro as 
their  currency,  this  implies  that,  on  the  one  hand,  monetary  policy  is  inherently  indivisible, 
and in the euro area it is thus conducted at the supranational level by the ECB. On the other 
hand, fiscal policies remain largely the competence of national governments. 
In this lecture I would like to explore how the unique institutional framework of Economic and 
Monetary Union (EMU) in Europe has fared over the past 12 years and particularly during the 
global financial crisis.  
As you will be aware, the primary objective of the European System of Central Banks is to 
maintain price stability in the euro area. In the first part of my lecture I will show how the ECB 
achieved this primary objective before, during and after the crisis. I will also try to convince 
you that the economic performance of the euro area as a whole has been quite remarkable 
over the past twelve and a half years. 
At the same time, we have to recognise that several individual countries in the euro area are 
facing significant challenges and that experiences during the crisis in different parts of the 
euro area have been quite diverse. In the second part of my lecture, I will address the issue 
of economic diversity in the euro area and show that the euro area shares this characteristic 
with the United States – an economy and a currency area that is a natural reference point 
taking into account its size. 
Finally, the crisis has exposed weaknesses in the economic governance framework of EMU 
that need to be addressed urgently. I will close my lecture with some comments about what 
these reforms of the economic governance framework should look like from the perspective 
of the ECB. 
The ECB’s primary objective: price stability in the euro area before and after the crisis 
I can say today that the ECB has fulfilled its primary objective to the letter. As you know, the 
ECB aims at inflation rates of below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. Annual inflation 
over the first 12 years of EMU has been 1.97% on average. A precision landing.  
More generally, the degree of price stability has been greater, over the past 12 years, in the 
euro area as a whole than in the individual euro area countries over the previous 50 years.  
This is no small achievement. The ECB has faced many challenges in pursuing its objective: 
the bursting of the dot-com bubble, the shock wave of 11 September 2001, the volatility of 
commodity  prices  and,  of  course,  the  worst  financial  crisis  the  world  has  known  since  the 
Second World War. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
During  the  crisis,  together  with  other  central  banks  around  the  world,  the  ECB  has  had  to 
operate in an uncertain environment. Allow me to explain our monetary policy response to 
the crisis in more detail. 
Crucially,  we  were  alert  from  the  very  first  day.  We  were  one  of  the  first  central  banks  to 
react, when the financial markets became abruptly turbulent, in August 2007, taking action 
swiftly. 
Dysfunctional financial markets threatened to compromise our ability to guide the outlook for 
price  stability  by  using  only  our  conventional  instrument  –  interest  rates.  Faced  with  this 
situation,  over  the  years  that  followed,  we  have  implemented  a  number  of  unconventional 
measures  to  ensure  that  our  decisions  on  interest  rates  are  transmitted  to  the  whole 
economy,  despite  the  problems  observed  in  the  financial  sector  and  capital  markets.  In 
particular, the major task was to allow banks – regardless of the level of the key interest rate 
which  was  designed  to  deliver  price  stability  –  to  continue  to  lend  to  households  and 
businesses. 
 
  
It is important to understand that we maintained a principle of strict separation between our 
conventional measures and our unconventional measures. Our interest rates are set so that 
we can ensure price stability over the medium term. The implementation of unconventional 
measures depends on the functioning of the monetary policy transmission mechanism and is 
intended  to  repair  disruptions  of  monetary  and  financial  markets  and  of  specific  market 
segments that might impede the overall transmission. 
As  the  crisis  called  for  rapid  and  unprecedented  action,  we  did  not  lose  sight  of  our  main 
objective, namely to maintain price stability over the medium term for the benefit of the 331 
million citizens of the euro area. All – I stress that word – all monetary policy decisions we 
have taken over the last 12½ years were aimed at fulfilling this commitment. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Let me elaborate on this point. As you know, in normal times, central banks mainly influence 
the economy and inflation by using the instrument for setting short-term interest rates. 
In practice, the identification, at an early stage, of the risks to price stability is a delicate task. 
To see it through, the ECB bases itself on a monetary policy strategy supported by several 
sources  of  information.  The  economic  analysis  we  undertake  enables  us  to  synthesise 
information on short-term inflationary pressures from a large number of economic indicators. 
Thanks to the monetary analysis that we also undertake, we can cross-check this information 
with  medium-term  inflationary  pressures  drawn  from  the  monetary  and  financial  indicators. 
These are the two “pillars” of our monetary policy, which indicate to us the necessary steps in 
respect of the interest rate to ensure price stability over the medium term. 
The  measures  we  have  taken,  sometimes  in  the  face  of  political  pressures  have 
demonstrated our determination to stick to our mandate in full independence. We refused to 
lower interest rates in early 2004 when Germany, France and Italy in particular asked us to 
do  so.  And  we  did  not  hesitate  to  raise  interest  rates  in  December  2005,  a  time  when 
10 governments  out  of  12  in  the  euro  area,  plus  many  international  observers,  asked  the 
ECB to leave its key rates unchanged. 
International  financial  institutions,  in  particular,  highlighted  the  risks  that  the  tightening  of 
monetary policy – after a prolonged period of accommodative monetary policy – could pose 
to  the  recovery.  Despite  these  warnings,  we  conducted  our  monetary  tightening,  and 
international  financial  institutions,  with  the  benefit  of  hindsight,  have  agreed  that  we  were 
right to make that decision. 
After the crisis escalated in mid-September 2008, while inflationary pressures subsided, we 
decided,  in  full  accordance  with  our  mandate,  to  reduce  our  key  interest  rate.  We  cut  it 
rapidly, from 4.25% in October 2008 to 1% in May 2009. 
We lowered the key interest rate at a pace and to a level unprecedented in the recent history 
of the euro area countries. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  3
With the benefit of hindsight, the decisions we took during the crisis were, I think, vindicated. 
They  have  in  particular  helped  to  preserve  a  very  solid  anchoring  of  inflation  expectations 
over the past four years. Our determination to maintain price stability over the medium term 
has enabled us to prevent both the risk of inflation and of deflation from materialising. 
With the recovery now more firmly established, we have seen in recent months upside risks 
to the outlook for price stability over the medium term. Again, the sharp increase in oil and 
other commodities has had a major impact on overall inflation. In these circumstances, the 
central bank must prevent increases in the prices of raw materials from being incorporated 
into the long-term inflation expectations, which could trigger second-round effects on wages 
and prices. 
It  is  against  this  background  that  the  Governing  Council  decided  in  April  to  raise  interest 
rates. I stressed, in reporting this decision, that it had been taken unanimously. The action of 
the Governing Council is motivated by a common goal. 
That decision in April confirmed that the separation principle is strictly applied and that our 
non-conventional  measures  do  not  restrict  in  any  way  our  ability  to  toughen  the  monetary 
policy stance when facing inflationary pressures. Thus, when the Governing Council decided 
in April that it was time to raise interest rates, in parallel, at the same time, it decided to keep, 
in  the  second  quarter,  the  provision  of  unlimited  fixed-rate  liquidity  for  a  period  of  three 
months. 
Contributing to economic performance 
Price stability is the best contribution that central banks can make to sustainable economic 
growth  and  job  creation.  I  think  there  is  widespread  agreement  on  this  among  central 
bankers and academic researchers. 
In  the  short  run,  however,  some  academic  research  suggests  that  there  might  be  a 
significant  trade-off  between  low  inflation  volatility  and  low  output  volatility.  If  prices  are 
stable,  economic  adjustment  has  to  occur  through  the  real  economy  channel.  It  may 
therefore be difficult to achieve these two goals at the same time.  
The  chart  shows  that  the  euro  area  scores  relatively  well  on  both  dimensions.  This  is 
puzzling,  given  that  the  euro  area  has  quite  rigid  product  and  labour  markets,  at  least 
compared with the United States. The higher degree of price and wage rigidity in the euro 
area would suggest that output volatility should be significantly larger in the euro area than in 
the more flexible US economy.  
This would be particularly true during a period when the economy is subject to supply-side 
shocks,  which  are  simultaneously  exerting  inflationary  and  recessionary  influences.  Yet 
surprisingly, and despite the negative supply-side shocks that had been hitting the euro area 
economy  over  the  years  up  to  2007,  the  data  suggested  that  both  inflation  volatility  and 
output volatility in the euro area were lower than elsewhere. 
Output volatility in the euro area is much higher when the crisis is included in the sample. 
But,  remarkably,  the  euro  area  still  scores  well  on  both  dimensions  compared  with  other 
advanced countries. 
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
How can we explain this puzzle? How can nominal rigidities plus supply-side pressures not 
produce bad or worse macroeconomic outcomes?  
I  believe  that  the  strong  anchoring  of  inflation  expectations  in  the  euro  area  is  the  key  to 
understanding this good economic performance of the euro area. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  5
 
Inflation  expectations  have  remained  solidly  anchored  in  line  with  our  definition  of  price 
stability throughout the crisis. In particular, there was no materialisation of a deflation risk. 
This has enormously facilitated our task, especially during the period of economic freefall in 
the winter of 2008/09. 
Other indicators corroborate the finding that at the aggregate level the real economy of the 
euro  has  proved  relatively  dynamic  in  comparison  with  the  US:  real  output  per  capita  has 
grown at a similar pace in the euro area as in the United States. 
 6 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
Employment growth in the euro area has also been strong over the past 12 years. More than 
14 million jobs have been created since the introduction of the euro, compared with 8 million 
in the United States. 
This  is  not  to  suggest  that  there  is  time  for  complacency.  Unemployment  at  9.9%  of  the 
labour force remains much too high, and structural reforms are of the essence to make the 
euro area economy much more flexible and to elevate its growth potential. 
Finally, public finances in the euro area as a whole are relatively sound. As elsewhere, the 
financial  crisis  has  left  its  mark  on  government  deficit  and  debt  in  the  euro  area.  Yet,  the 
fiscal deficit in the euro area on aggregate for this year is estimated at less than one half of 
that in the United States and Japan. 
One may argue, however that this bird’s eye view is misleading. One common belief is that 
the US economy is more homogeneous than the economy of the euro area. In other words, 
aggregate economic data may hide very significant differences in the variance in economic 
performance across regions within a monetary union.  
Economic diversity in the euro area and the United States 
Looking more closely at the regional dispersion across US regions and euro area economies 
show  that,  contrary  to  what  is  generally  perceived,  the  dispersion  of  many  of  the  key 
indicators is similar. 
Let  us  take  a  look  at  the  inflation  indicator.  The  dispersion  of  HICP  inflation  in  euro  area 
countries  remained  broadly  stable  since  the  late  1990s,  at  a  level  similar  to  the  14  US 
Metropolitan  Statistical  Areas.  During  the  crisis  we  saw  a  temporary  increase  in  inflation 
dispersion in the euro area. As you can see, this has been reversed over the past 12 months. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  7
The picture is similar for the dispersion of GDP growth. Before the crisis the dispersion of 
growth rates was around 2%, in both the euro area and the United States. Dispersion rose 
somewhat during the crisis in both currency areas but remained broadly in line with pre-crisis 
patterns overall.1 
  
Let us go one step further and investigate the sources of this growth dispersion in the US 
and  euro  area  economies.  This  reveals  parallels  even  in  the  root  causes  of  dispersion  in 
economic performance. Both currency areas comprise regions that experienced a significant 
boom  and  bust  cycle  over  the  past  decade.  Both  also  contain  regions  that  are  facing 
significant structural challenges of a more long-term nature. 
Nevada,  Arizona,  Florida  and  California  in  the  United  States,  for  example,  experienced 
increases in house prices that outpaced the national average by a wide margin. Steep house 
price increases and the related strong performance of real estate, construction and financial 
services probably contributed to above average growth in these states.  
Some  other  US  states,  particularly  the  former  manufacturing  powerhouses  in  the  “Great 
Lakes” region, saw a long episode of below average growth at the same time. Below average 
performance of the region – and particularly weaker growth rates in the states of Michigan 
and  Ohio  –  are  related  to  strong  reliance  on  manufacturing.  Structural  shifts  in  the  US 
economy towards services have gradually reduced the value added of manufacturing relative 
to GDP, with implications for areas with a high concentration of companies in manufacturing 
industries other than information and communications technology. 
                                                 
1  The  2010  data  for  US  regions  are  provisional  estimates  published  by  the  Bureau  of  Economic  Analysis  on 
7 June 2011. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The sharp fall in house prices in Florida and the south-western US states turned boom into 
bust.  These  states  experienced  the  harshest  recession  among  the  US  states.  But  GDP 
growth  in  the  “Great  Lakes”  region,  which  was  below  average  before  the  crisis,  also 
remained below average during the crisis. 
Some  euro  area  countries  experienced  asymmetric  boom-and-bust  cycles  similar  to  those 
just  described  in  the  United  States.  Several  euro  area  countries  had  higher  than  average 
growth  in  the  pre-crisis  years,  while  a  few  have  experienced  growth  below  the  euro  area 
average for the past decade due to structural issues that could have been tackled with more 
determination.  
The effect of the crisis on the different euro area economies follows a similar pattern to those 
of comparable US states. The countries in the euro area that have been hit hardest are those 
in which either large asset-bubble driven imbalances unwound or structural problems were 
left  unaddressed  before  the  crisis.  More  specifically,  Ireland  and  Greece,  in  particular, 
remained in recession in 2010.  
Those countries that have yet to implement more far reaching structural reforms also have 
relatively low growth prospects after the crisis. 
Just a few years ago, Germany was – entirely wrongly – labelled the “sick man of Europe”. 
Yet  Germany  is  now  an  example  of  how  big  the  dividends  of  reform  can  be  if  structural 
adjustment is made a strategic priority and implemented with sufficient patience. 
The  relatively  low  growth  rates  in  some  countries  are  linked  to  a  deterioration  of 
competitiveness, driven, for example, by persistent above average unit labour costs.  
Ahead of EMU, unit labour costs converged in the euro area. What is more – disregarding 
the  most  recent  countries  to  join  the  euro  area  –  dispersion  both  ahead  of  the  crisis  and 
during the crisis was very similar in the euro area and the United States.  
At the same time, it is worth noting that both currency areas include regions with persistently 
above  or  below  average  growth  of  unit  labour  costs.  Again  leaving  aside  the  most  recent 
countries to join the euro area, here, Greece, Portugal and Ireland, in particular, have lost 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
competitiveness vis-à-vis their main trading partners in the euro area. Germany, in contrast, 
has been able to lower relative unit labour costs over the same period.  
  
Similar persistent losses and gains in competitiveness are also observed in the United States. 
Some  states  have  experienced  large  or  persistent  increases  in  unit  labour  costs,  currently 
exceeding the national average by as much as 20%. Other states, on the other hand, have 
been gaining competitiveness vis-à-vis the national average over the past decade. 
 10 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
In summary, these results suggest that those who are questioning the viability of the euro 
area  as  a  single  currency  area  on  the  grounds  of  economic  heterogeneity  are  misguided. 
Over the past 12 years, this has been broadly similar in the euro area and the United States.  
This should, however, be no reason for any complacency in the euro area.  
As  the  crisis  has  taught  us,  persistent  losses  in  competitiveness  on  the  part  of  individual 
members in a currency union lead to a build-up of external and internal imbalances. When 
these unravel, the cost for the affected economies can be very large. They can also have 
spillover effects on other members of the currency union. 
In any union, an economic governance framework is needed to prevent developments in an 
individual member state endangering the smooth functioning of the union. But for EMU, the 
economic  governance  framework  devised  in  the  1990s  has  not  been  implemented  and,  in 
any  case,  has  proved  too  weak  during  the  crisis.  The crisis  has  exposed  a  clear need  for 
strong reform. As I speak today the reform debate is still in progress, and in the last part of 
my lecture, I would like to talk briefly about the present reform of economic governance in the 
euro area. 
to  be 
insufficiently  binding  while 
Economic governance in the euro area 
The existing economic governance framework has been incorrectly implemented and, more 
importantly,  has  proved 
lacking  appropriate 
comprehensiveness.  
Today’s  reform  of  the  governance  framework  has  to  take  the  current  constitutional 
framework. We have to accept this situation as a given, at least for the foreseeable future, 
even  if  I  am  convinced  that  we  have  already  to  reflect  upon  further  steps  for  economic 
governance in the longer term. Today, we have to empower the institutional arrangements 
that are already in place to the point at which they can really and durably inspire confidence.  
The requirements for a very significant reinforcement of the fiscal surveillance of the Stability 
and  Growth  Pact  and  for  the  creation  of  a  new  surveillance  of  competitive  indicators  and 
macroeconomic policy have been discussed widely and in much detail.  
As you may know, the ECB takes the strong view that there is the need for more speed and 
automaticity in the sanctioning mechanism, particularly in the Stability and Growth Pact, but 
also  in  the  broader  macroeconomic  policy  surveillance  framework.  The  experience  of  the 
past months has vividly demonstrated the importance of a timely correction of internal and 
external imbalances. 
Beyond faster and more automatic sanctions, the enforcement tools also need to be more 
effective. The macroeconomic surveillance framework, in particular, needs to provide clear 
incentives  by  imposing  financial  sanctions  at  an  early  stage.  This  also  means  that  there 
should be no room for discretion in the implementation of the surveillance framework.  
At the same time, requirements for fiscal and other macroeconomic policies should be more 
ambitious. To ensure that none of the euro area countries are left behind, they have to bring 
national policies in line with membership of a currency union. 
The implementation of sound fiscal and macroeconomic policies is best ensured if these are 
solidly  anchored  at  the  national  level.  An  effective  way  of  achieving  this  is  to  implement 
strong national budgetary frameworks in the euro area Member States.  
Another important area of reform, at the global level, is the reform of financial governance. 
I have to say that on financial reform we have made relatively rapid progress at the global 
and  European  levels.  As  you  know,  we  have  drawn  up  a  set  of  more  stringent  banking 
regulations, more ambitious capital requirements to absorb losses, improving coverage and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
reducing the risk of excessive borrowing. The countercyclical capital buffers are designed to 
reduce pro-cyclicality.  
 At  the  same  time,  the  supervision  of  financial  institutions,  financial  markets  and  market 
infrastructure has been tightened, and the organisational structure of financial oversight has 
been overhauled. The European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB),  which I chair together with 
Mervyn King, and the European Supervisory Authorities (ESAs) – the three new authorities 
created for the European banking sector, insurance and occupational pensions, and capital 
markets – have taken up their work at the beginning of this year. The ESRB is in the process 
of  developing  the  tools  necessary  to  warn  and,  if  appropriate,  make  recommendations  as 
regards  systemic  risk.  And  the  ESAs  will  allow  closer  monitoring  of  the  interrelationships 
within the EU’s financial system. 
But much remains to be done. Most importantly, we need to ensure the full implementation of 
the envisioned reforms. In addition, key areas where work is still in progress – not only at the 
European, but also at global level – include: the treatment of systemically important financial 
institutions;  the  mechanism  of  bank  crisis  management  and  resolution;  oversight  of  the 
shadow  banking  system;  and  –  very  importantly  –  the  further  regulation  and  oversight  of 
financial markets and their functioning.  
 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
Conclusion  
Let me conclude. Europe’s European Union on the one hand and European Economic and 
Monetary  Union  on  the  other  hand  have  always  had  their critics.  For example,  as  regards 
EMU,  some  have  argued  that  a  single  currency  was  inappropriate  for  a  continent  that  is 
economically more heterogeneous than the United States. And some have claimed that the 
ECB would not be able to set appropriate interest rates for the euro area to maintain price 
stability and contribute a positive economic outlook. 
The evidence I have presented here proves these sceptical views not confirmed. The euro 
area as a whole has witnessed an unprecedented degree of price stability since its inception 
more  than  12  years  ago,  including  during  the  crisis.  This  achievement  has  been 
accompanied by economic performance in terms of growth per capita and job creation that 
compares positively with other large advanced economies.  
It  is  also  remarkable  that  there  is  convincing  evidence  that  the  euro  area  and  the  United 
States have similar features in terms of diversity of the economies that are part of these vast 
continents: member countries on this side of the Atlantic and the States on the other side. 
This  is  documented,  in  particular,  as  regards  asymmetric  inflation,  asymmetric  growth 
developments  and  even  in  terms  of  somewhat  persistent  asymmetric  gains  and  losses  of 
competitiveness.  
As I have said, none of this should make us complacent. The sovereign debt crises in three 
smaller euro area countries underline the urgency of a far-reaching overhaul of the fiscal and 
macroeconomic  surveillance  institutions  in  Europe.  Here  the  governments  of  the  Member 
States are called on to create the institutions that are commensurate with full economic and 
monetary union. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
