Vítor Constâncio: Strengthening European economic governance – 
surveillance of fiscal and macroeconomic imbalances 
Speech  by  Mr  Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
Brussels Economic Forum, Brussels, 18 May 2011. 
 Thank  you  very  much  for  the  invitation  to  participate  in  this  panel  today.  The  session  is 
intended to focus on “surveillance of fiscal and macroeconomic imbalances”, which arguably 
is the most important strand of the economic governance package. But one should consider 
that this package – beyond the 6 legislative acts – also contains three other strands: the Euro 
Plus  Pact,  the  creation  of  the  European  Stability  Mechanism  and  the  setting-up  of  the 
European  System  of  Financial  Supervision.  A  fundamental  strengthening  of  economic 
governance  in  the  euro  area  requires  simultaneous  progress  in  all  three  areas.  The  first 
strand is necessary to prevent and correct imbalances; the second to ensure the conditions 
for future growth and competitiveness; the third to provide a last resort backstop if crises still 
occur, the fourth to guarantee financial stability, in particular in the banking sector.  
That said, prevention and correction of fiscal and macroeconomic imbalances must be given 
priority as it is the pre-condition for sustainable economic growth and financial stability. As 
the ECB has stressed on a number of occasions, here a “quantum leap” forward is needed in 
strengthening  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  and  creating  an  effective  new  framework  for 
surveillance of macroeconomic imbalances.  
Important negotiations are ongoing between the Commission, the Council and the European 
Parliament to reach agreement on the legislative package of economic governance reforms. 
For  this  agreement  to  reach  the  necessary  “quantum  leap”,  the  following  elements  are 
essential.  
First,  greater  automaticity  is  needed  in  all  surveillance  procedures,  including  the  new 
macroeconomic  surveillance  framework.  The  Council  should  have  less  room  for  halting  or 
suspending procedures against Member States. Strict deadlines to avoid lengthy procedures 
and the deletion of escape clauses would also contribute to automaticity. This is critical to 
ensure the credibility of the new framework and address spillovers in a timely manner. 
Second,  enforcement  tools  need  to  be  more  effective.  In  addition  to  financial  sanctions, 
political  and  reputational  measures  would  help  foster  early  compliance,  as  would  the 
application  of  earlier  and  more  gradual  financial  sanctions  within  the  macroeconomic 
surveillance framework. Discretion to reduce or suspend financial sanctions is undesirable as 
it strongly reduces effectiveness and sets the wrong incentives.  
Third, more ambitious policy requirements would better match the current reality of the euro 
area. It makes sense for macroeconomic surveillance to have a clear focus on the euro area 
countries with large current account deficits, significant losses of competitiveness and high 
levels of public and private debt. As regards fiscal surveillance, ambitious benchmarks are 
needed when establishing an excessive deficit and in setting the adjustment path towards a 
country’s  medium-term  budgetary  objective.  Such  benchmarks  need  to  be  even  more 
ambitious if a country’s debt exceeds the reference value of 60% of GDP or there are fiscal 
sustainability risks. 
Finally, the gap between the EU and national level must be closed. New procedures will not 
be  sufficient  if  they  are  not  solidly  anchored  at  national  level.  Binding  commitments  by 
Member  States  to  swiftly  implement  strong  national  budgetary  frameworks  are  essential. 
Major  improvements  are  needed  regarding  the  quality  and  independence  of  fiscal  and 
economic  analysis  and  the  production  of  fiscal  statistics.  All  these  aspects  should  be 
contemplated as mandatory features in the foreseen Directive on national fiscal frameworks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
In  the  ECB’s  view,  the  proposals  meanwhile  agreed  do  not  go  far  enough.  Regarding  the 
final result, we are encouraged by the fact that the European Parliament has shown some 
ambition  in  its  approach,  particularly  as  regards  greater  automaticity  and  the  broader  and 
timelier  use  of  sanctions.  The  room  for  halting  or  suspending  procedures  against  those 
Member States breaking the rules must be reduced. Some other points of the Parliament’s 
proposals also deserve a positive mention like the strengthening of the Commission’s role in 
the procedures and an earlier and more gradual application of financial sanctions within the 
macroeconomic surveillance framework. It is also positive the support in the same framework 
for  a  clear  distinction  between  Member  States  belonging  or  not  to  the  euro  area.  The 
requirements of avoiding negative imbalances must be more demanding for members of the 
monetary union. This type of distinction, making full use of the Treaty’s new Article 136, has 
to  be  applied  in  different  domains,  drawing  the  appropriate  lessons  of  the  crisis  for  the 
functioning of the monetary union. 
We hope that the ongoing negotiations over the legislative package will permit the texts to be 
significantly  improved  along  these  lines.  The  ECB  is  encouraged  that  the  amendments 
proposed by the European Parliament go in the direction of the significant strengthening of 
economic governance that we have called for. 
However,  there  are  some  important  areas  in  which  the  texts  should  not  be  weakened.  In 
particular,  softening  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  by  introducing  further  exceptions  or 
treating in a special way specific expenditure items, such as public investment, would create 
further room for unwarranted discretionary decisions. It is also of crucial importance that the 
economic  governance  reform  is  fully  implemented  as  soon  as  possible  and  without  any 
transition period.  
Economic governance is not only about preventing crisis, but also about creating conditions 
for  economic  growth.  Here  the  second  strand  of  the  economic  governance  package  –  the 
Euro Plus Pact – is important to give renewed impetus to structural reforms and support the 
ambitious targets of the Europe 2020 Strategy. On current projections, economic growth in 
both the EU and euro area is expected to be weak over the next decade, in a large part due 
to disappointing productivity growth. Faced with ongoing debt sustainability challenges and 
future age-related expenditures, Europe needs to do more to reverse this trend. Elevating the 
growth potential of the euro area through structural reforms is therefore essential. 
Reinforcing  economic  governance  and  elevating  economic  growth  cannot  exclude  the 
possibility  of  crises.  We  would  all  agree  that,  even  with  the  best  fire-proof  materials  and 
state-of-the-art alarms, it is still prudent to employ a fire service. Thus the third part of the 
package – the creation of the ESM – is appropriate. However, it should be underscored that 
the ESM is for the last resort. Its purpose is to provide temporary bridge funding to solvent 
but temporarily illiquid countries in financial difficulties, with the aim to create breathing space 
to  implement  a  deep  adjustment  programme  to  correct  imbalances  and  regain  market 
access. Any financing under the ESM needs to be subject to very strong policy conditionality 
and, in general, should be designed such as to avoid moral hazard. 
If implemented in a comprehensive and ambitious manner, the overall governance package 
will ensure competitiveness in the euro area, strengthen its growth potential and contribute to 
prevent  future  crises.  However,  within  this  package  the  first  priority  is  prevention  and 
correction of fiscal and macroeconomic imbalances, as this provides the pre-conditions for 
sustainable growth and financial stability in the euro area as a whole. The ECB hopes that 
policymakers seize this opportunity to place the euro area and its citizens on a prosperous 
and stable path. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
