Thomas Jordan: Does the Swiss National Bank need equity? 
Summary of a speech by Mr Thomas Jordan, Vice-Chairman of the Governing Board of the 
Swiss  National  Bank, 
the  Statistisch-Volkswirtschaftliche  Gesellschaft,  Basel, 
28 September 2011. 
to 
 The complete speech can be found in German on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch). 
The Swiss National Bank (SNB) had to report heavy losses for 2010 and the first half of 2011 
due to the strength of the Swiss franc – or, more precisely, due to valuation changes on its 
foreign  currency  reserves.  Consequently,  it  suffered  a  substantial  reduction  in  its  equity. 
Understandably in such a situation, concerns began to be voiced in public. Questions often 
posed in this context include: Might the SNB lose its capacity to act as a result of a negative 
equity  level?  And,  if  its  equity  were  negative,  would  the  SNB  have  to  be  recapitalised,  or 
might it even have to go into administration? The short answer to these questions is “No”, 
because the SNB cannot be compared with commercial banks or other private enterprises. 
For  one  thing,  a  central  bank  cannot  become  illiquid.  This  means  that  a  central  bank’s 
capacity  to  act  is  not  constrained  if  its  equity  turns  negative.  Moreover,  unlike  other 
enterprises, it is not forced to implement recovery measures or go into administration. For 
another,  central  banks  enjoy  a  funding  advantage  over  private  companies,  owing  to  their 
banknote-issuing  privilege.  Moreover,  they  generate  surplus  income  over  the  long  term. 
Thus, over time, a central bank like the SNB can usually rebuild its equity level all on its own 
after a loss. Nevertheless, even for a central bank, a long period of negative equity is not 
without its problems, as it can undermine the bank’s credibility and its independence in the 
longer term. For these reasons, it is important for the SNB to maintain a sufficient level of 
equity. To ensure that the SNB can carry out its monetary policy mandate without restriction, 
also in the long term, in the interests of the country as a whole it is essential that its capital 
base  be  adequately  rebuilt.  This  means  that  the  necessary  profits  must  be  earned,  and 
retained. In the long run, the entire economy will benefit.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
