Ewart S Williams: Building individual and organisational capacity 
Feature  address  by  Mr  Ewart  S  Williams,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and 
Tobago,  at  the  Co-operative  Credit  Union  League,  Launch  of  Events  Calendar  2011, 
Chaguanas, 26 January 2011. 
 I wish to thank the Co-operative Credit Union League for the invitation and extend a Happy 
New Year to you and your organisations. It has been some time since I have met with the 
credit union movement, so I welcome this opportunity. 
You  have  suggested  that  I  address  the  topic  “Building  Individual  and  Organisational 
Capacity”. I am not sure that I could tell you much about this, since your credit unions, in 
order  to  survive  in  this  increasingly  competitive  environment,  have  had  to  expend 
considerable  efforts  in  capacity  building.  I,  however,  welcome  the  opportunity  to  offer  my 
variation on this theme since, in my view, the outlook both for the economy and for your 
sector will require you to intensify and, indeed, broaden your capacity building efforts, 
if  you  are  to  maximize  your  contribution  to  your  membership  and  adhere  to  the  new 
regulatory paradigm that is on the way.  
Permit me to put my views against the background of the following recent developments: 
As  you  know,  the  decline  in  economic  activity  in  2009  was  followed  by  another  year  of 
economic  stagnation  in  2010.  The  economic  downturn  was  triggered  by  the  sharp 
contraction  of  activity 
in  non-energy  sector  (most  notably  construction)  and  was 
accompanied  by  a  significant  increase  in  unemployment.  The  official  data  show  that 
unemployment rose from a low of 3.9 per cent in the last quarter of 2008 to 6.7 per cent in 
the first quarter of 2010. I guess, with your close day-to-day involvement in the community, 
you  are  in  a  better  position  to  appreciate  the  real  level  of  employment  and  under-
employment in the country. 
The  more  challenging  economic  environment  has  led  to  a  sharp  rise  in  non-performing 
loans on the commercial banks’ balance sheets – from 1 per cent to 5 per cent. The non-
banks,  that  cater  to  a  somewhat  different  clientele  have  recorded  an  even  more  sizable 
increase in loan delinquency – from around 4–5 per cent to almost 12 per cent of total loans. 
Fortunately, the banking system – both the banks and non-banks, have the resources to 
adequately provide for these bad loans. 
We, in the Central Bank, do not have up-to-date comprehensive data for the credit union 
sector.  However,  the  information  we  have  been  able  to  piece  together,  suggest,  that  the 
current economic situation is also taking its toll on credit unions as more members 
face lay-offs and find it more difficult to pay their loans on time.  
In fact, sample data for credit unions (and I should clarify that it is a relatively small sample) 
suggest that delinquency ratios went up significantly in 2010. What’s more, it appears 
that  many  credit  unions  have  not  been  vigorously  addressing  delinquency,  for 
example, through adequate provisions or by writing off bad debts.  
I am also advised that some credit unions (and not only the small credit unions) may still not 
have recognized the importance of “provisions” or know how to provision. In some cases, it 
is  not  clear  whether  the  boards  of  the  credit  unions  are  fully  aware  of  the  extent  of  the 
problem and thus, in fact, what may be happening is that dividend payouts are coming out 
of reserves. If that is so, this is certainly not good financial management. 
The other “contextual” development that I would like to refer to has to do with the credit 
unions’  exposure  in  the  unfolding  CLICO  situation.  The  information  which  is  in  the  public 
domain indicates that 65 credit unions had investments amounting to close to $700 million in 
CLICO. That, in itself, is not my issue. What is the issue? It is that for some credit unions, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
the impairment of these investments would threaten their very viability. This suggests that, 
the  management  of  these  credit  unions  may  not  have  properly  assessed  credit  and 
investment risks and, through insufficient portfolio diversification, almost compromised 
the viability of their organizations. Fortunately, it appears that satisfactory arrangements 
have been made to contain any systemic damage to the credit union sector. 
These  two  situations  point  to  chronic  challenges  being  faced  by  the  credit  union 
sector. You add to these the medium term outlook, in which economic recovery is expected 
to  depend  heavily  on  small  business  development,  and  you  mix  in  the  enhanced 
requirements of the new regulatory framework that is being proposed, and the prescription 
is  for  more  and  more  diversified  capacity  enhancement,  at  both  the  individual  and 
organizational level. 
Permit me to expand on this theme. 
As you know better than I, what makes the credit union movement different from the banking 
sector  is  your  founding  principle  –  not  for  profit,  not  for  charity  but  for  service.  The 
philosophy  of  “people  helping  people”  is  the  cornerstone  of  your  movement.  This 
philosophy imposes on each credit union and on the movement, the obligation to educate 
their members. Put another way, “financial education or financial literacy” must be at the top 
of your agenda. 
As the CLICO crisis underscores, the rapid pace of financial innovation requires that financial 
institutions  contribute  to  providing  more  information  and  more  financial  education  to  the 
consumer  public.  Credit  union  members  consume  other  financial  services  –  they  have 
variable  rate  mortgages  with  commercial  banks,  they  have  mutual  funds,  they  have  bank 
loans, some participate in the stock market and they need to have the facts in order to 
make informed decisions and to understand their exposure. And because of the special 
relationship  of  trust  between  the  credit  union  and  its  members,  you  are  in  a  better 
position than most other people to provide that education. 
I know some credit unions (and I believe, the League) occasionally put on financial education 
sessions  but  this  must  become  an  integral,  on-going  component  of  your  operations. 
Perhaps it could be seen as a “community” service, available to members and non-members 
alike, in which case the entire country will benefit from your efforts. 
I  would  like  to  stress  that  the  Central  Bank  stands  ready  to  collaborate  with  the  credit 
union movement or with individual credit unions to further the cause of financial education in 
Trinidad  and  Tobago.  We  would  particularly  welcome  collaborating  in  “train  the  trainer” 
sessions which offer opportunities for reaching a wider membership. 
It is clear that going forward our economy will need to depend more on the non-energy 
sector  and  on  job-creation  in  the  small  and  micro-enterprise  sector.  The  credit  union 
movement  has  stood  out  as  a  major  source  of  financing  for  this  sector  and  could  be 
expected to face even increasing demand over the next few years.  
To  cater  to  this  increasing  demand,  while  protecting  the  resources  of  your  shareholders, 
credit  unions  will  be  well-served  by  increasing  their  capacity  to  provide  business 
services  to  the  clients,  to  accompany  the  provision  of  finance.  The  combination  of 
finance and business advice will redound to the benefit of your micro-enterprise borrowers 
and contribute to reducing loan delinquency. 
Again, here is an area in which you could collaborate with other agencies – this time with 
NEDCO, BDC and other SME development institutions. I am not sure how much of this is 
being done at present. 
Then there is the need for building organizational capacity to prepare for the new regulatory 
paradigm that is expected to be in place later this year. 
Permit me to digress a bit about this new regulatory framework – particularly to clarify what it 
is and what it is not intended to do. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Formal regulation by the Central Bank is not designed to interfere with or undermine the co-
operative  (democratic)  character  of  the  credit  union  sector.  We  fully  recognize  that  this  is 
what  makes  the  sector unique  and so  important  to  our  economic  and  social  development. 
The Bank has no intention of stymieing the growth of the sector or closing down credit unions 
that  do  not  immediately  meet  the  prudential  requirements.  We  do  intend  to  work  with  the 
sector to ensure that credit unions are able to operate at standards that are the appropriate 
standards.  We  have  also  ensured  that  credit  unions  have  a  reasonable  amount  of  time 
(maximum five years) to make the transitions necessary to comply with the new legislation. 
What is the regulation intended to do? 
In a practical sense, the new credit union regulation will formalize many of the practices that 
the  many  credit  unions  already  implement  –  like  managing  their  financial  performance  by 
adhering to the PEARLS ratios. The proposed regulation will now formalize the requirements 
to  have  adequate  liquidity  and  capital  buffers,  to  limit  borrowing  by  credit  unions  and  to 
control related-party lending and investments. 
The legislation will also emphasize good governance, which is critical for the protection of 
shareholders and for effective financial management. For example, Board members will be 
required  to  meet  certain  fit  and  proper  criteria  and  an  appropriate  level  of  financial 
competence,  as  determined  by  the  credit  union,  not  by  the  Central  Bank.  In  turn,  the 
Board will need to ensure that the credit union has the systems in place, including, as a 
minimum, an audit and a credit committee, to ensure transparency and accountability. 
The  legislation  will  provide  for  strict  reporting  requirements  and  audited  financial 
statements to be submitted three months after the close of the financial year. 
I  should  also  note  that  the  new  regulatory  structure  envisages  the  introduction  of  a 
mandatory insurance fund for the protection of members’ deposits and shares. As in the 
case  of  the  commercial  banks,  the  protection  will  have  a  certain  threshold,  which  will  be 
determined  in  collaboration  with  the  credit  union  movement.  It  is  envisaged  that  the 
mandate of the Deposit Insurance Fund will be expanded to cover credit unions. 
Credit unions will need to build the necessary capacity to operate effectively in line with the 
new regulatory requirements. I would like to identify four areas:  
Firstly, members will need to understand the provisions of the draft new legislation. 
Secondly, credit union members will need to insist that their credit unions operate according 
to the rules and put in place an adequate governance structure.  
Third,  Board  members  or  those  aspiring  to  be  Board  members  may  want  to  strengthen 
their understanding of the laws and philosophy governing credit unions, their ability to 
read and interpret financial statements and to acquire some knowledge of risk management; 
and 
Four, the recent passage of the Anti-Money Laundering legislation also applies to credit 
unions. As such, credit unions are expected to put measures in place to ensure compliance 
with the AML/CFT. 
I hope these few ideas help you to plan your activities. I also hope we could continue to work 
together  to  bring  the  Credit  Union  Legislation  and  the  regulatory  framework  into  operation 
this year. As you know, we are awaiting Government’s approval of the policy framework after 
which we would proceed rapidly to the preparation of the Draft Bill. Work is proceeding, in 
parallel, on the amendment to the present Co-operative Societies Act. 
It  is  my  firm  conviction  that  the  new  legislation  is  in  the  best  interest  of  the  credit  union 
movement and ultimately will strengthen the contribution that the sector could make to the 
economy. 
I end by reiterating my earlier statement that the Central Bank strongly supports the Credit 
Union  Movement  which has made a significant contribution to the economy over the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
past decade and which I am sure will continue to play a major part in our attainment of long 
term sustainable growth and improvement for our entire population. 
I wish the League and its membership, the best for 2011. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
