Duvvuri Subbarao: US recession anxiety and the eurozone sovereign 
debt crisis 
Intervention  by  Dr  Duvvuri  Subbarao,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
International Monetary Fund Meeting, Washington DC, 23 September 2011. 
 1. 
The messages that we heard are sharp, specific and candid. If I were asked to pick 
the headline message of the presentation, it is that we are rapidly running out of time, and 
may therefore be running out of solutions. 
2.  
The  two  big  flashpoints  are:  renewed  anxiety  in  the  US  about  recession,  and  the 
deepening of the sovereign debt crisis in the Euro area. Each is by itself a big risk, but the 
bigger  risk  is  that  both  could  materialize  simultaneously,  and  interact  with  each  other  with 
adverse feedback loops manifested through trade, finance and confidence channels. 
Political gridlock 
3.  
impediment to an effective resolution common to both flashpoints appears to be political. 
 
The  problems  are  well  known,  and  the  solutions  are  on  the  table.  The  main 
In the US, the central issue is managing the tension between fiscal stimulus in the 
immediate term, and credible fiscal consolidation over the medium to long term. 
In the Euro area, there is a shared monetary framework, but without a shared fiscal 
framework.  What  is  standing  in  the  way  of  a  credible  and  confidence  inspiring 
resolution of the fiscal-financial imbroglio are political compulsions. 
 Decoupling 
4.  
Let me look at the global situation from the perspective of the EMEs. Before 2008, it 
was intellectually fashionable to talk of “decoupling” – that EMDCs will continue to be resilient 
even if there is a downturn in advanced economies, because of improved macroeconomic 
policies,  robust  foreign  exchange  reserves  and  resilient  financial  flows.  In  an  age  of 
globalization,  the  decoupling  theory  was  never  persuasive.  The  2008  crisis  dented  its 
credibility and the 2011 crisis has completely demolished it.  
Channel of contagion to EMEs 
5.  
stability and financial stability are jeopardized by the global crisis through several channels. 
 
EMEs  have  been  affected  by  both  crises.  Their  macroeconomic  stability,  price 
First,  there  is  the  trade  channel.  With  growth  stalled  in  the  advanced  economies, 
external demand is slowing and affecting the exports of EMEs. 
The  second  channel  of  transmission  is  capital  flows.  The  crisis  is  permeating  to 
EMEs  through  risk  aversion  and  deleveraging  to  produce  volatility  in  capital  flows 
and  in  financial  markets.  This  is  impacting  financing  conditions,  with  feedback  to 
economic activity. 
The third channel through which shocks are being transmitted is commodity prices. 
Spikes  of  volatility  in  the  already  elevated  levels  of  commodity  prices  are  stoking 
inflationary  pressures  in  some  of  the  EMEs  and  complicating  macroeconomic 
management in the face of slowing growth. Among the drivers of commodity prices 
is  accommodative  monetary  policy  in  advanced  economies.  Abundant  liquidity  is 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  adding pressures to commodity prices. The negative outlook on growth should have 
driven down prices, but that has not been evident so far to any significant extent. 
Fourth,  macro-financial  loops  could  come  into  play  as  another  channel  of 
transmission of shocks. Rising credit risks due to deterioration in asset quality could 
impair the capital of banks or even render it insufficient. This could trigger a cascade 
of deleveraging with attendant real economy consequences. 
By far, the most important channel of transmission is the confidence channel which 
could hurt investment and growth prospects in EMEs – when confidence is hit, even 
strong fundamentals do not matter. 
6.  
The  probability  that  all  these  channels  become  active  and  feed  on  each  other  is 
quite  high.  The  impact  on  an  EME  depends  on  its  objective  conditions  and  on  which 
channels  become  most  active  in  its  case.  Thus,  the  crisis  could  affect  different  EMEs 
differently.  But  what  is  common  across  EMEs  is  that  their  growth  momentum  will  be 
interrupted if the current global problems are not resolved quickly. 
Market signals 
7.  
In  trying  to  reach  a  solution,  it  is  important  to  recognize  what  the  markets  are 
signaling, even though, admittedly the basis of some of these market engendered fears may 
not be objective. Let me illustrate with a metaphor from physics. It is well known that Einstein 
could not reconcile to the probabilistic nature of quantum mechanics all through his life. He 
famously said: “God does not play dice.” Less well known perhaps is the retort of his friend 
and  mentor  Niels  Bohr  who  said:  “Albert,  stop  telling  God  what  he  can  or  cannot  do.” 
Similarly,  it  is  possibly  the  case  that  all  market  signals  are  not  objective.  But  as  policy 
makers,  we  cannot  presume  to  tell  the  market  how  to  behave.  We  have  to  take  market 
signals as given. The policy decisions that we take will be more effective if they are seen to 
be endorsed by markets. 
2008 and 2011 
8.  
To  understand  the  situation  today,  let  us  throw  back  to  the  global  crisis  of  2008. 
Then too, we faced similar extreme siege conditions of the global financial system, and the 
challenge  of  responding  immediately  and  decisively  to  the  crisis  within  the  boundaries  of 
democratic processes. We  managed  that  challenge.  The G-20’s  leadership  and  the  all-out 
efforts mounted by the IMF and other multilateral institutions to do what it takes to pull back 
the  global  economy  from  the  brink  of  collapse  and  set  it  on  a  path  of  recovery  were 
applauded across the world. 
9.  
i. 
There are important differences between the 2008 crisis and today’s situation. 
In 2008, when the world got into a crisis, there was a lot of policy force. In the years 
before  the  crisis,  the  world  enjoyed  the  so  called  “Great  Moderation”  with  steady 
growth in advanced economies and accelerated growth in the emerging economies, 
and low inflation all around. So we could attack the crisis with the full fire power of 
monetary  and  fiscal  stimulus.  Sadly,  the  policy  space  for  stimulus  is  much  less 
today.  
In  2008,  the  world  responded  to  the  crisis  in  coordination.  Sure  there  were 
differences,  but  these  differences  were  resolved,  and  governments  and  central 
banks acted firmly, decisively and where required creatively. A similar perception of 
coordination is lacking today. 
In  2008,  both  advanced  economies  and  EMDCs  were  at  the  same  phase  of  the 
business cycle. Today, they are at different phases of the business cycle. 
ii. 
iii. 
2 
 iv. 
In 2008, the crisis originated in the financial sector and transmitted to the real sector, 
but the rescue was by the public sector. In 2011, it is the other way round. The crisis 
is  originating  in  the  public sector and  hitting  the  financial  sector,  and  undermining 
the confidence of the private sector.  
10. 
Let me now conclude. There is a great deal of anxiety around the world about the 
outcome of this weekend’s Fund-Bank annual meetings and the G-20 meetings. There are 
strong expectations that we will converge on a plan of action that will reverse the crisis of 
confidence.  We  once  again  have  to  show  the  resolve  that  we  did  in  2008  to  meet  those 
expectations.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
