Thomas Jordan: The challenges of the global economic crisis – can 
Switzerland master them? 
Summary of a speech by Mr Thomas Jordan, Vice-Chairman of the Governing Board of the 
Swiss  National  Bank,  on  the  occasion  of  a  panel  discussion  at  the  Central  Bank  of  the 
Republic of Austria, Vienna, 1 February 2011. 
The complete speech can be found in German on the Swiss National Bank’s website. 
 Many  countries  are  facing  major  economic  challenges  as  a  result  of  the  financial  and 
economic crisis. Which of these are of particular importance for Switzerland? And how can 
we  tackle  them?  Switzerland  is  currently  facing  three  key  challenges.  First,  the  crisis  has 
shown that countries can encounter serious difficulties due to systemically important banks. 
Switzerland has two systemically important banks, in fact, these big banks are systemically 
important even at the global level. Thus for our country, in particular, it is essential that the 
stability of the financial system be sustainably reinforced. Second, the crisis has substantially 
changed the economic environment in which Switzerland – an economy with an extremely 
global orientation – operates. On the one hand, our country has to cope with the appreciation 
of the Swiss franc, particularly against the euro, which has come under pressure because of 
the sovereign debt crisis affecting certain European countries. On the other hand, the crisis 
has reinforced the shift in economic power towards the emerging economies. Consequently, 
Switzerland must do everything it can to secure its competitive position in this changing world 
– now and in the future. Third, convincing answers will be needed to counter the international 
pressure on Switzerland, which has increased considerably of late, particularly in connection 
with  the  question  of  the  tax  compliance  of  foreign  assets  in  Switzerland.  These  are 
formidable challenges. However, Switzerland is well equipped to meet them with confidence. 
What  is  essential  is  that  we  are  able  to  benefit  from  the  strengths  that  characterise  the 
country now as in the past. These success factors include (a) a social and political culture 
that builds on inclusiveness and the ability to reach a consensus, (b) innovative ability and 
flexibility, and (c) political and economic stability. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
