William C Dudley: Job creation in the region 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, at the Quarterly Regional Economic Press Briefing, New York, 
12 August 2011. 
 Good morning and welcome once again to the New York Fed’s Quarterly Regional Economic 
Press Briefing. I am pleased to have this opportunity to talk with the journalists covering our 
region – and through you, to the people in our District. This morning I will focus on regional 
economic  conditions,  with  particular  attention  to  job  creation  trends  in  the  Second  Federal 
Reserve  District,  which  covers  New  York  State;  northern  New  Jersey;  Fairfield  County, 
Connecticut; Puerto Rico; and the U.S. Virgin Islands. Following my remarks, my colleagues 
will  provide  more  details.  As  always,  what  I  have  to  say  reflects  my  own  views  and  not 
necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or the Federal Reserve 
System.  
National economic conditions 
The statement issued by the FOMC earlier this week presents a sober assessment of the 
state of the U.S. economy. Economic growth so far in 2011 has been quite a bit slower than 
we expected earlier in the year. While jobs growth picked up early in the year, in the last few 
months conditions in the labor market have deteriorated again and the unemployment rate 
edged  up.  Household  spending  has  flattened  out,  and  the  housing  sector  is  depressed. 
Business  investment  in  equipment  and  software  is  expanding,  but  investment  in  corporate 
office and other commercial buildings is weak. 
Some of the weakness in economic activity in the first half of the year was due to temporary 
factors such as the hit to household income from higher food and energy prices, and supply 
chain  disruptions  following  the  tragic  earthquake  in  Japan.  These  restraining  forces  have 
abated and thus, we should see stronger growth in the second half. But it is clear that not all 
of the weakness was due to these one-time factors – and in light of this, I have revised down 
my expectations for the pace of recovery going forward. 
On the inflation front, the committee noted that inflation has moderated recently as energy 
and commodity prices have declined from their peaks – having picked up earlier in the year, 
mainly  reflecting  higher  prices  for commodities  and  imported  goods,  as  well  as  the  supply 
disruptions from Japan. Longer-term inflation expectations remain stable, and the committee 
now expects inflation to settle over the coming quarters at levels at or below those consistent 
with our mandate to promote full employment and price stability. 
In light of the current outlook, the FOMC in its statement noted that we now anticipate that 
we are likely to keep short-term interest rates exceptionally low at least through mid-2013. 
We  also  discussed  the  range  of  policy  tools  available  to  promote  a  stronger  economic 
recovery in a context of price stability. Further details on the discussion at the meeting will be 
available  when  the  minutes  are  published  in  three  weeks  time.  I  will  not  comment  on 
monetary policy any further today. 
Following the release of the FOMC’s statement, market interest rates generally moved lower, 
which should help provide some additional support for economic activity and jobs. I would 
note, however, that conditions remain unsettled and the equity market in particular remains 
very volatile. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Regional economic conditions 
Turning  to  our  region,  the  economic  recovery  continues  to  be  slow,  although  much  of  the 
region is performing reasonably well compared with the nation as a whole. 
To  frame  our  current  situation,  let  me  put  this  recession  and  recovery  in  the  context  of 
previous cycles. While this recession lasted longest, caused the deepest job losses, and has 
shown the slowest employment recovery of any post-war recession for the United States, it 
has not been the worst on record for the region. 
New  York  State  sustained  fewer  severe  job  losses  than  the  nation  during  the  recent 
recession  –  a  reversal  of  historical  patterns.  Upstate  New  York,  which  has  struggled  with 
sluggish economic growth in recent decades, has proven particularly stable. In fact, while job 
losses were quite severe during previous recessions, that was not the case this time around. 
Similarly, New York City’s job losses were more moderate than in previous recessions. New 
Jersey,  on  the  other  hand,  saw  steeper  jobs  losses  than  New  York  and  a  more  tepid 
recovery. Puerto Rico endured a serious downturn lasting for over five years and is now just 
beginning to show signs of stabilization. 
Why was the downturn in our region less severe than in many other parts of the country? 
Part of the reason is that the effects of the housing boom and bust on the region’s economy 
were  less  consequential.  Of  course,  we  have  seen  declines  in  construction  employment, 
losses of housing equity and people losing their homes. However, as in most mature regions, 
the housing market tends to be less influential here than it is in parts of the country where 
population growth has been more rapid. This is particularly true across much of Upstate New 
York,  which  experienced  little  in  the  way  of  a  construction  boom,  home  price  growth  or 
subprime mortgage penetration. While many areas in downstate New York and northern New 
Jersey did experience a more significant boom and bust, the changes there were not on the 
same scale as in hard-hit states, such as Nevada, Arizona or Florida. 
Also, while the financial crisis was a key driving force behind the recession, employment in 
New York City was not affected nearly as much as some had predicted. Instead, it turned out 
that the finance sector held up better than expected. 
The pace of recovery in our region, though somewhat stronger than at the national level, has 
nonetheless  been  disappointing.  Growth  has  been  weak  and  the  unemployment  rate  has 
remained stubbornly high. This slow pace of recovery continued into the second quarter of 
2011. 
As  attendees  at  previous  regional  press  briefings  may  recall,  the  New  York  Fed  produces 
economic activity indexes (CEIs) to help monitor the performance of the regional economy. 
Based  on  these  measures,  activity  continued  to  expand  in  both  New  York  State  and  New 
York  City  through  June,  with  growth  decelerating  only  modestly  in  the  second  quarter.  By 
contrast, the recovery in New Jersey’s economy has been more sluggish, though the index 
for New Jersey did pick up in 2011, which is an encouraging development. 
We monitor Puerto Rico using an index produced by the Government Development Bank for 
Puerto Rico. This index shows that the recession there, which started back in 2005 – well 
before  the  mainland’s  –  continues  to  be  a  challenge.  The  sharp  decline  in  activity  that 
persisted well into 2010 appears to have subsided. However, for some time now the island’s 
economy has experienced a series of fits and starts. As such, the recent improvements will 
need to be sustained for a period of time before we’ll know that they are breaking out of the 
pattern of mixed signals. 
The performance of regional housing markets continues to influence the pace of recovery for 
local economies. Many of the places hit hardest by the housing bust have had a particularly 
weak recovery. Although housing markets remain fragile, an encouraging development here 
is that home prices appear to be firming across much of our region. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Turning to jobs, data for the second quarter of 2011 indicate that businesses in the region, on 
balance, expanded employment at a more rapid pace than the nation. Still, the number of 
jobs being created each month is not enough to sustain a robust recovery. 
Given  the  slow  recovery  of  employment  across  much  of  the  region,  unemployment  rates 
have edged up in most places. June’s unemployment rate of 8.0 percent in New York State 
and  9.5  percent 
in  New  Jersey  remain  unacceptably  high.  While  Puerto  Rico’s 
unemployment  rate  has  fallen  sharply  in  recent  months,  it  is  still  particularly  elevated  at 
14.9 percent. 
One factor that remains a drag on overall employment growth in much of the region is the 
weakness of the public sector. As we have discussed at previous press briefings, our state 
and local governments continue to cut jobs more sharply than governments elsewhere. The 
recent  exception  to  this  trend  is  Puerto  Rico.  While  the  island  sustained  deep  cuts  in 
government  jobs  in  2009  and  2010,  a  recent  increase  in  this  sector  was  a  key  reason  for 
Puerto Rico’s relatively strong job growth in June. Overall, the weakness of the public sector 
continues to pose a risk to employment growth throughout our region going forward. 
Another  potentially  troubling  development  for  the  region  is  the  recent  weakness  in  the 
financial sector. The finance industry, which had begun to recover late in the cycle, appeared 
to be showing signs of expansion when we last met. Since then, the industry has lost jobs in 
New York City and in New Jersey. This recent job loss has been particularly significant in the 
city’s securities industry, which has shed nearly 4,000 jobs since April. More difficulties may 
lie ahead, as there have been many recent announcements of consolidations and layoffs in 
the region’s banking sector. 
Despite weak labor market conditions overall, some sectors are enjoying robust growth in the 
region.  In  particular,  the  professional  and  business  services  and  education  and  health 
sectors have continued to add jobs. These are high-value-added services that the region can 
export to other parts of the country and overseas, and provide jobs that tend to be performed 
by highly skilled people. As such, these sectors help support the broader economy and are 
likely to provide a source of growth for the region going forward. 
It  is  difficult  to  say  when  the  pace  of  job  growth  will  pick  up.  As  such,  we  will  continue  to 
monitor our region’s economy and job situation closely. 
Job creation in the region 
The fact that the recovery has been so sluggish might lead you to believe that no jobs are 
being  created.  However,  this  is  not  true.  Beneath  the  high  unemployment  rate  and  overall 
slow job growth lies a considerable amount of job churning. Ongoing losses in some sectors 
are being offset by gains in other sectors. Today we look inside this churning for clues about 
how these changes are playing out in our region. 
How do these changes in the labor market occur in the midst of a recession and recovery? 
First,  many  jobs  are  destroyed  rapidly  and  few  created  as  the  economy  weakens.  This 
pattern is a defining characteristic of recessions. Afterward, during the recovery, employment 
rises as layoffs subside and firms begin to hire more. As this process plays out, some hiring 
will  be  in  different  industries  from  the  layoffs.  For  example,  some  auto  manufacturing  jobs 
may never come back, while health care providers continue to add jobs. 
Thus, employers are adding two sorts of jobs: new and old. Some jobs are in industries that 
continued to expand jobs throughout the recession and weak recovery, such as health care 
and  education.  We  think  of  these  as  “new  jobs.”  These shifts  in  jobs  are  transformational. 
They are part of how our region adjusts to the evolution of technology, trade patterns and 
consumer preferences. In addition, now that we are in recovery, a broad set of industries are 
beginning to add jobs to replace earlier layoffs, such as administrative support and wholesale 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
and retail trade. We think of these as “old jobs” because they restore their industries’ share of 
jobs as economic activity picks up. 
The two recessions before the current one saw an unusually high share of “new job” creation 
– in expanding industries, rather than rebounds of “old jobs” – compared with recessions in 
the  1970s  and  1980s.  Research  done  here  at  the  New  York  Fed  documents  this  for  the 
nation and New York.1 The preponderance of transformational “new job” creation may have 
reflected the fact that the recessions of 1990–91 and 2001 were relatively shallow. 
In addition, employers may be more likely to use recessions as an opportunity to make their 
operations  more  efficient.  For  example,  employers  are  less  likely  to  use  temporary  layoffs 
when they reduce staff during downturns and more likely to use temporary service agencies 
or outsource part of their operations when they need to expand. 
So far, the current recession does not follow the pattern of the last two downturns. In New 
York and New Jersey as well as the nation, job creation during the recovery has been fairly 
evenly balanced between new jobs and old jobs – instead of heavily weighted toward new 
jobs as in the past two recessions. If this pattern holds, the recovery process could have a 
higher  share  of  unemployed  workers  returning  to  jobs  similar  to  those  they  left  during  the 
downturn.  That  could  be  promising  for  the  adjustment  process  when  the  recovery  gathers 
strength.  There  is  some  variation  within  the  region,  though,  and  the  areas  with  a  higher 
preponderance  of  new  jobs  are  undergoing  more  rapid  transformations  that  could  position 
them well for growth going forward. As a result, these areas could face a particularly strong 
need to retrain and educate their workers. 
In  order  to  prepare  our  region  to  be  as  competitive  as  possible,  policy  makers,  firms  and 
workers need to accurately gauge which industries and jobs will grow fastest. 
Given the trend over the past few decades, it is no surprise that the new jobs being created 
across the region and nation are most likely to be in industries with a high share of workers 
with a college education. Thus, education and worker training is likely to continue to be very 
important in maintaining the economic vitality of our region going forward. 
Conclusion 
In summary, the recovery in our region continued at a slow pace during the second quarter of 
2011. While overall job growth has been sluggish through the recovery, we find that there 
has been a great deal of job churning below the surface throughout our region. So far, this 
job churning is about evenly balanced between old and new job creation. The evidence to 
date is pretty clear that these new jobs, on balance, are in industries that employ workers 
with higher levels of skills and education. 
I will now ask Jaison Abel to provide additional details on the regional economy. 
                                                 
1  Groshen, Erica L. and Simon Potter. 2003. “Has Structural Change Contributed to a Jobless Recovery?” 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York Current Issues in Economics and Finance 9, no. 8. 
  Groshen, Erica L., Potter, Simon, and Rebecca J. Sale. 2004. “Economic Restructuring in New York State.” 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York Current Issues in Economics and Finance 10, no. 7. 
  Groshen, Erica L. 2011. “Temporary Layoffs during the Great Recession.” Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York Liberty Street Economics Blog, April 6. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
