Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Talent management, the new paradigm 
Opening remarks by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 
AIF  (The  Asian  Institute  of  Finance)  International  Symposium  2011,  Kuala  Lumpur, 
7 April 2011. 
 It  is  my  great  pleasure  to  speak  at  this  inaugural  AIF  International  Symposium  2011  on 
Talent  Management,  the  New  Paradigm.  While  I  may  not  be  here  in  person,  I  am  most 
certainly here in my commitment to this Symposium on the enhancement of human capacity 
in the financial services industry. 
Importance of human capital development 
Significant new trends continue to reshape the financial services industry. In this recent two 
decades, the intensification of the globalisation process, the advancement in technology and 
the  unprecedented  consequences  of  the  global  financial  and  economic  crisis  have 
contributed to these changes. While the global economy is now on a recovery path, several 
challenges continue to remain. The focus of the crises affected countries have been on the 
immediate term challenges involving the resumption of the functioning of financial markets 
and  the  financial  intermediation  process  while  supporting  the  overall  economic  growth.  As 
part of the response to the crisis, is the financial regulatory reform both at the national and 
international level. This has also been reinforced by a tightening of the supervisory oversight. 
These cumulative developments are also dramatically transforming the financial landscape of 
the international and national financial systems.  
The future has therefore become more complex, uncertain, unfamiliar and more ambiguous. 
In the context of these fundamental and far reaching changes, less attention has however 
been accorded to the necessary changes to the human capital development that is required 
for the effective participation and performance in this new financial landscape. Indeed, the 
talent required also needs to be transformed. These changes have also precipitated a revisit 
and  review  of  education  systems  around  the  world  over  to  address  the  current  discontent 
that  the  education  has  not  kept  up  with  the  changing  human  capital  requirements  of  the 
financial services industry.  
The  World  Economic  Forum  has  projected  that  “staggering”  talent  gaps  will  arise  in  large 
parts of the world by 2020, and this will have a bearing on national competitiveness while 
organisations  compete  for  talent  on  an  unprecedented  scale.  Managing  talent  has 
consequently become significantly more challenging and needs to be addressed with talent 
development.  The  objective  is  to  harness  the  full  potential  of  the  workforce.  This  is 
particularly  urgent  for  Asia  as  it  emerges  as  an  important  growth  centre  in  the  global 
economy. With Asia’s financial services industry poised to grow rapidly, this growth must be 
supported  by  the  development  of  capabilities  among  the  financial  industry  professionals. 
Going forward, the investment in this core pillar will be a defining factor in the performance 
and the capacity of the industry to reinvent and transform and thus enhance its resilience and 
sustainability.  
The path forward needs to be guided by a strategic response to the forces that are shaping 
the new talent landscape. There is now an increased demand for highly-skilled knowledge 
workers that are able to meet the changing requirements of an increasingly globalised and 
borderless  workplace.  More  interconnected  businesses  within  national  economies  and 
across the globe have also increased expectations for employees to be highly versatile and 
able  to  adapt  to  the  fast  changing  conditions.  Talent  mobility  has  therefore  increased 
substantially  not  only  across  geographical  boundaries,  but  also  across  sectors,  as  the 
demand  for  talent  in  financial  services  by  the  energy,  telecommunications,  software  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
thinking  about 
consultancy  sectors  are  likely  to  increase  over  time.  Organisations  including  financial 
institutions  therefore  need  to  give  greater  attention  to  these  shifts  and  develop  clear 
strategies to narrow the skills gap, in particular to address growing shortages in the mid to 
senior level talent groups.  
The  recent  regulatory  reform  in  the  financial  sector  and  the  onset  of  new  standards  and 
requirements under both Basel II and Basel III, the emergence of new risk disciplines and the 
fundamental changes in financial reporting standards, also require financial professionals to 
be equipped with new knowledge and skills. Similarly, talent shortages continue to be acute 
in high-growth areas such as wealth management, Islamic finance, and investment advisory 
services.  At  the  same  time,  the  role  of  the  financial  services  sector  in  the  recent  global 
economic meltdown has also raised questions on the issue of the quality of the leadership 
and workforce and for the need to place greater focus on developing ethical and responsible 
leaders who will be able to lead a sustainable industry over the medium and longer term. 
The  economic  costs  of  a  failure  to  arrest  talent  shortages  are  strategically  significant  and 
include low productivity, the slow pace of innovation and lost opportunities. Building a strong 
talent  pipeline  has  therefore  become  an  economic  imperative  as  human  capital  rivals 
financial  capital  as  the  critical  economic  engine  of  the  future.  This  requires  new  and 
innovative  ways  of 
talent  development,  programs,  processes  and 
competencies. The human capital challenge has therefore to be approached with a different 
set of solutions.  
Giving recognition to its importance, in the United States, the accounting rules were adjusted 
to allow organisations to treat a wider range of talent development costs in the same manner 
as long-term investments in equipment, manufacturing plants and other facilities. Financial 
institutions today are also forming stronger relationships with business schools to increase 
the  relevance  of  their  curriculum.  The  World  Economic  Forum,  through  its  recent  work  on 
skills  and  talent  mobility,  has  fostered  a  concerted,  multi-stakeholder,  cooperation  and 
dialogue  among  policy-makers,  relevant 
institutions,  governments  and 
businesses  to  develop  interdisciplinary  solutions  to  address  the  talent  shortage.  The 
promotion of more effective international  cooperation on training and skills development to 
meet  the  changing  demands  of  the  industry,  more  comprehensive  strategies  on  talent 
development and greater mobility that is consistent with the realities of the global economy 
will support such talent development. 
Despite these demands, under investment in learning remains in a significant proportion of 
financial institutions. This is largely due to the focus on keeping short term costs low. This 
has however resulted in drawing talent from the existing pool which has in turn resulted in 
rising costs of talent. Surveys suggest that the biggest skills and knowledge gaps faced by 
financial institutions are in knowledge of regulatory standards, communications, management 
skills and risk assessment and management. Professional and technical skills, particularly in 
the middle to senior levels, are still very much needed in many parts of Asia. These skills 
shortages will intensify as financial institutions expand their operations. Strategies for talent 
management  and  development  must  therefore  change  if  financial  institutions  want  to  be 
competitive and well positioned to adjust and adapt to the changing conditions.  
The Asian Institute of Finance (AIF) was initiated by Bank Negara Malaysia and established 
jointly  with  the  Securities  Commission  in  [2009]  to  respond  to  the  growing  needs  of  the 
financial  industry  for  high  quality  and  efficient  training  opportunities  that  would  develop  in-
demand skills. Working with its Affiliated Institutes from the industry, the Institute of Banks 
Malaysia (IBBM), the Islamic Banking and Finance Institute Malaysia (IBFIM), the Malaysia 
Insurance  Institute  (MII)  and  the  Securities  Industry  Development  Corporation  (SIDC),  AIF 
has  an  important  role  in  driving  and  supporting  the  development  of  talent  in  the  financial 
sector.  This  also  includes  the  development  of  intellectual  capital  through  research  that  is 
being  undertaken  in  the  AIF  Risk  Management  Centre  and  the  Applied  Finance  Research 
Centre.  
international 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
AIF has the vision to build a world class financial sector workforce. In support of this vision, 
AIF  has  developed  a  Learning  Programme  Assessment  and  Accreditation  Framework 
(LPAAF)  which  provides  a  structured  and  comprehensive  approach  that  defines  quality 
assurance  standards  for  training  programmes  for  the  industry.  Benchmarked  against 
international standards, the framework is designed to be both current and forward-looking. 
The education standards promulgated through the framework ensures first class, job-specific 
training  to  meet  the  industry  requirements,  and  equip  practitioners  with  the  practical 
knowledge, skills and expertise that are important to their respective job functions.  
Malaysia’s  financial  sector  has  continued  to  forge  ahead.  The  contribution  of  the  financial 
industry to the country’s GDP has increased from 9.2% in the year 2000 to 11.7% in 2009 
and this figure is expected to grow further in time. Likewise, the employment growth in the 
financial sector will continue to accelerate, with increasing demands for specialised skills and 
enhanced  expertise  in  finance.  In  the  fast  changing  and  increasingly  complex  financial 
landscape, our workforce in the financial sector must not only rise above current challenges, 
but must be well equipped to excel in the significantly changed environment.  
In  Malaysia,  we  have  prioritised  talent  development  in  the  financial  sector  as  a  strategic 
priority  and  to  approach  this  in  a  holistic  manner,  across  the  spectrum  of  the  financial 
services  industry.  The  goal  is  to  develop  a  deep  pool  of  financial  sector  talent  with  world 
class  capabilities  to  drive  responsible  growth  and  development  of  the  financial  sector.  As 
many of the initiatives supporting these strategies are multi-disciplinary and multi-layered, the 
approach  is  grounded  in  a  shared  commitment  with  the  industry  in  a  comprehensive, 
coordinated  and  collaborative  manner.  This  is  our  best  hope  for  rising  confidently  to  the 
human  capital  challenge  that  lies  before  us.  With  the  strong  support  of  all  the  key 
stakeholders and practitioners in the industry, we can make a critical and lasting contribution 
towards creating a talented workforce for the industry. 
In this journey, the sharing of best practices and experiences will be extremely valuable. I 
therefore  welcome  and  encourage  your  participation  at  this  international  symposium  to 
discuss the important issues, challenges and the way forward in talent development for the 
financial services industry.  
On this note, I wish you a successful and productive session. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
