Ben S Bernanke: Dodd-Frank implementation – monitoring systemic risk 
and promoting financial stability 
Testimony  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal 
Reserve System, before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, US Senate, 
Washington DC, 12 May 2011. 
 Chairman Johnson, Ranking Member Shelby, and other members of the Committee, thank 
you for the opportunity to testify on the Federal Reserve Board’s role in monitoring systemic 
risk and promoting financial stability, both as a member of the Financial Stability Oversight 
Council (FSOC) and under our own authority.  
Financial Stability Oversight Council 
The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act) created 
the FSOC to identify and mitigate threats to the financial stability of the United States. During 
its existence thus far, the FSOC has promoted interagency collaboration and established the 
organizational structure and processes necessary to execute its duties.1 The FSOC and its 
member  agencies  also  have  completed  studies  on  limits  on  proprietary  trading  and 
investments in hedge funds and private equity funds by banking firms (the Volcker rule), on 
financial  sector  concentration  limits,  on  the  economic  effects  of  risk  retention,  and  on  the 
economic consequences of systemic risk regulation. The FSOC is currently seeking public 
comments  on  proposed  rules  that  would  establish  a  framework  for  identifying  nonbank 
financial firms and financial market utilities that could pose a threat to financial stability and 
that therefore should be designated for more stringent oversight. Importantly, the FSOC has 
begun  systematically  monitoring  risks  to  financial  stability  and  is  preparing  its  inaugural 
annual report.  
Additional financial stability-related reforms at the Federal Reserve 
In  addition  to  its  role  on  the  FSOC,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  other  significant  financial 
stability  responsibilities  under  the  Dodd-Frank  Act,  including  supervisory  jurisdiction  over 
thrift  holding  companies  and  nonbank  financial  firms  that  are  designated  as  systemically 
important  by  the  council.  The  act  also  requires  the  Federal  Reserve  (and  other  financial 
regulatory agencies) to take a macroprudential approach to supervision and regulation; that 
is, in supervising financial institutions and critical infrastructures, we are expected to consider 
the  risks  to  overall  financial  stability  in  addition  to  the  safety  and  soundness  of  individual 
firms.  
A major thrust of the Dodd-Frank Act is addressing the too-big-to-fail problem and mitigating 
the threat to financial stability posed by systemically important financial firms. As required by 
the  act,  the  Federal  Reserve  is  developing  more-stringent  prudential  standards  for  large 
banking  organizations  and  nonbank  financial  firms  designated  by  the  FSOC.  These 
standards  will  include  enhanced  risk-based  capital  and  leverage  requirements,  liquidity 
requirements,  and  single-counterparty  credit 
limits.  The  standards  will  also  require 
                                                 
1   The  FSOC’s  internal  structure  consists  of  a  Deputies  Committee  –  composed  of  personnel  from  all  of  the 
voting and nonvoting members – and six other standing committees, each with its own specific duties. The 
Deputies Committee, under the direction of the FSOC members, coordinates the work of the six committees 
and aims to ensure that the FSOC fulfills its mission in an effective and timely manner. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
systemically important financial firms to adopt so-called living wills that will spell out how they 
can be resolved in an orderly manner during times of financial distress. The act also directs 
the Federal Reserve to conduct annual stress tests of large banking firms and designated 
nonbank financial firms and to publish a summary of the results. To meet the January 2012 
implementation deadline for these enhanced standards, we anticipate putting out a package 
of proposed rules for comment this summer. Our goal is to produce a well-integrated set of 
rules  that  meaningfully  reduces  the  probability  of  failure  of  our  largest,  most  complex 
financial firms, and that minimizes the losses to the financial system and the economy if such 
a firm should fail.  
The  Federal  Reserve  is  working  with  other  U.S.  regulatory  agencies  to  implement 
Dodd-Frank  reforms  in  additional  areas,  including  the  development  of  risk  retention 
requirements  for  securitization  sponsors,  margin  requirements  for  noncleared  over-the-
counter  derivatives,  incentive  compensation  rules,  and  risk-management  standards  for 
central counterparties and other financial market utilities.  
The  Federal  Reserve  has  made  significant  organizational  changes  to  better  carry  out  its 
responsibilities. Even before the enactment of the Dodd-Frank Act, we were strengthening 
our  supervision  of  the  largest,  most  complex  financial  firms.  We  created  a  centralized 
multidisciplinary  body  called  the  Large  Institution  Supervision  Coordinating  Committee  to 
oversee  the  supervision  of  these  firms.  This  committee  uses  horizontal,  or  cross-firm, 
evaluations  to  monitor  interconnectedness  and  common  practices  among  firms  that  could 
lead to greater systemic risk. It also uses additional and improved quantitative methods for 
evaluating  the  performance  of  firms  and  the  risks  they  might  pose.  And  it  more  efficiently 
employs the broad range of skills of the Federal Reserve staff to supplement supervision. We 
have established a similar body to help us effectively carry out our responsibilities regarding 
the oversight of systemically important financial market utilities.  
More recently, we have also created an Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research at 
the  Federal  Reserve  Board.  This  office  coordinates  our  efforts  to  identify  and  analyze 
potential  risks  to  the  broader  financial  system  and  the  economy.  It  also  helps  evaluate 
policies to promote financial stability and serves as the Board’s liaison to the FSOC.  
International regulatory coordination 
As a complement to those efforts under Dodd-Frank, the Federal Reserve has been working 
for some time with other regulatory agencies and central banks around the world to design 
and  implement  a  stronger  set  of  prudential  requirements  for  internationally  active  banking 
firms.  These  efforts  resulted  in  the  agreements  reached  in  the  fall  of  2010  on  the  major 
elements  of  the  new  Basel  III  prudential  framework  for  globally  active  banks.  The 
requirements under Basel III that such banks hold more and better-quality capital and more-
robust  liquidity  buffers  should  make  the  financial  system  more  stable  and  reduce  the 
likelihood of future financial crises. We are working with the other U.S. banking agencies to 
incorporate the Basel III agreements into U.S. regulations.  
More remains to be done at the international level to strengthen the global financial system. 
Key  tasks  ahead  for  the  Basel  Committee  and  the  Financial  Stability  Board  include 
determining  how  to  further  increase  the  loss-absorbing  capacity  of  systemically  important 
banking  firms  and  strengthening  resolution  regimes  to  minimize  adverse  systemic  effects 
from the failure of large, complex banks. As we work with our international counterparts, we 
are striving to keep international regulatory standards as consistent as possible, to ensure 
that  multinational  firms  are  adequately  supervised,  and  to  maintain  a  level  international 
playing field.  
Thank you. I would be pleased to take your questions.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
