José Manuel González-Páramo: Rethinking risk management – from 
lessons learned to taking action 
Speech  by  Mr  José  Manuel  González-Páramo,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Risk  and  Return  South  Africa  conference,  Cape  Town, 
4 March 2011. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Good afternoon, 
I was very pleased to accept the organisers’ kind invitation to participate in this conference 
and to speak about a topic that at the European Central Bank (ECB) we consider of utmost 
relevance:  How  to  adjust  our  financial  risk  management  frameworks  in  the  light  of  the 
lessons learned from the crisis. 
Indeed,  the  ECB  has  always  placed  a  great  importance  on  the  design,  development  and 
implementation of sound risk management practices. The financial and economic crisis that 
started in 2007 and that continues affecting the global economy has prompted us to rethink 
and further strengthen the risk management function at the ECB and within the Eurosystem 
(consisting of the ECB and of the national central banks of the seventeen countries that have 
adopted the euro).  
Therefore,  it  is  a  pleasure  to  have  the  opportunity  to  share  our  recent  experience  with 
distinguished professionals from the financial industry, such as those present in this room. 
My intention is to comment upon a number of issues that may have probably been already 
touched upon in the previous sessions. More specifically, I will first summarise some of the 
general lessons for risk managers that we have learned from the financial crisis. I will then 
discuss how the risk management function needs to be adjusted to the new economic and 
financial environment. Finally, I will quickly describe some of the challenges ahead for central 
banks as risk managers. 
Lessons from the financial crisis 
2. 
So let me start by referring to some of the key lessons from the financial crisis. 
From  the  selection  of  topics  for  this  conference,  with  its  focus  on  innovations  in  risk 
management and reforms to the regulatory frameworks, it is clear that we have learned very 
valuable  lessons  from  the  crisis.  However,  the  fact  that  we  are  drawing  lessons  from  the 
crisis  is  not  only  illustrated  by  the  novelty  of  the  issues  under  discussion,  but  also  by  the 
different  approaches  taken  to  examine  topics  that  were  regularly  discussed  in  Risk  and 
Return conferences in pre-crisis times. 
As examples of topics that were “usual suspects” in past conferences, but are now presented 
in a different manner, let me mention two specific issues: (1) the broadening of investment 
universes, and (2) the advantages in terms of yield pick-up of investing in new markets and 
asset classes.  
In  the  past  the  analysis  on  these  issues  would  have  typically  concentrated  on  the  return 
aspects  and  portfolio  management  considerations,  with  only  limited  space  for  risk-related 
considerations  in  the  exposition,  the  latter  usually  consisting  of  some simple  references  to 
the  tracking  error  of  certain  assets  against  the  benchmark  portfolios.  Nowadays,  even 
presentations firmly oriented on return-maximising investment decisions dedicate more time 
to look at the absolute risks of trading strategies and assets, and this is particularly true for 
credit and liquidity risks.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Indeed, during the current crisis we have learned the hard way that those “forgotten” risks, 
which  were  perceived  as  not  deserving  a  single  slide  in  many  presentations  of  the  past, 
matter more than we previously thought. For those holding responsibilities in the design and 
implementation  of  public  policies,  to  observe  the  increasing  recognition  among  market 
participants of the importance of strengthening risk management practices constitutes one of 
its very few positive consequences.  
Causes and dynamics of the crisis 
Some of the main lessons from the crisis seem obvious in hindsight, but unfortunately were 
not seen as such before the outburst of the financial turmoil in 2007 and 2008. In particular, 
there  are  clear  indications  that  the  way  we  look  now  at  the  trade-off  between  risks  and 
returns has significantly changed over the past thee years and a half. 
However, the key question is whether the shift in attitude towards risk has changed only as a 
consequence  of  the  materialisation  of  some  “forgotten”  risks  or  whether  there  is  a  deeper 
and  more  structural  explanation  for  this  shift.  My  view  is  that  the  reason  why  academics, 
market participants and public authorities devote more time and resources to identifying and 
assessing risk-related issues is not only the severity of the crisis and the uncertainty currently 
surrounding  our  economic  and  financial  systems,  but  more  fundamentally  the  fact  that  not 
only  the  roots,  but  also  the  trunk  and  branches  of  the  crisis  are  closely  related  to  risk 
management and governance aspects. 
In  this  regard,  a  number  of  thoughtful  explanations  of  the  causes  and  dynamics  of  the 
financial and economic crisis have been put forward. There is no doubt that risk managers 
can  extract  valid  lessons  from  all  of  them,  since  there  may  be  indeed  some  truth  to  all. 
Indeed,  there  is  probably  no  single  argument  that  can  alone  explain  everything  that  has 
happened over the past few years and we also must remain objective enough to separate 
ideology  from  facts,  when  assessing  the  different  versions of  the  history  that  have  or  may 
become best-sellers.  
Some  of  the  possible  causes  and  elements  characterising  the  nature  and  evolution  of  the 
crisis  that  have  been  advanced  by  commentators  include:  (i)  the  excessive  borrowing  by 
financial industry and the private sector due to the prevailing low interest rates; (ii) the build 
up of financial disequilibria and asset price bubbles; (iii) the biased system of incentives that 
led investors to excessive risk-taking; (iv) the failure by regulators to adapt to the state of the 
evolution of the financial system; (v) the market failures related to information asymmetry and 
lack  of  transparency  about  risks  and  characteristics  of  the  different  products;  (vi)  the 
existence of obvious conflicts of interests affecting key agents needed in the securitisation 
process; and (vii) finally, the failure of investors to conduct due diligence, blindly relying on 
information and models that proved to be inappropriate to capture some very relevant risks. 
It is probably not very adventurous to say that the bursting of the house price bubble in the 
US,  with  the  ensuing  increase in  the  default  rate  and  the  severe  underperformance  of  the 
subprime mortgage sector, was the spark that ignited the financial and economic crisis.  
In the summer of 2007, as highly leveraged investors were forced to unwind some positions 
to cover margin calls, liquidity in some fixed-income markets dried out completely. Investors 
found themselves trapped and were forced to sell assets at considerable discounts. In some 
cases further sales – particularly for subprime Mortgage Backed Securities – were forced by 
stop-losses and Value-at-Risk based risk budgets. Liquidity risk-related losses piled up over 
losses registered as a result of fair value accounting as risks in the real estate sector started 
to materialise on a scale unseen since the Great Depression.  
In  the  absence  of  asset  liquidity  and  with  many  of  the  main  actors  in  financial  markets 
undergoing  painful  processes  of  loss-recognition,  consolidation  and  deleveraging,  some  of 
the assumptions of the models regularly used for risk management did not hold anymore. For 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
instance, this was the case of the assumptions of price continuity and sufficient arbitraging 
activity that underlie proper market functioning. 
Furthermore,  a  variety  of  assets  had  to  be  priced  using  models  that  were  over-reliant  on 
assumptions and inputs such as credit ratings that had come under strain, thereby increasing 
the  scope  for  model  risk.  As  a  result,  uncertainty  about  the  “true”  fair  value  of  the  assets 
being held by financial institutions increased significantly. 
As  if  the  discovery  of  these  “forgotten”  risks  –  the  liquidity  risk  as  well  as  tail  market  and 
credit risks – would have not been sufficient evidence of the failures of investment decision-
making practices at the global level, the default of Lehman opened our eyes even wider and 
the focus shifted to counterparty risk. This source of risk became increasingly important due 
to  the  implementation  of  hedging  and  trading  strategies  based  on  derivatives  contracts, 
which were very concentrated on a few institutions.  
Financial globalization and international integration, which are key components of the recipe 
for global prosperity, acted during the crisis as a channel for the transmission of shocks to 
the  global  economy.  Systemic  risks  arose  due  to  the  interconnectedness  of  the  financial 
systems and the impossibility to isolate the problems within the sectors and institutions that 
were hit first. The global financial architecture showed deficiencies that need to be addressed 
in order to strengthen the foundations of our economic systems. 
The role of risk management in the crisis 
In general, most of the causes of the crisis that I have just described relate to some extent to 
a  clear  deviation  from  well-established  principles  in  the  management  of  risk  by  financial 
institutions  and  investors.  Common  sense  risk  management  practices  such  as  “know  your 
counterparties”,  “invest  only  in  products  you  understand”,  “do  not  outsource  credit  risk 
management by relying exclusively on external credit assessments”, “do not rely exclusively 
on quantitative models, no matter how sophisticated they are” were abandoned. 
Overconfidence  in:  (1)  the  ability  of  portfolio  managers  to  generate  returns,  (2)  the 
advantages  of  financial  innovation  to  spread  in  an  efficient  way  risks  and  returns,  (3)  the 
adequacy  of  models  and  data  used  to  estimate  risks,  (4)  the  efficiency  of  markets,  and 
(5) the ability and willingness of monetary authorities to mitigate the effect of downturns in 
asset  prices,  did  not  allow  the  capital  markets  to  adequately  reflect  upon  and  price-in  the 
considerable risks that were being built. 
Quite  obviously,  the  crisis  has  taught  us  some  lessons.  Expressions  like  “stress-testing”, 
“black-swan”, “animal-spirits” and even “sovereign debt” have become the new buzzwords in 
the financial industry. Risk managers have been reminded of model risk; portfolio managers 
have  discovered  the  true  face  of  risks;  market  participants  have  started  to  think  about  the 
compound effects of risks, the dynamics of crises and the impact of systemic risks arising 
from  macroeconomic  shocks,  contagion  effects  and  “hidden  imbalances”;  academic  and 
practitioners  have  further  analysed  market  failures,  particularly  based  on  behavioural  and 
institutional aspects; and a certain degree of scepticism has spread, leading to some people 
wondering  whether  there  is  a  genuinely  risk-free  asset  and  what  are  the  real  benefits  of 
diversification. 
It seems clear that the “risk reassessment” process in the wake of the financial and economic 
crisis  has  been  rather  extensive  and,  perhaps,  even  excessive.  For  instance,  market 
reactions  to  recent  rumours  about  the  financial  soundness  of  institutions  and  sovereigns 
have  been  in  some  cases  “off-the-charts”.  Likewise,  markets  that  had  traditionally  enjoyed 
lively trading activity and relatively good liquidity conditions completely dried-out. 
The shift in attitude that we have experienced in recent years relates not only to the ability of 
market participants to take risks, but also to their willingness to take them. In general, the 
crisis  has  eroded  the  capital  position  of  the  financial  industry,  forcing  some  institutions  to 
embark  on  a  process  of  deleveraging  and  risk  downsizing  that,  in  absence  of  an  orderly 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
mechanism,  may  bring  global  capital  markets  further  down.  This  process  has  dragged  the 
real  economy  and  the  fiscal  position  of  many  countries,  thereby  contributing  to  the  further 
deterioration of the global picture of risks.  
This  sort  of  negative  feedback  from  financial  factors  can  be  explained  both  from  the 
fundamental side, as global risks did increase while the ability to absorb losses decreased, 
but also from a behavioural perspective, since confidence disappeared as the evolution of 
the crisis pushed us to unchartered territories and away from the comfort zone in which we 
thought we were living. 
As  central  bankers,  but  also  as  risk  managers,  we  fear  that  in  some  cases  we  may  have 
gone  too  far,  and  that  what  we  see  now  cannot  be  explained  only  in  terms  of  a  better 
understanding of risks, but in many cases reflects a sharp increase in risk aversion that it is 
not  always  fully  justified  by  the  “learning  process”.  It  seems  obvious  that  we  need  to 
incorporate in our decision-making process and in the models we use to support it, the notion 
that markets are driven by behavioural factors. 
All in all, one can optimistically conclude that this time some important lessons have been 
learned and hope that by implementing the necessary reforms, confidence can be restored. 
In any case, a crucial question remains: has the crisis changed our minds in a permanent 
manner  or  are  we  just  living  in  a  “crisis”  mode  and  the  lessons  learned  will  be  forgotten 
shortly after once the crisis is over? Or if I may paraphrase the title of Reinhardt and Rogoff’s 
best-seller, is this time any different? 
To make it truly different we need to take action. 
And we need to take action on different battle fields. 
Adapting risk management to a new economic and financial environment 
3. 
We need to start adapting our risk management frameworks to a new economic and financial 
environment.  
Public  authorities  need  to  incorporate  the  lessons  from  the  crisis  into  the  regulation  in  a 
meaningful  manner.  Among  the  different  regulatory  measures  that  need  to  be  taken  to 
prevent similar crisis in the future let me mention the following:  
1. 
promoting  sound  risk  management  practises  and  better  integrating  the  risk 
management function into the decision-making process of agents;  
addressing  the  challenges  posed  by  “too-big-to-fail”  institutions  and  the  related 
moral hazard;  
enhancing  the  global  financial  infrastructure  to  make  it  more  robust  to  crisis,  by 
promoting instruments and initiatives to mitigate counterparty risks and limiting the 
channels of contagion of firm- or sector-specific shocks;  
further  encouraging 
elaboration of financial statements; and  
redesigning regulatory policies and capital requirements to avoid procyclical effects, 
for  instance  by  introducing  dynamic  provisioning  mechanisms  as  well  as  liquidity 
and funding requirements. 
fair  valuation  and  standardisation 
transparency, 
the 
in 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
The  implementation  of  changes  to  the  international  banking  regulatory  standards  as 
proposed in the Basel III accord will represent a key milestone in this regard. The gradual 
adjustment to the new regulatory framework over a sufficiently long period, also to take into 
account the weakened economic position of many developed countries and financial systems 
as a consequence of the crisis, will mitigate the impact of implementing the new rules. In the 
medium to long run, the transition to a regulatory framework designed to improve the capital 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
that  historical  data,  opinions  and  models  are 
position and the risk management practices of financial institutions will play a major role in 
fully restoring the credibility and public confidence in the financial system.  
Further initiatives aiming to improve the governance and transparency of capital markets and 
institutions  will  also  be  needed  to  restore  the  orderly  functioning  of  the  markets.  In  this 
regard,  the  ECB  has  launched,  in  cooperation  with  market  participants,  an  initiative  to 
disclose  loan-by-loan  level  data  in  the  European  ABS  market,  which  in  our  view  will  help 
reviving such market and mitigate some of the risks associated to those products. 
Of course, this initiative relies on the will of market participants to improve the way in which 
due diligence is performed. The commitment of the ECB and the Eurosystem in this regard 
may serve market participants as a benchmark. It is the duty of public institutions to live up to 
the highest governance standards, and therefore we strive at continuously improving our due 
diligence and risk management practices. 
We  expect  that  financial  institutions  and  private  investors  in  general  also  will  rethink  their 
governance and risk management functions. In this respect, risk management should help 
driving the strategy and decision making processes by defining the extent of the risk appetite 
of the institution clearly and by establishing a clear enterprise-wide risk management system. 
In  this  context,  the  design  and  attribution  of  risk  budgets  and  the  clear  communication  of 
risks to decision-making bodies and to all relevant business areas should be ensured. 
A better due diligence in the risk management function requires reducing dependence on the 
output of specific risk models and on external assessments, such as those provided by rating 
agencies. The correct understanding and assessment of risks requires the development as 
much  as  possible  of  internal  capacities  to  evaluate  risks.  In  addition,  it  is  essential  to 
understand 
the 
comprehension and communication of risks, but with limitations that need to be accounted 
for in the decision-making process. 
In  this  regard,  I  would  like  to  emphasise  that  what  constitutes  a  severe  problem  is  not  so 
much the use of risk measures such as Value at Risk, models like the single-factor Gaussian 
copula model for credit risk, and risk opinions like external credit ratings, but rather the lack 
of understanding of the limitations of those measures and models.  
Accordingly, there has historically been an over reliance and mechanical use of models and 
external opinions that constituted one of the critical failures of the financial system before and 
during the crisis. Those models, measures and opinions are still valid tools, but need to be 
used in a correct manner, and need to be complemented by other tools and, more generally, 
by expert judgement.  
Risk  managers  should  not  simply  take  comfort  in  recent  historical  regularities  and  in  well-
established standards for risk measurement. Discomfort should be their habitat. All business 
areas of the institution should contribute and challenge the risk management function to look 
at risks in a different manner and to adopt better communication strategies.  
We have recently lived through many “what-ifs” that almost nobody thought of, and although 
risk management is all about dealing with uncertainty rather than making point forecasts, our 
warm  and  placid  financial  models,  fed  with  short-sighted  inputs,  were  not  capable  of 
adequately capturing the risks that ended up materialising.  
In  hindsight  it  seems  unbelievable  that  we  believed  in  models  that  were  predicting  that 
nothing terrible could happen in 99 out of 100 years, usually using less than 10 years of data 
to construct such prediction. In the last 100 years, not counting the recent crisis, we have 
experienced  2  world  wars,  the  Great  Depression  and  an  increasingly  frequent  number  of 
financial  crises  affecting  specific  sectors  and  regions  that  have  often  been  a  source  of 
contagion.  
It does not take a statistician to prove that the models were fundamentally misused. It just 
takes common sense, but as the saying goes, this may be the least common of the senses. 
that  aid 
tools 
just 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
How  could  we  be  ready  for  the  unthinkable  if  we  were  not  even  ready  to  assimilate  past 
experiences? Some have said that standard risk management models could not capture a 
“black swan” event. Well, in some cases they could not capture a white swan either.  
In  this  regard,  stress  testing  is  seen  as  one  of  the  core  elements  of  a  modern  risk 
management function. The design of plausible yet demanding (forward-looking) stress tests 
both  at  the  business  area  and  at  a  firm-wide  level  can  significantly  contribute  to 
understanding  the  sources  and  the  consequences  of  the  risks  faced  by  the  different 
institutions. 
One  of  the  key  lessons  that  we  have  learned  from  the  crisis  is  the  interaction  between 
different types of risk. This interaction sometimes leads to compounding effects that were not 
properly captured by the risk management tools available before the crisis. A comprehensive 
risk management framework should therefore not only be firm-wide, but also encompass and 
aggregate  in  a  meaningful  manner  the  different  types  of  risks  to  which  a  specific  firm  or 
institution is exposed. We need to pay attention to inter-risk correlations (i.e. the interaction 
across different types of risks), as much as to intra-risks correlations, and build a portfolio 
that is as diversified as possible on both dimensions and that matches our hedging needs or 
our risk-return preferences. 
But  the  single  most  valuable  lesson  that  we  have  recently  learned  is  that  crises  are  more 
frequent than what we tend to think. In this regard, we should also be ready for new crises 
that will be different from the present one. No matter whether the next crisis ahead will be 
due  to  increases  in  the  prices  of  oil  and  food,  to  geopolitical  tensions  or  to  the  bust  of 
potential asset bubbles in emerging markets, we should stand ready to react to any of those 
possible shocks.  
In order to be prepared we need to understand that finance and economics are not natural 
sciences,  there  are  no  “fundamental  laws”  to  discover,  but  they  are  more  about  modelling 
and understanding the outcome of  interactions between humans in human-made  systems. 
That is, probably, one of the biggest challenges risk managers need to face. 
Challenges ahead for central banks as risk managers 
4. 
Last but not least, I would like to quickly refer to the challenges ahead for central banks. 
I’m not going to refer to the challenges faced by those central banks which are also banking 
supervisors or regulators, which are relevant enough to be deserve a full conference on their 
own, but I will focus on the crisis and risk management function in central banks. 
The job of central banks is akin to that of risk managers, in the sense that they have to deal 
with crisis situations and manage risks to the economy using a limited toolbox. The role of 
the ECB in the management of the different stages of the crisis has been and continues to be 
very  prominent,  also  through  our  participation  in  institutions  such  as  the  recently  created 
European Systemic Risk Board. Obviously, such crisis management role requires having a 
deep  understanding  of  risks,  particularly  systemic  risks,  to  the  financial  system  and  the 
economy in general. 
Of course, the materialisation of risks may potentially have implications for the central bank’s 
own financial position. In this regard, central banks around the globe also act as risk takers in 
the conduct of monetary policy operations and investment operations.  
Central  banks,  as  other  public  investors,  are  distinct  from  most  market  participants  in  that 
they have been entrusted with the management of public funds. As a consequence, central 
banks are typically perceived to be very conservative investors. While this perception may be 
right with regards to the risk appetite of the central bank as an investor, this is not so clear 
when  it  comes  to  its  role  as  policy-maker.  Central  banks  need  to  take  some  risks.  For 
instance, they must hold amounts of assets denominated in foreign currency on a scale that 
private financial institutions would consider to be very large from a risk-return perspective.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Further to this, at times of crisis central banks tend to follow, due to their responsibility as 
policy-makers, the so-called “inertia principle” that recommends not to take risk management 
actions that could worsen the pro-cyclical behaviour of the financial markets. Obviously, such 
principle applies to monetary-policy operations, where central banks have typically increased 
their level of risk taking during the crisis, but also to some extent to their investment activities. 
With the markets being shut-down for almost all financial institutions and the economy being 
strangled by lack of financing, the central banking community had to resort to a number of 
unconventional measures to support the continued provision of credit to the economy and to 
sustain the implementation of the monetary policy in an environment where its transmission 
could be endangered.  
In  the  language  of  risk  managers,  “unconventional  measures”  means  larger  exposures. 
Asset  purchases,  long-term  operations,  full-allotment  tender  procedures,  relaxation  of  the 
collateral framework… All these measures have something in common: they raise the bar for 
risk management in central banking precisely in those times in which our brains are wired to 
shout  “run”.  But  of  course,  we  must  exercise  a  disciplined  and  calmed  responsibility  and 
accept our role in crisis situations.  
Indeed, central banks are likely to be more exposed to risks in the event of a crisis. At the 
same  time,  they  need  to  remain  financially  sound  to  ensure  their  independence  and 
credibility in the conduct of monetary policy. This is particularly important at times of crisis, 
when inflationary expectations risk becoming unanchored.  
This  is  why  it  is  crucial  for  central  banks  to  continuously  re-think  their  risk  management 
framework to stand ready, even in the “good times”, to switch to the “crisis mode”, and also 
to ensure that the decisions taken in the midst of a crisis will not jeopardise their ability to 
pursue their institutional objectives in the future. 
Concluding remarks 
5. 
To  conclude,  it  is  crucial  for  a  central  bank  to  fulfil  the  highest  governance  standards  in 
organizing its risk management function and applying state-of-the-art tools, in order to ensure 
that  the  right  decisions  are  taken  in  the  design  of  the  risk  control  framework  and  the 
implementation of monetary policy and investment operations. By doing so we may also be 
encouraging other market participants to follow. Therefore, our responsibility is twofold. 
As  you  see,  the  challenges  we  face  may  be  slightly  different  from  those  faced  by  private 
institutions. But the lessons learned from the crisis, and the actions to be taken in the near 
future may not be so different. 
We are all on the same boat, learning how to sail towards a safe port. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
