Alan Bollard: Where we are going with macro- and microprudential 
policies in New Zealand 
Speech  by  Dr  Alan  Bollard,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand,  with 
Messrs Bernard  Hodgetts  and  Mike  Hannah,  at  the  Basel  III  Conference,  Sydney, 
25 March 2011. 
 Thanks  to  Mike  Hannah  and  Bernard  Hodgetts  for  assistance  in  preparing  this  speech  and  to  Grant  Spencer, 
Toby Fiennes, Michael Reddell, Yuong Ha and Anella Munro for useful comments. 
Introduction 
Following  the  Global  Financial  Crisis,  there  has  been  general  acceptance  of  the  need  for 
central  banks  and  financial  regulators  to  adopt  a  greater  “macro-prudential”  orientation  to 
their  supervision  of  financial  systems  and  institutions.  While  the  objectives  of  prudential 
policy  are  usually  systemic,  the  policies  have  focused  on  ensuring  the  balance  sheets  of 
individual  institutions  are  robust  to  shocks.  The  crisis  showed  that  this  micro-prudential 
approach can sometimes miss important system-wide financial risks. So, policymakers are 
increasingly focussing on the resilience of the financial system as a whole, and in particular 
on the capacity for pro-cyclical lending behaviour to amplify the macroeconomic cycle in a 
destabilising manner. I will return to these concepts and issues later. 
There  is  currently  considerable  interest  in  macro-prudential  instruments  –  policy  tools  that 
might be used to promote a more stable and resilient financial system and help smooth the 
credit cycle, reducing the risk of boom-and-bust cycles. These tools would take the form of 
specific  prudential  requirements  placed  on  the  balance  sheets  of  banks  or  other  financial 
institutions, such as capital requirements that vary over time, or restrictions on lending like 
loan-to-value caps.  
This is not to suggest that micro-prudential policy is unimportant or that existing tools cannot 
be enhanced. On the contrary, a strong micro-prudential framework is essential for a robust 
financial system and remains at the heart of our efforts to maintain stability in the financial 
system. The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (the Basel Committee) is now close to 
completing a major strengthening of the micro-prudential framework, while keeping system-
wide stability objectives firmly in mind. 
Micro-prudential policies/tools 
The Basel Committee has developed and released new global regulatory standards for bank 
capital adequacy and liquidity, as endorsed by G20 leaders at their November 2010 summit. 
While the frameworks are now broadly set, further work is being undertaken on some areas 
of detail, in particular with regard to the liquidity standards.  
In addition, work continues on related international financial reform issues such as measures 
for  systemically  important  banks,  and  reviews  of  international  accounting  standards,  the 
Basel Committee’s Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision, and the international 
standards for financial market infrastructures. 
The Reserve Bank of New Zealand is not compelled to adopt the full package of new global 
standards. While we are very supportive of strengthening global standards for bank capital 
adequacy  and  liquidity,  we  are  likely  to  adapt  aspects  of  the  standards  to  New  Zealand 
conditions or take a different view on some matters (for instance in relation to the leverage 
ratio). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
We  are  currently  in  the  process  of  assessing  the  potential  impact  of  the  new  Basel  3 
standards  in  the  New  Zealand  context,  but  are  yet  to  make  final  decisions  about  the 
measures we will adopt. We do not propose to “lead the world”, but just as most jurisdictions 
are likely to implement Basel 3 ahead of the Basel Committee’s timeline, we would expect to 
do likewise. 
We are also likely to continue to implement our new liquidity policy according to our existing 
timetable (which is some years ahead of the Basel 3 timeline). While our liquidity policy is 
different in form to Basel 3, the substance is similar, and we do not propose to modify the 
policy in the near term.  
There  remains  some  uncertainty  about  how  our  liquidity  policy  will  align  with  the  global 
standards  and  with  the  Australian  Prudential  Regulation  Authority’s  liquidity  requirements. 
We  will be monitoring  international  developments  and  engaging  closely  with  APRA  as  this 
process unfolds. 
With  regard  to  the  Basel  3  leverage  ratio,  it  is  not  risk-based,  so  it  can  give  a  misleading 
picture of risk, and a single leverage ratio implies that one size fits all banks, which is not 
credible.  However,  we  will  explore  practical  issues  with  the  ratio  prior  to  making  a  final 
decision on this. 
More generally, the Reserve Bank remains committed to making improvements to its existing 
prudential  policy  framework,  given  the  importance  for  both  institutional  and  wider  financial 
system stability. With our major banks accredited to use their own risk measurement models 
for  Basel  2  capital  calculations,  we  put  particular  emphasis  on  ensuring  that  those  capital 
models  are  calibrated  to  plausible  economic  downturn  scenarios,  rather  than  the  relatively 
benign credit loss conditions of the past decade.  
Macro-prudential/financial policies/tools 
Objectives 
We  have  always  had  system  stability  as  our  objective  for  prudential  policies,  and  the 
institutional  focus  of  those  policies  has  worked  well  in  practice.  The  conservative  and 
through-the-cycle  approach  to  capital  adequacy,  including  Basel  2  implementation,  is  an 
example of how our micro-prudential stance has enabled our financial system to flourish and 
to be resilient through the recent crisis. We believe this approach and our micro settings are 
effective  in  doing  the  job  almost  all  of  the  time.  However,  by  its  nature,  micro-prudential 
supervision  has  not  always  paid  sufficient  regard  to  macro-financial  interactions.  The  aim 
now  is  to  design  prudential  policies  with  macro-effects  firmly  in  mind.  The  challenge  for 
researchers is to identify policy instruments that can actually be used in a real-world setting. 
This involves careful analysis of what individual tools might or might not be able to achieve, 
the  channels  through  which  they  would  be  expected  to  work,  and  the  potential  costs 
associated with using them.  
The  case  for  these  new  instruments  rests  mainly  on  their  scope  to  build  greater  financial 
system resilience to the risks associated with the extremes of the credit cycle. In addition, 
some  tools  may  have  the  ability  to  directly  dampen  the  credit  cycle.  Some  tools  are 
potentially more effective in achieving the first of these objectives than the second. While a 
range  of instruments  is being  viewed  enthusiastically  by  some  commentators,  we must  be 
careful about unintended consequences. The case for any particular instrument needs to be 
informed  by  a  full  analysis  of  its  likely  effectiveness  in  a  real-world  setting,  along  with  the 
associated costs of deploying it.  
It  is  important  here  to  be  clear  whether  tools  would  be  aimed  at  building  resilience  and/or 
dampening excessive credit growth. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
We also need to think about policies that address the cross-sectional dimension as well as 
the  time  dimension.  In  other  words,  the  risk  exposures  and  interconnections  between 
institutions at any point in time (the “cross-section” dimension), as well as the tendency for 
financial  institutions,  households  and  businesses  to  become  over-exposed  during  an 
upswing, and excessively cautious in the subsequent downturn (the “time dimension”). There 
are  also  numerous  design  issues.  Would  the  instruments  be  set  by  rules  or  discretion? 
Would they be set once and left alone or varied over the course of the economic cycle? Or 
would they be deployed only in exceptional circumstances? What governance arrangements 
are needed?  
We need to be very conscious of the costs of using macro-prudential tools when considering 
whether to use them. Some tools have the potential to damage financial system efficiency. 
They could also result in disintermediation (that is, promote lending through channels other 
than  those  affected  by  the  restrictions)  or  cause  other  unintended  or  undesirable 
consequences.  During  the  period  from  the  1960s  to  the  1980s,  New  Zealand  and  other 
countries used a range of prudential measures to assist in the control of money and credit, 
some  of  which  look  rather  similar  to  the  macro-prudential  instruments  currently  under 
consideration. Some of these tools, including the system of reserve asset ratios that applied 
to  the  trading  banks  in  New  Zealand,  ultimately  proved  quite  ineffective  and  led  to  the  
re-routing of financial activities outside of the banking system. So history reminds us of the 
need for caution. 
Above all, macro-prudential policy should not be viewed as a panacea for macro-economic 
imbalances. When seeking solutions to these imbalances, we also need to consider the role 
of the tax system and the broader regulatory environment. Where clear distortions in these 
areas  exist,  we  need  to  correct  them  in  lieu  of  adopting  macro-prudential  solutions.  Tax 
distortions  in  the  area  of  investor  housing  contributed  to  an  overheated  housing  market  in 
New  Zealand  during  the  last  cycle,  and  the  Reserve  Bank  was  strongly  supportive  of  tax 
changes made in this area last year. 
Potential macro-prudential instruments for New Zealand 
Over  the  past  year,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  been  assessing  a  range  of  macro-prudential 
instruments that might have a role to play in contributing to broader financial stability in New 
Zealand.1 
As in other countries, credit growth in New Zealand is currently weak, so we have not felt a 
pressing  need  to  implement  such  tools.  We  want  the  credit  process  to  be  able  to  support 
economic growth. 
However,  there  have  certainly  been  periods  in  our  history  where  we  have  experienced 
unsustainably strong credit growth and asset price cycles, and we have seen the damaging 
effects of these, both on the economy and the financial system. We will certainly face similar 
developments  in  the  future,  so  we  want  to  develop  our  macro-prudential  toolkit  now  to 
enhance  our  ability  to  deal  with  them  when  the  time  comes.  Rapid  credit  and  asset  price 
growth have amplified the general economic cycle and have made monetary policy’s task of 
controlling inflation more difficult. We have seen the difficulties that can arise when interest 
rates  alone  are  used.  The  collateral  damage  to  the  net  export  sector  from  the  high  New 
Zealand dollar exchange rate during the previous economic upswing prompted a search for 
potential tools to assist monetary policy. Now, in light of the broader and significant social 
and macroeconomic costs arising from financial system distress in the aftermath of the global 
financial crisis, there is greater will to consider additional tools. 
                                                 
1   For further discussion on macro-prudential instruments see Ha and Hodgetts (2011). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
We  believe  several  instruments  may  be  useful  from  this  perspective  and  could  potentially 
form  a  useful  part  of  the  Bank’s  macro-prudential  toolkit  in  the  future. The  instruments  we 
have been considering include credit-based measures and liquidity and capital buffers.  
We have been analysing these policy options in a New Zealand context, undertaking some 
simulations and other calculations to help establish their likely effectiveness.  
Our  expectation  is  that  we  would  use  these  tools  infrequently.  In  this  regard,  the  Basel 
Committee  has  suggested  that  some  countries  might  only  use  the  counter-cyclical  capital 
buffer  once  every  10  to  20  years  when  faced  with  exceptionally  strong  credit  growth.  We 
think this is a useful perspective. 
Related  to  this  we  would  have  a  preference  for  standards  that  can  be  set  and  to  work 
through  a  cycle  where  possible,  that  is  act  as  an  automatic  stabiliser  rather  than  a 
discretionary stabiliser. This is an important learning from fiscal policy. 
While our work is ongoing, we would offer the following preliminary conclusions: 
Credit-based tools 
A range of credit-based tools has been used by the emerging economies, especially in Asia, 
for many years. They include a wide range of regulated caps, targets and limits. These tools 
are  receiving  increased  attention  by  the  advanced  economies.  Of  these  tools,  we  have 
looked specifically at loan-to-value restrictions. 
Loan-to-Value restrictions 
Loan-to-Value restrictions (or LVRs) have been used by a number of countries in response to 
excessive credit growth and overheated housing markets and, on balance, appear to have 
met  with  some  success.  Such  a  tool  could  be  particularly  useful  in  circumstances  when 
funding  and  credit  margins  move  counter-cyclically,  and  so  reduce  the  effectiveness  of 
liquidity and capital requirements in braking credit growth during a boom. Another advantage 
would be that an LVR restriction could be imposed and enforced relatively swiftly, given that 
banks  would  require  longer  operational  lead  times  to  meet  higher  liquidity  and  capital 
requirements.  However,  the  use  of  non-price  or  administrative  restrictions  is  subject  to 
greater  long-term  enforcement  and  disintermediation  risks. Moreover,  we  are  not  aware  of 
any instances where LVR restrictions have been applied to sectors other than housing. 
Accounting-based tools 
Expected loss provisioning 
Expected  loss  provisioning  is  a  return  to  the  more  forward-looking  (and  less  pro-cyclical) 
standards of the 1990s, where general provisions may be based on the expected loss over 
the  life  of  a  portfolio  of  loans,  rather  than  current  loss  experience.  The  two  international 
accounting boards – the IASB and the FASB – have each published proposed models for 
expected  loss  accounting  and  the  two  boards  have  since  been  working  to  align  these 
proposals. A return to a system of expected loss provisioning in due course can be expected 
to play its part in contributing to a less pro-cyclical financial system. 
Liquidity tools 
Core Funding Ratio 
The Core Funding Ratio is a tool that can help promote greater financial system resilience by 
requiring  banks  to  fund  credit  using  more  stable  sources  than  they  might  choose  in  the 
absence of the requirement. This discipline is particularly desirable during periods of rapid 
credit  growth,  when  recourse  to  relatively  cheap  short-term  wholesale  funding  rather  than 
more stable longer term funding is more likely. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
As a tool to actively lean against excessive credit growth, our simulations suggest that the 
Core  Funding  Ratio  could,  in  some  circumstances,  play a  useful  supplementary  stabilising 
role  by  requiring  banks  to  always  maintain  a  proportion  of  core  funding  which  is  typically 
more expensive than shorter-term wholesale funding. Alternatively, the Core Funding Ratio 
could be used as a counter-cyclical policy tool. Although the Core Funding Ratio could be a 
less effective anchor on credit growth during a global boom (when funding spreads become 
compressed),  it  would  still  be  effective  in  its  primary  role  of  ensuring  that  banks  resort  to 
more stable funding sources. 
Capital-based tools 
Countercyclical Capital Buffers 
A Countercyclical Capital Buffer is a further potential tool for building resilience in the face of 
excessive credit growth, which could be very beneficial during the subsequent downswing. It 
has also been suggested that these buffers might help to dampen the credit cycle directly. 
However,  our  calculations  suggest  it  would  have  only  a  small  dampening  effect  on  the 
upswing of the credit cycle through its effect on the cost of funds (unless one makes extreme 
assumptions about the size of the counter cyclical buffer or the market cost of capital). 
Sectoral risk-weight adjustments 
Sectoral  risk  weights  could  be  adjusted  to  boost  capital  requirements  for  lending  to  a 
particular sector, over and above that calculated under the existing Basel 2 framework. While 
sectoral  capital  buffers  would  offer  scope  to  more  closely  target  those  sectors  subject  to 
rapid credit growth, we have found in simulations that the use of such buffers is likely to have 
only  a  modest  effect  on  the  pricing  of  credit  for  the  affected  sectors,  unless  dramatic 
adjustments are imposed. In principle, sectoral risk weights, generated by Basel II through-
the-cycle risk models, should already reflect the risks of lending to the sector, including the 
risk of a cyclical downturn. Accordingly, we must, in the first instance, focus carefully on the 
integrity of the risk models used to support Basel 2, before contemplating additional overlays. 
In  recent  years,  we  have  sought  improvements  to  the  banks’  Basel  II  risk  models  in  New 
Zealand in key areas such as housing and agriculture, when it has become clear that risk 
assessments have been overly optimistic.  
Moral suasion 
The potency of the tools we have considered as instruments to affect the credit cycle could 
be enhanced by a “moral suasion” effect, in addition to any direct impact via the cost of funds 
or credit constraints. This might mean that our simulations and calculations understate the 
effectiveness of the various tools to influence the credit cycle. The deployment of any tool 
would  send  an  important  signal  to  financial  institutions,  investors,  rating  agencies  and  the 
general  public  about  the  central  bank’s  unease  about  rapid  credit  growth,  and/or  the  risks 
accumulating in the financial system. It could thus help to reinforce a change in lending and 
borrowing  behaviour.  That  said,  we  are  naturally  cautious  about  the  strength  of  the  moral 
suasion effect, particularly in the context of a credit boom (where risk aversion may be low), 
and if the instruments themselves were not widely considered by institutions to have “bite”. 
Interplay of macro-financial and monetary objectives 
The  recent  focus  on  macro-prudential  instruments  has  gone  hand-in-hand  with  the  debate 
about the role of monetary policy in leaning against asset price cycles and the accumulation 
of financial imbalances. We know that easy monetary policy, in the form of low interest rates, 
can  interact  with  financial  decisions  by  encouraging  greater  leverage.  Whether  monetary 
policy  can  moderate  imbalances  or  lean  against  the  dynamics  of  credit  booms  is  a  more 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
complex  question.  Some  economists  have  argued  that  monetary  policy  could  be  used  to 
more  actively  address  these  imbalances  than  in  the  past.  This  would  essentially  see 
monetary policy take on a more active role in leaning against asset market and credit cycles 
rather than focussing solely on medium-term inflation.  
An  alternative  view  is  that  macro-prudential  policy  instruments  are  the  preferred  means  to 
deal  with  these  imbalances.  This  has  been  the  suggestion  of  Blanchard  and  others2  who 
state that the authorities now have potentially many more instruments at their disposal than 
they used before the crisis. They argue that the policy interest rate is a poor tool to deal with 
excess leverage, excessive risk taking, or deviations of asset prices from fundamentals.  
Whether macro-prudential tools are actually suitable for leaning against the credit cycle and 
managing  various  imbalances  ultimately  rests  on  an  analysis  of  the  individual  tools  and 
policy experience over time. Some tools may be useful, while others may well prove to be 
ineffective.  
Our analysis of recent credit cycles suggests that the timing and magnitude of previous credit 
and asset price cycles fuelled the general business cycle and made the monetary policy task 
more difficult. These credit cycles also resulted in growing macro imbalances and institutional 
resilience was weakened due to the heavy reliance on short-term wholesale funding. Though 
bank  capital  positions  remained  adequate  throughout  the  past  two  decades,  there  were 
downside  risks,  given  that  sectoral  lending  looked  stretched,  particularly  for  housing  and 
agricultural lending. To the extent that macro-prudential policy may have helped to dampen 
the  credit  cycle,  there  would  have  been  less  pressure  on  monetary  policy  and  on  the 
exchange rate.  
While none of the macro-prudential instruments we have considered would be a silver bullet 
in terms of moderating the credit cycle, we believe some could make a useful contribution. It 
may be the case that macro-prudential tools could be employed more effectively to influence 
the credit cycle by adopting a multi-pronged approach where several tools are employed in 
tandem. For example, faced with evidence of excessive credit growth, counter-cyclical capital 
requirements could be used alongside increases in the Core Funding Ratio, and this might 
represent a more even-handed approach than focussing on either one alone. This approach 
might  even  be  supplemented  by  a  more  targeted  instrument  such  as  a  Loan-to-Value 
restriction.  Using  multiple  tools  in  this  fashion  would  also  tend  to  reinforce  the  signalling 
effect on lenders and borrowers. 
Our current policy stance 
In addition to strengthening banks’ liquidity positions, the new Core Funding Ratio might be 
expected to discourage periods of very strong credit expansion. In recent years, banks have 
tended to fund cheaply in the offshore money markets and then use derivatives to synthesise 
fixed-rate term New Zealand dollar funding at a relatively low cost. The Core Funding Ratio, 
which is part of the new prudential liquidity policy, will drive banks to either compete for more 
stable funding from non-financial customers, or borrow in wholesale markets for terms longer 
than one year. During periods of rapid credit expansion, banks will thus not have the same 
ability to borrow in the offshore money markets, and will need to put increased emphasis on 
customer  deposits  and  longer-term  funding  markets.  As  a  result,  lending  rates  may 
automatically move higher without the Reserve Bank needing to move the official cash rate 
to the same extent. Through these channels, the policy has the potential to have a role in 
assisting monetary policy, although this effect is likely to operate “at the margin”. With short-
term wholesale market rates not likely to rise as much, the attractiveness of the New Zealand 
                                                 
2   See Blanchard et al (2010). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
dollar as a destination for “carry trade” investors could also be reduced, which is of benefit to 
a small open economy such as ours in terms of reducing exchange rate volatility.  
Statutory powers and governance3 
The  prospect  of  new  macro-prudential  tools  raises  important  governance  issues.  These 
include how decision-making about particular tools can be dovetailed with monetary policy 
decision-making and how policy changes should be implemented.  
In New Zealand, the Reserve Bank has dual responsibilities for price stability and promoting 
the soundness and efficiency of the financial system through its prudential powers under the 
Reserve  Bank  Act.  The  powers  under  the  Act  thus  provide  us  with  the  scope  to  adopt 
additional  macro-prudential  instruments  as  long  as  they  are  used  with  the  intent  of  better 
achieving financial system stability. On the other hand, using macro-prudential tools purely 
for  macroeconomic  stabilisation  purposes  would  require  changes  to  current  legislative 
arrangements. We do not believe that such an approach would be sensible.  
In  most  instances  we  would  expect  a  macro-prudential  intervention  aimed  at  moderating 
macro-financial imbalances to be consistent with the desired monetary policy stance. In the 
rare  event  of  inconsistency  with  monetary  policy,  we  would  either  need  to  hold  back  on 
macro-prudential  intervention,  or  proceed  with  considerable  caution.  An  example  of  this 
might be in a severe downturn where, on financial stability grounds, we might want to keep a 
capital or liquidity buffer in place for longer than usual, while also wishing to stimulate the 
economy.  
An  important  issue  for  consideration  is  thus  how  the  Reserve  Bank  might  choose  to 
implement  macro-prudential  policy  in  the  future.  The  process  would  begin  by  establishing 
that asset market imbalances had become exceptional and unsustainable − as reflected in 
asset  prices  and/or  excessive  credit.  Then  we  would  determine  whether  this  was  likely  to 
contribute  to  macro  imbalances  in  the  future,  which  warranted  policy  action  to  bolster 
financial  sector  resilience  and/or  moderate  the  credit  cycle.  We  are  continuing  to  work  on 
developing  a  set  of  indicators  to  help  identify  the  build-up  of  financial  imbalances,  but,  in 
practice, there will need to be a degree of judgment in assessing whether a macro-prudential 
overlay is warranted based on the Bank’s financial stability objective. Next, we would assess 
whether  a  macro-prudential  overlay  would  support  monetary  policy,  or  at  least  not  work 
against it.  
The  nature  of  the  imbalances  would  then  guide  the  selection  of  the  appropriate  tool. 
Generalised  credit  growth  and  broadly-based  accumulation  of  banking  system  risk  would 
prompt consideration of tools that are broad-brush in effect, such as the Core Funding Ratio, 
or  an  aggregate  Capital  Buffer.  Pressures  emanating  specifically  from  housing  or  other 
sectors could suggest more targeted tools such as Loan-to-Value restrictions or adjustments 
to risk weights for the implicated sectors. 
Turning to governance structures, there is no consensus in the literature whether monetary 
policy  and  prudential  regulation  and  supervision  should  be  combined  in  a  central  bank,  or 
undertaken by separate institutions. A strong case can be made that central banks are best 
placed  to  be  macro-prudential  regulators  and  that  centralising  responsibilities  within  the 
central bank helps to avoid problems of coordination. Certainly, this appears to be the trend 
internationally  following  the  crisis.  Our  own  experience  is  that  dealing  with  these  policy 
overlaps is assisted by having a small “full-service” central bank managing monetary policy 
and  prudential  policy  across  all  its  dimensions.  Nevertheless,  the  coordination  of  these 
functions can still pose challenges and good internal process is important. 
                                                 
3   See Spencer, G (2010) for further discussion of the Reserve Bank’s macro-financial stability role. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
We established a Macro-Financial Committee in 2009 for the internal consideration of macro-
financial  issues  and  policies.  This  complements  the  Reserve  Bank’s  Monetary  Policy  and 
Financial  System  Oversight  Committees,  which  consider  monetary  policy  and  micro-
prudential policies respectively. The Macro-Financial Committee currently reviews indicators 
of  financial  stability,  oversees  production  of  the  Bank’s  Financial  Stability  Reports,  and 
analyses  potential  new  macro-prudential  policy  tools.  If  and  when  new  macro-prudential 
policies are implemented, these will be reviewed and recommended to the Governor by the 
Macro-Financial Committee. The implications of such recommendations for micro-prudential 
policy and for monetary policy will be considered by the Governor and potentially referred to 
the  other  policy  committees.  We  also  regularly  consult  with  the  Treasury  and  Minister  of 
Finance  to  keep  them  abreast  of  prudential  policy  developments  and  to  glean  their  views. 
The  Financial  Stability  Report,  which  is  a  legal  requirement  under  our  Act,  requires  us  to 
explain and justify the prudential policies we adopt.  
Conclusion 
Micro-prudential  and  macro-prudential  policies  are  both  important.  Good  micro-prudential 
regulation should contribute to financial system stability and we need to remain focused on 
improving  the  regulation  of  individual  financial  institutions.  However,  we  have  learned  that 
this  might  not  be  enough  to  contain  system-wide  risks.  Macro-prudential  instruments  that 
focus on system-wide imbalances can also bolster financial system resilience and possibly 
help to moderate credit cycles. We need to be realistic about what can be achieved. Even if 
credit cycles can be moderated, they will not be eliminated.  
Like  other  countries,  New  Zealand  has  already  taken  steps  to  promote  a  more  resilient 
financial  system  with  our  liquidity  policy  helping  to  shift  the  banking  system  on  to  a  more 
stable  funding  base.  In  terms  of  using  macro-prudential  instruments  to  better  manage  the 
credit  cycle,  there  has  not  been  a  pressing  need  for  the  use  of  such  tools  given  recent 
weakness in the credit cycle. However, we do need to keep preparing for how we might deal 
with credit and asset price booms when they recur in the future. Our work so far on macro-
prudential instruments suggests that we should keep our expectations modest, but we have 
identified several tools that we would contemplate using in the right circumstances.  
The  world  has  little  practical  experience  with  some  of  the  macro-prudential  tools  currently 
under consideration. There will be an important learning period ahead as countries start to 
use  these  instruments  and  develop  their  implementation  frameworks.  We  can  expect  our 
understanding of this broad area to have evolved significantly in five or ten years’ time.  
References 
Blanchard, O, G Dell’Ariccia and P Mauro (2010), “Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy”, IMF 
Staff Position Note 10/03, IMF February. 
Ha,  Y  and  B  Hodgetts  (2011),  “Macro-prudential  instruments  for  New  Zealand:  A  preliminary 
assessment”, paper prepared for Reserve Bank workshop on macro-prudential policy, RBNZ, 21 
March 2011, available at http://www.rbnz.govt.nz/research/workshops/March2011/4280799.html 
Spencer,  G  (2010),  “The  Reserve  Bank  and  Macro-Financial  Stability”,  Reserve  Bank 
Bulletin, 73(2), June, available at http://www.rbnz.govt.nz/research/bulletin/  
RBNZ (2010), Financial Stability Report, November, available at  
http://www.rbnz.govt.nz/finstab/fsreport/  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
