Durmuş Yilmaz: Expectations in global economy 
Speech by Mr Durmuş Yilmaz, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, at 
the Leaders of Change Summit, Istanbul, 15 March 2011. 
 Distinguished Guests, 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  speak  here  at  the  Leaders  of  Change  Summit  that  has  gathered 
politicians,  decision  makers,  journalists,  economists  and  bureaucrats  who  have  played 
prominent roles in their fields and inspired societies across the world.  
Today,  I  will  share  my  thoughts  regarding  the  outlook  of  the  global  economy  and  the 
challenges faced by the emerging market economies in the aftermath of the crisis. Then, I 
will discuss the role of central banks in this new era. Finally, I will conclude my remarks with 
the experience of the Turkish economy and the response of the monetary policy.  
Distinguished Guests, 
More  than  two  years  after  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers,  the  dust  over  international 
financial system seems somewhat abated. Unprecedented measures taken by central banks 
and fiscal authorities have put financial markets back on a relatively steady course by late 
2009.  As  economic  activity  has  started  to  gain  pace,  risk  perceptions  gradually  improved, 
notwithstanding heightened sovereign risk in the Euro area, concerns over housing and labor 
markets  in  the  United  States,  uncertainty  regarding  the  health  of  financial  institutions  in 
advanced economies, huge influx of capital flows and associated risks in emerging market 
economies, and last but not least, questions surrounding the pace of demand rotation in the 
global economy. A long list of lessons on financial stability has emerged, though how to put 
them in practice is subject to an intense debate. The cooperation at a global scale is the key 
to  solve  current  problems  and  addressing  the  future  ones,  but  to  maintain  the  spirit  of 
cooperation among nations is getting more challenging as the memory of the crisis starts to 
fade away.  
Outlook for emerging market economies 
As we all know, capital flows to emerging market economies have intensified recently thanks 
to  better  growth  prospects,  interest  rate  differentials,  and  relative  stability  of  financial 
institutions in these countries that proved their strength and flexibility to extreme shocks. As 
liquidity in the global financial system increases thanks to rapid expansion of high powered 
money in major currency countries, central banks of small open economies face the risk of 
losing  control  over  monetary  conditions.  Policy  rate  hikes  to  contain  inflationary  pressures 
and restrain credit expansion are likely to lead further widening in interest rate differentials, 
thereby fueling even more capital inflows, more borrowing, higher asset prices and inflation. 
As  a  result,  emerging  market  economies  today  face  a  growing  risk  of  asset  bubbles, 
excessive  borrowing  and  inflationary  pressures  –  all  of  which  are  threatening  the  financial 
stability.  The  problems  facing  countries  with  current  account  deficits  are  much  challenging 
than the surplus ones, since they have to deal with both financial stability problems arising 
from the strength of capital flows and the risk of sudden stops.  
Assessing whether capital flows to emerging market economies are permanent or transitory 
is  a  challenging  task.  The  current  wave  of  capital  inflows  reflects  both  global  push  factors 
(including  ample  liquidity  and  low  interest  rates  across  advanced  economies)  as  well  as 
country-specific  pull  factors  (including  buoyant  growth  prospects,  relatively  sound  fiscal 
positions, and decreasing country risk perceptions). Over the medium term the pull factors 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
are likely to remain complacent, as relative to advanced economies, emerging markets are 
expected to grow faster, which would put upward pressure on interest and exchange rates, 
perpetuating  their  attractiveness  for  international  capital.  Although  it  is  far  from  certain 
whether  quantitative  easing  in  several  advanced  economies  would  persist  in  the  medium 
term,  monetary  authorities  in  these  countries  are  likely  to  maintain  their  accommodative 
stance in the near future as well. All in all, the current outlook suggests that capital flows to 
emerging  market  economies  may  be  a  permanent  phenomenon,  while  its  magnitude  is 
subject to change in risk perceptions.  
While  tools  to  manage  large  capital  inflows  are  well  known,  the  appropriate  policy  mix 
depends  on  country-specific  circumstances.  Fiscal  policy,  monetary  policy,  exchange  rate 
policy,  foreign  exchange  market  intervention,  macro-prudential  tools,  and  capital  controls 
could be used to cope with the inflows, but each of them entails some tradeoffs, which are 
likely  to  be  quite  costly  for  emerging  deficit  countries  in  particular.  Some  countries  have 
opted for various forms of capital control, although their effectiveness needs to be evaluated 
based  on  the  objective  of  imposing  them  at  the  first  place.  Some  studies  find  that  capital 
controls have some compositional effect and could alter the maturity of new investments. So 
far  as  reducing  the  volume  of  flows,  the  empirical  evidence  is  inconclusive.  Unless  the 
authorities have full control over capital accounts, partial restrictions are unlikely to offset the 
impact  of  flows,  prevent  appreciation  of  local  currency  and  provide  more  space  for 
independent monetary policy.  
In principle, flow of capital from advance economies to emerging ones and appreciation of 
the currencies of the latter over time is a mutually beneficial secular trend, as long as it is 
supported  by  strong 
fundamentals,  better  growth  prospects,  and  high  productivity 
differentials. Rather than fighting against this trend through over restrictive capital controls or 
excessive reserve accumulation, there is strong legitimacy in using macro-prudential policies 
to mitigate the adverse effects of volatility in capital flows, especially those with speculative 
nature, over financial stability. Several emerging economies have started implementing such 
measures to limit the credit growth and asset price bubbles. These measures include raising 
reserve  requirement  ratios,  requiring  higher  income-  and  deposit-to-loan  ratios,  tightening 
capital  adequacy  requirements  and  liquidity  ratios,  introducing  transaction  taxes,  fees  etc. 
The adequacy of such measures has yet to be seen, but the swift and proactive response of 
policy  makers  is  a  positive  step  forward,  as  the  most  recent  events  have  clearly 
demonstrated that it is likely to cost less to undertake preventive measures prior to a crisis 
than to clean up in its aftermath.  
Of course, economic conditions and institutions differ across countries. An effective macro 
prudential  tool  in  one  country  might  not  work  in  another  country.  Therefore,  policy  makers 
need to take country specific factors into account in designing their own framework. It is also 
imperative for the academic community and international organizations to focus on this issue 
and develop a set of concrete policy tools that national authorities, at their own discretion, 
can use to identify, assess and manage systemic risks. 
Financial stability and central banks 
The  critical  importance  of  financial  stability  from  a  central  bank’s  perspective  is  not  new. 
Smooth functioning of the financial system and payment mechanism has been a concern of 
central banks since their foundation. In fact, that is the reason they are called as “the bank of 
banks”  or  “the  lender  of  last  resort”  for  financial  institutions.  However,  over  time  as  the 
financial  system  gets  more  complicated  and  expanded  exponentially,  its  supervision  and 
regulation has been partially transferred to other institutions. The challenge faced by central 
banks is to establish a framework that combines both price and financial stability as primary 
mandates  and  identify  the  policy  instruments  to  target  both,  even  at  times  they  seem  to 
conflict with each other.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Central  banks  have  typically  calibrated  short-term  interest  rates  as  their  primary  policy 
instrument to determine their monetary stance. Since policy rates are too blunt instruments 
that  affect  the  entire  economy,  using  them  to  achieve  both  of  these  targets  may  lead  to 
unintended  consequences.  The  level  of  interest  rate  required  to  ensure  price  stability  can 
differ from an interest rate needed to preserve financial stability. For example, during boom 
periods driven by productivity and financial innovation shocks, a low policy rate would suffice 
to contain inflation; yet the very same level of interest rate may still lead to accumulation of 
financial  risks.  Moreover,  during  boom  periods,  emerging  markets  typically  attract  large 
capital inflows even with reasonably low level of interest rates. In such periods, the external 
and internal equilibrium requires different interest rates and monetary policy has to use more 
than one instrument. The “Tinbergen Rule” suggests that one instrument could be employed 
to achieve only one target, which in our case is conventionally recognized as price stability. 
There  is  clearly  a  need  for  a  second  set  of  policy  tools.  This  second  instrument,  in  my 
opinion, may be in the form of macro prudential tools that directly address financial activities.  
Should all authority and responsibility related to financial stability be centralized and vested 
in  central  banks?  On  the  one  hand,  the  benefit  of  vesting  the  decision  making  power  and 
responsibility  under  one  institution,  which  happens  to  be  the  central  bank,  is  clear:  no 
coordination problem, more effective communication under one voice, and swift response to 
emergencies. 
There are also downsides to such approach. The distinction between “goal independence” 
and  “instrument  independence”  lies  at  the  foundation  of  what  we  call  central  bank 
independence  today.  If  central  banks  assume  all  regulatory  and  supervisory  activities 
regarding the financial system and becomes the only authority responsible for its oversight, 
the  instruments  needed  to  achieve  that  goal  may  reach  to  a  point  where  the  principles  of 
democracy necessitates a much closer coordination and cooperation with the government, 
blurring  the  central  bank’s  independence.  Expanding  the  role  of  central  banks  in  the 
economy has the potential to create a strong and out of the ordinary entity in a democracy 
that emphasizes accountability and the responsibility of elected officials.  
Central  banks  played  a  vital  role  in  maintaining  financial  stability  in  the  past  and  they  are 
likely  to  do  so  in  the  future.  The  optimal  use  of  policy  rates  and  macro-prudential  tools  to 
achieve  both  the  price  and  financial  stability  would  define  the  criteria  for  assessing  the 
success of central banks in the post crisis era. During the crisis, new monetary tools have 
been explored by the central banks. Now, in addition to continuing to explore such monetary 
policy tools, policy makers would have to elaborate on the uses of regulatory rules for limiting 
the risks threatening financial stability and designing the optimal institutional structure for that 
purpose that finds the perfect balance between the risk of losing central bank independence 
and the risk of creating coordination problems (between the central bank and the regulatory 
and supervisory agency). 
Financial stability in Turkey and the monetary policy 
In the second part of my speech, let me turn to financial stability in Turkey and the monetary 
policy we have started to implement in the aftermath of the global financial crisis. 
Turkey used to be among emerging economies with high volatility and particularly sensitive 
to  global  risk  perceptions  throughout  the  1990s  and  early  2000s.  However,  this  time  the 
headwinds from the global crisis has remained relatively subdued thanks to the resilience of 
the financial system and prudent macro policies. Of course, the growth rate of the economy 
has dropped sharply, but neither price nor financial stability has been seriously jeopardized. 
In fact, Turkey was one of the few emerging countries that ended up with higher credit rating 
than pre-crisis level. 
A combination of several factors made the difference, but lack of excessive borrowing turned 
out to be the key. Unlike its peers, the leverage ratios in Turkey stayed at moderate levels 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
it  essential 
to  effectively  utilize  policy 
during  the  period  of  excess  global  liquidity,  thanks  to  prudent  policies  of  the  Banking 
Regulatory and Supervision Agency and the Central Bank of Turkey. In fact most of those 
policies implemented in Turkey since 2002 are incorporated into the Basel III principles, such 
as countercyclical buffers (banks in Turkey are not permitted to expand unless their ratio is at 
least four percentage points above the legal minimum) and liquidity ratios (both in local and 
foreign currency). Debt level of the public sector was also reduced significantly thanks to a 
quite ambitious fiscal discipline. The real strength of the economy, however, came from the 
management  of  foreign  exchange  risks,  which  is  the  most  critical  aspect  of  a  small,  open 
economy. Thanks to prudent regulations and oversight, the overall FX position of the Turkish 
banking  sector  was  balanced.  Households  carried  a  long  position  in  FX,  limiting  their 
exposure to curreny shocks. Although the corporate sector carried a significant FX position, 
their debt was mainly in long term.  
All  these  factors  contributed  to  the  resilience  of  the  Turkish  economy  to  the  global  crisis, 
which in turn provided ample space to the Central Bank of Turkey to implement front-loaded 
and  aggressive  monetary  easing  without  compromising  price  stability  objective.  No  rescue 
package  was  needed  to  support  the  banking  system.  Thus,  the  government  was  able  to 
enact  modest  but  still  quite  effective  counter-cyclical  fiscal  policies  in  the  midst  of  global 
turmoil. 
Since  early  2010,  due  to  anemic  growth  in  external  demand,  current account  balance  has 
been deteriorating rapidly, whereas core inflation remains subdued and output gap persists. 
Recent surge in capital flows toward emerging markets, including Turkey, has the potential to 
exacerbate  the  divergence  between  the  pace  of  recovery  in  the  domestic  and  external 
demand. If this pattern of growth coexists with rapid credit expansion and deterioration in the 
current  account  balance,  it  may  lead  to  financial  stability  concerns.  These  developments 
make 
than  policy  rates. 
Consequently, in today’s challenging financial environment, which is likely to persist in the 
foreseeable future, the Central Bank of Turkey underscored four basic principles upon which 
the monetary policies would be built to maintain financial stability. 
The first one is to discourage excessive leverage and keeping the debt ratios of banks and 
the  corporate  sector  at  modest  levels.  The  second  principle  is  extending  the  duration  of 
borrowing for private and public sector, as well as household deposits. The third principle is 
strengthening  the  FX  position  of  both  the  public  and  private  sector,  which  is  usually  the 
Achilles’  heel  for  emerging  economies  with  sizable  current  account  deficit.  The  fourth 
principle  is  better  management  of  foreign  currency  risk  by  the  corporate  sector  through 
instruments like the Turkish Derivative Exchange.  
In  November  2010,  we  have  started  quantitative  tightening  to  deal  with  rapidly  increasing 
macro imbalances driven by short term capital inflows and acceleration in credit growth. To 
that  end  we  have  raised  required  reserve  ratios  to  control  the  rapid  credit  expansion  by 
restricting  the  supply  of  loanable  funds.  Another  issue  we  considered  is  lengthening  the 
maturity  of  capital  inflows.  This  is  important  for  improving  the  quality  of  capital  account, 
limiting  maturity  mismatches,  and  avoiding  exchange  rate  misalignments.  To  this  end,  we 
lowered the policy rate and widened the corridor between overnight borrowing and lending 
rates so as to create some extra volatility in the short-term interest rates.  
Although  it  looks  quite  complicated  at  first  sight,  the  framework  we  adopt  in  spirit  is  not 
significantly different from the conventional inflation targeting framework. The only difference 
is that, previously our policy instrument was the one week repo rate, but now our instrument 
is  a  “policy  mix”—which  consists  of  a  combination  of  short  term  interest  rates,  reserve 
requirement  ratios  and  interest  corridor.  We  seek  to  use  these  instruments  in  right 
combination  in  order  to  cope  with  both  inflation  and  macro-financial  risks.  The  monetary 
policy stance in this framework is not only determined by the path of policy rates, but as a 
mixture of all policy instruments outlined above. Just like the conventional inflation targeting 
framework, the policy is forward looking and contingent on the economic outlook. The exact 
instruments  other 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
setting of the policy mix depends on the factors affecting price stability and financial stability. 
Although it is too early to assess the success of these policies, initial impact so far seems 
promising. 
Conclusion 
The recent crisis put front and center the rising economic power of emerging countries. It has 
also  demonstrated  the  vulnerabilities  within  the  global  system,  especially  across  financial 
markets.  Financial  stability  becomes  a  major  concern  for  policy  makers,  which  has  the 
potential to reshape the monetary policy framework of central banks. Significant steps have 
been  undertaken,  but  significant  progress  is  still  needed  to  tackle  global  imbalances.  That 
involves  not  only  revisiting  economic  policies,  but  also  economic  and 
institutional 
infrastructure  that  shapes  them.  As  the  quest  for  a  new  global  order  continues  both  in 
theoretical and practical levels; the predictability, balance and sustainability of the new global 
order will depend on the cooperative and coordinated efforts to establish a well-represented 
infrastructure. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
