José Manuel González-Páramo: The euro as one of the main aspects 
shaping European identity today 
Speech  by  Mr  José  Manuel  González-Páramo,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European Central Bank, on the occasion of the inauguration of the Euro Exhibition at Banca 
Naţională a României, Bucharest, 10 March 2011. 
 Dear Governor Isărescu, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I am delighted to be here today for the opening of the Euro Exhibition, which is being hosted 
by Banca Naţională a României until 27 May 2011. This is yet another example of the strong 
ties that the European Central Bank has developed with Banca Naţională a României over 
the last few years – I remember vividly the Romanian artists who performed in Frankfurt in 
2009 as part of the ECB’s Cultural Days, which were showcasing Romania that year.  
The  Euro  Exhibition  is  dedicated  to  Europe’s  single  currency:  the  euro.  Stage  Three  of 
Economic and Monetary Union began on 1 January 1999 with the irrevocable fixing of the 
exchange rates of the currencies of the 11 Member States initially forming the euro area, and 
culminated on 1 January 2002 with the introduction of the euro banknotes and coins. Since 
then, countries have continued to join the euro area, the latest, as you know, being Estonia 
on 1 January this year. The euro banknotes and coins are therefore now legal tender in 17 of 
the 27 EU Member States and are used by the 331 million citizens in an area stretching from 
Cyprus to Ireland and from Portugal to Finland. In fact, they have become one of the most 
visible  symbols  of  Europe  and  the  euro  is  one  of  the  main  aspects shaping  the European 
identity today.  
The introduction of the euro has brought many advantages – not only for citizens of the euro 
area  countries,  but  also  for  citizens  of  other  EU  Member  States,  such  as  Romania.  For 
example,  when  travelling  within  the  euro  area,  Romanian  citizens  can  use  the  euro  as  a 
means  of  payment  across  borders  and  thus  only  need  to  exchange  their  currency  once. 
Furthermore,  they  can  compare  prices  across  the  euro  area  countries  much  more  easily. 
Finally, Romanian enterprises, for which the euro area is an important trading partner, can 
use  one  currency,  namely  the  euro,  in  their  transactions  with  business  partners  from  the 
17 euro area countries.  
In  order  to  join  the  euro  area,  each  EU  country  must  meet  a  number  of  clearly  defined 
criteria, namely:  
1. 
it  must  not  be  subject  to  an  EU  Council  decision  that  an  excessive  budget  deficit 
exists; 
it must have a price performance that is sustainable and an average inflation rate 
that  does  not  exceed  by  more  than  one  and  a  half  percentage  points  that  of  the 
three best-performing EU countries in terms of price stability;  
it must have had an average nominal long-term interest rate that does not exceed by 
more than two percentage points that of the three best-performing EU countries in 
terms of price stability; 
its national currency must have participated in the Exchange Rate Mechanism II for 
at least two years and thus have respected the defined fluctuation margins of the 
currency towards the euro;  
it should ensure that it meets the requirements of legal convergence. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
In its regular convergence reports, the European Central Bank has emphasised that these 
criteria be met in a sustainable manner. With regard to Romania, achieving an environment 
conducive to sustainable convergence requires, inter alia, a stability-oriented monetary policy 
and the strict implementation of its fiscal consolidation plans. 
Let me now return to the Euro Exhibition itself. The Euro Exhibition has been on display at 
many  locations  throughout  the  EU,  so  far  including  Bratislava,  Barcelona,  Rome,  Berlin, 
Frankfurt,  Luxembourg,  Warsaw  and  Tallinn.  After  Bucharest,  it  will  continue  its  journey 
across Europe to Paris, Sofia and Athens. 
The  main  objective  of  the  Euro  Exhibition  is  to  give  citizens  of  all  ages  the  opportunity  to 
familiarise themselves with the euro. Visitors will have the chance to explore subjects ranging 
from the history of money to the production of euro banknotes. In addition, they will be able 
to learn how to check the security features of euro banknotes through the many interactive 
displays. 
As you walk around the exhibition, you will no doubt recognise the images of bridges that 
feature on the back of the euro banknotes. These bridges symbolise communication between 
the people of Europe, and between Europe and the rest of the world. They also represent the 
connection between the past and present, and symbolise a common European future. The 
diversity  of  Europe  is  also  reflected  on  the  national  sides  of  the  euro  coins,  which  depict 
national icons and symbols representing the national heritage and culture of each euro area 
country.  
The  Euro  Exhibition  also  takes  the  younger  generations  into  consideration.  In  the  kids’ 
corner, children can play the educational computer games, learn more about the features of 
euro  banknotes  from  the  interactive  displays  or  follow  the  story  of  Anna  and  Alex  as  they 
catch counterfeiters. For those of you here who have children, this is a good opportunity for 
them to learn about the euro in an entertaining and enjoyable way. 
Ladies and gentlemen, I sincerely hope that you will enjoy your visit to the Euro Exhibition. It 
is a pleasure for me, on behalf of the European Central Bank, to declare the exhibition open. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
