William C Dudley: Road to recovery – Hudson Valley  
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, at the State University of New York at New Paltz, New Paltz, 
New York, 19 May 2011. 
 Good morning. I am pleased to be in New Paltz to speak to you and meet with the business, 
community and academic leaders of the Hudson Valley. I particularly want to thank the Ulster 
County Chamber of Commerce and Community Capital Resources of the Hudson Valley, the 
Dutchess  County  Regional  Chamber  of  Commerce,  the  Dutchess  County  Economic 
Development Corporation and the Orange County Chamber of Commerce who assisted us 
with  our  recent  survey  of  small  business  finances.  More  than  100  businesses  responded 
from the mid-Hudson region. The survey results will be published early this summer and, of 
course, we will share the results with you and post them on our website.  
Each visit to this area gives me a chance to deepen the Bank’s relationship with the people 
whom  I  represent  as  head  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York.  Last  summer  I 
travelled through central and western New York and met with community leaders, business 
people, academics, bankers and government officials. 
On this visit I will also meet with a wide range of people to talk about what we do and to hear 
first-hand the economic and financial issues important to you in the Hudson Valley so that I 
can best represent all my constituents in my work at the Fed. I also look forward to walking 
across  that  magnificent  old  railroad  bridge,  the  Walkway  Over  the  Hudson,  for  the 
spectacular view that I’m told awaits me. 
I thank the Center for Research, Regional Education and Outreach for inviting me to speak at 
SUNY New Paltz today. This morning I will talk about economic conditions in the nation and 
the  region,  paying  particular  attention  to  how  the  recession  has  affected  the  labor  market 
here. As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the 
Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee (that is, the committee that 
sets interest rates – also known by its initials as the FOMC). 
Introduction to the New York Fed 
By way of introduction, let me start with a synopsis of what the New York Fed is, what we do 
and what makes my job so interesting. 
The  New  York  Fed  is  part  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System,  America’s  central  bank,  which 
was created by Congress in 1913. With this act, Congress delegated to the Fed System its 
constitutional authority to manage the supply of money in the nation’s economy. 
The  Fed  System  is  comprised  of  the  Board  of  Governors  in  Washington,  D.C.  –  a  federal 
agency currently led by Chairman Ben Bernanke – plus 12 regional Reserve Banks that span 
the  country.  For  example,  the  district  overseen  by  the  New  York  Fed  includes  all  of  New 
York, the 12 northern counties of New Jersey; Fairfield County, Connecticut; Puerto Rico and 
the U.S. Virgin Islands. 
Each Reserve Bank is distinct, with its own charter and a board of directors drawn from its 
district, but overseen by the Board of Governors. The law that created the Federal Reserve 
made  the  central  bank  independent  so  that  policymakers  could  make  decisions  about 
monetary  policy  –  such  as  whether  to  adjust  interest  rates  –  in  the  national  interest, 
somewhat insulated from political pressure. However, the Fed is accountable to Congress. 
Congress  has  set  an  explicit  objective  for  monetary  policy:  To  pursue  the  highest  level  of 
employment  consistent  with  price  stability.  This  objective  is  often  referred  to  as  our  “dual 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
mandate,” because it combines two goals: high employment, and low and stable inflation. In 
order to promote these objectives, we also pay close attention to financial stability, because 
without financial stability, it is very hard to achieve our goals for jobs and inflation. 
The Federal Open Market Committee consists of the Board of Governors plus the presidents 
of  each  of  the  12  district  Banks.  It  meets  in  Washington,  D.C.,  eight  times  per  year  to 
deliberate and vote on monetary policy, that is – should we change interest rates and, if so, 
how much. As the current New York Fed president, I am vice chairman at these meetings. At 
these  meetings,  each  committee  member  presents  his  or  her  current  outlook  for  the 
economy.  For  these  assessments,  we  augment  input  from  our  research  departments  with 
critical  information  about  local  economic  conditions  supplied  by  our  boards  of  directors, 
regional advisory councils and conversations with local stakeholders. My visit to New Paltz 
today is a part of these regional activities in which I learn first-hand about the economic and 
financial conditions important to you. 
One thing that makes my job even more interesting is that New York has some roles unique 
within  the  Fed.  For  example,  the  New  York  Fed  is  the  Reserve  Bank  charged  with 
implementing monetary policy. This means that at the direction of the FOMC, we buy and sell 
Treasury securities in order to adjust short-term interest rates. We are also the eyes and ears 
of the Fed on Wall Street, and we supervise many of the largest financial institutions in the 
country. We operate Fedwire® – the conduit for large money transfers between banks. And, 
we provide banking services to the U.S. Treasury, and central banks and governments from 
around the world. 
At the regional level, we continually track economic conditions in our District with the help of 
a number of tools that we have created for this purpose. For example, to fill a void in current 
measures  of  economic  output,  my  staff  produces  indexes  of  economic  activity  which 
approximate output for New York State and New York City on a monthly basis. We also have 
initiated a consumer credit panel so that we can monitor local credit conditions. And, we have 
begun a quarterly survey of small business finances to track the issues related to credit and 
financing for this key job-generating sector. If you are not already part of the survey, I invite 
you to give your business card to my staff and we will add you to our survey universe, so that 
it can reflect your views, too. 
To  share  the  information  that  we  gather  and  produce  about  our  diverse  district,  we  have 
created a rich website with very localized current data and maps on conditions in the region. I 
invite you to visit us on the web to explore the highly detailed information on small business, 
credit and housing conditions that we provide. 
Finally,  and  crucially,  in  the  aftermath  of  the  financial  crisis,  we  are  working  with  our 
colleagues in Washington and at other agencies in the United States and abroad to help put 
the nation’s financial system on a firmer footing. As regulators, we have made progress, for 
instance,  in  crafting  tougher  capital  rules  for  the  biggest  banks,  but  much  remains  to  be 
completed and we are determined to keep at it. I recognize fully that there can be no return 
to pre-crisis business as usual – whether on the part of the financial sector or on the part of 
regulators  like  ourselves.  We  must  learn  from  the  economic  catastrophe  of  the  past  few 
years so that the financial system is able to perform its essential role in supporting economic 
activity without being a source of instability for the economy as a whole. 
All in all, there is a lot to keep my colleagues and me quite busy – even in normal times. 
National economic conditions 
Now, what is the outlook for and risks to economic activity, employment and inflation in the 
nation? 
Since  the  recession  ended  in  2009,  the  economy  has  grown  at  a  relatively  modest  pace. 
Economic growth in the first quarter of 2011 was somewhat softer than anticipated, with the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
advanced reading of real gross domestic product (GDP) – that’s the economic output of the 
economy – increasing at only a 1.8 percent annual rate. A number of factors contributed to 
the slowdown. Construction activity fell – likely reflecting the continued large supply of unsold 
homes – and government expenditures at the federal, state and local levels declined. 
In addition, real consumption growth (that is, spending on goods and services adjusted for 
price increases) in the first quarter was slower than in the last quarter of 2010. This occurred, 
in  part,  because  of  the  rise  in  gasoline  and  food  prices  that  pushed  up  consumer  price 
inflation  last  quarter  and  reduced  the  amount  of  income  available  for  other  household 
purchases, a pattern that continued to be evident in retail sales for April. High energy prices 
have contributed to weaker consumer confidence, which also may have negatively affected 
consumer spending. 
However,  the  weakness  of  real  output  growth  in  the  first  quarter  probably  will  prove 
temporary.  Although  manufacturing  production  fell  in  April,  largely  because  of  supply 
disruptions  associated  with  the  earthquake  in  Japan,  business  survey  indicators,  including 
the  New  York  Fed’s  own  Empire  State  Manufacturing  Survey,  generally  continue  to  signal 
growth, suggesting that production should soon return to more robust growth. And financial 
conditions  have  continued  to  improve,  albeit  gradually.  The  temporary  reduction  in  payroll 
taxes and other fiscal measures also are providing support to demand. In addition, demand 
abroad – particularly in Asia – remains robust, supporting our exports. 
Most importantly, the labor market has shown further improvement, as demonstrated by the 
latest employment report. Although payroll job growth has been subdued during most of this 
recovery, the latest figures show the economy added 244,000 jobs in April – and an average 
of 233,000 over the past three months. While the unemployment rate – which is based on a 
different  survey  –  ticked  higher  last  month  to  9  percent  it  is  nonetheless  0.8  percentage 
points lower than it was in November, a relatively rapid decline by historic standards. Private-
sector  job  growth  has  been  strong  enough  to  more  than  offset  government  layoffs, 
particularly at the state and local levels. 
A particularly encouraging sign is the rapid growth of manufacturing jobs over the past year 
and the recent broadening strength in services employment. While the exact pace of a jobs 
market recovery is always hard to predict, we were expecting the rate of job growth to pick 
up  over  the  first  half,  and  I  am  hopeful  that  job  growth  will  continue  to  strengthen  in  the 
coming months. We would welcome this. However, even if the economy added 300,000 jobs 
per month from now on, we would likely still have considerable labor market slack at the end 
of 2012. 
Despite these clearly encouraging signs, there are still some downside risks to the growth 
outlook that bear watching. Let me list them for you: 
 
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  high  oil  and  commodity  prices  have  cut  into  household 
purchasing power, a difficult situation for many families that could constrain overall 
spending more than I anticipate.  
The renewed decline in home prices could dampen consumer spending and housing 
activity more than I expect.  
Finally, aggressive near-term government spending cuts or tax increases could slow 
economic growth at least in the short- to medium-term. I would emphasize, however, 
that  a  credible  plan  for  medium-term  fiscal  consolidation  is  sorely  required  and 
would have many economic benefits. 
  Although these issues bear watching, they remain risks rather than likely outcomes. 
In regard to inflation, after a period in which inflation was below the levels the Fed judges to 
be  most  consistent  with  its  statutory  objectives,  on  a  year-over-year  basis,  headline  CPI 
(consumer price index) has increased more than 3 percent, which is somewhat above this 
desired level. The rise in commodity prices over the past year probably will push up headline 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
inflation further in the next few months. It is noteworthy, however, that even with the sharp 
rise in oil and food prices over the past year (and notwithstanding the more recent drops), 
there has been limited pass-through into the prices of other goods and services. In fact, most 
measures of underlying inflation trends – such as core inflation (which excludes volatile food 
and energy prices) – remain below levels consistent with our mandate for price stability. 
Going forward, futures markets do not signal that investors expect rapid ongoing increases in 
commodity  prices  from  current  levels.  Provided  these  prices  stabilize  (or  indeed  retreat 
further), I would expect headline inflation to move back to a more mandate-consistent rate. 
While this process plays out, however, it is critical that we ensure that inflation expectations 
do not become unmoored. It is much harder to keep inflation in check if people begin to raise 
their expectations of inflation. At this point, measures of inflation expectations overall remain 
stable. 
Economists  at  the  New  York  Fed  have  examined  inflation  expectations  using  a  unique 
survey that we sponsor. As reported in a recent post on our new Liberty Street Economics 
blog, they find no evidence to suggest that a wage-price inflation spiral is getting underway. 
However, we will continue to monitor expectations for medium-term inflation very closely. 
To sum up, economic conditions have improved in the past year. Yet, the recovery remains 
moderate and we still have a considerable way to go to meet the Fed’s dual mandate of full 
employment and price stability. 
Regional economic conditions 
So,  how  is  our  region  doing?  As  some  of  you  may  know,  the  New  York  Fed  produces 
Indexes  of  Coincident  Economic  Indicators  to  help  monitor  the  performance  of  the  region. 
Based  on  these  measures,  the  downturn  in  economic  activity  in  New  York  ended  in 
November of 2009, and since then activity in New York State and New York City has been 
recovering steadily at a moderate pace. 
Regional employment trends 
Let me turn specifically to employment trends in the region. In particular, I want to describe 
our region’s experience during the recession and recovery. 
Nationally,  the  Great  Recession,  which  began  in  December  2007,  has  been  the  deepest 
economic downturn since World War II. When employment finally bottomed out in February 
2010  –  about  seven  months  after  the  official  end  of  the  recession  –  the  country  had  lost 
almost  6.5  percent  of  its  jobs  and  the  unemployment  rate  had  more  than  doubled.  Many 
people lost their jobs or saw their hours or income cut, and the duration of unemployment for 
jobless workers reached a historical high. For many families, this distress was compounded 
by  losses  of  wealth  from  declining  home  prices.  Since  that  low  point  of  employment,  job 
creation has resumed, albeit at a slower pace than we would like, and unemployment has 
retreated by a percentage point. As in other parts of the country, employment in our region 
declined  substantially  during  the  recession.  But,  the  various  parts  of  our  region  had  very 
different experiences. 
Employment in much of New York State, including the Hudson Valley, declined less severely 
than the nation. Both the state and city lost about 3.8 percent of their jobs. Part of the reason 
for  the  more  moderate  decline  in  jobs  in  New  York  during  the  recession  was  a  less 
pronounced boom-bust housing cycle. Indeed, as a percentage, the city and state lost fewer 
jobs during this recession than they did during either of the last two downturns. 
Now, as in the nation, a labor market recovery has begun across much of the region. Over 
the  past  year,  New  York  State  has  added  roughly  100,000  private-sector  jobs.  Within  the 
state,  the  recovery  has  been  somewhat  uneven.  New  York  City  has been  gaining  jobs  for 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
more than a year now – at roughly the same pace as the nation, while to date, the Hudson 
Valley has seen little overall job growth. 
Conditions in the Hudson Valley 
Continuing to drill down geographically, let me talk in more detail about conditions here the 
mid-Hudson  Valley.  I  am  referring  to  Dutchess  and  Orange  counties,  which  comprise  the 
Poughkeepsie-Newburgh-Middletown  metropolitan  area,  and  Ulster  County  –  which  is  also 
the Kingston metropolitan area. 
First, what does the mid-Hudson Valley region look like from an economic standpoint? There 
is a lot of economic activity here. All told, about 850,000 people live here and 420,000 jobs 
are located here. And, over the past decade, all three counties added people more rapidly 
than the state. 
People  here  are,  on  average,  more  highly  educated  than  in  the  nation  as  a  whole,  as 
measured  by  the  over  30  percent  of  residents  who  have  college  degrees.  So,  it  is  not 
surprising that median household income in all three counties is above the national median. 
The industrial composition varies by county. 
 
Ulster County employs  a relatively large share of people in its hotels and resorts, 
reflecting the importance of tourism. And, SUNY New Paltz is a major employer in 
the county.  
Dutchess County’s jobs are heavily weighted toward high-tech manufacturing, with 
growing diversification.  
In  Orange  County, 
large  share  of 
employment, partly due to Stewart Airport. West Point Military Academy is a major 
employer,  and  many  Orange  County  residents  commute  to  New  York  City, 
Westchester or Rockland for work. 
transportation  accounts 
for  a  relatively 
  Now, how has the area fared during the recent recession and recovery? I will address this 
from three perspectives: housing, credit conditions and jobs. 
Unlike  central  and  western  New  York,  this  region  experienced  a  modest  boom  and  bust 
housing cycle. During the boom period from 2000 to 2006, home prices more than doubled in 
the Poughkeepsie area and increased by 150 percent around Kingston – exceeding the U.S. 
rise of roughly 90 percent and the average rise of roughly 50 percent that prevailed in our 
region. The price declines in the bust period, from 2007 to 2009, were somewhat less severe 
than  the  nation,  falling  by  roughly  20  percent  in  both  areas,  compared  with  30  percent 
nationally. Recently – and this is a hopeful sign – home prices in both areas have steadied. 
Next,  how  are  families  in  the  Hudson  Valley  doing  in  restoring  their  finances?  During  the 
recession, all across the nation, debt delinquencies soared and many families found that they 
needed to reduce their debt to a sustainable level. We keep track of the credit conditions in 
the Second District – including the average debt that people in area carry and whether they 
are current with their payments – using the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s Consumer 
Credit Panel. In the Hudson Valley, debt per person with a credit report is now down by 5 
percent from its peak level in 2008. As of the first quarter of this year, debt was continuing to 
fall modestly. At the same time, delinquency rates continue to rise. The proportion of debt 
that is at least 90 days delinquent has risen from 2 percent in 2005 – which was low for New 
York  –  to  9  percent  currently,  matching  the  delinquency  rate  statewide.  These  patterns 
suggest that households in the area are making progress on restoring their balance sheets, 
but they may not have completed the process. 
With  regard  to  jobs,  employment  losses  in  the  area  during  the  2008–09  downturn  were 
steeper than in most of New York State, although less severe than for the Unites States as a 
whole.  As  of  the  first  quarter  of  2011,  the  Hudson  Valley  had  yet  to  see  a  clear  upturn  in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
employment.  The  private  sector  has  actually  seen  brisk  job  gains  in  the  leisure  and 
hospitality  sector,  and  the  professional  and  business  service  sector  added  jobs  in  the 
Poughkeepsie-Newburgh-Middletown  metro  area.  And  private-sector  employment  has  held 
steady in the Kingston area over the past year. Both areas, however, have seen continuing 
job  losses  in  retail  trade  and,  especially,  government  employment.  State  and  local 
government  employment  has  declined  by  about  3.5  percent  in  the  past  year  and  has 
weighed down overall job growth in both areas. 
Unemployment  rates  in  the  mid-Hudson  valley  peaked  at  8.4  percent  in  late  2009  –  well 
below  the  national  peak  of  10  percent  and  moderately  below  the  state-wide  peak  of 
8.9 percent. Nevertheless, as in much of the region and the nation, jobless rates have not 
retreated much thus far and remain stubbornly high. 
Thus, the area was severely affected by the recession, but somewhat less so than the rest of 
the country. The recovery has begun, but some signs of distress remain in housing, credit 
and labor markets. 
In the near-term, the regional economy, and indeed the economy of the entire state, faces a 
number of challenges. Among them is the need to address the large state budget gap. New 
York  is  not  alone  in  having  seen  its  tax  revenue  decline  as  the  economy  weakened  and, 
thus,  facing  hard  choices.  As  I  mentioned,  state  and  local  government  employment  has 
already weakened in many areas. Going forward, further contraction in this sector continues 
to pose some risks to the recovery. 
Longer term, one of the key challenges for this region is to ensure that it trains and attracts a 
highly skilled workforce that can meet the needs of innovative and rapidly changing firms. A 
region’s  human  capital  –  that  is,  the  skills  and  education  of  its  work  force  –  determines  a 
large part of its economic success and resiliency. The education and research taking place in 
local colleges and universities, such as SUNY New Paltz, directly helps to build those skills 
and sustain economic growth. 
Conclusion 
To sum up, the national economy experienced a soft patch in activity during the first quarter 
of 2011, while the recovery in much of the region continued at a good pace. 
In the region, the continued expansion of employment across the nation should help increase 
economic activity and employment in the Hudson Valley. Yet, as elsewhere, state and local 
government will likely be a drag for some time. 
And, both nationally and regionally, unemployment remains unacceptably high. 
Thank you for your kind attention. I will now be happy to answer some questions. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
