Ardian Fullani: Recent economic and financial developments in Albania 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the press conference on 
monetary policy decision of the Bank of Albania’s Supervisory Council, Tirana, 25 May 2011. 
 Today, on 25 May 2011, the Bank of Albania’s Supervisory Council reviewed and approved 
the  monthly  Monetary  Policy  Report.  Based  on  a  thorough  analysis  of  Albania’s  latest 
economic  and  monetary  developments  and  discussions  on  their  outlook,  the  Supervisory 
Council  decided  to  maintain  the  key  interest  rate  unchanged,  at  5.25%.  The  Supervisory 
Council judges that the current monetary conditions are appropriate to meet inflation target 
and continue the economic activity stimulus. 
Let me proceed with an overview of economic developments and main issues discussed at 
today’s meeting. 
 The  Albanian  economy  continues  to  maintain  a  positive  development  trend.  Recovery  in 
domestic  demand  over  the  first  four  months  of  the  year  and  the  positive  contribution  of 
external  demand,  have  impacted  on  positive  growth  of  the  Albanian  economy.  Also,  the 
major  macroeconomic  balances  have  remained  stable  and  the  financial  system  indicators 
appear to have generally improved. 
Following the shock of February, CPI inflation has followed a downward trajectory, reflecting 
the subdued inflationary pressures on the economy and Albanian financial markets. Available 
data  on  2011  Q1  show  that  the  economic  activity  has  registered  growth;  however,  the 
persistence  of  some  spare  capacity  suggests  that  this  growth  remains  below  potential. 
Negative  output  gap  implies  the  existence  of  low  domestic  demand-induced  inflationary 
pressures; however, persistent shocks to import prices caused inflation expectations to move 
up slightly. On the other hand, relative exchange rate stability and increased domestic food 
supply are factors that have made a positive contribution to lowering the inflation rate. Aiming 
at stabilizing inflation expectations in the medium term, the Bank of Albania raised the key 
interest  rate  by  0.25  percentage  points  at  end-March.  This  move  has  been  transmitted  to 
financial markets, in line with the time lags of monetary policy transmission mechanism. 
Inflation rate rose to 4.1% in April 2011, falling back gradually towards the Bank of Albania’s 
target. Its performance has reflected the increases in food prices, in the excise tax of some 
goods,  and  to  some  extent,  the  administered  price  inflation.  Higher  supply  of  agricultural 
products, likewise in March, made a positive contribution to lowering the annual inflation rate. 
Compared  to  the  previous  month,  consumer  price  index  fell  by  0.6%,  hitting  the  lowest 
monthly inflation rate of April in the last decade. 
Processed Foods and Non-food Consumer Goods, including oil and pharmaceuticals, have 
been  main  drivers  to  inflation.  The  first  item,  following  the  increase  in  primary  commodity 
prices  in  global  markets,  has  determined  and  will  continue  to  determine  the  inflation  rate 
throughout 2011. The second item has registered positive upward values as a result of global 
conjuncture of this item’s commodity prices, particularly oil prices. 
Besides the increase in basic food prices, April’s inflation rate has reflected also the second-
round effects, being materialised in higher prices of several services. The Bank of Albania 
judges that the Albanian economy should find space to face the external supply shocks or 
international price fluctuations by promoting domestic production in some key sectors. 
Annual inflation of tradable goods sector resulted 4.9% in April, accounting for about 73% of 
the headline inflation rate. High inflation rate of this sector of the Consumer Price Index (CPI) 
basket  continued  to  be affected  by  high  primary  commodity  prices  in global  markets,  non- 
optimistic  mid-term  anticipations  related  to  them,  and  depreciated  exchange  rate  pass-
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
through.  On  the  other  hand,  the  decline  in  this  item’s  share  to  determining  the  headline 
inflation  was  an  outcome  of  entry  of  domestic  agricultural  supply  into  the  market.  Non-
tradable goods inflation, reflecting better the domestic inflationary pressures, settled at 2.5% 
in April, attesting to a slight upward trend. April’s core inflation, which strips out the temporary 
effects, was close to 3.3%, reaching historical highs. 
Monthly paces of inflation rise, which are a better signal about inflation expectations trend, 
however, registered slower paces than in the previous months. Core inflation shows that the 
economy’s  inflation  expectations,  although  reflecting  a  relatively  higher  rate,  remain  well 
anchored at the Bank of Albania’s target. 
The Bank of Albania judges that in the period ahead, inflationary pressures along the time 
horizon of monetary policy stance will remain relatively high, but their intensity will decrease 
during  the  year.  In  the  following,  I  will  analyse  in  detail  the  factors  determining  inflation 
developments and related risks. 
During  the  first  months  of  2011,  global  economic  activity  continued  to  grow,  although  the 
signals coming from confidence indicators suggest that risks associated with these positive 
developments are in place. Global inflationary pressures have increased as a consequence 
of  a  higher  demand  and  persistent  supply-side  shocks.  In  advanced  economies,  fiscal 
consolidation and public debt reduction remain the major concerns, whereas inflation pickup 
has decreased the space for monetary stimulus. 
In  advanced  economies,  the  positive  global  demand  momentum  has  led  to  increased 
aggregate  demand,  while  the  upward  inflationary  pressures  have  made  the  central  banks 
respond by tightening the monetary policy. In financial markets, the public balance health has 
determined  the  yield  performance  in  several  countries,  while  the  political  tensions  have 
elevated  the  demand  for  safer  instruments.  The  outlook  remains  highly  uncertain,  as  a 
consequence  of  higher  global  prices,  fiscal  consolidation  in  some  euro-area  countries  and 
less space for fiscal and monetary stimulus. 
Returning  to  Albanian  economy,  the  latest  data  on  2011  Q1,  obtained  from  business 
confidence  surveys,  the  performance  of  external  trade  activity,  and  monetary  and  fiscal 
indicators, support the continued recovery of the domestic economic activity, primarily due to 
positive contribution of production sector. External demand and fiscal stimulus are factors of 
major influence on this growth. The data analyzed by the Supervisory Council show that Q1’s 
budget spending rose by 16.8%, sustained in part by ALL 12.5 billion budget deficit increase, 
compared to the same period a year earlier. 
April’s data show a decelerated growth of budget revenues over this period, underlining the 
necessity  of  taking  measures  to  observe  the  budget  deficit  projection.  Real  economy  data 
suggest a slow consumption growth, due to uncertainties about employment outlook. On the 
other  hand,  better  performance  of  business  credit  and  increase  in  capital  goods  imports 
suggest  that  investments  have  been  positive,  reinforcing  the  grounds  for  a  sustainable 
economic growth in the future. Continued business investments in turn require the response 
of  consumer  demand,  about  which  the  Bank  of  Albania  judges  that  there  is  room  for 
recovery. On the other hand, long-term investment growth will be conditioned by the ability of 
the  Albanian  economy  to  attract  foreign  capital.  In  this  context,  responsible  institutions  at 
macro  and  microeconomic  level  should  further  strengthen  the  work  for  structural  reforms, 
which  develop  the  comparative  advantages  of  the  Albanian  economy  and  enhance  our 
economic competitiveness in goods, labour and capital markets. The Bank of Albania judges 
that  preserving  the  macroeconomic  stability  parameters  is  an  indispensable  condition  to 
orient its work towards maintaining price stability and supporting financial stability at home. 
2011 Q1’s data on trade activity performance at home show a slight trade deficit narrowing, 
due  to  increased  imports  and  decelerated  export  growth  over  March.  Merchandise  trade 
deficit  shrank  by  roughly  0.3%  y-o-y,  accounting  for  22.1%  of  GDP.  Import  coverage  by 
exports  ratio  averaged  44.5%,  or  up  9  percentage  points  from  the  same  quarter  of  the 
previous  year.  During  the  period  under  analysis,  exports  in  value  continued  their  upward 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
trend  having  started  since  2010  Q1  and  expanded  by  45.4%  y-o-y.  However,  following  a 
speeded-up  growth  over  the  first  two  months  of  the  year,  our  export  growth  rates  were 
significantly mitigated in March. During the same period, imports grew by 15.9% y-o-y. The 
division  of  imports  according  to  their  final  use  highlights  the  rapid  growth  of  imports  of 
intermediate  and  capital  goods.  The  outlook  of  these  trends  may  be  associated  with 
expanded  current  account  and  trade  deficits  in  the  country.  The  Bank  of  Albania  is  very 
attentive  to  this  development,  since  it  significantly  conditions  the  external  balances  of 
Albanian economy and the foreign exchange market. 
Monetary  expansion  during  2011  Q1  was  in  line  with  economic  agents’  money  demand, 
marking  a  steady  year-over-year  growth  of  roughly  11%.  The  6.2%  y-o-y  growth  of  real 
money supply remained close to historical lows. Moderate growth rates of M3 aggregate and 
other  monetary  indicators  are  in  line  with  so-far  assessments  of  existence  of  contained 
monetary  inflation  pressures.  This  trend  is  also  supported  by  developments  of  currency 
outside  banks.  This  indicator  continued  to  fall  y-o-y,  and  together  with  the  shift  of  deposit 
structure to longer maturity terms, it indicates economic agents’ lower preference for liquidity. 
In  March,  the  annual  broad  money  expansion  was  supported  by  increased  private  sector 
credit,  which  rebounded  in  line  with  its  seasonal  trend  path.  The  upward  contribution  of 
private sector’s demand for money has offset the gradual decline in net foreign assets. Public 
sector’s demand for money has been upward, supportive to the government’s more active 
stance  over  the  first  quarter  of  the  year.  In  annual  terms,  the  private  sector  loan  portfolio 
grew by 11.5% from 10.3% in February. 
Business loan remains the main contributor to expanding the private sector lending. In the 
meantime, in March, household loans also showed positive signs. 
Overall,  financial  markets  performed  positively  during  the  first  four  months  of  2011.  The 
information transmitted from financial markets shows agents’ anchored inflation expectations. 
Key interest rate rise at end-March is passed-through to short-term money market interest 
rates,  leading  to  a  slight  flattening  of  T-bill  yield  slope.  In  deposit  market,  interest  rates 
continued to fall, reflecting also the correction of their high rates having been marked after 
2008.  The  foreign  exchange  market  has  operated  smoothly  and  the  exchange  rate  has 
continued to depreciate at low annual paces. The Bank of Albania has supplied the interbank 
market with the necessary liquidity for their normal functioning. 
To sum up, the Bank of Albania judges that the relatively high inflationary pressures over the 
first quarter of the year generally resemble transitory shocks. Other factors affecting inflation, 
such  as  current  and  expected  economic  performance  against  the  potential  rate  of 
development, expansion of monetary assets in the economy, and the public’s expectations of 
financial markets, exert inflation-restraining impact. 
Our  projections  for  the  rest  of  the  year  support  the  maintaining  of  positive  performance  of 
Albanian  economy.  Consumption  and  private  investments  are  expected  to  grow  further, 
whereas  following  the  2010  slowdown  the  fiscal  sector  is  expected  to  provide  a  positive 
contribution  to  economic  growth.  However,  the  demand  growth  is  likely  to  be  below  our 
economy’s potential even for 2011. This will condition the downward inflation pressures from 
the domestic economy, which are expected to offset the foreign price rise effect. On the other 
hand, the Bank of Albania is determined to take appropriate measures to meet its inflation 
target in the medium term.  
 The Supervisory Council judges that, based on the above overview, medium-term inflationary 
pressures  are  in  check.  Inflation  expectations  remain  anchored  at  the  Bank  of  Albania’s 
inflation target. In the absence of any unexpected shocks, inflation is expected to be within 
the  Bank  of  Albania’s  target  over  the  medium  term.  Also,  the  risks  around  this  central 
scenario appear to be balanced. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
At the end of the discussions, the Supervisory Council concluded that monetary conditions 
appear suitable for meeting the inflation target in the medium term and decided to maintain 
the interest rate unchanged, at 5.25%. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
