Kiyohiko G Nishimura: A central banker’s perspective on the 
international monetary system 
Remarks  by  Mr  Kiyohiko  G  Nishimura,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the 
International  Symposium  of  the  Banque  de  France:  Regulation  in  the  Face  of  Global 
Imbalances, Paris, 4 March 2011. 
 Introduction 
The theme of this panel, “Towards which international monetary system?” is a grand theme 
which cannot be easily captured in a ten minute intervention. So, I will focus on two issues. 
One  is  the  over-arching  issue  of  how  to  understand  the  role  and  limitations  of  the  current 
international  monetary  system,  or  IMS.  The  other  is  the  challenges  for  central  bankers  in 
fulfilling our responsibilities within the current IMS.  
The role and limitations of the current IMS 
First,  the  current  IMS.  The  IMS  provides  a  critical  underpinning  for  the  global  economy.  It 
enables  the  efficient  and  smooth  allocation  of  goods  and  services  as  well  as  capital,  both 
domestically and in a cross-border context. The central issue confronting the current IMS is 
how to introduce symmetrical adjustment between external surplus and deficit countries. The 
current  IMS  does  not  have  a  built-in  mechanism  which  automatically  fosters  a  balanced 
adjustment  process.  The  United  States  as  the  main  reserve  currency  country  has  little 
incentive  to  reduce  its  current  account  deficit,  especially  because  once  a  currency  is 
established as the main reserve currency, there is a strong inertia to continue its use. On the 
other  hand,  surplus  emerging  economies  are  expanding  their  foreign  currency  reserve 
holdings both from a precautionary motivation and from the perspective of maintaining their 
export competitiveness. To the extent domestic price developments are manageable, there 
are  few  constraints  to  this  strategy.  Past  attempts  to  reduce  imbalances  have  been 
conducted mostly on a bilateral basis and have, in some cases, turned into quite contentious 
discussions and negotiations.  
Another  issue  regarding  the  IMS  is  the  extent  of  the  adjustment  that  would  be  required 
among  surplus  and  deficit  countries.  The  distinction  between  longer-term  trends  in 
investment-savings  balance,  which  are  strongly  influenced  by  the  stage  of  economic 
development  and  demographics,  and  short-term  cyclical 
is  not  necessarily 
straightforward.  For  example,  in  the  1980s  there  was  substantial  pressure  on  Japan  to 
reduce its trade and current account surplus. However, such pressure could easily turn into 
misdirected  attempts.  In  the  Japanese  case,  using  macro-economic  policies,  especially 
accommodative fiscal and monetary policy, failed to achieve its goal and rather contributed to 
foster  an  environment  where  it  became  more  difficult  for  authorities  to  act  promptly  when 
there were signs that the economy was overheating. We all know where this ended up.  
That  is  why  the  G20  mutual  assessment  process  which  aims  to  bring  about  strong, 
sustainable  and  balanced  growth  and  reduce  persistent  large  imbalances,  and  the  G20 
discussions  on  the  IMS,  such  as  dealing  with  global  capital  flows  and  global  liquidity,  are 
interlinked. Combined,  they  are  expected  to  work  to  enhance  the  long-term  stability  of  the 
global economy and financial system. What is important here is that the mutual assessment 
process will likely be, at least in its initial phase, a process through which countries better 
understand  each  others’  policies  and  the  implications  of  their  domestic  policies  on  other 
countries. This will become the basis for constructive dialogue aimed at reaching an optimal 
combination of economic policies across multiple countries. The reform of the IMS will also 
be a long-term project. A caveat here in this global debate is that there will not be any single 
trends, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
model or concept applicable to all countries and situations. A thorough analysis, taking into 
consideration  each  country’s  unique  situation,  both  cyclical  and  structural  aspects,  will  be 
required. Even the IMF with its immense amount of expertise and resources has struggled to 
identify  unsustainable  imbalances  over  the  years.  In  1989,  in  the  Article  IV  discussion  for 
Japan,  staff  noted  that  inflation  in  Japan  was  not  “a  matter  of  concern”  and  therefore  “no 
compelling  reason”  could  be  found  to  tighten  monetary  policy.  In  the  2007  Article  IV  Staff 
Report  for  Ireland,  it  explained  that  “economic  performance  remains  impressive”  and  that 
“banks have large exposures to the property market, but stress tests suggest that cushions 
are  adequate  to  cover  a  range  of  shocks.”  The  IMF  Staff  Report  for  the  US  in  2007  also 
presented “a soft landing” as the most likely scenario. It also noted that “financial innovation 
and stability have underpinned US economic success.” The limitations of IMF surveillance in 
the run-up to the current global crisis are detailed in the recently published IEO1 report. I am 
not  trying  to  single  out  the  IMF  for  criticism.  Nobody  was  completely  successful  in 
recognizing  beforehand  the  emergence  of  bubbles  and  the  huge  negative  impact  after  its 
collapse. I simply wanted to highlight that when a single approach toward assessing an issue 
dominates the intellectual climate, it can cloud our judgment in finding emerging risks which 
could be seen when approached from a different angle.  
The challenges for central bankers in the current IMS 
Let me move on to the challenges for central bankers in the current IMS. I would like to raise 
three aspects.  
First,  the  implementation  of  macro-prudential  policy.  The  recent  global  financial  crisis  has 
brought to the forefront the importance of macro-prudential policy. We have not been able to 
nail  down  its  definition  nor  come  up  with  a  comprehensive  toolkit.  It  may  take  some  time 
before we can make it truly operational. But, we do need to recognize that it took a couple of 
decades  before  the  importance  of  price  stability  for  macro-economic  stability  was  fully 
appreciated and became embedded in central banks’ monetary policy framework worldwide.  
Second, dealing with tail risks. Taking preemptive action to avoid the emergence of bubbles 
which  can  seriously  harm  the  economy  means  implementing  measures  to  prevent  the 
build-up of tail risks or occurrence of low-frequency, high-severity events. The independence 
and the need for a clear mandate are often emphasized as an important basis for a macro-
prudential authority. However, I believe that is not enough. A fundamental change in the way 
economic  policy  is  perceived  is  called  for.  A  collective  understanding  within  society  that  it 
would  be  acceptable  and  appropriate  for  the  macro-prudential  authority  to  take  away  the 
punch  bowl  when  conditions  still seem  to  be  benign,  is  necessary.  This  is  a large  change 
from  the  current  policy  paradigm,  where  measures  are  typically  introduced  after  specific 
negative shocks occur.  
Third, the cross-border spillover effects of policy actions. Due to continuing globalization and 
financial  innovation,  the  interlinkages  among  economies  and  financial  markets  continue  to 
strengthen.  In  this  environment,  regardless  of  whether  it  is  monetary  policy  or  macro-
prudential  policy,  policy-makers  will  have  to  inevitably  be  cognizant  of  the  cross-border 
implications of their policy actions. It also needs to be recognized that there will be feedback 
effects from overseas economies and markets which will influence domestic economic and 
financial conditions. Forums such as the BIS have played critical roles in enhancing central 
bank communication and cooperation over the years. Their importance will increase further 
in such an environment.  
                                                 
1  
Independent Evaluation Office of the International Monetary Fund. The IEO released a report titled the “IMF 
Performance in the Run-Up to the Financial and Economic Crisis: IMF Surveillance in 2004–07” in January 
2011. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
I will not go into details here, but issues such as strengthening the plumbing of the financial 
system  though,  for  example,  further  improvements  in  foreign  exchange  settlement,  and 
enhancing the framework for resolving cross-border failures of financial institutions must not 
be forgotten as well.  
Concluding remarks  
Already forty years ago, the Nobel Prize-winning economist Sir John R. Hicks predicted that 
in a globalized financial market “a national central bank will no longer be a true central bank,” 
but  will  become  “single  banks  in  a  world-wide  system.”  Whether  we  like  it  or  not,  this  is 
clearly the direction we are heading. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
