Ardian Fullani: Building our future through financial education 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the 9th Annual Conference of 
the Bank of Albania “Building our future through financial education”, Tirana, 15 September 2011. 
 Honourable Minister of Finance, 
Honourable deputy Minister of Education, 
Your excellencies Ambassadors, 
Honourable NBS Governor Šoškiæ, 
Honourable Mr. Passacantando, 
It is a special pleasure for me to open the 9th conference of the Bank of Albania which this 
time is dedicated to financial education. I take this opportunity to wish a warm welcome to all 
the participants in this room and in particular to our foreign guests.  
If  you  asked  me  directly  what  I  mean  by  financial  education,  I  would summarise  it  as:  the 
ability of consumers and investors to understand financial concepts and products; ability to 
understand how to protect oneself against unwanted developments; ability of people to make 
sound decisions about their money in accordance with their life’s circumstances.  
Financial  education  should  start  with  understanding  the  role  of  finance  in  a  free  market 
economy. Finance “lubricates” the economic growth process. It also provides opportunities 
for all those who do not have sufficient financial resources. In 1911, the renowned Austrian 
economist  Joseph  Schumpeter  said:  “...that  the  structure  of  modern  industry  could  not  be 
erected  without  finance,  that  it  makes  the  individual  to  a  certain  extent  independent  of 
inherited  possessions,  that  talent  in  economic  life  ‘rides  to  success  on  its  debts’  even  the 
most conservative orthodoxy of the theorists cannot well deny.”  
If you asked me why is financial education important, I would say it in these words: because 
it contributes to Albanians’ financial welfare.  
The  more  literate  we  are  financially,  the  more  capable  we  are  to  make  decisions  that 
contribute to our improved welfare. This is true for everyone, regardless of who we are or 
where we come from. As Friedman, the Nobel prize winner, says: “Economic freedom is an 
essential  condition  for  political  freedom”.  Our  exercising  rights  that  result  from  economic 
freedom would be unavailing in absence of financial literacy and equality in the marketplace. 
This implies not only the same information at the same time, but also the capacity to use this 
information.  
Finances  create  an  added  value  not  only  for  the  rich,  but  also  for  the  entire  society.  It  is 
necessary  to  create  equal  access  for  all  citizens.  Equal  access  to  finances  and  equality 
before  the  law  are  the  foundations  of  modern  market  economy.  Finance  and  financial 
education walk side by side. While literacy may turn a poor man into a rich man, illiteracy, on 
the other hand, may conduct a rich man into misery. Finances are dangerous when you are 
not financially literate enough. That is why I consider this conference as highly important. 
The  Bank  of  Albania  has  devoted  constant  attention  to  financial  education.  Our  education 
agenda  is  integral  and  comprehensive  both  in  terms  of  geography  and  age  groups,  full  of 
interactive elements and modern communication methodology. Furthermore, I would like to 
refer  to  some  of  the  elements  that  constitute  the  philosophical  grounds  of  our  educational 
work.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
First,  I  would  like  to  recall  that  financial  welfare  is  inextricably  related  with  the 
country’s economic progress.  
It has been already proven that individual’s welfare is proportionate to economic activity and 
prices of financial assets. The cause-effect relation is true on both directions. Our economy 
and  financial  institutions  are  strong  when  revenues  and  wealth  grow.  Financially  healthy 
individuals are  inclined  to  increase  their  consumption  and,  therefore, boost  their spending, 
consequently  pushing  the  economy  forward.  Moreover,  financially  successful  people  boost 
lending potential by channelling their savings into deposits.  
Therefore, they are in a position to have access in crediting by the banking system, giving life 
to new businesses which, in turn, provide higher employment and welfare.  
To most of the people, having a job and a salary or estate is essential to personal financial 
welfare.  However,  the  fact  that  you  may  have  a  job,  or  a  salary  does  not  imply  that  you 
automatically have the capacity to make wise decisions on effective money utilisation.  
This  is  the  point  where  our  relation  with  financial  education  is  subjected  to  the  test  of  the 
truth. Is this test passed? The sub-standard credit crisis in the US revealed that individuals in 
most  cases  did  not  manage  to  pass  this  test.  Consequently,  the  debt  load  on  individuals 
grew even heavier, while access to crediting became tighter, resulting in a big risk for their 
financial  future.  A  similar  analogy  may  be  drawn  for  lending  in  foreign  currency  in  some 
Eastern European countries.  
Secondly,  financial  education  should  be  seen  as  a  public  good  that  brings  about 
positive externalities to the society. It not only increases individuals’ financial welfare, 
but also affects directly economic policy efficiency undertaken by relevant authorities.  
The more-educated the public, the higher economic policy efficiency is. Maintaining inflation 
and  economic  activity  under  control  is  almost  impossible  in  a  society  ailing  from  financial 
illiteracy.  Macro-economic  balances  are  achieved  and  maintained  through  monetary  and 
fiscal policies instruments. The society needs to be aware of these instruments, understand 
them, evaluate stimuli and incentives, and properly respond to them.  
The important role of consumer behaviour for the policies success is clearly evidenced in the 
“rational expectations” theory. A simple intuition behind this theory is that rational individuals 
shape  their  expectations  using  the  available  information  optimally.  They  respond  to  new 
information by adopting their behaviour to maximise welfare. 
In this case, individuals “equipped” with financial literacy read and understand developments 
in economic policies and respond to them rationally. This mutual understanding would drive 
the economy towards the desired direction. The central bank adjusts its policies in response 
to the actual behaviour of agents, who would adjust their behaviour in line with the central 
banks  policy.  For  this  interaction  to  happen,  both  the  public  and  the  central  bank  need  to 
speak  the  same  language  and  understand  each  other  unequivocally.  Money  management 
needs this two-way understanding and the active role of individuals. Consequently, the trust 
and  confidence  of  the  public  is  earned,  monetary  policy  objectives  are  achieved  and  its 
reliability is enhanced. 
Thirdly, I would like to underline that financial education of individuals establishes a 
more stable society on one hand and a stronger and secure banking system on the 
other.  
Efficient  and  ongoing  financial  education  is  a  path  trotted  by  millions  of  individuals  and 
families in their endeavour to achieve financial goals and accumulate wealth.  
The positive effect of this process is reflected in a stronger economic and financial stability 
for the entire society. The banking system has its role to play in this process, mainly through 
lending to businesses and households. As a regulator, the Bank of Albania gives its share of 
contribution ensuring that banks strictly abide by legal and regulatory obligations in relations 
with  their  customers.  On  the  other  hand,  financially  literate  customers,  contribute  to  the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
development of the banking system with their increasing demand for financial products and 
services. Therefore, the result is clear: higher efficiency, lower charges, better services and 
healthier and safer banking system.  
Fourthly,  I  would  like  to  highlight  that  financial  education,  over  time,  improves  the 
living standard in the long run, including retirement age.  
In  a  recent  analysis,  the  essential  reason  why  an  individual  needs  to  amplify  his  financial 
literacy is that this investment will help him to reach his money management objectives.  
Although personal objectives may vary from an individual to another, on financial education 
point of view, improvement of society’s living standard is guaranteed and confidence for the 
future is boosted.  
Financially  literate  individuals,  are  capable  to  make  healthy  financial  plans,  from  an  early 
stage  of  their  career.  Their  knowledge  enables  them  to  plan  their  finances  for  retirement, 
children’s  education  and  accumulation  of  financial  assets.  These  individual  behaviours, 
seemingly irrelevant, bring about great benefits in the national perspective.  
Fifth,  I  would  like  to  underline  that  financial  education  is  a  long-term  process, 
extended over time, and that the presence of specialised institutions is indispensable.  
Although  in  financial  crisis  individuals  incur  large  damage,  they  continue  to  be  involved  in 
future  crisis.  The  number  of  individuals,  who  are  familiar  with  interest  rates  they  either 
receive or pay in financial transactions, remains low.  
The  same  may  be  said  about  investment  strategies,  financial  risk  identification  and 
assessment, and other elementary money management concepts.  
Many people do not think in financial terms and do not perceive accurately profits and costs 
resulting from bank loan use, or wealth-related effects originating from home ownership and 
other similar long-term assets.  
Reasons behind this behaviour are understandable and related to the fact that the majority of 
the  society  acquires  information  circumstantially,  hoping  that  the  actual  failure  becomes  a 
lesson for the future.  
One  way  to  eradicate  circumstantial  learning  is  the  introduction  of  financial  reading  at  an 
early  stage  of  education.  In  this  view,  I  would  proudly  say  that,  the  Bank  of  Albania  has 
provided an outstanding contribution. Allow me to briefly make an résumé of our work in this 
aspect.  
The first strategic station of financial education provided by the Bank of Albania was needs 
assessment and identification of training priorities. From this point of view, we assessed that 
it  was 
frequent 
communications  with  the  market  and  its  important  participants,  as  well  as  periodic 
explanations  of  monetary  policy  decision-making  and  risks  balance  related  to  inflation  and 
financial stability, are some initiatives that we consider as a very effective education process. 
I am proud to say that now we have: 
 
 
A public opinion that builds up expectation as regards our decision-making; 
A  media  sector,  which  has  admirably  enhanced  understanding,  interpretation  and 
expectations related to our decision-making; 
A  banking  sector,  which  reads  accurately  and  responds  with  high  flexibility  to  the 
direction oriented by us; 
A  qualified  public  critique,  where  Bank  of  Albania  finds  a  mirror  of  alternative 
opinions on its adopted decisions and practices.  
the  public.  More 
the  Bank  “de 
indispensable 
to  open 
facto” 
  to 
Another important aspect is the identification and division of the population according to their 
demographic, geographic and cultural characteristics. For us, financial education is a public 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
good  intended  for  all.  In  compliance  with  the  best  international  experiences,  we  identified 
financial education for young people as highly important, targeting not only students but also 
their  educators.  Its  practical  realisation  has  been  a  complex  process  requiring  adequate 
human and financial resources.  
For that purpose, the slogan adopted by us is very meaningful: “Education may be costly, but 
it  is  priceless”.  The  implementation  methodology  is  widely  known:  meeting  face-to-face, 
interactive games that intrigue children’s imagination, a series of publication with a flexible 
level  of  difficulties,  training  of  teachers  of  economy,  and  a  tour  in  various  schools  of  the 
country.  
In this regard, I would like to point out to the recent contribution of the Bank of Albania to 
high-school  students  for  the  book  on:  “Personal  finance  in  your  hands”,  which  is 
conceptualised as an elective subject for high schools. 
Honourable participants,  
Education  is  a  never-ending  process.  Learning  is  lifelong.  It  is  deep,  immense,  and 
comprehensive. Therefore, I have to say that in spite of what we have done so far, we still 
have  a  long  way  to  go.  The  Bank  of  Albania  deems  as  imperative  the  drafting  and 
implementation  of  a  national  strategy  on  contemporary  financial  education.  The  Bank  of 
Albania stands ready to join any initiative at national level, which aims at promoting literacy 
across the country.  
Thank you! 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
