Nor Shamsiah Mohd Yunus: Raising the bar in compliance and 
enforcement 
Opening address by Ms Nor Shamsiah Mohd Yunus, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of 
Malaysia,  at  the  International  Conference  on  Financial  Crime  and  Terrorism  Financing 
(IFCTF)  2011  –  “Raising  the  Bar  in  Compliance  and  Enforcement”,  Kuala  Lumpur, 
19 September 2011. 
 the  Securities 
It  is  my  pleasure  to  wish  all  of  you  a  warm  welcome  to  this  Third  Annual  International 
Conference on Financial Crime and Terrorism Financing. We are indeed privileged today to 
have  the  presence  of  Yang  Berhormat  Dato’  Seri  Hishammuddin  Tun  Hussein,  Minister  of 
Home Affairs of Malaysia, who has kindly agreed to deliver the keynote address, and officiate 
the  opening  of  this  conference.  His  presence  reflects  the  significance  placed  by  the 
Government of Malaysia on the roles and contributions of the financial sector in supporting 
the national agenda to combat and reduce crime, particularly economic and financial crime 
as well as terrorist financing, which is crucial in maintaining the integrity and stability of our 
financial  system.  On  behalf  of  the  financial  sector,  I  wish  to  extend  our  gratitude  to 
Yang Berhormat Dato’ Seri for gracing today’s event. 
I  also  am  heartened  by  the  continuous  and  encouraging  participation  of  the  private  and 
public  sectors  in  this  conference.  Now  in  its  third  year,  this  conference  has  become  a 
hallmark  event  that  brings  together  various  stakeholders  in  Malaysia  and  from  abroad,  to 
discuss issues relating to financial crimes and terrorist financing. In addition, this conference 
continues to receive support from, and participation of, renowned international experts and 
our regional counterparts. I bid you a warm welcome to Malaysia, and would like to take this 
opportunity to extend our appreciation for your support and contributions. 
Allow  me  to  also  to  congratulate  the  organiser  of  this  event,  the  Compliance  Officers 
Networking Group of Malaysia (CONG) and the collaborating partners, namely the Institute of 
Bankers  Malaysia, 
the  Malaysian 
Insurance  Institute,  Islamic  Banking  and  Finance  Institute  Malaysia  (IBFIM)  and  the  Asian 
Institute  of  Finance  for  successfully  putting  this  event  together.  I  have  been  made  to 
understand  that  for  the  first  time,  this  conference  has  also  received  support  from  the 
academia, with the participation of Universiti Teknologi MARA as a collaborating partner.  
Financial crime continues to evolve in modus operandi, multiply in scale and complexity, and 
hence,  the  greater  the  potential  harm  they  can  inflict  on  the  smooth  functioning  of  the 
financial markets and payment systems, financial sector stability and economic development 
globally.  As  an  unintended  consequence  of  enhanced  access  to  financial  services  and 
greater mobility of funds, facilitated by increased globalisation, technological advancements 
and  ongoing  efforts  to  promote  financial  sector  development  and  financial  inclusion,  the 
opportunity and attractiveness for criminal elements to abuse the financial sector, and use it 
as  a  conduit  to  move  illicit  funds,  and  to  disguise  criminal  activities,  have  increased.  The 
International  Monetary  Fund  or  the  IMF  has  estimated  the  amount  of  money  laundered 
worldwide  to  be  in  the  region  of  2%  to  5%  of  global  GDP  annually  or  equivalent  to 
USD800 billion to USD2 trillion a year. Indeed, the financial community now regards financial 
crime such as fraud, money laundering and terrorist financing, including cyber terrorism and 
crime, as one of the top operational risks that they face. 
While the direct cost of financial crimes to individual financial institutions may be substantial, 
it pales in comparison to the damage to the overall financial system that can arise from the 
failure to implement adequate measures to effectively combat financial crimes, in particular 
those  relating  to  money  laundering  and  terrorist  financing.  Such  costs  include  reputational 
damage  to  the  institution  and  country,  loss  of  confidence  of  key  stakeholders  such  as 
Industry  Development  Corporation, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
to 
to 
international 
financial  system, 
implement  appropriate  countermeasures 
depositors,  investors  and  the  public  at  large  and  perhaps  more  damaging,  the  loss  of  or 
restricted  access 
including  correspondent  banking 
relationships. With the increasing trend by supranational bodies to publicly name jurisdictions 
that are seen to be uncooperative, and to call on their respective members and the broader 
international  community 
in  dealing  with 
institutions and entities from these jurisdictions, the implications, both financially and socially, 
can be devastating to the countries concerned. 
Over the years, the risk areas and thus the scope of regulations to prevent the use of the 
financial system as a conduit for illegal and other undesirable activities that can pose threats 
to  global  security  have  also  increased.  From  money  laundering  to  terrorist  financing,  the 
regulations  and  standards  are  being  extended  to  comprehensively  address  new  and 
emerging threats. This is evident in the ongoing review of the Financial Action Task Force 
(FATF) 40+9 Recommendations, where among others, several policy goals and initiatives for 
combating  corruption,  and  addressing  proliferation  financing  more  effectively,  are  being 
thoroughly discussed and deliberated. A major development in the review of the standards, 
that is relevant to the industry, is the higher emphasis that will be placed on assessing the 
effectiveness  of  measures  implemented  to  counter  the  risks  of  money  laundering  and 
terrorist financing, rather than merely looking at technical compliance. 
This  is  indeed  very  relevant  to  the  theme  of  this  year’s  conference  “Raising  the  Bar  in 
Compliance  and  Enforcement”.  As  Malaysia’s  AML/CFT  regime  grows  in  maturity,  the 
benchmark  for  compliance  by  financial  institutions  will  be  measured  more  in  terms  of  its 
effectiveness in deterring and preventing financial crimes before they occur, and in effectively 
supporting the relevant law enforcement agencies to bring the perpetrators to justice when 
such  crimes  happen,  despite  our  best  efforts.  In  this  regard,  I  urge  the  industry  to  take 
advantage of the knowledge and experience of the panel of experts assembled here at this 
conference,  to  better  understand  and  prepare  for  the  implications  of  the  review  of  the 
FATF 40+9 Recommendations, and the expectations on financial institutions and boards of 
directors moving forward.  
For  Bank  Negara  Malaysia,  the  enhancement  to  the  nation’s  infrastructure  to  combat 
financial crimes will remain as one of our key priorities. In this regard, our role as Malaysia’s 
primary financial regulator will continue to focus three broad areas. The first is to deter and 
prevent criminals from abusing the financial system to be the conduit for illegal activities by 
ensuring  the  continued  effectiveness  of  Malaysia’s  legal  and  other  relevant  infrastructure, 
systems  and  processes  in  combating  financial  crimes.  Secondly,  is  to  ensure  all  financial 
institutions  continue  to  strengthen  their  defences  against  such  threats  and  risks  via  our 
regulatory policies as well as risk-based supervisory and surveillance activities; and thirdly, to 
strengthen collaboration between the financial industry with other domestic and international 
stakeholders  in  AML/CFT  initiatives  to  protect  the  integrity  and  stability  of  our  financial 
system, including implementing capacity building programmes, such as this Conference.  
While the financial sector has, over the years, strengthened its risk management and control 
functions  to  combat  financial  crimes,  a  higher degree  of  emphasis  and  attention by  senior 
management  and  the  Board,  on  issues  relating  to  AML/CFT,  can  further  improve  the 
standards  of  compliance  and  the  effectiveness  of  measures  put  in  place  to  fight  against 
money  laundering  and  terrorist  financing.  We  also  observed  that  financial  institutions 
exhibiting effective defences against financial crimes shared four common attributes in their 
AML/CFT  framework.  These  are:  (i)  well  developed  and  clearly  articulated  policies  and 
procedures;  (ii)  effective  governance  structure,  particularly  on  the  compliance  function; 
(iii) incorporation  of  AML/CFT  compliance  assessments 
the  audit  and  capacity 
development  programmes;  and  (iv)  increased  and  effective  use  of  information  technology 
and  management  information  systems  for  AML/CFT  risk  monitoring  and  management. 
therefore,  talent  development  in  this  area  is  becoming  increasingly  critical.  A  well  trained 
workforce  is  a  valuable  asset  that  would  contribute  to  the  implementation  of  an  effective 
compliance framework with impactful results. This can be achieved through the formulation 
in 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
of  structured  and  coordinated  capacity  development  programmes  aimed  at  elevating  the 
level of technical skills, leadership and professionalism.  
On this note, Bank Negara Malaysia lauds the initiative by the financial sector in formulating 
the  AML/CFT  Certification  Programme  for  compliance  officers  that  will  be  launched  during 
this conference. 
This conference and indeed the theme “Raising the Bar in Compliance and Enforcement” is 
very  timely  and  relevant.  It  is  our  hope  this  and  other  similar  platforms  will  foster  greater 
collaboration and sharing of ideas among the industry, compliance practitioners, regulators, 
law enforcement agencies and other relevant stakeholders and further contribute towards the 
enhancement of our framework and initiatives to combat financial crimes and preserve our 
financial and macro-economic stability. With that, I wish to thank you for your kind attention 
and wish you a productive conference.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
