K Dwight Venner: New economics of nationhood in the eastern 
Caribbean 
Speech  by  Sir  K  Dwight  Venner,  Governor  of  the  Eastern  Caribbean  Central  Bank,  at  the 
public  forum  on  the  Organization  of  Eastern  Caribbean  States  (OECS)  Economic  Union 
“OECS Economic Union – integrate for a brighter future”, panel discussion “Opportunities for 
economic  development  within  an  OECS  Economic  Union”,  Kingstown,  St  Vincent  and  the 
Grenadines, 15 February 2011. 
 The  ratification  of  the  new  OECS  Economic  Union  Treaty  on  21st  January  2011  signifies 
both a new beginning and a potential turning point for the small states of the Caribbean. 
In  light  of  the  current  stagnation  of  the  Caribbean  Single  Market  and  Economy  (CSME) 
project of CARICOM, the importance of the OECS Economic Union lies in two areas, namely: 
Providing a platform and instrument for socio-economic development of the OECS; 
1. 
and 
Giving hope to current and future integration efforts in the wider region.  
2. 
With  respect  to  the  first,  the  new  Economic  Union  will  provide  a  single  financial  and 
economic  space,  which,  through  a  process  of  aggregation,  should  lead  to  the  following 
advantages: 
 
 
 
Economies of scale in production, distribution, marketing and public administration; 
The spread of risk across a greater land space and a bigger population; and 
Increased  capacity  to  negotiate  with  third  countries,  groups  of  countries,  regional 
and international institutions and foreign private investors.  
The  nature  of  an  Economic  Union  is  so  complex,  that  is,  involving  a  number  of  sovereign 
states, that it requires appropriate political arrangements and institutions to be successful. 
In  the  hierarchy  of  integration  arrangements,  which  range  in  ascending  order  from  Free 
Trade Areas to Customs Unions, Common Markets, Economic Unions, to full Political Union, 
there is the need for more political inputs at each succeeding rung of the ladder. By the time 
the  participating  countries  arrive  at  Economic  Union  status,  the  basic  elements  of 
government or the state should be in place, namely, a Legislature, Executive and Judiciary. 
The  difference  between  a  Political  Union  and  an  Economic  Union  is  that  the  former  is  a 
Nation State, taking the governmental form of either a Federation or a Unitary State, with the 
critical  political  powers  being  centralised.  The  latter,  that  is,  the  Economic  Union  can  be 
described, in the new political science jargon, as a State Nation or Nation of States where 
the ultimate political power still resides at the state level.  
In summary, in the Political Union there is one sovereign state, while in the Economic Union 
there are multiple sovereigns. The Economic Union allows member states to define new and 
expanded economic borders while the political borders remain the same. 
We are faced with both a challenge and an opportunity to create a new state with the unique 
characteristics of both an Economic and Political Union. Ultimately we will have to conceive 
of  an  arrangement  that  provides  for  a  dual  system  of  Government,  Governance  and 
Economic Management. 
In all of this, the fundamental question which must be posed is, “What are the benefits to the 
people of the OECS which will be derived from an Economic Union in the face of our current 
and future challenges?” 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
to  external  shocks.  The  global  recession  has  vividly  exposed 
The international arena; 
The CARICOM Region; and 
Our domestic circumstances. 
These challenges come from three sources: 
1.  
2.  
3.  
The  international  arena  poses  some  significant  challenges  to  us,  given  our  openness  and 
vulnerability 
these 
vulnerabilities and the internal structural deficiencies of our very small economies.  
The major sources of foreign exchange, namely, tourism receipts, foreign direct investments 
and remittances have been negatively affected by the recession.  
The slow recovery in the economies of our traditional trading partners, because of the depth 
of the recession, and its continuing impact on employment and their financial systems, will 
clearly also affect our recovery. 
The  global  economy  is  also  going  through  significant  shifts  in  terms  of  the  supply  and 
demand  for  critical  commodities  such  as  oil,  food  and  iron  ore.  These  shifts  have  been 
exacerbated by the effects of climate change in the case of food, and political turmoil in the 
case  of  oil.  Significant  improvements  in  technology,  particularly  ICT  and  transportation,  as 
well as more sophisticated supply chains are also having a significant impact on production 
cycles. 
There are also significant global imbalances in trade and foreign exchange reserves between 
the mature economies and the new emerging markets such as China, India and Brazil which 
have resulted in a shift in global economic power and influence.  
Within CARICOM, the major issues are stagnation in the progress towards the Single Market 
and Economy and the uneven distribution of benefits to member states.  
At the national level the principal challenges are: 
 
 
 
 
 
The  challenges  are  daunting  and  cannot  be  successfully  met  without  a  concerted  and 
collective effort by our states and societies. This can be posed as a two step process. Within 
each state there must be consensus on the way forward. The body politic and civil society 
must  come  to  an  agreement  and  understanding  on  the  medium  to  long-term  goals  of  our 
countries and the requirements to achieve them.  
In addition, in the economic sphere there must be meaningful integration through:  
(a)  
The secular decline in growth over the last three decades; 
High levels of unemployment and poverty; 
Declining government revenues as a consequence of the recession; 
Increasing debt to GDP ratios; and 
Increasing levels of crime and socially deviant behaviour.  
the  provision  of  information  on  employment  opportunities,  investment  possibilities, 
and potential markets for goods and services; and 
the facilitation of linkages between economic sectors, for example, agriculture and 
tourism, and between the public and private sectors. 
(b)  
As a practical matter at the national level there must be a good road network and an efficient 
internal transportation system, as well as efficient and reasonably priced seaport and airport 
services and facilities. 
At  the  Economic  Union  level  there  must  be  sectoral  production  integration  which  will  be 
facilitated by: 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Efficient and reasonably priced air and sea transportation; 
Free movement of goods and services, capital and labour; and 
Effective coordination of economic policies.  
 
 
 
This process of internal restructuring and integration will usher in a new entity with a different 
persona and brand, both regionally and internationally. There will be a significant increase in 
physical size, population and GDP.  
The  new  treaty  provides  for  a  Regional  Executive  with  legislative  powers,  alongside  a 
Regional Legislative Assembly with discussive functions. This is paralleled at the local level 
by Cabinets and the National Legislatures. The Judiciary has long been regional and will be 
consolidated through the absorption of the magistracy.  
The OECS arrangement, due to the existence of a Monetary Union, already has features of 
an  Economic  Union.  It  also  has  regional  regulatory  functions  in  the  areas  of  banking, 
securities markets, telecommunications and civil aviation. There has also been a very high 
degree of functional co-operation. 
In response to the global crisis, the OECS and the ECCU have also introduced significant 
institutional arrangements such as: 
 
 
A Joint Meeting of the Authority and the Monetary Council; and 
Sub-Committees  of  the  Council  to  treat  with  the  management  of  financial  stability 
issues in banking, insurance, credit unions, and international finance.  
Finally, there are four major areas which are critical to the success of the new entity. The first 
of these, Justice, Law and Order, is the primary public policy goal of each state and in this 
case  would  involve,  in  my  view,  the  regionalisation  of  the  courts,  the  police  and  prison 
services. 
Transportation is a sine qua non for the integration of multiple states. Also, energy is such an 
important factor in both consumption and investment that it must be dealt with at the regional 
level. 
Finally,  education,  skill  training  and  innovation  are  critical,  both  to  create  regional  and 
national  citizens,  and  to  produce  the  type  and  quality  of  labour  force  that  can  make  the 
economies of the Economic Union regionally and internationally competitive.  
The  Economic  Union,  as  a  collective  entity,  must  then  reposition  itself  in  relation  to 
CARICOM and the global economy. 
With respect to CARICOM, there will have to be a two track approach which outlines:  
(i)  
(ii)  
The role of the OECS within CARICOM; and 
Bilateral  relations  between  the  OECS  as  a  bloc  and  individual  members  of 
CARICOM. 
There  has  been  a  remarkable  reversal  of  fortunes,  circumstances  and  individual  country 
policies  within  the  region  since  the  demise  of  the  West  Indies  Federation.  To  put  this  in 
context, three reasons have been advanced, among others, for this failure:  
1.  
2.  
3.  
Freedom of movement of people – Trinidad and Tobago’s sticking point;  
Customs Union which was Jamaica’s objection; 
The  fear  of  having  to  support  the  smaller  islands  which  was  illustrated  by  the 
Jamaica  Labour  Party’s  cartoon,  “Sucking  Me  Dry”  and  Trinidad’s  iconic  phrase, 
“One from Ten leaves Nought”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Today,  the  smaller  islands  are  receiving  a  large  number  of  migrants  from  Jamaica  and 
Guyana,  and  are  running  very  large  trade  and  services  imbalances  with  Barbados  and 
Trinidad and Tobago. 
The  economic  arrangements 
in  CARICOM  are  dysfunctional  with  no  redistributive 
mechanisms. Until a structured approach to this, and other issues is taken, there is likely to 
be no progress. Given these circumstances, the OECS has no option, and in fact, has an 
obligation to deal with this matter at both the CARICOM and bilateral levels in a very urgent 
and direct manner.  
In the cases of Trinidad and Tobago and Barbados – the CARICOM states which are nearest 
to us, there are two overriding issues, namely:  
1.  
The very large trade and services imbalances which should have by now invoked 
some protestation under the Treaty of Chaguaramas; and 
The vexed matter of the CLICO and British American Insurance Companies which 
are  headquartered  in  those  countries  and  to  which  citizens  and  institutions  in  the 
OECS have a very large exposure. 
2.  
In the case of the global economy, the OECS as a bloc has to do the following:  
(i)  
Restructure our external economic relations policies to access resources from the 
rest  of  the  world  on  terms  favourable  to  ourselves.  We  need  to  organise  trade 
agreements,  development  aid,  foreign  investment,  new  tourism  markets,  and  the 
transfer of technology as critical elements of this new policy. 
Realignment  with  new  centres  of  global  growth  such  as  China,  India  and  Brazil, 
while adjusting to the new circumstances of our traditional trading partners. 
Raising the bar for our economic performance through increased competitiveness, 
flexibility  in  production  and  the  rebranding  of  the  OECS  as  a  collective  economic 
entity. 
(ii)  
(iii)  
The optimal use of the wider economic space; 
The significant lowering of the unit costs of production; and 
Better policies and their effective implementation.  
This will have to be underpinned by: 
(a)  
(b)  
(c)  
We  have  developed  two  models,  one  for  an  explanation  of  the  current  economic 
underperformance and the other to provide a possible answer to a high growth regime.  
The first model is referred to as the Input, Consumption, Default Model.  
In very short summary, this is explained as follows:  
We have concentrated on inputs, mainly in the form of finances in both public and private 
sector  projects.  The  money  spent  has  not  been  matched  by  commensurate  increases  in 
output. 
The  economies  have  been  largely  consumption  oriented,  a  characteristic  facilitated  by  the 
sophistication  of  the  import  infrastructure  for  consumer  goods  and  the  proliferation  of 
wholesale and retail traders in the economy. 
Policies  and  sectors  have  continued  in  existence  by  default,  long  after  their  positive 
contributions to the economy have ended. 
The model which looks to the future is the Aggregation, Coordination, Output Model which 
is epitomised by the new Economic Union.  
The aggregation of the resources of the member countries can be outlined in terms of both 
economic theory and economic geography. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
With respect to economic theory, this involves the incremental addition of the resources of 
each country starting from the smallest and recording with each, the easing of the constraint 
of small size. In the case of economic geography, it would be working with the countries in 
close proximity to each other to see the effects of the easiest way to combine resources. 
The coordination of policies is the defining feature of an Economic Union and gives the state 
the opportunity to plan and guide economic activities.  
Output must be looked at from both the starting point and the end point. We must identify 
rates  of  growth  which  are  desirable  and  then  put  in  place  the  policies  and  allocate  the 
resources which will give the desired results.  
These new approaches will have to be centered around three major programmes:  
(a)  
(b)  
(c)  
The rationalisation, development and mobilisation of these three sectors would be the basic 
platform for our development. This, however, stands a much better chance of success under 
regional, as opposed to national regimes.  
The Heads of Government have stated specific goals which are headed by a growth rate of 
6 per  cent.  Further  analysis  by  the  World  Bank-sponsored,  Growth  Commission  suggests 
that a 7 per cent rate of real growth sustained over at least ten years should lead to better 
and more lasting outcomes. 
Economic  transformation  would  in  fact  require  this  high  and  sustained  rate  of  growth  and 
could be described as: 
 
Public Sector Modernisation; 
Financial Sector Development; and 
Private Sector Development. 
Diversification of the economies with at least five sectors, contributing a minimum of 
10 – 15 per cent towards GDP; 
Substantial growth in the private sector oriented mainly towards exports; 
Flexible and adaptive production structures; and 
Highly trained work forces engaged in quality jobs.  
 
 
 
This  approach  requires  specific  targeting  of  sectors  and  industries  which  have  significant 
potential for growth. All the analyses and the empirical evidence would seem to indicate that 
tourism almost selects itself as what can be referred to as the lead transformative sector. It 
does seem to have a comparative, though not a competitive advantage at this time, but given 
the new arrangements, the conversion to a more competitive position is definitely possible. 
through 
The  utilisation  of 
multidestination  tourism  and  the  greater  possibility  of  backward  and  forward  linkages  in  a 
widened market space will provide the potential for greater competiveness.  
The advantages which tourism brings are as follows: 
(a)  
Increasing market size through the addition of a transient, high per capita income 
group; 
Increasing export potential by bringing what is essentially an export product into the 
domestic space; and 
The  industry  can  be  structured  to  fill  the  gap  which  our  countries  missed  by  not 
passing through a consolidated industrial phase.  
the  complete  economic  space  of 
the  Economic  Union 
(b)  
(c)  
One can cite the linkages as follows: 
 
Backward Linkages 
– 
Agriculture 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
 Agro Industries 
– 
Fishing 
– 
Forestry 
– 
Handicrafts 
– 
– 
Manufacturing 
Forward Linkages 
– 
– 
– 
Finance 
ICT 
Services 
–  Business  
–  Educational  
–  Health  
–  Cultural  
–  Sporting  
–  Consulting 
In  conclusion,  one  can  state  with  some  authority  that  given  current  circumstances  and 
policies,  as  well  as  the  existing  predilection  to  single  country  arrangements,  the  rate  of 
growth and sustained development is unlikely to be achieved.  
The countries have responded by establishing new treaty arrangements and the preparation 
of an Eight Point Stabilisation and Growth Programme.  
The Eight Point Programme has been converted to a strategy following the deliberations of 
the  69th  Meeting  of  the  Monetary  Council  held  on  11  February  2011  at  the  Eastern 
Caribbean Central Bank’s Headquarters in St Kitts.  
The strategy is predicated on a combined approach to fiscal and debt management across 
the  Currency  Union  with  fiscal  targets  which  will  be  set,  published  and  monitored  on  a 
quarterly basis. This will cover points 1, 2 and 3 of the Eight Point Programme. This is being 
simultaneously linked to points 6, 7 and 8 which address financial stability in the banking and 
insurance sectors. 
These will be the prerequisites for public sector investment programmes which will promote 
the platform for investments by both the domestic and international private sectors. 
The critical elements for success in transforming these economies, now that we have started 
down this path, will be the following: 
1.  
Political  vision,  commitment,  direction,  decision  making,  oversight,  monitoring  and 
insistence on implementation and the meeting of deadlines;  
Technical and administrative capacity in both the public and private sectors; and 
Widespread and broad based social consensus and accountability.  
2.  
3.  
In the final analysis we have to define our goals clearly and carefully so that we can measure 
our success or failure in a tangible way. 
We also have to remember that we must identify the actions that we need to achieve these 
goals. 
In this regard, I end with this quotation: 
“A goal without a plan is just a wish” 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
