Philip Lowe: Some current issues in the Australian economy 
Address  by  Mr  Philip  Lowe,  Assistant  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  the 
Committee  for  Economic  Development  of  Australia  (CEDA)  -  New  South  Wales  (NSW) 
Economic and Political Overview 2011, Sydney, 17 February 2011. 
 I am very pleased to be able to participate again in CEDA’s annual Economic and Political 
Overview.  
In line with the theme of this morning’s conference, I would like to discuss a couple of issues 
that will have an important bearing on economic developments in Australia over the next year 
or  so.  The  first  of  these  is  the  performance  of  the  world  economy  and,  in  particular,  the 
ongoing strength in global commodity prices. And the second is the continuing evidence of 
restraint  in  consumption  and  borrowing  by  Australian  households.  I  would  also  like  to  talk 
briefly about the RBA’s  forecasts that were published in the latest  Statement on Monetary 
Policy (SMP).  
The world economy and commodity prices 
When I spoke at this conference a year ago, the central forecast for the world economy was 
that it would grow by around 4 per cent in 2010, with many commentators focussing on the 
downside  risks.  Now  that  most  of  the  GDP  figures  are  in  for  the  year,  it  looks  like  global 
growth was quite a bit stronger than this, with global GDP estimated to be up by around 5 per 
cent in 2010. There have also been upward revisions to forecasts for 2011, with the IMF now 
expecting that growth will continue to be above trend in both this year and next (Graph 1).  
Graph 1  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
While  the  recent  outcomes  for  the  world  economy  have  been  better  than  expected, 
significant downside risks remain, not least because of the poor state of public finances in 
many of the advanced economies. These risks clearly cannot be ignored, although the recent 
more  positive  data  have  led  to  renewed  focus  on  another  risk  –  that  is,  a  rise  in  global 
inflationary  pressures,  particularly  as  commodity  prices  have  increased  significantly  over 
recent months. As an illustration of this increase, the RBA’s own Index of Commodity Prices 
is at an all time high and has risen by almost 50 per cent over the past year (Graph 2).  
Graph 2  
  This  upward  pressure  on  commodity  prices  is  occurring  at  a  time  when  conventional 
measures  of  the  global  output  gap  remain  quite  large.  Many  of  the  advanced  economies 
continue  to  operate  well  below  full  capacity  and  unemployment  rates  are  still  very  high. 
These  large  output  gaps  mean  that  there  is  little  upward  pressure  on  domestic  costs  and 
prices in most advanced economies, with core measures of inflation generally still very low. 
In earlier episodes in which these economies were operating well below potential, there was 
typically also general softness in commodity markets, with weak demand weighing on prices. 
Yet, this is not occurring on this occasion. Instead, we are experiencing the co-existence of 
strong commodity prices and large output gaps in the advanced economies.  
The most plausible explanation for this is the continuing shift of global economic weight to 
the emerging market economies, particularly those in Asia. While industrial production in the 
advanced economies remains below its 2008 peak, industrial production in Asia has grown 
very strongly (Graph 3). As a result, there has been strong growth in demand for resources. 
And similarly, with incomes growing rapidly in the region over a number of years, the demand 
for agricultural commodities has also been very strong.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Graph 3  
  In trying to understand what is going on, it is useful to put these recent developments in a 
longer-term context.1 Graph 4 shows an index of global food prices using World Bank data  
– adjusted for changes in the general price level – back to the beginning of the 20th century. 
As  is  evident  from  this  graph,  the  1980s  and  1990s  was  a  period  of  unusually  low  food 
prices. According to this particular index, between 1982 to 2000, the average price of food 
was around 30 per cent lower than the average for the previous 80 years. The same general 
picture  applies  to  the  prices  of  base  metals,  and  to  a  lesser  extent,  for  iron  ore  and  coal 
prices  (Graphs  5  and  6).  More  recently,  of  course,  this  has  all  changed,  with  the  relative 
prices of food, base metals, iron ore and coal all increasing significantly. In the case of iron 
ore and coal, the prices are now at very high levels compared with their historical averages.  
                                                 
1   See also O’Connor and Orsmond (2007), “The Recent Rise in Commodity Prices: A Long-Run Perspective”, 
RBA Bulletin, April, pp 1–7. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Graph 4  
   Graph 5  
   4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Graph 6  
  These movements in prices reflect the evolving balance of supply and demand. During the 
late 1980s and 1990s, the low prices for many commodities led to reduced global investment 
in  exploration  and  mine  development.  And  in  parts  of  agriculture,  the  rate  of  technological 
progress  slowed  down  with  growth  in  both  yields  and  the  land  area  devoted  to  crops 
declining  significantly  (Graph 7).  In  effect,  low  prices  meant  that  the  incentive  to  expand 
productive  capacity  was  diminished.  We  saw  a  clear  example  of  this  in  Australia,  with  the 
level of mining investment (as a share of GDP) in the late 1980s and 1990s lower than it was 
in the early 1970s and early 1980s, and much lower than it has been over the past decade.  
Graph 7  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
As things have turned out, this period in which the supply side was being pushed out only 
slowly  was  immediately  followed  by  a  period  of  very  strong  growth  in  demand,  largely 
because of developments in Asia. As I have spoken about previously, the urbanisation and 
industrialisation  of  China  is  very  resource  intensive,  especially  in  the  commodities  used  to 
make steel.2 In addition, the demand for protein has risen rapidly in Asia as average incomes 
have  increased.  For  many  commodities,  global  inventories  are  now  quite  low  and  it  would 
appear  that  we  are  currently  operating  on  a  relatively  steep  part  of  the  global  commodity 
supply curve, with weather-related disruptions adding to the recent price pressures for some 
commodities.  
Looking forward, we cannot be sure about what the future will hold; few people predicted the 
transformational  effects  on  the  world  economy  of  China’s  growth.  At  the  moment  though, 
there  has  been  some  response  on  the  supply  side  to  the  high  commodity  prices,  with 
increased rates of investment in the resources sector. In Australia, we see this more clearly 
than  in  most  other  countries.  What  is  difficult  to  predict  is  the  time  frame  over  which  this 
increase in global capacity will allow the world economy to again operate on a flatter part of 
the supply curve. If recent experience is anything to go by, this time may be some way off.  
What  does  seem  clearer  is  that  the  world  economy  is  going  through  a  change  in  relative 
prices, and that this change is likely to be quite persistent. In theory, a change of this sort 
need not be inflationary for the world, with monetary policy ensuring that the target rate of 
overall inflation is achieved. And even where a change in relative prices is accommodated by 
a step up in the overall level of prices, the result need not be ongoing inflation, particularly if 
inflation expectations do not increase.  
In  practice  though,  earlier  international  experience  suggests  that  things  are  not  always  so 
easy. A complicating factor is that the current change in relative prices is playing out over a 
run of years and there is uncertainty as to how much of it will be reversed. It can also be 
difficult for some prices to fall to offset those that are rising. This change in relative prices is 
also occurring against the backdrop of ongoing stimulatory monetary policy around the world, 
including in Asia. While in most countries, domestically sourced inflationary pressures remain 
subdued,  there  is  an  important  global  factor  coming  from  the  capacity  constraints  in 
commodity markets. At least for the time being, it would appear that the ability of the world to 
produce commodities is becoming a key constraint on non-inflationary growth for the global 
economy.  
As  the  Governor  said  last  week  at  the  Parliamentary  Hearing,  managing  these  price 
pressures  in  commodity  markets  is shaping  up as  one  of  the  major  international issues  of 
2011.  In  Asia,  the  high  food  prices,  in  particular,  have  meant  that  headline  inflation  rates 
have  risen  and  there  has  been  a  lift  in  inflation  expectations  in  some  countries.  If  these 
inflationary pressures were to intensify, a stronger policy response than seen to date would 
be likely, increasing the risk of a subsequent sharp slowdown in the region. 
Consumer restraint 
The second issue that I would like to talk about is the restraint in consumer spending and 
borrowing.  
As many retailers will attest, consumer spending has been subdued in recent times. You can 
clearly  see  this  in  the  household  saving  ratio  (Graph  8).  While  there  are  a  whole  host  of 
measurement qualifications, the current data show that the saving ratio has increased from a 
                                                 
2   See  Lowe  (2010),  “The  Development  of  Asia:  Risk  and  Returns  for  Australia”,  Speech  to  NatStats  2010 
Conference,  Sydney,  16  September  and,  Lowe  (2009)  “The  Growth  of  Asia  and  Some  Implications  for 
Australia”, Speech to Citi Australia Inaugural Australian Investment Conference, Sydney, 19 October. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
little below zero in the first half of the 2000s to around 10 per cent in 2010. This increase has 
reversed the steady decline that took place over the previous two decades.  
Graph 8  
  With  the  benefit  of  hindsight,  a  change  in  the  trend  looks  to  have  started  in  the  middle  of 
2000s, although, at the time, this was difficult to detect. Over the decade to 2005, there was 
a large run-up in household debt and asset prices, and a decline in saving, as households 
adjusted to lower nominal interest rates and innovation in the financial system. It is plausible 
that this adjustment was largely completed by the mid 2000s and that since then, household 
spending  patterns  have  returned  to  more  traditional  norms.  Over  the  past  few  years,  this 
change has been reinforced by the global financial crisis which has led some households to 
rethink  their  spending  and  borrowing  decisions,  partly  in  response  to  greater  uncertainty 
about future asset returns.  
A  slightly  different  way  of  seeing  this  change  is  to  look  at  how  much  of  the  increase  in 
household incomes each year is actually spent. In quite a few of the years during the decade 
and a half to 2005, household consumption increased by more than one dollar for every extra 
dollar  of  household  disposable  income  received  (Graph  9).  In  contrast,  since  2005,  only 
around 65 cents in every extra dollar of income has been spent. It now seems reasonably 
clear  that  after  a  long  period  of  structural  adjustment  many  households  are  putting  a  little 
more aside each month than they were for most of the 1990s and the early 2000s.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Graph 9  
  This  change  can  also  be  seen  in  a  range  of  other  indicators.  One  example  is  the 
disaggregated data available through the annual HILDA survey of household finances. In the 
surveys that were undertaken between 2000 and 2005, there was a clear trend, with fewer 
and  fewer  households  with  mortgages  reporting  that  they  were  ahead  of  schedule  in  their 
repayments  (Graph  10).  However,  this  downtrend  slowed  around  2005,  and  then  in  2009  
– the most recent year for which data are available – there was a marked increase in the 
share of people reporting that they are ahead of schedule.  
Graph 10  
  8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Similarly,  over  the  past  couple  of  years,  there  has  been  an  increase  in  the  proportion  of 
households who report that they pay their credit card balance in full each month. This change 
in behaviour is also evident in the responses to the monthly survey of consumers conducted 
by the Melbourne Institute and Westpac. In particular, over recent years, there has been a 
marked increase in the number of households that say paying down debt, or building up bank 
deposits, is the wisest thing to do with their savings (Graph 11). Correspondingly, there has 
been a decline in the perceived attractiveness of more risky investments.  
Graph 11  
  A similar story is also evident in the estimates of how much equity the household sector is 
adding  to  the  housing  stock.  Until  the  late  1990s,  it  was  normal  for  the  value  of  new 
investment  in  housing  to  significantly  exceed  the  total  amount  of  new  housing-related 
borrowing – in effect the household sector was building up equity in the housing stock. But 
during  the  early  part  of  the  2000s  this  changed  and  we  went  to  a  position  in  which  the 
household  sector  was  withdrawing  equity  (Graph  12).  Over  recent  years,  things  have 
changed again and we have returned to the more traditional pattern.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
Graph 12  
  Taking all these indicators together, it seems pretty clear that something has changed in the 
behaviour  of  households.  It  is  likely  that  part  of  this  change  reflects  the  completion  of  the 
structural  adjustment  to  lower  interest  rates  and  innovation  in  the  financial  system.  But 
recently, there also appears to have been a change in attitudes.  
As was discussed in the SMP, an important factor shaping the outlook is how persistent this 
change in attitudes turns out to be. On the one hand, it is plausible that consumption growth 
will strengthen considerably over the period ahead, supported by strong income growth and 
an unemployment rate that is trending down. On the other hand, this more cautious approach 
to spending could be quite long lasting, with households using the strong income growth to 
further improve their balance sheets. In putting together our forecasts, we have assumed a 
middle  path,  with  the  saving  rate  staying  high,  but  consumption  growth  broadly  matching 
income growth over the next couple of years. We will, of course, be looking very closely to 
see if this is how things evolve.  
Before talking about the forecasts in more detail, I would like to draw your attention to one of 
the side effects of the recent subdued growth in retail spending. And that is the downward 
pressure on the prices of many retail goods. Over the past year, the ABS’s price index for 
clothing has fallen by 6 per cent (Graph 13). The price index for major household appliances 
has fallen by 4 per cent. The price index for furniture and furnishings has fallen by 1½ per 
cent and the price index for audio, visual and computing equipment has fallen by 18 per cent. 
In  fact,  there  are  very  few  (non-food  manufactured)  goods  in  the  CPI  whose  prices  have 
increased over the past year.  
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Graph 13  
  These  pervasive  price  declines  follow  a  substantial  appreciation  of  the  exchange  rate  and 
tariff cuts on a range of goods in early 2010. While it is difficult to be definitive, it is possible 
that  the  weak  consumer  spending  has  led  to  faster  pass-through  of  these  changes  than 
suggested  by  previous  experience.  There  has  also  been  some  moderation  in  inflation  for 
goods and services whose prices are not directly influenced by the exchange rate, although 
the effects have been  smaller. Overall, over 2010 the CPI increased by 2.7 per  cent, with 
underlying measures of inflation running at about 2¼ per cent.  
Updated forecasts 
I would now like to turn briefly to the Bank’s updated forecasts.  
Our central scenario remains for the economy to grow strongly over the next few years. The 
quarterly GDP outcomes in the near term are, however, going to be materially affected by the 
recent extreme weather events. These events significantly disrupted production in both the 
December and March quarters, especially in the coal industry. The Bank’s current estimate  
– which remains subject to significant qualifications – is that total output in the March quarter 
will be around 1 per cent lower than it otherwise would have been. Given this mainly arises 
from a disruption to production, the decline in spending is likely to be somewhat smaller than 
1 per cent.  
Following  the  March  quarter,  we  expect  a  strong  rebound  in  output,  as  coal  production 
recovers its fall and the rebuilding effort gets underway. Over 2011, our current forecast is for 
the economy to grow by around 4¼ per cent. This is higher than we were expecting three 
months ago, although this upward revision just reflects a lower starting point because of the 
decline in coal production in December 2010. Beyond the current year, our central scenario 
remains for the economy to grow in the 3¾ – 4 per cent range.  
The  recent  extreme  weather  events  will  also  have  a  noticeable  effect  on  the  near-term 
outcomes  for  inflation.  Since  the  SMP  was  released  we  have  been  able  to  make  a 
preliminary assessment of the likely effects of Cyclone Yasi, primarily on banana and other 
fruit and vegetable prices. The Bank now expects CPI inflation to be around 3 per cent over 
the year to June 2011, with the combined effect of floods and the cyclone likely to contribute 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
around ½ percentage point to this outcome. This forecast represents an upward revision to 
the one published in the SMP, largely because of the expected increase in banana prices. Of 
course, with the price of bananas expected to fall back to more normal levels later in the year 
as  production  recovers,  there  is  a  period  during  2012  when  the  year-ended  inflation 
outcomes can be expected to be lower than at the time of the SMP. Looking through these 
weather-related  effects,  inflation  is  expected  to  gradually  increase  over  the  next  couple  of 
years to around 3 per cent in late 2012.  
Finally, as always, these forecasts are subject to a number of uncertainties. As is the Bank’s 
usual practice, we will continue to examine the ongoing flow of data on the global economy, 
domestic  activity  and  prices  and  assess  whether  the  outcomes  remain  consistent with  our 
broad outlook. As I said at the outset, developments in global commodity markets and the 
attitudes of Australian consumers to spending are likely to have an important bearing on how 
our economy evolves over the next year or so.  
Thank you for your time.  
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
