DeLisle Worrell: In praise of foreign banks 
Address by Dr DeLisle Worrell, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, at the Re-opening 
of CIBC FirstCaribbean’s Wildey Branch, Wildley, Bridgetown, 9 August 2011. 
     Barbados is fortunate to have banking system composed entirely of foreign banks:  
 
Canadian banks in particular are of high repute internationally, and they dominate 
our system; 
Canadian banks have survived the international financial crisis in better shape than 
most large financial institutions in the industrial world; 
their size relative to the Barbados market means that they can contemplate projects 
of a magnitude that a domestically owned bank could not; 
the  impact  of  recession  on  credit  quality  is  more  easily  absorbed,  with  no  real 
danger  of  severe  loss  of  capital  or  danger  of  insolvency,  when  a  bank  has  the 
backing of a large parent; 
local  subsidiaries  and  branches  of  Canadian  banks  have  to  meet  the  regulatory 
standards of the Canadian Office of the Supervisor of Financial Institutions, so there 
is an additional guarantee of internationally acceptable standards of lending, asset 
management,  risk  management  and  financial  reporting.  I  say  additional,  because 
the  Central  Bank  of  Barbados  supervises  the  local  subsidiaries  according  to  the 
standards  of  the  Basel  Committee  of  Banking  Supervision.  Over  the  years  The 
Central Bank of Barbados has had very good relationships with commercial banks.  
The principle which undergirds our policy making is one of cooperation, based on a common 
understanding of the economic and financial circumstances the country faces. This approach 
has served us well in the past. For example, during the1991 balance of payments crisis short 
term  foreign  currency  borrowings  from  commercial  banks  filled  in  the  gap  in  the  Central 
Bank’s  Foreign  exchange  reserves  during  an  interim  period  of  several  months  while  a 
programme of financial assistance from the IMF was under negotiation. 
More  recently,  we  have  stepped  up  our  collaboration  with  banks  and  other  financial 
institutions, as well as with other financial regulators. Last year in October we held a one day 
conference  of  all  financial  institutions  and  financial  regulators  in  Barbados,  to  discuss 
presentations  on  topics  of  immediate  importance  to  the  performance  and  resilience  of  the 
financial system. This is intended to be an annual event and we are planning for this year’s 
conference,  to  be  held  on  November  3.  At  that  meeting  we  will  discuss  the  health  of  the 
financial sector, our common interests as financial institutions, regulators and citizens, and 
what  policy  changes  may  be  helpful  in  charting  the  way  forward.  The  conference 
supplements  meetings  that  the  Central  Bank  arranges  with  commercial  banks  as  a  group 
and one-on-one, quarterly and on an ad hoc basis. 
The  Central  bank  of  Barbados  is  very  conscious  that  policy  is  about  creating  the  right 
incentives  to  guide  the  actions  of  corporations  and  individuals  in  directions  which  will  add 
value to the economy, by virtue of their mutual transactions and with those with whom we do 
business  abroad.  The  GDP  is,  after  all,  the  sum  of  the  value  created  by  the  actions  of 
individuals  and  corporations.  It  is  the  job  of  the  policy  maker  to  provide  incentives  which 
guide decisions about economic transactions in directions which add value.  
It  is  for  this  reason  that  we  place  so  much  emphasis  on  information  and  analysis,  and  in 
sending a clear message about our understanding of the economy and how it functions. This 
has to be an evolving process, because we live in a very dynamic world where established 
norms  and  practices  become  outmoded,  and  where  we  have  no  choice  but  to  chart  our 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
course  in  uncertain  waters.  Just  last  Friday  the  lowest-risk  securities  in  the  world,  those 
issued  by  the  Government  of  the  USA,  no  longer  became  the  lowest  risk  securities  in  the 
world,  at  least  in  the  view  of  one  authority  on  these  matters.  The  best  way  to  deal  with 
unavoidable uncertainty is through thorough discussion of all the information that can be had 
on  the  issue  of  interest,  and  that  is  the  spirit  in  which  the  Central  Bank  interacts  with  the 
banking system. 
We  are  pleased  that  FCIB  continues  to  be  a  leading  partner  with  us  and  other  financial 
institutions in our collaborative management of our nation’s financial affairs, and we welcome 
the  reopening  of  the  Wildey  branch  of  your  bank  as  evidence  that  your  parent’s  long-
established  commitment  to  the  Barbadian  economy  remains  as  strong  as  ever.  We  look 
forward to many more fruitful years of collaboration. I trust your bank will continue to prosper 
and be profitable, and that you will find irresistible incentives to deploy those profits right here 
in the Caribbean.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
