Jean-Claude Trichet: Hearing at the Economic and Monetary Affairs 
Committee of the European Parliament 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, 
at a hearing at the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee of the European Parliament, 
Brussels, 30 June 2011. 
 Dear Madam Chair, 
Dear Honourable Members, 
It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  back  in  Parliament  and  your  Committee  for  our regular  exchange  of 
views.  
Once again, our meeting comes at a time when important decisions are being taken but also 
pending. Of particular concern is the conclusion of the legislative procedure on the economic 
governance package.  
Je tiens tout d’abord à saluer les efforts continus du Parlement européen et du Conseil afin 
de  rapprocher  leurs  positions  sur  le  paquet  de  gouvernance  économique.  Le  Conseil  des 
Gouverneurs  aurait  souhaité  que  le  Conseil  européen  du  24  Juin  dernier  fasse  un  geste 
d’ouverture  envers  le  Parlement  européen  sur  ce  dossier. Le  principal  point  de  désaccord  
– l’extension de la majorité qualifiée inversée dans le volet préventif du pacte de stabilité et 
de croissance – est d'une importance clé. La zone euro a urgemment besoin d'un cadre de 
gouvernance  économique  renforcé  et  ambitieux.  La  crise  actuelle  démontre,  de  manière 
irréfutable, s’il en était encore besoin, les conséquences néfastes de politiques budgétaires 
et économiques malsaines.  
Deshalb  ist  es  unerlässlich,  zu  einer  ambitionierten  Einigung  zu  kommen.  In  der  aktuellen 
Lage  wäre  eine  Einigung  besonders  begrüßenswert,  um  deutlich  zu  machen,  dass  die 
richtigen Lektionen aus der Krise gezogen werden.  
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  economic  and  monetary  developments  in  the  euro  area  since  our 
previous meeting in March, as well as the two topics you have asked me to focus on, namely 
fiscal consolidation and monetary policy on the one hand, and sovereign debt developments 
on the other.  
Economic and monetary developments 
I. 
Let  me  first  turn  to  the  economic  and  monetary  developments  in  the  euro  area  since  our 
previous meeting in March. In this context, let me also note that we are now in the purdah 
period,  as  the  next  Governing  Council  meeting  will  take  place  on  7  July.  This  means  that 
nothing in what I will say is intended or should be interpreted in any respect in terms of future 
monetary policy. 
Incoming  information  since  I  last  spoke  to  you  has  confirmed  a  positive  underlying 
momentum of economic activity in the euro area. We expect the continued expansion of the 
world economy and domestic demand from the private sector as the main driver of economic 
growth in the euro area. The latest Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections are in line 
with this assessment. They foresee the economy to grow between 1.5% and 2.3% for 2011 
and between 0.6% and 2.8% for 2012. In our view, the risks to this outlook remain broadly 
balanced in a context of elevated uncertainty.  
As  regards  price  developments,  we  are  observing  continued  upward  pressure  on  prices, 
especially in the earlier stages of the production process. Inflation in the euro area stood at 
2.7% in May, after 2.8% in April. The inflation rates seen over the past few months largely 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
reflect higher energy and commodity prices. Going forward, inflation is likely to stay clearly 
above  2%  over  the  months  ahead,  mainly  due  to  energy  and  commodity  prices.  The 
Eurosystem staff projections indicate inflation ranging between 2.5% and 2.7% for 2011, and 
between 1.1 and 2.3% for 2012. It is of paramount importance that the current relatively high 
inflation rates do not translate into second-round effects, via higher wages and price-setting, 
and thereby do not lead to broad-based inflationary pressures.  
Risks  to  the  medium-term  outlook  for  price  developments  continue  to  be  on  the  upside. 
Notably, energy prices could increase faster than currently expected, and indirect taxes and 
administered prices might be raised faster with a view to reducing budget deficits. In addition, 
increasing capacity utilisation may exert stronger upward pressure on domestic prices.  
As  regards  our  monetary  analysis,  we  see  the  underlying  pace  of  monetary  expansion 
gradually  recovering.  At  the  same  time,  monetary  liquidity  remains  ample.  This  has  the 
potential to accommodate price pressures. 
As you are aware, we are strongly determined to secure that inflation expectations remain 
firmly in line with our aim of keeping inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium 
term. 
Against this background the Governing Council raised the key ECB interest rates by 25 basis 
points in April, in order to adjust the very accommodative monetary policy stance in the light 
of upside risks to price stability. Since then we have kept the rates unchanged. At the same 
time, as I said in the press conference after the last Governing Council, we see the monetary 
policy stance as still accommodative and risks to price stability on the upside. Accordingly, I 
said that we are in a state of strong vigilance and that we stand ready to act in a firm and 
timely manner to avoid that recent price developments give rise to broad-based inflationary 
pressures over the medium term.  
As regards our non-standard measures, the Governing Council earlier this month decided to 
maintain its fixed rate tender procedures with full allotment in its refinancing operations up to 
the third quarter of 2011.  
Fiscal consolidation and monetary policy 
II. 
Let me now turn to the topic of fiscal consolidation and monetary policy.  
In a monetary union, the central bank when setting interest rates has to take an area-wide 
perspective. In the same manner the US Federal Reserve do not and cannot tailor its interest 
rate to the specific economic conditions in individual US states.  
Setting the policy rate with a clear focus on the euro area as a whole does not, however, 
mean ignoring the diversity in financial conditions. Since the financial crisis erupted, the ECB 
has adopted a number of non-standard measures to foster as much as possible a smooth 
functioning of the monetary policy transmission throughout the euro area. 
 
The  current  major  challenges  faced  by  a  few  euro  area  countries  are  mainly  the 
result  of  some  governments  not  conducting  sound  policies  and  not  implementing 
reforms that would benefit their citizens and the European public as a whole. It is 
essential  that  euro  area  countries  fully  assume  the  responsibilities  at  the  national 
level that derive from their participation in the euro area. Past experiences of fiscal 
consolidation  episodes  demonstrate  the  long-term  benefits  of  reducing  sizeable 
fiscal  imbalances.  There  are  at  least  three  reasons  why  well-designed  fiscal 
consolidation 
the  current  circumstances.  Accompanied  by 
appropriate structural reforms, it promotes long-term growth. For those economies 
with  large  fiscal  imbalances,  it  is  indispensable  to  bolster  confidence.  And  for  all 
economies  it  helps create  buffers  that  would  be  essential  to  deal  with unforeseen 
events.  
is  beneficial 
in 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  It is also for this reason that the ongoing negotiations on the governance package 
should  produce  an  ambitious  outcome.  I  have  been  emphasising  time  and  again 
why  we  are  very  much  in  agreement  with  the  European  Parliament  on  this  –  the 
need for a quantum leap in economic governance through the currently discussed 
legislative package.  
At this stage, I would like to recall two points: 
First, we should not be content with a stronger Stability and Growth Pact only at the 
later stages of an excessive deficit procedure. We need to halt any fiscal excesses 
early on and correct them. The obvious way is a higher degree of automaticity early 
on in the procedures, that is, more reverse qualified majority voting in the preventive 
arm of the Pact; and therefore the prospect of more timely sanctions, possibly of a 
reputational nature. 
Second,  we  would  benefit  considerably  from  an  equally  ambitious  macroeconomic 
imbalances  framework  that  detects  imbalances  early  on,  through  a  well  focused  and 
rigorously applied scoreboard; and then corrects them, again in a timely fashion. Here, we 
need  to  focus  on  those  countries  that  ultimately  pose  a  risk  to  other  euro  area  countries 
through in particular persistent and excessive competitiveness losses. 
Sovereign debt developments 
III. 
Let me now turn to the current sovereign debt developments.  
As  you  know,  at  the  euro  area  level,  we  see  that  fiscal  consolidation  in  many  countries  is 
ongoing, and will, according to the European Commission’s Spring 2011 Forecast, bring the 
euro  area  general  government  deficit  down  to  3.5%  by  2012.  This  is  an  encouraging 
prospect,  especially  by  international  comparison.  Also  for  the  current  year  the  euro  area 
fiscal deficit is somewhat less than half of that of the US and Japan. However, selected euro 
area countries are currently still facing high debt and deficit levels. 
The ECB has always made clear that the best way to cope with the current sovereign debt 
positions is a determined and disciplined implementation of agreed fiscal consolidation paths 
and  the  structural  reform  agenda  to  promote  medium  term  growth.  For  the  euro  area 
countries under an EU/IMF programme, a determined implementation of those programmes 
is of utmost importance to get back to a sound economic situation. This call has been echoed 
by  the  European  Council,  which  at  its  recent  meeting  urged  the  national  authorities, 
especially but not only in Greece, to continue implementing rigorously and with the highest 
resolve the necessary adjustment efforts to put the country on a sustainable path. To that 
end, national unity and cross-party consensus are essential.  
As to the possibility of debt action, let me recall what I have said many times on this matter, 
on  behalf  of  the  Governing  Council:  We  strongly  advise  against  all  concepts  that  are  not 
purely voluntary or that have elements of compulsion. We call for the avoidance of any credit 
events and selection default or default.  
Let  me  add  that  I  am  from  time  to  time  surprised  by  the  narrow  view  of  private  sector 
involvement that is generally taken in the present debate. We should not forget that private 
capital  is  also  mobilised  when  embarking  on  privatisation.  Privatisation  is  a  good  way  of 
mobilising  private  capital  and  is  something  that  we  have  encouraged  considerably, 
particularly in the case of Greece. It is an effective way of mobilising private capital and has 
positive consequences not only on the financing of the country, but also in terms of positive 
structural  effects  on  growth  and  employment.  Finally,  the  private  sector  involvement  that 
everybody is aiming at is to go back as soon as possible to private sector market financing. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
