Guy Debelle: In defence of current account deficits 
Address by Mr Guy Debelle, Assistant Governor (Financial Markets) of the Reserve Bank of 
Australia,  at  the  ADBI/UniSA  Workshop  on  Growth  and  Integration  in  Asia,  Adelaide, 
8 July 2011. 
 I thank George Gardner and Michael Shoory for their help. 
Thank  you  to  Tony  Cavoli  and  the  other  organisers  for  putting  together  this  interesting 
conference examining issues around trade and capital flows. I’m very pleased to be in my 
home town to give this talk which will address the theme of the conference.  
Current  account  deficits  have  a  pretty  poor  reputation,  unfairly  so  in  my  opinion.  While  in 
some instances this reputation is earned, today I want to provide some arguments in their 
defence, highlighting that there are a number of circumstances in which one should not be 
concerned about their presence. In particular, I want to make the point that deficit does not 
have  to  equate  to  imbalance.  Deficits  are  not  always  and  everywhere  a  bad  thing, 
notwithstanding the pejorative connation of the word deficit.1 
Cross-border  capital  flows,  which  are  the  mirror  of  current  account  positions,  can  convey 
large benefits. As the BIS states in its recent Annual Report: “international financial flows … 
free firms’ investment decisions from domestic financing constraints while allowing investors 
to  reduce  risks  and  optimise  returns  by  globally  diversifying  their  assets.  International 
financial flows thus enhance the efficiency with which capital and know-how are allocated.”2 
This is very much the argument I  wish to prosecute, but the BIS then follows this positive 
statement with a chapter highlighting the risks of international flows.  
Much  of  my  argument  is  presented  considerably  more  eloquently  in  a  recent  paper  by 
Max Corden, and I commend that paper to you.3 I hope I can do some justice to the position 
Max puts.  
I  will  start  by  presenting  a  short  summary  of  the  global  imbalance  argument.  Then  I  will 
present a framework with which one can think about the issue and present a case for the 
defence.  In  the  final  part  of  the  speech,  I  will  describe  some  recent  developments  in  the 
Australian current account position and particularly the associated capital flows.  
Current account imbalances 
Olivier  Blanchard  and  Gian  Maria  Milesi-Ferretti  provide  a  concise  summary  of  the  global 
imbalance argument in  a recent IMF paper.4 They describe the difference between “good” 
and “bad” current account deficits. Bad current account deficits are those which result from 
domestic distortions or excessive fiscal positions. Good ones are those which do not have 
such causes.  
                                                 
1 
It is interesting to note that the language associated with current account deficits also tends to be pejorative. 
Current account deficits worsen rather than widen and improve rather than narrow. 
2  BIS (Bank for International Settlements), BIS Annual Report 2010/11, p 33. 
3  Corden  WM  (2011),  “Global  Imbalances  and  the  Paradox  of  Thrift”,  CEPR  Policy  Insight,  No 54;  see  also 
Corden  WM  (2008),  “The  Global  Imbalances:  What  is  the  Problem”,  Revised  version,  Wincott  Lecture, 
September 2007 and Corden WM (2007), “Those Current Account Imbalances: A Sceptical View”, The World 
Economy, 30(3), pp 363–382. 
4  Blanchard  O  and  GM  Milesi-Ferretti  (2011),  “(Why)  Should  Current  Account  Balances  be  Reduced?”,  IMF 
Staff Discussion Note 11/03. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
This  is  effectively  Pitchford/Lawson  redux.5  As  you  may  recall,  John  Pitchford  and 
Nigel Lawson (then Chancellor of the Exchequer) presented the “consenting adults” view of 
current account positions. As long as current account positions are the result of savings and 
investment decisions by the private sector which are not affected by distortions, then there is 
no cause for concern.  
Pitchford and Lawson used this framework to argue that the current account positions in their 
respective  countries  (Australia  and  the  UK)  did  not  represent  an  imbalance,  given  the 
absence of any apparent distortions. In contrast, Blanchard and Milesi-Ferretti conclude that 
even good current accounts are mostly bad too and hence most current account deficits are 
imbalances.  
Blanchard and Milesi-Ferretti also make the point that it is important to look beyond current 
accounts  to  the  whole  structure  of  the  capital  (financial)  accounts.  While  disagreeing  with 
their  conclusion  just  mentioned,  this  is  a  point  I  would  wholeheartedly  endorse  for  two 
reasons:  
 
Firstly,  current  accounts  are  fundamentally  endogenous.  They  reflect  the  net 
outcome  of  a  raft  of  savings  and  investment  decisions  taken  by  households, 
businesses  and  government  across  the  whole  economy.  The  current  account 
position is a symptom not the cause. If one is concerned about the imbalance, the 
focus should be on the policy that is causing it. 
Secondly,  the  capital  (or  financial)  account,  which  is  the  mirror  of  the  current 
account,  is  the  net  of  a  large  array  of  gross  capital  flows.  These  flows  reflect  the 
financial decisions taken by both domestic and foreign investors. 
 For  example,  in  the  global  imbalances  debate,  it  is  often  noted  that  Europe  has  a  current 
account position that is close to zero. This is true, but it masks large divergences between 
current  account  positions  within  the  euro  area,  which  are  symptomatic  of  the  problems 
manifesting  themselves  now.  Secondly,  there  is  nothing  intrinsically  optimal  about  zero.  It 
may well be the case that the appropriate balance for Europe is not zero but distortions of 
one form or another have delivered such an outcome. If that were the case (and I am not 
arguing that it necessarily is), then Europe would be contributing to global “imbalances” as 
much  as  those  with  large  current  account  positions.  Thirdly,  behind  the  European  zero 
balance, there are very large capital flows in both directions. Some of these, most obviously 
investment in US sub-prime mortgage securities, were clearly problematic, while others were 
clearly beneficial.  
Similarly, the US current account deficit through the 2000s was the net balance of very large 
capital  inflows  and  outflows.  Much  of  the  inflows  were  into  either  US  treasuries  or  to  US 
mortgage securities and related products, while a sizeable share of the outflow was foreign 
direct investment by US corporations. The US was able to earn relatively more on its stock of 
foreign assets than it paid on its foreign liabilities such that its net income position was often 
in surplus.6 Some of the flows were “bad”, at least ex post, such as those which found their 
way  into  poor-performing  securities.  However,  very  few  were  able  to  identify  ex  ante  the 
distortion that was generating these “harmful” flows. Other flows were clearly “good”. But the 
point to make is that focusing on the net balance of these flows, which is the current account 
position, is not particularly helpful relative to more scrutiny of the various components of the 
gross capital flows.  
                                                 
5  Pitchford  J  (1989),  “A  Sceptical  View  of  Australia’s  Current  Account  and  Debt  Problem”,  The  Australian 
Economic Review, 86, pp 5–14. 
6  This “exorbitant privilege” is examined in detail by Gourinchas P-O and H Rey (2005), “From World Banker to 
World Venture Capitalist: US External Adjustment and the Exorbitant Privilege”, NBER Working Paper 11563 
and  Curcuru  S,  T  Dvorak  and  F  Warnock  (2010),  “Decomposing  the  U.S.  External  Returns  Differential”, 
Journal of International Economics, 80, pp 22–32. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Some context 
To mount a defence of current account deficits, I would like to provide a bit of context with 
which to think about this issue. One place to start is with an overlapping generations model 
of  a  closed  economy,7  which  we  can  think  of  as  a  country.  Within  this  country  there  are 
households  that  are  at  various  stages  of  their  lifecycle.  The  younger  working  households 
save, the middle-aged households borrow, while the older households run down their stock 
of accumulated saving. So we have “imbalances” across the household sector.8 The young 
households  have  current  account  surpluses,  the  middle-aged  households  like  me  are  in 
current account deficit. But these “imbalances” are not generally cause for concern. It would 
not be socially desirable if there were no cash flows between households.  
Alternatively, we could consider the Australian states. At any point, there can be large current 
account positions between the Australian states. There are large financial flows across state 
borders too. Are we even aware that this is the case and should we be concerned? By and 
large, we should not. Again it is useful to think about why any such imbalances across the 
Australian states are not a cause for concern. Here we are straying into the optimal currency 
literature,  most  famously  associated  with  Robert  Mundell,  which  is  currently  getting  a  fair 
working over in the context of the problems of the European periphery.  
Some of the reasons we are not concerned about the current account “imbalances” of the 
Australian  states  are  that  the  Australian  states  have  a  common  currency,  a  federal  fiscal 
system, sizeable interstate labour mobility (of which I and much of my Adelaide cohort are a 
good  example  of)  and  generally  experience  similar  economic  shocks.  These  are  the  main 
prerequisites identified for an optimal currency area.9 
The  point  of  the  two  scenarios  I’ve  described  here  is  that  current  account  positions,  even 
large ones, can exist that are benign and could not be classified as imbalances. The capital 
flows that are the counterpart to these current account positions are “good”, because they 
are associated with appropriate intergenerational transfers in the first case, and appropriate 
cross-border flows in an integrated economy in the second.  
Max Corden distils the concern that many have about global imbalances down to a concern 
about  the  “return  journey”.  Lenders  of  capital  expect  to  receive  the  money  they  have  lent 
back with interest (dividends if it is an equity investment).  
One reason that might increase concern as we move from transfers between households to 
crossing state borders to crossing national borders is that the information asymmetry about 
the return journey increases. Amongst other things, the geographic separation reduces the 
ability of the lender to monitor the use of funds by the end-borrower. One could question why 
this still remains true today, with increased transparency and lower cost of information.  
For example, in the recent episode, the funds that made their way to the US housing market 
over the 2000s had a long and non-transparent chain between the provider of the funds and 
the ultimate borrower. There were major problems of information asymmetry and failures of 
due diligence right along the chain.  
Another reason that borders matter is that the capacity to borrow in one’s own currency is 
important. The claims across state borders are denominated in Australian dollars, which are 
                                                 
7  This is the model which Olivier Blanchard himself taught me! 
8 
9 
In this stylised world, one could also add the corporate sector to the mix. As they are generally a net borrower, 
they would be another generator of current account deficits. 
In the current economic climate in Australia, one could think about the possibility of the Western Australian 
economy  experiencing  an  exchange  rate  appreciation  relative  to  the  rest  of  the  country  to  mitigate  the 
adjustment.  However,  the  assessment  is  that  the  benefits  of  a  common  currency  union  for  the  Australian 
states vastly outweigh any costs. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
easily settled without doubt in the integrated Australian financial system. Indeed, the system 
is  so  integrated  that  there  is  no  easily  obtainable  measure  of  cross-border  claims  for  the 
states.  
A  further  aspect  that  appears  to  be  a  common  cause  for  concern  about  current  account 
deficits is the economic adjustment that might ensue were they to narrow precipitously. Much 
of this concern appears to stem from a fixed exchange rate world. In a fixed exchange rate 
world,  sudden  stops  can  (and  did)  occur  that  are  very  disruptive.  Capital  inflows  dry  up 
rapidly and capital outflow increases, necessitating a sharp contraction of domestic demand 
so that the trade balance moves into surplus. Inevitably, this is associated with a domestic 
recession.  
Such a scenario does not directly translate into a world of floating exchange rates. In that 
environment,  the  main  mechanism  of  adjustment  is  the  exchange  rate.  If  global  investors 
reduced  their  appetite  for  investment  in  a  particular  country,  the  exchange  rate  would 
depreciate until the point where investors would be happy once again with their allocation to 
the  country  in  their  overall  portfolio.  While  the  exchange  rate  might  overshoot  in  this 
scenario, the depreciation is stimulatory to the economy, whereas in the fixed exchange rate 
world, the adjustment is contractionary.  
The conclusion I wish to draw then is that there can be perfectly good reasons why current 
account  balances  are  not  zero,  and  indeed  can  even  be  quite  sizeable,  without  them 
constituting imbalances or being a cause for concern. The accompanying capital flows are 
often  beneficial.  This  is  not  to  say  that  they  should  not  be  scrutinised  but  rather  that  the 
scrutiny should really be on the nature of those capital flows to examine whether they are 
being driven by inappropriate policies or distortions.  
Recent changes in the composition of Australia’s capital flows 
With  the  previous  discussion  in  mind,  I  will  now  turn  to  a  short  analysis  of  the  Australian 
situation.  Over  the  past  three  years,  there  have  been  some  quite  sizeable  changes  in  the 
size and composition of Australia’s current account and capital account.  
Graph 1 
4 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
From the early 1990s until 2007, Australia recorded a current account deficit which averaged 
around  4¼ per cent  of  GDP  (Graph  1).10  There  were  cycles  around  that  level,  with  the 
current account narrowing to 2 per cent of GDP in 2001 in the aftermath of the Asian crisis 
and widening to around 6 per cent of GDP in 2007. 
At  the  same  time,  there  was  reasonable  stability  in  the  major  components  of  the  capital 
account.  The  inflow  arising  from  the  offshore  funding  of  the  banking  sector  was  around 
3½ per cent of GDP. This led to the common assessment that the Australian banking sector 
was “funding the current account”.  
In my opinion, this analysis is incomplete. As mentioned earlier, a current account deficit and 
its equivalent capital account surplus is the net outcome of considerably larger gross flows. 
This is evident in Graph 1. Through this period there was substantial Australian investment 
abroad,  particularly  in  the  form  of  equity.  Much  of  this  was  the  result  of  the  Australian 
superannuation sector investing a sizeable share of their funds in offshore equity markets. At 
times, there were also sizeable equity inflows to Australia.  
Over  the  past  few  years,  the  composition  of  these  capital  flows  has  changed  quite 
significantly,  providing  some  contrary  evidence  to  the  hypothesis  that  the  banks  fund  the 
current  account.  I  don’t  think  there  was  any  particular  problem  with  the  structure  of  these 
capital flows previously, nor do I think there is one now.  
Graph 2 
In 2010, the net inflow to the Australian banking sector was close to zero (Graph 2). Indeed, 
over the last three quarters of 2010, the Australian banking sector was a net repayer of its 
offshore  liabilities.  That  is,  maturities  exceeded  issuance.  This  did  not  reflect  a  lack  of 
appetite for Australian bank paper, as the cost of issuance was broadly flat or even slightly 
                                                  
10  Indeed, Australia has recorded a current account deficit for much of its history. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
lower over the period. Instead, as I discussed in a recent speech,11 it reflected the fact that 
the  banks  had  less  need  for  wholesale  borrowing  given  the  conjuncture  of  fast  deposit 
growth and subdued asset growth. The terming out of the banking sector’s funding is also 
evident  in  the  decline  in  the  stock  of  short-term  foreign  liabilities  but  an  increase  in  their 
longer-term liabilities. 
Graph 3 
 This  picture  is  reinforced  if  we  include  flows  into  Australian  non-bank  securitised  assets 
(Graph 3). After net inflows amounting to around 1–2 per cent of GDP through the first half of 
the 2000s, there have been net outflows over the past three years. This change in net flows 
reflects the sharp drop-off in global appetite for securitised products as the problems in the 
US housing market came to the fore. The decline in demand for Australian securitised assets 
in  part  reflects  the  fact  that  a  lot  of  the  buyers  of  the  paper  pre-June  2007,  structured 
investment  vehicles,  are  no  longer  around.12  Recent  developments  suggest  appetite  for 
these assets is growing again, both on- and offshore.  
In  2010,  while  the  banking  sector’s  net  offshore  borrowing  was  zero,  the  current  account 
deficit, while narrower than earlier years, was still 2½ per cent of GDP. An increase in foreign 
purchases of Australian government debt and decreased Australian investment abroad offset 
the decline in net capital inflow to the banking sector.  
Turning to the current account side of the balance of payments, the notable development has 
been the shift in the trade balance from deficit to surplus as the much-commented-on rise in 
                                                 
11  Debelle  G  (2011),  “Collateral,  Funding  and  Liquidity”,  Address  to  Conference  on  Systemic  Risk,  Basel  III, 
Financial Stability and Regulation, Sydney, 28 June. 
12  See  Debelle  G  (2010),  “The  State  of  Play  in  the  Securitisation  Market”,  Address  to  the  Australian 
Securitisation Conference 2010, Sydney, 30 November. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Australia’s terms of trade has significantly boosted resource export earnings. In that respect, 
it  is  sometimes  remarked  that  absent  the  terms  of  trade  rise,  Australia’s  current  account 
would  be  markedly  wider.  But  that  ignores  the  fact  that  the  exchange  rate  has  also 
appreciated significantly alongside the rise in terms of trade, thereby reducing the boost to 
export earnings as well as causing changes in domestic absorption and production.  
Another effect of the rise in the terms of trade has been on the net income deficit. Because a 
sizeable share of Australia’s resource sector is foreign-owned, the increased income of that 
sector  partly  “leaks”  into  a  higher  payment  to  the  foreign  owners,  either  in  the  form  of 
dividend payments or retained earnings, thereby increasing the net income deficit. This also 
would not be occurring if the terms of trade were not at their current level.  
Conclusion 
So in conclusion, I am reminded of some sage advice from Hamlet: “there is nothing either 
good or bad, but thinking makes it so”.  
Current account deficits have a bad reputation, which is not always warranted. While some 
current  account  positions  are  the  result  of  distortionary  policies  that  should  be  redressed, 
others are not. The examples I have discussed show that there are configurations of current 
account positions and capital flows that should not be a cause for concern. Indeed, in many 
cases,  they  are  beneficial  and  facilitate  a  productive  reallocation  of  global  capital.  At  a 
minimum,  a  more  nuanced  examination  of  current  account  positions,  and  the  associated 
capital flows, is appropriate, rather than a simple focus on headline numbers.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
