Øystein Olsen: Monetary policy and interrelationships in the Norwegian 
economy 
Address by Mr Øystein Olsen, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at the 
Centre  for  Monetary  Economics  (CME)/BI  Norwegian  School  of  Management,  Oslo, 
5 September 2011. 
Please note that the text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. 
 When Trygve Haavelmo was awarded the Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences in 1989 for his 
pathbreaking work to quantify economic interrelationships, the Nobel Committee summarised 
his  contributions1.  First,  empirical  science  must  be  based  on  theories  which  reflect  reality. 
Second, data and observations must conform to theoretical concepts. Third, a methodology 
is  needed which  can  be  used  to  quantify  and  test  theoretical  relationships  on  the basis  of 
empirical observations. 
The interrelationships in the Norwegian economy serve as a backdrop for my address. The 
purpose of the Centre for Monetary Economics (CME) is to be a venue where researchers 
and economists in banking and finance can exchange views and gather knowledge about the 
Norwegian economy, perhaps with particular emphasis on monetary policy. My contribution 
today  will  be  an  analysis  of  relationships  between  some  key  economic  variables  and  how 
Norges Bank utilises that insight when setting the key policy rate. 
As Haavelmo described, theories regarding economic interrelationships can never conform 
fully with empirical observations. Nor can economists carry out controlled experiments in the 
same  way  as  in  the  natural  sciences.  Nevertheless,  Haavelmo  was  an  optimist.  Empirical 
methodologies may be used to uncover interrelationships in the economy with a reasonable 
degree of accuracy. 
Haavelmo’s contribution can be put to good use when Norges Bank, as the central bank, is 
to  set  the  interest  rate  with  a  view  to  stabilising  inflation.  The  Bank’s  monetary  policy 
assessments and decisions must be based on knowledge it can obtain on interactions within 
the Norwegian economy and how the interest rate interacts. The theory the Bank applies and 
the empirical methodology it employs will depend on the purpose of the analysis. A model 
apparatus  that  is  to  be  used  as  an  aid  in  making  interest  rate  decisions  requires  different 
attributes and is based on different principles than models that seek to provide optimal near-
term inflation and output forecasts. 
Chart: Different time horizons – different models 
Current  statistics  and  anecdotal  information  can  serve  as  a  basis  for  providing  some 
indication  of  how  the  economy  has  evolved  up  to  the  present.  But  the  statistical  basis  is 
uncertain.  Statistics  are  published  with  a  lag  and  are  often  subject  to  revision.  Data  from 
different sources can provide different pictures of the situation at hand. Statistical models can 
provide us with good support and help distinguish between news and noise in the data. They 
can capture time series properties in data and correlations that in many cases will be able to 
produce  good  forecasts  of  developments  in  the  next  months  ahead.  It  then  makes  little 
difference whether or not the models are based on economic theory. 
There are certain similarities between projecting developments in the Norwegian economy in 
the  coming  months  and  forecasting  the  weather.  Meteorologists  have  observed  that 
averaging a large number of forecasting models generally produces more accurate forecasts. 
                                                 
1   Ysander,  Bengt-Christer,  “Award  Ceremony  Speech”,  Royal  Swedish  Academy  of  Sciences,  10  December 
1989. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
To project consumer price inflation in the coming quarters the Bank has developed a system 
for averaging forecasts from about 170 different statistical models, all of which are intended 
to project inflation in the Norwegian economy in the very near term. The models are grouped 
into three classes, and the models within each class may contain different variables or be 
variants  of  one  another2.  The  weights  are  continually  adjusted  on  the  basis  of  historical 
accuracy,  so  that  models  with  better  predictive  power  are  given  greater  weight  in  the 
subsequent  round.  The  Bank  has  a  similar  system  including  almost  250  models  for 
forecasting  mainland  GDP.  The  projections  from  these  systems  of  models  extend  four 
quarters ahead in time and are published at regular intervals on the Bank’s website. We call 
this apparatus SAM (System for Averaging Models). 
For  projections  with  slightly  longer  horizons,  the  Bank  parts  company  with  weather 
forecasters. While meteorologists are unlikely to influence the weather with their predictions, 
Norges  Bank’s  interest  rate  setting  can  actually  influence  economic  developments  in  the 
medium term. This places particular demands on the system of analysis and involves other 
demands than if the sole purpose were to make forecasts. Norges Bank has developed the 
Norwegian  Economy  Model  (NEMO),  which  we  use  as  an  aid  when  drawing  up  one-year-
ahead to four-year-ahead forecasts. 
NEMO is a model for analysing cyclical fluctuations around a long-term trend. In the medium 
term, the economy may in periods deviate substantially from trend, but when the fluctuations 
subside, we must assume that the economy is moving towards equilibrium. The model does 
not explain the long-term trend so we have to look to other economic theory. For example, 
economic growth over time will be determined by technological developments and the supply 
of labour and capital, and there will likely be a relationship between the real interest rate and 
potential growth. 
When we set the interest rate, we give weight to the current situation and the outlook two to 
three years ahead. The statistical models help us understand the current situation, while the 
equilibrium properties frame the analysis. NEMO describes how the interest rate can be set 
to bring the economy from its current starting point back to the long-term equilibrium path. As 
a  support  tool  in  making  monetary  policy  decisions,  such  a  model  apparatus  is  thus 
particularly relevant. I will come back to the main features of NEMO later. 
Chart: Monetary policy model requirements 
Norges Bank operates under a formal monetary policy mandate. The Bank’s objective is to 
stabilise  inflation  and  provide  the  economy  with  a  nominal  anchor.  As  a  minimum,  an 
economic model to be used as support for interest rate decisions should be based on the 
assumption that monetary policy can steer inflation. 
Economic agents can be expected to look ahead when making consumption and investment 
decisions. It is not only current economic policy that is likely to matter to them, but also what 
they expect it will be in the future. Expectations must therefore be incorporated and play a 
role in a monetary policy model. 
Furthermore, the functioning of monetary policy should be in line with theory and experience. 
For example, Norway’s recent history tells us that there is little likelihood that monetary policy 
will be able to influence the economy’s long-term growth potential. 
Chart: Growth and inflation 
Many  economists  previously  argued  that  unemployment  could  be  reduced  by  accepting 
slightly  higher  inflation  over  time.  Monetary  policy  was  oriented  accordingly  and  inflation 
                                                 
2   Factor models, indicator models and VAR models. For a detailed discussion, see Aastveit, K.A, K. Gerdrup, 
A.S. Jore (2011) “Short-term forecasting of GDP and inflation in real time: Norges Bank’s system for averaging 
models”, Staff Memo 9/2011, Norges Bank. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
accelerated in many countries, without a sustained decline in unemployment. It turned out 
that  bringing  rising  inflation  under  control  involved  substantial  real  economic  costs.  In  the 
past 20 years, inflation has been consistently low and stable. Economic growth has been just 
as high, if not higher, since inflation came down to a low level, compared with the years when 
inflation was high and at times at double-digit levels. 
Chart: Monetary policy model requirements 
For the model to be relevant it should build on long-term relationships that we believe to be 
valid  and  it  should  be  consistent  with  data.  For  example,  the  model’s  relationships  should 
describe  how  the  interest  rate  works,  in  line  with  relevant  empirical  observations  of  the 
Norwegian economy. 
It  is  also  of  considerable  importance  to  us  that  the  economic  mechanisms  in  the  model 
should be understandable and easy to communicate. The model apparatus is to function as 
a  useful  tool,  both  in  the  internal  process  ahead  of  the  monetary  policy  meetings  and  in 
Norges Bank’s external communication. 
Chart: Quote George Box 
A model will never be able to provide an exhaustive description of reality. In 1979, the British 
statistician  George  Box  stated:  “Essentially,  all  models  are  wrong,  but  some  are  useful”. 
Models  can  help  to  identify  key  driving  forces,  ensure  a  valid  line  of  reasoning  and 
consistency over time. This will enable the model to play an important role in the analytical 
basis for interest rate setting. At the same time, we must use common sense and experience 
when  evaluating  the  model-based  results  and  supplement  these  results  with  our  own 
professional judgement. In this respect, the Bank has a pragmatic attitude regarding the use 
of models. 
Before I discuss Norges Bank’s suite of models in greater detail, I would like to look at a few 
key  macroeconomic  variables  and  their  interaction.  Studying  fundamental  statistical 
relationships provides important insight into the functioning of the economy. Along with the 
theoretical  foundation,  such  insight  is  one  of  the  most  important  building  blocks of  a  good 
analytical apparatus for implementing monetary policy. 
Chart: Output and inflation 
Let  me  begin  by  taking  a  look  at  the  relationship  between  output  and  inflation.  In  recent 
years,  consumer  price  inflation  (CPI)  has  fluctuated  between  0  and  3  per  cent.  Mainland 
GDP  growth  has  also  fluctuated,  giving  rise  to  economic  cycles.  The  chart  shows 
developments in the two variables measured as deviations from long-term trend growth, in 
other  words  an  “inflation  gap”  and  an  “output  gap”3.  The  blue  line  in  the  chart  shows  that 
GDP growth was markedly higher than trend growth in the latter half of the 1990s and in the 
period from 2003 to 2008, but that it has risen somewhat more slowly in the period following 
the  financial  crisis.  When  developments  in  output  are  compared  with  inflation,  a  pattern 
emerges. A pickup in GDP growth has consistently occurred 4–5 quarters before a rise in 
inflation4. While the chart says nothing about causality, turning points in GDP growth seem to 
be a fairly reliable leading indicator of turning points in inflation. 
Chart: Output and employment 
                                                  
3   The gaps express deviations from estimated trends in seasonally adjusted figures for mainland GDP and CPI 
adjusted for tax changes and excluding energy products (CPI-ATE), respectively. The trends are estimated 
using a Hodrick Prescott (HP) filter on quarterly data with λ=40000. The output gap is a technical estimate and 
does not fully correspond with the output gap in Norges Bank’s Monetary Policy Report. 
4   The correlation between these two data series is highest when the output gap is deferred 4–5 quarters into the 
future. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
The  path  from  changes  in  output  to  inflation  passes  through  the  labour  market,  among 
others.  We  have  seen  that  when  economic  growth  has  picked  up,  unemployment5  has 
declined one to two quarters thereafter. The relationship between the “output gap” and the 
“unemployment gap” is fairly strong. This is a useful observation because GDP figures are 
published with a considerable lag and often subject to revision, while unemployment data are 
published at the end of each month and are not revised. If there is uncertainty about the GDP 
figures – which there often may be – falling unemployment can be an indication of a recovery 
in economic growth. 
Chart: Unemployment and wage growth 
Labour market developments, in turn, affect wage growth, as illustrated by the blue line in the 
chart. High unemployment results in low wage growth, and vice versa. The chart shows that 
in  periods  of  falling  unemployment,  wage  growth6  moves  up  fairly  rapidly.  Changes  in 
unemployment appear to have a fairly immediate impact on wage growth. 
Chart: Wage growth and domestic inflation 
Not unexpectedly, there is also a close statistical relationship between wage growth and the 
rise in prices for domestically produced goods in the CPI7. It appears to take about one year 
for changes in wage growth to feed through to inflation. 
Such observations of data provide a picture of some of the interrelationships in the economy, 
but  they  say  little  about  causality  or  how  interest  rates  feed  through  to  the  economy. 
Correlations  are  nevertheless  interesting  as  a  background  for  the  analytical  tools  that  are 
used in interest rate setting. 
Chart: The interest rate is an endogenous variable 
Historically, the interest rate has been set in response to various developments and shocks. 
In  this  respect,  the  interest  rate  is  an  endogenous  variable.  The  relationship  between  the 
interest  rate  and  other  key  variables  has  through  history  also  been  influenced  by  shifting 
monetary policy objectives. If the interest rate is raised today in response to an unexpected 
change in price and cost inflation, a fall in capacity utilisation must be expected. However, if 
the interest rate is increased in response to an unexpected pickup in demand for goods and 
services, the path will be a different one. In historical data, a higher interest rate can go hand 
in hand with both lower growth and higher growth. It is therefore demanding to identify the 
effects of interest rate changes when studying historical data series. 
Moreover,  the  effect  of  an  interest  rate  change  will  depend  on  whether  the  change  is 
anticipated  or  comes  as  a  surprise.  For  example,  a  lower-than-expected  interest  rate 
increase might easily be perceived as an expansionary monetary stance, even though the 
rate  is  actually  being  raised.  Expectations  may  also  result  in  a  change  in  market  interest 
rates well in advance of an actual adjustment in the key policy rate. This may influence how 
quickly an interest rate change feeds through to the economy. 
Furthermore, the impact will depend on the expected duration of the interest rate change. If 
the Bank were to embark on a totally new monetary policy course, we would have to assume 
that this would result in a different path for the economy than if an interest rate hike occurs 
one month earlier than planned. 
Chart: VAR model 
                                                 
5   Unemployment measured according to LFS. 
6   Mainland hourly wage growth from quarterly national accounts. 
7   Adjusted for tax changes and excluding energy products, seasonally adjusted figures. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
In  order  to  analyse  the  effects  of  the  interest  rate,  we  need  to  study  more  than  pure 
correlations. We need an analytical apparatus that allows the interest rate to be endogenous. 
A vector autoregressive model (VAR) model on Norwegian data quantifies how the interest 
rate  has  reacted  historically  to  other  key  economic  variables.  The  model  is  based  on 
statistical relationships between GDP, interest rates, exchange rates and inflation, taking into 
account  that  variables  may  be  interdependent.  All  the  variables  are  a  function  of  lagged 
values  of  themselves  and  the  other  variables.  To  estimate  the  model,  the  relationship 
between some of the variables is predetermined in line with economic theory. For example, 
on the basis of well known economic relationships, assumptions can be made concerning the 
sequence  in  which  the  different  variables  will  affect  one  another  and  we  can  impose  the 
assumption that the interest rate will not affect GDP in the long term. 
A  common  approach  to  analysing  the  effect  of  the  interest  rate  in  models  where  it  is 
endogenously determined is to apply an exogenous impulse or a shock to the interest rate. 
This means that the interest rate is raised in response to factors other than those that can be 
explained historically by the other variables in the model. Thereafter the model takes over, 
and the interest rate moves in line with the model’s estimated reaction pattern. 
The effect of an interest rate shock will depend on the variables included in the model, the 
model’s  structure  and  estimation  period.  The  result  can  be  more  robust  if  we  use  a  long 
time-series  in  the  estimation.  On  the  other  hand,  changes in  monetary  policy  regimes  can 
influence the results. It may therefore be of greater interest to confine the estimation period 
to, for instance, the period of inflation targeting. 
First, I would like to look at the implications of the choice of estimation period for the results. I 
will then compare the VAR model with a corresponding interest rate shock in NEMO. 
Chart: Isolated effect on GDP of an interest rate increase in two different VAR models 
In  order  to  further  explore  the  extent  to  which  the  estimation  period  has  a  bearing  on  the 
results, we have estimated VAR models with successive starting points from 1986 to 19968. 
Each  model  is  quantified  on  quarterly  data  up  to  2009.  In  the  analysis,  the  interest  rate 
increases by 1 percentage point and then gradually falls back. The increase in the interest 
rate will result in a temporary decline in GDP growth. The chart shows the effect in two of the 
models, one that is estimated from the mid-1980s and the other where the estimation period 
starts  ten  years  later.  The  impact  on  GDP  occurs  somewhat  earlier,  but  is  a  little  smaller 
when  we  start  the  estimation  period  later.  This  may  reflect  the  change  in  monetary  policy 
regime during the period or structural changes in the Norwegian economy. 
Chart: Maximum impact of a 1 percentage point interest rate increase, different estimation 
periods 
If we only look at the maximum impact of an interest rate increase in each of the models, we 
obtain a picture of how this has changed over time. Each point in the chart represents the 
impact  on  the  level  of  GDP  and  inflation  when  the  effect  of  an  interest  rate  increase  is 
strongest in each model (estimation period). 
The  charts  show  that  an  unexpected  change  in  the  key  policy  rate  of  1  percentage  point 
results in a maximum downward shift in GDP of 0.4–0.7 per cent and a maximum decline in 
inflation of 0.2–0.3 percentage point. 
Chart:  Number  of  quarters  to  maximum  effect  of  interest  rate  change,  different  estimation 
periods 
The timing pattern of the impact of interest rates on the economy has also changed. Using 
the  same  models,  this  chart  shows  how  many  quarters  it  takes  before  the  impact  of  an 
                                                 
8   The VAR models are based on mainland GDP data, inflation adjusted for tax changes and excluding energy 
products (CPI-ATE), the krone exchange rate (I-44) and 3-month NIBOR. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
interest rate increase on GDP and inflation reaches its maximum. As shown in the chart, the 
impact  occurs  slightly  faster  if  the  estimation  period  starts  later.  The  maximum  impact  on 
GDP occurs on average with a lag of 5–6 quarters, while the maximum impact on inflation 
occurs on average after 9–11 quarters. 
Chart: Effect of monetary policy shocks, different models/estimation periods 
If we illustrate the entire profile of the monetary policy response in all the VAR models in a 
single chart, we obtain an overall picture of the degree of spread between the results. If we 
were to draw a fan chart around each model, it would become clear that the uncertainty is 
even greater than the spread alone indicates. If we were nevertheless to draw a conclusion 
on this basis, it must be that an interest rate increase will dampen GDP growth in the course 
of  the  subsequent  year  –  all  else  being  equal.  Somewhat  further  ahead,  inflation  will  also 
recede. As the interest rate returns to normal, GDP growth and inflation will pick up again. 
As  mentioned,  the  VAR  models  are  based  on  a  number  of  theoretical  assumptions  about 
how the economy works. However, they only provide a rough description of the structure of 
the  economy  and  the  behaviour  of  economic  agents.  The  results  from  the  VAR-based 
analyses must therefore be interpreted with caution. 
Chart: NEMO 
Our macroeconomic model NEMO has a more precise theoretical construction than the VAR 
models. NEMO is a dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE)  model, and has many 
features that are similar to corresponding models used by other central banks. It describes 
the behaviour of households and firms. Economic agents are forward-looking when making 
decisions so that expectations are of significance. In the model, monetary policy is geared 
towards  stabilising  inflation  at  2.5  per  cent  and  weight  is  also  given  to  stabilising 
developments  in  output.  The  long-term  growth  potential  of  the  economy  is  determined  by 
technological  developments.  There  is  no  long-term  trade  off  between  inflation  and 
unemployment. As prices and wages respond with some lag, monetary policy can, however, 
influence  demand,  output  and  employment  in  the  short  and  medium  term.  NEMO  is  an 
empirical model, that is to say it is estimated on Norwegian data. 
NEMO can help us provide economic interpretations of observed developments. Changes in 
key variables such as GDP and inflation can be explained by factors such as productivity, 
competitiveness in labour and product markets and the propensity to save. In that respect, 
NEMO is quite different from the “weather forecasting models” I cited earlier, which provide 
little scope for interpretations based on economic theory. 
Chart: Effect of monetary policy shocks in the VAR models and in NEMO 
As indicated by the red line in the chart, NEMO provides a description of monetary policy that 
is  broadly  consistent  with  that  derived  from  the  VAR  models9.  In  NEMO,  an  unexpected 
interest rate increase of 1 percentage point implies, in isolation, a decline in GDP of around 
0.4 per cent around one year later. Inflation is reduced by about ¼ percentage point with a 
lag of around two years. Compared with the VAR models, NEMO is in the upper part of the 
area for GDP and in the lower part for inflation. NEMO is estimated from the mid-1990s and 
the results are also close to those derived from the VAR models that are estimated over the 
same time period. 
A model will never be able to provide an exact indication of how the interest rate should be 
set.  The  ultimate  assessment  is,  as  mentioned,  a  result  of  Norges  Bank’s  professional 
                                                 
9   The  estimation  is  based  on  a  one  percentage  point  increase  in  the  interest  rate,  followed  by  a  gradual 
reduction in line with the response pattern in the model. The analysis shows the impact of the interest rate 
increase on mainland GDP for Norway and inflation adjusted for tax changes and excluding energy products 
(CPI-ATE). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
judgement and will also capture considerations that are not sufficiently safeguarded by our 
models. As such, the models are only a tool. But, a model such as NEMO is a very useful 
tool  for  analysing  developments  and  in  interest  rate  setting.  It  helps  us  interpret  and 
understand  the  dynamics  of  the  Norwegian  economy.  The  model  apparatus  is  continually 
being  developed.  Among  other  things,  we  are  exploring  how  financial  markets  and  the 
linkage to the real estate market can be incorporated into such a model. 
Norges Bank’s response pattern expresses the assessments we make and how we set the 
interest  rate  to  attain  our  objectives.  We  must  use  professional  judgement  and  our 
experience  of  how  the  Norwegian  economy  functions.  We  attempt  to  incorporate  our 
response  pattern  into  NEMO  by  setting  the  interest  rate  in  the  model  so  as  to  stabilise 
inflation  at  target  while  reducing  fluctuations  in  output  and  employment.  The  model  can  in 
this respect be a tool for ensuring consistency over time when we set the interest rate. 
In  our  communication,  we  seek  to  be  open  about  our  response  pattern.  Many  important 
economic  decisions  depend  on  economic  agents’  expectations  concerning  the  future.  The 
inflation target and our response pattern influence and can change their expectations. The 
task of stabilising inflation is facilitated when households, firms and market participants have 
a good understanding of how monetary policy works and how Norges Bank sets the interest 
rate. 
Chart: Forecasts of inflation and the output gap in the June 2011 Monetary Policy Report 
The  monetary  policy  response  pattern  can  be  communicated  in  several  ways.  In  our 
Monetary Policy Report, we present a chart with our forecasts of inflation and the output gap. 
Combined, they provide a picture of key assessments underlying our interest rate decisions, 
and hence our response pattern. The interest rate is set so that inflation and the output gap 
move in balance. If inflation is well below target, the interest rate will normally be low so that 
the output gap increases and eventually pushes up inflation. Inversely, if inflation is too high, 
the interest rate will be raised so that the output gap narrows and inflation recedes. 
As shown in the chart, in our latest Report from June we  presented a scenario where the 
output gap increases somewhat further ahead, with the downturn in the wake of the financial 
crisis being followed by a mild upturn. The low level of inflation would then move up to target. 
Chart: Interest rate forecast with fan chart in the June 2011 Monetary Policy Report 
The  interest  rate  forecast  is  shown  in  a  fan  chart.  Our  forecasts  provide  an  expression  of 
what we consider to be the baseline path. But the forecasts are uncertain, as illustrated by 
the fan chart. Our interest rate forecast is not an unconditional promise, but signals how we 
will  set  the  interest  rate  if  developments  in  the  Norwegian  economy  are  in  line  with  our 
projections. The  interest  rate  path  presented  in June  indicated  that  the interest  rate  would 
gradually be raised towards a normal level in the next years. It followed that the interest rate 
would, with some degree of probability, be increased in August. This was conditional on the 
economic outlook we presented at that time. 
Chart:  Interest  rate  forecast  with  fan  chart  and  alternative  scenarios  in  the  June  2011 
Monetary Policy Report 
The  Bank’s  Monetary  Policy  Report  also  presents  alternative  scenarios  for  the  Norwegian 
economy. If developments are broadly in line with expectations, economic agents can expect 
that  the  interest  rate  will  be  set  in  line  with  that  projected  by  Norges  Bank.  If  conditions 
change,  as  was  the  case  in  August,  Norges  Bank  will  naturally adapt  the monetary  policy 
stance in the light of new economic prospects. Through our communication and the reports 
we publish, it is possible for an external observer to anticipate this reaction with a fair degree 
of accuracy. My impression is that economic agents and analysts are generally fairly close to 
the mark in their analyses when they attempt to predict the interest rate level. 
Chart: Summary 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
When the inflation target was introduced, Norges Bank stated that it would place particular 
emphasis  on  stabilising  inflation  in  the  initial  years.  As  inflation  became  more  firmly 
anchored,  there  was  broader  scope  for  giving  more  weight  to  stabilising  output  and 
employment. In addition, we now have ten years of experience and insight. Compared with 
the first years, inflation targeting is now more flexible. 
When  Haavelmo  received  the  Nobel  Prize,  he  reminded  us  that  economic  policy  can  be 
demanding.  A  failure  to  react  to  the  build-up  of  imbalances  undermines  confidence  in 
economic policy. If we tighten policy to rein in imbalances – and succeed – we are viewed in 
retrospect as having been unduly pessimistic. There is, though, reason for a certain degree 
of  optimism.  Theoretically  anchored  models  and  improved  methods  for  quantifying  them 
empirically provide a better basis for conducting an effective economic policy. Moreover, we 
use  professional  judgement,  which  we  take  on  board  when  we  apply  and  further  develop 
models and the analytical apparatus in Norges Bank. Knowledge about relationships in the 
Norwegian economy, in conjunction with professional judgement, provides a good platform. 
Thank you for your attention. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
      BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
    10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
    12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
    14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15
    16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 17
   18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
