Mark Carney: Summary of the latest Monetary Policy Report 
Opening  statement  by  Mr  Mark  Carney,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  the  press 
conference following the release of the Monetary Policy Report, Ottawa, 20 July 2011. 
 Good morning. Tiff and I are pleased to be here with you today to discuss the July Monetary 
Policy Report, which the Bank published this morning. 
 
The  global  economic  expansion  is  proceeding  broadly  as  projected  in  April,  with 
modest  growth  in  major  advanced  economies  and  robust  expansions  in  emerging 
economies. 
Growth  in  the  U.S.  economy  has  been  slower  than  expected.  It  continues  to  be 
restrained  by  the  consolidation  of  household  balance  sheets  and  slow  growth  in 
employment. 
While  growth  in  core  Europe  has  been  stronger  than  expected,  necessary  fiscal 
austerity measures in a number of countries will restrain growth over the projection 
horizon. In Japan, the economy has begun to recover from the disasters that struck 
on  11  March,  but  the  level  of  economic  activity  will  remain  below  previous 
expectations. 
In contrast, growth in emerging-market economies, particularly China, remains very 
strong.  As  a  consequence,  commodity  prices  are  expected  to  remain  at  elevated 
levels,  following  recent  declines.  These  high  prices,  combined  with  persistent 
excess  demand  in  major  emerging-market  economies,  are  contributing  to  broader 
global inflationary pressures. 
Widespread  concerns  over  sovereign  debt  have  increased  risk  aversion  and 
volatility  in  financial  markets.  The  Bank’s  projection  assumes  that  authorities  are 
able to contain the ongoing European sovereign debt crisis, although there are clear 
risks around this outcome. 
In Canada, the economic expansion is proceeding largely as projected, although the 
expected  rotation  of  demand  is  somewhat  slower  than  had  been  anticipated. 
Household  spending  remains  solid  and  business  investment  robust.  Net  exports 
remain  weak,  reflecting  modest  U.S.  demand  and  ongoing  competitiveness 
challenges, particularly the persistent strength of the Canadian dollar. 
Despite increased global risk aversion, financial conditions in Canada remain very 
stimulative and private credit growth is strong. 
Following  an  anticipated  slowdown  in  growth  during  the  second  quarter  due  to 
temporary  supply  chain  disruptions  and  the  impact  of  higher  energy  prices  on 
consumption, the Bank expects growth in Canada to re-accelerate in the second half 
of 2011. 
Over  the  projection  horizon,  business  investment  is  expected  to  remain  strong, 
household spending to grow more in line with disposable income, and net exports to 
become more supportive of growth. 
Relative to the April projection, growth in household spending is now projected to be 
slightly  firmer,  reflecting  higher  household  income,  and  net  exports  to  be  slightly 
weaker, reflecting more subdued U.S. activity. 
         BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
       Overall,  the  Bank  projects  the  economy  will  expand  by  2.8  per  cent  in  2011, 
2.6 per cent in 2012, and 2.1 per cent in 2013, returning to capacity in the middle of 
2012. 
In the near term, total CPI inflation is expected to remain above 3 per cent, largely 
reflecting temporary factors such as significantly higher food and energy prices. It is 
expected to return to the 2 per cent target by the middle of 2012 as the temporary 
factors  unwind,  excess  supply  in  the  economy  is  gradually  absorbed,  labour 
compensation growth stays modest, productivity recovers, and inflation expectations 
remain well-anchored.  
Core inflation is slightly firmer than anticipated, owing to temporary factors and to 
more  persistent  strength  in  the  prices  of  some  services.  Core  inflation  is  now 
expected to remain around 2 per cent over the projection horizon. 
Although  the  global  outlook  remains  broadly  unchanged,  global  risks  have 
intensified,  most  notably  in  Europe.  The  three  main  upside  risks  to  inflation  in 
Canada  relate  to  the  possibility  of  higher-than-projected  commodity  prices  and 
global  inflation,  stronger  momentum  in  Canadian  household  spending,  and  the 
possibility that there is less excess capacity in the Canadian economy. 
The  three  main  downside  risks  to  inflation  in  Canada  relate  to  sovereign  debt 
concerns in Europe, headwinds from the persistent strength of the Canadian dollar, 
and  the  possibility  that  growth  in  Canadian  household  spending  could  be  weaker 
than projected. 
Overall, the Bank judges that the risks to the inflation outlook in Canada are roughly 
balanced over the projection horizon. 
Reflecting  all  of  these  factors,  the  Bank  yesterday  maintained  the  target  for  the 
overnight  rate  at  1  per  cent.  To  the  extent  that  the  expansion  continues  and  the 
current material excess supply in the economy is gradually absorbed, some of the 
considerable  monetary  policy  stimulus  currently  in  place  will  be  withdrawn, 
consistent with achieving the 2 per cent inflation target. Such reduction would need 
to be carefully considered.  
With that, Tiff and I would be pleased to take your questions. 
 2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
