Vítor Constâncio: The governance of financial stability in the euro area 
Speech by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the “ECB 
and its Watchers XIII” conference, Frankfurt am Main, 10 June 2011. 
 Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure to take part in this thirteenth edition of the ECB and its Watchers conference. 
I would like to use my intervention today to reflect on how the economic and financial crisis 
should  alter  policymakers’  conception  of  the  governance  of  financial  stability  in  the 
euro area. 
Prior  to  the  crisis,  financial  stability  was  often  viewed  in  a  rather  abstract  manner,  as  a 
condition that flowed from other well-defined pre-conditions – for example, low inflation – or 
as a concept that could only be addressed after the fact – for example, once bubbles had 
burst.  However,  the  crisis  revealed  that  financial  stability  warrants  much  more  prominent 
attention:  
 
First,  it  became  clear  that  financial  stability  depends  on  a  much  broader  range  of 
sources than was previously acknowledged, from both macroeconomic imbalances 
in the real economy and imbalances in the financial sector.  
Second, it was revealed that the channels through which financial instability could 
spread are various and complex, with negative consequences for both the financial 
and real sectors, thus requiring ex ante and not only ex post policy responses.  
 These  two  findings  militate  in  favour  of  a  more  comprehensive  policy  framework  for 
governing  financial  stability  in  Europe,  which  should  comprise  in  my  view  the 
following. 
First,  the  full  implementation  of  the  economic  governance  reform,  which  is  presently 
under  discussion.  It  is  unquestionable  that  a  sound  and  credible  framework  of  economic 
governance is fundamental for financial stability, as, for example, public debt developments 
have demonstrated. 
Second,  a  strengthening  of  financial  supervision  in  the  euro  area.  This  should  be 
understood  as  an  essential  component  for  the  overall  effectiveness  economic  governance 
alongside  the  strengthening  of  the  fiscal  pillar,  the  surveillance  of  macro-economic 
imbalances, co-ordination of economic policies, and the European Stability Mechanism. 
I will organise my remarks today as follows.  
I will begin by examining how the crisis unveiled the shortcomings of economic governance 
in what regards in particular the channels through which financial instability can propagate in 
the euro area. 
I will then propose what should be, in my view, the five key components of financial stability 
governance,  highlighting  in  particular  the  necessary  euro  area  dimension  of  such 
governance.  
Economic governance and financial stability 
The  crisis  provided  some  important  lessons  for  economic  governance  in  the  euro  
area – lessons that were not fully understood at the inception of EMU. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
forward 
important  step 
The first lesson refers to the sources of financial instability in the euro area. Euro area 
economic governance had been constructed primarily to prevent negative spillovers via the 
public finance unbalances and we learned that this was not enough.  
As a response, the economic governance in the euro area is being reformed. 
The  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  is  being  strengthened  to  focus  more  on  fiscal  sustainability 
and  reducing  government  debt  levels,  with  a  clearly  defined  debt  reduction  rule  and 
sanctions. A surveillance procedure for macroeconomic imbalances is being instituted which 
will include a new “Excessive Imbalances Procedure” and a special focus on the euro area. 
This is complemented by the European Semester and Euro Plus Pact, which aim to improve 
ex ante policy co-ordination. If crises are still relevant, a permanent mechanism, the ESM, is 
being  put  in  place  to  provide  bridge  funding  while  countries  with  liquidity  challenges 
implement  a  deep  adjustment  programme,  correct  imbalances  and  regain  market  access. 
These  measures  represent  an 
towards  providing  a  more 
comprehensive economic governance framework in the EU and the euro area. 
But there is also a second lesson revealed by the crisis, which I would like to highlight. It 
falls outside what I might call the “conventional” economic governance debate and refers to 
the channels through which financial instability can spread in the euro area.  
Monetary union was associated with a structural increase in financial integration in the euro 
area.  The  resulting  interconnectedness,  coupled  with  the  balance  sheet  structure  of  the 
financial sector, constitutes a powerful mechanism to propagate economic shocks between 
sovereigns and the financial sector. 
Negative  feedback  loops  are  the  key  transmission  mechanism.  Rating  downgrades  of 
sovereigns  often  translate  into  comparable  downgrades  of  their  domestic  banks,  reflecting 
the diminished ability of the government sector to support domestic banks. At the same time, 
funding  vulnerabilities  and  impaired  capital  positions  of  domestic  banks  translate  into  a 
higher need for government support, putting further pressure on sovereign debt.  
Monetary union naturally increases cross-border holdings of sovereign debt as banks move 
to diversify their sovereign risk. This creates exposure, not only to the risk of their domestic 
issuer, but to the average risk in euro area government debt. One country’s fiscal challenges 
can, by undermining bank balance sheets, potentially become a liability for other euro area 
sovereigns.1 
Indeed,  this  relationship  between  the  sovereign  and  the  financial  sector  has  led  some  US 
academics and policymakers to suggest that the sovereign debt problem in Europe is mostly 
a banking problem, being ultimately a reflection of the insufficient capital buffers of European 
banks.  This  view  is  based  on  the  reasoning  that,  should  banks  be  better  capitalised,  they 
could be partially decoupled from the fiscal condition of the sovereign and thus relieve the 
drag of the financial sector on the sovereign signature. 
Although I would be careful in attributing causality in this way, I concur that increasing the 
robustness of the financial sector is key to solving sovereign debt concerns. For this reason, 
the “conventional” economic governance debate can only be half the story. It may prevent 
negative feedback loops emerging via the public sector, but to prevent also their emergence 
in the financial sector – as we have seen in the Irish case – a broader remit for governance is 
needed.  
Imbalances in the euro area would not have developed in the same scale if the behaviour of 
the  banking  sectors  in  all  countries,  in  core  and  peripheral  countries,  had  been  better 
supervised.  Some  banking  sectors  distributed  too  much  credit  and  others  provided  a 
                                                 
1  Bolton,  P.,  and  O.  Jeanne,  “Sovereign  default  risk  and  bank  fragility  in  financially  integrated  economies”, 
CEPR Discussion Paper No. 8358 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
significant part of the funding that then dried-out when the crisis came and the credit risk was 
suddenly reassessed.  
All this implies necessarily that effective economic governance needs also to address 
the financial sector, in order that imbalances, externalities and spillovers are tackled 
effectively.  Conceptually,  financial  supervision  needs  to  be  exercised  as  much  as 
possible  at  the  European  level.  It  cannot  be  left,  as  presently,  in  the  domain  of 
exclusive national competences. 
The components of financial stability governance in the euro area 
Accordingly,  let  me  now  propose  what  are,  in  my  view,  the  key  components  to  achieve 
reinforced governance in the euro area for financial stability. 
First: macro-prudential risk monitoring and assessment 
The first component is enhancing the capacity of public authorities to identify and address 
systemic  risk  at  the  European  level,  both  from  an  analytical  and  an  institutional 
perspective.  
Prior  to  the  crisis,  the  lack  of  an  institutional  mechanism  to  translate  the  financial  stability 
analysis  made  by  central  banks  and  the  ECB  into  policy  actions  was  a  major  lacuna.  In 
response,  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB)  has  been  set  up  to  monitor  and 
assess macro-prudential risks. Given that the new framework began operating in January 
this year, it is difficult to assess its effectiveness comprehensively.  
However,  it  could  be  instructive  to  review  ex  ante  the  robustness  of  the  analytical  toolbox 
assigned to the ESRB, and consider ex post whether such a toolbox would have enhanced 
policymakers understanding of systemic risk prior to the crisis. 
Before doing so, I should make clear that the purpose of the ESRB is not to predict crises. 
The academic literature on early warning signal models, developed over the years, suggests 
that, for a number of reasons, the scope for error in predicting crises is substantial. Either the 
eruption of a crisis is missed or a period is wrongly identified by the start of a crisis. For this 
reason,  the  ESRB’s  analytical  toolbox  is  based  on  early  warning  models  and  indicators 
designed  to  identify  emerging  vulnerabilities  or  imbalances  that  could  lead  to  financial 
instability.  
These models aim to perform three functions in particular. 
First,  to  identify  the  variables  which  are  associated  with  financial  instability.  To  this 
end,  an 
institution-specific 
vulnerabilities,  is  tested  against  variables  such  as  credit  growth,  property  price  changes, 
private sector leverage and current account deficits, to discover which variables predict that 
index. Measures of bank leverage, balance sheet growth and maturity mismatches may also 
be used in order to gauge the extent to which the financial sector is driving developments. 
Second, to assess the relative importance of different risks for financial stability. This 
is done using “adverse scenarios” that are designed and macro stress-tested to establish the 
potential severity of different types of risk and the overall resilience of the financial system to 
severe shocks. Such models, including top-down stress test of individual institutions, allow 
risks to be assessed more broadly and at a higher frequency than is possible with bottom-up 
exercises run by financial institutions, thus enhancing the “real time” information on systemic 
risk available to policymakers. 
Third, to assess the financial channels through which risk can be propagated, thereby 
factoring-in  potential  second-round  effects.  The  use  of  contagion  and  spillover  models 
allows, for example, the assessment of the impact on the financial system of the failure of a 
particular financial institution or of turbulence in a particular sovereign debt market. 
index  of  aggregate  macro-financial 
imbalances,  or  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
We could consider how this framework would have functioned if applied retrospectively. For 
example,  the  monitoring  of  the  credit-to-GDP  ratio  as  an  early  warning  indicator  of 
widespread  asset-price  misalignments  would  have  initiated  early  warning  signals  as 
early as mid-2005. If the ESRB had been operational at this time, a risk warning would have 
been  issued  drawing  attention  to  substantial  price  misalignments  in  mortgages  and  equity 
prices.  Corrective  measures  could  then  have  been  recommended  to  curb  credit  growth, 
potentially distinguishing across countries depending of the magnitude of the imbalances. If 
followed,  these  policy  measures  could  have  deflated  the  asset  price  bubble  before  its 
dramatic burst in 2007. 
This  example  suggests  that  the  analytical  framework  employed  by  the  ESRB  could 
significantly strengthen macro-prudential risk assessment. At the same time, whilst its policy 
recommendations  are  not  legally  binding,  they  should  carry  weight  as  they  are  addressed 
predominantly to the ESRB’s members, who would have to “comply-or-explain” in front of 
their peers. Additional pressure could derive from the publication of recommendations. 
Ultimately, the effectiveness of the ESRB’s recommendations will depend on the quality of 
the analysis behind them. Macro-prudential authorities will face a heavy burden of proof to 
justify  concrete  policy  changes,  and  so  their  analysis  must  be  beyond  reproach.  For  this 
reason, in order to support the work of the ESRB, the ECB is enhancing its analytical tools 
with regard to risk surveillance and assessment. We have now operational models and tools 
to fulfil the three functions previously mentioned and we continue to work hard to improve 
them. 
Looking ahead, the area in which I see a need for particular focus from policymakers is to 
strengthen the link between stress testing of bank capital and recapitalisation. Steps 
are currently being taken in this direction via public and private sector solutions, but these 
remain essentially ad hoc and not part of a well-established framework for maintaining and 
restoring,  when  needed,  levels  of  capital  commensurate  to  the  needs  of  the  European 
banking sector.  
Second: a European framework for micro-prudential supervision 
A  more  comprehensive  European-wide  understanding  of  systemic  risks  needs  to  be 
complemented  by  an  effective  micro-prudential  supervisory  framework  to  monitor  and 
prevent these risks. This implies a more consistent set of regulatory and supervisory rules 
across Member States, together with stronger rules and practices for co-operation between 
supervisory authorities on cross-border groups, both in normal and crisis situations.  
In this context, the European Supervisory Authorities have been allocated a significant set 
of  competences  related  to  rule-making,  enforcement  of  rules  and  co-ordination  of 
supervision. All together, through these tools, the ESAs are expected to develop a single 
“EU rulebook” which is enforced consistently throughout the single financial market. 
This  should  address  a  major  weakness  in  the  current  framework,  namely  the  divergences 
across  countries  in  key  regulatory  elements  –  for  example  the  different  components  of 
regulatory capital used across Member States.  
Furthermore,  the  ESAs  have  the  power  to  take  legally  binding  decisions  addressed  to 
national  supervisors  or,  in  case  of  non-compliance,  to  specific  financial  institutions  if 
warranted by financial stability considerations. These powers can be triggered by a breach of 
EU 
in 
cross-border  situations;  and  the  declaration  of  an  emergency  situation  by  the  Council. 
However,  in  the  latter  two  cases  the  ESAs’  powers  are  subject  to  the  “fiscal  clause”, 
which provides that the ESAs’ powers cannot impinge on the national fiscal responsibilities. 
law  by  supervisors;  disagreement  between  national  supervisory  authorities 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Third: reinforced financial supervision within the euro area 
So  far,  I  have  argued  for  two  pillars  of  financial  stability  governance,  which  are  widely 
consensual,  that  is,  macro  and  micro-prudential  supervision  with  a  true  European  scope. 
Taking  however  into  account  what  we  are  experiencing  with  the  sovereign  debt  problems 
and the needed reform of economic governance, I believe that we must take a further step 
forward and reinforce substantially financial supervision specifically within the euro area. 
The  tools  at  the  disposal  of  the  EBA  and  the  ESRB,  which  for  most  part  are  of  a 
co-ordinating nature in a decentralised setting, are appropriate for the EU as a whole given 
the  several  monetary  policy  jurisdictions  and  the  less  strict  framework  of  economic 
governance, particularly for the conduct of fiscal policies. However, such tools may fall short 
of  ensuring  the  necessary  degree  of  supervisory  intensity  to  implement  micro  and 
macro-prudential rules in a consistent manner across the euro area with a single monetary 
policy, single liquidity provision, and single lender of last resort, a perfectly integrated money 
market,  and  close  interconnectedness  among  financial  institutions,  markets  and  market 
infrastructures. 
Moreover, the effectiveness of the economic governance framework requires, as I mentioned 
before, a “financial stability pillar”. The sources of systemic risk that may originate from the 
interplay  between  the  financial  sector  and  real  economy  imply  that  safeguarding  financial 
stability is essential for ensuring fiscal sustainability and co-ordinating economic policies, and 
also in the context of any potential financial assistance by the ESM.  
Accordingly, it is essential in my view to also enhance the supervisory framework within the 
euro area. This could be achieved through several institutional steps.  
One possibility would be to grant the EBA specific powers for the euro area, including wider 
possibilities to take mandatory decisions in certain fields addressed to national supervisors 
and  financial  institutions.  Nevertheless,  it  is  worth  remembering  that  in  12  out  of  the 
17 members  of  the  euro  area,  the  respective  Central  Banks  have  full  responsibilities  in 
banking supervision. After the crisis, the trend in several countries has been to change the 
system of banking supervision by giving that responsibility to the respective Central Banks. 
Regarding  macro-prudential  policies  the  Eurosystem  (the  ECB  plus  the  National  Central 
Banks) was already given a special role in supporting the mission of the European Systemic 
Risk Board.  
All this opens the opportunity to an alternative future development in the direction of giving a 
more  significant  role  to  the  Eurosystem  in  the  supervision  of  banks,  in  particular  of  large 
cross-border banking groups 
An enhancement of the role of the Eurosystem would not need to represent a major overhaul 
of the institutional setting. As mentioned, twelve of the seventeen national central banks of 
the Eurosystem are prudential supervisors, while the others are also involved in supervision. 
The Treaty and the Statute of the ECB and the Eurosystem also foresee the activation of a 
role in prudential supervision. Therefore, it would be an alternative step which would be also 
fully consistent with the institutional requirements of a financially integrated monetary area.  
Fourth: financial crisis management and resolution 
A  fourth  pillar  for  financial  stability  governance  in  the  euro  area  is  crisis  management  and 
resolution.  This  is  a  very  challenging  process.  Public  authorities  must  aim  to  “square  the 
circle”  of  preserving  financial  stability  in  a  highly  integrated  financial  area,  while  the 
competent  authorities  maintain  national  mandates  reflecting  their  fiduciary  responsibility  to 
domestic taxpayers. 
Nevertheless,  important  progress  is  being  made  within  these  constraints.  The  recent 
Commission proposal on cross-border crisis management, for example, foresees a mediation 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
role for the EBA in order to facilitate compromise in situations where national interests and 
assessments diverge. 
Whilst  these  proposals  should  contribute  to  effectiveness,  in  the  longer  term,  I  would  also 
favour  a  more  centralised  framework  for  resolution  within  the  euro  area,  as  a  necessary 
counterpart  to  the  enhanced  supervisory  function  for  the  euro  area  that  I  have  just 
advocated.  Ex  ante  burden  sharing  by  public  authorities  appears  unworkable  as  it  creates 
misaligned incentives as well as the risk of moral hazard and free-riding.  
However, the establishment of an Euro Area Resolution Fund, funded by ex ante private 
sector  contributions,  is  an  avenue  that  could  be  considered.  Such  a  fund  could  both 
mitigate the systemic impact of bank failures and help to solve the burden sharing problem, 
which  could  allow  a  swift  intervention  in  a  crisis.  Naturally,  clear,  stringent  and  properly 
communicated  conditions  for  the  use  of  the  fund  would  be  a  crucial  component  of  the 
scheme, outlining that any form of bail-out is to be excluded. 
On a more fundamental level, moving towards a true euro area regime of supervision and 
crisis  resolution  requires  a  stronger  concept  of  the  euro  area  as  a  legitimate  entity 
requiring separate treatment. Prior to the crisis, this concept was underdeveloped. Since the 
crisis, a stronger focus on the euro area has been evident in, for example, the meetings of 
the European Council in euro area composition and the agreement of the Euro Plus Pact.  
Ultimately, to give the euro area dimension real impetus requires a permanent political centre 
of gravity. In my view, institutionalising the European Council in euro area format would 
go a long way towards creating the specific economic governance concept that the euro area 
merits. 
Fifth: involvement of central banks in financial stability 
Finally, a comprehensive discussion on how to ensure financial stability within the economic 
governance  framework  should,  of  course,  also  look  closer  to  home  and  to  the  proper 
involvement of central banks. One of the most important lessons from the financial crisis is 
that ensuring price stability is necessary but by no means sufficient for financial stability. The 
conventional wisdom of central banking that prevailed before the crisis – the Jackson Hole 
Consensus – had not foreseen that price stability and financial stability could be de-linked, if 
only occasionally. Consensus had solidified on two axioms. 
First, stabilising inflation would be a sufficient prescription for overall stability.  
The second axiom was largely a consequence of the first: central banks should only pick 
up the pieces after the bubble had burst, in those rare cases in which the central bank 
had failed to check the bubble in the financial exuberance phase, because of inattention for 
inflation  or  because  of  other  factors  occasionally  blurring  the  connection  between  the 
markets, demand and inflation.  
The  large  output  losses  during  the  financial  crisis  have  clearly  demonstrated  that  for 
policymakers  to  intervene  ex  post  is  suboptimal.  And  the  financial  distress  accumulated 
before the crisis was just too colossal to be attributed to insufficient attention for inflation on 
the side of central banks. A more plausible explanation is that an exclusive focus on inflation 
is  not  enough  to  define  a  robust  policy  strategy.  It  needs  to  be  reinforced  through  a 
perspective of a leaning-against the wind to avoid monetary policy becoming pro-cyclical in 
relation to boom-bust credit and leverage cycles.  
After the crisis occurs, the policy has to be conducted according to the separation principle 
that allows a central bank to separate the decision on the appropriate monetary policy stance 
and the decision on the support of the financial system. We clearly demonstrated this in April 
when  we  decided  to  leave  the  non-standard  measures  unchanged,  but  at  the  same  time 
decided to increase our key policy interest rates. In the future we will continue to live up to 
our mandate. We will do whatever is necessary to deliver price stability in the medium term, 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
using  our  policy  interest  rates,  and  continue  to  contribute  to  the  stability  of  the  financial 
system, using our non-standard measures. 
Conclusions 
To sum up, significant progress is being made in Europe to produce a more comprehensive 
and encompassing concept of economic governance.  
Looking  forward,  I  believe  however  that  it  is  crucial  that  the  euro  area  dimension  of 
economic  governance  is  further  reinforced  in  order  to  be  commensurate  with  the  wide 
range of sources and channels of financial instability, which has been made evident by the 
financial crisis.  
This reinforcement should involve two main institutional moves:  
 
Closing  the  gap  between  the  economic  and  financial  aspects  of  euro  area 
governance by fully integrating financial supervision within the concept of economic 
governance; and, consequently 
Significantly strengthening the arrangements for financial supervision within the euro 
area, which could be supported by the establishment of a pan-euro area resolution 
fund.  
 De facto, we are already seeing some progress in the integration of financial stability within 
economic  governance  through  the  European  Financial  Stability  Facility  and  the  future 
setting-up of the European Stability Mechanism. The use of these facilities to provide loans 
for  banking  sector  recapitalisation  reflects  the  recognition  that  crisis  management  for 
sovereigns and for financial institutions is increasingly intertwined. 
Perhaps over time this will provide the foundation for a more integrated European system of 
crisis prevention and management for the public and financial sectors. Ultimately, it is every 
euro area country’s interest that the collective governance arrangements reflects the reality 
of  economic  and  financial  integration.  Following  this  path  of  necessary  gradual  reforms  is 
essential for the efficiency and welfare of the whole euro area. 
 7
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 