Joanne Kellermann: The challenge of diversity in central banks 
Speech by Ms A J Kellermann, Executive Director of the Netherlands Bank, at the European 
Central Bank (ECB) Diversity forum, Frankfurt am Main, 28 March 2011. 
 Within De Nederlandsche Bank, role models are important for the emancipation of its 
female staff. As the first and only woman on DNB’s Governing Board, I am glad to act 
as  a  role  model  in  that  sense.  Although  DNB  may  appear  to  be  a  male  bastion,  it’s 
good to remember that its continuance – shortly after its establishment – depended on 
a woman: the widow Borski. 
When  King  Willem  I  founded  De  Nederlandsche  Bank  in  1814,  not  all  of  the  5000  issued 
shares  were  sold  immediately.  However,  Madam  Borski  had  confidence  in  the  newly 
established bank and, in 1815, she decided to buy the remaining 2000 shares. Her purchase 
was subject to a secret condition that the King would not issue any extra shares for three 
years. Many years later Madam Borski sold her shares at a tidy profit. 
Introduction – general 
Many women are inclined by nature to wait until the organisation notices their management 
potential.  They  only  apply  for  a  position  if  they  comfortably  meet  all  the  job  requirements. 
When interviewing job candidates of their own sex, recruiters tend to more easily recognise 
gender-specific aspects and to value them more highly. 
Personal 
Within our organisation too – despite our successful diversity policy – these gender aspects 
sometimes play a significant role. As a woman member of DNB’s Governing Board, I see it 
as my task to speak out in such situations. For example, not a single woman was included in 
a  recent  list  of  potential  candidates  for  the  position  of  Divisional  Director.  However,  I  was 
able to intervene to add the name of a good female candidate to the list. 
Why do we need a diversity policy? 
DNB is convinced that diversity among its staff will lead to better results. In view of the tighter 
labour  market,  DNB  is  keen  to  use  female  potential.  Finally,  as  a  guardian  of  financial 
stability, DNB has an important social role. In keeping with our social responsibility, we wish 
to pursue a diversity policy that ensures that our workforce is a good reflection of our society. 
This means that diversity within DNB embraces more than just the gender aspect, which I am 
focusing  on  today.  Cases  in  point  are  employees  with  different  cultural  backgrounds,  an 
occupational handicap or different sexual preferences. I’m glad to tell you that DNB has its 
own  network  for  homosexual  and  lesbian  employees  and  that,  for  the  third  time,  DNB  will 
participate  with  its  own  boat  in  the  Canal  Parade  as  part  of  the  Amsterdam  Gay  Pride 
celebration. 
The Talent to the Top Charter 
Let  me  tell you  about  an  interesting  Dutch  initiative,  launched  in  2007 by  the  government, 
corporate  sector  and  women’s  representatives:  the  Talent  to  the  Top  Charter.  The  idea 
behind the Charter is to bring more talented women to the top and help keep them there. The 
Netherlands  was  lagging  behind  internationally  in  respect  of  the  number  of  women  in  top 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
management positions. In 2008, the signatories reported that the number of women in top 
functions at their organisations was 16.7%. Their aim is to bring this figure up to 24.6%. The 
Talent to the Top Charter has since been signed by almost 170 organisations, including DNB 
in 2008. 
Commitment by DNB 
By  signing  the  Charter,  we  committed  ourselves  to  realising  and  preserving  a  continuous 
smooth flow of women into top positions. Here is an overview of the exact percentages at 
DNB  over  the  past  few  years.  A  commission  will  monitor  whether  we  actually  honour  our 
commitment  as  a  signatory.  Starting 
the  year  2009,  when  women  were 
underrepresented  at  28%,  DNB  has  set  itself  a  target  that  women  will  fill  32%  of  its 
management positions in 2012. It’s important to note that at that moment – in 2009 – there 
were  not  many  women  whose  potential  talent  had  been  recognised  and  who  were  being 
groomed for a managerial position. 
So  what  is  DNB’s  vision  and  policy  to  meet  the  challenge  of  increasing  gender  diversity. 
What measures have been taken to realise this vision? I’d like to share our experiences and 
the lessons we have learnt in the process. 
from 
DNB’s vision and objectives 
In the context of our commitment to the Talent to the Top Charter, we have set some target 
figures for 2012. These clear and measurable targets show where we are heading, but are 
not an end in themselves. The slide shows the situation in 2004, where we are now, and our 
target for 2012.  
The target for divisional directors is set at 25%, for department heads at 30% and for section 
heads at 40%. DNB’s Governing Board has expressly committed itself to these targets and 
the  Supervisory  Board  is  given  an  annual  update  on  progress  towards  them.  DNB  has 
translated this vision into several diversity targets. Within DNB, we promote that: 
 
more  women  enter  the  organisation  as  professionals  and  later  move  on  to 
management positions, 
more women participate in training and mentoring programmes, 
more women are nominated for management vacancies and are appointed and 
more  women  with  valuable  capacities  are  seen  and  stimulated  to  put  themselves 
forward and to present themselves as management candidates. 
 We deploy a range of instruments to realise these diversity targets. Let’s take a look at some 
specific instruments. 
Instruments 
1) 
Entrants 
We made our recruitment and selection process diversity-proof by enhancing the awareness 
of  gender  aspects  among  our  recruitment  and  selection  staff.  In  addition,  the  HR  advisors 
who  interview  candidates  are  trained  to  operate  from  a  broader  gender  perspective. 
Moreover, we try to always include a woman in the selection commission, which generally 
consists of an HR advisor, line manager and sometimes a team member. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
2)   Development – VLOT and questions 
DNB  has  its  own  year-long  training  programme  to  develop  management  potential.  Within 
DNB,  this  management  development  programme  is  important  for  employees’  chances  of 
securing  a  management  position.  Formerly,  candidates  applied  to  join  the  programme 
themselves.  Now,  the  divisional  directors  have  been  asked  to  nominate  candidates  and  to 
ensure that at least half of the nominees are female. If the ratio falls short, our management 
commission will discuss the nominations with the divisional director. Women should make up 
at least 40 percent of the group that is eventually admitted to the management development 
programme. 
To create a sufficient pool of high-potential women, DNB launched a personal development 
course for young promising staff a few years ago. At least 40 percent of the entrants to this 
group, too, should be women. 
Appointments to management positions 
3)  
DNB  uses  an  open  application  procedure  for  management  vacancies.  Management 
development  staff  regularly  discuss  gender  diversity  with  the  persons involved  in  selecting 
and  interviewing  candidates.  The  name  of  the  preferred  candidate  is  passed  on  to  a 
management  commission,  consisting  of  four  divisional  directors,  which  then  puts  the 
proposed nomination before the DNB Governing Board. 
An  important  success  factor  in  recognising  female  management  potential  is  that  women 
make up 50 percent of this management commission. After all, people are more inclined to 
appreciate gender-specific aspects in a candidate of their own sex. 
Another important success factor is that Management Development staff actively encourage 
female  colleagues  to  apply  for  a  management  position.  Women  still  appear  to  need  such 
encouragement. Finally, I notice that divisional directors are becoming more keen to appoint 
a female candidate to enhance diversity in their team. 
Discovering female talent  
4)  
Within  DNB,  too,  women  tend  to  wait  until  the  organisation  notices  their  management 
potential. The Human Resources department hence engages in active dialogue with DNB’s 
female  staff.  In  this  way  HR  officers  detect  management  potential  and  gain  an  overall 
impression of women’s professional desires and ambitions and the obstacles facing them in 
their career. Our terms of employment are already conducive to female participation thanks 
to  the  opportunity  for  a  36-hour  working  week  over  four  days  and  partially  paid  parental 
leave. Moreover, working times at DNB are flexible. 
We  aim  to  support  talented  women  with  the  ambition  to  become  managers.  Through  our 
“Empower  yourself”  workshops  and  mentoring,  women  with  valuable  capacities  can  be 
identified  and  encouraged  to  profile  themselves  as  management  candidates.  As  our 
mentoring system had proved itself in practice as an effective development tool, we decided 
to radically expand it in 2009. Part of the success of mentoring is that it is an easy and quick 
way for adults to learn. 
Management targets 
5)  
The  success  of  these  diversity  measures  hinges  on  management  commitment.  When  we 
introduced this diversity policy we made managers aware of the prejudices against women, 
but also of the benefits they bring to the workplace. Diversity, in a broader sense too, was 
highlighted through workshops and seminars.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
All  managers  at  DNB  are  required  to  set  personal  performance  targets  for  promoting 
diversity.  The  point  is  not  to  meet  a  specific  target  figure  but  to  give  an  undertaking  to 
actively support more diversity. 
Role  models  are  also  important  within  DNB.  Role  models  make  employees  aware  of  the 
effect of their own behaviour and create support for the envisaged changes. 
A women’s network at DNB organises a wide range of activities for all DNB staff. As of 2007, 
a man or women who acts as a role model for others is chosen from a shortlist. A person 
who makes an significant contribution to shifting the boundaries within DNB is awarded an 
annual trophy. I am honoured to say that the trophy bears my name because, thanks to my 
position, I can act as a role model for many female colleagues. 
I’m sure you are wondering whether our measures have worked. Fortunately, the answer is 
unmistakably yes. We are on track, and it now looks as if women will fill 32% of management 
positions at DNB in 2012. Finally, I’d like to share a key insight: recruiting talented women 
takes a woman’s touch. 
 
 
 4 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  5
