Mugur Isărescu: International Financial Reporting Standards – 
international experience and implementation by the banking sector in 
Romania in 2012 
Opening speech by Mr Mugur Isărescu, Governor of the National Bank of Romania, at the 
IFRS  conference  “International  experience  and  implementation  by  the  Romanian  banking 
sector in 2012”, Bucharest, 20 June 2011. 
 information  across 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Distinguished audience,  
It  is  an  honour  to  have  the  opportunity  to  open  the  proceedings  of  the  Conference  titled 
“International  Financial  Reporting  Standards: 
International  Experience  and 
Implementation by the Banking Sector in Romania in 2012”. This is a topical and, at the 
same time, a hotly-debated issue that we are going to discuss together with the Institute of 
Chartered Accountants in England and Wales (ICAEW).  
Economic  and  financial  developments  tending  towards  internationalisation  of  banking 
operations in the context of globalisation of financial markets have highlighted the importance 
of  financial  information  provided  by  companies,  especially  in  terms  of  assessing  and 
presenting the results and risks attached to their activity. Moreover, in the aftermath of the 
past years’ financial crisis, stronger pressures for harmonising accounting rules worldwide as 
a basis for the published financial information have emerged.  
Under the circumstances, the National Bank of Romania, in its capacity as the regulatory and 
supervisory authority of the Romanian banking system has steadily sought to harmonise its 
rules and practices with the best practices in the field so as to increase transparency and 
ensure  comparability  of 
the  entire  banking  sector.  The  actual 
implementation  of  the  International  Financial  Reporting  Standards  is  part  of  the  central 
bank’s  area  of  concerns,  since  relevant  and  adequate  assessments  of  credit  institutions’ 
assets, debts and shareholders’ equity are essential prerequisites for the calculation of real 
prudential indicators. In order to fulfil this objective, the NBR has steadily cooperated with the 
commercial banks and the Romanian Banking Association and has enjoyed the support of 
leading consulting and audit firms in Romania.  
The Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales, an institution famous for its 
rich experience regarding International Financial Reporting Standards, has recently provided 
the  NBR  support  to  carry  on/complete  the  implementation  of  financial  reporting  standards. 
Today,  its  experts  will  present  useful  information  and  recommendations  to  accurately 
comprehend and implement the International Financial Reporting Standards.  
Within the process of accounting reform intended for credit institutions in Romania, following 
the  transposition  of  the  EU  acquis  –  given  that  European  standards  did  not  establish  any 
rules –, the NBR has contributed to the enlargement of the European regulatory framework 
by  adopting  solutions  consistent  with  the  principles  of  International  Financial  Reporting 
Standards.  Thus,  the  implementation  of  these  standards  at  individual  level  by  credit 
institutions in Romania has taken a graduated approach.  
At  consolidated  level,  i.e.  banking  groups,  the  International  Financial  Reporting  Standards 
have  been  transposed  via  a  seamless  approach;  the  NBR  exerted  its  national  options 
embedded in the acquis, but included all credit institutions, not only the listed ones, in the 
scope of applicability.  
In  2010,  the  National  Bank  of  Romania  adopted  the  Strategy  for  IFRS  Implementation  by 
credit institutions starting with the 2012 financial year. For its implementation, the updating of 
the  accounting  regulatory  framework  was  completed  and  steps  were  taken  to  ensure 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
transition towards the new standards. Thus, credit institutions will prepare and present action 
plans whose implementation will be monitored by the central bank throughout the remainder 
of this year. Also in the first half of 2011, the financial reporting framework suiting the needs 
of the supervisory authority was updated.  
The  National  Bank  of  Romania,  in  its  capacity  as  an  authority  responsible  for  prudential 
supervision of the banking system, has recently prepared and sent for public consultation the 
bills  needed  to  elicit  accounting  figures  reported  by  banks  so  that  they  match  the  banks’ 
prudential objectives.  
I  trust  this  endeavour  aimed  at  broadening  the  scope  of  applicability  of  such  standards, 
serving as the basis for accounting and for preparing individual financial statements by credit 
institutions  in  Romania,  should  be  seen  as  a  sine  qua  non  condition  to  secure  effective 
supervision of the Romanian banking system.  
Let  me  stress  that  the  importance  of  implementing  the  International  Financial  Reporting 
Standards by credit institutions in Romania is also reflected by the new financing agreements 
signed with international institutions (the European Commission, the International Monetary 
Fund, the World Bank).  
I am confident that you experts have now a good opportunity for an in-depth analysis of the 
evolution  of 
the 
implementation  of  International  Financial  Reporting  Standards,  as  well  as  for  a  useful 
projection  of  the  major  challenges  to  implementing  the  new  accounting  standards  by  the 
banking  sector  in  Romania,  given  its  importance  in  achieving  a  modern  and  efficient 
accounting system.  
Let me reiterate on this occasion our institution’s willingness to cooperate with stakeholders 
in the implementation of International Financial Reporting Standards by the banking sector. I 
trust  that  any  problems  relating  to  the  introduction  of  the  new  accounting  rules  will  be 
resolved in a timely manner so that the current transition ends successfully.  
Last but not least, my appreciation goes to the representatives of the Institute of Chartered 
Accountants  in  England  and  Wales  for  their  effort  to  ensure  that  world-acclaimed  IFRS 
experts and representatives of leading consulting and audit firms in Romania, with which the 
NBR maintains close cooperation ties, are participating in this event.  
I  trust  that  today  as  many  as  possible  issues  related  to  the  implementation  of  the 
International  Financial  Reporting  Standards  will  be  discussed  and  clarified.  Finally,  let  me 
wish all of you every success.  
international  accounting  system  and 
the  problems  arising 
the 
in 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
