Miyako Suda: The current situation of and outlook for Japan’s economy 
and the conduct of monetary policy 
Summary  of  a  speech  by  Ms  Miyako  Suda,  Member  of  the  Policy  Board  of  the  Bank  of 
Japan, at a meeting with business leaders, Yamagata, 1 December 2010. 
 Introduction  
It is a great pleasure to address this meeting on economic and financial matters. The topic I 
would like to discuss today is the current situation of, and outlook for, Japan’s economy and 
the Bank of Japan’s conduct of monetary policy. Let me begin by looking at developments in 
economic activity and prices in Japan.  
I. 
Economic activity and prices in Japan  
The current situation  
A. 
Japan’s  economy  still  shows  signs  of  a  moderate  recovery,  but  the  recovery  seems  to  be 
pausing. Exports and production, which had been increasing reflecting the improvement in 
overseas economic conditions, have recently been decelerating as the pace of recovery in 
overseas economies is slowing down. Private consumption had continued to recover mainly 
due to the effects of various demand-boosting policy measures targeted at durable consumer 
goods, but more recently has been decreasing following the spike in demand before these 
policy measures expired. I will first look at developments in demand, economic activity, and 
prices overseas, and then make a more detailed examination of domestic demand in Japan.  
Overseas demand, economies, and prices  
1. 
Breaking  down  Japan’s  real  exports  by  destination,  East  Asia  accounted  for  more  than 
50 percent, the United States and the European Union for slightly less than 30 percent, and 
other countries for the remaining 20 percent. Until recently, Japan’s real exports had been on 
an  upward  trend,  led  by  the  increase  in  exports  to  emerging  and  commodity-exporting 
economies. However, growth in exports has recently been decelerating due to a number of 
factors,  including  measures  by  the  Chinese  government  to  prevent  an  overheating  of  the 
economy, the effects of which have materialized with a time lag; inventory adjustments in IT-
related goods, particularly with regard to those exported to the NIEs and ASEAN countries; 
and the appreciation of the yen.  
Overseas economies  
a. 
I will now move on to developments in overseas economies as a whole, which underlie the 
trends in Japan’s real exports. With inventory restocking – the driving force of the recovery 
after  the  Lehman  shock  –  having  run  its  course  and  the  demand-boosting  effects of  fiscal 
policy  measures  waning,  the  pace  of  economic  growth  has  been  slowing  since  summer 
2010.  
Looking at developments by region, the U.S. economy is continuing to recover moderately 
although  the  pace  has  slowed.  However,  the  situation  in  the  housing  market  remains 
uncertain, and with home sales, housing starts, and home prices all remaining at low levels, 
there  are  persisting  concerns  about  home  foreclosures  and  buybacks  brought  about  by 
mortgage delinquencies. Many homeowners suffer from negative equity, and balance-sheet 
adjustment pressures continue to weigh heavily on households. As for the employment and 
income situation, neither the unemployment rate nor nominal wages have shown a notable 
recovery. In these circumstances, private consumption on the whole lacks momentum.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Economic  activity  in  the  euro  area  as  a  whole  is  recovering  moderately,  with  some 
differences  in  growth  by  country.  Although  the  pace  has  recently  slowed,  exports  have 
continued to increase, while private consumption has been rising gradually. However, market 
concerns  regarding  sovereign  risk  in  some  euro  area  countries  have  resurfaced  amid 
uncertainty  regarding  the  response  of  governments.  Thus,  financial  markets  in  the  United 
States and Europe partially show signs of instability and warrant continued attention.  
On  the  other  hand,  though  the  pace  has  slowed  somewhat,  emerging  and  commodity-
exporting  economies  continue  to  grow  at  a  relatively  rapid  pace,  led  mainly  by  domestic 
demand. In China, economic growth has been accelerating again. The pace of increase in 
China’s exports has been slowing due to the deceleration in overseas economies, but growth 
in  private  consumption  has  been  firm  due  to  households’  higher  income  levels.  Fixed 
investment  continues  to  show  high  growth  despite  a  slowdown  partly  due  to  government 
measures  to  rein  in  real  estate  transactions  and  energy  consumption.  With  regard  to 
economic conditions in the NIEs and the ASEAN countries, although growth in exports and 
production  has  slowed  sharply  due  to  the  deceleration  in  overseas  economies  and 
adjustments with regard to IT-related goods, the recovery trend remains intact supported by 
firm domestic demand. 
As for the outlook, though the pace of growth in overseas economies will probably continue 
to slow for the time being, the recovery trend itself is likely to remain intact, and from 2011 
the growth rate will start to increase again. Looking at developments by region, emerging and 
commodity-exporting  economies,  including  China,  despite  a  temporary  slowdown,  will 
continue  to grow  at  a  relatively  rapid  pace,  supported  mainly  by  robust  domestic  demand. 
Meanwhile, the effects of balance-sheet adjustments will continue in the U.S. economy, but 
growth  there  is  expected  to  accelerate  again  from  2011  on  the  back  of  a  rise  in  exports, 
mainly  to  emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies,  and  a  moderate  recovery  in 
business  fixed  investment  and  private  consumption.  Economic  activity  in  Europe  on  the 
whole is likely to continue to recover moderately, although the pace of recovery will differ by 
country. 
Overseas prices  
b. 
As for the price situation in overseas economies, a significant divergence can be observed 
between advanced economies and emerging and commodity-exporting economies. The U.S. 
and European economies continue to experience disinflationary tendencies due to the slack 
in supply and demand conditions in the goods and service markets as well as in the labor 
market.  For  example,  in  the  United  States,  the  rate  of  change  in  the  core  personal 
consumption expenditure (PCE) deflator fell to 0.9 percent on an annual basis in October, 
and the rate of increase in the consumer price index (CPI) is likely to remain low for the time 
being.  In  this  situation,  following  the  speech  made  by  Federal  Reserve  Chairman  Ben 
S. Bernanke on August 27,1 markets started to factor in possible additional monetary easing, 
and transactions based on the anticipation of a reversal in the disinflation trend increased – 
as evident from, for example, the rise in the breakeven inflation rate, which is a measure of 
medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations.  Moreover,  concerns  about  the  risk  of  inflation 
have  been  raised  following  the  Fed’s  decision  on  November  3  to  conduct  large-scale 
purchases of longer-term Treasury securities totaling 600 billion U.S. dollars.  
As  for  emerging  and  commodity  exporting  economies,  inflationary  pressure  has  been 
increasing due to higher natural resource and food prices and greater utilization of production 
factors. In fact, in some countries, including China, inflation has already started to pick up. 
One reason is the acceleration of capital inflows to emerging economies caused by monetary 
                                                 
1   See  “The  Economic  Outlook  and  Monetary  Policy,”  a  speech  made  by  Chairman  Bernanke  at  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Symposium in Jackson Hole, Wyoming, on August 27, 2010. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
easing in advanced economies, especially the United States. This means that, given the so-
called  “trilemma  of  international  finance”  –  the  impossibility  of  simultaneously  pursuing  a 
stable  exchange  rate,  free  capital  movements,  and  an  autonomous  monetary  policy  –  in 
some  countries,  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  may  be  affected  by  interventions  in  the 
foreign  exchange  market  to  avoid  a  surge  in  the  exchange  rate,  resulting  in  a  delay  of 
necessary adjustments in monetary policy.  
Domestic demand in Japan  
2. 
Turning to domestic demand in Japan, business fixed investment is showing signs of picking 
up,  supported  mainly  by  the  improvement  in  corporate  profits.  Specifically,  the  aggregate 
supply  of  capital  goods,  a  coincident  indicator  of  machinery  investment,  has  registered  a 
moderate  increase,  while  there  has  been  a  substantial  increase  in  machinery  orders,  a 
leading indicator of machinery investment. The employment and income situation, although 
remaining severe, has eased somewhat, with a slight rise in the number of employees and in 
wages,  as  well  as  a  gradual  improvement  in  the  ratio  of  job  offers  to  applicants.  In  this 
situation, growth in private consumption until September turned out stronger than expected, 
reflecting the last-minute rise in demand ahead of the expiration of subsidies for purchasers 
of environmentally friendly cars and the increase in the tobacco tax, in addition to the boost 
from  the  extremely  hot  weather.  Since  the  beginning  of  October,  however,  private 
consumption  has  dropped  following  the  earlier  spike  in  demand.  Meanwhile,  housing 
investment has stopped declining, with the number of housing starts (a leading indicator of 
housing investment) – especially those for the sale of real estate lots – generally picking up 
and sales of apartments in the Tokyo metropolitan area increasing. On the other hand, public 
investment has been declining since the second half of 2009.  
Given this situation in domestic and overseas demand, domestic growth in production has 
lost momentum. Production dropped in September, mainly due to the decline in production of 
cars and semiconductor and related products reflecting the decrease in demand following the 
expiry  of  government  measures.  The  drop  was  also  seen  on  a  quarterly  basis.2 
Consequently,  inventories  have  been  increasing  somewhat,  mainly  in  durable  consumer 
goods and in electronic parts and devices. 
Prices in Japan 
3. 
With regard to price developments in Japan, the CPI excluding fresh food is declining on a 
year-on-year basis due to the substantial slack in the economy as a whole, but the pace of 
decline  has  continued  to  slow.  In  October,  the  year-on-year  pace  of  decline  in  the  CPI 
slowed significantly due especially to the increase in the tobacco tax. 
B. 
The Outlook 
The October 2010 Outlook Report 
1. 
As  we  have  seen  so  far,  Japan’s  economy  is  still  showing  signs  of  a  moderate  recovery, 
although the pace of recovery seems to have temporarily slowed. The key issue is how to 
come  out  of  this  temporary  slowdown.  Let  us  therefore  consider  the  outlook  for  economic 
activity  and  prices  in  Japan,  which  the  Bank  released  in  the  October  2010  issue  of  the 
Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (hereafter the Outlook Report).  
                                                 
2   As a result of the revision to seasonal adjustments carried out in April 2010, it is likely that a portion of the 
significant  drops  in  production  in  the  October-December  quarter  of  2008  and  the  January-March  quarter  of 
2009  is  recognized  as  seasonal  rather  than  actual  movement.  Such  a  seasonal  adjustment  method  would 
push up future growth rates for the October-December and January-March quarters, but push down those for 
the April-June and July-September quarters. Therefore, it is necessary to assess actual terms for the April-
June and July-September quarters by adjusting for such downward pressure. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Starting with the outlook for the economy, the pace of recovery is likely to slow temporarily in 
the second half of fiscal 2010 due to factors such as the slowdown in overseas economies 
and the ending of the boost from policy measures targeted at durable consumer goods, as 
well as the recent appreciation of the yen. The growth rate of the economy for the October–
December  quarter  of  2010,  in  particular,  is  highly  likely  to  turn  out  negative  following  the 
higher-than-expected growth in the July–September quarter. However, although the effects 
of the appreciation of the yen may continue to linger, the economy is expected to return to a 
moderate  recovery  path  once  we  enter  fiscal  2011,  given  that  –  with  growth  in  overseas 
economies  expected  to  pick  up  again  –  exports  are  projected  to  continue  increasing  and 
firms’  sense  of  excessive  capital  stock  and  labor  is  likely  to  dissipate  gradually.  In  fiscal 
2012, Japan’s economy is expected to continue growing at a pace above its potential amid 
the  continued  relatively  high  growth  in  overseas  economies,  especially  emerging  and 
commodity-exporting economies.  
Although my view regarding the outlook is basically in line with the Bank’s projection, I am 
concerned  about  the  extent  to  which  Japan’s  economy  will  be  able  to  benefit  from  global 
economic  growth.  In  fact,  I  have  a  growing  sense  that  Japan  has  not  yet  enjoyed  much 
success  in  this  regard,  given  that  the  pace  of  growth  in  Japan’s  exports  has  been  more 
moderate than that of other countries since the mid-1990s and that Japan’s share in world 
exports has been declining since the mid-1990s despite trade liberalization in countries such 
as China. Moreover, Japan is likely to face an even tougher global competitive environment 
due  not  only  to  the  recent  rapid  appreciation  of  the  yen  –  in  a  situation  where  domestic 
capacity is yet underutilized – but also to factors unrelated to foreign exchange – such as the 
technological  catch-up  of  emerging  economies  and  the  increase  in  free  trade  agreements 
concluded abroad – some of which I will discuss later. In addition, issues that directly affect 
the  competitiveness  of Japanese  firms,  such  as  various  environmental  constraints,  the  tax 
burden, and labor laws and regulations, still give cause for concern. Thus, attention should 
be paid to the growing possibility that the Japanese economy and Japanese firms will not be 
able to benefit from global demand to the extent commonly expected.  
As for the price outlook, the year-on-year pace of decline in the CPI excluding fresh food is 
expected to continue slowing as the aggregate supply and demand balance is projected to 
continue improving gradually in a situation where medium- to long-term inflation expectations 
are assumed to remain stable. In the Outlook Report, the Bank projected that the timing of 
the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  entering  positive  territory  would  likely  be 
sometime in fiscal 2011, and that thereafter the rate of increase would start rising through 
fiscal 2012. However, I have a more cautious view of future developments in prices. Let me 
explain why this is the case.  
Views on the expected rate of inflation  
2. 
When examining the outlook for price developments, key aspects to be considered are the 
size of the output gap, the expected rate of inflation, and import prices. In addition, empirical 
studies show that the current rate of inflation is also affected by past inflation. Thus, empirical 
analyses of inflation dynamics often use the following type of specification: Inflation rate for 
the current term 
= γ × (the expected rate of inflation for the next term) 
+ (1 – γ) × (the inflation rate for the previous term) 
+ β × (the output gap for the current term)  
+ α × the rate of change in import prices, 
where α, β, and γ are parameters.  
A frequent criticism of this type of specification is that the inclusion of the inflation rate in the 
previous term lacks microfoundations and its role is therefore difficult to interpret. However, 
one possible interpretation is that the rate of inflation not only is determined by medium- to 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
long-term inflation expectations but also may be affected by short- to medium-term inflation 
expectations  that  are  influenced  by  actual  inflation  in  the  past.  According  to  this 
interpretation,  the  key  question  for  Japan  at  the  moment  is  which  of  the  two  influences  is 
stronger – positive medium- to long-term inflation expectations or negative inflation rates in 
the past.3 
It goes without saying that for Japan it is important to enhance the influence of medium- to 
long-term inflation expectations on the actual rate of inflation. However, I believe it will not be 
easy  to  do  this  given  the  prolonged  deflation  Japan  has  been  suffering.  Furthermore,  it 
seems  that  Japan  is  not  the  only  country  where  the  influence  of  medium-  to  long-term 
inflation expectations is weak. Though the context differs, in the United Kingdom – where the 
inflation rate has exceeded the ceiling of the target for almost a year – the possibility of a rise 
in medium-term inflation expectations driven by past rates of inflation is considered a serious 
risk.4 Furthermore, in the United States, concern has been voiced over the possibility of the 
current disinflation depressing medium-term inflation expectations.5 
Moreover, given that inflation rates in the past were influenced by the output gap at the time, 
the  fact  that  current  inflation  is  affected  by  past  inflation  means  that  current  inflation  is 
determined  not  only  by  the  output  gap  at  present  but  also  that  in  the  past.  Given  that  the 
utilization rate of Japan’s economy remains low and growth in the third quarter of fiscal 2010 
is expected to be negative, little improvement is likely in the output gap. The effect of this 
output gap on future inflation cannot be ignored, and the influence of medium- to long-term 
inflation expectations on current inflation is not likely to be very strong. 
Japan’s response to globalization  
3. 
Needless  to  say,  Japan’s  response  to  globalization  is  also  an  important  factor  when 
considering the outlook for price developments. The Japanese economy has stagnated for 
more than ten years and prices have been on a downward trend for much of that period, and 
it  is  clear  that  globalization  –  through  the  increase  in  low-priced  imports  and  intensified 
competition – has played a role in this.6  
                                                 
3   The forecast for the medium- to long-term rate of inflation by economists has been stable at around 1 percent 
for the past few years. 
4   At a press conference in November 2010, Bank of England Governor Mervyn King stated, “And if the period of 
above-target  outturns  causes  medium-term  expectations  to  drift  up,  then  the  inflation  outlook  could  be 
significantly higher” (Bank of England, Inflation Report Press Conference Opening Remarks by the Governor, 
10th November 2010), and “If inflation expectations start to move away from target in a way that threatens the 
behaviour of inflation in the medium term, then  we certainly  would be concerned. And that is obviously the 
major upside risk and we talk about that at great length in the [Inflation] Report” (Bank of England, Quarterly 
Inflation  Report  Q&A,  10th  November  2010).  Moreover,  at  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  meeting  in 
November, it was stated that “some Committee members were concerned that recent inflation outturns and 
the higher near-term profile meant that the risk to inflation expectations was somewhat greater than previously 
thought” (Bank of England, “Minutes of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting 3 and 4 November 2010”).  
5   See, for example, William C. Dudley’s speech entitled “The Outlook, Policy Choices and Our Mandate,” given 
at the Society of American Business Editors and Writers Fall Conference at the City University of New York on 
October 1, 2010. At the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting held on June 22 and 23, 2010, it 
was  stated  that  “some  participants  judged  the  risks  to  the  outlook  for  inflation  as  tilted  to  the  downside, 
particularly in the near term, in light of [. . .] the possibility that inflation expectations could begin to decline in 
response to low actual inflation.” Moreover, the minutes of the FOMC meeting held on November 2 and 3, 
2010  stated  that  “participants  citing  downside  risks  noted  concerns  about  the  degree  to  which  lingering 
resource slack in the economy was putting downward pressure on inflation, or about the possible effects that 
an extended period of low readings on actual inflation might have in reducing inflation expectations.” 
6   For details on structural issues in Japan that form the background to the prolonged deflation, see the speech I 
delivered  at  the  University  of  Tokyo  on  December  1,  2010  entitled  “Seichoukiban  Kyouka  no  Juuyousei  to 
Kin’yuseisaku (The Importance of Strengthening the Foundations for Economic Growth and Monetary Policy)” 
(available in Japanese only). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
their  competitiveness.  Traditionally,  Japanese 
With  regard  to  globalization,  one  issue  that  I  have  recently  been  concerned  about  is  the 
effect  on  Japan’s  economy  and  prices  of  the  rapid  technological  catch-up  of  emerging 
countries with Japan. In recent meetings with corporate managers, I increasingly hear that 
firms from emerging economies have, for example, been acquiring at low cost facilities made 
redundant  at  Japanese firms  through  restructuring  and  absorbing  production  know-how  by 
employing expert technicians retired from Japanese firms, including from small and medium-
sized  firms,  enabling  emerging  economies  to  catch  up  rapidly  with  Japanese  firms  with 
respect  to  production  technology  and  skills.  If  the  production  technology  of  emerging 
countries were to improve rapidly, this would not only further intensify global competition but, 
from Japan’s perspective, also increase the impact of exchange rate fluctuations on exports 
due  to  the  increased  price  elasticity  of  exports.  In  addition,  the  possibility  of  competitive 
disadvantages due to factors other than the exchange rate, such as tariffs, is increasing, so 
that  exporting  firms  in  particular  will  have  no  choice  but  to  cut  costs  further  in  order  to 
maintain 
to  raise 
productivity  through  advances  in  labor-saving  technology  and  cost  cutting;  however,  given 
that there still remain significant wage differentials with emerging economies, it is possible 
that firms will seek to lower labor costs further by shifting more production bases overseas, 
replacing  full-time  employees  with  part-timers,  and  shortening  working  hours.  For  this 
reason, downward pressure on wages is likely to increase, in which case upward pressure 
on  prices  –  including  prices  of  services,  which  are  affected  by  wages  –  will  weaken. 
Considering the price-setting behavior of firms in a situation where competition with overseas 
firms  is  expected  to  increase,  I  cannot  help  but  be  cautious  with  regard  to  the  outlook  for 
prices.  
In view of what I have described, I believe that the probability that the year-on-year rate of 
change in the CPI will leave negative territory during fiscal 2011 is not high and that it will 
take  some  time  to  attain  conditions  necessary  to  overcome  deflation.  The  probability  is 
pushed down further by the scheduled change in fiscal 2011 of the base year for the CPI to 
2010, as explained in the Bank’s Outlook Report.7 
firms  have 
tended 
Risk factors 
C. 
As stated in the introduction of the October 2010 Outlook Report, a careful analysis of both 
upside and downside risks is of great importance due to the high level of uncertainty in the 
current economic situation and the considerable risk that the economy may deviate from the 
scenario considered most likely by the Bank. 
In  the  October  2010  Outlook  Report,  the  following  risk  factors  regarding  economic  activity 
were  identified:  (1)  developments  in  advanced  economies;  (2)  developments  in  emerging 
and commodity-exporting countries; (3) developments in business and household sentiment; 
and  (4) 
long-term  growth  expectations.  Risks  regarding  price 
developments  included  (1)  the  materialization  of  upside  and  downside  risks  regarding 
economic activity; (2) medium- to long-term inflation expectations of firms and households; 
(3) the uncertainty in gauging the aggregate supply and demand balance and its impact on 
prices; and (4) developments in import prices. 
I personally am also conscious of these risk factors. In what follows, I will consider them in 
greater detail. 
firms’  medium- 
to 
                                                 
7   See  Footnote  8  in  “The  Bank’s  View”  of  the  October  2010  Outlook  Report,  which  stated,  “This  outlook  for 
inflation is predicated on the 2005-base CPI. The statistics authority has announced that the base year for the 
CPI is scheduled to  be changed to 2010 in August 2011, and  year-on-year figures  as  far back  as January 
2011  are  scheduled  to  be  revised  retroactively.  This  rebasing  is  likely  to  cause  the  year-on-year  rate  of 
increase in the CPI to be revised downward.” 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Risks concerning overseas economic activity and prices  
1. 
I  will  first  look  at  risks  concerning  overseas  economies.  In  advanced  economies,  room  for 
further  fiscal  stimulus  measures  is  limited  (and  emphasis  is  in  fact  shifting  to  fiscal 
consolidation), and downside risks such as balance-sheet adjustments in the United States 
and  Europe  and  a  high  level  of  uncertainty  remain.  On  the  other  hand,  in  emerging  and 
commodity-exporting  economies,  where  governments  have  room  for  further  policy  actions, 
there are upside risks such as a further acceleration of the economy. Thus, at present, risks 
concerning overseas economies seem to be well balanced, although the level of uncertainty 
is high. However, as I mentioned earlier, considering the current economic situation and the 
level  of  asset  prices  in  emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies,  adjustments  to  the 
accommodative  monetary  policies  there  seem  to  be  somewhat  delayed.  Against  this 
background,  upward  pressure  on  prices,  including  those  of  commodities  and  food,  is 
heightening.  Thus,  the  risk  of  economic  overheating  and  a  subsequent  rapid  reversal 
appears to have grown slightly.  
Although  I  mentioned  that  emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies  seem  to  have 
fallen  somewhat  behind  in  adjusting  accommodative  monetary  policies,  it  would  be 
inappropriate to focus on these countries alone. The sharp contrast in price developments 
between advanced economies and emerging and commodity-exporting economies – with the 
former facing disinflation and the latter inflation – combined with global external imbalances 
poses great difficulties for policymakers in countries around the world. At the same time, I am 
increasingly concerned that when policy actions are taken they might – contrary to intentions 
– widen fluctuations in real economic activity and prices around the world. This is because 
the  economic  size  of  emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies  as  a  group  is 
approaching  that  of  advanced  economies  as  a  group,  and  the  closer  the  size  of  the 
economies  of  the  two  groups,  the  more  their  policy  actions  affect  each  other.  In  terms  of 
policy  effects,  this  means  that  the  feedback  effects  of  policies  also  increase  accordingly 
through this external economic impact. However, given the lack of adequate information on 
the  domestic  economy  and  overseas  economies,  and  due  to  differences  in  exchange  rate 
regimes and in capital mobility, it is difficult to accurately gauge the impact of such feedback 
effects and the spillover effects from policies undertaken by other countries.8 
2. Risks concerning the domestic economy 
Next,  I  will  talk  about  the  risks  concerning  the  Japanese  economy.  At  present,  financial 
markets cannot be described as stable due to the great uncertainty surrounding the economy 
and financial markets, and the volatility in the degree of risk tolerance in financial markets. 
Given the low capacity utilization in the economy, the recent appreciation of the yen, and the 
deterioration  in  corporate  and  consumer  sentiment,  there  remains  a  high  risk  that  the 
expected temporary weakness in the economy will persist.  
From a longer-term perspective, a downside risk of concern is that the expected growth rate 
may fall much further than expected. Following the bursting of the bubble economy, Japan 
was  preoccupied  with  addressing  the  legacy  of  the  bubble  and  failed  to  take  sufficient 
measures  to  deal  with  major  issues  such  as  the  large  fiscal  deficit  and  the  aging  and 
shrinking  of  the  population.  And  this,  I  believe,  is  the  fundamental  reason  why  Japan  has 
been unable to raise the expected growth rate. Another major reason is that Japan has not 
responded  sufficiently,  or  has  been  slow  to  respond,  to  structural  changes  in  the  global 
economy,  in  particular  the  rise  of  emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies.  Put 
                                                 
8   Generally  speaking,  in  a  two-economy  setting  where  one  economy  is  large  and  the  other  small,  the  small 
economy will be affected by policy decisions of the large economy, while the policies of the small economy will 
not affect the large economy. However, if both economies are of a similar size, their policies will affect one 
another and it is therefore necessary to pay close attention to feedback effects. See, for example, chapter 18 
of International Economics by Robert A. Mundell. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
in  order 
to  capture 
international  sales  networks 
differently,  as  I  pointed  out  earlier,  Japan  has  not  been  able  to  benefit  fully  from  global 
economic growth.9 
Against this background, many Japanese firms have recently been developing new products 
and  expanding 
infrastructure  and 
consumption demand in emerging and commodity-exporting economies. Among these firms, 
some are aiming to restructure their business strategies from a global viewpoint by acquiring 
overseas firms, making use of the strong yen. Such a constructive approach could increase 
corporate  confidence  and  dispel  the  prevailing  sense  of  gloom,  leading  possibly  to  an 
increase  in  the  expected  growth  rate.  If,  however,  firms  that  are  developing  business 
overseas place priority on strengthening overseas production by shifting production abroad 
and/or closing down domestic bases altogether, the impact on the Japanese economy – and 
especially  the  direct  impact  on  subcontractors  and  sub-subcontractors  –  would  be  quite 
severe because of the large spillover effects from exporters.10 In fact, the Bank’s Regional 
Economic  Report  released  in  October  2010,  based  on  information  gathered  from  its  Head 
Office  and  branches,  highlighted  the  concern  raised  by  some  that  increased  overseas 
production was restraining new hiring in Japan.11 Thus, there is a risk that Japan’s expected 
growth  rate  will  decline  unless  all  economic  players  take  forward-looking  action  in  their 
respective fields. 
Risks concerning prices 
3. 
The last issue is risks concerning prices. An increase in commodity prices brought about by 
high  growth  rates  in  emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies  could  cause  prices  in 
Japan  to  rise  more  than  expected.  At  present,  international  commodity  prices  are  on  an 
upward trend, so it is necessary to carefully monitor the impact of import prices. However, 
the risk of a downturn in the rate of inflation cannot be ruled out because of factors such as a 
decline in medium- to long-term inflation expectations.  
Regarding the outlook for prices, the crucial point, as I mentioned earlier, is how well current 
inflation is anchored to stable medium- to long-term inflation expectations. I personally take a 
cautious  view  on  this  issue.  I  am  also  wary  about  the  effectiveness  of  the  comprehensive 
monetary easing policy that I will explain later, and therefore believe that, on balance, risks 
concerning prices are weighted on the upside. 
II. 
A. 
Conduct of monetary policy 
Background to the Bank’s decision to implement a comprehensive monetary 
easing policy  
Next, I will outline the Bank’s current conduct of monetary policy. The Bank recognizes that 
Japan’s  economy  faces  the  critical  challenge  of  overcoming  deflation  and  returning  to  a 
sustainable growth path with price stability. To this end, it will continue to consistently make 
contributions as the central bank, namely, strive to pursue powerful monetary easing, ensure 
financial market stability, and support strengthening the foundations for economic growth. At 
the same time, it will carefully examine the outlook for economic activity and prices, and if 
                                                 
9   According to the 43rd Opinion Survey on the General Public’s Views and Behavior conducted by the Bank in 
October 2010, the proportion of respondents who replied that they expected the Japanese economy to grow at 
about  the  current  rate  decreased  to  33  percent,  while  the  proportion  of  those  who  answered  that  they 
expected it to grow only at a lower rate increased to 64 percent. 
10   See Kozo Kiyota, “Nihon no Yushutsu to Koyou (Japan’s Exports and Employment),” RIETI Discussion Paper 
No. 10-J-29, Research Institute of Economy, Trade and Industry, April, 2010. 
11   See the summary of the Regional Economic Report released by the Bank in October 2010. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
judged  necessary,  take  policy  actions  in  a  timely  and  appropriate  manner.12  The  Bank 
examined  the  outlook  for  economic  activity  and  prices  at  the  Monetary  Policy  Meeting  on 
October 4 and 5, 2010, and judged that it had become more likely that the return of Japan’s 
economy to a sustainable growth path with price stability would be delayed. Based on this 
assessment,  the  Bank  decided  to  implement  comprehensive  monetary  easing  as  an 
additional policy measure to further enhance monetary easing.13 
In  recent  months,  following  the  Monetary  Policy  Meeting  in  July  2010,  at  which  the  Policy 
Board members conducted an interim assessment of the Bank’s view presented in the April 
2010  Outlook  Report,  I  have  been  thinking  in  more  detail  about  the  outlook  for  economic 
activity and prices through fiscal 2012. By September, I had become increasingly concerned 
about the downside risks to the economic outlook, especially for fiscal 2011 and thereafter, 
and  concerned  that  the  recovery  in  prices  might  be  weaker  than  expected.  Therefore,  my 
view  was  that  the  Bank  should  take  drastic  policy  action  using  unprecedented  measures. 
Looking back, it seems that other Policy Board members, each from their own perspective, 
have had a similar or acute view. It is these concerns that prompted the decision to introduce 
the comprehensive monetary easing policy. 
Objectives of the comprehensive monetary easing policy 
B. 
The  comprehensive  monetary  easing  policy  consists  of  three  measures:  a  change  in  the 
guideline for money market operations; a clarification of the commitment regarding the time 
horizon for maintaining the virtually zero interest rate policy based on the “understanding of 
medium-  to  long-term  price  stability”  (hereafter  “understanding”);  and  the  establishment  of 
the Asset Purchase Program. Next, I will explain the objectives of these measures in detail. 
For clarity, I have classified the objectives into four categories, which are to achieve (1) lower 
interest  rates,  (2)  quantitative  easing,  (3)  qualitative  easing,  and  (4)  to  affect  market 
expectations. 
Change in the guideline for money market operations  
1. 
The  first  measure  was  to  change  the  guideline  for  money  market  operations.  The  Bank 
decided  to  change  the  target  for  the  uncollateralized  overnight  call  rate  from  previously 
“around  0.1  percent”  to  “around  0  to  0.1  percent.”  The  Bank  has  pursued  a  virtually  zero 
interest rate policy since the policy change in December 2008, setting the target for the rate 
at around 0.1 percent. However, because it was not necessarily clear by how much the Bank 
would allow the rate to deviate from 0.1 percent in its daily market operations, it decided to 
clarify  this  point.  While  the  Bank  has  been  committed  to  providing  ample  funds  since  the 
Lehman shock, it will further enhance the provision of liquidity through measures such as the 
implementation of the Asset Purchase Program, which I will explain later. In addition, given 
that the transaction volume in the call market has declined as the ample provision of funds by 
the Bank increasingly replaced private interbank transactions, the uncollateralized overnight 
call rate may fall considerably below 0.1 percent. Since the Bank considered that explicitly 
allowing the overnight call rate to fall below 0.1 percent would enhance the effectiveness of 
its policy, it decided to adopt the change in the guideline for money market operations.  
However, while the aim of the change in the guideline for money market operations was to 
allow  the  overnight  call  rate  to  fall  below  0.1  percent,  the  interest  rate  applied  to  the 
complementary deposit facility has been maintained at 0.1 percent. Some may feel that if the 
interest rate paid on financial institutions’ excess reserve balances were lowered, this would 
result in a decline in interest rates. However, since an excessively low call rate would deprive 
financial institutions of profit opportunities, it could result in a decline in interbank transactions 
                                                 
12   See “Statement on Monetary Policy” released by the Bank on September 7, 2010. 
13   See “Comprehensive Monetary Easing” released by the Bank on October 5, 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
and ultimately lead market participants to exit the market, as happened when the quantitative 
easing  policy  was  implemented.  Thus,  the  functioning  of  financial  intermediation  could  be 
impaired, which would in turn hamper the effects of monetary easing. Therefore, weighing up 
the advantages and disadvantages I have mentioned, the disadvantages of further lowering 
the interest rate for the complementary deposit facility at this point in time would be greater. 
Chairman Bernanke made a similar point in his speech on August 27, 2010.14 
Clarification of the duration of the virtually zero interest rate policy  
2. 
The  second  measure  taken  by  the  Bank  was  to  clarify  the  duration  of  the  virtually  zero 
interest rate policy. Specifically, the Bank explicitly stated that it would continue the virtually 
zero interest rate policy until it judged that price stability on the basis of the “understanding” 
was in sight. However, the continuation of the virtually zero interest rate policy is subject to 
the  condition  that  no  problem  will  be  identified  in  examining  risk  factors,  including  the 
accumulation  of  financial  imbalances,  because  if  monetary  policy  focused  only  on  price 
developments, other risk factors might be overlooked. 
With regard to the four objectives I mentioned earlier, this measure meets the fourth and the 
first ones; that is, it aims at affecting market expectations and prompting a decline in interest 
rates. To explain this in more detail, the importance of trying to influence market expectations 
follows from what is called “expectations theory” with regard to long- and short-term interest 
rates. Specifically, this theory suggests that long-term interest rates are determined by the 
average rate of the expected series of overnight rates in the corresponding period. Thus, if 
the  Bank  announces  to  the  markets  that  it  will  continue  with  its  virtually  zero  interest  rate 
policy  until  it  judges  that  price  stability  is  in  sight  and  this  is  recognized  by  market 
participants, they will form the expectation that the overnight call rate will stay around zero 
percent as long as deflation is expected to continue, and term rates and medium- to long-
term rates will stabilize at extremely low levels as a result. This effect of monetary easing is 
called the “duration effect.”  
When  the  Bank,  in  March  2006,  terminated  its  quantitative  easing  policy,  which  was 
accompanied  by  such  a  duration  effect,  it  introduced  a  new  framework  for  the  conduct  of 
monetary policy and decided to conduct monetary policy based on its “understanding” – that 
is,  the  level  of  inflation  that  each  Policy  Board  member  understands,  when  conducting 
monetary  policy,  as  being  consistent  with  price  stability  over  the  medium  to  long  term  – 
expressed in the form of a numerical value. Moreover, in April 2007, the Bank presented in 
the  Outlook  Report  its  assessment  of  the  outlook  for  price  developments  based  on  the 
“understanding,”  and  in  December  2009  it  provided  further  clarification  with  regard  to  the 
numerical value in the “understanding.”15 With regard to the current comprehensive monetary 
easing, the time horizon of the policy is clarified by making it explicit that the “understanding” 
is the basis for the judgment regarding the duration of the virtually zero interest rate policy. 
Establishment of the Asset Purchase Program 
3. 
The  third  measure  of  the  comprehensive  monetary  easing  policy,  the  Asset  Purchase 
Program,  aims  at  encouraging  a  decline  in  longer-term  interest  rates  and  various  risk 
premiums to further enhance monetary easing. Specifically, through the Program, the Bank 
will purchase a total of about 5 trillion yen of various financial assets, such as government 
securities,  corporate  bonds,  commercial  paper  (CP),  exchange-traded  funds  (ETFs),  and 
Japan  real  estate  investment  trusts  (J-REITs),  and  will  conduct  fixed-rate  funds-supplying 
                                                 
14   See Chairman Bernanke’s speech cited in Footnote 1. 
15   The “understanding” in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI was made clearer by changing the 
expression from each Policy Board member’s “understanding” “falls in the range approximately between 0 and 
2 percent, with most Policy Board members’ median figures at around 1 percent” to “falls in a positive range of 
2 percent or lower and the midpoints of most Policy Board members’ “understanding” were around 1 percent.” 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
operation against pooled collateral worth approximately 30 trillion yen. Taking on credit risks 
of  individual  firms  is  an  extraordinary  measure  for  a  central  bank,  and  the  reason  for 
establishing the Program was to make it easier for the Bank to grasp the risk profile of the 
assets purchased and to increase the transparency of the management of these assets by 
separating the assets purchased through the program from those purchased through regular 
money market operations. The Bank has already started purchasing some types of assets for 
which necessary arrangements have been completed. In addition, on November 8 it started 
to purchase Japanese government bonds (JGBs). Purchases of all other types of assets are 
planned to start by the middle of December.  
With regard to the four policy objectives, this measure mainly meets the third and the first 
ones, namely, to achieve a decline in risk premiums and in longer-term interest rates. Market 
participants have tended to focus on the size of the Program, but let me underline here that 
the  direct  objective  has  not  been  quantitative  expansion;  rather,  the  measure  seeks  to 
encourage  a  decline  in  longer-term  interest  rates  and  various  risk  premiums  resulting  in 
quantitative expansion. Efforts to achieve a decline in risk premiums under the Program do 
not mean that risk assets are purchased in substantial quantities to underpin prices. Rather, 
the aim is for the purchase of various risk assets by the Bank to act as a catalyst to increase 
the demand for and supply of riskier financial assets in the market and spur the effective use 
of the ample funds that have been already provided to the market so as to provide a boost to 
the economy.  
The  Bank’s  decision  to  encourage  a  decline  in  longer-term  interest  rates  and  various  risk 
premiums  through  comprehensive  monetary  easing  was  based  on  its  experience  with  the 
quantitative  easing  policy16  during  the  five  years  from  March  2001  through  March  2006. 
Since one of the ways in which quantitative easing worked was through the policy duration 
effect, it is difficult to clearly isolate the effects of quantitative expansion itself in assessing 
the  overall  effect  of  the  policy.  However,  most  subsequent  empirical  studies  suggest  that 
although  quantitative  easing  contributed  to  stabilizing  the  financial  system,  the  impact  on 
economic activity and prices was limited.17 Moreover, preliminary assessment indicates that 
the extent to which the decline in interest rates resulting from the policy duration effect of the 
quantitative  easing  policy  affected  the  yields  of  other  financial  assets  –  the  so-called 
“portfolio rebalancing effect” – was limited. Given these results, the Bank judged that – in a 
situation where there was little room for a further decline in short-term interest rates – the 
most effective policy to achieve additional monetary easing would be to try to directly effect a 
decline  in  longer-term  interest  rates  and  various  risks  premiums,  meaning  that  this  policy 
pursues the first and the third of the objectives outlined earlier, that is, to lower interest rates 
and achieve qualitative easing.  
However,  I  did  not  concur  with  all  the  measures  of  the  Bank’s  comprehensive  monetary 
easing policy. Specifically, I disagreed with the inclusion of government securities as assets 
to be purchased through the Program. The main reason is that I believe it would be more 
effective to strengthen efforts to effect a decline in risks premiums, which remain at a high 
level – that is, to focus on qualitative easing – than to focus on longer-term interest rates at a 
time  when  financial  institutions  were  raising  the  weight  of  government  securities  in  their 
                                                 
16   The  Bank’s  quantitative  easing  policy  consisted  of  four  measures:  (1)  the  main  operating  target  for  money 
market operations was changed from the uncollateralized overnight call rate to the outstanding balance of the 
current accounts at the Bank; (2) the new procedures for money market operations would remain in place until 
the rate of change in the CPI (excluding perishables, on a nationwide statistics) on a year-on-year basis was 
stable  at  or  above  zero  percent;  (3)  the  Bank  raised  the  target  for  the  balance  outstanding  at  the  Bank’s 
current accounts to around 5 trillion yen; and (4) the Bank would increase the amount of its outright purchase 
of long-term government bonds from the then 400 billion yen per month, if it considered this to be necessary 
for the smooth provision of liquidity. 
17   See Hiroshi Ugai, “Effects of the Quantitative Easing Policy: A Survey of Empirical Analyses,” Monetary and 
Economic Studies, 25 (1), Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies, Bank of Japan, 2007. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
portfolios and both short- and long-term interest rates were declining anyway (the yield on 
2-year instruments in the past month has been in the range of only 0.130–0.200 percent). In 
fact,  I  think  that  even  before  the  implementation  of  comprehensive  monetary  easing,  a 
lowering  of  longer-term  interest  rates  had  already  been  achieved  to  a  substantial  extent 
through the Bank’s lowering of the policy interest rate to 0.1 percent, through policy duration 
effects from previous policies, and through the provision of ample funds. Therefore, I felt that 
increasing the purchase of government securities to achieve a further decline in longer-term 
interest  rates  would  only  have  limited  positive  effects18  and  would  increase  the  risk  of 
overheating  in  the  bond  market;  moreover,  excessively  low  interest  rates  could  deprive 
financial  institutions  of  profit  opportunities  and  instead  hamper  the  effects  of  monetary 
easing,  so  that  any  positive  effects  might  be  outweighed  by  the  potential  negative  side 
effects. Another reason why I disagreed with the purchase of long-term government bonds 
through  the  Program  is  that  –  in  a  situation  where  there  is  uncertainty  over  government 
finances  in  the  medium  to  long  term  –  making  an  exception  to  the  principle  that  the 
outstanding  amount  of  the  Bank’s holdings  of JGBs  should  be  kept  below  the  outstanding 
amount of banknotes in circulation could arouse suspicions in the market that the Bank had 
taken a step toward engaging in government debt financing, which in turn could adversely 
affect long-term interest rates. 
Ensuring the Bank’s financial health  
4. 
Next, I would also like to mention the disadvantages of risk asset purchases by the Bank. 
Excessive  intervention  by  the  Bank  may  distort  price  formation  in  the  market  and  deprive 
financial  institutions  of  profit  opportunities.  Moreover,  the  Bank,  too,  may  ultimately  incur 
losses from the purchases. As you may know, any revenues the Bank makes derive from the 
issuance  of  currency  based  on  having  the  sole  right  to  do  so,  and  this  is  referred  to  as 
seigniorage. As seigniorage revenue essentially belongs to the public, it is transferred to the 
government’s general account and the Bank has no right to use it at its own discretion. To 
put it differently, any losses the Bank incurs will ultimately have to be borne by the public. 
Moreover, any damage to the Bank’s financial health could undermine the independence of 
the  Bank  and  prevent  it  from  taking  policy  actions  in  a  timely  and  appropriate  manner, 
undermining confidence in the currency. This is why the Bank has sought the government’s 
understanding regarding the way in which the Bank would treat any losses incurred under 
the  Program.19  I  believe  that  particularly  when  the  Bank  pursues  unconventional  monetary 
policies  that  come  close  to  fiscal  policy,  it  is  important  to  take  the  view  of  the  public  into 
account. 
C. 
The fund-provisioning measure to support strengthening the foundations for 
economic growth  
So  far  I  have  been  talking  about  the  Bank’s  comprehensive  monetary  easing  policy 
introduced on October 5, 2010, but it is of course also necessary to continue with medium- to 
long-term  measures  aimed  at  sustainably  overcoming  deflation.  Based  on  various 
assumptions regarding trends in the overall population and the labor force participation rate 
(the  number  of  persons  willing  and  able  to  work  divided  by  the  number  of  persons  aged 
15 years  and  over),  and  using  the  recent  rate  of  labor  productivity  growth  per  employee 
                                                 
18   One of the reasons for my disagreeing with the policy change on August 30, 2010 (the introduction of a six-
month term in the fixed-rate funds-supplying operation against pooled collateral and a substantial increase in 
the amount of  funds to be provided through the operation)  was that  such policy  action would produce only 
limited easing effects. 
19   Specifically,  the  Bank’s  statement  released  after  the  Monetary  Policy  Meeting  held  on  October  28,  2010 
stated, “The Bank intends to ensure its financial soundness by managing risks stemming from the purchases 
of  various  financial  assets  under  the  Program  and  by  properly  recording  loss  provisions  and  appropriately 
treating losses if they are incurred. The Bank seeks the government’s understanding in this regard.” 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
(around 1 percent for the past 20 years), the economy is estimated to grow at a rate of little 
more than 1 percent, even with a rise in the labor force participation rate of women and the 
elderly. As you can see from this, if things continue as they are, and unless the nation as a 
whole makes the utmost effort to raise labor productivity, Japan is unlikely to achieve a rise 
in the potential growth rate and a sustainable expansion in demand. By introducing the fund-
provisioning  measure  to  support  strengthening  the  foundations  for  economic  growth,  the 
Bank has raised awareness of this issue and, in my view, should continue with the measure 
in the future.20 
Although  the  measure  has  met  with  severe  criticism  that  it  has  prompted  a  race  among 
financial  institutions  to  lower  lending  rates,  financial  institutions’  lending  stance  to  firms  – 
regardless of their size, from small ones to large ones – for investment in new growth areas 
fortunately  appears  to  have  turned  more  active.  Moreover,  I  am  informed  that  a  growing 
number  of  firms  have  been  approaching  financial  institutions  to  borrow  funds  through  this 
measure. All this suggests that the measure is beginning to bear some fruit. Meanwhile, I am 
told  that  regional  financial  institutions,  too,  are  supplying  funds  for  business  start-ups  –  a 
development  that  I  find  extremely  encouraging.  One  factor  underlying  Japan’s  prolonged 
deflation seems to be a growing tendency to avoid risks and a reduced willingness to take on 
new  challenges. 
to  support 
strengthening  the  foundations  for  economic  growth,  together  with  the  Bank’s  purchase  of 
various  risk  assets  under  the  Asset  Purchase  Program,  will  be  one  step  in  resolving  the 
structural problem of deflation.  
fund-provisioning  measure 
therefore  hope 
that 
this 
I 
                                                 
20   For details, see section 3 of the speech mentioned in Footnote 6. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
