Vítor Constâncio: Financial regulatory reform and the economy 
Speech  by  Mr  Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
20th Annual  Hyman  P  Minsky  Conference,  organised  by  the  Levy  Economics  Institute, 
New York, 15 April 2011. 
 It is indeed a pleasure for me to participate in this 20th Conference to honour Hyman Minsky 
and I want to thank President Papadimitriou for inviting me. 
Lessons from the crisis and the regulatory response 
I. 
Four years after the eruption of the financial turmoil, which quickly turned into a full-blown 
financial crisis after the collapse of Lehman Brothers in 2008, the international banking and 
regulatory landscape is now being changed in ways that significantly impact the future of the 
financial  sector  and  the  economy.  The  speed  of  the  propagation  of  the  crisis  from  one 
country to another as well as from one sector to another posed exceptional challenges for 
banks, regulators and supervisors alike. 
Key lessons drawn from the crisis 
1. 
The crisis had many causes, often intertwined and mutually reinforcing. A key area where 
several shortcomings were detected, and therefore where decisive actions had to be taken, 
concerns  the  regulatory  framework,  both  from  a  micro-  as  well  as  macro-prudential 
perspectives.  Considering  the  set  of  causes  that  contributed  to  the  crisis,  the  reform  of 
financial regulation has addressed the following points: 
First,  excessive  asset  growth  in  the  financial  sector  during  periods  of  boom  has  to  be 
contained, thus reducing the risks of asset price bubbles as well. In this context, it has to be 
acknowledged that overly accommodative monetary policy may have contributed to inflating 
the  stock  market  and,  subsequently,  the  housing  markets. Therefore,  a  cautious monetary 
policy of “leaning against the wind” could help to address this problem. This policy should be 
based on the re-definition of price stability objectives to capture longer time horizons as well 
as  on  a  more  systematic  incorporation  of  financial  and  monetary  developments  in  the 
assessment of risks to price stability. However, it should under no circumstances imply any 
mechanical  reaction  of  central  banks  to  asset  price  movements.  The  main  response  must 
come  from  a  reduction  of  the  pro-cyclicality  of  the  financial  system  by  means  of  macro-
prudential  policy  measures.  As  we  have  seen  in  the  recent  crisis,  pro-cyclicality  can  be 
exacerbated by certain features of the regulatory capital framework as well as by accounting 
rules.  Consequently,  the  implementation  of  effective  macroprudential  policies,  like counter-
cyclical  capital  buffers  as  well  as  the  revision  of  accounting  standards,  are  of  paramount 
importance.  Furthermore,  the  introduction  of  a  non-risk  based  leverage  ratio  will  also 
contribute to putting an ultimate brake on the system.  
Second,  the  financial  crisis  clearly  showed  the  lack  of  loss  absorption  capacity  of  many 
regulatory capital elements, namely of the so-called hybrids. In some important institutions 
common equity was as low as 2% of total risk weighted assets in the run-up to the crisis. 
There  was  a  clear  need  to  implement  new  standards  demanding  more  and  better  quality 
capital  to  strengthen  the  loss  absorbing  capacity  of  the  financial  system.  The  Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (BCBS)  has  already  agreed  on  a  new  global  capital 
standard,  endorsed  also  by  G20  Leaders  in  November  2010,  the  potential  implications  of 
which I’ll discuss in more detail later. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Third,  the  financial  system  was  too  vulnerable  to  market  and  funding  liquidity  shocks.  The 
introduction of regulation on liquidity ratios, imposing more robust buffers in the short term 
and less structural dependence on unstable wholesale funding, is an important step towards 
enhancing the resilience of the system. 
Fourth, the elimination or significant mitigation of the “too big to fail” problem represents a 
major challenge for regulators. A number of initiatives are currently being discussed at the 
international level under the aegis of the Financial Stability Board (FSB). 
Fifth, the prevention of systemic risk coming from the “shadow banking sector” remains one 
of  the  most  important  issues  of  the  current  regulatory  agenda.  This  can  be  achieved  both 
directly by enlarging the perimeter of regulated institutions as well as reinforcing accounting 
rules  on  consolidation and  indirectly  by  regulating  the  flows  of  credit  or  liquidity  backstops 
coming from the regulated sector. 
Sixth,  tightening  the  regulation  of  over-the-counter  derivatives  through  the  use  of  central 
counterparties  (CCP’s)  and  trade  repositories  as  well  as  by  moving  trade  of  standardized 
instruments  (e.g.  CDS’s) 
to  organized  exchanges  are  key  elements  of  enhancing 
transparency and mitigating counterparty credit risk in these markets.  
Seventh, correction of the prevailing adverse incentives created by an excessively short-term 
perspective  of  risk  measurement  and  performance  assessment.  The  introduction  of  new 
governance principles regarding risk management and compensation guidelines should help 
to align incentives with long-term sustainability. 
Finally, improving the oversight of Credit Rating Agencies (CRA’s) and reducing the reliance 
on  external  ratings  for  official  regulatory  purposes.  CRAs  have  contributed  to  the  pro-
cyclicality of the financial sector and played a very negative role in the sub-prime crisis by 
failing to properly assess the risk characteristics of complex financial products. 
The regulatory reforms in the US and the EU 
2. 
Most of the aspects of a new regulatory environment are being widely adopted around the 
world.  The  substantive  work  has  been  done  by  the  BCBS  and  the  FSB  under  guidelines 
approved by the G20. The core areas of reforms on both sides of the Atlantic address the 
key lessons I just mentioned. In this context, the regulatory and supervisory objectives in the 
US and the EU share a common agenda. 
From  a  regulatory  perspective,  the  main  initiative  in  the  US  has  been  the  Dodd-Frank  Act 
(DFA). With the DFA the US has created a yardstick for the regulatory response to the crisis. 
The DFA is an elaborate framework and a fundamental and ambitious reform. 
In Europe the European Commission has already adopted several new pieces of legislation 
and many more are in preparation until the end of this year. Besides dealing with the Basel III 
decisions,  the  whole  set  addresses  other  subjects,  from  OTC  derivatives,  consumer 
protection,  deposit  guarantee  schemes  and  Resolution  Funds  to  Credit  Rating  Agencies, 
securitization, short selling or securities market integrity.  
These are just a few examples of the very comprehensive overhaul of the financial market 
regulation underway in the EU. These examples illustrate, first, that authorities on both sides 
of  the  Atlantic  are  determined  to  draw  lessons  from  the  crisis.  Second,  they  point  to  the 
importance of intensifying regulatory cooperation across countries. International coordination 
on financial reform is essential to prevent regulatory arbitrage, avoid loopholes, and ensure a 
level playing field. 
Some differences are likely to remain in aspects not harmonized at world level. For example, 
regarding  CRAs  ,  the  EU’s  regulation  has  introduced  strict  authorisation  requirements  and 
supervision for CRAs. However, the regulation might not be enough to overcome all the risks 
related to the use of external ratings. Therefore, issues such as the over-reliance on ratings 
and the lack of competition in the sector are currently further explored. The DFA includes an 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
obligation  to  remove  references  to  (private  sector)  external  credit  ratings.  As  the  CRAs 
continue to accentuate their pro-cyclical behaviour, we closely follow in Europe the efforts of 
US regulators to apply this particular aspect of the DFA. 
Both  in  the  US  and  the  EU  reforms  require  hedge  funds  (above  a  certain  threshold)  to 
register  with  an  authority  and  report  information  regularly.  In  the  US  the  DFA  has  also 
introduced limits on investment in hedge funds for financial institutions as well other aspects 
associated with the so-called Volcker Rule. In the EU, a Volcker-Rule-type of regulation is 
not envisaged as experience with the universal bank model, which is predominant in the EU, 
is generally seen as a success.  
Implications of the regulatory reform for the economy 
II. 
Given  the  comprehensive  nature  of  the  regulatory  reform,  impacting  a  wide  range  of 
institutions,  markets  and  business  activities,  it  is  understandable  that  the  reaction  of  the 
industry was critical towards the policy measures. While generally supporting the underlying 
objectives of the regulatory reform by recognizing the responsibilities of the financial services 
industry  in  the  crisis  and  acknowledging  the  serious  weaknesses  in  business  practices 
across a range of financial institutions (IIF, 2008), resistance remains substantial with regard 
to certain elements of the reform package. In particular, criticism was raised against the new 
capital requirements (increased minimum capital ratios, introduction of capital conservation 
and  counter-cyclical  buffers  as  well  as  a  capital  surcharge  for  Systemically  Important 
Financial  Institutions  –  SIFIs),  arguing  that  this  will  increase  costs  for  banks,  reduce 
profitability, lead to credit supply restrictions, shrink the banking sector and, ultimately, hurt 
the economy (IIF, 2010). 
Theory and historic experience however demonstrate that those claims are partly based on 
misconceptions that are important to dispel. A series of recent studies (Admati et al., 2011; 
Miles et al., 2011; Angelini et al, BIS, 2010; Kashyap et al., 2010) explain clearly the theory 
behind the fact that changes in capital ratios had historically no such effects or, at least, not 
in a magnitude claimed by the industry. As Admati et al. (2011) conclude, “… requiring that 
banking institutions are funded with significantly more equity entails large social benefits and 
minimal, if any, social costs”. 
Furthermore, there does not appear to be a clear empirical relationship between the size 
of  the  financial  sector  and  sustainable  growth,  thus  it  is  not  at  all  evident  that  a  more 
moderate expansion of the financial system will have adverse impact on the economy as a 
whole. Let me elaborate on these issues in more detail. 
Historically based arguments 
1. 
The interdependencies between finance and economic growth are multifaceted. They should 
–  and  will  –  remain  high  in  the  research  agenda  for  the  economics  profession  for  a  long 
period. 
The  insights  of  Schumpeter  pioneered  the  understanding  of  the  role  of  a  well  developed 
financial system for fostering technological innovations and ultimately economic growth.1 The 
approach  was  taken  in  recent  times  by  the  endogenous  growth  literature,  in  particular 
through theoretical contributions by Aghion and Howitt (2005 and 2009) and empirical work 
by Rajan and Zingales (1998 and 2003). Nonetheless, the knowledge gap remains very wide 
                                                 
1   The banker […] stands between those who wish to form new combinations and the possessors of productive 
means. He is  essentially a  phenomenon of development, though only  when no central authority directs the 
social process. He makes possible the carrying out of new combinations, authorizes people, in the name of 
society as it were, to form them”. Schumpeter (1934). More generally, see Aghion and Howitt (2009) for an 
overview of many aspects regarding the finance-growth nexus. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
and the recent crisis has underlined the importance – in social welfare terms – of filling this 
gap sooner rather than later and drawing from it more powerful policy designs.  
Turning  to  the  facts  and  figures  of  all  this,  let  me  first  stress  the  important  caveat  of 
measurement issues when speaking about the link between finance and growth. Even the 
size  of  the  financial  sector  in  a  given  country  is  not  easy  to  characterise,  let  alone  to 
measure. While many indicators can be invoked, none is immune from criticism.2 Also the 
perimeter of the financial sector is typically not easy to pin down. It shifts over time, pushed 
by  financial  innovations,  and  institutional3  and  structural  specificities  at  country  level  make 
international comparisons a daunting task. The periphery of the financial sector is particularly 
opaque  and  hard  to  apprehend.  Comprised  of  OTC  products,  complex  derivatives  and 
investment  vehicles,  its  lack  of  transparency  is  commensurate  to  the  systemic  risks  it  has 
posed  to  the  rest  of  the  economy,  as  we  painfully  witnessed  in  2008  and  2009  after  the 
Lehman demise. 
Let me now take you through a shortened and unavoidably oversimplified account of what 
we know about growth-finance interactions.4 I will focus in particular on three results, broadly 
defined. 
Firstly,  looking  at  the  available  empirical  evidence  on  the  relation  between  the  financial 
sector  and  potential  growth,  most  studies  do  not  point  to  the  role  of  size  of  the  financial 
sector  per  se,  but  rather  to  the  degree  of  development  of  the  financial  sector  as  the  key 
variable (see in particular Levine, 2005)  
Secondly,  when  focusing  on  the  nexus  between  the  size  of  the  financial  sector  and 
sustainable  growth,  over  the  recent  past,  there  is  no  clear  empirical  relationship.  Recent 
research at the ECB and elsewhere shows that the continuing increase of the financial 
sector size does not always contribute to higher economic growth, in particular since 
the late 90’s. In fact, some empirical evidence suggests that, above a certain threshold, the 
effects of finance on growth potential weaken with the degree of economic development as 
the  effect  of  finance  on  growth  is  not  necessarily  monotonic.  There  are  several  potential 
reasons  for  that.  The  provision  of  financial  services  may  reach  a  threshold  beyond  which 
there  are  diminishing  returns  to  scale.  The  expansion  of  the  financial  sector  is  associated 
with  a  reallocation  of  productive  talent  away  from  real  economic  activities,  which  may 
ultimately depress economic growth through lower industrial innovation. Besides, if banks in 
particular  become  too  large  and  powerful,  they  may  extract  excessive  rents  from  the 
corporate  sector,  impose  their  taste  for  prudence  on  their  corporate  clients,  or  become 
captured  by  the  interests  of  large  inefficient  incumbents,  disrupting  the  natural  process  of 
Schumpeterian creative destruction. Indeed, over the last years, bank equity appears to have 
registered a higher average return than non-bank equity. 
Third, financial development may exacerbate the trade-off between growth and stability, and 
so  the  findings  of  the  traditional  finance-and-growth  literature  may  have  been  driven  by 
studying  short  periods  of  relative  calm  during  the  Great  Moderation.  Preliminary  evidence 
suggests  that  periods  of  very  fast  expansions  of  credit  (or  other  forms  of  financial 
intermediation)  tend  to  be  disorderly  and  often  indicative  of  the  emergence  of  financial 
inefficiencies that are not conducive to sustainable growth, breeding the sources of financial 
crises associated with severe economic downturns. 
                                                 
2   See A. Haldane (2010) for a discussion of the pitfalls that may affect this statistic. 
3   See  Dorrucci,  E.,  Meyer-Cirkel,  A.  and  D.  Santabárbara,  (2009)  for  an  analysis  of  the  institutional 
characteristics in emerging economies. 
4   See for example Goldsmith, R. (1969); King, R. and Levine, R. (1993); Beck, T., Levine, R. and Loayza, N. 
(2000); Levine, R., Loayza, N. and Beck, T. (2000); Demirguc-Kunt, A. and Levine R. (2001), Levine (2005). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
To conclude this brief overview, I would underline that larger financial sectors have generally 
been associated with a higher degree of economic diversification, resulting in a lower overall 
volatility  of  GDP  growth  for  the  same  level  of  long-term  output  growth.  (Manganelli  and 
Popov,  2010).  However,  the  decade  of  the  run-up  to  the  crisis  saw  the  effect  of  larger 
financial  sectors  on  higher  economic  growth  partly  disappear.  This  phenomenon  is 
connected to the complex non-linearities involved in the finance-and-growth-nexus, causing 
the  effect  of  finance  on growth  to  peter  out  over  the  development  cycle,  as  well  as  to  the 
trade-off between growth and tail risk exacerbated by the expansion of the financial sector. 
Indeed,  the  main  finding  of  research  paper  by  Popov  (ECB,  2011)  is  that  financial 
globalization  increases  simultaneously  the  mean  and  the  left  skewness  of  output  growth. 
This implies that while raising long-term growth, financial globalization has also exacerbated 
the  risk  of large,  abrupt,  and  rare  macroeconomic  contractions.  This  is  consistent with  the 
view that in financially liberalized economies, systemic risk taking raises the probability of a 
collapse  in  financial  intermediation.  The  paper  also  finds  that  the  welfare  effects  of 
liberalization vary with the degree of economic and financial development, therefore financial 
globalization is not a one-size-fits-all development. 
There is also some evidence suggesting that higher growth of the financial sector may come 
at the expense of higher volatility in general (Levchenko et al., 2009), both for developed and 
developing  economies  (Popov,  ECB  2011).  These  research  papers  emphasize  the 
characteristics of the financial sector as key determinants of macroeconomic performance in 
all its facets, notably as regards long-term potential, cyclical fluctuations and likelihood and 
severity of crisis episodes (see also Kaminsky and Reinhart, 1999).  
This  may  call  for  strengthening  our  efforts  to  understand  the  macro-finance  nexus,  extract 
lessons  from  the  crisis  and  foster  the  synergies  across  the  various  analyses  and 
perspectives  (monetary  policy,  stability,  etc.)  in  which  central  banks  analyse  the  financial 
system.  
Let me now turn to another important point: historical evidence seems to indicate that there is 
also no relationship between simple book capital ratio (or leverage as its inverse) and 
economic  growth.  Miles  et  al.  (2011,  page  6)  point  out  that  in  the  UK  in  1880–1960  the 
leverage  ratio  was  about  half  the  level  of  recent  decades.  Similarly,  Kashyap  et  al.  (2010, 
page 19) demonstrate that the book equity to book assets ratio for US commercial banks has 
declined substantially over time: while the ratio exceeded 50% in the 1840s, it fell steadily to 
reach 15% in 1930s and 6% in the 1940s. Later, with the introduction of the Basel I regime in 
the early 90’s, capital ratios started to improve again in the US, however, this development 
was accompanied by increasing off-balance sheet activities, potentially reflecting regulatory 
arbitrage as well as the mis-measurement of risks. The evidence of both countries indicates 
clearly  that very  different  levels  of capital  coincided  with  similar  rates of  economic  growth, 
showing no specific historical relation between the two. 
Turning to the relationship between simple book capital ratio (or leverage as its inverse) and 
spreads or rates of business loans, both Miles et al. (2011) and Kashyap at al. (2010) find no 
evidence  of  any  clear  link  between  these  ratios  and  bank  lending  rates,  for  the  UK  since 
1890 and for the US since 1920, respectively. Overall, the main findings of these studies cast 
doubts  on  the  reliability  and  accuracy  of  some  of  the  estimates  on  the  excessive 
macroeconomic  and  social  costs  of  strengthened  capital  requirements.  Nevertheless, 
historical  examination  can  only  provide  an  impressionist  type  of  evidence.  We  need,  of 
course, more precise analytical and econometric analysis. 
Analytical and empirical evidence 
2. 
Against this background, it is of particular importance that policy makers have an appropriate 
and  balanced  view  of  the  potential  impacts  of  the  reform  package.  In  this  context,  it  is 
necessary to make a clear distinction between long term and short term impacts. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
First of all let me underline that when the authorities calibrated the new requirements they 
took into account the estimated potential costs and benefits of the reform. These estimates 
were  made  at  the  initiative  of  the  FSB  and  the  BCBS.  The  Macroeconomic  Assessment 
Group (so called MAG) was established to assess the impacts during the transition towards 
the new regulatory regime, while the Long-term Economic Impact Group (or so called LEI) 
assessed the long-term (steady state) net benefits from the implementation of Basel III. The 
ECB and several Eurosystem national central banks contributed actively to the preparation of 
these studies. 
Let me first start with the estimated long-term impact of the enhanced capital and liquidity 
regulation. As we have recently experienced, financial crises can impose enormous costs on 
tax  payers  and  society  at  large.  In  order  to  avoid  such  losses,  Basel  III  reforms  aim  at 
improving  banks’  capital  base  and  thus  banking  sector’s  resilience  that  can  help  to  foster 
financial stability as well as to mitigate systemic risks in the global financial system. Thus, the 
long-term economic benefits, while difficult to quantify precisely, can be very substantial. 
The main economic benefit of the reform stems from the reduced frequency of future crises. 
The  prevention  and  mitigation  of  downside  tail  risks  for  the  economy  implies  a  sizeable 
reduction  in  the  expected  output  losses  associated  with  systemic  events  and  as  such, 
contributes to more sustainable economic growth over the long term. To be more precise, the 
study of the Long-term Economic Impact Group has estimated that banking crises occur on 
average  every  20  to  25  years.  This  estimate  means  that  there  is  a  4.6  per  cent  annual 
probability of a crisis. The study shows that a 4 percentage points increase in the capital ratio 
lowers  this  annual  probability  to  less  than  1  per  cent.  Another  conclusion  is  that  a  one 
percentage point reduction in the annual probability of banking crises produces an expected 
net saving of 0.6 percent in terms of unrealised output loss.  
The  LEI  study  also  provided  a  thorough  examination  of  the  potential  long-term  economic 
costs. It was found that a 1 percentage point increase in the capital ratio translates into a 
[median] loss of output of 0.09 percent. The additional loss of meeting liquidity requirements 
is  of  similar  magnitude.  A  more  recent  BIS  paper  by  Angelini  et  al  (2011)  also  arrived  at 
conclusions that are fully consistent with the LEI report. 
Overall, the main finding the LEI analysis is that there is considerable room to tighten capital 
and liquidity requirements to achieve significant net benefits in terms of output. This finding is 
even more pronounced if we take into account the fact that the LEI study is based on the 
assumption of constant return on equity (ROE) thus potentially underestimating the long-term 
benefits of higher capital and liquidity requirements. 
Similar conclusions are provided by Miles et al. (2011) who estimated the costs and benefits 
of higher bank capital. By using data on the UK banks they show that even proportionally 
large  increases  in  bank  capital  are  likely  to  result  in  only  a  small  long  run  impact  on  the 
borrowing  costs  faced  by  bank  customers.  They  estimate  the  average  cost  of  capital  for 
banks to increase by a relatively minor 10–40 basis points when the bank capital doubles. 
Importantly, this analysis takes into account the impact of heightened capital ratios on banks’ 
stability and therefore the lower return of equity demanded by investors. 
The  analysis  by  Kashyap  et  al  (2010)  also  finds  that long-run  steady-state  impact  on  loan 
rates is likely to be modest, falling in the range of 25–45 basis points for a ten percentage 
point  increase  in  the  capital  requirement.  Given  the  relatively  mild  impact  of  changes  in 
capital ratios on the borrowing costs that banks’ customers have to face, the implications for 
economic growth may also remain modest. 
Overall, the referred studies found that the potential negative impact of the new framework 
on long-term output was considerably lower than the benefits related to lower frequency of 
systemic  events.  This  conclusion  is  even  reinforced  when  considering  additional  benefits 
beyond  the  reduced  frequency  of  crises.  In  particular,  the  new  prudential  rules  will  also 
improve  the  level  playing  field  for  the  international  banking  sector  as  it  harmonises  the 
different  national  practices.  Improving  level  playing  field  is  expected  to  help  financial 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
institutions to save costs and to encourage cross-border activities. This will in turn result in a 
more efficient financial sector and will also bring benefits to non-financial corporations and 
households through higher competition and increasing availability of financial services.  
Let  me  now  say  a  few  words  about  the  theoretical  rationale  behind  these  results.  A  key 
conceptual  issue  that  warrants  further  investigation  is  the  impact  of  strengthened  capital 
ratios  on  the  expected  return  on  equity.  As  I  already  mentioned,  enhanced  stability  of 
financial institutions should, in principle, be reflected in lower risk premiums and thus lower 
funding costs for banks. The theoretical underpinning behind this idea is the Modliglani-Miller 
(M-M)  theorem  which  states  that  if  certain  assumptions  hold  (symmetric  information  and 
rational  behaviour  of  market  participants,  complete,  frictionless  markets  etc)  the  funding 
structure  of  a  firm  is  irrelevant  for  its  business  decisions.  In  an  M-M  world,  the  primary 
differences  between  the  costs  of  debt  and  equity  can  stem  only  from  their  different  tax 
treatment. Both the paper of Miles et al (2011) and Kashyap et al (2010) are based on the  
–  at  least  partial  –  validity  of  the  M-M  theorem.  The  relevant  point  is  that  more  capital 
reduces the volatility of return on equity and increases the safety of debt thereby reducing 
the required returns by the market on both equity and debt. This means that the equity risk 
for a bank should decline linearly with leverage. Indeed, Miles et al (2011) show empirically 
for the UK that for a leverage of 30 the bank equity risk premium is 6.5% and for a leverage 
of 15 is just 3.1%. They estimated also the relationship between leverage and equity beta by 
using different analytical approaches and found that changes in leverage have a significant 
impact on banks’ riskiness. The results of their analysis suggest that, depending on model 
specifications, the M-M effect is about 45–75% of what it would be if the M-M theorem held 
precisely. However, as the authors pointed out, their analysis was based on the assumption 
of no change in the required rate of return on debt, which means that with the more likely 
assumption of a reduction of that required return the M-M effects would be even higher. 
In  this  framework,  it’s  clear  that  a  substantial  increase  in  the  simple  book  capital  ratio  (or 
leverage  as  its  inverse)  should  lead  to  a  decrease  in  the  required  return  on  equity.  This 
seems  to  be  one  of  the  reasons  why  many  in  the  sector  oppose  the  new  capital 
requirements. Therefore, it has to be emphasised in this context that a simple ROE ratio, if 
not  adjusted  to  leverage  (and  risk),  can  provide  totally  misleading  signals  for  investors.  In 
fact, part of the high ROE ratios reported by banks before the crisis was due to high leverage 
and high risk. A recent ECB study on EU banking structures (ECB, 2010) highlighted that the 
inappropriate  assessment  of  the  risk  characteristics,  and  thus  the  un-sustainability,  of  the 
observed ROE ratios led to huge losses in the recent crisis. Averaging the ratios over time to 
include the crisis years shows that the effective ROE of banks and other financial institutions 
was  much  lower  than  previously  thought.  The  industry  has  to  accept  therefore  that  the 
regulatory  reform  leads  to  an  apparent  lower  ROE  which  nevertheless  is  shown  to  be 
misleading when proper consideration for leverage and risk is factored in. In this regard, the 
ECB  report  pointed  out  that  “desirable  features  for  banks’  performance  measures  should 
encompass  more  aspects  of  the  performance  than  just  profitability  embedded  in  a  pure 
market-oriented  indicator  such  as  ROE”  and  that  “risk-adjusted  types  of  returns  indicators 
may benefit from higher disclosure and better explanation to the markets, or at least to the 
supervisors”. 
Let  me  now  turn  from  long-term,  steady  state  impacts  towards  the  potential  short  term 
consequences  of  the  reform  proposals.  While  the  long-term  net  benefits  of  the  new 
regulatory  framework  vindicate  the  scope  and  magnitude  of  the  regulatory  measures,  it 
should  not mask  the  challenges  that  are  associated  with  the  implementation  of  the  reform 
package. Indeed, Basel III will have some potential transitional costs that arise as banks, 
on average, need to increase their capital base in order to fulfil the new requirements. While 
the basic assumptions on the M-M theorem may hold in the long term, financial markets are 
characterised  by  information  asymmetries  and  frictions  in  the  short  run,  which  can  be 
especially prevalent in distressed periods. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
related 
transitional  costs 
Banks  have  several  possibilities  to  adjust  their  capital  ratios.  For  instance,  they  can  raise 
capital, increase lending spreads, reduce dividends and/or downsize (risk-weighted) assets. 
In practice, it is likely that banks’ adjustment is going to be achieved through a combination 
of all these measures. There is empirical evidence, however, that in the short term and in 
crisis periods in particular, banks react to capital (and liquidity) constraints by de-leveraging 
and  by  tightening  of  credit  conditions  (Hempell  –  Kok,  2010)  that  can  have  a  measurable 
impact  on  loan  supply  and  thus  on  economic  activity  (De  Bondt  et  al.  2010).  Whatever 
methods  banks  choose  to  adjust  their  capital  ratios,  the  overall  effect  is  channelled  to  the 
macro-economy via various transmission channels.  
The  Macroeconomic  Assessment  Group  analysed 
to  a 
1 percentage  point  increase  in  the  capital  ratio  implemented  over  eight  years,  assuming  a 
constant  return  on  equity.  The  results  of  the  study  show  that  the  transitional  costs  are 
subdued.  The  cumulated  reduction  of  GDP  relative  to  the  baseline  would  amount  to 
0.15 percentage points. Similarly, the negative [un-weighted median] impact on bank lending 
to  the  real  economy  would  be  approximately  1.4%  in  cumulated  terms.  The  lending  rate 
spreads are estimated to increase by 15.5 basis points. The peak impact would occur after 
35  quarters  from  the  beginning  of  implementation  period  but  the  negative  impact  recedes 
when the time elapses.  
The interim report of the Macroeconomic Assessment Group assessed also the implications 
of  new  tighter  liquidity  requirements.  A  25%  increase  in  the  holding  of  liquid  assets  was 
estimated  to  yield  a  fall  in  lending  volumes  of  3.2%  and  a  [median]  increase  in  lending 
spreads of 14 basis points after four and a half years. This would induce a [median] decline 
in  GDP  of  0.08%  relative  to  the  baseline.  However,  as  the  new  liquidity  requirements  are 
subject to a long observation period that allows further fine-tuning of the requirements, it is 
far too early to draw definitive conclusions over the macroeconomic impact.  
As shown by the results of the Macroeconomic Assessment Group as well as by the referred 
paper of Kashyap et al (2010), the length of the implementation period matters crucially for 
determining the transition costs. Clearly, the longer the implementation period, the milder is 
the negative impact on the economy. If the new framework were implemented hastily, banks 
would need to undergo sizeable consolidation of their capital base and carry out a reshuffling 
of their balance sheet structure over a short period of time. This could have some adverse 
impacts  on  credit  intermediation  in  the  short  term.  Such  transitional  impact  motivated  the 
design of long phase-in arrangements.  
As the transition period is agreed to last from 2013 to 2018, the new measures will become 
fully  effective  only  on  1  January  2019.  These  eight  years  from  now  should  provide  the 
banking sector ample time to adjust to the new regulatory requirements by earnings retention 
and improved efficiency. Also, we can reasonably expect a gradual decline in investors’ profit 
expectations as they realise and price in the improved stability of individual institutions and 
the  financial  system  as  a  whole.  Taking  into  account  the  expected  improvements  in 
profitability  of  the  banking  sector,  it  is  likely  that  banks  will  be  able  to  cope  with  the  new 
requirements  without  major  distress.  Thus,  the  long  phase-in  period  of  the  new  Basel  III 
capital requirements prevent disruption in credit flows and bring enough clarity and scope for 
banks to smoothly absorb the necessary adjustments over time. This implies in turn that the 
transitional costs for real economic activity are likely to be relatively moderate and distributed 
over the long implementation period. 
The benefits of higher capital and its calibration 
III. 
As  I  have  highlighted,  better  capitalised  banks  may  represent  substantial  benefits  from  a 
social perspective in the long run while the transition costs depend largely on the amount of 
additional capital that banks have to accumulate and the available time for banks to adjust to 
the new framework. The question therefore is whether we can identify an “optimal” level of 
capital that could maximise social benefits. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
According  to  the  LEI  report,  the  long  term  benefits  for  the  society  are  highest  when  the 
capital  ratio  falls  in  the  range  of  13–15%.  Taking  into  account  the  potential  impact  of 
declining ROE expectations that may moderate the increase in funding costs of banks; the 
socially  optimal  capital  ratio  can  be  even  higher.  Indeed,  Miles  et  al  (2011)  arrive  at  a 
concept  of  optimal  capital  ratio  of  16  to  20%  for  the  UK.  Kashyap  et  al  (2010)  for  the  US 
mention appropriate capital around 15%.  
The total capital ratio demanded by the new Basel regulations until 2019 is 8%, to which we 
should  add  the  additional  2.5%  requirement  for  the  capital  conservation  buffer,  the 
countercyclical capital buffer (between 0% and 2.5% according to the economic cycle) and 
the  extra  loss  absorbency  capacity  for  the  Global  SIFI’s.  An  important  observation  is  that 
these levels refer to the new definitions of capital adopted by Basel III whereas the previous 
calculations  on  the  capital  ratio  are  based  on  the  current  definitions  of  capital  and  risk 
weighted assets. The Quantitative Impact Study carried out by the BCBS highlights in this 
regard that the combined effect of the changes in the new concepts of the regulatory capital 
and the risk weighted assets is equivalent, on average, to a 5.6 percentage points decline in 
capital ratios under present definitions before Basel III. In other words, in order for the banks 
to achieve the new Basel capital ratios, they should have on average a 5.6% extra capital 
under present definitions that will “diminish” when the narrower definition of eligible capital 
(resulting  in  a  decline  in  the  numerator  of  the  capital  ratio)  and  the  extension  of  the  risk 
coverage (leading to an increase in the denominator of the capital ratio) will come into force. 
Taking all these effects also into account, we can see that the new calibration of the Basel 
framework  falls  within  the  range  of  socially  optimal  capital  ratio  indicated  by  the  studies  I 
mentioned. 
Two important potential consequences of the new capital requirements must be highlighted 
as  they  could  create  risks  that,  if  materialised,  could  have  negative  consequences  for  the 
economy. First, there is the risk that higher capital requirements could lead to a search for 
yield and consequent higher risk taking by financial institutions if they do not accept the idea 
that  a  lower  return  that  is  less  volatile  is  preferable  to  apparent  higher  short  term  returns 
dependent on excessive leverage and risk. In this respect, good supervision under the rules 
of Basel III will be essential to avoid a repetition of significant crisis episodes.  
Second, another real risk of tighter capital regulation is that the new rules may lead to an 
increase of the shadow banking system. It is therefore necessary to be prepared to redefine 
the perimeter of regulation, manage the boundary problem and to regulate the flows between 
the regulated and non-regulated parts of the system.  
Other components of the regulatory reform 
IV. 
Notwithstanding  the  substantial  achievement  in  many  areas,  there  remain  some  important 
aspects  of  regulation  where  further  steps  need  to  be  taken  by  authorities  to  address  the 
identified  shortcomings.  In  this  context,  let  me  highlight  that  a  wide  range  of  regulatory 
initiatives  are  currently  being  discussed  under  the  aegis  of  the  FSB  and  the  BCBS  where 
concrete results are expected already in the near term. 
First,  work  is  ongoing  with  relation  to  the  prudential  treatment  of  systemically  important 
institutions (SIFI’s) which are expected to have a loss absorbing capacity beyond the Basel 
standards given the implicit subsidy they get and the enormous costs their potential failure 
may  represent  for  society.  At  the  current  juncture,  it  is  of  primary  importance  that  a 
consensus  is  achieved  among  regulators  on  the  definition  of  global  systemically  important 
financial  institutions  (SIFI’s)  as  well  as  on  the  determination  of  a  reasonable  range  of 
additional  loss  absorbency.  Any  additional  requirements  should  be  proportional  to  the 
institutions’ systemic importance the measurement of which represents, admittedly, a major 
challenge for regulators. In order to avoid unwarranted deviations from an international level 
playing field in this area, consistency across jurisdictions has to be ensured, supported also 
by effective peer reviews of implementation. The other major issue in dealing with SIFI´s is to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
this  regard, 
for  authorities  across  countries.  In 
improve substantially the resolution regime of such institutions in order to reduce the implicit 
subsidy they get from society thus reducing moral hazard. Nevertheless, it has to be realized 
that  for  cross-border  institutions  this  goal  will  be  very  difficult  to  achieve  in  view  of  the 
heterogeneity of legal regimes. A high degree of harmonization of company law, especially 
bankruptcy  law,  would  have  to  be  attained.  Recognizing  also  that  all  countries  seem  to 
refuse the idea of breaking-up big institutions, it is therefore important that regulatory efforts 
and  more  intense  supervision  should  aim  at  making  “too  big  to  fail”  into  “too  good  to  fail” 
institutions. 
Second, the consistent implementation of the new counter-cyclical buffering mechanism also 
represents  a  major  challenge 
the 
implementation  guidelines  developed  by  the  BCBS  to  reduce  national  discretion  and  to 
maintain level playing field have to be respected. In line with the Eurosystem’s stance on this 
issue, I believe that the macroprudential authorities, like the ESRB or the FSOC, should play 
a  key  role  in  the  operation  of  the  mechanism  as  well  as  in  international  cooperation  and 
information exchange on buffer settings and impact assessments. 
Third, further progress has to be achieved on OTC derivatives markets reform, including the 
move  of  standardized  products  to  organized  exchanges.  While  some  jurisdictions  have 
already endorsed legislation in this filed (e.g. US, Japan) or are in a process of finalising a 
regulation  (EU),  others  are  lagging  behind  substantially.  This  may  again  distort  the  level 
playing field with the potential for regulatory arbitrage. 
Fourth, as I mentioned before, the incentives created by tighter capital and liquidity regulation 
for  banks  raises  the  risk  that  certain  activities  that  have  traditionally  been  carried  out  by 
banks  will,  in  the  future,  be  transferred  into  the  “shadow banking”  sector  that is out  of  the 
scope of regulatory oversight. Therefore, it is important for authorities to explore and better 
understand  the  interconnections  between  regulated  and  not  regulated  entities  that  are 
involved 
the  complex  chain  of 
intermediation  activity  as  well  as  the  channels  for  possible  contagion  and  defining  the 
appropriate  policy  response  remains  another  main  challenge  for  authorities  in  the  years 
ahead, also with a view to the fundamental data gaps in this field. The authorities seem to be 
taking seriously all these concerns as it is shown in the recent publication by the FSB of the 
contents of the work being done regarding the definition of what will be considered as entities 
and activities of the “shadow system”, as well as the enumeration of the policy measures to 
be used to deal with the potential problems that may emerge.  
Finally,  the  role  of  CRAs  in  financial  intermediation  is  an  issue  that  would  require  further 
analysis and an appropriate policy response. Notably, the intensely pro-cyclical behaviour of 
CRAs  and  thus  their  destabilizing  role  in  the  recent  crisis  have  by  now  been  widely 
acknowledged. 
A paper by Flandreau et al (2010) of the BIS already finds that in the period 1920s and 30s, 
ratings from the US rating agencies performed pro-cyclically. Moreover, they did not find that 
superior  forecasting  capacities  explained  the  agencies’  growing  importance.  We  have  not 
progressed  much.  See  the  way  they  did  not  consider  any  effect  in  reducing  credit  risk  in 
Europe as a result of the important decisions on the EFSF and ESM. Ratings are supposed 
to  reflect  all  available  information  in  a  forward-looking  manner,  and  this  should  include  a 
proper assessment of such decisions. 
In  this  regard,  the  use  of  credit  ratings  in  regulations  and  supervisory  policies  remains  a 
topical issue that has to be addressed by authorities in line with the principles published by 
the  FSB  in  October  2010  in  this  field.  Although  the  FSB  requested  standard  setters  and 
regulators to translate the principles into specific policy actions, work in this field is still at an 
early stage in several jurisdictions. 
In  particular,  analysing 
intermediation. 
financial 
in 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Conclusions 
V. 
Let  me  conclude  by  saying  that  financial  regulation  is  a  very  complex  task  where  policy 
makers have to face numerous challenges. In my speech today I could only highlight some of 
the core initiatives and provide you with a short assessment of the potential impacts of the 
new  Basel  framework  that  I  consider  as  one  of  the  most  important  elements  of  the 
comprehensive policy response to the crisis. 
I  have  highlighted  today  that  there  are  well-founded  arguments  to  tighten  capital 
requirements  given  that  this  is  expected  to  result  in  significant  net  social  benefits  in  the 
medium  to  long  term.  This  argument  was  underpinned  also  by  a  wide  range  of  empirical 
studies  which  emphasized  the  difference  between  privately  and  socially  optimal  levels  of 
capital and demonstrated that increased levels of capital are not expected to have a dramatic 
impact on lending and on economic growth as argued by some in the industry. 
Furthermore, I have emphasised the importance of the proper assessment of the enhanced 
resilience of individual institutions and the financial system as a whole that should, over time, 
be reflected in lower levels of expected return on equity as well. 
Increasing  capital  and  liquidity  requirements  will  result  in  economic  benefits  that  widely 
exceed  the  potential  costs.  A  more  stable  financial  sector  is  good  for  long  term  return  on 
capital and also positive for economic growth and social welfare.  
That  said,  it  should  not  be  forgotten  that  financial  markets  are  often  characterised  by 
asymmetric  information  and  other  types  of  frictions  in  the  short  run,  which  may  potentially 
lead  to  disturbances  in  financial  intermediation,  especially  in  stress  periods.  Therefore  a 
careful design of the measures and a continuous assessment of the impact mechanism are 
of  utmost  importance  for  policy  makers.  This  is  reflected  also  in  the  extended  transition 
period  for  the  Basel  capital  requirements  as  well  as  in  the  agreed  observation  period  for 
liquidity  measures  and  the  leverage  ratio.  The  same  principles  should  be  followed  in  the 
design  of  the  additional  regulatory  measures  that  are  currently  being  discussed  at  the 
international level. 
Finally, I would like to underline that the new regulatory framework should not be taken as a 
static set of measures: it is continuously changing and evolving. Regulators and supervisors 
should reflect on the new types of activities that banks engage in the future as well as on the 
new  types  of  risks  associated  with  these  activities.  I  firmly  believe  that,  if  implemented 
effectively  across  jurisdictions,  the  new  Basel  rules  and  the  other  regulatory  initiatives  will 
appropriately  address  the  shortcomings  identified  in  the  recent  crisis.  Testing  and  the 
revision  of  certain  measures,  if  deemed  necessary,  will  however  remain  one  of  the  main 
challenges of the future.5 
References 
Admati, A.R., DeMarzo, P.M., Hellwig, M.F., Pfleiderer, P. (2011): “Fallacies, irrelevant facts, 
and myths in the discussion of capital regulation: Why bank equity is not expensive”, mimeo. 
Aghion P. and Howitt P. (2009), “The Economics of Growth”, MIT press.  
Aghion, P., Howitt, P., and D. Mayer-Foulkes, (2005), “The Effect of Financial Development 
on Convergence: Theory and Evidence”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120, 173–222. 
                                                 
5  
I would like to acknowledge the contribution of Balázs Zsámboki and Mervi Toivanen to the preparation of this 
speech, as well as the inputs from Roger Stiegert, Feline von Heimburg, Laurent Maurin, Daniel Santabarbara 
and Alexander Popov. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
Angelini P., Clerc L., Cúrdia V., Gambacorta L., Gerali A., Locarno A., Motto R., Roeger W., 
Van  den  Heuvel  S.  and  Vlček  J.  (2011):  BASEL  III:  Long-term  impact  on  economic 
performance and fluctuations BIS Working Papers No 338 
Beck, T., Levine, R., and N. Loayza, (2000): “Financial intermediation and growth: Causality 
and causes”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 46, 31–77. 
De Bondt, G., Maddaloni, A., Peydró, J.L., and Scopel, S. (2010): “The bank lending survey 
matters:  Empirical  evidence  for  credit  and  output  growth”,  ECB  Working  Paper  Series 
No. 1160. 
Demirguc-Kunt,  A.,  and  R.  Levine  (2001),  “Financial  structure  and  economic  growth”,  MIT 
Press. 
Dorrucci,  E.,  Meyer-Cirkel,  A.,  and  D.  Santabárbara,  (2009):  “Domestic  Financial 
Development  in  Emerging  Economies:  Evidence  and  Implications”  Occasional  Paper 
Series 102, European Central Bank. 
European  Central  Bank  (2010):  Beyond  ROE  –  How  to  measure  bank  performance. 
Appendix to the report on EU banking structures 
Flandreau  M.,  Gaillard  N.,  Packer  F.:  (2010)  “To  err  is  human:  rating  agencies  and  the 
interwar foreign government debt crisis”, BIS Working Paper No. 335 
Goldsmith,  R.,  (1969),  Financial  Structure  and  Development  (New  Haven,  Connecticut:  Yale 
University Press). 
Haldane, A., (2010), “The Contribution of the Financial Sector: Miracle or Mirage?”, Speech 
at the Future of Finance Conference, London, 14 July 2010. 
Hempell H., Kok Sørensen, C. (2010): “The impact of supply constraints on bank lending in 
the euro area – crisis induced crunching?”, ECB Working Paper Series No. 1262 
Institute of International Finance (2008): “Final Report of the IIF Committee on Market Best 
Practices:  Principles  of  Conduct  and  Best  Practice  Recommendations.  Financial  Services 
Industry Response to the Market Turmoil of 2007-2008” 
Institute  of  International  Finance  (2010):  “Net  Cumulative  Economic  Impact  of  Banking 
Sector Regulation: Some new Perspectives”, October 11, 2010 
Kaminsky,  G.,  and  C.  Reinhart,  (1999)  “The  Twin  Crises:  The  Causes  of  Banking  and 
Balance-of-Payments Problems,” American Economic Review, 89, 473–500. 
Kashyap, A.K., Stein J.C. and Hanson, S. (2010): “An analysis of the impact of “substantially 
hightened” capital requirements on large financial institutions”, mimeo 
King R., and R. Levine, (1993), “Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might Be Right”, Quarterly 
Journal of Economics, 153, 717–738. 
Levchenko, A., Rancière, R., and M. Thoenig, (2009): “Growth and risk at the industry level: 
The real effects of financial liberalization,” Journal of Development Economics, 89, 210–222. 
Levine, R., (2005), “Finance and Growth: Theory, Evidence, and Mechanisms”, in P. Aghion 
and S. Durlauf, (eds), The Handbook of Economic Growth (Amsterdam: North Holland). 
Levine,  Ross  &  Loayza,  Norman  &  Beck,  Thorsten  (2000):  “Financial  intermediation  and 
growth: Causality and causes” Journal of Monetary Economics, 46, 31–77. 
Manganelli, S. – Popov, A. (2010): “Finance and diversification”, ECB Working Paper Series 
No. 1259 
Miles,  D.,  Yang,  J.,  Marcheggiano,  G.  (2011):  “Optimal  bank  capital”,  Bank  of  England, 
External MPC Unit, Discussion Paper No. 32 
Popov, A. (2011), “Financial liberalization, growth, and risk”, ECB mimeo.  
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Rajan,  R.G.,  and  L.  Zingales,  (1998),  “Financial  Dependence  and  Growth”,  American 
Economic Review, 88, 559–586. 
Rajan,  R.G.,  and  L.  Zingales  (2003):  “The  great  reversals:  the  politics  of  financial 
development in the twentieth century”, Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 69, pp. 5–50. 
Schumpeter,  J.  A.  (1934),  “The  Theory  of  Economic  Development:  An  Inquiry  into  Profits, 
Capital, Credit, Interest and the Business Cycle”, Harvard University Press. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
