Duvvuri Subbarao: Corporate governance of banks in India in pursuit of 
productivity excellence 
Inaugural address by Dr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
FICCI-IBA  (Federation  of  Indian  Chambers  of  Commerce  &  Industry  –  Indian  Banks’ 
Association) Conference on “Global Banking: Paradigm Shift”, Mumbai, 23 August 2011. 
 For the third year in a row, it is my privilege to be addressing this joint conference of FICCI 
and IBA. I know both corporates and banks attach a lot of value to this conference, and so 
does the Reserve Bank. A joint forum of FICCI and IBA is an important platform for us in the 
Reserve Bank to share our views on topics of current relevance with two important segments 
of the economy – corporates and banks – which have a vital role in, and responsibility for, 
driving growth and development. 
Indian banking – productivity excellence 
The  theme  of  this  conference  –  Indian  Banking  –  Productivity  Excellence  –  has  perennial 
relevance, but is much more relevant now, as going forward incremental growth will depend 
increasingly on productivity growth. India witnessed a remarkable growth acceleration in the 
years before the crisis; many of the factors that aided this have been acknowledged. But, as I 
have said before, one of the unacknowledged drivers of that growth performance has been 
the improvement in the quantum and quality of financial intermediation led by the commercial 
banking sector. We need to build on that achievement, and productivity improvement is by 
far the most vital instrument for doing so. 
Over the next two days, you will be contemplating the challenges of productivity improvement 
in  banking.  How  can  I  add  value  to  that?  I  could  cover  a  breadth  of  issues  that  warrant 
attention, but that is clearly not the Reserve Bank’s comparative advantage. Instead, I have 
decided to focus on a single topic: Corporate Governance of Banks in India. This choice has 
been motivated by more than one factor. This conference is jointly organized by FICCI which 
pursues the interests of corporates, and IBA which looks after the interests of banks. I have 
simply inserted the Reserve Bank’s area of interest, “governance”, between corporates and 
banks  so  that  all  our  collective  interests  are  covered.  And  importantly,  I  believe  more 
effective  and  enlightened  corporate  governance  of  Indian  banks  can  be  a  vital  avenue  for 
improving banking productivity.  
Why is corporate governance important? 
Before going into corporate governance of banks in particular, let us recall, just for the sake 
of  context,  why  corporate  governance  is  important  in  general.  At  its  most  basic  level, 
corporate  governance  sets  up  the  “rules  of  the  game”  to  deal  with  issues  arising  from 
separation  of  ownership  and  management  so  that  the  interests  of  all  stakeholders  are 
protected.  Empirical  evidence  shows  that  businesses  with  superior  governance  practices 
generate bigger profits, higher returns on equity and larger dividend yields. Importantly, good 
corporate  governance  also  shows  up  in  such  soft  areas  as  employee  motivation,  work 
culture, corporate value system and corporate image. Conversely, the failure of high profile 
companies such as BCCI, Enron, WorldCom and Parmalat was a clear lesson of the damage 
bad corporate governance can inflict. 
Here  at  home  we  had  a  corporate  scandal  of  unprecedented  dimensions  in  Satyam 
Computers where the company’s CEO admitted to having falsified accounts to the tune of 
over 7000 crore, and that too spread over several years. Even as the judicial process relating 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
to this alleged fraud is still under way, the big question is in what ways was this a failure of 
corporate  governance  and  how  are  we  fixing  those  lacunae?  We  had  instances  of  poor 
governance  in  the  banking  sector  as  well  –  erosion  of  standards  in  forex  derivative 
transactions and fraud in wealth management schemes – reminding us that we need to work 
hard to get to best practice in every area of corporate governance.  
How is corporate governance of banks different? 
Banks are different from other corporates in important respects, and that makes corporate 
governance of banks not only different but also more critical. Banks lubricate the wheels of 
the  real  economy,  are  the  conduits  of  monetary  policy  transmission  and  constitute  the 
economy’s payment and settlement system. By the very nature of their business, banks are 
highly leveraged. They accept large amounts of uncollateralized public funds as deposits in a 
fiduciary capacity and further leverage those funds through credit creation. The presence of a 
large and dispersed base of depositors in the stakeholders group sets banks apart from other 
corporates.  
Banks  are  interconnected  in  diverse,  complex  and  oftentimes  opaque  ways  underscoring 
their  “contagion”  potential.  If  a  corporate  fails,  the  fallout  can  be  restricted  to  the 
stakeholders.  If  a  bank  fails,  the  impact  can  spread  rapidly  through  to  other  banks  with 
potentially serious consequences for the entire financial system and the macroeconomy.  
All economic agents tend to behave in a procyclical manner, and banks are no exception, as 
aptly summed up by Chuck Prince, the former CEO of Citigroup, who said that one had to 
keep  dancing  as  long  as  the  music  was  on!  Where  banks  differ  is  that  their  procyclical 
behaviour hurts not just the institution but the larger economy. Among the many lessons of 
the crisis is the one that financial markets are not self-correcting. This is in part because the 
signals of financial instability are difficult to detect in real time. On top of that, banks escape 
some  of  the  disciplinary  pressures  of  the  market  as  their  balance  sheets  are  typically 
opaque.  
Given the centrality of banks to modern financial systems and the macroeconomy, the larger 
ones  become  systemically  important.  That  raises  a  moral  hazard  issue  since  systemically 
important banks will then indulge in excessive risk in the full knowledge that all the gains will 
be theirs; and should the risks blow up, the government or the central bank will bail them out 
and  thereby  the  losses  can  be  socialized.  Having  collectively  experienced  the  biggest 
financial crisis of our generation over the last three years, we all know that these risks and 
vulnerabilities  of  the  financial  system  are  not  just  text  book  concepts;  they  are  all  highly 
probable real world eventualities.  
If banks are “special” in so many ways that I have indicated above, it follows that corporate 
governance  of  banks  has  to  be  special  too,  reflecting  these  special  features.  In  particular, 
boards  and  senior  managements  of  banks  have  to  be  sensitive  to  the  interests  of  the 
depositors, be aware of the potentially destructive consequences of excessive risk taking, be 
alert  to  warning  signals  and  be  wise  enough  to  contain  irrational  exuberance.  Post-crisis, 
there is a debate on the extent to which failure of corporate governance has been responsible 
for  the  crisis.  Given  such  overwhelming  evidence  of  corporate  governance  failure,  this  is  a 
futile debate. The short point is this. If the directors on the boards of banks didn’t know what 
was going on, they should ask themselves if they were fit enough to be directors. If they did 
know and didn’t stop it, they were complicit in the recklessness and fraud. 
In  fact,  the  post-crisis  verdict  on  corporate  governance  of  banks  is  quite  damning.  The 
Institute of International Finance, an association of major international banks, has concluded 
after  an  examination  of  board  performance  of  banks  in  2008  that,  “events  have  raised 
questions about the ability of certain boards to properly oversee senior managements and to 
understand  and  monitor  the  business  itself”.  As  per  an  OECD  report,  nearly  all  of  the 
11 major  banks  reviewed  by  the  Senior  Supervisors  Group  (an  informal  group  of  senior 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
supervisors  under  the  auspice  of  the  Financial  Stability  Board  –  FSB)  in  2008  failed  to 
anticipate  fully  the  severity  and  nature  of  the  market  stress.  On  the  positive  side,  there  is 
some early evidence that banks with stronger corporate governance mechanisms moderated 
the  adverse  impact  of  the  crisis  on  them,  had  higher  profitability  in  2008  and  provided 
substantially higher stock returns in the immediate aftermath of the market turmoil.  
A  relevant  question  in  this  context  is  whether  there  are  any  additional  dimensions  to 
corporate governance of banks in emerging economies. Indeed there are, and I will cite just 
two  important  ones.  First,  in  emerging  economies,  banks  are  more  than  mere  agents  of 
financial  intermediation;  they  carry  the  additional  responsibility  of  leading  financial  sector 
development  and  of  driving  the  government’s  social  agenda.  Second,  in  emerging 
economies, the institutional structures that define the boundaries between the regulators and 
the regulated and across regulators are still evolving. Managing the tensions that arise out of 
these  factors  makes  corporate  governance  of  banks  in  emerging  economies  even  more 
challenging.  
Regulation and corporate governance of banks 
Regulation  has  historically  had  a  significant  role  in  the  evolution  of  corporate  governance 
principles in the banking industry. However, to believe on this basis that good regulation can 
offset  bad  corporate  governance  will  be  patently  wrong.  Regulation  can  complement 
corporate governance, but cannot substitute for it. 
The  crisis  has  triggered  a  swathe  of  financial  reforms  to  mitigate  some  of  the  known  risks 
revealed by it. Understandably, these reforms also encompass corporate governance. Several 
countries have effected major structural changes to improve the functioning of their financial 
institutions,  to  ensure  the  robustness  of  their  risk  management  systems  and  to  make  their 
operations  more  transparent.  By  far  the  most  notable  has  been  the  Dodd-Frank  Act  in  the 
United States which, among other things, aims to induce greater transparency with regard to 
the board and the top management positions and their compensation. 
While regulation has a role to play in ensuring robust corporate standards in banks, the point 
to recognize is that effective regulation is a necessary, but not a sufficient condition for good 
corporate  governance.  Regulation  can  establish  principles  and  lay  down  rules  but  the 
motivation  to  implement  these  principles  and  rules  in  their  true  spirit  is  a  matter  of 
organizational culture. If banks see adherence to regulation as a mere compliance function, 
and  not  as  a  culture  building  objective,  the  ability  of  regulation  to  further  corporate 
governance  can  be  quite  restrictive.  Let  us  take  the  example  of  bank  audits.  The 
effectiveness of external auditors is a critical component of a sound corporate governance 
framework. As long as audit is being done, the regulatory requirement is complied with. But 
is the audit effective? Has the audit unearthed all the frauds, excesses and mistakes? Has 
the audit led to sustainable and systemic corrective action? If the answer is “no”, then the 
corporate governance of banks is faulty or ineffective. 
Evolution of corporate governance of banks in India 
Let me now briefly sketch the evolution of corporate governance of banks in India. In the pre-
reform  era,  there  were  very  few  regulatory  guidelines  covering  corporate  governance  of 
banks. This was reflective of the dominance of public sector banks and relatively few private 
banks.  That  scenario  changed  after  the  reforms  in  1991  when  public  sector  banks  saw  a 
dilution of government shareholding and a larger number of private sector banks came on 
the  scene.  How  did  these  changes  shape  the  post-reform  standards  of  corporate 
governance?  
First, the competition brought in by the entry of new private sector banks and their growing 
market  share  forced  banks  across  board  to  pay  greater  attention  to  customer  service.  As 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
customers were now able to vote with their feet, the quality of customer service became an 
important variable in protecting, and then increasing, market share.  
Second, post-reform, banking regulation shifted from being prescriptive to being prudential. 
This  implied  a  shift  in  balance  away  from  regulation  and  towards  corporate  governance. 
Banks  now  had  greater  freedom  and  flexibility  to  draw  up  their  own  business  plans  and 
implementation strategies consistent with their comparative advantage. The boards of banks 
had  to  assume  the  primary  responsibility  for  overseeing  this.  This  required  directors  to  be 
more  knowledgeable  and  aware  and  also  exercise  informed  judgement  on  the  various 
strategy and policy choices.  
Third, two reform measures pertaining to public sector banks – entry of institutional and retail 
shareholders  and  listing  on  stock  exchanges  –  brought  about  marked  changes  in  their 
corporate  governance  standards.  Directors  representing  private  shareholders  brought  new 
perspectives to board deliberations, and the interests of private shareholders began to have 
an impact on strategic decisions. On top of this, the listing requirements of SEBI enhanced 
the standards of disclosure and transparency.  
Fourth, to enable them to face the growing competition, public sector banks were accorded 
larger autonomy. They could now decide on virtually the entire gamut of human resources 
issues, and subject to prevailing regulation, were free to undertake acquisition of businesses, 
close or merge unviable branches, open overseas offices, set up subsidiaries, take up new 
lines  of  business  or  exit  existing  ones,  all  without  any  need  for  prior  approval  from  the 
Government. All this meant that greater autonomy to the boards of public sector banks came 
with bigger responsibility. 
Lastly,  a  series  of  structural  reforms  raised  the  profile  and  importance  of  corporate 
governance  in  banks.  The  “structural”  reform  measures  included  mandating  a  higher 
proportion  of  independent  directors  on  the  boards;  inducting  board  members  with  diverse 
sets  of  skills  and  expertise;  and  setting  up  of  board  committees  for  key  functions  like  risk 
management,  compensation,  investor  grievances  redressal  and  nomination  of  directors. 
Structural  reforms  were  furthered  by  the  implementation  of  the  the  Ganguly  Committee 
recommendations relating to the role and responsibilities of the boards of directors, training 
facilities for directors, and most importantly, application of “fit and proper” norms for directors.  
Some important issues relating to corporate governance of banks in India 
Let me move on to discussing a few issues in corporate governance of banks which should 
engage our collective attention. I will do so under five headings. 
Bank ownership 
The first issue concerns ownership. There is typically a divergence between the interests of 
shareholders  and  of  depositors.  Shareholders  want  profits  to  be  maximized  by  taking  on 
greater  risk;  depositors  have  an  overriding  preference  for  the  safety  of  their  deposits  and 
hence for lower risk. At the same time, depositors have little say in the governance of banks 
whereas the shareholders’ say is very pronounced. Within the shareholder group, the extent 
of  control  exercised  by  promoter  shareholders  too  is  an  important  determinant  of  the 
effectiveness  of  corporate  governance.  As  some  recent  instances  demonstrated,  such 
excessive influence of promoters can turn the board into a mouthpiece of the promoter to the 
detriment of the interests of all other stakeholders.  
Another way to look at the issue of ownership is in terms of public vs. private ownership. If 
banks are publicly owned, issues of conflict of interest between shareholders and depositors 
get  mitigated.  Public  ownership  of  banks  would  also  inspire  confidence  in  the  financial 
system.  On  the  other  hand,  an  important  question  is  whether  effective  and  autonomous 
corporate  governance  is  compatible  with  public  ownership  of  banks.  The  question  arises 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
because  publicly  owned  banks  render  accountability  to  the  government  and  to  the 
democratic  institutions.  The  government  judges  them  on  criteria  quite  different  from  those 
used  by  the  market.  How  can  we  resolve  this  dilemma?  Is  it  possible  to  stay  with  public 
ownership but still give near total autonomy to the boards? Is it, in particular, possible to cede 
the  power  to  appoint  the  CEO  to  the  board,  but  make  the  board  accountable  to  the 
government and the shareholders for the performance of the bank?  
Diversified  ownership  and  “fit  and  proper”  status  of  shareholders  are  other  important 
determinants  of  corporate  governance.  The  Reserve  Bank’s  guidelines  on  ownership  and 
governance in private sector banks, issued in February 2005, were aimed at ensuring that 
ownership and control of banks are well diversified. The Reserve Bank has been consistently 
following  up  with  banks  having  concentrated  ownership  to  ensure  adherence  to  the 
prescribed limits in a time bound manner. Similarly, to ensure “fit and proper” status of large 
shareholders,  acknowledgement  from  Reserve  Bank  is  mandatory  for  any  acquisition  of 
shares in private sector banks resulting in a shareholding of 5 per cent or more of the total 
paid up capital of the bank. Having said that, it must be acknowledged that evaluating “fit and 
proper”  is  far  from  being  a  science;  it  involves  a  considerable  amount  of  judgement. 
Moreover, “fit and proper” is a one time exercise, not repeated unless new information comes 
in. These limitations need to be recognized. 
Another  issue  in  ownership  of  banks,  one  that  we  highlighted  in  our  Discussion  Paper  on 
new  bank  licences,  is  whether  corporates  should  be  made  eligible  to  promote  banks. 
International  experience  in  this  regard  is  varied.  There  are  persuasive  arguments  both  for 
and against the proposal. The strongest point in favour is that corporates can bring in the 
capital  as  also  business  experience  and  managerial  competence.  By  far  the  biggest 
apprehension is about self-dealing – that corporates will use the bank as a private pool of 
readily available funds.  
There are, of course, both statutory and regulatory checks against self-dealing. For example, 
the Banking Regulation Act expressly prohibits banks from lending to directors on the board 
and to entities in which they are interested. Regulations also prohibit lending to relatives of 
directors without the prior approval or knowledge of the board. Directors, who are directly or 
indirectly interested in any loan proposal, are required to disclose such interest and to refrain 
from participating in the discussion on the proposal.  
As  much  as  these  prescriptions  are  extensive,  there  are  still  gaps.  For  instance,  if  a 
corporate has an interest in a bank as a promoter or a shareholder, but has no position on 
the board, then there is no prohibition on the bank lending to the corporate. This opens up 
opportunities for self-dealing. Another apprehension that was raised during the public debate 
on  the  Discussion  Paper  was  that  it  is  not  easy  for  supervisors  to  prevent  or  detect  self-
dealing because banks can hide related party lending behind complex company structures or 
through lending to suppliers of the promoters and their group companies. As we contemplate 
allowing corporates to promote banks, there is need for changes in statutes and regulations 
to address these concerns. 
Accountability, transparency and ethics 
The  separation  of  ownership  and  management  can  create  conflict  of  interest  if  there  is  a 
breach of trust by managers on account of intention, omission, negligence or incompetence. 
This  can  be  taken  care  of  by  making  boards  more  accountable  to  all  stakeholders  and 
making their functioning transparent. Over the years, we have tried to align our transparency 
and disclosure standards to global best practices. But we need to ask questions. Is the voice 
of independent directors always independent? Do bank CEOs countenance criticism from the 
board?  Are  boards  succumbing  to  “group  think”  and  abandoning  their  responsibility  for 
independent judgement? It is only through such soul searching that corporate governance of 
banks can improve its effectiveness. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
The failure on the scale we saw during the recent global financial crisis is also reflective of 
poor ethical standards in banks. Almost all the complex gamut of causes of the crisis relate 
to  how  the  financial  system  operated.  The  behaviour  of  actors  across  the  chain  of  the 
financial  sector  was  swayed  by  the  opportunity  for  making  quick  profit  rather  than  by  fair, 
ethical and moral standards. Neither were the sub-prime borrowers adequately warned that 
there was a good chance of fall in asset prices nor did investment advisers tell their clients of 
the  risk  they  were  taking  in  buying  MBAs  and  CDOs.  Such  behaviour  was  not  only  not 
checked, but was even encouraged.  
Here at home, though our banking sector largely escaped the crisis, we should introspect on 
our own shortcomings and loose practices. To what extent have banks deviated from proper 
conduct in the sale of forex derivatives? Is there too much focus on the quarterly earnings 
cycle  to  the  detriment  of  longer  term  performance?  Are  aggressive  strategies  leading  to 
excessive  risk  taking?  Issues  such  as  these,  I  believe,  underscore  the  special  ethical 
dimension of the financial sector over and above that of other businesses. Boards of banks 
and financial institutions have to be conscious of their obligation not to hold the larger public 
interest hostage to their private profit motive.  
in 
fuelled 
the  advanced  countries 
Compensation 
Compensation in the banking sector has been another high profile issue post-crisis. It is now 
widely acknowledged that the flawed incentives framework underlying banks’ compensation 
structures 
the  crisis.  The  performance-based 
compensation  of  bank  executives  is  typically  justified  on  the  ground  that  banks  need  to 
acquire  and  retain  talent.  We  now  know,  with  the  benefit  of  hindsight,  that  this  argument 
overlooked the perverse incentives it would engender. Bank executives were motivated by 
short-term  profits  even  if  it compromised  long term  interests.  The  Financial  Stability  Board 
(FSB) has since evolved a set of principles to govern compensation practices, and the Basel 
Committee  has  developed  a  methodology  for  assessing  compliance  with  these  principles. 
The proposed framework involves increasing the proportion of variable pay, aligning it with 
long-term value creation and instituting deferral and claw-back clauses to offset future losses 
caused by the executive.  
In  contrast  to  most  other  jurisdictions,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  the  power,  in  terms  of  the 
Banking Regulation Act, to regulate board compensation, including the pay and perquisites 
of  the  CEO  of  private  sector  banks.  In  evaluating  compensation  proposals  for  wholetime 
directors and CEOs of private sector banks, the Reserve Bank is guided by relevant factors 
such as the performance of the bank, compensation structures in the peer group, industry 
practice  and  regulatory  concerns,  if  any.  As  regards  bonus,  in  terms  of  the  Reserve  Bank 
guidelines  issued  in  August  2003,  bonus  in  respect  of  wholetime  directors  and  CEOs  has 
been capped at 25 per cent of their salary or at the level of bonus paid to other employees of 
the bank.  
Post  crisis,  reflecting  the  spirit  of  the  global  initiative  on  compensation  structures,  we 
determined that there is a need for reform in India too. Accordingly, in July 2010, the Reserve 
Bank  issued  draft  guidelines  on  “Compensation  of  Whole  Time  Directors/Chief  Executive 
Officers/Risk  Takers  and  Control  Staff”,  inviting  public  comments.  The  draft  guidelines 
proposed that banks should have a compensation policy, align compensation structures with 
prudent  risk  taking  and  institute  a  claw  back  mechanism.  These  guidelines  were  originally 
intended to be implemented with effect from 2011–12 but that schedule was deferred as the 
Basel Committee was in the process of finalising methodologies for alignment between risk, 
performance and remuneration. Meanwhile, the Reserve Bank carried out impact studies on 
select banks. Taking into account the feedback received on the draft guidelines, the result of 
the impact studies and the final prescriptions issued in the matter by the Basel Committee in 
May  2011,  the  Reserve  Bank  is  in  the  process  of  finalizing  the  guidelines  relating  to 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
compensation.  The  guidelines  are  scheduled  to  be  implemented  from  the  financial  year 
2012–13, and banks have already been advised to start preparatory work in this regard. 
Another relevant aspect is the compensation of non-executive directors on the board. There 
is  a  view,  also  articulated  in  the  Government  of  India’s  Corporate  Governance  Voluntary 
Guidelines  2009,  that  companies  should  have  the  option  of  giving  a  fixed  contractual 
remuneration,  not  linked  to  profits,  to  non-executive  directors.  In  the  banking  sector,  non-
executive  directors  are  typically  compensated  through  sitting  fees,  except  non-executive 
chairmen who are paid a regular remuneration.  
The question is whether non-executive directors of banks should also be paid a regular or a 
fixed contractual remuneration. This is probably a good concept, but difficult to implement in 
practice. Typically, in banks, the outcomes of risks taken become manifest after a long gap. 
While it is possible to align compensation of executives to the risks since they are long term 
employees,  it  is  more  problematic  in  the  case  of  non-executive  directors  who  serve  for 
relatively  shorter  periods  and  have  term  limits.  Furthermore,  unlike  wholetime  executive 
directors, non-executive directors function collectively as a part of the board and committees 
of boards making it difficult to apportion responsibility on them individually. Notwithstanding 
these implementation issues, we need to debate on how to align the compensation of non-
executive directors to the outcomes of corporate governance.  
Splitting the posts of chairman and CEO of banks 
Splitting  the  posts  of  the  Chairman  and  the  CEO  of  banks  is  another  issue  that  has 
generated  a  contentious  debate.  The  Ganguly  Committee  appointed  by  the  Reserve  Bank 
had  recommended  that  the  posts  of  the  chairman  of  the  board  and  the  CEO  of  the  bank 
should be bifurcated. The logic is that such a bifurcation of leadership of the board from the 
day  to  day  running  of  the  business  will  bring  about  more  focus  and  vision  as  also  the 
necessary thrust to the functioning of the top management of the bank. It will also provide 
effective checks and balances. 
The Reserve Bank implemented the Ganguly Committee recommendations in all the private 
sector banks in 2007. Experience shows that this arrangement has worked well. In fact, the 
Ganguly Committee recommendation to this effect has been echoed by the Basel Committee 
on Banking Supervision (BCBS) in its document entitled, “Principles for Enhancing Corporate 
Governance” which was put out last year. Let me quote briefly from the document. It says, “to 
achieve appropriate checks and balances, an increasing number of banks require the chair 
of the board to be a non-executive, except where otherwise required by law. Where a bank 
does not have this separation and particularly where the roles of the chair of the board and 
Chief Executive Officer (CEO) are vested in the same person, it is important for the bank to 
have measures in place to minimize the impact on the bank’s checks and balances of such a 
situation (such as, for example, by having a lead board member, senior independent board 
member or a similar position).” 
Given our own positive experience as well as the global endorsement for this position, the 
question is whether we should extend the principle of separation of the posts of chairman of 
the board and CEO to public sector banks as well. An important criterion for deciding on this 
will be to what extent we will be able to lay down and enforce strict eligibility criteria for the 
position of the chairman of the board of a public sector bank. We will discuss this issue with 
the Government. Meanwhile, it will be useful if there is some debate on this issue. 
Corporate governance under financial holding company structure 
As we all know, the prevalent model for financial conglomerates in India has been the bank 
subsidiary model as opposed to the more popular financial holding company (FHC) model 
around the world. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
The  risks  of  a  bank  subsidiary  model  are  quite  well  known.  First,  the  burden  of  corporate 
management of the bank as well as of equity infusion in the future will fall on the bank, and 
that may stretch its managerial competence and financial capacity. Second, a concern from 
the regulatory perspective is that the losses of subsidiaries will impact the balance sheet of 
the bank and even jeopardize the interests of the depositors of banks. Third, a bank typically 
has access to implicit subsidy by way of safety-net, deposit insurance, access to central bank 
liquidity and access to payment systems. The bank subsidiary model opens up an avenue for 
leakage of the subsidies to the non-bank subsidiaries raising a moral hazard issue. Finally, 
there will also be the problem of resolution if the bank, or any of its subsidiaries, gets into 
trouble.  
It  is  interesting  that  in  the  recent  global  financial  crisis,  financial  conglomerates  suffered 
equally irrespective of under which model they were structured. While the post-crisis reforms 
do  not  specify  a  preference  for  either  model,  the  focus  with  respect  to  structure  is  on 
strengthening  capital  requirements  at  the  consolidated  level,  reducing  complexities  of 
structures to enable efficient resolution in case of a problem, and separation of investment 
banking from commercial banking.  
The Shyamala Gopinath Working Group appointed by the Reserve Bank has recommended 
that  the  financial  holding  company  model  should  be  pursued  as  a  preferred  model  for  the 
financial sector in India. We must recognize that regardless of the corporate structure, banks 
cannot be totally insulated from the risks of non-banking activities of their affiliates. In moving 
to a new regime, we must also contend with legacy issues relating to existing conglomerates. 
Any framework to harmonise them under the FHC model will require a new legislation and 
new regulatory architecture.  
Conclusion 
Let  me  now  conclude.  It  has  been  my  endeavour  to  emphasize  how  good  corporate 
governance should be an important element in the pursuit of productivity excellence. I have 
highlighted how banks are different from other corporates and how this casts larger and more 
complex responsibilities on their corporate governance. I have briefly traced the changes in 
the Indian banking structure following the reforms in 1991 and how this has had important 
implications  for  corporate  governance.  Finally,  I  highlighted  important  issues  in  five  areas 
covering corporate governance of banks which should engage our collective attention. 
A  final  thought  as  I  finish.  Should  corporate  governance  in  general,  and  corporate 
governance of banks in particular, be motivated only by measurable performance indicators 
or is there something more to it? In his erudite and insightful book, The Difficulty of Being 
Good,  Gurcharan  Das  turns  to  our  great  epic,  The  Mahabharata,  to  explore  the  elusive 
notion of dharma. 
This  discourse,  I  believe,  is  very  contextual  as  dharma  was  wounded  by  the  failure  of 
corporate governance in the financial sector in the period leading up to the crisis. Dharma is 
exemplified  when  Draupadi  exhorts  her  husband,  Yudhishthira  who  gambled  away  his 
kingdom,  to  raise  an  army  and  fight  back.  “What  is  the  point  of  being good?”  she argues. 
“Isn’t it better to be powerful and rich than to be good in an unfair world, where those who 
cheat sleep on sheets of silk while those who are good are condemned to the hard ground? 
Why be good?” To this Yudhishthira replies in the only way he knows: “I act because I must”. 
The king’s answer represents the uncompromising, compelling voice of dharma. Leadership 
everywhere  is  about  inspiring  people.  You  can  inspire  in  many  ways  –  through  energy, 
enthusiasm, earnestness, intelligence and determination. But the most lasting inspiration is 
through  dharma.  When  Yudhishthira  tells  Draupadi  that  he  acts  because  he  must,  he  is 
demonstrating character in its quintessence. 
I hope this ideal of dharma that is so much a part of Indian heritage and culture will guide and 
inform corporate governance of our banks. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
