Jens Weidmann: Germany’s role in the global economy 
Speech  by  Dr  Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the  American 
Council on Germany, Washington DC, 26 September 2011. 
1. 
Introduction 
 Ladies and gentlemen 
I  would  like  to  thank  the  American  Council  on  Germany  for  giving  me  the  opportunity  to 
speak  here  today.  The  American  Council  on  Germany  was  founded  in  1952  in  order  to 
encourage reconciliation and understanding between Germany and North America following 
the two world wars in the first half of the twentieth century. To this day, it has the objective of 
enhancing transatlantic understanding. This is still very important as we are experiencing fast 
and significant changes. The headwinds generated by the global financial crisis are still being 
felt and on both sides of the Atlantic a rethinking of old certainties is underway. In such a 
situation, it is crucial to exchange ideas, re-examine the perceptions we have of ourselves 
and of one another and foster mutual understanding. With this in mind, I would like to talk 
about Germany’s role in the global economy, which, of course, is closely connected to its role 
as a member of European Monetary Union. 
One  thing  that  people  often  associate  with  Germany  is  its  export  strength.  And  the  export 
sector certainly has traditionally played an important role in the German economy. However, 
the German economy has not always performed as solidly as it is doing now. The past two 
decades  have  seen  changing  patterns  in  Germany’s  economic  performance,  with  a  major 
structural  weakness  following  the  boom  of  reunification  and  an  arduous  but  ultimately 
successful process of reform in the years that followed.  
As popular as individual German export products are globally, Germany sometimes faces the 
reproach that its export strength comes at the expense of global stability. Critics either imply 
that Germany promotes imbalances at a global level or within the euro area or that it should 
have done more to bolster global demand. As I will outline in more detail during this speech, 
the difficult but ultimately successful adjustment that Germany has undergone in the past has 
enabled  it  to  serve  as  an  important  buffer  for  global  demand  during  the  crisis  and  an 
indispensable  anchor  of  stability  within  EMU,  both  throughout  the  crisis  and  during  the 
subsequent recovery. In order to clarify these points, I will concentrate on the following three 
aspects: 
 
First, I will shed some light on the underlying factors behind persistent divergences 
in  price  competitiveness  within  the  euro  area,  which,  together  with  past  fiscal 
profligacy, are to a large part responsible for the problems we are facing today. In 
particular,  I  will  illustrate  how  those  member  states  whose  competitiveness  has 
deteriorated  substantially  since  monetary  union  have  not  managed  to  take 
advantage of it.  
Second, I will describe Germany’s economic performance during the crisis and the 
recovery. In particular, I will show how Germany served as an import buffer during 
the economic downturn that followed the financial crisis. Now that many countries 
are struggling with recovery, the more dynamic upswing in Germany is providing an 
important impetus to the rest of Europe.  
Finally, I will turn to the challenges that the European sovereign debt crisis is posing 
to  Germany.  Considering  that  Germany  is  providing  a  large  part  of  the  fiscal 
contributions  to  euro  area  countries  with  refinancing  problems,  confidence  in 
Germany’s solvency is vitally important in the current situation. Germany therefore 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
has to set an example for implementing sound fiscal policies within the euro area. 
However,  this  alone  will  not  be  sufficient  to  resolve  the  sovereign  debt  crisis.  To 
secure  long-run  stability  within  EMU,  significantly  stronger  incentives  for  sound 
public finances are indispensible.  
Intra-EMU divergences 
2. 
What  critics  actually  have  in  mind  when  they  talk  about  Germany’s  export  strength  is  the 
existence of current account surpluses which contrast with current account deficits in other 
EMU  member  states  or  other  countries  around  the  world.  I  would  like  to  emphasise  that 
neither current account surpluses nor current account deficits are a bad thing per se. Current 
account  surpluses  reflect  net  foreign  lending  and  current  account  deficits  net  foreign 
borrowing, and depending on the circumstances, both can be appropriate for a given country. 
For a country with a declining working-age population, for example, it is quite reasonable for 
residents to save money for the future and to invest a share of it abroad. By compensating 
for  a  shrinking  income  in  the  future,  the  money  saved  today  allows  consumption  to  be 
smoothed  over  time.  Conversely,  countries  which  are  undergoing  a  catch-up  process  and 
need financing for the investments might be willing and promising borrowers of foreign funds.  
Consequently,  for  a  proper  assessment  we  have  to  take  a  closer  look  at  the  underlying 
drivers  of  current  account  surpluses  in  some  euro-area  countries  and  of  current  account 
deficits in others. One worrying development is that divergences in current account balances 
have  mostly  gone  hand  in  hand  with  divergences  in  price  competitiveness.  Whereas 
Germany,  as  a  surplus  country,  has  been  able  to  improve  its  price  competitiveness 
significantly since the launch of the euro, the current account deficits in Greece, Spain and 
Portugal  and  to  a  lesser  extent  in  Ireland  were  accompanied  by  significant  losses  in  price 
competitiveness:  The  lower  interest  rates  brought  about  by  monetary  union  and  inflowing 
capital  had  partly  fuelled  unsustainable  developments,  such  as  excessive  credit  dynamics 
and  real  estate  bubbles  in  Spain  or  excessive  fiscal  spending  in  Greece.  The  resulting 
domestic  boom  and  existing  labour  market  rigidities  led  to  large  wage  increases  well  in 
excess  of  productivity  growth,  triggering  a  loss  in  price  competitiveness  and  thereby 
impairing export performance. Current account deficits were therefore ultimately a symptom 
of countries living beyond their means. The deficits will only decline if ambitious and often 
painful adjustments are undertaken that bring these economies back on a sustainable track. 
What about Germany? At first sight, Germany’s gain in price competitiveness since monetary 
union seems quite large. However, it is important to bear in mind that this increase followed a 
period  of  rather  weak  economic  performance  in  the  1990s  after  Germany’s  reunification 
boom. The most recent competitiveness gains and the resulting impulse for exports were the 
consequence  of  a  painful  but  necessary  and  ultimately  successful  adjustment  process.  An 
important part of this process was a restructuring in the corporate sector, which significantly 
enhanced  the  profitability  of  firms.  In  addition,  there  were  major  and  long  overdue  policy 
reforms,  namely  labour  market  reforms,  fiscal  consolidation  and  adjustments  in  the  social 
security systems. Consequently, and in contrast to some other surplus countries, Germany’s 
current  account  surpluses  were  certainly  not  caused  by  policy  interventions  aimed  at 
boosting exports. Instead, they resulted from market-driven adjustments to external pressure 
as well as overdue structural reforms. It is true that the restructuring process has fostered the 
emergence of current account surpluses by putting a strain on domestic consumption. As the 
restructuring  process  was  temporary,  however,  German  current  account  surpluses  are  not 
expected to reach pre-crisis levels soon again. 
In  addition,  Germany’s  experience  should  provide  some  reassurance  to  those  countries 
faced  with  the  need  to  restore  their  competitiveness:  Structural  reforms  can  initiate 
necessary  adjustments  and  will  pay  off  in  the  end  –  thanks  to  its  reforms,  the  German 
economy was much stronger in the years preceding the crisis than before. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Economic spillovers during the crisis and the recovery 
3. 
Not least for this reason, Germany was able to serve as an anchor for stability within EMU 
throughout the crisis as well as in the current recovery. Because of its export strength, the 
German  economy  was  affected  particularly  strongly  by  the  global  economic  downturn  that 
was triggered by the financial crisis. However, as this shock hit the German economy in a 
phase  of  structural  strength  and  was  only  temporary,  the  negative  effects  were  contained. 
From  today’s  perspective  we  know  that  Germany  has  weathered  the  economic  crisis 
comparatively well. The labour market was only weakly affected as firms in the export sector 
chose  to  reduce  working  time  over  staff  layoffs,  whereas  the  domestic  economy  was  less 
affected  and  even  continued  to  increase  employment.  Now  unemployment  rates  are  even 
lower  than  before  the  crisis.  In  addition,  Germany  profited  from  its  previous  consolidation 
efforts.  The  almost  balanced  fiscal  budget  at  the  beginning  of  the  crisis  allowed scope  for 
implementing sizeable fiscal stimulus programmes. As a consequence, private consumption 
remained robust throughout the crisis, which explains why Germany was able to serve as an 
important  buffer  for  world  demand  at  the  height  of  the  financial  crisis.  In  fact,  the  huge 
downturn in the German economy was largely driven by a decline in exports: about two thirds 
of the downswing can be attributed to a negative contribution from foreign trade. 
Having experienced a disproportionately strong decline during the crisis, exports in Germany 
have  also  benefited  disproportionately  from  the  revival  of  global  economic  activity.  So  far, 
Germany  has  undergone  a  sound  process  of  recovery.  Economic  activity  has  almost 
returned  to  its  pre-crisis  level  and  the  output  gap  has  been  closed,  indicating  that  the 
recovery process is at an advanced stage. The recovery is also broader-based than in past 
cycles.  The  positive  labour  market  situation  and  the  improved  real  wages  and  income 
expectations of private households are supporting growth in consumption, which had already 
been  resilient  throughout  the  crisis.  And  even  though  spillover  effects  from  growth  in 
Germany  to  other  countries  are  comparatively  low,  Germany  still  serves  as  an  important 
transmitter of the impulses from global demand to other EU member states. 
Most  recently,  the  German  economic  outlook  has  been  dampened  by  high  overall 
uncertainty, especially regarding further developments in the European sovereign debt crisis. 
But  we  expect  economic  activity  to  remain  robust  in  the  third  quarter,  and  even  though 
expectations for the winter months are subject to considerable risks, this should prove to be 
more of a soft patch. Nevertheless, there is a heightened danger that financial market turmoil 
affects the real economy. Thus, it is crucial to find a prompt and consistent political answer to 
the sovereign debt crisis in order to reduce downside risks. 
Fiscal discipline and the European sovereign debt crisis 
4. 
In addition to its robust economic conditions, Germany is an anchor of stability within EMU 
through  the  high  level  of  confidence  in  the  sustainability  of  its  public  finances  as  well  as 
through  its  financial  support  to  those  countries  within  EMU  which  currently  lack  this 
confidence. 
While  Germany  profited  from  its  public  finances  being  in comparatively  good  shape  at  the 
beginning of the crisis, the economic downturn and necessary rescue measures for banks 
during the crisis have put a serious strain on the national budget. The debt ratio increased by 
19 pp to 84% of GDP between 2007 and 2010, mostly due to the support for the financial 
sector.  Given  the  experience  from  the  sovereign  debt  crisis,  it  is  imperative  to  sustain 
confidence in public finances. This requires credible consolidation efforts now and not just 
some kind of commitment to future steps. 
The debt brake, which Germany has enshrined in its constitution, is principally a good means 
of achieving this objective, as it legally binds politicians to obtaining sound public finances. 
Germany has therefore set an important example within EMU and I welcome the aspirations 
in France, Spain, Portugal and Italy to follow this example. This is an acknowledgement to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
the importance of sound fiscal policy. However, the effectiveness of national debt brakes will 
depend on their specific design and in the case of Germany on the condition that the debt 
brake is applied according to its rules. 
As important as effective national debt brakes are, they are not sufficient to solve the current 
sovereign  debt  crisis  within  the  euro  area.  To  achieve  this,  we  need  an  effective  policy 
framework that meets the requirements stemming from the unique nature of EMU. EMU is a 
monetary union between sovereign states, not a federal state with a common budget. This is 
a fundamental difference compared for example to the United States. It means that euro area 
countries decide independently about their fiscal policy, but that the high indebtedness of one 
country  affects  all  of  the  member  states  because  of  its  effects  on  the  common  monetary 
policy. This harbours the danger of weakening incentives for sound public finances as the 
individual  countries  no  longer  carry  the  full  burden  of  high  sovereign  debt  by  themselves. 
Ultimately, this could even translate into pressure on monetary policy to ease the burden of 
high public debt, for example by a more expansionary monetary policy or by using central 
banks’ balance sheets to shift burdens among member states. In order to correct for these 
adverse  effects,  European  Monetary  Union  was  founded  on  a  stability-oriented  policy 
framework.  This  framework  includes  legal  provisions  that  preclude  monetary  financing  of 
governments, strict fiscal rules laid down in the Stability and Growth Pact and the “no bail-
out” clause, which, by ensuring that each country ultimately has to bear the consequences of 
its own fiscal policy, is an indispensable prerequisite for sound public finances within the euro 
area. 
The severity of the sovereign debt crisis in some member states and the imminent risks of 
contagion  for  other  member  states,  however,  have  threatened  financial  stability  within  the 
European Monetary Union as a whole. The European Council therefore agreed that financial 
assistance  should  be  granted  to  countries  with  severe  refinancing  problems,  a  substantial 
part of which is provided by Germany. This financial support is intended to buy time for the 
affected  countries  to  conduct  necessary  structural  reforms  and  implement  consolidation 
measures in order to regain market participants’ confidence in the soundness of their public 
finances  and  their  competitiveness.  The  assistance  is  therefore  bound  to  adjustment 
programmes, which each recipient country has to fulfil. 
However,  the  reduction  of  interest  payments  on  the  financial  aid  has  weakened  the 
incentives  for  countries  in  an  adjustment  programme  to  re-establish  sound  public  finances 
via  fiscal  and  economic  reforms  and  return  to  the  capital  market.  Furthermore,  the 
conditionality  of  the  support  measures  has  been  loosened  by  the  recent  decisions  of  July 
21st. This weakens the underlying principle of European Monetary Union that each country 
has to bear the full consequences of its own fiscal policy. Contrary to what is actually needed 
in order to overcome the sovereign debt crisis, we risk seeing the propensity for excessive 
deficits rise even further in the future. Germany’s debate about the way forward in the crisis 
is therefore motivated by a serious concern for the stability of monetary union.  
We will not be able to regain stability within EMU without re-establishing the credibility of its 
framework.  A  fundamental  political  decision  is  therefore  needed:  either  the  existing  policy 
framework of EMU has to be changed fundamentally or the incentives for sound fiscal policy 
have  to  be  strengthened  within  the  existing  framework.  The  first  option  would  imply  EMU 
member states abandoning a substantial part of their national sovereignty over fiscal policy 
and would therefore require fundamental legal changes on the European and possibly also 
the  national  level.  The  second  option  requires  a  return  to  the  fundamental  principles  of 
monetary union, with each member state bearing the consequences of its own fiscal policy 
decisions.  Either  option  would  be  sustainable  from  an  economic  point  of  view.  However, 
combining  elements  of  both  options,  ie  sharing  the  risks  of  unsound  fiscal  policy  and 
retaining national sovereignty over fiscal policy, is condemned to failure. It would undermine 
the incentives for sound fiscal and economic policy even further, thus achieving the opposite 
of stabilising monetary union. Ultimately, this approach would also not be credible to financial 
markets as its inconsistencies raise doubts about the public and political support. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Conclusion 
5. 
Let me conclude my speech on Germany’s role in the global economy with some caveats. In 
spite  of  the  rather  favourable  performance  during  the  crisis,  Germany  faces  major 
challenges,  overcoming  the  euro  area’s  sovereign  debt  crisis  being  the  most  pressing.  In 
addition, the level of public debt has risen substantially throughout the crisis. Consequently, 
and considering the increasing fiscal burdens caused by an ageing society and a shrinking 
working-age population, consolidation is a major task for Germany, too. It is indispensable to 
ensure the long-term sustainability of its public finances.  
But  unlike  some  other  EMU  member  states,  Germany  is  still  in  a  relatively  favourable 
position. This combined with the fact that Germany continues to be an important economic 
player  despite  global  shifts  in  economic  weights  is  due,  not  least,  to  painful  but  ultimately 
rather successful structural reforms undertaken in the past. It would be short-sighted to rely 
solely  on  these  achievements.  But  they  could  well  serve  as  an  encouragement  to  reform-
minded  policymakers  in  other  countries.  And  the  fact  that  these  reforms,  including  the 
emphasis  on  fiscal  soundness,  contributed  to  revitalising  the  German  economy  and  to 
increasing its resilience should not be a cause for concern or complaint. Instead, it should be 
seen as good news – for Germany, but also for EMU and the global economy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
