Christian Noyer: The financial crisis – how are we doing? 
Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France and Chairman of the Board 
of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, at the Global Interdependence Center 
Conference “Capital Markets in the Post-Crisis Environment” Part V, organised together with 
the Bank of Finland, Helsinki, 6 June 2011. 
 It is a great pleasure for me to be here today in Helsinki. It is also a privilege to address such 
a distinguished audience.  
But  as  you  all  know,  next  Board  of  ECB  Governors  will  be  held  in  a  few  days  and  I  am 
therefore to respect a silent period. The remarks that follow are general and do not prejudge 
the decision of the Board. 
I would like to take the opportunity I have been offered of giving you my assessment of how 
we are doing three years after the start of the crisis. For reasons you certainly understand, I 
would like to focus more on the situation in Europe and the euro area.  
Economic prospects are encouraging 
Recent macroeconomic developments point to a successful exit from the crisis. Recovery is 
now widespread, as most countries across the world experience pre-crisis growth rates. After 
a strong rebound, world trade is back on track to its pre-crisis trend. Financial conditions are 
favorable,  with  short  and  long-term  interest  rates  at  low  levels  and  scarcely  any  signs  of 
credit rationing.  
In this supportive international environment, the euro area experienced a brilliant first quarter 
of  2011,  emphasizing  the  robustness  of  the  recovery.  GDP  increased  by  0.8%  over  the 
quarter but as fast as 1.5% in Germany and 1.0% in France. All euro area countries, except 
Portugal,  enjoyed  positive  growth  rates.  These  developments  no  longer  reflect  solely  the 
economic policy stimulus and the inventory cycle; they testify to a broad-based recovery, with 
a self-sustained private sector dynamics. One remarkable development of this first quarter is 
that French and German growth has been mainly driven by private domestic demand and, in 
particular, business investment. In France, it grew at a 1.9% quarterly rate, posting a fourth 
consecutive quarter of strong growth.  
The pace of recovery may slow in the coming quarters. Business climate indices, such as the 
Purchasing  Managers  Index,  the  Economic  Sentiment  Indicator  or  Germany’s  IFO,  have 
peaked  at  high  levels.  Beyond  these  observations,  the  crisis  may  have  left  scars  on  our 
economies.  Potential  growth  may  have  been  affected.  The  balance  sheet  repair  process, 
involving both public and private agents, may also weigh on growth in the medium term.  
Still, prospects are encouraging. The OECD, which recently issued its latest forecasts, has 
just raised its growth forecast for the euro area to 2.0% in 2011 and 2012. 
All in all, we have strong reasons to believe that we successfully exited the economic crisis. 
There are increasing signs that the recovery is now well on track. While there is still a high 
degree  of  uncertainty,  recent  economic  data  confirm  the  positive  underlying  momentum  of 
economic activity in the euro area.  
The sovereign crisis in Europe  
While economic prospects have improved, we still face challenges. The most important one 
is  certainly  “the  sovereign  crisis”  in  the  euro  area.  Broadly  speaking,  opinions  and  views 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
expressed  on  this  by  people  outside  the  euro  area  can  be  divided  into  three  categories: 
hostility, skepticism and support.  
First,  outright  hostility:  gloomy  predictions  about  the  imminent  demise  of  the  euro  came 
predominantly from deeply anti-European commentators. While these views, like all opinions, 
should be treated with respect, there is no point in trying to refute arguments that are largely 
irrational and mainly reflect wishful thinking.  
Second,  skepticism:  it  comes  mainly,  but  not  only,  from  academic  circles.  Prestigious  and 
well-respected  economists  have  been  pointing  to  the  fact  that  the  euro  is  not  an  optimum 
currency  area  and  that  some  form  of  fiscal  federalism  is  missing  to  compensate  for 
insufficient labour mobility. Let me simply recall a few facts. The benefits of the euro cannot 
be assessed exclusively through the lens of the optimum currency area theory. The euro has 
brought to more than 300 million European citizens unprecedented stability: price stability, of 
course, with inflation averaging 1.97% over the past decade, but also financial stability. It is 
always  useful  to  think  of  counterfactual  (?)  when  assessing  a  situation.  Looking  beyond 
current  fiscal  turbulences,  let  us  think,  for  instance,  of  how  euro  area  member  countries 
would have absorbed the crisis with fifteen different currencies, fluctuating internal exchange 
rates, and, consequently, much higher volatility, uncertainty, risk premia and interest rates. 
This  experiment  speaks  for  itself.  Let  me  add,  also,  that  despite  the  perception  of  slow 
motion from European authorities, we share a great sense of urgency and solidarity. There is 
no benign neglect nor resignation/despair.  
The last type of reaction is support. It shows up in comments from a majority of observers 
and  investors,  especially  in  emerging  economies:  they  praise  the  euro;  they  want  it  to 
succeed; but they sometimes question our collective ability, in current circumstances, to do 
what is necessary, to make the right decisions or make them at the right time and to set in 
place  the  proper  framework  for  the  future.  These  are  the  concerns  I  would  now  like  to 
address.  
Where and how did it start?  
Most  euro  area  and  EU  countries  entered  the  crisis  with  significantly  deteriorated  fiscal 
positions,  very  far  from  the  “structural  balance  objective”,  which  is  the  core  of  our  fiscal 
framework and also the commitment made by Member States that adopted the euro. With 
the  crisis,  fiscal  imbalances  increased,  not  so  much  because  of  a  rise  in  expenditure,  but 
essentially  through  a  massive  loss  in  revenue.  The  IMF  has  shown  that,  in  all  advanced 
countries, including the United States and the United Kingdom, these losses accounted for 
around  two  thirds  of  the  deterioration  in  fiscal  positions  observed  during  the  crisis.  Fiscal 
deterioration was compounded, in some countries, by the size of implicit blanket guarantees, 
which  materialized  as  the  crisis  unfolded  through  public  money  injections  in  the  financial 
sector. 
Unfortunately,  these  problems  were  not  specific  to  the  euro  area.  Public  debt  jumped  by 
around 30% of GDP in the United Kingdom and in the United Kingdom. Structural deficits in 
these countries stand at similar or higher levels than those in most parts of the euro area. 
This is also true for Japan. 
Overall,  the  crisis  has  brought  to  light  major  deficiencies  in  the  implementation  of  fiscal 
discipline and, more generally, in the economic governance of the euro area. The founders of 
the  euro  had  put  in  place  the  Growth  and  Stability  Pact.  The  principles  were  sound.  The 
framework was adequate. The implementation has been extremely weak. Bluntly speaking, 
peer pressure failed to ensure consistent and rigorous compliance with the principles which 
had  been  agreed  upon.  It  was,  and  remains  necessary  to  make  a  “quantum  leap”  in 
economic governance.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
is  a  new  process 
fiscal  rules.  The  second  pillar 
What have we done?  
Governments  are  addressing  these  deficiencies.  Significant  progress  has  been  made  over 
the past year. At the national level, all Member States have embarked upon credible public 
finance consolidation plans that are already bearing fruit.  
At the EU level, a new framework has been agreed upon, built around three pillars. The first 
pillar  is  much  stronger  prevention:  surveillance  of  budgetary  policies  has  been  reinforced; 
government  debt  levels  are  better  taken  into  account;  and  sanctions  will  become  more 
automatic.  Ideally,  this  should  be  completed  by  the  adoption,  in  each  Member  State,  of 
strong  national 
for  monitoring 
competitiveness and, in particular, unit production costs. The last pillar is the new framework 
for  crisis  management  agreed  upon  by  euro  area  Member  States,  to  provide  temporary 
financial support to euro area Member States facing impaired access to market financing.  
At  the  same  time,  Europe  has  equipped  itself  with  financial  fire  power.  A  new,  temporary 
facility,  the EFSF,  was  set  up  in  May  2010  for  a  three  year  period.  In  March  this  year,  its 
capacity  was  raised  to  an  effective  EUR  440  billion.  Member  States  also  agreed  on  a 
permanent framework to start in 2013 and mainly based on a European Stability Mechanism 
(ESM)  with  an  effective  lending  capacity  of  EUR  500  billion.  This  mechanism  will  make  it 
possible  to  conduct  exceptional  interventions  in  sovereign  debt  primary  markets.  Identical 
and  standardized  Collective  Action  Clauses  (CACs)  will  be  included  in  all  new  euro  area 
government securities, with maturities above one year, from July 2013.  
Significantly,  all  of  these  mechanisms  involve  the  IMF  and  the  European  Commission,  “in 
consultation” with the ECB, to avoid having to rely only on peer pressure between Members 
States and to ensure proper conditionality.  
As you know, the crisis has also led the Eurosytem to embark on a very limited programme 
of  bond  purchases,  with  a  view  to  restoring  the  monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism 
where it had been impaired. This programme has served us well. The monetary impact has 
been systematically and fully sterilized.  
Where do we stand?  
Overall,  these  changes  have  been  favorably  received  by  the  markets.  Nevertheless,  the 
sense  of  crisis  has  not  yet  disappeared.  Most  recently,  a  joint  IMF  /  EU  EUR  78  billion 
programme has been approved for Portugal.  
In order to alleviate the persistent sense of crisis, existing programmes must be delivered on. 
In  this  respect,  their  conditionality  is  of  the  utmost  importance.  Countries  under  a  joint 
programme  have  committed  themselves  to  conducting  structural  reforms,  whose  benefits 
and positive impact cannot immediately be assessed. These programmes pave the way for 
stronger and more sustainable growth in the near future.  
To be absolutely clear, there is no doubt that countries under assistance have to deliver fully 
on their austerity programme. Solutions akin to debt restructuring are not an option. It would 
push these countries into a disastrous scenario, associated with a sustained loss of access 
to any kind of financing. 
Programmes  can  and  do  work.  If  you  look  at  Eastern  European  countries  that  received 
conditional  financial  assistance  from  the  EU  and  the  IMF  two  or  three  years  ago,  you  will 
conclude  that  these  programmes  proved  to  be  highly  useful  and  successful.  Hence,  the 
assessment has to be cautious, before being definitive. In short, in just one year, since May 
2010,  the  EU  has  embarked  on  a  radical  overhaul  of  its  economic  governance,  while 
managing  the  sovereign  crisis.  This  is  a  great  achievement,  especially  considering  the 
multiplicity  of  actors  involved  and  the  creativity  of  the  response,  which  also  had  to  take 
account of public opinion.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Positive developments 
Looking  at  aggregate  numbers,  it  is  very  difficult  to  understand  many  of  the  concerns 
expressed on the euro area. The euro area is the only major currency area with its external 
accounts in balance, and which therefore does not depend on external finance. This is an 
essential element of robustness. For outside investors, it provides a strong guarantee of long 
term  solvency.  Its  aggregate  fiscal  balance  (with  a  deficit  of  6.3%  of  GDP  in  2010)  is  the 
most favorable of all advanced economies (10.5% for the United States, 9.6% for the United 
Kingdom and 7.7% for Japan). The same holds true for public debt, which stands at 92% of 
GDP, close to that of the United States (93%), and much lower than that of Japan (200%).  
Looking at national fiscal situations, most analysts would acknowledge the magnitude of the 
efforts undertaken. Yet, some tend to take a very pessimistic view about future outcomes. In 
short, their argument is that the euro area, and more specifically, its periphery, will be unable 
to  return  to  normal  growth  anytime  in  the  foreseeable  future.  This  is  a  very  dramatic 
assumption  and  it  matters  a  lot  because,  as  we  all  know,  debt  dynamics  are  extremely 
sensitive to forecasts about future growth.  
Some of the implicit assumptions underlying current negative judgments seem to me to be 
seriously misguided.  
Recall what I pointed out at the start of my talk. We have recently been pleasantly surprised 
by  growth  dynamics  in  the  euro  area.  Consumer  confidence  is  almost  back  to  pre-crisis 
levels; PMIs are at an all time high and GDP growth will almost certainly be above potential, 
on average, for the year 2011. These developments take place at a time when drastic fiscal 
consolidation  programmes  are  being  implemented  in  all  countries.  Positive  confidence 
effects  in  the  private  sector  are  outweighing  the  negative  impact  of  reductions  in  public 
expenditure.  What  about  countries  in  the  periphery?  The  Spanish  growth  rate  swung  from  
–3.7%  in  2009  to  –0.1%  in  2010,  despite  the  fact  that  a  major  austerity  plan  was  being 
implemented. Spanish exports are booming, with an increase of 10% within the euro area 
and 19% outside the euro area in 2010. This compares very favourably with performances of 
other countries both inside and outside the euro area.  
Let me also remind you that real convergence is at play in the euro area. This process will 
continue  and  support  growth  in  the  future,  contrary  to  over  simplistic  descriptions.  One 
overlooked  fact  is  the  very  fast  productivity  catch-up  in  the  periphery  of  the  euro  area. 
Between  2000  and  2008,  Greece  and  Ireland  posted  cumulative  labor  productivity  growth 
rates,  as  measured  by  the  output  per  employee,  of  14.7%  and  10.2%  respectively.  Both 
significantly outpaced that of Germany (6.1%). This is exactly what you would expect in an 
integrated  economic  and  monetary  area  and  this  process  should  continue  in  the  future, 
provided  that  appropriate  policies  are  implemented.  Economic  convergence  will  therefore 
boost growth and support the return to debt sustainability.  
It is true that, looking at nominal developments, a different picture emerges. During the same 
period, nominal wages grew by a total of 42% in Ireland and 52% in Greece, compared with 
only 7.4% in Germany. There has to be a regime change in the way in which nominal wages 
and prices are set in some parts of the euro area. As central bankers, we have been putting 
forward  this  argument  for  years.  Strong  reforms  are  now  being  pushed  in  labor  market 
legislation as well as in wage determination in the public sector in many countries.  
What about banks? 
I would like to end with a few words about the banking sector.  
Revenues for the twelve biggest European banks grew, in aggregate terms, by 8.6% in 2010 
(as  compared  to  2.5%  for  the  main  US  banks).  As  a  result,  European  banks’  Core  Tier  1 
ratios stood at between 8.5% and 15.3% at the end of 2010 (corresponding numbers for US 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
banks were between 8.4% and 13.3%). Our “universal banking model”, based on a diversity 
of activities and sources of income has proven its resilience.  
Obviously,  there  is  a  circular  causality  between  government  debt  and  the  banking  sector. 
Spreads  on  public  debt  naturally  act  as  floors  for  the  funding  costs  of  banks.  And, 
conversely, doubts about banks’ solvency create expectations of public support and lead to a 
deterioration in public finances. This gives rise to multiple equilibria where sudden shifts in 
confidence can be self-fulfilling.  
In  this  context,  the  main  purpose  of  stress  testing  is  to  break  that  circularity.  Our  first 
European tests included 81 banks, compared with only 19 for the United States. The basic 
exercise  was  sound  and  taken  as  such  by  analysts  when  it  was  published.  Somehow 
clumsily,  however,  a  few  banks  were  added  at  the  last  moment,  with  only  limited 
investigation,  and  these  are  precisely  the  banks  which  proved  problematic  afterwards  and 
which undermined the credibility of the whole exercise. This mistake will not be repeated and 
the coverage for the new stress tests has been carefully examined.  
A lot has been made of the fact that no sovereign stress was made on the banking book. And 
indeed, as regulators, we did not want to give any credibility to a scenario that we consider 
unacceptable. However, there will be, like last time, full, total, and transparent disclosure of 
exposures to sovereigns for each individual bank. Everybody will therefore be free to make 
their own assumptions and calculations. With knowledge of the exposure, it does not take a 
rocket scientist to figure out some scenarios. It turns out that, during the last exercise, such 
calculations would produce very reassuring numbers. But, for some reason, they were never 
made public by most analysts. Just as an illustration, the total exposure of French banks to 
sovereign debt in Southern Europe is 38% of total Tier 1 (13% without Italy). I will let you 
draw your own conclusions. Even in an apocalyptic scenario, only a small fraction of French 
banks’ Tier 1 ratio would be compromised. The same results apply, with some variations, to 
other countries.  
Conclusion  
Let me now conclude. Like all other major advanced economies, the euro area is facing big 
challenges  in  adjusting  to  the  post-crisis  environment.  For  all,  these  challenges  relate  to 
long-term fiscal sustainability. They are neither bigger nor smaller for the euro area than for 
the United States, the United Kingdom or Japan. They may be more complicated to solve 
because, by nature, our governance is more complex and we face specific collective action 
problems. It may take us longer to deal with difficulties as they appear, and we are paying a 
price for this relative inertia. But problems are being tackled, reforms are being implemented 
and I am convinced that, in the end, the euro area will emerge as a stronger and more robust 
entity than before the crisis. As for the European System of Central Banks, I can assure you 
that we stand ready to act as forcefully as necessary to ensure price stability and preserve 
the integrity of the euro, which is, today, our most precious common good.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
