Masaaki Shirakawa: One month after the great East Japan earthquake – 
critical role of financial infrastructure  
Opening remarks by Mr Masaaki Shirakawa, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting 
hosted by the Institute of Regulation & Risk, North Asia, Tokyo, 11 April 2011. 
 Introduction  
I. 
I am honored to have been invited today to this meeting hosted by the Institute of Regulation 
& Risk, North Asia.  
It  is  now  exactly  one  month  since  the  March  11  earthquake.  I  would  like  to  express  my 
sincere condolences to the victims of the disaster and offer my heartfelt sympathies to those 
who are suffering. I am pleased to see many friends in attendance today, and my gratitude 
especially goes to Bill Dudley, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, who is 
here despite these difficult times after the disaster triggered by the earthquake.  
I am told that the meeting focuses on financial regulation and supervision. The earthquake, 
which had a magnitude of 9.0 and was the largest on record in Japan, the tsunami, and the 
nuclear  plant  problems  were  a  series  of  events  that  have  raised  many  risk  issues  that  go 
beyond the level of risk management by financial institutions. For that reason, it is critical to 
reconsider how society as a whole copes with such issues. Of course, it would be premature 
to  attempt  to  provide  comprehensive  answers  at  this  juncture,  but  one  of  the  important 
aspects in this regard is the robustness of social infrastructures. In what follows, from such a 
perspective,  I  would  like  to  make  a  modest  contribution  by  sharing  with  you  what  has 
happened in terms of financial infrastructure, which is one of the critical social infrastructures, 
in the past month and my impressions over this period.  
Impact on financial infrastructure  
II. 
Let me first talk about how the disaster affected Japan’s financial infrastructure.  
The  physical  damage  to  financial  institutions  in  the  areas  hit  by  the  earthquake  was 
enormous, including the destruction and flooding of some branches. Thanks to the dedicated 
efforts  of  those  involved,  financial  institutions  have  been  gradually  starting  to  get  their 
branches and offices in those areas back on their feet. There are 72 financial institutions with 
headquarters in one of the six prefectures of the Tohoku region or Ibaraki Prefecture. Of the 
2,700 branches and offices of these financial institutions, those closed as of March 16 were 
about 310, or about 10 percent of the total, but as of today this has declined to about 150, or 
about 6 percent of the total. The other 94 percent are open for business as usual, providing 
various financial services.  
Looking at the impact on a nationwide level, Japan’s core payment and settlement systems, 
including the Bank of Japan Financial Network System, or BOJ-NET, have been consistently 
functioning  as  normal  since  the  earthquake  struck.  In  financial  markets,  the  Tokyo  Stock 
Exchange has been open for business as usual.  
Like  electricity,  water,  gas,  railways,  and  roads,  the  financial  and  settlement  systems  are 
critical infrastructure that supports people’s lives and economic activity. If the financial and 
settlement  systems  as  a  whole  had  ceased  to  function  normally,  the  adverse  effects  on 
people’s lives and economic activity probably would have been even greater. The robustness 
of  the  financial  system  that  we  have  seen  this  time  was  attributable  to  the  hard  work  and 
solidarity of the people involved after the earthquake struck. I would also like to point out that 
the  steady  efforts  of  those  involved  in  normal  times,  such  as  in  developing  business 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
continuity  plans  and  carrying  out  street-wide  disaster  exercises,  greatly  contributed  to  this 
robustness.  
Bank of Japan’s responses  
III. 
Next, I would like to explain how the Bank of Japan reacted to the disaster.  
Continued provision of financial services  
What the Bank of Japan did first was to continue providing financial services as usual.  
In  that  regard,  it  was  vitally  important  to  maintain  the  financial  functions  that  serve  as  a 
lifeline in the affected areas. On the financial front, the first urgent need faced by people in 
the  affected  areas  is  to  secure  cash  to  purchase  the  necessities.  The  day  the  earthquake 
occurred,  I  promptly  asked,  jointly  with  the  Minister  for  Financial  Services,  financial 
institutions to take appropriate measures to accommodate the needs of those affected by the 
disaster, such as permitting the withdrawal of deposits even in cases where depositors had 
lost  certificates  of  deposits  or  passbooks.  Moreover,  the  Bank  of  Japan  strived  to  provide 
cash  to  the  disaster  areas  in  a  prompt  and  sufficient  manner  day  after  day,  including 
holidays,  to  meet  the  cash  needs  of  people  in  those  areas.  In  fact,  the  amount  of  cash 
provided  to  the  affected  areas  was  three  times  larger  than  in  normal  times.  The  Bank  of 
Japan  has also  been  taking  all  possible  measures  as  the  central  bank  to support  affected 
areas by responding to various related financial needs such as exchanging banknotes and 
coins that were damaged by the earthquake and tsunami. The Bank of Japan’s operations in 
the  Tohoku  region,  including  our  branches  in  Sendai  and  Fukushima  and  our  office  in 
Morioka, have been providing uninterrupted central banking services as usual, thanks to the 
efforts of the employees of these operations and the support provided by the Bank of Japan’s 
head office and other branches.  
In addition to maintaining retail payment functions, it is also vital to ensure that the wholesale 
payment  systems  for  funds  and  securities  continue  to  function  in  a  stable  manner.  In  this 
regard, as I mentioned earlier, the BOJ-NET continued to operate without interruption after 
the earthquake.  
Ensuring the stability of financial markets  
The Bank of Japan’s second response was to ensure financial market stability.  
When a huge risk manifests itself, such as a disaster triggered by an earthquake, and there 
is increased uncertainty over the future, market participants try to retain a large amount of 
funds  at  hand  to  prepare  for  the  worst.  If  such  an  increase  in  precautionary  demand  for 
liquidity is left unaddressed, it could destabilize financial markets and eventually adversely 
affect economic activity. To prevent such a situation, the Bank of Japan has been providing 
ample  liquidity  since  immediately  after  the  earthquake,  and  has  been  striving  to  ensure 
financial  market  stability  by  maintaining  a  sense  of  security  on  the  funding  front.  On 
March 14, the first business day after the disaster, the Bank of Japan provided a total of 21.8 
trillion  yen  in  liquidity.  This  was  a  daily  record  and  four  times  larger  than  the  largest  daily 
liquidity provision after the Lehman crisis. The Bank of Japan has continued to provide ample 
liquidity every day and its outstanding current account balance also reached a record high of 
42.6 trillion yen on March 24.  
Although  the  disaster  had  no  impact  on  Japanese  financial  institutions’  foreign  currency 
funding, in its U.S. dollar-funds supplying operation that has been in place since before the 
earthquake, the Bank of Japan started to offer one-week funds, as a safety valve, in addition 
to the existing three-month funds. Since Bill is here, I should not forget to mention that this 
operation  is  based  on  swap  arrangements  between  major  central  banks  and  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York.  I  would  also  note  that  coordinated  foreign  exchange  market 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
intervention by G-7 countries played a critical role in not only stabilizing the foreign exchange 
market,  but  also  helping  to  prevent  negative  spillovers  into  other  markets,  for  example 
Japan’s stock market.  
With such ample liquidity provision and backup support, calm has been restored in Japan’s 
money markets and they are currently quite stable.  
Enhancement of monetary easing  
The third response was to take policy measures on the monetary policy front, by enhancing 
monetary easing.  
It so happened that the Monetary Policy Meeting was scheduled to be held over two days 
starting from the next business day after the earthquake. As the Bank of Japan deemed it 
desirable to examine the possible effects of the disaster on Japan’s economy and finances 
and promptly announce a guideline for money market operations, thereby ensuring stability 
in public sentiment and in the financial markets, it shortened the duration of the meeting to 
one day and decided on enhancement of monetary easing on March 14.  
What we feared most immediately after the disaster was a situation in which a deterioration 
in business sentiment or an increase in investors’ aversion to risk would lead to an increase 
in various risk premiums, thereby adversely affecting economic activity. Since the autumn of 
2010, the Bank of Japan has started to purchase various assets, including risk assets such 
as CP, corporate bonds, exchange traded funds (ETFs), and Japan real estate investment 
trusts (J-REITs), under the comprehensive monetary easing framework. This time, the Bank 
of Japan decided to increase the amount of the Asset Purchase Program, by doubling the 
purchases  of  assets  from  about  5  to  about  10  trillion  yen.  This  measure  appears  to  have 
helped to reassure financial markets.  
Confidence in financial infrastructure  
IV. 
That concludes my explanation of what we did in the month following the earthquake. As the 
situation is still evolving and we do not yet have sufficient information, it is too early to draw 
any lessons at this juncture. Nevertheless, it does seem worthwhile to share our impressions 
with one another while our memories are fresh, ahead of full-scale examination of the issue 
in the future. I myself have thought many things, but if I were to choose one, it would be the 
importance of ensuring that people retain confidence and trust that financial infrastructure will 
function normally.  
In the week following the earthquake, rumors spread mainly among some foreign financial 
institutions that Tokyo financial markets would close. While hard to believe, there was also a 
groundless rumor that the Bank of Japan would move its computer center to Osaka. Extreme 
anxiety  can  in  itself  induce  self-propagating  market  reactions.  Fortunately,  such  rumors 
gradually  dissipated.  Several  factors  contributed.  The  first  of  these  was  the  strong 
commitment  shown  by  those  involved.  For  my  part,  I  explained  to  overseas  authorities, 
through an impromptu conference call with G-7 finance ministers and central bank governors 
and  on  other  occasions,  that  the  Bank  of  Japan  had  been  taking  all  possible  steps  to 
maintain  Japan’s  financial  intermediation  function  and  ensure  smooth  fund  settlement. 
Moreover,  the  International  Bankers  Association,  which  is  a  group  of  foreign  financial 
institutions active in Japan, issued a press release on March 15, soon after the earthquake, 
stating that major foreign financial institutions in Japan were continuing to operate business 
as usual. Subsequently, senior executives of such institutions visited Japan one after another 
and  expressed  their  commitment  to  continue  to  do  business  in  Japan.  Along  with  such 
communication,  it  is,  as  I  mentioned  earlier,  of  utmost  importance  that  settlement systems 
and  the  financial  markets  physically  continue  to  function  as  normal.  Once  financial 
infrastructure continues to function normally, unfounded rumors will disappear in due course. 
If,  on  the  contrary,  financial  infrastructure  does  not  function  normally,  the  situation  will 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
deteriorate  further.  For  that  reason,  even  in  times  of  disaster,  it  is  important  to  make  the 
necessary  preparations  to  enable  the  normal  functioning  of  financial  infrastructure.  In  this 
regard, it has driven home to me the importance of the “logistics” of providing human and 
physical resources, and within this the importance of the location of backup centers.  
The  foremost  challenge  for  Japan  today  is  responding  to  the  acute  emergency  after  the 
disaster. Financial infrastructure is vital not only in this emergency phase immediately after 
the disaster, but also in the process of economic rebuilding that will gradually become more 
and  more  center-stage.  The  financial  markets  have  the  most  important  role  as  the 
infrastructure for providing the financing necessary for this rebuilding. After the Great Kanto 
Earthquake  of  1923,  foreign  currency-denominated  government  securities  were  issued  to 
cover the rebuilding costs. At that time, the government was forced to issue securities at high 
interest rates. Since the recent earthquake, there have been 12 auctions for 35.0 trillion yen 
worth  of  newly-issued  government  securities  including  treasury  discount  bills.  Despite  the 
unprecedented major earthquake and subsequent disasters and despite the fact that Japan’s 
fiscal conditions remain severe, it was still possible to issue securities at low interest rates in 
a stable manner. This was possible partly because the markets have confidence that the aim 
of  Japan’s  monetary  policy  is  to  achieve  sustainable  growth  with  price  stability  and  not  to 
facilitate  government  financing.  It  is  not  easy  to  get  a  sense  of  the  importance  of  the 
infrastructure at the heart of society, such as electricity supply and the road network, when it 
is  functioning  as  normal.  The  recent  disaster  has  made  us  recognize  that,  once  such 
infrastructure is damaged and impaired, repairing it is not easy and the damage has a very 
large  impact  on  people’s  lives  and  economic  activity.  The  same  thing  can  be  said  of 
confidence in the nation’s currency. The Bank of Japan will continue, as the central bank, to 
steadfastly work to ensure that trust in Japan’s currency is maintained as well as to carefully 
examine the outlook for economic activity and prices, and take appropriate policy actions as 
necessary.  
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
