Jan F Qvigstad: Managing wealth – the Norwegian experience 
Speech by Mr Jan F Qvigstad, Deputy Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), 
at  a  seminar  hosted  by  FEDEA  (Fundación  de  estudios  de  economía  aplicada),  Madrid, 
23 March 2011. 
 The seminar was hosted with the assistance of Mr Torgeir Larsen, Norway’s ambassador to Spain.  
It is difficult to overstate the effects of the financial crisis that started in September 2008. As a 
financial crisis, it has been one of the most severe on record. The crisis in the real economy 
was even worse. For the first time since the Second World War, total world output has fallen 
from one year to the next.  
The  crisis  hit  all  countries  and  was  surprisingly  synchronised.  This  shows 
the 
interconnectedness of modern finance. Big banks have important parts of their operations in 
other countries, often on other continents. Some Spanish banks provide good examples. 
Though the crisis hit us quite similarly, we have emerged from it in very different ways. The 
crisis was difficult to foresee, but was it possible – ex ante – to point out the countries that 
would end up in trouble after a crisis?  
Norway has escaped this crisis more lightly than many countries. Luck explains a lot, but not 
everything. We had our own very serious crisis 20 years ago. One central instrument we put 
in place after that crisis was a fiscal rule. This rule is closely related to our sovereign wealth 
fund, the Government Pension Fund.  
Many  explanations  are  offered  for  the  fall  of  the  Roman  Empire.  Likewise,  there  are 
numerous  causes  behind  the  financial  crisis.  Greed,  especially  in  the  financial  sector, 
stupidity, low lending standards and low interest rates have all been highlighted, and these 
arguments are not without merit. Still, two very important and striking features preceding the 
crisis were the growing imbalances in world trade and capital adequacy ratios in the banking 
system. 
The crisis was preceded by a build-up of global imbalances. Large and growing deficits in the 
US were driven by high consumption and a large appetite for debt among US households. In 
the US, domestic spending had outpaced domestic production for a long period. Private debt 
increased in the US, but also in Europe, matched by high saving in Asia – primarily in China.  
Federal Reserve Governor Ben Bernanke called the imbalances a global savings glut. This 
glut pushed down real interest rates and hence the return on investments. Low interest rates 
and compensation to take on risk led to a search for yield, increasing the inherent risk in the 
system. 
Global trade imbalances have been reduced somewhat over the past two years, but there is 
a considerable risk that they will persist. They must be corrected through structural changes 
in the real economy. This may weaken growth in the world economy in the coming decade. 
Asian economies, however, have fared well through the crisis. Emerging economies are now 
sufficiently  large  for  growth  in  their  economies  to  provide  impetus  to  production  in  other 
regions. 
The question has been raised, why didn’t we – the economists – see the crisis coming? As 
long  as  the  credit  system  has  existed,  crises  have  struck  with  irregular  intervals.  Still,  we 
must strive to keep the intervals as large as possible. A poorly regulated financial sector is 
partly to blame for this crisis as for many others. In many countries, the capital requirements 
were  reduced  year  by  year  before  the  crisis,  to  very  low  levels.  The  quality  was  gradually 
impaired.  Many  banks  issued  large  quantities  of  hybrid  capital,  but  the  investors  were  not 
ready to bear losses.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
In  addition  to  low  capital  requirements,  few  countries  had  any  macroprudential  policies  to 
speak of. Spain was an important exception. To avoid the next crisis, or at least dampen the 
effect, better banking regulation is necessary. 
First,  the  financial  crisis  revealed  that  banks  held  insufficient  capital,  excessive  short-term 
market funding and inadequate liquidity buffers. The new Basel III framework sets out stricter 
requirements. Higher and better-quality capital will increase banks’ resilience to pronounced 
fluctuations in the economy without their having to tighten lending abruptly. The new rules 
aim to moderate growth in banking in periods of expansion.  
Second,  the  new  framework  includes  macroprudential  tools  that  can  be  applied  as 
necessary.  Banks  may  be  subject  to  additional  capital  requirements  if  credit  growth  in  the 
wider economy is excessive. The requirement is intended to ensure that banks build up an 
extra capital buffer when systemic risk increases. Loan-to-value ceilings on mortgage loans 
may also be imposed. 
On this point, the Spanish model of statistical provisions, introduced by Banco de España as 
early  as  2000,  has  proved  valuable.  At  the  end  of  2007,  Spanish  banks  held  as  much  as 
1.3 per cent of total assets in these provisions, nearly a fourth of total regulatory capital. 
Third,  the  authorities  must  acquire  tools  that  enable  banks  to  be  wound  up  in  an  orderly 
manner.  In  this  context,  it  is  important  that  the  structure  of  banking  groups  is  transparent. 
Banks must also draw up plans for their own liquidation in the event of difficulties. Owners 
and creditors – not taxpayers – must bear the losses. The interest rate on banks’ funding will 
then reflect the risk they take rather than an implicit government guarantee. This will in itself 
have a preventive effect. 
The Basel Committee has decided on important measures. If countries are able to enforce 
new rules faster than the minimum standard of 2018, this should be welcomed.  
Let me now turn to the mitigating policies; provisions to help societies through the crisis with 
as little human cost as possible. The crisis has been eased by active economic policy. 
Monetary  policy  has  been  expansionary.  Twenty  years  of  low  and  stable  inflation  had 
provided confidence in central banks’ ability to control inflation, which in turn had paved the 
way for a sharp reduction in real interest rates without compromising the overall monetary 
policy target. 
This contrasts with the downturn in the late 80s, as illustrated in the case of Norway, as well 
as during the Depression, when real interest rates were kept high due to faltering credibility.  
Fiscal  policy  has  also  been  used  everywhere,  and  has  prevented  an  even  sharper  fall  in 
output. After two years of extensive fiscal measures, many governments are facing the wall. 
They are unable to finance further deficit spending and have to cut spending and increase 
taxes now.  
The  graph  shows  the  increasing  government  deficit  in  the  UK.  The  government  has  no 
choice  but  to  tighten  policy.  The  Swedish  government,  on  the  other  hand,  in  spite  of 
expansionary  policies  in  the  aftermath  of  the  crisis,  had  maintained  a  surplus  in  the  years 
before, and the Swedish economy has thus fared well.  
Although  countries  were  hit  by  the  crisis  in  a  fairly  similar  way,  they  emerged  from  it  very 
differently. Some countries have experienced good growth rates and falling unemployment. 
Others are struggling to keep their head above water. Production is still far below the pre-
crisis level, with unemployment hovering at record levels. 
Are these differences predictable?  
As  a  participant  in  OECD  meetings  for  many  years,  I  have  sometimes  been  among  the 
backbenchers,  trying  to  check  the  pulse  of  the  economy  in  various  countries.  I  have 
developed a few simple rules for selecting variables to keep an eye on: 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Over  time,  governments  cannot  run  an  increasing  deficit.  To  prevent  the  debt  level  from 
exploding, the deficit must be kept in line with nominal GDP growth. That figure is around 
4 per cent annually, for most Western countries.  
A fiscal balance can hide important imbalances. If one sector in the economy is far too large, 
the taxes from this sector can contribute significantly to the fiscal budget. An example is the 
construction  sector  in  some  European  countries  in  the  years  leading  up  to  the  crisis.  In 
normal times, this sector is around 3–5 per cent of GDP in most countries. In Spain, housing 
construction  was  9  per  cent  in  2006.  In  Ireland,  the  contribution  was  11  per  cent.  When 
problems  arose,  construction  activity  decreased  and  tax  income  was  reduced  significantly. 
Therefore,  one  should  also  look  at  the  current  account.  Inflation  above  4  per  cent  might 
indicate that price stability is not firmly anchored. If unemployment is above 4 per cent of the 
labour force, it might signal a labour market out of order. Finally, the risk of running into a 
crisis seems to increase if the total assets of the banking sector constitute more than 4 times 
GDP. 
This table illustrates the 4 per cent rule. Many countries had negative fiscal balances through 
the last decade despite moderate to high economic growth. Spain seemed to be in a different 
position  with  a  positive  fiscal  balance,  though  this  was  mainly  due  to  unsustainable  high 
growth in the construction sector.  
This illustrates the first question, which is how to solve time inconsistency in fiscal policy. It is 
easier to follow the prescriptions of Keynes in bad times than in good times. This asymmetry 
may lead to an increase in budget deficits and sovereign debt over time, also referred to as 
the fiscal bias. As a result, many countries are forced to tighten policy in a period when the 
real economy would certainly benefit from further stimulus.  
The crisis caused fiscal balances to deteriorate by 8–10 percentage points of GDP. There is 
an immense difference between encountering a shock of this magnitude from a positive fiscal 
balance of 4 per cent and encountering it from a negative fiscal balance of 4 per cent.  
A similar time inconsistency problem, the inflation bias, has been a much debated issue in 
monetary policy. The solution has been central bank independence. The results have been 
fairly good. The question remains, is there a lesson to be learnt in the fields of fiscal policy 
and banking regulation?  
This crisis has been very benign to the Norwegian economy. One of the reasons, I believe, is 
that we had a national banking crisis only 20 years ago. Many of the executives in banks, 
corporations and government this time, had experienced the previous crisis. Hopefully, they 
had learned some useful lessons.  
According to Kenneth Rogoff and Carmen Reinhart, the Norwegian banking crisis is in the 
top  five  list  of  the  most  severe  banking  crises  in  history,  which  also  includes  Spain  1977, 
Finland 1991, Sweden 1991 and Japan 1992. 
Three of Norway’s four biggest banks received capital injections from the government, after 
writing off the entire equity capital. The banks were fully nationalised. Two of them were later 
sold  100  per  cent  to  private  owners,  while  the  government  retained  a  large  share  (34  per 
cent) in DnB Nor. The banks had too little capital, as much of it was unable to bear losses. 
Therefore, the Norwegian definitions of Tier 1 capital were stricter than most countries.  
Like  many  resource-rich  economies,  Norway  expanded  its  welfare  state  rapidly  after  the 
discovery of oil. During the latter half of the 1970s, the government increased its ambitions in 
many key areas of the economy: the pension age was cut, agricultural subsidies increased, 
industrial policy widened and the government reduced taxes to bring wages under control.  
The  consequences  were  galloping  inflation,  a  depreciating  currency  and  worst,  meager 
productivity development in the Norwegian economy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
After 1986, steps were taken to get back on track. Interest rates were increased to subdue 
lending  and  the  fiscal  deficit  was  reduced.  By  1990,  Norwegian  government  believed  a 
potentially upcoming crisis had been averted. 
But  Norway,  like  most  European  countries,  was  hit  by  the high  interest  rates  following  the 
German  unification.  A  full  blown  banking  crisis  started  in  1990,  peaking  with  the 
nationalisation of the three main Norwegian banks in 1992. Unemployment in Norway rose 
rapidly and reached unprecedented levels. 
The last two decades have been a golden era in the Norwegian economy. Partly thanks to 
sound  macroeconomic  policy  and  growth-stimulating  structural 
reforms,  we  have 
experienced a strong growth record, after many years of meager performance. 
Due  to  good  luck,  we  have  also  experienced  very  positive  terms  of  trade  developments. 
Increasing  prices  for  our  exports,  such  as  petroleum,  fish  and  aluminium,  and  decreasing 
prices for important import products like clothing and consumer electronics have made the 
average Norwegian much better off than he or she was twenty years ago. Norway’s income 
has nearly tripled over the past 20 years. 
It is often politically easier to introduce structural reforms during crises. When bad news fills 
newspapers  and  television  programmes,  the  electorate  is  more  likely  to  accept  necessary 
measures. In the long run, reforms prove to be very profitable even though they are painful in 
the short run. Among the changes in the Norwegian economy from the 1990s on were the 
removal  of  subsidies,  closing  down  of  government-owned  enterprises,  deregulation  in 
important markets like housing and electricity, tax reform which increased incentives to work 
and closed tax evasion loopholes, and the reform of parliamentary budget procedures.  
Finally,  a  fiscal  rule  was  put  in  place,  providing  a  sustainable  relationship  between  the 
Government Pension Fund and the government budget. 
The fiscal rule states that the government every year shall use the estimated long term real 
return  on  the  Fund,  set  at  4  per  cent.  However,  there  is  no  direct  link  between  petroleum 
revenues and the Fund. The government collects taxes from the whole economy, including 
the petroleum sector. After all government expenditures are paid, the surplus is transferred to 
the Fund. 
The last 10 years, fiscal policy has been geared towards a cyclically adjusted non-oil deficit 
which corresponds to 4 per cent of the Fund every year.  
Let  me  now  turn  to  one  very  specific  Norwegian  issue:  the  management  of  our  oil  fund, 
called  the  Government  Pension  Fund  Global.  For  the  last  20  years,  Norway  has  been  a 
major petroleum producer. At the maximum, our nation produced about 4 per cent of global 
petroleum. This geological luck has given the Norwegian state an overwhelming cash flow. 
The first money was transferred to the fund in 1996. Fifteen years later the Fund stands at 
NOK 3.2 trillion, or EUR 410 billion. It is probably the second largest sovereign wealth fund in 
the world. The Fund is now 120 per cent of Norway’s GDP. 
Norges Bank, as manager of this financial wealth, has laid down several governing principles 
for  the  Fund.  We  seek  no  controlling  stakes.  In  fact,  the  maximum  ownership  in  any  one 
company is 10 per cent. We seek as good a return as possible, given the moderate level of 
risk defined by the Norwegian parliament and the Ministry of Finance. 
Although  government-owned,  the  Fund  has  no  role  at  all in  Norwegian  foreign  policy.  The 
Fund  is  managed  within  an  ethical  framework.  This  framework  has  two  pillars.  Some 
companies  are  excluded  from  the  investment  universe,  by  the  Ministry  of  Finance.  And 
Norges  Bank  has  a  corporate  governance  department  which  works  together  with  the 
companies we invest in. 
The overall principle for the investment strategy of the Fund is to keep a medium risk profile, 
defined by the Parliament and Ministry. Norges Bank makes investment decisions within this 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
risk profile, to achieve as good a return as possible. As time has gone by and crises have 
emerged  and  subsided,  the  Norwegian  parliament  and  public  have  increased  their  risk 
tolerance. 
From the start, the Fund was invested alongside our foreign currency reserves, exclusively in 
government  bonds  with  high  liquidity,  low  risk  and  mediocre  return.  In  1998  we  started 
investing  in  stocks,  placing  40  per  cent  of  the  Fund  in  equity  and  keeping  60  per  cent  in 
bonds.  In  the  following  years,  the  investment  universe  was  gradually  expanded.  Emerging 
markets were included, as were corporate bonds and stocks from small companies. 
In  2007,  the  Norwegian  parliament  decided  to  increase  the  Fund’s  equity  share  to  60  per 
cent. Last year, we started investing in real estate. When the real estate target of 5 per cent 
is reached, bonds will constitute only 35 per cent of the Fund.  
The  Fund  is  invested  broadly,  with  shares  in  8000  companies  world-wide  and  bonds  from 
2000 different issuers. The decision to increase the equity share in June 2007 took place just 
before the financial crisis started. Over the next two years, thanks to rebalancing and high oil 
prices, the Fund invested USD 150 billion in the world’s equity markets.  
The Fund now owns around 1 per cent of the world’s listed stocks. In Europe, the ownership 
stake  in  the  average  listed  company  is  close  to  2  per  cent.  The  Fund  is  overexposed  in 
Europe,  with  more  than  half  the  fund  invested  here.  The  heavy  weight  for  Europe  was 
inherited from the management of foreign exchange reserves. 
Going  forward,  a  neutral  weighting  across  regions  may  be  warranted.  There  are  good 
reasons for Norway to invest more heavily in countries far from us. 
Since 1998 the return on the Fund has been a little disappointing. The fiscal rule is based on 
an annual real return of 4 per cent after costs. The realised return has only been 3 per cent. 
It is important to note that the period includes two large stock market crashes. The US stock 
market has gained zero over this period.  
As I noted earlier, the Fund is invested mainly in line with market capitalisation – so called 
passive management. As a manager, we still have a mandate for active management to a 
certain  degree.  Our  target  is  to  generate  an  excess  return  of  0.25  per  cent.  We  aim  to 
achieve a return on the Fund which exceeds market returns by 25 basis points every year. 
Since inception, the excess return has been 31 basis points, a satisfactory result in our view.  
The  chart  shows  our  major  investments  in  Spain.  We  more  than  doubled  our  holdings  of 
Spanish  public  debt  during  2010.  The  reason  was  partly  increasing  returns,  which  made 
these  investments  more  attractive.  By  the  end  of  2010,  the  Fund  owned  stocks  in 
80 companies  listed  on  Bolsa  de  Madrid.  The  total  value  of  these  investments  was  EUR 
5.6 billion. That is on a par with the benchmark portfolio. 
That makes our Fund one of the largest financial investors in Spain. The fact that the Fund 
represents  another  country’s  government  makes  it  important  for  us  to  be  transparent, 
regarding both our targets and aims and our modus operandi. 
The  central  point  is  the  division  between  the  government  and  the  central  bank.  The 
government  provides  the  rules,  the  central  bank  makes  the  concrete  investment  decision. 
Another is our mission to be a financial investor. We seek no strategic stakes. We do not sit 
on the executive boards. 
Thank you. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  6 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  7
 8 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   9
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   11
  12 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   13
   14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   15
  16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
