Gane Simbe: Financial empowerment of women in the Solomon Islands 
Address  by  Mr  Gane  Simbe,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Solomon  Islands, 
during  the  launching  of  the  Rokotanikeni  Women  Association  book  “Women  and  Money 
Solomon Islands”, Central Bank of Solomon Islands, Honiara, 22 August 2011. 
 Thank you for inviting me to participate in one of the mile-stones in the progress made by the 
Rokotanikeni Women’s Association to bring participation, equity and raising the standard of 
living of women in the village; through financial services provided to its members.  
Financial empowerment of women, through the financial literacy and provision of affordable 
financial services is one of the key strategic goals of the National Financial Inclusion goals of 
the Solomon Islands Government that is being assigned to the National Financial Inclusion 
Taskforce, and chaired by the Governor of the CBSI. We want to see, at least 30,000 new 
women accessing affordable financial services by 2015.  
Rokotanikeni,  is  one  examples  of  the  kinds  of  member  initiatives  which  could  help  our 
Country  achieve  this  goal.  From  humble  beginning,  the  leaders  of  Rokotanikeni,  have 
patiently worked to see their membership grow. And they have seen the empowerment that 
their  Saving  Club  can  bring  to  the members.  The  Saving  Club  enlightens  the  membership 
that  the  opportunity  to  save  money  does  not  belong  to  only  those  who  have  formal 
employment.  Rotanikeni  is  putting  into  practice  the  principle  of  natural  growth;  “start  small 
and  grow  big”.  A  huge  tree  starts  with  a  small  seed  and  grows  over  time.  Similarly,  little 
money, saved overtime can grow. And this is strategic model being applied in Rokotanikeni 
Women Association-growing little by little over time.  
The Launch of the “Women and Money Solomon Islands” financial literacy book I am sure 
will enhance the education of our women, in financial matters. Educating women in Solomon 
Islands  about  money  and  its  management,  is  crucial,  not  only  is  the  fact  that  women  are 
better financial managers than men, but women are the teachers in their homes to pass on to 
our children about financial management as our Country matches forward towards a more 
monetarised economy.  
In conclusion, may I take this opportunity to congratulate, Rokotanikeni and its leadership. 
You  have  shown  us,  that  women  can  bring  changes  that  can  impact  and  empower  their 
association members.  
Thank you, and congratulations. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
