José Manuel González-Páramo: Risk, return, resilience – the future 
financial system 
Speech  by  Mr  José  Manuel  González-Páramo,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European  Central  Bank,  at  the  3rd  Annual  Risk  and  Return  Russia  Conference,  Moscow, 
14 April 2011. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
As the crisis is still unfolding, we cannot tell with certainty how our economic and financial 
systems will function in the future. Unfortunately, based on past experience, we can safely 
predict that individual banks, and the financial system as a whole, will face new challenges, 
and even crises. 
We,  as  risk  managers,  have  the  weighty  responsibility  of  ensuring  that  our  institutions  are 
prepared to weather these financial storms. Our role is not to eliminate the risk faced by an 
institution  –  this  would  not  be  possible  or  even  desirable.  In  order  to  create  resilient 
institutions, our role must be to act as guardians of the balance between risk and return. To 
do this, we must learn lessons from history; however, we should not be blinkered by history – 
we must use our knowledge of the past, combined with our intellect and our imagination, to 
anticipate and design appropriate responses for the challenges of the future. 
In response to the crisis, a new risk control framework is evolving in many of our institutions. 
This  framework  puts  risk  management at the core of the decision-making process. Today, 
based  on  lessons  learned  from  the  crisis,  I  would  like  to  highlight  some  of  the  principles 
which should guide the development of this new approach. Moreover, since this framework 
will  require  powerful  quantitative  and  judgemental  based  tools  to  guide  decision-making,  I 
would like to highlight the importance of taking a twin pillar approach so that the risk to which 
an institution is exposed is recognised and controlled – here, I am referring to the twin pillars 
of  statistical  risk  models  and  stress  testing.  Although  today  I  will  focus  on  the  framework 
being developed by institutions in the private sector, I would like to point out that many of the 
guiding  principles  as  well  as  the  quantitative  and  judgemental  based  tools  are  equally 
relevant in public institutions such as central banks. 
The importance of the financial system1 
2. 
Before considering this new framework in more detail, let me first emphasise that the role of 
institutional  risk  managers  and  institutional-specific  risk  control  frameworks  is  more 
significant than simply protecting an individual institution from failure: the concerted efforts of 
risk managers, regulators and central bankers can – and indeed must – ensure the resilience 
of the entire financial system. 
Why  is  the  resilience  of  the  financial  system  so  important?  The  financial  system  is  the 
lifeblood  of  the  real  economy.  It  touches  all  facets  of  our  economy  from  households  to 
corporations  and  even  governments.  Although  much  could  be  said  about  the  positive 
contributions  of  the  financial  system  to  the  real  economy,  for  the  sake  of  brevity  let  me 
highlight three contributions which I believe are of fundamental importance: 
                                                 
1  Finance and growth – theory and evidence, Handbook of Economic Growth (2005). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
1. 
2. 
3. 
First, an important role of the financial system in the real economy is to intermediate 
between savers and borrowers to create a mutually beneficial symbiotic relationship: 
From  the  point  of  view  of  borrowers  the  existence  of  sound  financial 
 
intermediation  means  that  people  can  obtain  mortgages  to  buy  homes; 
entrepreneurs  can  obtain  funding  to  bring  new  ideas  and  innovations  to  life; 
and  governments  can  undertake  long-term  projects  to  build  roads  and 
hospitals. 
From the point of view of individual savers lending through a sound financial 
intermediary 
to  borrowers  since 
intermediaries  screen  potential  borrowers;  perform  ongoing  due  diligence; 
diversify over many loans; have expertise in assessing the risk in investment 
strategies and importantly financial intermediaries can provide savers with the 
level of liquidity they require. 
lending  directly 
risky 
than 
less 
is 
 Second,  capital  markets  on  one  hand  can  give  corporations  access  to  funding 
allowing  them  to  invest  and  grow  their  businesses,  and  on  the  other  hand  the 
reliance of a corporation on capital markets creates incentive for good governance 
in order to entice and retain shareholder investment. 
Third, financial products allow businesses to hedge against risks such as adverse 
interest rate and exchange rate movements, allowing entrepreneurs to concentrate 
on growing their core business. 
The  seeds  of  the  crisis  were  sown  when  the  financial  system  began  to  loose  its  focus  on 
these core services: 
 
“Originate-to-distribute”  business  models  meant  that  institutions  no  longer  fulfilled 
their primary function of performing due diligence on borrowers. 
Investors  purchased  opaque  financial  products  such  as  securitisations  but  were 
unable  to  undertake  adequate  due  diligence  of  the  instruments  they  held,  instead 
they relied blindly on the judgements and the assessments of third parties such as 
credit rating agencies 
The risk involved in investment strategies was not properly assessed, in particular 
the probability and impact of tail events. 
Rather  than  relying  on  deposits  from  private  savers,  some  financial  institutions 
began  relying  on  wholesale  funding  markets  which  are  much  more  sensitive  to 
confidence-related shocks. 
Some institutions began investing in complex financial products whose function had 
little to do with economic fundamentals, for example re-securitised products such as 
CDO squared; 
The crisis has demonstrated in no uncertain terms that the behaviour of financial institutions 
has the power to inflict great harm on the real economy. As a result of the crisis, trust in the 
financial system has been damaged. Regulators and central bankers have now started on 
the long road to rebuilding this trust: 
 
The  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  for  financial  institutions  is  currently 
undergoing a major overhaul to close the gaps identified by the crisis – for example 
Basel III and Solvency II will strengthen the capital and liquidity positions of financial 
institutions and thus enhance the resilience of the financial system as a whole. 
Initiatives  to  improve  the  transparency  of  the  financial  system  have  also  been 
launched.  For  example,  in  cooperation  with  market  participants,  the  ECB  has 
launched the ABS loan level project. This is an initiative to make loan-by-loan data 
available  for  European  asset-backed  securities.  The  aim  is  to  promote  greater 
     2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
transparency  in  these  historically  opaque  instruments  in  order  to  foster  renewed 
confidence in securitisation markets. 
Steps are being taken by regulators and central banks to reduce their over-reliance 
on external credit assessments.2 
 Risk managers also have an important role to play – using the new regulatory framework as 
a  sound  foundation,  the  risk  control  framework  for  the  future  needs  to  be  implemented  to 
ensure the resilience of individual institutions and to contribute towards the resilience of the 
financial system as a whole. A resilient financial system will have a positive influence on the 
economy as a whole. 
Challenges facing individual institutions and the global financial system 
3. 
Now, let’s consider some adverse scenarios which could serve as food for thought for risk 
managers when designing a risk control framework for the future. Even during the relative 
calm of the last few decades there have been numerous crises in different parts of the globe 
– some which impacted only individual institutions while others which have been systemic in 
nature. Although these events never seem to repeat themselves in exactly the same way, it 
is  possible  to  identify  some  common  causes  and  triggers.  For  each  of  these  causes  and 
triggers, risk managers need to ask themselves the question “How would my institution cope 
if …?” 
Due  to  the  nature  of  finance,  it  is  not  uncommon  for  individual  banks  to  face  challenges. 
These challenges come in many shapes and forms: for example, a counterparty default, a 
credit rating downgrade, the withdrawal of a secure funding line, the overvaluation of assets, 
an upsurge in non-performing loans, flight of deposits, or outright fraud. These are potential 
adverse scenarios which a risk manager must consider when preparing for the future. 
Of  course  banks  do  not  exist  in  isolation:  they  are  subject  to  their  economic  environment. 
Therefore, in collaboration with supervisors and regulators, risk managers need to prepare 
for the eventuality of systemic crises in the markets where they operate. For example: 
 
Many  of  you  sitting  in  the  audience  today  will  have  experienced  first  hand  the 
devastating  impact  of  the  currency  crisis  which  Russia  experienced  in  the  1990s. 
Directly, this impacted banks reliant on foreign borrowing. Indirectly, bond and equity 
prices  collapsed  and  the  resulting  depression  resulted  in  higher  levels  of 
nonperforming loans.3 A risk manager needs to understand the direct and indirect 
impact that an event can have on an institution by evaluating well thought-out and 
comprehensive potential adverse scenarios. 
During the past decades, assets have played an increasingly important role in many 
economies.  Therefore  the  boom  and  bust  cycles  of  asset  prices  can  have  far-
reaching  consequences  economically.  For  example,  we  witnessed  the  severe 
impact  of  a  property  price  bubble  in  Japan  in  the  1990s.  Currently,  we  are 
witnessing  a  sharp  increase  in  commodity  prices,  as  the  growing  emerging 
economies account for an increasing share of global consumption. The role of risk 
managers is to evaluate and prepare for the impact of a downturn in prices. 
In  recent  decades  we  have  also  witnessed  crises  in  emerging  markets  where 
economies  have  overheated.  For  example  the  Asian  Crisis  in  the  late  1990s  first 
became evident in Thailand before quickly spreading to neighbouring countries and 
led  to  fears  of  wider  economic  impact  due  to  financial  contagion.  A  risk  manager 
                                                   
2  European commission’s public consultation on credit rating agencies – Euro system reply, 23 February 2011. 
3  Making the banking sector more efficient and resilient, OECD Economic Surveys: Russian Federation (2009). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
 must consider where the risks may lie in the future, for example by considering the 
impact  of  a  financial  slowdown  in  important  emerging  economies  like  Brazil  or 
China. 
In light of the current banking crisis, it is evident that the impact of the activities of 
lightly regulated entities on the financial system cannot be ignored. In particular, risk 
managers  must  become  more  aware  of  the  risks  associated  with  the  off-balance 
sheets  activities  of  their  own  institutions  since  the  crisis  has  revealed  that  these 
activities can have a direct impact on the financial health of the institution. 
With these adverse scenarios in mind, it is clear that the risk control framework needs to be 
robust and comprehensive so that institution-specific events or wider economic challenges 
don’t create a crisis for the institution. 
Let us now consider how the risk control frameworks of the past need to evolve to meet the 
challenges of the future. 
A robust risk control framework for the future 
4. 
The role of the risk control framework is to evaluate the risk inherent in the business activities 
of an institution and to ensure that these risks don’t endanger the institution even in extreme 
circumstances.  However,  financial  institutions  have  struggled  as  the  current  financial  crisis 
has unfolded and many have not been able to withstand the shocks that the financial system 
has  experienced.  But  exactly  why  did  these  failures  occur?  Well,  the  diagnosis  is  clear: 
industry reports highlight that the risk control framework in many institutions was not robust 
enough, due primarily to weak governance and lack of understanding of the risks inherent in 
the  business  strategies  adopted.  The  reports  conclude  that  risk  management  reforms  are 
necessary to create stronger institutions and a resilient financial system.4 
Individual institutions and the financial industry as a whole are learning from experience and 
are  now  developing  a  resilient  risk  management  framework  for  the  future.  This  framework 
should  be  built  following  some  guiding  principles  and  should  be  supported  by  a 
comprehensive risk management toolkit, namely the twin pillars of statistical risk models and 
of stress-testing programmes. 
I  would  like  to  add  that  central  banks  do  not  consider  themselves  exempt  from  the 
implementation of such a framework. Central banks, as public institutions, are accountable to 
the citizens they serve and must lead by example: In normal times, the core functions of a 
central bank include conducting repurchase operations to implement monetary policy and the 
investment of public money. In order to do this prudently, a framework must be in place to 
assess and mitigate the associated risks. Moreover, in times of crisis a central bank must act 
as the Lender of Last Resort and take socially necessary risks to safeguard the stability of 
the  financial  system.  Inevitably,  this  means  additional  credit  risk  exposure.  However,  this 
additional risk should not be borne blindly: it is essential that the risk control framework can 
quantify the true magnitude of the risk borne by the central bank. 
                                                 
4  Reform  in  the  Financial  Services  Industry:  Strengthening  Practices  for  a  More  Stable  System,  Institute  of 
International Finance (Dec. 2009); Risk Management Lessons from the Global Banking Crisis of 2008, Senior 
Supervisors  Group,  (Oct.  2009);  Containing  Systemic  Risk:  The  Road  to  Reform,  Counterparty  Risk 
Management Policy Group (Aug. 2008); Principles of conduct and best practice recommendations, Financial 
services industry response to the market turmoil of 2007–2008 (Jul. 2008). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Principles for a risk control framework 
4.1 
Let us now consider four guiding principles around which the risk control framework should 
be built.5 
1. 
First,  and  most  important,  is  the  principle  of  sound  governance:  The  voice  of  risk 
management  must  be  independent  and  within  the  boardroom  must  be  at  least  as 
powerful  as  that  of  the  revenue-makers:  good  advice  from  risk  managers  is 
worthless if senior management do not listen or are not fully committed to controlling 
the risks generated by revenue-makers. Clearly, this first principle is the base upon 
which the other principles stand. If this principle is not followed, then the impact of 
the other principles is, to all intents and purposes, nullified.  
Second, there needs to be a clear understanding of the risk inherent in the business 
model adopted by the institution. The risk control framework needs to give a bird’s 
eye view of the risks associated with the high-level overarching strategy, individual 
business lines and specific portfolios. Even the risks associated with the off-balance 
sheet  activities  of  the  institution  cannot  be  overlooked.  Let  me  illustrate  the 
importance of each of these considerations by drawing on some of the lessons of 
the crisis which I briefly mentioned earlier: 
 
2. 
The crisis highlighted the vulnerability of some business models, in particular 
those models which relied heavily on wholesale markets for funding. It is clear 
that  the  liquidity  risks  associated  with  such  a  model  were  not  properly 
assessed or understood. Consequently sufficient contingency measures, such 
as  adequate  liquidity  reserves  or  alternative  sources  of  funding,  were  not  in 
place to cope with the evaporation of liquidity in stressed conditions. Therefore 
it is essential that the risk framework can properly assess the risks associated 
with the high-level business model and that steps are taken to mitigate these 
risks. 
The crisis showed that many institutions did not properly understand the risks 
associated with the complex instruments which they held in their portfolios and 
that there was a blind reliance on the trading strategies or the assessments of 
others,  for  example  so-called  “smart”  market  participants  or  rating  agencies. 
Therefore  a  robust  risk  framework  must  be  able  to  drill  down  to  a  granular 
level so that the risk associated with individual portfolios can be analysed. 
The crisis revealed that the activities of lightly regulated entities were not as 
de-linked from their originators or sponsors as was previously thought. During 
the  crisis  many  institutions  had  to  bring  the  assets  of  the  lightly  regulated 
entities  to  which  they  had  close  links  onto  their  balance  sheet  when  the 
entities ran into trouble, although in most cases there was no legal onus to do 
this.  The  reason  for  such  action  was  to  help  protect  the  reputation  of  the 
regulated institution in the markets. 
  When defining the business model and strategy of a firm the risk tolerance of the institution 
needs  to  be  clearly  defined  and  communicated  to  all  business  lines.  The  risk  control 
framework needs to include explicit checks and controls to ensure that the actual risk profile 
of the firm stays line in with the risk tolerance of the financial institution. 
Furthermore it should be recalled that the potential for high returns goes hand in hand with 
high risks, therefore when developing business strategies a balance needs to be struck so 
that long run profitability can be ensured. In particular the risk control framework should be 
                                                 
5  Please refer to the previous footnote for further information. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
able  to  identify  the  risks  associated  with  high  profit  business  lines  so  that  this  can  to  be 
signalled to, and understood by, the highest level of management. 
3. 
The third key principle is the concept of diversification: It is clear that an institution 
which has well diversified activities is better placed to weather challenges. However, 
as  our  global  economy  becomes  more  interconnected  the  traditional  definition  of 
diversification  must  be  re-examined:  diversifying  across  equity,  market  and  credit 
risk is no longer enough – institutions also need to consider business lines which are 
less  sensitive  to  the  business  cycle.  Having  said  this  there  is  still  room  in  our 
financial  system  for  specialised  banks  which  have  the  expertise  required  to  take 
particular risks onto their balance sheet. For these banks which lack the cushion that 
diversification  provides, 
I  mentioned,  a  clear 
understanding of the risks inherent in the business model, is paramount.6 
Fourth and finally, the strategy of an institution should be forward looking: The risk 
control framework should look “through the cycle” and in particular identify and seek 
to mitigate the risks associated with pro-cyclicality – that is the exaggeration of the 
peaks and troughs of the natural economic cycle. For example, the institutional risk 
control  framework  must  account  for  the  risks  associated  with  following  similar 
strategies as other market participants particularly during the contraction phases of 
economic cycles, when many firms may be unwinding similar positions at the same 
time.  Here,  of  course,  the  individual  institutions  can  benefit  from  the  counsel  and 
guidance of the macro-prudential supervisors. 
the  second  principle  which 
4. 
4.2 
Strategic decisions should be guided by a two pillar analytical approach:  
A toolbox of statistical risk models and a comprehensive stress-testing 
programme 
In order that these four core principles can be followed, the tools used within the risk control 
framework  need  to  be  capable  of  evaluating  the  totality  of  the  risk  the  institution  faces. 
Furthermore,  it  should  be  possible  to  communicate  this  evaluation  in  a  concise  but 
comprehensive  way  to  all  stakeholders  in  the  institution.  In  order  to  achieve  this,  a 
comprehensive  risk  evaluation  toolbox  needs  to  be  put  in  place.  This  toolbox  should 
comprise  of  a  suite  of  complementary  statistical  risk  models  and  a  comprehensive  stress 
testing programme.  
First let me highlight some considerations regarding the statistical risk models before turning 
my attention to the concept of stress-testing. 
A toolbox of complementary statistical risk models 
We use statistical risk measures such as value-at-risk, expected loss or expected shortfall to 
assess  the  risk  facing  an  institution.  However,  as  I’m  sure  you  are  aware,  statistical  risk 
models have been subject to strong criticism in recent times since the crisis has brought the 
shortcomings of some of these models to light. Nevertheless, this does not signal the death 
toll for such models. On the contrary, statistical models, properly used, will be an important 
component of the risk control framework since they allow us to compress the myriad of risks 
facing an institution into a few easy-to-understand figures. 
There are some common-sense guiding principles which will ensure that this toolbox is used 
in a constructive manner to evaluate and control the risks faced by an institution:  
                                                 
6  EU Banking Structures, ECB (September 2010). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
First, and perhaps most importantly, risk models are a tool: they are created to help 
aid  our  understanding  of  risk  but  are  not  there  to  replace  the  intellect  of  a  risk 
manager who must interpret their output in a meaningful way. 
Second,  risk  models  should  not  be  used  in  isolation:  every  model  encapsulates a 
different  version  of  reality  therefore  using  different  models  helps  to  build  a  more 
representative picture of the risks facing an institution.  
Third,  risk  models  by  their  nature  make  simplifying  assumptions  regarding  reality. 
Therefore  limitations  of  individual  models  should  be  clearly  signalled.  If  the 
limitations  of  the  model  are  not  properly  understood  then  this  can  lead  to 
misinterpretations  of  the  output.  For  example,  statistical  models  may  work  well 
under  normal  market  conditions  but  not  under  stressed  market  conditions  where 
accessing funding may become more challenging or liquidity may evaporate. 
Fourth, since statistical models use historical data to anticipate what might happen 
in the future, accurate and representative historical data is a basic requirement as 
without this, even the most sophisticated model is worthless.  
Fifth,  the  field  of  statistical  risk  modelling  is  still  evolving  but  it  is  important  when 
developing new models that emphasis is placed on ease of use and calibration and 
that model outputs are easily interpreted and understood: sophisticated models are 
worthless if it is not possible to derive realistic input assumptions from the market or 
interpret the output in a meaningful way. 
With these guiding principles in mind, it should be possible to create a statistical risk toolbox 
which can help inform the decision makers of an institution.  
A comprehensive stress-testing programme7 
Now let me turn to the second pillar of the risk analysis toolbox – namely a comprehensive 
stress-testing programme. (Of course, I refer here to an “internal” stress-testing programme 
which is designed and executed by the institution itself, rather than the “external” stress-tests 
carried  out  by  regulators  such  as  the  European  Banking  Authority.)  An  internal  institution-
specific  stress-testing  programme  should  be  used  to  complement  statistical  risk  analysis 
since  a  well-developed  programme  will  allow  decision-makers  to  gain  an  insight  into  what 
happens in extreme circumstances or so-called “tail-events”.  
In  the  past,  stress-testing  in  an  institution  was  normally  done  in  a  rather  ad-hoc  way,  for 
example: 
 
sensitivity  tests  were  carried  out  to  check  that  statistical  models  where  not 
concealing  potentially  large  risk  exposures  due  to  their  specific  assumptions  and 
limitations, or 
mechanical stress tests were carried out, for example, increasing interest rates by a 
certain – rather arbitrary – factor to determine the impact on a particular portfolio. 
 Although  sensitivity  tests  and  mechanical  tests  have  their  place,  such  tests  are  not 
necessarily  a  reflection  of  reality.  So  while  these  tests  may  be  stressful,  it  is  difficult  to 
interpret whether they are in fact plausible. 
This,  of  course,  must  be  the  core  tenet  of  a  comprehensive  stress  testing  programme: 
scenarios  should  be  “stressful  but  plausible”.  To  achieve  this,  institutions  are  placing  less 
emphasis  on  the  ad-hoc  tests  of  the  past  and  are  implementing  an  approach  whereby 
scenarios are defined by considering a set of coherent events; the impact of these events on 
                                                 
7  Principles for sound stress testing practices and supervision, BIS (May 2009). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
the  institution,  on  business  lines  and  even  on  individual  portfolios  and  positions  is  then 
examined.  
In order to ensure that such scenarios are indeed “stressful but plausible”, this programme 
cannot be the sole responsibility of risk managers – all business areas within the institution 
need  to  be  involved,  and  macro-prudential  supervisors  consulted,  so  that  the  end-result  is 
credible. For inspiration, to those of you who will take up the challenge of developing such a 
programme, let me recall some of the adverse scenarios I mentioned earlier:  
 
on one hand, institution-specific (and even business-line specific) events need to be 
considered: a counter-party default, a credit rating downgrade, the withdrawal of a 
secure funding line, the overvaluation of assets… 
on the other hand, and perhaps more importantly, macroeconomic scenarios need 
to be considered: for example asset price bubbles, slowing global economies, the 
impact of difficulties in the less regulated markets. 
 Once  an  array  of  scenarios  have  been  chosen,  these  skeletal  scenarios  must  then  have 
meat  added  to  them.  The  chain  reaction  resulting  from  the  initial  scenario  needs  to  be 
developed:  for  example  a  slowing  emerging  economy  may  or  may  not  have  a  large  direct 
impact  on  an  institution,  but  what  if  an  important  counterparty  is  exposed?  Or  what  if  the 
slowing  emerging  economy  causes  a  collapse  in  the  demand  for  commodities,  how  would 
this affect internal portfolios? Is the institution indirectly affected by a collapse in commodity 
prices due to high exposure to commodity-rich countries? ... and so on. 
The impact of such a scenario on an individual institution can be determined by looking at 
historical data, but it is not reasonable to assume that the world is not changing; we must 
also  prepare  for  risks  which  have  never  occurred.  To  help  us  economic  forecasts  and 
analysis play a role – but our judgement and imagination are also indispensable tools. 
To  develop  such  a  comprehensive  stress-testing  programme  is  not  a  trivial  task.  It  will 
require  an  investment  of  time  and  resources.  But  there  are  high  dividends  to  be  reaped: 
institutions with such a programme will surely be better placed to survive the next crisis. 
Conclusion 
5. 
Let me conclude. 
In  the  years  leading  up  to  the  crisis,  too  often,  in  the  clamour  for  ever  higher  returns,  the 
voice of reason was not heard and risks were ignored. The crisis has exposed this and has 
revealed  significant  shortcomings  in  the  risk  control  frameworks  of  financial  institutions.  In 
particular, the failure to properly assess the risks inherent in business models, in portfolios, 
and in off-balance sheet activities has become evident. Consequently, a rebalancing of risk 
and return is required to ensure resilient institutions and a resilient financial system.  
To achieve this, a strengthening of the risk control framework is needed so that our financial 
institutions are ready to face the challenges that lie ahead. Such a framework needs to put 
risk  management  at  the  heart  of  the  strategy  and  decision  making  processes  of  each 
institution. The framework should be supported by the twin pillars of risk analysis, that is a 
suite  of  statistical  risk  models  to  provide  a  measure  of  the  different  risks  faced  by  the 
institution  and  a  comprehensive  stress  testing  programme  which  consists  of  a  more 
judgemental  and  coherent  risk  analysis  based  on  scenarios  that  the  institutions  may  be 
facing in the future. 
I  will  leave  you  with  a  final  reflection:  although  the  global  economy  may  show  signs  of 
recovery, many uncertainties remain. There is no room for complacency as new challenges 
will undoubtedly arise. We must act now to rigorously implement risk control frameworks so 
that we are prepared to face the next challenge from wherever that may come. 
Thank you for your attention. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
