Caleb M Fundanga: Foreign private investment in Zambia 
Opening remarks by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the Closing 
and  Dissemination  Workshop  on  Foreign  Private  Investment  and  Investor  Perceptions 
Survey, Lusaka, 20 January 2011. 
 The Deputy Secretary to the Cabinet, Mr Evans Chibiliti; 
The  Deputy  permanent  Secretary  at  the  Ministry  of  Works  and  Supply,  Mrs  Bweupe 
Kaonga;  
The MEFMI Executive Director, Dr Elias Ngalande;  
The IMF Country Representative, Mr Perry Perone;  
Heads of Government Departments present;  
Chief Executive Officers of various Companies and Associations present  
Colleagues from Bank of Zambia;  
Distinguished Participants;  
Members of the Press;  
Ladies and Gentlemen.  
It  is  my  honour  and  privilege  to  officiate  at  this  very  important  Closing  and  Dissemination 
workshop of Phase III of the Survey on Foreign Private Investment and Investor Perceptions. 
As I welcome you all, I wish to convey my appreciation for your contributions to the success 
of this project. May I, in this regard, express our special appreciation to the private sector 
colleagues for their cooperation during the survey.  
Let  me  also  take  this  opportunity  to  extend  my  sincere  gratitude  to  the  Private  Sector 
Development  (PSD)  Programme,  for  providing  financial  support  for  this  very  important 
project.  Further,  our  thanks  go  to  the  Macroeconomic  and  Financial  Management  Institute 
(MEFMI), and Development Finance International (DFI) for providing technical support to this 
survey.  With  their  technical  support,  the  Government,  through  the  Balance  of  Payments 
Statistical Committee, comprising representatives from the Ministry of Commerce, Trade and 
Industry, Ministry of Tourism and Natural Resources, Zambia Development Agency, Central 
Statistical Office and Bank of Zambia, was able to undertake this very important survey.  
Distinguished  Participants,  As  you  are  aware,  the  Zambian  economy  has  recorded 
significant  positive  developments  in  the  recent  past,  owing  to  the  economic  reforms  the 
Government  has  been  implementing  since  1992.  These  reforms  have  facilitated  foreign 
investments in various sectors of the economy. These reforms have also resulted in Zambia 
recording  tremendous  improvement  in  world  ranking  with  regard  to  the  ease  of  doing 
business. The favourable investment climate created has raised investor confidence in the 
Zambian economy thereby attracting both local and foreign investments.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  survey  findings  we  are  disseminating  today  show  that  the 
overall  Foreign  Private  Investment  inflows  in  2009,  declined  to  US  $935.4  million  from 
US $1,932.8 million recorded in 2007. This was explained mainly by the notable reduction in 
re-invested  earnings,  due  to  lower  profits  recorded  by  enterprises  during  the  year.  The 
overall reduction in foreign investment inflows is also consistent with global developments. In 
fact,  at  a  global 
to 
US $1,114.2 billion in 2009 from US $1,770.9 billion in 2008 and US $2,100.0 billion in 2007. 
Nonetheless, new equity investment inflows in Zambia surged to US $419.2 million in 2009 
from  US  $131.6  million  recorded  in  2007.  The  substantial  increase  in  new  equity 
investments,  despite  the  effects  of  the  global  financial  and  economic  crisis,  demonstrates 
how favourable the Zambian investment climate is in attracting foreign investment.  
inflows  drastically  declined 
foreign  direct 
Investment 
level, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Distinguished Guests, It is also encouraging to note that the Government’s diversification 
efforts  are  yielding  favourable  results.  The  survey  findings  show  that  the  concentration  of 
foreign direct investment in the mining sector is reducing as evidenced by the substantial FDI 
inflows to other sectors such as manufacturing, wholesale and retail trade, and the tourism 
sector in 2009.  
Evidence  from  South  East  Asia  and  the  recent  global  financial  and  economic  crises  show 
that  high  volatility  in  foreign  private  capital  if  not  properly  monitored  and  managed,  can 
induce  financial  and  macro-economic  instability.  In  light  of  this  the  results  of  the  Foreign 
Private Investment and Investor Perception Survey are important and intended to assist the 
Government to effectively monitor and manage these flows.  
In  addition,  better  information  on  investor  perceptions  will  assist  Government  in  designing 
policies  and  programmes  that  will  help  enhance  Zambia’s  favourable  investment  climate. 
Further,  the  results  of  the  survey  should  prove  useful  to  the  private  sector  and  other 
stakeholders as they highlight some concerns which Government should address as well as 
the  overall  business  profitability  and  performance  prospects  of  various  sectors.  The 
importance  of  timely  and  reliable  information  on  capital  flows  in  the  design  of  appropriate 
policy responses by Government and thus enhancing macroeconomic stability can hardly be 
overemphasised.  Adequate  and  consistent  information  on  capital  flows  will  also  greatly 
improve Balance of Payments Statistics for Zambia and serve as an early warning system for 
Government on potential financial crises and other external shocks.  
Mr. Chairman, Zambia has adequate technical capacity to collect, analyse and disseminate 
data and information on foreign private investment. It has, however, lagged behind in terms 
of  the  frequency  of  these  surveys  compared  with  some  other  countries  in  the  region.  For 
instance, while we are now at the third phase of the Survey, Uganda, Tanzania and Malawi 
are in their eighth, fifth and fourth phases, respectively.  
This only emphasises the critical need to conduct this enterprise survey more regularly. To 
this  end,  I  wish  to  reiterate  the  Bank  of  Zambia’s,  continued  support  and  commitment  in 
working  in  close  collaboration  with  Government  and  other  Balance  of  Payments  Statistical 
Committee member institutions in ensuring that the collection of this vital information is done 
on  an  annual  basis.  Accordingly,  it  is  my  hope  that  participants  at  this  workshop  will 
appreciate the importance of this survey and find the results useful.  
Distinguished Guests, I am particularly happy to learn that compared to other countries in 
the region, the Zambian team has conducted this enterprise survey in record time. It shows 
true commitment and dedication of the team to this project. Please keep up the good work. 
Be reminded, however, that you have established a benchmark, which can only be improved 
on. I have no doubt that we will sustain the record we have set within the Macroeconomic 
and Financial Management Institute of Southern and Eastern African member countries. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, I am confident that this workshop will achieve its intended objective 
of disseminating the findings of the survey and stimulate active participation and comments 
from the various stakeholders. It is now my pleasure and honour to declare this Closing and 
Dissemination  Workshop  on  Foreign  Private  Investment  and  Investor  Perception  Survey 
officially opened and wish you fruitful deliberations.  
I thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
