Christian Noyer: Inflation, Europe’s response to the debt crisis, 
emerging-market economies and priorities for the G-20 – interview in The 
Wall Street Journal 
Interview  with  Mr  Christian  Noyer,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France  and  Chairman  of  the 
Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  in  The  Wall  Street  Journal, 
Paris, conducted by Mr Brian Blackstone and Ms Nathalie Boschat on 24 January 2011 and 
published on 26 January 2011. 
 WSJ:  The  European  Central  Bank  recently  toughened  its  stance  on  inflation.  How 
concerned are you about the risks of inflation taking hold in the euro zone? 
Noyer:  The  uptick  in  inflation  is  mostly  due  to  the  rise  in  oil  and  commodity  prices.  Core 
inflation  has  remained  relatively  subdued.  By  nature,  that  [the  rise  in  inflation]  should  be 
temporary. Our projections show that the inflation rate should come back to a zone perfectly 
in line with our definition of price stability during the course of 2011. 
As a central bank, we are very attentive to the only risks that exist in such a situation, which is 
that there might be second-round effects – an acceleration of inflation due to other causes – 
wages and other dynamics of internal costs. 
This is why we are vigilant about all those evolutions. I am quite confident that we will be able 
to keep inflation at bay. That includes sending the message that we will never tolerate that 
inflation  could  become  entrenched.  We  are  determined  not  to  let  inflation  become 
entrenched  through  second-round  effects.  It  is  this  determination  that  would  permit  us  to 
keep expectations where they are. 
WSJ:  Since  the  current  rise  in  inflation  is  due  in  large  part  to  the  buoyancy  of 
emerging countries, are you worried that controlling inflation is to some extent out of 
your control? 
Noyer: It’s true that there are factors beyond our direct control. But there are also structural 
answers  to  these  factors,  such  as  development  of  production,  in  order  to  limit  the  rise  in 
agricultural  prices.  There  are  possibilities,  and  the  level  of  prices  helps  a  lot  to  develop 
production and alleviate the pressure. 
When  we  look  at  the  global  picture  of  economy,  there  are  emerging  countries  which  have 
suffered less from the economic crisis and advanced economies which had to recover from a 
much  lower  growth  and  even  recession.  That  in  turn  creates  problems  for  emerging 
economies,  including  the  fact  that  some  of  them  have  hesitated  to  run  the  fiscal  and 
monetary  policy  that  would  have  been  absolutely  appropriate  given  the  state  of  their 
economies. 
That  calls  for  a  better  understanding  of  each  other’s  state  of  economic  development  and 
economic policies. That’s what the G-20 wants to do through the framework for strong and 
sustainable growth initiative. 
WSJ: The G-20 is looking at various factors to assess the nature of global imbalances, 
and the debate often focuses on the part that foreign exchange rates should play in 
this assessment. What role do you think currencies, including the yuan, should play in 
the global rebalancing? 
Noyer:  It  is  up  to  [China]  to  assess  exactly  what  part  the  exchange  rate  can  play  in  the 
rebalancing. But appreciation of the yuan can help [China] enhance domestic consumption 
and dampen some of the effects of the rise in commodity prices. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
WSJ:  In  order  to  address  currency  misalignments,  shouldn’t  the  G-20  call  more 
strongly for increased currency flexibility across the board? 
Noyer: The G-7 has been monitoring excessive currency fluctuations. But the world having 
changed and G-7 economies no longer being the dominant ones, should we adopt the same 
rules as we did during the ‘70s? We need to find out how to manage the system. 
How  can  we  monitor  capital  flows,  and  how  can  we  avoid  the  risk  of  capital  controls 
hampering global trade? We need to give a clear mandate to the IMF to monitor the capital 
account.  It  would  be  useful  to  have  a  clear  set  of  rules.  The  IMF  can  be  an  independent 
assessor of policies and give advice on the best course of action. 
WSJ: What lessons have you learned from the crisis? 
Noyer: There was probably during the period of time that preceded the crisis an excessive 
belief that the combination of the growing importance of emerging economies, which brought 
a  disinflationary  force  in  the  manufacturing  sector,  and  the  credibility  attained  by  central 
banks globally had created a world where inflation could be kept at bay quite easily. 
There was insufficient focus on some of the effects of low interest rates for a long period, like 
the  fact  that  it  facilitated  asset  bubbles  and  asset  bubbles  may  lead  to  burst  bubbles  and 
economic and financial crisis or the transmission into pressure on inflation. We’ll probably be 
more attentive in the future. 
WSJ:  The  ECB  has  upped  its  vigilance  on  inflation  in  the  euro  zone,  but  if  interest 
rates were to b e raised earlier than expected, it could be a problem for countries in 
the  periphery  that  depend  on  the  ECB’s  support  through  its  bond-buying  program. 
Would  it  be  possible  for  the  ECB  to  raise  rates  to  address  rising  inflation  in  core 
countries while keeping nonstandard measures in place to prop up peripheral states? 
Noyer: Generally speaking, it is technically feasible. I am not signaling that we are going to 
raise interest rates. As a matter of fact we have done a lot to start unwinding nonstandard 
measures. Excess liquidity in the euro-system has decreased dramatically and the situation 
has normalized. Now the market is working much better. 
People  know  that  we  never  have  hesitated  to  do  whatever  was  necessary  to  restore  the 
proper  functioning  of  the  monetary  market  and  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy 
transmission. We have been sometimes criticized but the results are there. 
WSJ:  Do  you  think  the  euro  zone’s  bailout  fund  –  the  European  Financial  Stability 
Facility – should be expanded? 
Noyer: The European response has been an ambitious response to the present crisis and 
the fund has been a remarkable success. We would clearly favor the fund to be enhanced 
both  quantitatively  and  qualitatively.  I  think  increasing  it  quantitatively  is  probably  the 
intention of governments. The fund’s firepower is limited by a number of technical constraints 
to get a triple-A rating. How to move closer to the original intention in terms of firepower is 
clearly up to the reflection of governments. It is appropriate to think about [enlarging the size 
of the fund] even if there is no immediate need. 
As  far  as  the  qualitative  aspect  of  the  fund  is  concerned,  it  seems  to  me  that  having  the 
capacity  for  instance  to  intervene  in  secondary  markets  could  probably  be  an  interesting 
feature  in  some  cases,  if  only  to  facilitate  access  to  the  market.  This  of  course  raises  for 
governments  the  question  of  conditionality  of  the  support  …  but  probably  they  can  find 
answers to that. 
Another possibility would be that of precautionary programs [such as credit lines], like what 
the IMF is doing. 
It’s useful that governments look into that and look at the various tools that could be effective 
and which could correspond to the various goals that they want to pursue, including making 
sure  that  the  policies  followed  by  member  states  receiving  EFSF  support  are  aimed  at 
restoring a sound fiscal and the appropriate competitiveness. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
