Ben S Bernanke: Financial literacy 
Statement  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal 
Reserve System, provided for the record of a hearing held on 12 April 2011 conducted by the 
Subcommittee  on  Oversight  of  Government  Management,  the  Federal  Workforce,  and  the 
District  of  Columbia,  Committee  on  Homeland  Security  and  Governmental  Affairs,  US 
Senate, Washington DC, 20 April 2011. 
 Chairman Akaka, Ranking Member Johnson, and members of the Subcommittee, thank you 
for inviting me to submit a statement for the record. As April is Financial Literacy Month, I am 
pleased to highlight the importance of financial literacy to a stable and healthy economy and 
to describe some of the Federal Reserve System’s efforts to help Americans make informed 
financial decisions.  
The recent crisis demonstrated the critical importance of financial literacy and good financial 
decisionmaking,  both  for  the  economic  welfare  of  households  and  for  the  soundness  and 
stability  of  the  system  as  a  whole.  Good  financial  choices  depend  on  reliable  and  useful 
information, presented in an understandable way. Essential components of personal financial 
management  include  an  understanding  of  how  to  budget  strategically,  use  credit,  save  to 
build personal wealth, and shop for and choose suitable financial products.  
The Federal Reserve recognizes that informed, educated consumers not only achieve better 
outcomes  for  themselves  but,  through  careful  shopping  for  and  use  of  financial  products, 
help to increase market efficiency and innovation. Our approach to assisting consumers to 
successfully  navigate  the  financial  marketplace  has  been  three-pronged:  First,  we  have 
worked diligently to foster financial and economic education. Second, we conduct research 
on  consumer  decisionmaking  that  helps  to  identify  what  works  in  financial  education  and 
informs  the  regulatory  process.  Third,  in  recognition  that  basic  financial  knowledge  is  not 
sufficient  to  safeguard  people  from  fraud  and  deceptive  practices,  we  have  promulgated 
strong consumer protection rules and consumer-tested required financial product disclosures 
to  ensure  they  present  information  clearly  and  in  a  useful  format.  We  vigorously  enforce 
consumer protection laws to ensure that providers of consumer financial products act fairly 
and comply with the spirit and letter of the rules.  
Financial and economic education 
In  our  dynamic  and  complex  financial  marketplace,  financial  education  must  be  a  life-long 
pursuit  that  enables  consumers  of  all  ages  and  economic  positions  to  stay  attuned  to 
changes in their financial needs and circumstances and to take advantage of products and 
services that best meet their goals. Well-informed consumers, who can serve as their own 
advocates, are one of the best lines of defense against the proliferation of financial products 
and services that are unsuitable, unnecessarily costly, or abusive.  
Financial education from the Federal Reserve 
The Federal Reserve has provided unbiased, credible, research-based financial information 
and educational materials, in print and on the Internet, for many years. We offer publications 
– in both English and Spanish – that provide consumers tips on a broad range of topics, from 
avoiding mortgage foreclosure scams to managing a checking account. More recently, the 
Federal Reserve Board has developed interactive webpages with up-to-date information on 
regulatory changes that affect consumer financial products and services. These webpages 
offer  information  in  plain  language  and  in  an  easy-to-understand  format;  they  also  provide 
links to calculators, additional resources, and other relevant material. The Board’s “What You 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Need  to  Know”  series  provides  user-friendly  information  and  tools  about  new  terms, 
disclosures,  and  protections  for  credit  card  accounts,  overdraft  protection  programs,  gift 
cards,  credit  decisions  and  credit  scores,  and  notices  of  mortgage  transfers.1  Since  the 
series webpage was launched in February 2010, more than 366,000 web views have been 
logged, with 60 percent of those visits for credit card information.  
The  Federal  Reserve  Banks,  through  their  Community  Affairs  offices,  have  developed 
financial  education  materials  and programs  on  topics  that range  from  establishing  banking 
accounts to building wealth. For example, the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, as part of 
Financial Literacy Month, offers free classes and activities during its “Money Smart Week.” In 
events developed in cooperation with local organizations and firms, young people and adults 
learn  about  financial  matters  ranging  from  opening  a  savings  account  to  applying  for  a 
mortgage. Several Federal Reserve Banks are also actively involved in “Bank On” programs 
that  help  cities  and  financial  institutions  bring  unbanked  and  underbanked  consumers  into 
the financial mainstream by educating them about the benefits of having a bank account and 
using other banking services.  
Exposing  young  people  to  financial  concepts  is  particularly  important.  Students  can  be 
particularly  vulnerable  to  the  temptations  of  taking  on  excessive  debt,  such  as  credit  card 
debt. And the earlier that young people can develop basic financial skills, the more likely it is 
that they will make good financial decisions when they become adults. The Federal Reserve 
is  committed  to  helping  teachers  and  schools  work  more  effectively  with  students  as  they 
develop their financial literacy. For  example, the Federal Reserve provides a financial and 
economic education website with a variety of resources for teachers, and students of various 
ages  and  knowledge  levels.2  The  site  offers  educational  games,  classroom  lesson  plans, 
online publications, and multimedia tools. Federal Reserve Banks offer teachers professional 
development opportunities to improve their ability to teach personal finance topics. A number 
of  Federal  Reserve  Banks  also  organize  personal  finance  essay,  video,  and  academic 
competitions  for  students.  We  encourage  students  and  teachers  to  visit  Federal  Reserve 
Bank learning centers and museums, which feature interactive exhibits about many aspects 
of banking, the financial system, and the economy.  
Collaboration in financial education 
In addition to conducting its own programs, the Federal Reserve collaborates with numerous 
organizations  and  agencies  that  educate  and  counsel  individuals  from  a  broad  range  of 
audiences. Our long-standing partnership and role on the board of NeighborWorks America 
supports  homebuyer,  foreclosure,  and  mortgage  modification  counseling  to  lower-income 
consumers  and  communities.  We  have  helped  these  and  other  organizations  –  such  as 
American  Savings  Education  Council,  Junior  Achievement,  the  Council  for  Economic 
Education, the National Endowment for Financial Education, and America Saves – develop, 
implement, and evaluate personal finance awareness and education programs. In addition, 
we have worked with the Jump$tart Coalition, American Library Association, the AARP, the 
National  Council  of  La  Raza,  the  National  Association  of  School  Boards,  and  the 
Congressional Black Caucus to increase awareness of our financial and economic education 
resources.  
We  also  collaborate  with  other  federal  government  agencies  on  education  and  outreach 
initiatives.  Since  2004,  the  Board  has  participated  in  the  Financial  Literacy  and  Education 
Commission  (FLEC),  which  is  composed  of  representatives  from  22  federal  agencies  and 
coordinates financial education resources offered by the federal government. To support the 
                                                 
1   See Board, “What You Need to Know Series.” 
2   See the Federal Reserve Education website. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
FLEC’s mission, Board staff members have served on Commission task forces to develop its 
website, national strategy, and research agenda.  
Research and evaluation 
As  part  of  our  policy  research  mission,  the  Federal  Reserve  dedicates  considerable 
resources to the study of consumer economics and consumer behavior. Our work includes 
the development of valuable new data and empirical studies in these areas. For example, for 
many  decades  the  Board’s  Survey  of  Consumer  Finances  has  provided  one  of  the  most 
important sources of information on the assets, debts, and wealth of American households.3 
The  Federal  Reserve  has  also  developed  substantial  expertise  in  assessing  and  drawing 
policy conclusions from a range of consumer financial data, such as data from credit records 
or data on mortgages provided by lenders under the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act.  
The  Federal  Reserve  has  been  involved  in  studying  the  efficacy  of  financial  education  in 
helping people make better financial decisions. For example, several years ago, researchers 
in  the  Board’s  Division  of  Consumer  and  Community  Affairs  joined  with  Army  Emergency 
Relief to conduct a longitudinal study of the effect of a two-day financial education program 
on  soldiers’  financial  management.  In  general,  studies  show  that  financial  education  for 
young adults is most effective when it is both timely and relevant. At the same time, research 
has also provided important insight into other factors that contribute to the development of 
personal financial skills, such as general education levels, family experiences and parental 
influence, access to financial services (for example, having a savings account while growing 
up),  and  income  level.4  These  findings  underscore  the  importance  of  early  and  ongoing 
education  as  well  as  experience  with  financial  products  in  helping  people  make  good 
financial choices.  
We  have  also  analyzed  alternative  approaches  to  financial  education.  For  example,  the 
economic  education  staff  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Philadelphia  investigated  the 
effectiveness of a personal finance course that uses a specific curriculum, “Keys to Financial 
Success.” This semester-long course is taught by teachers who attended a 30-hour training 
course. A 50-question exam administered before and after the course showed that students 
who  took  the  course  had  a  statistically  significant  increase  in  their  personal  finance 
achievement,  compared  with  a  control  group  of  students  of  the  same  age  who  were  not 
exposed to the program.5  
                                                 
3   The Board’s Survey of Consumer Finances. 
4   See  Catherine  Bell,  Daniel  Gorin, 
and 
(2009), 
Jeanne  M.  Hogarth 
Affairs  Research  Conference, 
“Does  Financial  
the  Federal  Reserve  
Education  Affect  Soldiers’  Financial  Behaviors?”  paper  presented  at 
16–17, 
April 
System  Community 
www.kansascityfed.org/publicat/events/community/2009carc/Hogarth.pdf;  Catherine  Bell  and 
Jeanne  
M.  Hogarth  (2010),  “Better  Deals  on  Wheels:  The  Effects  of  Financial  Education  on  Car  Buying,”  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  Minneapolis,  Community  Dividend,  April;  Catherine  J.  Bell,  Jeanne  M.  Hogarth,  and  
Daniel R. Gorin (2009), “Teaching for the Test, and Life Is the Final Exam,” paper presented at the annual 
conference  of  the  Association  for  Financial  Counseling  and  Planning  Education,  held  in  Scottsdale,  Ariz., 
November 18–20; and Catherine J. Bell, Daniel Gorin, and Jeanne M. Hogarth (2010), “What Makes a Good 
Money  Manager  Good?  Insights  from  an  Evaluation  of  an  Education  Initiative,”  paper  presented  at  the 
56th Annual Conference of the American Council on Consumer Interests, held in partnership with the Federal 
Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Atlanta, Ga., April 14–16. 
in  Washington, 
held 
5   See  Andrew  T.  Hill,  Bonnie  T.  Meszaros,  and  Brian  Tyson  (2011),  “Evidence  of  Student  Achievement  in  a 
High  School  Personal  Finance  Course,”  paper  presented  at  the  Allied  Social  Science  Associations 
conference, held in Denver, Colo., Jan. 6–9. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Consumer protection regulation and enforcement 
Although financial education is a critical first line of defense, it is not a substitute for strong 
and effective regulations that safeguard consumers against abusive and fraudulent practices. 
The  Board  has  been  the  primary  federal  agency  charged  with  writing  rules  governing 
consumer financial products, and in recent years, we have issued rules for mortgages, credit 
cards,  student  loans,  and  overdraft  protection  programs,  among  others.  We  have  also 
maintained a robust compliance program to ensure that banks under our purview adhere to 
these rules.  
As  you  know,  our  consumer-protection  rulemaking  authority  and  our  consumer-protection 
supervisory and enforcement authority over some of the nation’s largest financial institutions 
will  transfer  to  the  Bureau  of  Consumer  Financial  Protection,  pursuant  to  the  Dodd-Frank 
Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. The Board will retain some relevant rule-
writing  authorities  (for  example,  under  the  Community  Reinvestment  Act)  as  well  as 
supervisory authorities for smaller financial institutions that we also regulate for safety-and-
soundness purposes. We are working closely with the Department of the Treasury and the 
new Bureau to facilitate the necessary transfers of authorities and personnel.  
Regardless  of  how  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  responsibilities  are  distributed,  a 
comprehensive approach – one that includes education, research, and regulation – remains 
essential  to  ensuring  that  consumers  receive  adequate  protections  and  that  markets  for 
consumer  financial  products  function  well.  The  Board  will  work  collaboratively  with  the 
Bureau and other agencies to help individuals and families make the best choices for their 
financial futures.  
For  your  reference,  I  am  attaching  some  examples  of  financial  literacy  programs  and 
outreach that are available from the Federal Reserve.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Appendix A 
Federal Reserve System community affairs offices  
Financial education for consumers and communities  
The 12 Federal Reserve Banks offer a broad range of programs for nonprofit organizations, 
government agencies, and financial institutions that work to improve financial education and 
access  to  services  for  lower-income  consumers  and  communities.  The  following  is  a 
representation  of  the  wide  range  of  leadership,  resources,  training,  and  research  that  the 
Federal  Reserve  System’s  Community  Affairs  offices  have  undertaken  to  support  financial 
education  within  the  community  economic  development  field.  Additional  information  about 
Affairs 
the 
at 
www.federalreserve.gov/communitydev/default.htm.  
Federal  Reserve’s  Community 
offices 
found 
can 
be 
Asset and wealth building  
Atlanta  
 
The  Bank  provided  leadership  and  assistance  that  resulted  in  the  convening  of 
numerous regional meetings throughout Florida to gain input on asset policies and 
needs.  The  Bank  also  supported  the  Florida  Prosperity  Partnership,  the  Georgia 
4 Pro$perity, the Alabama Asset Building Coalition, and the Tennessee Alliance for 
Financial Independence initiatives.  
Dallas  
 
  The  Bank’s  key  asset-building  work  is  centered  around  the  educational  resource 
Building  Wealth,  the  Bank’s  most  requested  publication  and  the  most  frequently 
downloaded page on the Bank’s website. The Building Wealth program includes a 
booklet (in both English and Spanish), an online tool, and a train-the-trainer course.  
In  partnership  with  RAISE  Texas,  a  network  of  organizations  that  support  asset-
building activities, the Bank sponsored four rural asset-building forums in 2010.  
The  Bank  and  the  Texas  Department  of  Banking  hosted  a  webinar  on  financial 
education  in  the  workplace.  The  CFO  of  Randall’s  Food  Markets  discussed  her 
experience of using Building Wealth to teach financial education seminars to more 
than 400 employees throughout Texas.  
Kansas City  
 
Community  Affairs  partnered  with  the  Oklahoma  Native  Assets  Coalition  and  First 
Nations Development Institute to conduct a symposium on asset-building programs 
and policies for representatives of Native American tribes. 
Banking the unbanked  
Atlanta  
 
Community  Affairs  staff  played  key  roles  in  the  development  of  statewide  asset-
building  organizations  and  provided  valuable  support  to  regional  and  statewide 
“Bank  On”  initiatives,  including  developing  curricula  to  train  bank  and  credit  union 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
employees 
establishing banking relationships with their institutions.  
the  needs  of  unbanked  and  underbanked 
to  meet 
individuals 
Dallas  
 
Bank staff developed a guide (in both English and Spanish) about opening a bank 
account for the “Bank On” campaign.  
Kansas City  
 
Community  Affairs  staff  provided  leadership  in  the  development  of  “Bank  On” 
initiatives in Kansas City, Omaha, Denver, and New Mexico. The Bank also partners 
with “Bank On–America Saves of Greater Kansas City,” which is the first pilot in the 
country to combine the two programs.  
New York  
 
The  Bank  supports  the  “Bank  On”  campaigns  for  Manhattan  and  Newark, 
New Jersey.  
San Francisco  
 
Community  Affairs  staff  facilitated  the  creation  of  new  Jump$tart  affiliates  and 
convened  a  regional  group  of  Jump$tart  state  leaders  for  training  sessions.  Staff 
also  built  new  financial  education  and  asset-building  collaborative  groups  from 
scratch in areas that lack an existing networking mechanism or where networking is 
more challenging, such as in rural areas.  
The Bank supports the ongoing growth of the “Bank On” programs throughout the 
District, including San Francisco, Oakland, San Jose, Los Angeles, Nevada, Eastern 
Oregon,  Central  Oregon,  and  Idaho,  to  promote  access  to  mainstream  financial 
services  by  advising  new  communities  on  the  best  practices  identified  by  existing 
programs.  
In 2010, Community Affairs staff focused on exploring alternatives to payday lending 
and overdraft charges to meet consumers’ need for unsecured short-term consumer 
debt. The program convened several conferences and meetings to discuss the role 
that credit unions and alternative financial services providers can play in addressing 
this need.  
St. Louis  
 
The  Bank  collaborated  extensively  with  the  “Bank  On”  campaign  in  seven  cities 
throughout the District. 
Credit management  
Kansas City  
 
Community  Affairs  hosted  a  “Be  Credit  Smart  Workshop”  in  Omaha  for  small 
business owners and aspiring small business owners on personal finances as they 
prepare to apply for bank financing.  
The  program  hosted  a  webinar  for  District  financial  educators  on  the  history, 
provisions, and implementation of the Credit Card Act of 2009.  
   6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Foreclosure/mortgage loan modifications  
Atlanta  
 
 Dallas  
 
 intervention  programs.  The  program  participated 
In 2010, Community Affairs sponsored 14 events in 11 cities throughout the District 
that  focused  on  mortgage  delinquencies,  foreclosures,  and  foreclosure  scams. 
Technical  assistance  and  data  were  provided  to  19  organizations,  ranging  from 
federal and local governments to nonprofit entities, to help inform policy decisions 
and  develop  effective 
in 
10 additional  events  intended  to  maximize  local  neighborhood  stabilization  efforts, 
improve mediation practices, increase efficiencies in loan modification practices, and 
inform consumers of available foreclosure prevention resources.  
The  Bank’s  “Foreclosure  Response  Podcast  Series,”  initiated  in  2009,  concluded 
with  the  production  of  the  12th  podcast  in  January  2010.  A  second  installment 
began  in  the  fall  of  2010,  with  three  more  podcasts  added  to  the  series.  Topics 
include  vacant  properties,  best  practices 
in  REO  programs,  Neighborhood 
Stabilization Program follow-up, and rural foreclosure issues.  
Community  Affairs  staff  provides  leadership  for  the  Texas  Foreclosure  Prevention 
Task Force and facilitated the formation of the Border Foreclosure Prevention Task 
Force.  
The Bank hosted foreclosure scam alert forums and webinars focused on educating 
elected  officials,  community-based  organizations,  housing  counselors,  and  other 
stakeholders  on  the  increasing  number  of  homeowners  falling  prey  to  foreclosure 
scams. 
Kansas City  
 
Community  Affairs  co-hosted  housing  conferences  in  each  state  in  its  District  to 
address  affordable  housing  and  foreclosure  issues.  In  Missouri,  the  conference 
sparked an effort to create a statewide foreclosure task force.  
The  Bank  partnered  with  the  Dallas  Reserve  Bank  to  develop  the  “Foreclosure 
Mitigation Toolkit Update.”  
Community Affairs conducted the Foreclosure Resource Development Roundtable, 
focusing  on  emerging  issues  and  the  progress  made  in  combating  foreclosure-
rescue scams.  
Bank  staff  worked  to  help  initiate  a  new  regional  foreclosure  scam  prevention 
campaign that uses United Way’s 2-1-1 help line to reach distressed borrowers in 
eastern Missouri and western Kansas, including Wichita.  
Community  Affairs  hosted  a  seminar  to  raise  awareness  on  the  prevalence  and 
types  of 
that  community 
organizations can use to address them.  
The  Bank  sponsored  a  forum  that  explored  the  successes  and  challenges  of  the 
Home  Affordable  Modification  Program,  or  HAMP,  and  examined  the  potential 
results of the new Home Affordable Foreclosure Alternatives, or HAFA, program that 
is  intended  to  streamline  short  sales.  A  panel  of  real  estate,  appraisal,  and  REO 
(real estate owned) experts presented.  
Community Affairs hosted a statewide foreclosure counselor training in Colorado.  
in  Oklahoma  and  resources 
foreclosure  scams 
      BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
  Richmond  
 
In 2010, the Bank held four foreclosure prevention events in Maryland and Virginia, 
serving  nearly  1,700  borrowers.  In  addition,  Community  Affairs  sponsored  three 
tenants and foreclosure events in Maryland, the District of Columbia, and Virginia.  
Community  Affairs  staff  trained  95  pro  bono  attorneys  in  Baltimore  and  the 
surrounding areas in Maryland to assist troubled borrowers facing foreclosure and 
new homeowners closing loans to prevent mortgage fraud.  
St. Louis  
 
The  Bank  held  a  news  conference  to  increase  public  awareness  of  the  loan 
modification  scams.  The  attorneys  general  from  Missouri  and  Illinois  participated, 
along  with  a  representative  of  the  Federal  Trade  Commission  (FTC)  and 
NeighborWorks America.  
San Francisco  
 
Community  Affairs  staff  organize  borrower  outreach  events, 
train  housing 
counselors,  work  with  servicers  to  improve  the  modification  process,  and  engage 
law  enforcement  agencies  and  community  groups  to  raise  awareness  about 
foreclosure scams.  
To  fill  the  gap  in  the  area  of  foreclosure  recovery,  staff  collaborated  with  Atlanta 
Reserve Bank to create a new foreclosure recovery guide for individuals who have 
undergone  foreclosure.  The  guide  is  directed  toward  local  communities  and 
addresses  issues  such  as  relocation,  credit  repair,  job  training,  and  mental  health 
issues.  This  publication  was  introduced  through  a  series  of  local  convenings  and 
leveraged  by  encouraging  community  groups  and  local  governments  to  work 
together to address post-foreclosure issues.  
Research  
Atlanta  
 
The Community and Public Affairs offices partnered with the American Council on 
Consumer  Interests  to  host  the  annual  research  conference  in  April  2010.  The 
conference convened researchers from across the country to share study findings 
on  issues  including  foreclosure,  financial  education  and  literacy,  and  consumer 
implications of health care reform.  
Kansas City  
 
Community  Affairs  conducted  a  series  of  focus  groups  throughout  the  District  to 
uncover  and  understand 
the  perceptions  and  preferences  of  unbanked  or 
underbanked consumers. The research findings are being used to inform lenders, 
municipal leaders, and financial educators on ways to transition the unbanked and 
underbanked  into  a  relationship  with  a  regulated  financial  institution  and  to 
encourage communities to partner on solutions.  
Philadelphia  
 
Community  Affairs  research  staff  wrote  a  paper  evaluating  the  success  of  a  high 
school  personal  finance  curriculum  that  the  Bank  created  with  the  University  of 
Delaware and the Delaware Bankers Association.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
San Francisco  
 
The  research  team  engaged  a  UC  Berkeley  master’s  student  to  explore  the 
opportunities and challenges for passing a state mandate for financial education in 
California.  As  a  result  of  this  research,  the  team  partnered  with  the  Minneapolis 
Reserve Bank and the University of Arizona to convene a two-day workshop for 25 
of the top financial education researchers nationwide to improve the evaluation and 
effectiveness of youth financial education research.  
The Community Affairs research team conducted an in-depth qualitative evaluation 
of  an  innovative  youth  financial  education  program  run  by  a  credit  union  in  San 
Francisco’s  Mission  District  that  explores  the  effectiveness  of  prize-linked  savings 
accounts.  
 St. Louis  
 
Community  Affairs  collaborated  with  the  Social  Systems  Dynamics  Lab  at 
Washington  University  to  conduct  a  qualitative  research  initiative  to  develop  a 
systemic understanding of financial services choices of unbanked African Americans 
in the city of St. Louis and the inner-ring suburbs. The goal is for the study’s findings 
to inform the design of financial services that meet the needs of low- to moderate-
income families and individuals.  
Federal Reserve System  
 
research  and  present 
research  conference 
to  
The  Community  Affairs  offices  hold  a  biennial 
foster 
research  on  community  
recent 
economic  development  strategies,  including  the  efficacy  of  financial  education 
programs 
asset  
Information  
building  programs,  and  credit  management  and  repair 
about 
found  at 
www.chicagofed.org/webpages/in_focus/cedric/index.cfm. 
counseling, 
training. 
the  2011  conference  and  prior  conferences  can  be 
homebuyer/foreclosure 
the  most 
such 
as 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
Appendix B 
Federal Reserve System  
Financial education for youth  
The 12 Federal Reserve Banks offer a wealth of programs for educators and students. Below 
is  only  a  sample  of  the  wide  range  of  publications,  lesson  plans,  multimedia  resources, 
professional  development  opportunities,  and  tools  aimed  at  promoting  financial  education 
among  youth.  These  and  more  can  be  accessed  on  the  Federal  Reserve  System’s  online 
portal at www.federalreserveeducation.org.  
Publications and lesson plan units  
 
Cards, Cars and Currency is a curriculum unit that challenges students to become 
involved in three specific areas of personal finance: credit cards, debit cards, and 
purchasing a car.  
It’s Your Paycheck! is designed for use in high school personal finance classes. The 
curriculum contains three sections: “Know Your Dough,” “KaChing!,” and “All About 
Credit.”  
Keys to Financial Success, a comprehensive high school personal finance program 
promoted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, provides teachers with the 
training,  lessons,  and  materials  necessary  to  teach  students  how  to  be  financially 
savvy.  
Katrina’s  Classroom:  Financial  Lessons  from  a  Hurricane  is  a  free,  DVD-based 
curriculum developed to teach middle and high school students and their parents the 
importance of being financially prepared, especially in times of crisis.  
Building  Wealth  is  a  personal  finance  education  resource  for  schools,  nonprofit 
community organizations, financial services providers, and consumers to help young 
people, adults, families, and others develop a plan for building personal wealth.  
Children’s literature lesson plans use popular youth books to teach personal finance 
lessons.  
Piggy  Bank  Primer  is  a  student  workbook  that  uses  a  story  and  activities  to 
introduce  students  to  economic  concepts  such  as  saving,  spending,  budgeting, 
wants, goods, services, and opportunity cost.  
Great Minds Think: A Kid’s Guide to Money is an interactive booklet that introduces 
children to concepts such as earning, spending, budgeting, and saving.  
Econ Ed Live is a set of online courses for students that include interactive activities, 
podcasts, and more.  
Programs for students  
 
Live  classroom  videoconference  sessions  with  Federal  Reserve  staff,  presented 
right in the classroom  
Essay contests like the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland’s Be the Change You 
Want to See! creative writing challenge for high school students  
Video competitions, such as the Share the Wealth Challenge: A Financial Literacy 
Video  contest  for  undergraduate  students  to  promote  the  importance  of  financial 
literacy  
BIS central bankers’ speeches
          10 
    Reserve  Cup,  a  literacy  quiz  show  competition  for  high  school  students  that  tests 
their knowledge on a variety of financial topics and economics  
Money Smart Week (MSW), a series of free classes and activities designed to help 
consumers better manage their personal finances  
Tours of Reserve Bank exhibits and museums  
Professional development  
 
In  March  2011,  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  hosted  “The  Federal 
Reserve  in  the  21st  Century,”  a  symposium  for  college  professors  that  included 
presentations by the Bank’s senior staff.  
Personal  Finance  for  the  Middle  School  Classroom  is  a  professional  development 
program  that  provides middle  school  teachers with  methods  for  teaching  personal 
finance topics such as personal decisionmaking, saving, investing, budgeting, and 
the wise use of credit.  
Making  Sense  of  Money  and  Banking  is  a  teacher  workshop  covering  money, 
banking, and the Federal Reserve System.  
Newsletters  for  educators,  such  as  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Richmond’s  5E 
Educator,  offer  K-12  educators  content,  lesson  plans,  and  updates  on  free 
resources from the Federal Reserve System. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
