Jean-Claude Trichet: The monetary policy of the ECB during the financial 
crisis 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
University of Montreal, Montreal, 6 June 2011. 
 Prime Minister, 
Rector of the University of Montreal, 
Chancellor, 
President of the Board of Governors, 
Secretary-General of the University of Montreal, 
It is a great honour and pleasure to be awarded this honorary doctorate. The University of 
Montreal has a global reputation for excellence. And I particularly appreciate the kindness of 
your introduction, even if it seems to me to be too flattering…  
I intend to share with you my thoughts on the decisions taken by the European Central Bank 
in  the  period  we  have  been  experiencing  since  August  2007.  This  period  started,  as  you 
know, several weeks after the Montreal conference of June 2007 which I had the pleasure to 
attend. 
Just a comment to journalists here: I should say that I’m in the one-week period preceding 
the meeting of the Governing Council during which no indication must be given about future 
decisions.  Please  don’t  draw  any  conclusions  on  what  I’m  about  to  say  in  terms  of  future 
monetary policy decisions. 
 As  you  know,  the  main  task  of  the  ECB  is  to  ensure  price  stability  in  the  euro  area.  The 
heads  of  state  or  government  in  Europe  enshrined  this  mission  in  the  European  Union 
treaties  in  1992.  Pursuant  to  this  mandate,  the  Governing  Council’s  objective  is  to  keep 
inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. 
The  ECB  has  accomplished  its  mission  over  the  past  12  years.  During  this  period,  the 
average annual inflation rate stood at 1.97% in the euro area. 
It is important to grasp the significance of this achievement. Over these 12 years, the ECB 
has  faced  many  challenges  in  pursuing  its  objective  of  price  stability:  the  bursting  of  the 
dot-com  bubble,  the  shock  wave  of  11  September  2001,  the  volatility  of  commodity  prices 
and, of course, the worst financial crisis the world has known since the Second World War. 
I  would  like  to  discuss  today  in  particular  our  response  to  the  crisis  and  the  reform 
programmes of financial regulation and economic governance in which the euro area and the 
European Union as a whole are engaged. 
The measures taken by the ECB in response to the crisis 
I. 
During  the  crisis,  together  with  other  central  banks  around  the  world,  the  ECB  has  had  to 
operate in an uncertain environment. 
It  should  be  noted  that  we  have  been  vigilant  from  the  very  first  day.  When  the  problems 
started to appear in the financial markets, on 9 August 2007, we were the first central bank to 
react, taking action very quickly. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
In  parallel,  dysfunctioning  financial  markets  have  threatened  to  compromise  our  ability  to 
guide  the  outlook  for  price  stability  by  using  our  conventional  instrument  –  interest  rates. 
Faced  with this  situation,  over  the years  that  followed,  we  have  implemented  a  number  of 
unconventional measures to ensure that our decisions on interest rates are transmitted to the 
whole economy, despite the problems observed in the financial sector and capital markets. In 
particular, it was to allow banks – regardless of the level of the key interest rate – to continue 
to lend to households and businesses. 
From the outset of the crisis we have established the principle of strict separation between 
our unconventional and our conventional measures, that is to say, our policy rate of interest. 
Our interest rates are fixed so that we can ensure price stability over the medium term. The 
implementation  of  unconventional  measures  depends  on  the  functioning  of  the  monetary 
policy  transmission  mechanism  and  must  respond  to  the  degree  of  dysfunctioning  or 
disruption of monetary and financial markets and market segments. 
As  the  crisis  called  for  rapid  and  unprecedented  action,  we  never  lost  sight  of  our  main 
objective,  namely  to  maintain  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  for  the  benefit  of  the 
331 million citizens of the euro area. All – I stress that word – all monetary policy decisions 
we have taken over the last 12½ years were aimed at complying with this commitment. 
Let me elaborate on this point. As you know, in normal times, central banks mainly influence 
the economy and inflation by using the instrument for setting short-term interest rates. 
In practice, the identification, at an early stage, of the risks to price stability is a delicate task. 
To see it through, the ECB bases itself on a monetary policy strategy supported by several 
sources  of  information.  The  economic  analysis  we  undertake  enables  us  to  synthesise 
information on short-term inflationary pressures from a large number of economic indicators. 
Thanks to the monetary analysis that we also carry out, we can cross-check this information 
with  that  concerning  medium-term  inflationary  pressures  drawn  from  the  monetary  and 
financial indicators. These are the two “pillars” of our monetary policy which indicate to us the 
necessary steps in respect of the interest rate to ensure price stability over the medium term. 
The  decisions  we  have  taken  in  response  to  political  pressures  have  demonstrated  our 
independence. We refused to lower interest rates in early 2004 when Germany, France and 
Italy in particular asked us to do so. We did not hesitate to raise interest rates in December 
2005.  At  that  time,  ten  governments  in  the  euro  area  out  of  12  and  many  international 
observers asked the ECB to leave its key rates unchanged. 
International  financial  institutions,  in  particular,  highlighted  the  risks  that  the  tightening  of 
monetary policy – after a prolonged period of accommodative monetary policy – could pose 
to  the  recovery.  Despite  these  warnings,  we  conducted  our  monetary  tightening,  and 
international financial institutions have agreed that we were right to make that decision. 
After the crisis escalated in mid-September 2008, while inflationary pressures subsided, we 
decided,  in  full  accordance  with  our  mandate,  to  reduce  our  key  interest  rate.  We  cut  it 
rapidly, from 4.25% in October 2008 to 1% in May 2009. 
We lowered the key interest rate at a pace and a level unprecedented in the recent history of 
the euro area countries. 
With  the  benefit  of  hindsight,  the  decisions  we  took  during  the  crisis  were  effective.  They 
have in particular helped to preserve a very solid anchoring of inflation expectations over the 
past  four  years.  Our  determination  to  maintain  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  has 
enabled us to prevent both the risk of inflation and of deflation from materialising. 
With the recovery now more firmly established, we have seen in recent months upside risks 
to the outlook for price stability over the medium term. Again, the sharp increase in oil and 
other commodities has had a major impact on overall inflation. In these circumstances, the 
central bank must prevent increases in the prices of raw materials from being incorporated 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
into the long-term inflation expectations, which could trigger second-round effects on wages 
and prices. 
It  is  against  this  background  that  the  Governing  Council  decided  in  April  to  raise  interest 
rates. I stressed in reporting this decision it had been taken unanimously. The action of the 
Governing Council is motivated by a common goal. 
That decision in April confirmed that the separation principle is strictly applied and that our 
non-conventional  measures  do  not  restrict  in  any  way  our  ability  to  toughen  the  monetary 
policy stance when facing inflationary pressures. Thus, when the Governing Council decided 
in  March  and  April  that  it  was  time  to  raise  interest  rates,  in  parallel,  at  the  same  time,  it 
decided  to  keep,  in  the  second  quarter,  the  provision  of  unlimited  fixed-rate  liquidity  for  a 
period of three months. 
Let me remind you of what I said earlier: nothing of what I have just said can or should be 
interpreted in terms of future decisions of the Governing Council next Thursday. 
The economic and financial reforms brought about by the crisis 
II. 
The tensions we face in Europe today are not a crisis of the euro. They do not indicate a 
crisis  in  the  monetary  union.  The  single  currency  has  kept  its  promise  to  provide  price 
stability in the euro area. 
The  current  crisis  stems  rather  from  insufficient  monitoring  of  economic  policies  in  some 
Member States. Today, it’s not the monetary pillar of Economic and Monetary Union that is at 
stake, but the economic pillar. If we refer to the acronym of that union, EMU, we can say that 
the concerns relate to the “E” rather than “M” in the EMU. 
In the rest of my remarks I’ll consider what is being done now in Europe to strengthen the 
economic pillar of EMU. 
The main cause of the crisis has been the negligence of financial risk. It has necessitated the 
implementation of a programme of comprehensive reforms for virtually every aspect of the 
global financial system. We have to control the forces that led the system to think only about 
itself and put an end to this situation so that the system serves the real economy. And we 
have to ensure that the financial system contributes to sustainable economic growth. 
At this point, we have drawn up a set of more stringent banking regulations, providing capital 
to  absorb  more  losses,  improving  coverage  and  reducing  the  risk  of  excessive  borrowing. 
The countercyclical capital buffers are designed to reduce pro-cyclicality. 
The  supervision  of  financial  institutions,  financial  markets  and  market  infrastructure  is 
increasing, while the organisational structure of financial oversight is being overhauled. 
But much remains to be done. The most important aspect concerns the implementation of 
these reforms. In addition, the issue of financial institutions of systemic importance still has to 
be  settled,  and  should  strengthen  the  oversight  of  financial  markets.  We  cannot  allow 
ourselves  to  suffer  from  a  lack  of  transparency  and  the  excessive  influence  of  dominant 
players and oligopolistic market structures. 
The  new  European  System  of  Financial  Supervision  (ESFS)  represents  an  important  step 
forward. The three new authorities created for the European banking sector, insurance and 
occupational pensions, and capital markets allow closer monitoring of the interrelationships 
and impact of contagion in the financial system of the European Union. Finally, the European 
Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) is developing the tools necessary to warn and, if appropriate, 
make recommendations on measures to cope with potential sources of systemic risk. 
If negligence of financial risk is the main cause of the crisis, the macroeconomic risk – and 
the  many  channels  through  which  this  risk  interacts  with  fragile  budgetary  structures  –  is 
causing the budget problems which some countries in the euro area are facing today. These 
considerations bring me to the issue of reforming economic governance. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
to  guarantee 
far  not  managed 
framework  has  so 
The euro is unique among international currencies. It is the major currency that is not issued 
by a sovereign state, but by a union of states. Monetary policy is inherently indivisible in a 
monetary union, and for the euro area, it is conducted at European level. In contrast, fiscal 
policies and other macroeconomic policies continue to be largely the responsibility of national 
governments and reflect national political preferences. 
Our  economic  governance 
the 
implementation of sound policies in all Member States. The Treaty makes clear that Member 
States have pledged to pursue economic policies aimed at furthering the objectives of the 
Union, one of which is a stable single currency. It’s an obligation which they have not yet fully 
discharged. 
The  European  Union  is  about  to  set  up  monitoring  mechanisms,  specifically  targeting  the 
imbalances and differences in competitiveness within the euro area. This should have been 
done long ago. Since 2005, within the Eurogroup, and then publicly, shortly thereafter, the 
ECB has warned against the considerable risks arising from these differences, which would 
be the subject of corrective action. 
If fully implemented – which of course is absolutely essential – macroeconomic surveillance 
will ensure a smoother functioning of EMU. It will require Member States to take measures to 
counter the emergence of macroeconomic imbalances at an early stage, before they weigh 
down on the macroeconomic outlook and assume a systemic dimension. 
From 1997, even before the creation of EMU, the euro area governments had adopted the 
Stability  and  Growth  Pact  to  prevent  a  debt  crisis.  As  you  know,  the  Pact  requires  EU 
countries to limit their budget deficit and national debt to 3% and 60% of GDP. 
But in 2005, Member States decided to reform the Pact. At the request of Germany, France 
and Italy in particular, a greater freedom of action and greater flexibility was introduced into 
the monitoring procedures, to the detriment of the effectiveness of the Pact, a move which 
has weakened it considerably. 
I  then  expressed,  on  behalf  of  the  Governing  Council,  the  serious  concerns  of  the  ECB 
regarding the negative impact of these reforms on the functioning of EMU. 
It is important that Member States have recognised their error and intend to strengthen the 
Pact. The focus on fiscal sustainability and reducing public debt levels, supported by more 
effective sanctions, is a step in the right direction. 
That said, the Governing Council of the ECB is concerned that, although they are going in 
the  right  direction,  the  economic  governance  reforms  being  discussed  are  not  ambitious 
enough  to  correct  the  structural  weaknesses  of  fiscal  governance  and,  more  broadly, 
macroeconomic  governance,  of  the  euro  area.  We  believe  that  we  can  immediately  go 
further  in  the  “secondary  legislation”  with  the  current  Treaty.  It  is  particularly  suited  to 
enhance the automaticity of the application of sanction mechanisms. Countries in the euro 
area that violate our common rules should be accountable for their policies, and freedom of 
action  and  flexibility  in  this  field  should  be  reduced  as  much  as  possible.  This  implies  a 
reduction  of  the  margin  of  manoeuvre  to  terminate  or  suspend  proceedings  and  the 
introduction of stricter deadlines. 
In this context, we advocate a strengthening of sanctions to encourage countries to abide by 
the rules. This would require, first, a wider range of financial and non-financial measures and, 
second, reduced freedom of action  to reduce or suspend them. Such  strengthening would 
improve efficiency and create the right incentives. 
Meanwhile, more ambitious demands in terms of economic policy would be more in line with 
the  reality  prevailing  in  the  euro  area.  Ambitious  benchmarks  should  be  the  basis  when 
establishing  the  level  of  the  excessive  deficit  and  setting  the  adjustment  path  leading  to  a 
sound fiscal position. It is very important that macroeconomic surveillance clearly focuses on 
the countries with the greatest vulnerabilities. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The anchoring of these new rules at national level would strongly inscribe them in national 
legislation.  A  binding  commitment  on  the  part  of  Member  States  to  implement  sound 
domestic  fiscal  frameworks  is  essential  to  ensure  national  “ownership”.  Finally,  in  our 
opinion, it would be appropriate to further improve the production of fiscal statistics. 
All  these  issues  are  being  discussed  in  the  trialogue  between  the  Commission,  European 
Council and Parliament. The Governing Council of the ECB is confident that Parliament will 
push the Council further towards strengthening economic surveillance. 
Conclusion 
III. 
Let me conclude. The crisis has posed significant challenges for the euro area. But we have 
reacted to them. The European Central Bank has been an anchor of stability in a turbulent 
period.  Price  stability  has  been  ensured.  All  countries  in  the  euro  area  –  without  
exception – have benefited from it. 
We must not forget either that the euro area as a whole has made significant progress over 
the past 12 years. The economic dynamics of the euro area is the same order of magnitude 
as those registered in the United States. In both economic regions, per capita income has 
risen on average by about 1% annually. In the euro area, job creation has been stronger than 
in the US. Over the past 12 years, more than 14 million jobs have been created in the euro 
area. 
I can assure you that the European Central Bank will continue to contribute to the smooth 
functioning of monetary union by continuing to be the anchor of stability and confidence that 
is so necessary. 
Rector of the University, Secretary-General, let me thank you again for the great honour of 
being awarded this honorary doctorate from the University of Montreal. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
