Daniel Mminele: South African National Payment System Framework and 
Strategy document – Vision 2015 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Daniel  Mminele,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve 
Bank,  on  the  occasion  of  the  launch  of  the  South  African  National  Payment  System 
Framework and Strategy document – Vision 2015, Pretoria, 12 September 2011. 
 Good day ladies and gentlemen.  
Thank you for accepting our invitation to the launch of the South African National Payment 
System Framework and Strategy document – Vision 2015.  
The  mandate  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank’s  National  Payment  System  Department 
(NPSD) to oversee the payment system, emanates from the enabling legislation which is the 
South African Reserve Bank Act, 1989 (Act No. 90 of 1989 – SARB Act). Section 10 (1) (c) of 
the SARB Act makes provision for the Bank to perform such functions, implement such rules 
and procedures and, in general, take such steps as may be necessary to establish, conduct, 
monitor, regulate and supervise payment, clearing or settlement systems.  
During 1995 the Bank published its first South African National Payment System Framework 
and Strategy document – Vision 2005. The Vision 2005 document spanned a 10-year period 
and contained strategies to modernise the South African national payment system (NPS) and 
to  align  the  domestic  NPS  developments  with  international  best  practice.  With  the 
achievement of the major milestones and objectives envisaged in this document, a process 
was embarked upon to re-evaluate the NPS vision, which process culminated in the strategy 
document published in April 2006, referred to as Vision 2010.  
The Vision 2010 focused, inter alia, on access for bank and non-bank participants, oversight 
of  the  NPS,  enhanced  security  and  operational  resilience  in  the  NPS,  regional  and 
international participation in payment system development, as well as increasing awareness 
of the features NPS. The key strategic objectives outlined in the Vision 2010 document have 
similarly been implemented and achieved.  
In  late  2009  and  early  2010,  the  NPSD  embarked  on  an  extensive  consultation  and  fact-
finding  process  to  determine  any  new  challenges  facing  the  NPS,  and  to  establish  if 
refinements to the strategic direction of the NPS were required.  
Payment  systems  are  by  nature  dynamic  and  fast  changing,  and  various  challenges 
emerged  nationally  and  internationally.  It  was  decided  that  due  to  the  demands  and 
challenges facing the NPS, a refinement of the strategic direction was required.  
The purpose of this framework is to provide a high-level updated strategic direction for the 
payment system up to 2015. New objectives and strategies have been developed, and some 
of the Vision 2010 objectives and strategies have been reconsidered, resulting in a refocus 
in, and/or redefinition of the Vision 2015.  
Major strategic objectives and challenges up to 2015 include the following:  
 
To continue to evaluate opportunities for further access to the NPS and improve the 
participation  of  non-bank  stakeholders  in  the  clearing  system  and/or  in  the  formal 
payment  system  management  structures.  The  recent  financial  crisis  has  re-
emphasised the importance of sound risk management policies and practices in the 
maintenance of a safe and efficient payment system.  
To enhance the oversight of banks and non-banks. As non-bank stakeholders are 
playing  a  larger  role  in  the  payment  system,  effective  payment  system  risk 
management policies need to be considered.  
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
      To  enhance  communication  among  stakeholders  regarding  NPS  matters.  Better 
communication improves the understanding of payment system stakeholders of the 
multifaceted nature of the payment system, which is complex and at times appears 
to be misunderstood.  
To  participate  in  international  workgroups  and  forums.  Continued  participation  in 
international  forums  ensures  that  South  Africa  stays  abreast  of  international 
developments spanning the many dimensions of the payment system universe.  
To enhance human resources capacity in the broader NPS. An intensified focus on 
human resources development initiatives will enable depth skills and the building of 
much needed capacity in the industry.  
To ensure high-level operational effectiveness of the payment system infrastructure. 
Operational effectiveness ensures the circulation of funds in the financial system and 
efficient liquidity management by participants. Failure of the infrastructure components 
of the payment system could result in substantial systemic operational risk.  
To facilitate regional payment infrastructure integration that meets the needs of the 
Southern African Development Community (SADC) region. The emphasis will be on 
commencing the process towards an integrated infrastructure. 
To formalise and implement an interchange determination process in South Africa 
that  is  fair,  transparent  and  sustainable.  This  process  should  include  all  payment 
streams.  
Vision  2015  is  the  product  of  inter-organisational  brainstorming,  debate  and  consultation 
between  the  Bank,  the  banking  industry  and  various  other  specific  stakeholders.  The 
successful  implementation  of  the  strategies  will,  once  again,  depend  on  co-operation 
between all the payment system stakeholders.  
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the bank and non-bank stakeholders for the input 
provided and their continued co-operation with the Bank.  
Finally,  allow  me  to  also  convey  my  appreciation  to  my  colleagues  from  the  National 
Payment System Department, under the able leadership of Dave Mitchell, for their important 
contribution to the development of this forward-looking Vision 2015.  
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
