Paul Fisher: The economic outlook – some remarks on monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Paul  Fisher,  Executive  Director  for  Markets  of  the  Bank  of  England,  to  the 
Agency for Scotland, London, 23 May 2011. 
I would like to thank Ronnie Driver for his help in preparing this speech. 
 For most of us, the current outlook for the UK economy is not a very attractive prospect. After 
experiencing a precipitous fall in demand during 2008/09, the latest estimates suggest that 
UK  output  in  2011  Q1  remained  around  4%  below  its  peak  pre-crisis  level.  The  Monetary 
Policy  Committee’s  (MPC)  central  projection  published  in  its  May  Inflation  Report,  is  for 
output to grow at around its historical trend rate (Chart 1), such that it would be mid-2012 
before that previous peak level is regained (Chart 2). At the same time annual CPI inflation, 
far from being subdued by the recession, has picked up to 4½%. In the short-term it is likely 
to  go  higher  still  before,  we  expect,  falling  back  towards  the  2%  target  (Chart  3).  All  this 
poses a significant challenge for policy makers, not least because of the genuine hardships 
slow  growth  and  high  inflation  cause  for  businesses  and  households  up  and  down  the 
country.  
Chart 1  
GDP projection based on market  
interest rate expectations and  
£200 billion asset purchases 
Chart 2  
Projection of the level of GDP based  
on market interest rate 
expectations and £200 billion  
asset purchases 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  1
Chart 3  
CPI inflation projection based on market  
interest rate expectations and £200 billion  
asset purchases 
 The recent data has not been particularly encouraging. Official figures for 2010 Q4 and 2011 
Q1 suggest that there was no underlying growth (allowing for the unusual impact of snow in 
December).  And  the  unemployment  rate  remains  at  just  under  8%.  The  data  may  not  be 
totally reliable – they never are – but the message we get from our business contacts in all 
parts of the United Kingdom is not inconsistent with this broad picture painted by the official 
statistics. Meanwhile, CPI inflation is likely to go yet higher if (as the MPC expects) rises in 
the price of energy get reflected in utility bills in due course. 
The largely unanticipated path of CPI inflation over the past couple of years can be explained 
by three factors: changes in the standard rate of VAT, unforeseen changes in wholesale oil 
and  gas  prices  and  higher-than-expected  import  prices  following  the  25%  depreciation  of 
sterling  since  mid-2007.  Given  our  target  of  2%,  the  recent  path  of  CPI  inflation  is 
uncomfortable to say the least. Nevertheless, the nature of the price shocks were such that, 
in my  view, there was little that monetary policy should or even could have done to offset 
them. Rather, given that changes in Bank Rate (or asset purchases) take a long time to have 
their full effect on the economy, monetary policy needs to be forward looking, focusing on the 
medium-term  outlook  for  inflation  yet  to  come.  Trying  to  respond  to  every  short-term 
movement in prices would probably be futile and would certainly involve a lot of unnecessary 
volatility. The Remit we have from the Government allows for these circumstances: 
“The  framework  is  based  on  the  recognition  that  the  actual  inflation  rate  will  on  occasions 
depart from its target as a result of shocks and disturbances. Attempts to keep inflation at the 
inflation target in these circumstances may cause undesirable volatility in output”.1 
To meet our remit we should ideally try to look through one-off price level shocks, in either 
direction, only responding if there are risks to the rate of inflation expected to prevail in the 
medium term. That theory is all well and good: but the one thing we know about the future is 
just how little we know for sure. 
                                                 
1  The Remit for 2011 is available at 
 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/monetarypolicy/pdf/chancellorletter110323.pdf  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Since I joined the Committee in March 2009 – the very week we announced the “quantitative 
easing”  programme,  buying  gilts  in  large  scale  –  I  have  voted  with  the  majority  at  every 
meeting. As a result, my individual views on policy have mostly been wrapped up with those 
of others in the MPC Minutes and the Inflation Report. So today, I want to offer some more 
personal thoughts on how I see the economic outlook developing; how I interpret the balance 
of risks to output and inflation in the medium term; and why I have been voting for no change 
in Bank Rate or the scale of asset purchases at recent meetings. 
The outlook for growth 
The financial crisis brought with it the deepest recession the UK has experienced since at least 
the Great Depression of the 1930s. The  MPC responded by cutting Bank Rate as low as it 
could reasonably go and injecting £200bn of extra money into the economy (14% of annual 
nominal GDP). Since the trough in output in the autumn of 2009, the UK economy has been on 
a gradual, if bumpy, path of recovery. That was to be expected. Historically, and internationally, 
we  know  that  economic  recovery  after  a  major  financial  crisis  is  usually  slow  and  seldom 
smooth – the MPC (and I personally) have been aware of this and flagging it for some time. 
Even though we have been predicting a rough ride, the output data at the end of last year 
and  the  beginning  of  this  still  came  as  an  unwelcome  surprise.  Analysis  of  past  data 
suggests that the most likely explanation is that we are currently going through a temporary 
soft patch. We can’t be sure since no two historical episodes are ever exactly the same. Until 
underlying  growth  resumes,  we  can’t  be  certain  that  it  will,  of  its  own  accord.  At  the  very 
least, that makes me pause to consider when policy should start to be normalised or even 
whether further loosening might be justified. 
The  recovery  in  2010  was  driven  by  a  particularly  strong  contribution  from  business 
investment  and  stock-building  (Chart  4).  The  latter  was  always  likely  to  offer  a  transitory 
boost to overall growth as companies returned stock holdings towards their desired levels, 
after  de-stocking  during  the  recession.  And  investment  was  always  likely  to  make  some 
positive  contribution  –  at  least  once  delayed  projects  and  routine  maintenance  were 
re-started. But that boost is unlikely to persist without a pick-up in final demand to justify it. 
And consumer spending, the most important component of UK demand, has been stagnant 
for  a  year  (Chart  5).  The  current  behaviour  of  consumption  is  markedly  different  to  that 
during the 1980s and 1990s when consumption had broadly regained its pre-recession level 
by this point in the cycle, rather than being around 4% below it (Chart 6).  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Chart 4  
Contributions to 4-quarter  
GDP growth(a) 
Percentage points
6
Chart 5  
Household consumption(a) 
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8
Consumption
Government spending
Investment
Stockbuilding
Net trade
GDP (per cent)
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
Investment 
(a) 
excluding the alignment adjustment. 
includes 
valuables.  Stocks 
  (a)  Chained-volume  measure.  Includes  non-profit 
institutions serving households. 
(b)  Pre-recession  trend  calculated  by  projecting 
forward  household  consumption  from  2008-Q2 
using  the  average  quarterly  growth  rate  between 
1998 Q2 and 2008 Q1. 
Chart 6  
Chart 7  
Consumer spending during  
recessions and recoveries(a) 
Contributions to growth in real post-tax 
labour income since 2007 Q4 
Percentage point changes since
pre-recession peaks
8
1980s
Latest
1990s
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
Quarters from pre-recession peak
 (a) Household taxes include income tax and Council 
Tax. 
(b) Wages and salaries plus mixed income. 
(c) General government benefits minus employees’ 
National Insurance contributions. 
(d) Calculated as a residual. 
(e)  Nominal  post-tax  labour  income  divided  by  the 
consumer  expenditure  deflator  (including  non-profit 
institutions serving households). 
    4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Relative to its pre-crisis trend, a weak recovery in consumer spending was always expected. 
Prior to the financial crisis, the UK economy had become badly unbalanced, relying on overly 
robust  domestic  demand  to  offset  weak  net  export  demand.  The  depreciation  of  sterling 
starting in mid-2007 was in part a reaction to that and it was always likely to generate slower 
domestic demand growth and a stronger contribution from net trade. So, a switch away from 
domestic consumption – both private and public – and towards net exports was a necessary, 
if painful, development. 
What  is  making  it  so  painful  is  that  one  of  the  channels  through  which  rebalancing  is 
occurring  is  a  significant  squeeze  on  households’  real  post-tax  incomes.  According  to  the 
latest  data,  the  level  of  households’  real  take-home  pay  in  2010  Q4  was  the  same  as  in 
2007 Q4 (Chart 7). Put bluntly, real incomes have stagnated over the past three years. The 
main  driver  of  the  squeeze  was  the  elevated  rate  of  consumer  price  inflation  reflecting,  in 
part,  the  required  increases  in  indirect  taxation  (VAT)  needed  to  help  rebalance  the 
government budget, and increases in import prices relative to domestic wages and prices. 
But it also reflects the falls in labour productivity and the degree of slack in the labour market, 
which have weighed down on nominal earnings growth. During the depths of the downturn in 
2009, nominal wage inflation fell sharply (and in many cases pay cuts were introduced), as 
companies sought to reduce costs and, together with their employees, reacted flexibly to the 
risk  of  severe  cut  backs  in  employment.  Even  so,  the  unemployment  rate  rose  by 
3 percentage points, peaking at 8% in February 2010.  
Normally,  following  a  recession,  one  might  expect  household  income  to  start  recovering, 
once  unemployment  stops  rising  and  productivity  growth  recovers.  But  not  this  time. 
Although  the  data  released  last  week  suggested  that  unemployment  has  continued  to  fall 
back a little from its peak, it has not moved much. And nominal regular pay growth (which 
strips out bonuses, but includes merit related increases in pay) has remained subdued over 
the past year, averaging around 2%. Assuming that the potential growth rate of the economy 
has not been damaged by the financial crisis (and there is no compelling evidence to suggest 
that it has), then this level of wage growth would be too low to be consistent with the inflation 
target in the medium term. 
Looking  ahead,  it  is  most  likely  that  there  will  remain  a  reasonable  margin  of  slack  in  the 
labour market, which should help contain any pressure on nominal wages and hence price 
inflation. But this is unlikely to persist indefinitely. Historical analysis of the UK labour market 
shows that the longer individuals are unemployed, the lower their chances of getting a job 
become. Hence, persistently high actual unemployment tends to be followed by an increase 
in  the  level  of  structural  unemployment.  Theory  and  empirical  evidence  predict  that  the 
structurally unemployed exert less downwards pressure on wage inflation. Major shifts in the 
pattern of employment – as we are likely to see from the shifts in growth from services to 
manufacturing,  and  from  the  public  to  private  sector  –  tend  to  reinforce  that  effect.  If 
structural  unemployment  rises  sufficiently,  then  the  downwards  pressure  on  inflation  from 
spare capacity will eventually start to dissipate.  
For now, contacts of the Bank’s Agents confirm that the margin of slack in the labour market 
should  continue  to  restrain  wage  growth  in  the  coming  months.  In  my  view,  that  should 
continue for the next few years, even if structural unemployment begins to rise: the latter is a 
relatively slow process. Given the inflation outturns so far in 2011 and the prospects for near-
term inflation outlined in the May Inflation Report, the squeeze on household real incomes is 
likely to be intensifying in the short term. Overall, it could be quite some time before we start 
to see rising real take-home pay. 
The  marked  decline  in  household  confidence  since  the  start  of  the  crisis  might  also  have 
played  a  role  in  the  weakness  of  consumer  spending  during  2010.  For  a  given  level  of 
income, households may decide to spend less (and hence save more) if they are uncertain 
about the outlook for the economy and, especially, about the security of their job. Although 
survey measures suggest that households’ unemployment expectations have fallen slightly, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
the  fiscal  consolidation  now  underway  might  encourage  greater  precautionary  savings 
among some households – indeed, the MPC has been, to some extent, incorporating such 
an effect in its projections for over a year.  
The worry now is that consumer confidence has fallen back a second time: a forward looking 
measure derived from the GfK survey is close to its trough of mid-2008 (Chart 8). And the 
balance that assesses households’ views about “whether it is a good time to make a major 
purchase”  has  also  fallen  back  substantially  since  the  start  of  the  year  –  although  that  is 
likely, to some extent, to reflect the impact of the rise in VAT.  
Chart 8  
Measures of consumer confidence 
Optimism over the next year(a)
Good time to make a major purchase?
Balance
40
30
20
10
0
-10
-20
-30
-40
-50
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
 Source: Research carried out by GfK NOP on behalf 
of the European Commission. 
(a) Average of the questions on households’ current 
financial  situation,  and 
the  general  economic 
situation, over the next 12 months. 
 
Other factors, such as the ongoing restrictions on the availability of credit and households’ 
concerns about their levels of debt, may also contribute to the likely weakness of household 
spending  going  forward,  by  encouraging  households  to  save  more  and  spend  less,  for  a 
given level of income.  
Overall,  given  the  continuing  squeeze  in  household  real  incomes  and  the  renewed  fall  in 
consumer  confidence,  I  wouldn’t  be  surprised  if  there  was  only  slow  growth  in  consumer 
spending  over  the  next  year  or  so.  The  risks  around  that  are  probably  skewed  to  the 
downside. Even if we do get the anticipated boost to net exports, overall growth in output is 
unlikely  to  be  much  above  its  historical  average  rate.  That  is  a  lot  slower  than  would  be 
needed to regain the level of output implied by a continuation of the pre-recession trend. 
The outlook for inflation  
For many quarters, the judgment about the outlook for inflation two to three years ahead has 
been shaped by two opposing factors – the balance of demand and supply in the economy, 
and the extent to which the resulting degree of spare capacity bears down on prices; and the 
extent  to  which  price  shocks  cause  higher  inflation  expectations  to  become  embedded, 
prompting higher nominal wage and price increases. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
On the economy’s potential supply, the evidence is highly conflicting (there are few aspects 
of  the  economy  where  the  data  are  clear!)  On  the  one  hand,  labour  productivity  remains 
around  8%  below  the  level  it  would  have  reached  had  it  followed  its  pre-crisis  trend 
(Chart 9), implying a significant margin of spare capacity in the economy. But on the other 
hand, the main business surveys suggest that there is little spare capacity within businesses 
(Chart 10). Moreover, the expansion in output since the trough has been met by an increase 
in employment, rather than by productivity growth. Coming to a judgment about the degree of 
spare capacity in the economy is therefore difficult – but at the same time crucial. Given the 
scale of the numbers involved, small differences in the judgment about the relative roles of 
cyclical  and  structural  explanations  for  the  recent  path  of  productivity  can  have  enormous 
implications for one’s views of the risks to inflation. 
 
Chart 9  
Whole economy labour  
productivity per hour(a) 
Indices: 2006 = 100
Path implied by a continuation of 
pre-recession trend
Whole economy 
productivity per hour
110
108
106
104
102
100
98
96
94
92
90
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
 (a)  The  pre-recession 
is  calculated  by 
projecting forward labour productivity from 2008Q2 
using  the  average  quarterly  growth  rate  between 
1996Q1 and 2008Q1. 
trend 
 Chart 10  
Survey measures of capacity  
utilisation by sector 
Sources: Bank of England, BCC, CBI, CBI/PwC and 
ONS. 
(a) 
Includes  measures  of  services  capacity 
utilisation  from  the  Bank’s  Agents,  BCC  and  CBI. 
financial 
The  CBI  measure  weights 
services, 
business/consumer 
and 
distributive  trades  surveys  using  shares  in  nominal 
value  added.  The  BCC  data  are  non  seasonally 
adjusted. 
(b)  Includes  measures  of  manufacturing  capacity 
utilisation  from  the  Bank’s  Agents  and  CBI,  and  a 
measure  of  non-services  capacity  utilisation  from 
BCC. The BCC data are non seasonally adjusted. 
services 
together 
 
Personally, I believe that there is a significant margin of slack in the economy – you need 
only look to the labour market for evidence of that. But it is also likely that there is less slack 
in the economy than implied by the deviation of productivity from its pre-crisis trend. Looking 
ahead,  the  degree  to  which  the  margin  of  slack  is  eroded  will  depend  on  the  outlook  for 
demand.  If  demand  recovers  strongly,  that  would  close  up  the  degree  of  slack  in  the 
economy.  But  if  demand  stays  weak,  then  potential  supply  will  gradually  respond 
downwards,  also  closing  the  margin  of  slack  (although  that  process  would  probably  be 
slower than if it was faster demand growth doing the work).  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
The risks from inflation expectations are also difficult to assess, principally because we do 
not have good data on the true expectations of businesses and wage bargainers, only what 
they record in surveys. Personally, I look for signs of de-anchoring inflation expectations in 
two places. The first is in nominal wage growth, which as I have discussed earlier, remains 
subdued.  The  second  is  in  financial  prices,  where  we  can  extract  information  on  inflation 
expectations  by  looking  at  the  differences  between  the  yields  on  conventional  and  index-
linked gilts or by looking at inflation swap markets. These data – like any other – need to be 
interpreted and analysed with caution. Financial markets are prone to bouts of volatility. The 
instruments are linked to RPI and not CPI inflation. The short maturity end of both the gilt and 
the  swap  markets  are  relatively  illiquid,  and  the  long-end  of  the  markets  can  be  moved 
around by structural demand (e.g. from pension funds looking to maturity-match their long-
term liabilities). What this means is that it is difficult to separate moves driven by changes in 
market  liquidity,  investor  mandates  or  preferred  habitat  from  moves  driven  by  changes  in 
underlying inflation expectations. For me, the inflation swaps market, which has grown and 
deepened  in  recent  years,  gives  a  more  reliable  read  on  underlying  market  participants’ 
views of inflation expectations than the gilt market data. Those swaps suggest that there has 
been little change in medium-term inflation expectations for some time (Chart 11). 
Chart 11  
Medium term inflation  
expectations derived from  
inflation swaps(a) 
Per cent
5
4
3
2
1
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
 Sources: Bloomberg and Bank calculations. 
(a) Based on the 5-year, 5-year forward. 
Policy 
In these remarks, I have tried to explain how I personally read the main forces acting on the 
outlook for GDP growth and CPI inflation over the next few years. The final step is to explain 
my policy vote based on those views.  
At  the  moment,  I  see  the  risks  to  CPI  inflation  in  the  medium  term  as  broadly  balanced, 
around the 2% target. In particular, I expect that the upside risk from any deterioration in the 
level of potential supply is broadly offset by the downside risks to consumer spending. While 
there are certainly upside risks to the outlook from higher inflation expectations, those are not 
of immediate concern. I see little evidence that inflation expectations might generate the start 
of a wage-price spiral for example.  
There are,  however, immediate downside risks to the growth outlook. Although  my central 
expectation is that the recent weakness will just be a soft patch, I do worry about a more 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
prolonged weakness in demand, and in particular, consumer spending. That could knock the 
recovery off course for a sustained period, shifting the balance of risks around medium-term 
inflation to the downside. With that risk in mind, putting up Bank Rate could be exactly the 
wrong thing to do at this precise moment. If it further damaged consumer confidence then it 
could be the marginal factor that makes a soft patch turn into something worse.  
Of course, at some point, Bank Rate will have to rise: interest rates will need to normalise if, 
once  the  spare  capacity  in  the  economy  has  been  eliminated,  monetary  policy  is  to  be 
consistent with the 2% target. And because of the lengthy lags involved, Bank Rate will need 
to  start  the  long  journey  back  to  more  normal  settings  well  before  the  degree  of  spare 
capacity is eliminated.  
But for now, I believe there remains time to allow the economy to recover before the eventual 
tightening begins. I am not trying to give any hints today as to exactly when that will be. I 
honestly don’t know. I can only continue to assess the data and the outlook as it changes, 
month by month. As always, I stand ready to change my views should the economic outlook 
change sufficiently to warrant it. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
