Benny Popoitai: The National Informal Economy Policy 
Speech by Mr Benny Popoitai, Acting Governor of the Bank of Papua New Guinea, at the 
launch of the National Informal Economy Policy, Port Moresby, 24 February 2011. 
(Presented on the Acting Governor’s behalf by Dr Gae Y Kauzi, Manager, Research Department.) 
 Acknowledgement 
Honourable Dame Carol Kidu, Minister for Community Development  
Mr. Joseph Klapat, Secretary, Department of Community Development, and your staff  
Mr. Max Kep, Chairman, Informal Economy Committee, and your members  
Mr. Paul Barker, Director of Institute of National Affairs, and your staff  
The Consultative, Implementation and Monitoring Council 
Distinguished Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Introduction 
The  Bank  of  PNG  as  the  Central  Bank  of  the  country  is  pleased  to  have  been  invited  to 
participate  in  this  occasion  –  the  launching  of  the  National  Informal  Economic  Policy.  The 
Governor,  Mr.  Loi  Bakani,  has  to  attend  to  an  obligatory  engagement  with  one  of  our 
international  partners  so  he  passes  his  sincere  apology.  The  Acting  Governor,  Mr.  Benny 
Popoitai, has fallen ill and is not able to make it for the launching, and he also passes his 
sincere apology. I stand in to present this speech on his behalf. 
What the occasion is for and the role of the central bank 
The informal economy has the vast majority of the population, who does not have access to 
many  normal  services  and  therefore  are  hindered  from  taking  part  in  economic  activities. 
Greater participation by the mass of the country’s population in the development process is 
long  recognized  through  the  National  Constitution  with:  the  Preamble  to  the  Constitution 
calling for “development to take place primarily through the use of PNG forms of social and 
political  organization”  and  for  economic  development  to  give  special  emphasis  to  “small-
scale  artisan,  service  and  business  activity”;  and  also  through  one  of  the  Eight  Point  Plan 
Aims  adopted  upon  the  attainment  of  independence  calling  for  “greater  and  equal 
participation of the people” and for “equal distribution of wealth”. It is further recognized in the 
Government’s  2050  Vision  launched  in  2009,  specifically  in  the  wealth  creation  pillar  that 
states  “a  concerted  effort  is  required  to  empower  citizens  to  create  wealth  from  our  vast 
renewable natural resources and through the development of entrepreneurial skills to ensure 
that the nation’s wealth is fairly distributed to the majority of the people.” 
This occasion – the launching of the Informal Economy Policy formalizes a necessary and a 
pre-requisite  step  –  of  having  a  policy  statement  that  supports  the  Informal  Sector 
Development and Control Act (2004) and guides the Government in its administration of the 
Act, and in all matters concerning development of the informal economy.  
The Bank of PNG recognizes and accepts the need for greater participation of our people in 
meaningful activities for their benefit and thereby contributing to the development  process. 
The Bank has and will do what it can within its domain of responsibilities to engage in the 
development process, especially with respect to financial services. The Bank of PNG and all 
the  intermediaries  in  the  financial  sector  can  do  more  to  get  financial  services  to  the  vast 
majority  (about  92  percent)  of  our  population  who  do  not  have  access  to  formal  financial 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
services. There is definitely the need to progressively increase the level of financial inclusion 
(defined as to have access to formal financial services) of our people. 
Of interest to the Bank is the growth of the current financial service providers to complement 
each  other  in  provision  of  financial  services  to  a  large  unbanked  population  of  PNG.  The 
Bank has undertaken a few initiatives aimed at getting services to the people. I will give two 
examples  of  the  work  that  the  Bank  did  or  is  doing  in  the  area  of  financial  inclusion  and 
financial literacy. 
In  the  area  of  microfinance,  it  has  provided  the  oversight  in  the  establishment  of  Wau 
Microbank  in  2004  as  part  of  the  PNG-ADB  Microfinance  and  Employment  project  and 
operated under a conditional license from BPNG. In 2008, approval was granted by the Bank 
for  Wau  Microbank  to  change  its name  to  “Nationwide  Microbank  Ltd”  under  a  full  license 
and with branches in other centres, including Lae, Bulolo, Madang, Kainantu and Wewak. Its 
assets  and  the  number  of  depositors  have  grown,  many  of  whom  are  small  savers  and 
entrepreneurs. Over the years to 31st of December 2010: 
 
 
 
 
 
Total assets of the Nationwide Micro increased from K4.3m to 43.8m 
Total deposits increased from K2.8m to 39.1m 
Total number of depositors was at 57,991 
Total loans was at K13.9m 
Branches  in  Wau,  Bulolo,  Lae,  Madang,  Kainantu,  Wewak,  Mt.  Hagen,  Kimbe, 
Kundiawa and Port Moresby. 
This illustrates what can happen if opportunities are created for our people. In this regard, I 
note that in the detailed policy strategies and priority action areas in the policy document to 
be launched today, microfinance is identified as the appropriate instrument for the objective 
of improving financial inclusion in the country.  
In the last 10 years or so, there has been a strong interest in the area of financial literacy and 
there  have  been  initiatives  taken  in  government  and  private  sectors  to  improve  it  in  many 
countries, particularly high income countries. Currently, the Bank is overseeing a World Bank 
led research project to measure financial capability in selected communities in the country. 
PNG is one of the 8 countries participating in the project. The project will identify the levels 
and deficiencies of financial capability in PNG, out of which authorities such as the Bank of 
PNG  can  come  up  with  policy  measures  to  address  and  improve  financial  literacy  of  the 
people to in turn improve their financial capability. Similar research is being done in Fiji and 
Solomon  Islands.  This  research  initiative  and  the  country’s  participation  together  with  the 
Institute  of  National  Affairs  (  INA)  as  the  local  consultant  fits  in  well  with  the  initiatives 
undertaken in the South Pacific region, specifically the Coombs Declaration (2008) made by 
the Pacific Finance, Central Bank Governors and Senior Officials from the Pacific and Timor-
Leste,  that  proposes  a  regional  umbrella  –  MoneyPacific  and  the  related  Pacific  Financial 
Inclusion  Program  –  that  will  address  the  issue  of  financial  inclusion and  capability  across 
Pacific communities. 
Measures must be taken to encourage and harness the potential that the informal sector has 
in saving and investment to increase the inclusion of the people and improve their financial 
literacy  and  encourage  responsible  financial  practices,  and  discourage  the  practice  of 
informal  sector  lending.  Increased  savings  and  investments  in  the  informal  economy  will 
contribute positively to economic activity and growth of the whole economy. Indeed there are 
evidences and experiences of high income countries having a positive correlation between 
the level of financial inclusion, literacy and (capability of people in handling and managing 
money) and economic activity and growth, and income. So we have to keep on striving hard 
to improve financial inclusion and financial literacy in PNG. In the literature on the subject of 
financial  capability  and  financial  literacy,  providing  financial  education  is  seen  as  the  key 
intervention that reduces ignorance and improves outcomes. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Beside the initiatives mentioned above, the Bank is looking at the regulatory environment for 
mobile phone banking and has carried out a review of the national payments system with a 
view to reform the current payments system, with enabling legislation, to improve efficiency 
with respect to timely clearing of transactions, reduction in costs and risks, within PNG and 
with the rest of the world. 
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen I have focused on the area of financial service 
and  financial  inclusion  as  a  vehicle  to  empower  our  people  in  the  informal  economy  to 
participate in the development process as this area concerns the Bank. But as we all know 
there  are  other  areas  of  services  –  education,  transport  infrastructure,  health,  etc  –  that 
needs  to  be  improved  as  well  for  our  rural  population.  This  is  the  responsibility  of  other 
agents in the country. Indeed, the Vision 2050 calls for a better service delivery model in the 
country.  Improvement  in  these  areas  together  with  improvement  in  financial  inclusion  and 
literacy will go a long way in empowering the people in the informal economy and the whole 
economy  to  realize  their  potentials  in  contributing  to  the  development  of  the  country  as 
aspired in the National Constitution, and now the Vision 2050.  
While  the  informal  economy  is  being  recognized  through  the  Act  of  2004  and  now  the 
launching  of  the  policy,  there  are  others  who  can  pick  on  some  negatives,  as  in  many 
initiatives.  In  particular,  some  may  view  the  urban  squatter  settlements  as  the  source  for 
those who participate in informal activities. Port Moresby for instance has seen an increase 
in  the  number  of  settlements  and  expansion  of  existing  ones.  Many  of  the  informal  sector 
street  vendors,  for  instance,  come  from  settlements.  The  informal  activities  occur  outside 
shops  and  at  bus  stops  and  provide  an  avenue  for  opportunists  to  steal/pick  pocket  from 
people  of  both  formal  and  informal  economies/sectors.  Mothers  and  school  children  have 
fallen victims. These negative aspects must be minimized as stated in the mission statement. 
On the whole, there should be more positives that would outweigh the negatives if done and 
enforced properly. Other agents such as the law enforcement bodies must play their part in 
controlling the daily negative aspects of informal activities on the streets and weed out those 
who resort to petty crimes to earn a living, while also not unreasonably chasing mothers and 
stealing their items (like betelnuts) for sale. 
The  launching  of  the  Informal  Economy  Policy  will  provide  the  necessary  step  for  the 
development  of  the  informal  economy  towards  the  realization  of  that  dream  –  of  greater 
participation  of  the  mass  of  our  population  in  economic  activities  that  will  improve  their 
income and life style, and contribute to the growth and development of the economy. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
