Christian Noyer: Monetary policy – lessons from the crisis 
Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France and Chairman of the Board 
of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  the  Bank  of  France/Deutsche 
Bundesbank Spring Conference on “Fiscal and Monetary Policy Challenges in the Short and 
Long Run”, Hamburg, 19 May 2011. 
 the absence of a long-run trade-off between inflation and unemployment,  
the benefits of low and stable inflation for economic activity.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure for me to be here today at this conference, which has provided a lot of 
stimulating  ideas  on  monetary  and  fiscal  policy  frameworks.  In  my  address  I  will  start  by 
briefly discussing some general principles underlying the conduct of monetary policy which 
have not been altered by the financial crisis, in particular  
 
 
Central  banks,  who  bear  the  ultimate  responsibility  for  inflation  because  of  its  monetary 
nature, ought to encode all of these principles into the fabric of monetary policy frameworks.  
I will then talk about some of the crucial lessons from the crisis: that macroeconomic stability 
by itself does not guarantee financial stability and that the very same monetary policy, which 
successfully  delivers  inflation  and  output  stability  in  the  short-run,  may  sow  the  seeds  of 
future  disruption  at  longer  horizons.  A  key  lesson  of  the  crisis  is  that  inflation  forecasts  at 
(say)  the  two-year  horizon  are  not  a  sufficient  statistic  for  monetary  policy,  and  that  a 
thorough and broad-based analysis of underlying trends in monetary and credit aggregates 
may help in identifying longer-term risks to price stability. The second lesson of the crisis that 
I will stress today is that, contrary to the widespread view of the years leading up to the crisis, 
the zero lower bound of interest rates is not an issue of purely historical interest, and is rather 
relevant for contemporary policy-making. 
General principles of monetary policy not altered by the crisis 
I. 
The  financial  crisis  has  not  invalidated  the  general  principles  underlying  the  design  of 
monetary policy strategies during the previous two decades.  
First and foremost among them is the absence of a long-run trade-off between inflation and 
unemployment,  also  known  as  the  “natural  rate  hypothesis”.1  Underlying  the  natural  rate 
hypothesis  is  the  key  concept  of  monetary  neutrality:  in  the  long  run,  the  Phillips  curve  is 
perfectly  vertical,  which  is  another  way  of  expressing  Robert  Lucas’s  famous  dictum  that 
“You can’t buy a permanent economic high just by printing money”. 
A second key principle of monetary policy, which remains as valid today as before August 
2007, pertains to the benefits of keeping inflation low and stable, due to the corrosive impact 
of inflation on economic activity. Such a consensus – which is today dominant within both 
academia and the policy-making community – developed in the wake of the major economic 
disruptions  associated  with  the  so-called  Great  Inflation  of  the  1970s.  This  world-wide 
monetary crisis cemented the contemporary agreement that pursuing price stability ought to 
be the fundamental goal of monetary policy.  
A third  key  principle  is  a  logical  consequence  of  the  first  two:  since  inflation  reflects,  to  a 
large or even dominant extent, the economic agents’ inflation expectations, it follows that in 
                                                 
1  See Phelps (1968), Friedman (1968), and Lucas (1972a, b).  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
order  to  keep  inflation  under  control  it  is  of  paramount  importance  to  keep  inflation 
expectations firmly anchored. As I will discuss later on, our success in firmly anchoring Euro 
area inflation expectations throughout the crisis proved very helpful in allowing us to fight the 
crisis’ contractionary shock. As I will argue, if inflation expectations had not been so firmly 
anchored, the management of the crisis would have been much more difficult and our policy 
responses much less effective than they were.  
The fourth principle of monetary policy not invalidated by the crisis is the ultimate monetary 
nature of inflation. Over the past two centuries, upswings or downswings in the trend money 
growth  have  usually  been  followed,  a  few  years  later,  by  swings  in  the  same  direction  in 
trend inflation.2 This relationship has remained significant over the past two centuries, across 
a  variety  of  different  monetary  policy  regimes  and  in  spite  of  financial  innovation.  This 
naturally suggests that it is “hardwired” into the deep structure of the economy, i.e. that it is 
structural in nature. In turn, this suggests that by analyzing monetary developments – and in 
particular,  by  identifying  swings  in  trend  money  growth,  as  well  as  its  components  and 
counterparts – a central bank can implement a more forward-looking monetary policy.  
The  monetary  nature  of  inflation,  and  given  that  money  growth  at  the  long-run  horizon  is 
ultimately  under  the  control  of  the central  bank,  logically  leads  to  a fifth  key  principle:  the 
central  bank  has  ultimate  responsibility 
the  short-run 
macroeconomic dynamics, and therefore also inflation, are determined to a significant extent 
by events outside the central bank’s control. The last four years provided a forceful reminder 
with the 2008 shocks in food and energy prices, which led to a temporary hump in Euro area 
inflation, followed by the large contractionary shock associated with the financial crisis and 
several  months  of  deflation.  These  exceptional  circumstances  brought  euro  area  HICP 
inflation  to  4  per  cent  in  the  summer  of  2008  and  then  to  –0.6  per  cent  one  year  later. 
However, these large deviations from our definition of prices stability (an annual inflation rate 
below, but close to, 2%) have been short lived.  
In  line  with  the  theoretical  underpinnings  of  our  monetary  policy  strategy,  at  the  long-term 
horizon, the impact of all non-monetary shocks on inflation dissipates, so that inflation comes 
to be uniquely determined by  money supply. It  is for these reasons that the central banks 
bear the ultimate responsibility for inflation. 
This leads me directly to the sixth and final principle, pertaining to the crucial role played by 
the institutional framework for the conduct of monetary policy. If central banks are, de facto, 
ultimately  responsible  for  keeping  inflation  low  and  stable,  such  responsibility  ought  to  be 
clearly  enshrined  in  institutional  frameworks  for  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  In  this 
respect,  a  key  virtue  of  the  Euro  area’s  framework  is  that  it  clearly  assigns  the  European 
Central Bank that primary responsibility.  
Let me now turn to the lessons we learned from the crisis. 
inflation.  Of  course, 
for 
in 
Lessons from the crisis and implications for policymaking 
II. 
Although the financial crisis did not invalidate the just-discussed general principles underlying 
the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  during  the  pre-crisis  years,  it  nonetheless  presented 
policymakers  with  several  sobering  lessons,  calling  for  changes  in  both  the  intellectual 
framework surrounding monetary policy, and specific aspects of policymaking. 
 2  On this see Papademos and Stark (2010), Section 4.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Macroeconomic stability does not ensure financial stability 
II.1. 
The general assumption before the crisis was that the intense wave of financial innovation 
which had characterized the decade leading up to the crisis had contributed to making the 
financial  system,  and  therefore  the  overall  economy,  more  resilient.  This  resulted  from 
“spreading risk around”, and allowing such risk to be borne by those most able to absorb it. 
Such an assumption appeared to be validated by the experience of the two decades leading 
up  to  the  crisis,  the  so-called  “Great  Moderation”  era,  which  had  been  characterized  by 
historically  unprecedented  decreases 
in  macroeconomic  volatility  across  advanced 
economies. There was also a broad consensus with regard to the U.S., that, if – due to the 
bursting of an asset price bubble – financial instability were to threaten to derail economic 
growth, U.S. monetary policy would have been able to effectively react by means of interest 
rates cuts, as occurred for example in the U.S. following the 1987 stock market crash and the 
bursting  of  the  “dotcom  bubble”  of  the  second  half  of  the  1990s.  This  was  the  so-called 
“mopping up” approach to dealing with asset price bubbles, which I will discuss in more detail 
later on. 
Of course, there had been a few dissenting voices questioning the dominant optimistic view. 
Borio  and  White,  in  particular,  building  upon  Kindleberger’s  classic  historical  analysis  of 
bubbles and panics,3 had suggested that periods of inflation and output growth stability may 
sow the seeds of future instability, by engendering in the general public the erroneous notion 
that a new and much more stable era had been entered, in which the old rules did not apply 
any  longer.  In  this  respect,  it  is  interesting  to  notice  that  the  Great  Moderation  period  had 
been characterized not only by large decreases in macroeconomic volatility for both inflation 
and output growth, but also by a dramatic compression of risk premia across several asset 
classes, which is compatible with the notion that economic agents were indeed regarding the 
volatility  decreases  as  part  of  a  “new  norm”  characterized  by  permanently  more  stable 
macroeconomic dynamics. 
With  the  benefit  of  hindsight  –  and  of  the  decisive  “test”  of  the  respective  validity  of  the 
different viewpoints provided by the crisis – it is today easy to appreciate the soundness of 
Borio and White’s position. The Great Moderation years had been characterized, compared 
with the previous portion of the post-WWII era, by a significantly more frequent occurrence of 
asset price bubbles and subsequent crashes. A longer-term perspective focusing on the last 
two  centuries  even  shows  that  the  occurrence  of  asset  price  booms  and  busts  under 
conditions of price stability, far from being a “fluke” of the Great Moderation era, have in fact 
been historically quite common.  
Until the outbreak of World War I, indeed, monetary regimes based on commodity money, 
such as gold and silver, which had dominated for centuries, guaranteed an extent of price 
stability which is, by today’s standards, virtually unimaginable. In spite of such remarkable 
price stability, however, those standards had been recurrently plagued by financial crises and 
asset  price  booms  and  busts.  Historical  evidence 
that 
macroeconomic  stability  –  defined  as  stability  in  inflation  and  output  growth  –  does  not 
necessarily imply financial stability. On the contrary, the experience of the years leading up 
to  the  crisis,  provides  evidence  of  Kindleberger’s  thesis  that  macroeconomic  stability  does 
not  automatically  lead  to  financial  stability,  and,  on  the  contrary,  that  it  may  well  sow  the 
seeds of future financial instability. 
Dissenting  voices,  however,  did  not  have  major  impact  on  the  mainstream  view,  which 
remained resolutely optimistic.  
I will return to this point in the last part of my speech, when I discuss a further key lesson of 
the crisis, that is, that we, central bankers, should be more open to dissenting voices. 
therefore  clearly  shows 
                                                 
3  See Kindleberger (2005). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
What lessons should we draw from what precedes in terms of policymaking? Although (it is 
important to stress) we are currently in uncharted waters, and the new monetary framework 
is  being  developed  as  we  speak,  some  issues  are  already  clear.  The  new  framework  will 
feature two objectives – price and financial stability – which, based on standard economic 
analysis, means that we will need two separate set of instruments to achieve them. Further, 
based again on standard analysis, the assignment of instruments to objectives ought to be 
based on the principle of comparative efficiency: monetary policy is the natural instrument for 
pursuing price stability, whereas macroprudential policies – defined as a set of policies aimed 
at limiting both excessive credit growth and the build-up of systemic risk within the financial 
system – will have to take care of preserving financial stability.  
Monetary policy and financial stability 
II.2. 
During  the  years  leading  up  to  the  crisis,  the  dominant  doctrine  was  that  monetary  policy 
should  not  attempt  to  lean  against  bubbles  as  they  inflate  by  raising  interest  rates,  and  it 
should  rather  only  “mop  up”  the  consequences  of  their  eventual  bursting  by  cutting  rates 
aggressively. There were three main rationales behind such a position. 
First, it was argued, it is impossible for central banks to identify a bubble in real time: if it 
were  possible,  markets  would  have  identified  it  too,  and  the  bubble  would  not  have 
developed in the first place since central banks have access to the very same information as 
market participants. To be sure, this argument did not go unchallenged. On the one hand, 
the  notion  that  estimating  the  equilibrium  level  of  asset  prices  in  real  time  is  exceedingly 
complex is belied by the observation that central banks routinely undertake a conceptually 
similar  estimation  exercise  when  they  compute  potential  output,  and  therefore  the  output 
gap. Since, from a strictly conceptual point of view, there is no difference between estimating 
the  equilibrium  level  of  GDP  and  the  equilibrium  value  of  the  price  of an  asset,  it logically 
follows that, given that central banks estimate the former, and use it as a crucial input in their 
monetary policy decisions, they could well do the same for the latter.  
In  addition,  academic  research  has  questioned  the  notion  that,  if  the  market  knew  the 
equilibrium  level  of  a  specific  asset  price,  this,  in  itself,  would  be  sufficient  to  cause  the 
bubble  in  that  asset  to  disappear.  The  logic  underlying  such  an  assumption  is  that  if  an 
investor knew with certainty the correct price of an asset which was currently mispriced, or 
had  a  reasonably  good estimate  of such  a  price,  he  would  have  every  incentive  to  take  a 
very  large  bet  on  this  price,  thus  “making  a  killing”,  and  in  the  meanwhile  contributing  to 
bringing the price back to its equilibrium value. As argued already by Keynes in the 1930’s 
[and more recently, among others by Shleifer and Vishny],4 this logic misses a fundamental 
aspect of the way markets actually work: to put it in a nutshell, you may be right for longer 
than you can stay solvent. Even if you are right, consistently betting on that mispricing can 
drive you out of business if the majority of the other agents keep acting in such a way as to 
validate such mispricing. As in Keynes’ beauty-contest illustration, what matters for you is not 
so much to be right about fundamentals as to be right on what others will do. 
This position was best expressed just one month before the beginning of the crisis by Chuck 
Prince, then CEO of Citigroup, when, in an interview with the Financial Times, he stated that5 
“[w]hen the music stops, in terms of liquidity, things will be complicated. But as 
long as the music is playing, you’ve got to get up and dance. […] At some point, 
the  disruptive  event  will  be  so  significant  that  instead  of  liquidity  filling  in,  the 
liquidity will go the other way.” 
                                                 
4  See Shleifer and Vishny (1997). 
5  See  “Citigroup  chief  stays  bullish  on  buy-outs”,  by  Michiyo  Nakamoto  and  David  Wighton,  published  in  the 
Financial Times of July 9, 2007. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Those words provide the strongest possible refutation of the notion that an asset price being 
out of line with fundamentals will by itself guarantee that such a misalignment automatically 
disappears. It is important to stress the complex interdependence at the core of the entire 
mechanism, in which an individual investor’s strategy depends not only – as in the standard 
efficient  markets’  paradigm  –  on  the  discrepancy  between  the  market  price  and  the 
fundamental  price,  but  also,  and  crucially,  on  what  other  agents  are  doing.  And  as  is  well 
known,  such  interdependencies  can  give  rise  to  markedly  sub-optimal  outcomes,  with  the 
Prisoner’s Dilemma being the simplest and best-known. 
A second rationale for the “mopping up” position was that even if the central bank were able 
to  identify  an  asset  price  bubble  in  real  time,  monetary  policy  is  simply  too  blunt  an 
instrument  to  try  to  deflate  it,  especially  because  bubbles  typically  affect  only  a  subset  of 
asset  markets,  whereas  monetary  policy  exerts  its  impact  on  the  overall  economy.  This 
implies  that  a  central  bank  that  wanted  to  deflate  a  bubble  in  (for  example)  the  housing 
market would risk pushing the economy into a recession. Further, it has been argued that 
such  a  risk  of  “overkilling”  is  especially  serious  because,  given  the  very  nature  of  asset 
bubble dynamics, and the sizeable capital gains typically accruing to those who are “riding” 
them, the standard interest rate increase of 25, or even 50 basis point would most likely just 
be  shrugged  off.  To  put  it  differently,  a  central  bank  that  truly  wanted  to  deflate  a  bubble 
should  be  willing  to  run  the  risk  of  inflicting  serious  damage  on  the  economy,  by  hiking 
interest rates by significant amounts. This is a very serious objection, and it is indeed behind 
the  recent  drive  towards  macroprudential  instruments  and  regulation,  as  opposed  to  the 
adoption  of  “leaning-against-the-wind”  monetary  policies  aimed  at  countering  asset  price 
bubbles exclusively via interest rate hikes. 
Third, the historical experience of the period since the mid-1980s appeared to validate the 
“mopping up” position: in particular, aggressive rate cuts had succeeded in shielding the U.S. 
economy from the aftershocks of both the 1987 stock market crash, and the implosion of the 
dotcom bubble. In the light of the crisis, however, a new view of the experience of the last 
two  decades  and  a  half  has  gained  prominence.  According  to  this  view,  cutting  rates 
aggressively in the aftermath of the bursting of a bubble (the so-called “Greenspan put” on 
asset  prices)  creates  a  moral-hazard  problem  by  providing  investors  with  a  liquidity  safety 
net. In the absence of any additional policy that could react to asset prices, as they gradually 
recover, over and beyond their effects on future inflation, this moral-hazard problem sows the 
seeds of the next crisis, raising the risk that the policymaker is induced to inflate bigger and 
bigger bubbles.  
A key lesson of the crisis for policymaking is therefore that, in order to reduce inefficient and 
disruptive asset-price booms and busts, monetary policy should be complemented by other 
policies  of  a  macro-prudential  nature.  Further,  recent  research  has  investigated  other 
channels  through  which  monetary  policy  can  contribute  to  sowing  the  seeds  of  future 
financial instability. Low interest rates, for example, can contribute to the build-up of financial 
imbalances via the so-called “risk-taking” channel.6 Simply put, very low interest rates may 
create incentives for banks to take on more risks. Recent research has provided empirical 
evidence compatible with such a notion. It has been documented,7 for example, how market 
based measures of bank’s risks as perceived by financial market participants tend to react 
positively  to  increases  in  interest  rates,  so  that  a  lower  interest  rate  leads  investors  to 
perceive  banks  as  less  risky.  By  the  same  token,  several  papers8  have  shown  that  credit 
standards  are  correlated  with  the  level  of  interest  rates:  lower  interest  rates,  in  particular, 
imply  lower  credit  standards,  including  to  customers  who  are  perceived  as  representing  a 
                                                 
6  See Borio and Zhu (2008). 
7  See Altunbas et al. (2010). 
8  See Jimenez et al., (2008), Ioannidou et al. (2008), and Ciccarelli et al. (2009). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
higher  credit  risk.  On  the  theoretical  side,  research  done  at  the  Banque  de  France9  has 
shown that, when the regulatory environment is not transparent, a decrease in the level of 
real interest rate increases banks’ risk-taking behavior. A time-honored principle of finance is 
that, ceteris paribus, the only way to increase the expected rate of return is to take more risk, 
and  the  result  of  such  search  for  yield  is  therefore  that  banks  will  increase  their  risk 
exposure.  
Finally, the recent experience has shown that the costs associated with the bursting of an 
asset price bubble can be simply staggering, and that monetary policy cannot be reasonably 
expected  to  completely  shield  the  economy  from  the  aftershocks.  In  particular,  research 
spurred by the crisis – pursued, first and foremost, by Reinhart and Rogoff10 – has shown 
that, historically, the bursting of asset price bubbles has been associated, most of the time, 
with  deep  recessions,  slow  and  drawn-out  recoveries,  large  budget  deficits  and  dramatic 
build-ups of national debt. 
The (supposedly) encompassing role of inflation forecasts 
II.3. 
Let me now turn to a third lesson of the crisis, that is, the supposedly encompassing role of 
inflation forecasts. The dominant presumption among inflation-targeting central banks during 
the  period  leading  up  to  the  crisis  was  that  the  central  inflation  projection  at  the  desired 
horizon (typically, two years ahead) represents a sufficient statistic for monetary policy, in the 
specific sense of encoding all the information which is relevant for its conduct. This position 
had  two  logical  corollaries:  (i)  interest  rates  should  be  moved  in  order  to  bring  the  central 
inflation  projection  in  line  with  the  inflation  objective  at  the  desired  horizon;  and  (ii)  they 
should react to asset price movements only to the extent that such movements impact upon 
the  inflation  projection  at  the  relevant  horizon.  An  important  point  to  stress  is  that  this 
presumption  was  never  subscribed  to  within  the  Euro  area.  The  European  Central  Bank, 
indeed, has always been very clear that its monetary policy decisions are not automatically 
and  exclusively  driven  by  its  inflation  forecasts.  In  particular,  a  close  monitoring  of  money 
and credit trends – whose impact does not necessarily manifest in the inflation forecast at the 
two  years  horizon,  but  instead  informs  the  assessment  of  inflation  risks  at  the  medium-to-
long-term frequencies – plays an important role within its policy process. A key rationale for 
including a monetary analysis within the Euro area’s monetary policy framework has been to 
“cross-check”  the  signals  coming  from  the  so-called  “economic  analysis”,  which  typically 
pertains  to  the  short-to-medium  term,  with  the  longer-term  information  coming  from  the 
evolution of monetary and credit aggregates. 
The  financial  crisis  has  led  to  a  reassessment  of  the  merits  of  the  Euro  area’s  monetary 
policy framework, and its reliance on a thorough and broad-based analysis of the evolution of 
monetary  and  credit  aggregates.  As  I  previously  discussed,  indeed,  long-term  historical 
evidence shows that periods of output and inflation stability have often been associated with 
the  slow  but  relentless  build-up  of  financial  imbalances.  A  key  problem  for  the  traditional 
position of just focusing on the inflation forecast at (say) the two-year horizon is that typically 
these bubbles burst only after having built up over several years, but meanwhile, most of the 
time they do not appreciably impact upon inflation projections.  
This  logically  implies  that  an  exclusive  focus  on  the  two-year  ahead  central  inflation 
projection  will  cause  policymakers  to  miss  the  risk  of  undershooting  the  inflation  objective 
sometime  in  the  future,  possibly  by  a  non-negligible  amount.  In  turn,  this  implies  that  the 
central projection for inflation does not represent a sufficient statistic for monetary policy, and 
that  a  more  sophisticated  approach,  factoring  in  the  possibility  of  “tail  risks”  such  as  the 
bursting of a bubble, should be taken into account. A possible way of addressing the problem 
                                                 
9  See Dubecq et al. (2010). 
10  See Reinhart and Rogoff (2009). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
within  the  traditional  forecast-based  framework  which  has  been  dominant  among  inflation-
targeting central banks is to extend the forecast horizon beyond two years ahead. The risks 
to the central inflation projection deriving, say, from excessive credit growth and the resulting 
build-up  of  an  asset  price  bubble  would  then  be  encoded  in  the  probability  distribution  for 
inflation  at  longer  horizons.  This  would  allow  the  central  bank  to  meaningfully  discuss  the 
dangers  associated  with  such  a  build-up,  and  –  assuming  that  within  future  policy 
frameworks monetary authorities will be endowed with macro-prudential instruments – it will 
allow them to explain to the public the adoption of measures designed to curb credit growth. 
In essence, this is what the ECB has been doing through its “monetary analysis”, as a key 
rationale for its close monitoring of money and credit aggregates has precisely been to keep 
track  of  the  evolution  of  medium-to-long-term  tail  risks  which  simply  do  not  map  onto  the 
central projection for inflation. 
Let me now turn to another lesson of the crisis, namely the practical relevance of the zero 
lower bound for monetary policy purposes. 
The zero lower bound is a relevant issue for contemporary monetary policy 
II.4. 
For  many  years  before  the  crisis,  the  general  consensus  within  both  academia  and  the 
central banking community had been that the zero lower bound (henceforth, ZLB) and the 
associated problem of the liquidity trap, in which conventional monetary policy – that is, the 
one associated with setting short-term interest rates – all but loses its ability to impact upon 
the  economy,  were  issues  of  mainly  historical  interest.  Japan’s  recent experience  with  the 
ZLB, and its difficulty in extricating itself from a liquidity trap situation, presented a troubling 
counter-argument to this position, but that could be “explained away” as the result of a series 
of policy mistakes on the part of Japanese policymakers.  
As a consequence of the financial crisis, there is, today, a generalized recognition that the 
ZLB may be a much more significant problem for monetary policy than previously thought. 
After  all,  over  the  last  eight  decades  the  world  has  seen  three  major  episodes,  with  the 
associated liquidity traps: the Great Depression, the Japanese experience of the 1990s, and 
the current crisis. By any standards, three episodes within a period of eighty years cannot be 
regarded  as  just  an  “anomaly”  in  the  functioning  of  the  economy,  or  as  something  of  only 
minor relevance.  
On  the  other  hand,  the  experience  with  non-conventional  policies  during  the  crisis  offers 
some reassurance that the problem posed by the ZLB may in practice be manageable, and 
that  policymakers  may  therefore  be  able,  if  similar  circumstances  were  to  arise  again,  to 
avoid once again the slide into deflation. In this respect, let me stress again that the ability, 
on the part of central banks, to provide both conventional and unconventional stimulus to the 
economy has been substantially enhanced by the anchoring of medium to long run inflation 
expectations at a level consistent with their price-stability objective. The crisis has therefore 
illustrated  the  advantage  deriving  from  stable  inflation  expectations,  which  increase  the 
effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  in  the  face  of  large  contractionary  shocks  by  transmitting 
integrally moves in nominal interest rates into moves in real interest rates. 
Let me now turn to a final, and separate, lesson of the crisis, pertaining to the necessity of 
broadening  the  spectrum  of  views  available  to  policymakers,  and  more  generally  of  being 
more receptive to opinions and positions outside of the “mainstream”. 
The need to broaden the spectrum of views available to policymakers 
II.5. 
An interesting example of this necessity can be found in a report, recently released by the 
International Monetary Fund,11 assessing its performance during the years before 2007, and 
                                                 
11  See International Monetary Fund (2011). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
in  particular  its  failure  to  sound  alarm  bells  regarding  the  impending  economic  disaster. 
Among the problems the report identifies, key issues which are discussed are: 
“a high degree of groupthink, intellectual capture, a general mindset that a major 
financial crisis in large advanced economies was unlikely, [and] lack of incentives 
to […] raise contrarian views”. 
The report also makes clear that some contrarian views raising doubts about the prevailing 
consensus  were  indeed  present  within  the  IMF  –  most  notably,  as  I  previously  discussed, 
they had been presented by the Fund’s Chief Economist, Raghuram Rajan, in an address at 
Jackson Hole in 2005 – but that in most cases, they had simply not been included in the final 
versions of the Fund’s official documents produced for policymakers, and therefore failed to 
make any dent in the mainstream position, which remained resolutely optimistic. 
Although the risks associated with issues such as “groupthink” and “intellectual capture” are 
always  present,  they  can  be  countered  by  broadening  the  spectrum  of  views  available  to 
policymakers.  The  latter  should  always  search  for  logical  inconsistencies,  problematic 
assumptions, and inconsistencies with historical evidence pertaining to analogous situations, 
and present alternative scenarios based on different assumptions and competing analytical 
frameworks.  
It should finally be noted that contrarian views are probably easier to arouse in a decision-
making process that does not rest on a single unified analytical framework, such as one that 
would  be  used,  for  instance,  to  produce  the  central  bank’s  inflation  projections.  In  this 
respect, the ECB’s monetary policy strategy, which aims to pass some robustness checks by 
making  use  of  various  theoretical  and  empirical  approaches,  may  already  provide  the 
Governing Council with a relatively broad spectrum of views about risks to price stability. 
Conclusion 
III. 
Let me now conclude. The financial crisis has exposed several shortcomings in the monetary 
policy frameworks of the pre-crisis era, and more generally in their intellectual foundations. 
Not only does maintenance of output and inflation stability not automatically deliver financial 
stability, but on the contrary, the very same monetary policy which successfully keeps output 
and inflation stable in the short run may well lead to the build-up of financial imbalances and 
asset  price  bubbles  which  threaten  macroeconomic  stability  at  longer  horizons.  Further, 
commitment  to  “mopping  up”  such  bubbles  by  means  of  aggressive  interest  rate  cuts 
implemented  after  their  bursting  has  proved  to  be  most  unwise.  Moreover,  the  recent 
experience  demonstrated  that  such  a  strategy  may  well  be  unable  to  shield  the  economy 
from  the  costs  deriving  from  the  bursting  of  the  bubble,  costs  which  in  many  cases  may 
simply be staggering. Also, the sheer size of the macroeconomic shock associated with the 
bursting of the bubble may be sufficient to plunge the economy to the zero lower bound. This 
is the bad news. 
The good news, however, is that, first, many of the principles underlying pre-crisis monetary 
policy frameworks are still perfectly valid, so that, in a sense, we do not have to “reinvent the 
wheel”. Second, the adoption of macro-prudential policies aimed at taking care of the build-
up of disequilibria in asset markets, or within specific segments of such markets, offers the 
possibility of effectively tackling the problems which led us to the current predicament. 
Thank you for your attention. 
References 
Altunbas, Y., Gambacorta, L., and Marqués-Ibáñez, D. (2010), “Does Monetary Policy Affect 
Bank Risk-Taking?”, ECB Working Paper n. 1166, March 2010. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Borio, C., and White, W. (2003), “Wither Monetary and Financial Stability? The Implications 
of Evolving Policy Regimes”, presented at: Monetary Policy and Uncertainty: Adapting to a 
Changing Economy, a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 
Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 28 – 30, 2003. 
Claudio Borio and Haibin Zhu (2008), “Capital Regulation, Risk-Taking, and Monetary Policy: 
A  Missing  Link  in  the  Transmission  Mechanism?”,  BIS  Working  Paper  n.  2588,  December 
2008. 
Ciccarelli, M., Maddaloni, A., and Peydró, J.-L. (2009), “Trusting the Bankers: Another Look 
at the Credit Channel of Monetary Policy”, ECB, mimeo. 
Dubecq, S., Mojon, B., and Ragot, X. (2010), “Fuzzy Capital Requirements, Risk Shifting and 
the Risk Taking Channel of Monetary Policy”, Banque de France, mimeo. 
Friedman,  M.  (1968),  “The  Role  of  Monetary  Policy”,  American  Economic  Review,  58(1),  
1–17. 
International  Monetary  Fund  (2011),  IMF  Performance  in  the  Run-Up  to  the  Financial  and 
Economic Crisis: IMF Surveillance in 2004–07, available at http://www.imf.org. 
Ioannidou,  V.,  Ongena,  S.,  and  Peydró,  J.-L.  (2008),  “Monetary  Policy,  Risk-Taking  and 
Pricing: Evidence from a Quasi-Natural Experiment”, ECB, mimeo. 
Kindleberger,  C.  (2005),  Manias,  Panics,  And  Crashes:  A  History  Of  Financial  Crises, 
Palgrave Macmillan, 5th edition. 
Lowenstein,  Roger  (2000),  When  Genius  Failed:  The  Rise  and  Fall  of  Long-Term  Capital 
Management, Random House. 
Lucas, R.E., Jr. (1972a), “Expectations and the Neutrality  of Money”,  Journal of Economic 
Theory, 4, April 1972, 103–24. 
Lucas, R.E., Jr. (1972b), “Econometric Testing of the Natural Rate Hypothesis”, in Eckstein, 
O.,  ed.,  The  Econometrics  of  Price  Determination,  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal 
Reserve System, Washington, D.C. 
Papademos, L., and Stark, J. (2010), Enhancing Monetary Analysis, European Central Bank, 
Frankfurt-Am-Main. 
Phelps,  E.S.  (1968),  “Money-Wage  Dynamics  and  Labor  Market  Equilibrium”,  Journal  of 
Political Economy, 76 (S4), 678–711. 
Rajan, R. (2005), “Has Financial Development Made the World Riskier?”, presented at: The 
Greenspan  Era:  Lessons  for  the  Future,  a  symposium  sponsored  by  the  Federal  Reserve 
Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 25 – 27, 2005. 
Rajan, R. (2010), Fault Lines, Princeton University Press. 
Reinhart, C., and Rogoff, K. (2009), This Time Is Different, Princeton University Press. 
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny (1997), “The Limits of Arbitrage”, Journal of Finance, 
Vol. LII, No. 1, March 1997, 35–55. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
