Choongsoo Kim: The Bank of Korea’s profile in the global economic 
environment 
Address by Mr Choongsoo Kim, Governor of the Bank of Korea, upon the Bank of Korea’s 
61st Anniversary, Seoul, 10 June 2011. 
The  following  is  an  unofficial  English  translation  of  the  Governor’s  address  upon  the  Bank  of  Korea’s 
61st Anniversary. 
 My dear fellow members of the Bank of Korea, 
Today 61 years have passed since the foundation of the Bank of Korea as the central bank. 
On this day last year we gathered in this place and reflected on the special significance of 
the  Bank  of  Korea’s  60th  Anniversary,  marking  the  completion  of  what  is  comparable  to a  
60-year life cycle in the Orient and the beginning of a new one. We expressed our gratitude 
to  the  executives  and  staff  who  had  served  before  us,  with  great  dedication  to  this 
organization’s development, and vowed to unite our efforts in opening a new history, founded 
on the enduring tradition that we have inherited and uphold so dearly. In brief, we set out to 
create a new profile for the Bank of Korea as a world class central bank, under the banner of 
a “Global BOK” – the making of which we took as our call in this age. 
One year on, today, we gather again on the Bank of Korea’s 61st Anniversary, to look into 
what is required of us to heighten the Bank’s profile in the global economic environment that 
has newly emerged, and to reaffirm our resolution to establish a lofty profile for the Bank in 
this world. 
Understanding of global economic environment 
Although we have always faced new circumstances and fresh challenges, we find ourselves 
in a highly uncertain economic situation now, which makes it difficult even to chart the future 
course  of  developments,  since  the  agents  of  change  have  become  extremely  diverse 
compared to the past and the amplitude of the changes taking place has likewise broadened, 
particularly in the wake of the global financial crisis. From a worldwide perspective, the global 
economic trend toward further intensification of the interlinkages among all economic agents, 
including governments, has become generally pervasive. In such an environment, the role of 
our  past  experience  and  knowledge  cannot  but  be  limited  when  we  seek  to  predict  future 
developments and draw up policies in response. It is thus evident that each country’s place 
in  the  world  economy  will  depend  upon  how  wisely  it  goes  about  overcoming  these 
difficulties, and I would say that overcoming them and moving forward are huge challenges 
imposed on us. 
It is now well known that, in the course of overcoming the global financial crisis, the global 
economy has moved from an advanced-country-centered framework to a multipolar one, as 
can  be  observed  in  the  persistent  gap  now  seen  between  growth  in  advanced  economies 
and that in emerging markets, and in the differences in growth paths even among the major 
advanced countries themselves. Of course, in one dimension this phenomenon may be seen 
as  helping  to  narrow  the  income  gap  between  the  advanced  and  the  emerging  economy 
blocs.  In  another  dimension,  however,  some  degree  of  apprehension  also  arises,  as  to 
whether the proposals for addressing the global imbalances now being discussed will indeed 
enable  the  global  economy  to  achieve  stable  growth  at  an  early  date  backed  by  policy 
cooperation among countries of the world. The current state is one in which the uncertainties 
in the global economy in the throes of overcoming the crisis, and the ensuing risk factors, are 
not disappearing but lurk constantly around every corner. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
In terms of prices as well, we have moved away from the “Great Moderation” that had lasted 
since  the  1990s,  and  now  see  global  inflationary  pressures  mounting.  A  combination  of 
factors, including the sharp run-ups in international commodity prices led by that of oil, the 
abundant  global  liquidity,  and  the  demand  side  pressures  arising  from  economic  recovery, 
are  exerting  upward  pressures  on  prices.  The  inflation  problem  confronting  the  emerging 
market bloc in particular represents yet another global policy challenge that must be tackled 
to  ensure  global  economic  balance  and  stability,  one  that  is  set  apart  from  the  obscure 
prospects  for  recovery  in  advanced  economies  and  the  problems  of  excessive  sovereign 
debt. 
In this way the world economy of today presents a pattern of differentiation among countries, 
but on the other hand the trend toward an interlinked global economy has grown stronger, 
where the influence that any one country’s economic policy has on other countries is very 
much  greater  than  in  the  past  owing  to  the  growing  interconnectedness  in  terms  of  both 
finance and the real economy. 
I would say that the world economy currently faces two core tasks – the first being to solve at 
an early stage the problem of the global imbalances, which have been cited as a root cause 
of the current economic crisis, and restore the global economy to a state of equilibrium, and 
the second being to draw up proposals that will nip in the bud any repetition of the crisis. To 
these  ends,  an  action  plan  for  reducing  the  global  imbalances  has  taken  shape  under  the 
aegis of the G20, including the setting of indicative guidelines for current account balances 
and  going  so  far  as  discussion  of  proposals  to  reform  the  international  monetary  system. 
What is more, on the basis of the discussions so far, all-out reforms are currently underway 
of financial systems and their regulatory and supervisory frameworks, the evolution of which 
had since the 1980s been based on financial liberalization as a core value. Countries around 
the world are presently preparing for transition from the Basel II paradigm of regulating the 
soundness  of  individual  financial  institutions  to  the  Basel  III  paradigm  in  which  regulations 
are  further  tightened  to control  systemic  risks  in  a  world  where  all  national  economies  are 
interlinked. 
That  being  said,  we  must  remain  vigilant,  despite  such  efforts,  given  that  there  is  no 
guarantee that the global economy will escape the present crisis, nor that future economic 
crises can be adequately prevented. We should bear in mind that problems may arise at any 
time, from defects in the system themselves or from the inappropriate administration of them, 
particularly in a situation in which no legal establishment to discipline the global economy, 
i.e., a global jurisdiction exists. I would characterize our current era as one in which the  
awareness  of  these  problems  has  actually  elevated  the  sharing  of  information  and  policy 
cooperation among governments and central banks worldwide into a very important issue. 
Trend of establishing new roles for the Central Bank 
Dear friends and colleagues, 
Given  that  the  world  economy  is  rapidly  changing,  in  terms  of  both  finance  and  the  real 
economy,  the  roles  played  by  the  central  bank  must  also  change.  It  must  be  clearly 
understood that the central bank is no exception to being subject to change – in that, like any 
other  economic  entity,  it  also  cannot  stand  still  in  history  but  possesses  the  same 
characteristics  as  a  ceaselessly  evolving  creature.  Although  the  history  of  central  banks 
stretches  back  over  300  years,  I  believe  their  roles  are  in  the  process  of  changing  even 
today.  It  also  goes  without  saying  that,  in  the  course  of  exploring  ways  of  overcoming  the 
global  financial  crisis,  the  role  of  the  central  bank  is  appraised  as  having  become  more 
important than at any time in the past. For example, the “post-crisis role of central banks” has 
been  a  theme  discussed  in  great  depth  in  academic  circles,  and  we  may  well  be  looking 
toward change in the direction of a heightening of the duties and authorities of the central 
bank relative to the past. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The  bimonthly  meetings  of  central  bank  governors  held  by  the  Bank  for  International 
Settlements  (BIS),  the  G20  meetings,  the  IMF  Annual  Meetings,  the  Basel  Committee  on 
Banking Supervision (BCBS), the Financial Stability Board (FSB) and the like may be seen 
as  international  forums  that  have  taken  on  a  pivotal  role  in  the  establishment  of  a  new 
international  economic  order.  And  the  fact  that  central  bank  governors  take  part  in  all  of 
these meetings may serve as decisive evidence confirming the further enhancement of the 
role of central banks to a greater degree than ever before. 
In the process of overcoming the global financial crisis, the international financial community 
and academia have enthusiastically advocated central banks playing a more active role in 
safeguarding financial stability, in addition to fulfilling their basic mandate of price stability. 
This is based on the recognition that the central bank should not only play its traditional role 
as lender of last resort, through the supply of urgently needed liquidity in times of crisis, but 
also prevent financial system instability by means of the macro-prudential policies newly put 
forward to restrain the systemic risks seen to have been at the root of the global financial 
crisis. In fact, the US and the UK which were the epicenters of the global financial crisis are 
already reorganizing their relevant systems in this direction. 
Another weighty duty that we must carry out as a top priority is timely improvement of the 
central bank’s method of conducting policies in line with the changing economic environment 
that we are currently addressing. In the current context, where the interconnectedness of the 
global economy has intensified greatly and the importance of a collective response to major 
international financial issues has been accentuated, a global perspective is required of us all 
–  that  will  enable  us  in  our  policy  operations  to  take  into  account  not  merely  domestic 
economic conditions alone, but also broader matters including global economic trends and 
the changes in the policy of each country. 
Major policy tasks for the Bank of Korea 
Dear fellow members of the Bank of Korea, 
Today, on the occasion of our anniversary, we cannot but rethink the question of what vision 
the Bank of Korea should hold in preparing for the future, given these conditions at home and 
abroad. If the central bank is to become a main axis in the running of the national economy, 
we should bear in mind that our ways of thinking and patterns of behavior are never to be 
isolated from social and economic norms and practices. We must keep an eye on changes in 
the markets at all times, and possess the ability to understand economic activities in every 
sector  and  not  just  in  finance  alone.  We  should  not  become  mired  in  past  know-how  and 
concepts which take no consideration of the changing circumstances of the era. And it is for 
these reasons that I would point out the need that our activities be always informed by the 
twin  principles  of  “relevance  to  reality”,  meaning  that  our  operations  should  be  intimately 
linked to the realities on the ground, and of “globalization”. 
In  the  course  of  the  last  60  years,  which  have  seen  Korea  grow  from  a  poverty-stricken 
nation  to  a  G20  member  country,  the  Bank  of  Korea  has  contributed  greatly  to  economic 
development as the “Central Bank of the Republic of Korea”. I believe that we are now called 
upon to develop into a “World Class Bank of Korea” while carrying on this tradition. 
Over  the  last  one  year,  we  have  taken  a  huge  step  toward  a  new  advance,  through  the 
structural  reform  of  our  organization  and  improvements  in  our  modes  of  operation.  Going 
ahead,  in  conjunction  with  these  efforts,  we  look  forward  to  accomplishing  our  vision  of  a 
“Global  BOK”  by  striving  even  more  to  change  our  perceptions  and  build  our  capacities, 
driven by the impetus for change coming from within. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Dear friends and colleagues, 
There  are  many  tasks  to  be  pursued  if  we  are  to  realize  our  vision  through  actual  deeds, 
rather  than  seeing  it  stay  as  a  mere  catchword.  I  would  say  that  the  following  challenges 
await those departments with responsibilities related to actual policy. 
First  of  all,  a  new  monetary  policy  paradigm  appropriate  to  global  financial  and  economic 
conditions  previously  mentioned  and  to  the  changing  role  of  the  central  banks  must  be 
sought out. The conduct of policies based on their relevance to the Korean economy, while 
at the same time accurately charting the ebbs and flows of the world economy, is called for. 
We will also need to assiduously study methods of monetary policy operation that can bring 
about financial stability as well as firmly anchoring price stability. 
We will need to strive actively to form a concrete foundation for strengthening the Bank’s role 
in financial stability. We must harness all our wisdom to devise various arrangements that 
can uphold the framework of international cooperation – in regard for example to the scope 
of the central bank’s financial stability mandate, to the associated policy instruments, and to 
the framework for conduct of the policies concerned. In view of the fact that in this global era 
financial stability cannot be achieved by the efforts of any single country alone, it is vital to 
build up international financial cooperation and global networks. For this very reason, I would 
emphasize  the  importance  of  establishing  an  environment  in  which  international  standards 
can be applied. 
In parallel with our pursuit of price stability and financial stability, we should press persistently 
forward  with  efficient  conduct  of  our  currency-issuing  business  and  advancement  of  the 
payment and settlement system. Heightening payment and settlement system stability, in line 
with the new international standards being drawn up under the auspices of the BIS, is a vital 
task as well. 
We must also continue our endeavors to mitigate the volatility of foreign capital flows. The 
Bank  of  Korea,  in  coordination  with  the  government,  intends  to  implement  seamlessly  a 
Macro-prudential  Stability  Levy  on  non-core  foreign  currency  liabilities  as  scheduled  in  the 
latter  half  of  this  year.  In  addition,  we  will  need  to  strengthen  our  monitoring  of  the 
international and domestic financial and foreign exchange markets, and if necessary devise 
supplementary  measures,  while  remaining  on  guard  against  the  possibility  of  heightened 
capital flow volatility caused for instance by overseas risk factors. 
The  efficient  operation  and  administration  of  the  foreign  exchange  holdings  that  constitute 
reserve assets for external payments in times of emergency are of the utmost importance. 
We  must  maintain  our  efforts  to  maximize  our  operational  capacities,  by  enhancing  the 
effectiveness  of  the  operating  framework  and  heightening  the  expertise  of  staff,  befitting  a 
time when the foreign exchange reserves amount to more than 300 billion dollars. 
Ongoing pursuit of internal reform at the Bank of Korea 
Dear friends and colleagues, 
In keeping with the rapidly shifting external environment, the pace of our internal reforms will 
have  to  be  spurred  on  still  further.  It  is  vital  above  all  to  augment  the  Bank  of  Korea’s 
research capabilities, in order for it to not only fulfill its duties as a policy authority but also 
develop  into  a  first  class  economic  research  institute,  equipped  with  the  expertise  to 
diagnose a wide variety of economic issues and present prescriptions for addressing them. 
While  striving  to  improve  the  quality  of  the  economic  statistics,  we  must  maximize  the 
synergy effects of our departments charged with undertaking research through the activities 
of  the  newly-introduced  Research  Committee,  the  promotion  of  matrix-type  combined 
research, and joint research with international organizations, consequently consolidating the 
institutional  memory  of  the  Bank  of  Korea.  Through  these  steps  we  will  have  to  move  to 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
through 
international  networks 
heighten  the  quality  of  the  Bank  of  Korea’s  research  and  analyses  enough  to  be  duly 
recognized within the international community. 
In  aiming  for  a  “Global  BOK”,  the  importance  of  cultivating  human  talent  can  hardly  be 
overstated.  The  greatest  assets  of  the  central  bank  are  its  human  resources.  While 
strengthening  staff  competencies  and 
the  continued 
propulsion  of  secondments  to  foreign  central  banks  and  staff  entry  to  international 
organizations, we intend to take to a further stage the “Global Initiative Program” that started 
early  this  year.  We  will  have  to  continually  provide  our  staff  of  all  ranks  with  wide-ranging 
training opportunities to build individual capacities. 
We  must  be  resolute  in  our  will  to  heighten  still  further  the  profile  of  the  central  bank  in 
contributing to the national economy, all the more so in these times of change we now find 
ourselves in. Internal reform is a task that cannot be hesitated over for even one moment in 
our  quest  to  grow  as  a  central  bank  with  prestige  and  strong  public  credibility.  We  must 
ensure that the Bank of Korea is appreciated by the entire nation for the worth of its whole 
range  of  activities  and  organization,  by  contributing  substantially  to  the  development  of 
regional communities through the operations of our regional branches, and aim to improve 
our organizational management, for example, by strengthening the functions of our overseas 
representative offices. 
My dear friends and colleagues of the Bank of Korea, 
We should not forget that, as the interest and anticipations of society in regard to the central 
bank are heightened, our duties become much greater. Pushing the bounds of our capacities 
forever outward, we need to be conscious of our lofty mission and adopt an attitude of strict 
self-discipline. 
As  I  draw  toward  the  end  of  my  anniversary  address  today,  I  would  once  more  like  to 
emphasize  that  in  order  to  play  our  part  with  excellence  as  a  central  bank  and  efficiently 
conduct policies in today’s global era, the bounds of our consciousness and our spheres of 
activities should no longer be restricted to Korea alone but must extend to the world, and our 
ways  of  thinking  and  acting  are  necessarily  inseparable  from  those  of  our  society.  I  look 
forward to great efforts from each and every member of the Bank in embarking on the drive 
to create a “Global BOK”, and I offer you my heartfelt encouragement. 
When  we  gather  here  in  a  year’s  time  to  celebrate  the  62nd  anniversary  of  the  Bank’s 
foundation, may it be with a consciousness of dedication to being in the fore in developing 
the organization, so that we may take pride in having advanced the position of the Bank of 
Korea a stage further. On this occasion of the 61st anniversary, I thank you all again very 
sincerely for your endeavors, and I wish the best of health and happiness to you all and to 
those whom you hold dear. 
Thank you very much. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
