Rundheersing Bheenick: Risk mitigation in futures market v/s exposure 
to market forces – the EDGE for Mauritius exporters 
Address by Mr Rundheersing Bheenick, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at the inaugural 
seminar of GBOT (Global Board of Trade) EDGE (Empowerment and Development through 
Global  financial  markets’  Education),  organized  jointly  with  the  Mauritius  Exporters’ 
Association, Ebène, 4 May 2011. 
 It is an honour for me to have been invited this afternoon to address you on an issue that is 
close to my heart. Let me begin by congratulating the organizers, the Global Board of Trade 
(GBOT), for yet another excellent initiative, and the Mauritius Exporters’ Association (MEXA) 
for  hosting  this  event.  Any  initiative  that  helps  to  develop  our  foreign  exchange  and 
derivatives  market  will  of  course  receive  the  full  support  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius.  And  for 
those of you who may be inclined to believe that dabbling in derivatives by Central Banks is a 
risky business, let me assure you that promoting the development of the foreign exchange 
market and derivatives is very much part of the remit of the Bank.  
On a previous occasion when I had the honour to address a GBOT audience – it was on the 
occasion  of  the  Seminar  on  Currency  Derivatives  in  July  2009  –  I  had  emphasized  that 
financial development in Mauritius was incomplete and had a long way to go if we are to be 
reckoned as an international financial centre. I had then borrowed Randall Dodd’s image of a 
four-legged  table  to  depict  the  financial  system  and  argued  that  our  table  had  one  leg 
missing. I then welcomed the launch of GBOT, the first Pan-African Derivatives Exchange, 
which I believed would play a role in the development of our financial sector and help us to 
find that missing fourth leg. Today, I am very glad to note that GBOT has done some brisk 
business since its start of operation and its daily trading volume crossed the 50 million dollar-
mark  two  weeks  ago.  I  congratulate  GBOT  for  this  achievement  and  wish  them  continued 
perseverance in the pursuit of their trading volume target of USD 1 billion a day, which I think 
is achievable. 
On several occasions, in previous addresses and during meetings with various stakeholders, 
I have stressed the importance of foreign exchange hedging instruments in helping domestic 
corporates,  particularly  our  exporters  to  manage  currency  mismatches  in  their  balance 
sheets. A typical reaction was: we know how to produce textile products for the markets that 
we know – that is our job. We need the dollar at Rs35, the euro at Rs45, and the UK pound 
at Rs55 – that’s your job! Now, among the tools I discovered when I joined the Central Bank, 
unfortunately there was no magic wand… But I believe the debate has moved on a little. I am 
very  pleased  to  see  that  I  am  no  longer  a  lone  voice  in  the  wilderness.  I  understand  that 
many of you have started active treasury operations for a more efficient management of your 
foreign exchange exposures and the attendant risks that go along. Indeed, GBOT’s EDGE 
programme  aims  to  support  these  efforts.  The  acronym  is  self-explanatory:  Empowerment 
and Development through Global financial markets’ Education.  
I am also aware of GBOT’s efforts to familiarize operators with hedging. Much ink has been 
spilt on this issue of hedging in the local press in the wake of the unfortunate events at Air 
Mauritius  and  the  State  Trading  Corporation.  The  airline  ran  into  some  unexpected 
turbulence,  almost  bankrupted  itself  in  the  process,  and  ejected  management  and  board-
level executives to claw its way back to solvency. Our State Trading Corporation found fuel 
imports  to  be  an  explosive  issue  which  led  to  the  premature  departure  of  its  former  Chief 
Executive. But abuse, or misuse, of a tool does not make the tool useless. It only underlines 
the necessity of perusing the User’s Manual very carefully and familiarizing yourself with any 
health warning that comes with it, which is the object of this exercise this afternoon. It gives 
me great pleasure therefore to reiterate my full support to the EDGE initiative. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
As  Governor,  I  have  become  used,  if  not  inured,  to  the  periodic  recriminations  of  our 
exporters on the value of the rupee. There have been times when these were accompanied 
by direct threats to phase down operations, to lay off thousands of workers, and cause other 
mayhem, if we did not provide relief via currency depreciation. And my unfaltering answer to 
them has always been that we are in a free market with no capital controls and the foreign 
exchange  market  is  also  free.  The  Central  Bank  is  non-interventionist  and  when  we  do 
intervene,  it  is  only  to  smooth  out  unwanted  volatilities,  not  to  achieve  any  particular 
exchange value of our rupee vis-à-vis any particular currency. Hence, taking exchange risk is 
very much part and parcel of the game of our economic operators. Since the revolutionary 
idea that risk can be managed – which literally transformed the world – man is no longer left 
to  the  whims  of  the  gods.  The  concept  of  management  of  risks  actually  drives  modern 
society, and much of the progress made by man would not have been realized without the 
notion that risk not only can be managed, but can actually be rewarding. Indeed, risk and 
reward are the two faces of the same coin.  
The  exporters’  outcries  show  their  extreme  vulnerability  to  the  vagaries  of  global  financial 
markets. At the same time they reflect a certain inability, or should I say reluctance, to seize 
the  opportunity  that  modern  risk  management  tools  offer  to  mitigate  their  risk.  I  do 
understand your fears – trading in derivatives is quite complex and involves many risks. The 
memories  of  the  collapse  of  Barings  in  1995  and  the  more  recent  scandal  at  Société 
Générale in 2008 are still fresh in the minds of many people. These scandals have nourished 
the myth surrounding derivatives and their potential for leading to catastrophe. In both these 
cases,  as  indeed  in  the  more  recent  cases  like  Bear  Sterns  and  Lehman  Brothers,  the 
problem was not with the derivatives but with the controls those banks failed to put in place. 
And there was also a failure of regulation and supervisory oversight.  
Today, we are here to talk about risk mitigation through the futures market. Some corporates 
in Mauritius, as well as the Mauritius Sugar Syndicate, have traditionally hedged their foreign 
exchange  exposure  using  forward  instruments  traded  in  the  over-the-counter  market.  It  is 
good to know that futures and forwards contracts are both contracts to deliver an asset on a 
future date at an agreed price but they differ in some respects. Futures are standardized and 
exchange-traded, while forwards are customized and traded over-the-counter. Thus futures 
face an exchange, while forwards face a non-exchange counterparty. Furthermore, futures 
are often margined, while forwards are not. They have significantly less credit risk, and their 
funding is different. 
Like the forward contract, a futures contract is a guarantee that a certain product will be sold 
at a fixed price at a certain date. Although the proliferation of mysterious-sounding acronyms 
and the complex trade jargon may indicate a recent origin, the concept is certainly not new. 
In  fact  the  idea  of  entering  into  agreements  to  guarantee  a  fixed  return  in  the  future  is 
mentioned  by  Aristotle.  Gillian  Tett,  in  her  fascinating  book  “Fool’s  Gold”,  drawing  on  the 
aforesaid Randall Dodd, tells us of rudimentary futures and options contracts having been 
found on clay tablets in Mesopotamia, dating back to 1750 BC. The first futures exchange 
market was the Dōjima Rice Exchange in Japan in the 1730s, to meet the needs of samurai, 
who were being paid in rice and needed a stable conversion for the value of their currency 
which was the rice. The first-ever standardized “exchange traded” forward contracts, called 
futures contracts, were listed in 1864 by the Chicago Board of Trade, or C-BOT – surely the 
inspiration  for  G-BOT,  our  host  today.  Soon  there  were  contracts  created  on  a  number  of 
commodities, and futures exchanges developed all over the world. This was the birth of our 
modern  futures  market  as  we  know  it.  Today,  there  are  more  than  90  futures  and  futures 
options exchanges and these include the London International Financial Futures Exchange 
(now  Euronext.liffe),  Deutsche  Terminbörse  (now  Eurex)  and  the  Tokyo  Commodity 
Exchange (TOCOM).  
With the breakdown of the Bretton Woods system of fixed exchange rates, deregulation, and 
the  advent  of  new  technologies,  the  environment,  in  which  banks  and  other  financial 
intermediaries  evolved,  changed  drastically.  They  responded  by  developing  financial  risk 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
management  products  designed  to  better  control  exchange  risk.  They  started  with  simple 
foreign  exchange  forwards  that  obligated  one  counterparty  to  buy,  and  the  other  to  sell,  a 
fixed  amount  of  currency  at  an  agreed  date  in  the  future.  By  entering  in  such  contracts, 
customers  could  offset  the  risk  that  large  movements  in  exchange  rates  could  adversely 
impact  the  economic  viability  of  their  transactions.  The  World  Bank,  one  of  the  Bretton 
Woods  twins,  concluded  the  world’s  first  swap  deal  in  1981,  with  IBM  as  the  counterparty 
and Salomon Brothers as the arranger. Where Salomon Brothers led, others followed, piling 
innovation on innovation. An ever-increasing number of novel products designed to manage 
and  control  financial  risks  more  effectively  were  gradually  offered  to  customers.  There  is 
today an impressive array of financial risk management products available.  
When  we  compare  the  stage  of  development  of  our  financial  sector  with  that  of  the 
developed economies, or even with a few other emerging economies, it is evident that we 
are  trailing  quite  far  behind.  India,  for  example,  has  a  deep  and  liquid  equity  spot  and 
derivatives  market,  a  liquid  forex  OTC  spot  and  derivatives  market,  an  exchange  traded 
currency  futures,  a  market  for  Government  securities,  an  interest  rate  swap  market,  a 
securitization market, a primary market for corporate bank and money market instruments, 
and  a  repo  market  in  Government  securities  and  corporate  bonds.  We  are  indeed  trailing 
very  far  behind,  aren’t  we?  But,  by  way  of  mitigation,  I  have  to  point  out  that  the  Indian 
exchanges remain largely domestic given that capital controls still exist there. Our banks deal 
very little in forward transactions and even less in options. We only have a thin spot market 
that does not offer adequate protection to our operators against the volatility of the dollar and 
the euro.  
If our system is still deficient, it is certainly not through want of trying. We have spared no 
effort  to  put  in  place  the  appropriate  infrastructure  to  deepen  the  financial  system.  The 
enabling legislation has been put in place; there are continuing efforts at the Bank to develop 
a secondary market for Government paper; there are other initiatives by the Stock Exchange 
of Mauritius; and we have GBOT, the exchange which is hosting this event this evening. In 
December 2009, the Bank initiated foreign currency swaps tailor-made for the needs of our 
export operators when there was evidence that the volume of transactions on the domestic 
spot  foreign  exchange  market  had  declined,  and  was  causing  some  undue  volatility  in  the 
market. This measure had a two-fold objective: first, to cater to the needs of the operators 
temporarily, and second, to encourage them to have greater recourse to hedging instruments 
for securing their rupee earnings. Although we maintained the swaps throughout 2010, they 
have not been used since July of that year. Participants still show reluctance to hedge their 
exposures – it is not easy to get rid of old habits.  
Most  of  the  time,  our  exporters  have  evolved  in  a  fairly  well-protected  market;  they  have 
developed a reliant client-base in Europe, and they relied on the expected depreciation of the 
rupee to sustain their operations. There was no need for them to have recourse to hedging 
instruments to control their risks. Well, as you all know, that era is over. Today, there is not a 
single exporter in this room who does not believe that the economic viability of his enterprise 
depends on the proper management of its risks, or to put it differently, there is not a single 
exporter who believes he can ignore developments on the currency front and his business 
will  still  flourish.  Let  me  bring  up  some  statistics  to  highlight  the  importance  of  the  export-
oriented sector in the Mauritian economy and the extent to which they are exposed. 
The EOE sector plays a key role in our economy and its sustainability and competitiveness 
are  a  matter  of  national  interest.  To  take  2010  figures,  the  EOE  sector  represents  around 
6 per  cent  of  GDP,  accounts  for  58  per  cent  of  total  export  of  goods,  and  provides 
employment to nearly 56,000 persons, which in turn represents a little over 10 per cent of 
total employment.  
However, the EOE sector and external demand-led sectors as a whole are subject to some 
structural  weaknesses  which  make  them  particularly  vulnerable  to  external  shocks.  A  full 
two-thirds  of  our  total  export  of  goods  was  directed  to  European  markets  in  2010.  This 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
pattern  of  dependence  on  Europe  is  also  evident  on  the  services  front.  Two-thirds  of  our 
tourists  also  come  from  Europe.  To  complete  the  picture,  half  of  total  FDI  inflows  into 
Mauritius came from Europe in 2010.  
This  geographical  concentration  on  Europe  for  exports  of  goods  and  services,  and  inward 
investment,  is  not  replicated  on  the  import  side.  Europe  provided  only  one  quarter  of  our 
imports of goods. We are not only highly exposed to the European market; we also have to 
cope with the imbalance in the currency in which our trade is conducted. On the one hand, it 
is estimated that 41 per cent of our export proceeds is denominated in euros. The share of 
the US dollar and pound sterling stands at 39 per cent and 14 per cent, respectively. On the 
other hand, our imports are invoiced mainly in US dollars, with a share of 67 per cent. The 
euro represents 21 per cent and the pound sterling less than 2 per cent of imports.  
At one point in time, the combination of a downward slide of both the euro and the pound 
sterling  on  global  currency  markets,  coupled  with  a  stronger  US  dollar,  raised  serious 
concern  in  view  of  the  negative  implications  of  such  a  trifecta  on  a  wide  spectrum  of 
economic  activity  in  the  country,  including  the  sugar,  textiles,  tourism  and  BPO  sectors. 
Today,  fortunately  the  rupee  has  stabilized.  We  cannot,  however,  pretend  that  we  are 
protected  from  all  external  instability,  as  the  value  of  our  currency  in  the  domestic  foreign 
exchange market is largely driven by the interplay of domestic and international factors. After 
almost  84  weeks  of  non-intervention  in  the  foreign  exchange  market,  the  Bank  started 
intervening again to correct emerging distortions in the market. So while we, as regulator are 
playing our part to stabilize the market, you exporters, who are the active participants, are 
also expected to play yours. You cannot continue to take one-way bets on the exchange rate 
or  continue  to  try  to  pull  the  rug  in  your  direction.  It  will  come  as  no  surprise  to  close 
observers  of  the  Mauritian  economic  scene  that,  in  its  last  Article  IV  Consultation  Mission 
conducted early this year, the IMF finds that  our currency is broadly in line with economic 
fundamentals.  So  let’s  stop  griping  about  rupee  strength  or  weakness  and  take  action  to 
minimize currency risks.  
I  have  every  reason  to  believe  that  our  operators  are  beginning  to  appreciate  fully  the 
importance of managing their foreign exchange risk – the organization of this seminar with 
the support of MEXA, the exporters’ association, and the high turnout, are ample evidence of 
this. 2010 has been a very good year for our exporters in spite of the fragile recovery in our 
main export markets. Exports by EOEs rose by 11 per cent in 2010, nearly four times faster 
than the 2.8 per cent growth of 2009. The seafood sub-sector is said to be hauling in a very 
good  catch  and  the  textile  sector  remains  stable,  with  full  order  books  and  recovering 
markets.  
However,  we  are  conscious  that  the  export  sectors  are  facing  daunting  challenges  in  the 
wake of the uncertainty still surrounding the global economic environment, and, in particular, 
our  main  export  markets.  From  our  perspective,  risks  of  subdued  growth  surround  these 
traditional partners, although there are new opportunities arising in other parts of the world. 
But it is evident that now is the time, more than ever, for our export operators to rethink their 
business models to adjust to the new economic order. Now, more than ever, is the time for 
them to re-engineer their operations, achieve sustained rises in productivity and move into 
new products and new markets! Salvation can only come from diversification. Geographical 
diversification,  sectoral  diversification,  and  product  diversification.  Diversify,  Diversify, 
Diversify – that should be our new mantra. This is more of a medium-term challenge though; 
the simplest way to start is to learn how to properly manage your foreign exchange risk and 
this is what you are here for today.  
Let me briefly comment on some misconceptions on the use of derivatives. There are indeed 
many old wives’s tales about derivatives, and believing in the fairly widespread myths may 
lead people to avoid them altogether. That would be a mistake. It is true that the tremendous 
growth of the derivatives market and the reports of major losses associated with derivative 
products have created a lot of confusion about those complex instruments. Derivatives have 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
been  considered  as  the  villains  in  the  collapse  of  the  global  financial  system.  In  fact, 
companies and countries that bought derivatives in the form of mortgage-backed securities, 
credit default swaps and synthetic collateralized debt obligations as insurance, discovered, to 
their dismay, that the insurance cover was only as good as the counterparty at the other end 
of  the  contract.  Some  were  of  the  view  that  the  problem  was  not  so  much  with  the  exotic 
nature  of  some  of  the  products,  or their  volume,  as  with  the  fact  that  the  derivatives  were 
traded over the counter, that is, outside a transparent and regulated exchange. That is how 
the  value  of  OTC  derivatives  reached  ten  times  global  GDP.  Others  blamed  the  lax 
regulation of financial derivatives and perverse incentives. This is why there are proposals on 
the table on either side of the Atlantic for the better regulation of all derivatives trading.  
Essentially  what  derivatives  do  is  to  hedge  risks  by  reducing  future  uncertainties  and 
managing them more effectively. Derivatives help to improve market efficiency because risks 
can be isolated and sold to those who are willing and able to accept them at least cost. But 
using derivatives requires a firm understanding of the tradeoff of risks and rewards, and the 
decision to use them should be driven by the participant’s strategic objectives. It is important 
that  all  users  understand  how  their  contracts  are  structured,  the  unique  price  and  risk 
characteristics of those instruments, and how they will perform under stressful and volatile 
economic  conditions.  Derivatives  users  should  establish  a  framework  for  effectively 
managing and controlling derivative activities. The dark side of derivatives is that, if they are 
used improperly or without a plan, they can inflict serious losses. So without a clearly defined 
risk management strategy, the use of derivatives can be dangerous. When used wisely, they 
can increase shareholder value by providing a means to better control a firm’s risk exposures 
and cash flows. A firm should be clear about the risks it is comfortable with, and the risks it 
does not want.  
Now that we have an exchange where currency futures can be traded, new opportunities are 
opened to investors. Besides offering better price discovery and lower transaction costs, the 
futures  market  is  a  major  financial  hub  which  provides  an  outlet  for  intense  competition 
among buyers and sellers and, more importantly, a center to manage price risks. It is also a 
very  liquid  market.  Currency  prices  are  based  on  objective  considerations  of  supply  and 
demand  and  cannot  be  easily  manipulated  because  the  size  of the  market  does not  allow 
even  the  largest  players,  to  move  prices  at  will.  Futures  market  prices  depend  on  a 
continuous  flow  of  information  from  around  the  world  and  thus  require  a  high  amount  of 
transparency.  
It is an indeed very exciting time – watching the developments, albeit small, that are taking 
place in our financial system. We hope that after a few such training sessions we will soon 
see our exporters proactively seeking ways to hedge their risks. We have an exchange in 
Mauritius which is properly licensed and regulated, where there is price transparency. I can 
only  encourage  our  operators  to  participate  in  it.  GBOT  currently  offers  gold  and  silver 
contracts and futures in five currency pairs: EUR/USD, GBP/USD, JPY/USD, ZAR/USD as 
well as USD/MUR. I have no doubt the exporters will find among these, the instruments that 
would most suit their needs. May I add that the Central Bank is also closely monitoring the 
currency  trading.  Since  the  start  of  operations  until  the  end  of  April,  the  total  turnover  of 
transactions  in  the  various  currency  pairs  conducted  by  GBOT  add  up  to  nearly 
USD 1.4 billion. So far, so good, one may be tempted to say. But what is far from good is that 
trading  in  the  rupee-dollar  currency  pair  came  to  a  grand  total  of  less  than  USD 1  single 
million! There is considerable room for improvement, isn’t there?  
We  will  continue  to  support  the  development  of  professional  training  courses  and  investor 
education programmes to deepen expertise in the sector. One example of such training is 
the  OptionsXpress®  Investor  Education  Series  of  the  Chicago  Mercantile  Exchange  on 
futures options and which had the slogan: “Get your feet wet before you take the plunge”. I 
do  believe  this  is  what  our  exporters  are  precisely  here  for  –  to  get  their  feet  wet.  It  is 
important  that  you  have  a  proper  knowledge  of  the  product  and  an  understanding  of  the 
arithmetic  of  its  leverage  –  which  I  am  sure,  should  help  dispel  much  of  the  mystique 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
surrounding the world of derivatives. You should not overlook your treasury operations. This 
reminds me of General Motors (GM), the renowned US car maker which founded in 1919 the 
General  Motors  Acceptance  Corporation  (GMAC)  to  provide  financing  to  automotive 
customers. Over the years, GMAC expanded to include insurance, online banking, treasury 
operations  and  so  forth;  it  was  at  some  point  in  time  making  more  profits  than  GM  itself. 
Eventually it applied to the FED to become a bank holding company and changed its name 
to Ally Financial Inc in 2010. I am not telling you that you need to go that far – by all means, 
do not stray too far from your core competencies or, put differently, stick to your knitting! But 
you  should  not  overlook  the  importance  of  proper  treasury  operations  and  greater  use  of 
derivatives products that are now available to you. It might bring in some additional profits. 
Let me now conclude with a word of caution for the banks and foreign exchange dealers who 
are to be the main players in this game – the absence of robust risk management practices 
and adequate oversight surrounding this activity could have disastrous consequences. Banks 
and foreign exchange dealers should therefore ensure that their dealers are well trained, that 
there  are  clear-cut  controls  on  their  operations,  and  at  least  in  the  initial  stages  that  the 
activities  are  audited  on  a  concurrent  basis.  While  the  exchange  has  the  responsibility  to 
ensure against settlement risks, it is the institutions concerned that have to address internal 
procedural  issues.  We,  the  regulator,  expect  to  see  among  all  participants  unrelenting 
emphasis  on  efficient  risk  management 
the  ongoing 
development  of  a  qualified  talent  pool  with  deep  knowledge  in  the  area,  who  will  uphold 
proper  market  conduct.  We  intend  also  to  maintain  a  close  dialogue  with  all  relevant 
stakeholders to ensure a robust and conducive regulatory environment for the development 
of a vibrant futures market in Mauritius. 
Whether  you  are  reaching  out  to  new  markets,  branching  out  into  new  products,  or 
envisaging greater recourse to derivative products, it is change that is the order of the day. 
And I am reminded of Charles Darwin’s conclusion from his great study of species: “It is not 
the  strongest  of  the  species  that  survives,  nor  the  most  intelligent,  but  the  one  that  is  the 
most responsive to change”. 
I wish you all a very fruitful seminar.  
Thank you for your attention. 
infrastructure.  We  encourage 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
