Masaaki Shirakawa: How to address tail risks 
Speech by Mr Masaaki Shirakawa, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Annual General 
Meeting 2011 of the Foreign Bankers’ Association in the Netherlands, Amsterdam, 27 June 
2011. 
 Introduction 
I. 
Today  I  am  privileged  to  have  the  opportunity  to  speak  before  the  Foreign  Bankers’ 
Association  in  the  Netherlands,  a  respected  association  with  a  rich  history  and  tradition.  I 
would  like  to  express  my  gratitude  to  Chairman  Freddy  Boom  for  the  warm  introduction. 
Since I believe this marks the first time for a governor of Japan’s central bank to address the 
association, let me begin my remarks by briefly reviewing the historical relationships between 
the  Netherlands  and  Japan.  As  many  of  you  may  know,  the  two  countries  have  nurtured 
close ties for centuries. The first contact between them dates back to 1600, when a Dutch 
trading ship named De Liefde drifted to the land called Bungo. I happened to have worked at 
our branch located near the point of landing and have long been interested in this episode. A 
Dutch national named Jan Joosten became a diplomatic adviser to the first Shogun of the 
Tokugawa government,  which maintained a national isolation policy for some two hundred 
years from the early 17th century to the mid-19th century. Nevertheless, as an exception, the 
Netherlands continued to be a trading partner with Japan during this period. For Japan, the 
Netherlands  was  not  merely  a  provider  of  foreign  merchandise  but  also  a  window  on 
advanced western science and technology, such as medical science, physics, and chemistry. 
The intellectual class in Japan referred to such subjects as rangaku, or “Dutch studies.” Let 
me also note that the Enlightenment thinker Yukichi Fukuzawa, whose portrait is on the ten 
thousand yen bill, made strenuous efforts in his younger days to master Dutch and learned 
about western civilization from Dutch literature. 
When I was given this chance to make remarks in the Netherlands, the first thing that came 
to  my  mind  was  the  fact  that  both  the  Netherlands  and  Japan  have  devoted  significant 
energy to dealing with the war against nature. With a quarter of its land below sea level, the 
Netherlands  is  well  known  for  its  history  of  repeated  hardships  caused  by  great  floods. 
Historically,  Japan  has  lived  with  earthquakes.  Floods  and  earthquakes  do  not  happen 
frequently but do cause significant damage when they occur. In this regard, within the short 
period  of  the  past  three  years,  Japan  experienced  not  only  the  recent  Great  East  Japan 
Earthquake but also another significant event. Needless to say, this was the global financial 
crisis,  or  the  Lehman  shock.  The  two  differ  from  each  other  in  that  one  was  an  economic 
shock and the other a natural disaster, but they share a common feature in that both have 
had enormous impact on the economy and society. How to address such events is definitely 
a  big  challenge  for  the  authorities  in  many  countries  and  for  the  management  of  financial 
institutions including the members of this association. 
When describing these events, we often use the term “tail events” (Slide 1) and refer to risks 
arising  from  such  events  as  “tail  risks”  (Slide  2).  The  word  “tail”  implies  that  such  events 
rarely  happen  and  rest  within  the  tail  of  a  probability  distribution.  To  be  more  precise,  tail 
events or tail risks involve two types of events. One would be along the lines of the recent 
earthquake  in  Japan.  This  had  a  magnitude  of  9.0,  and  was  followed  by  an  enormous 
tsunami that hit a wide area of east coast of Japan. The last time in recorded history that a 
comparably  sized  tsunami  hit  eastern  Japan  was  in  the  year  869.  This  type  of  event  is 
therefore extremely rare and rests far beyond the end of the tail (Slide 3). Another type of tail 
event  is  a  financial  shock,  like  the  Lehman  shock.  The  financial  crisis  with  the  most 
comparable  seriousness  and  geographical  scale  as  the  Lehman  shock  was  the  Great 
Depression of the 1930s. Such events therefore occur with low probability but not as rarely 
as  once  in  a  thousand  years.  Looking  back  at  the  past  twenty  years,  however,  financial 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
crises  have  occurred  more  frequently  than  would  be  assumed  in  a  normal  probability 
distribution. In any case, both types of tail events have a devastating impact on the financial 
markets, the economy, and society (Slides 4, 5, and 6). 
In cases where extremely rare events far beyond the end of the tail occur and where rare 
events within the tail happen more frequently than anticipated, the common feature is that 
such unanticipated events invite devastating turmoil. The global financial crisis triggered by 
the subprime loan problem in 2007 was attributable to the formation and bursting of the credit 
bubble  at  a  scale  that  had  not  been  anticipated  in  the  preceding  period.  Natural  disasters 
such  as  earthquakes,  tsunami,  hurricanes,  and  floods  as  well  as  diseases  including  the 
pandemics of highly virulent new types of influenza could develop into tail events once their 
magnitude  and  the  scope  of  damage  surpass  expectations.  The  same  could  be  said  for 
large-scale computer disruptions, acts of terrorism, and wars. Responses to risks related to 
tail  events  are  important  not  only  as  part  of  national  economic  policy  but  also  in  terms  of 
management  of  the  financial  institutions  for  which  many  of  today’s  participants  are 
responsible. 
Today, I will talk about how to address tail risks while focusing on the recent financial crisis 
and the March 11 earthquake in Japan. 
II. 
The great east Japan earthquake 
The damage 
With  regard  to  significant  tail  events  that  have materialized  in  recent  years,  many  that  are 
related to the global financial crisis have already been discussed. Therefore, I would like to 
share  with  you  some  factual  information  about  what  exactly  happened  following  the  Great 
East Japan Earthquake. 
This time Japan suffered the interrelated tragic events of an earthquake, a tsunami, and an 
accident at a nuclear power plant. The toll of dead and missing persons was less than the 
105 thousand recorded at the time of the Great Kanto Earthquake of 1923 but still reached 
nearly 23 thousand. The amount of damage to capital stock from the recent earthquake has 
been  placed  at  about  3  to  5  percent  of  Japan’s  GDP,  according  to  government  estimates 
(Slide  7).  In  the  disaster  areas,  the  infrastructures  of  electricity,  gas,  water,  and 
communications services were interrupted across a wide area. Transportation networks such 
as roads, railways, and ports became dysfunctional all at once. To make matters worse, a 
serious fuel supply shortage followed due to problems at oil refineries and the disruption of 
transportation services. The tsunami seriously damaged the nuclear power plant, causing an 
electric  power  shortage  problem.  Most  of  the  key  infrastructures  and  fuel  supplies  have 
already been restored in disaster areas. But the situation at the nuclear power plant has not 
yet reached the stable stage of a cold shutdown. The estimated amount of damage I have 
just mentioned covers only capital stock and does not include damage to human resources 
or  the  economic  impact  of  the  nuclear  power  plant  accident.  Overall,  this  was  truly  the 
materialization of tail risk. 
The effects on economic activity 
I will now briefly describe the impact of the earthquake on Japan’s economy, focusing on the 
points relevant to considering how we should address tail events. 
First, needless to say, production has declined sharply and significantly (Slide 8). Although 
the March 11 earthquake clearly had no impact on the initial ten days of the month, a reading 
for the industrial production index in March showed that this fell by 16 percent on a month-to-
month basis, the largest one-month decline on record. This is attributable to the devastating 
damage  to  the  production  facilities  in  the  disaster  areas  as  well  as  electricity  supply 
constraints and  supply-chain  disruptions  experienced  across  wider  areas.  The  pronounced 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the  earthquake  also  affected 
production  decline  led  to  an  export  decline.  As  a  result  of  the  production  decline,  exports 
registered  an  almost  15  percent  cumulative  drop  from  February  in  the  subsequent  two 
months combined. 
Second, 
the  sentiment  of  economic  entities.  Private 
consumption declined as voluntary restraint by consumers dampened spending, particularly 
for  services  such  as  tourism  and  eating  out.  Moreover,  the  impact  of  the  disaster  went 
beyond just the sentiment of the Japanese people to affect the global perception of Japan 
being safe and secure. Although the current radiation levels in Tokyo are roughly the same as 
in Amsterdam, Berlin, or Paris, the number of visitors from abroad for business purposes or as 
tourists fell sharply below the level registered a year before, declining by 50 to 60 percent after 
the recent earthquake (Slide 9). 
Third, despite such a sharp and significant drop in production, the economy is returning to a 
gradual recovery path with the easing of the supply-side constraints. The current downward 
pressure on the economy following the disaster is basically arising from the abrupt supply-
side  shock.  The  fundamental  conditions  for  growth  –  namely,  expansion  of  overseas 
economies  –  remain  intact.  In  this  regard,  the  current  situation  differs  from  the  period 
following  the  Lehman  shock  when  demand  evaporated  both  at  home  and  abroad  due  to 
financial  contraction.  In  fact,  the  restoration  of  supply-chain  disruptions  has  been  making 
steady progress, thanks to strenuous efforts by private firms. Regarding the electric power 
shortage  problem,  although  uncertainty  and  concerns  remain  in  the  medium  and  long  run 
depending on the outcome of the ongoing discussion about future nuclear power policy, we 
are seeing better prospects for surviving the summer, when demand peaks due to the use of 
air conditioners. We have seen more thermal power plants resume operations, more firms 
install in-house power generation facilities, and firms and households make various efforts to 
conserve  electricity.  Manufacturing  production  is  gradually  recovering  from  the  bottom  in 
March and is expected to be restored to the pre-disaster level sometime in the third quarter 
of this year. 
Fourth, with regard to the global implications of the recent earthquake, its negative impact 
spread to overseas economies through supply chains with a certain time lag. Production in 
the auto and electronic products industries dropped in Europe, the United States, and Asia 
(Slide 10). 
The impact of supply-chain disruptions 
As I will explain shortly, the recent earthquake taught us various lessons. In terms of how to 
address tail events, the following facts require special attention. 
First, I would draw attention to the importance of supply-chain disruptions. More specifically, 
the  magnitude  of  the  economic  downturn  was  much  larger  than  implied  by  the  share  of 
disaster  areas  in  terms  of  economic  size  and  population  (Slide  11).  The  share  of  disaster 
areas was 6 percent in terms of GDP and 7 percent in terms of population. As I have said, 
however, the rate of decline in production was as high as 16 percent. The negative impact 
was  amplified  by  the  supply-chain  disruptions.  In  disaster  areas,  there  are  many  firms 
producing  hard-to-replace  parts  for  automobiles  and  electronics,  including  a  producer  of 
microcontrollers  for  automobiles  with  a  global  share  of  40  percent.  As  automakers  have 
relied  on  highly  customized  parts,  a  stoppage  of  production  in  disaster  areas  significantly 
affected  production  in  other  areas,  including  overseas  firms  dependent  on  imported  parts 
from Japan. The significance of the impact of such complicated supply chains had not been 
fully recognized before the recent earthquake. 
There are two important reasons for the greater-than-expected impact of the recent supply-
chain disruptions. The first is the low level of parts inventory. In normal times, a lower level of 
inventory  contributes  to  increased  efficiency  and  higher  profits.  Once  hit  by  an  enormous 
shock, however, firms are forced to curtail production sharply within a short period of time, 
and this creates a chain reaction to other firms. The second reason is the concentration risk 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
in procurement. Tracing back to the most upstream stage  of the complicated supply-chain 
network, it turned out that procurement greatly relied on specific firms in specific areas. As a 
result, the termination of production at a certain firm had a serious impact on the production 
activity  of  many  firms,  including  those  abroad.  While  supply  chains  increase  production 
efficiency,  our  experience  of  the  recent  earthquake  called  attention  to  the  problem  of 
concentration  risk 
the  purpose  of 
strengthening resiliency against shocks. 
inventory  management  and  procurement 
for 
in 
The importance of maintaining stability in the financial system 
Now I would like to call your attention to the second factual observation deemed crucial when 
considering how to address tail events. This is the importance of maintaining stability in the 
financial system. Production started to recover from a plunge caused by the earthquake at a 
relatively  fast  pace,  which  is  in  a  stark  contrast  to  the  situation  in  the  period  following  the 
Lehman shock. One of the reasons for this early recovery is the fact that stability has been 
maintained  in  financial  markets  and  the  financial  system.  Both  private  financial  institutions 
and  the  Bank  of  Japan  have  been  doing  their  utmost  to  preserve  stability  on  the  financial 
front since immediately after the earthquake. 
In terms of payment and settlement systems, although some clearing houses in the quake-
stricken  areas  had  to  suspend  their  operations,  major  payment  and  settlement  systems 
including the BOJ-NET – the settlement system for funds and government bonds – continued 
to operate smoothly. The buildings that store the computer center for the main payment and 
settlement systems sufficiently proved their resilience to the magnitude 5-plus earthquake in 
the  Metropolitan  Tokyo  area.  Moreover,  at  the  time  of  the  rolling  blackouts  that  were 
temporarily implemented with a short notice soon after the earthquake, financial institutions’ 
branch  networks  and computer  centers  maintained  their operations by  resorting  to  backup 
measures  such  as  the  use  of  in-house  power  generation  facilities.  Over  a  period  of 
successive days following the earthquake, the Bank of Japan provided financial markets with 
ample  liquidity  that  significantly  exceeded  the  amount  provided  at  the  time  of  the  Lehman 
shock.  Furthermore,  on  the  first  business  day  after  the  earthquake,  the  Bank  decided  to 
expand  the  size  of  its  program  to  purchase  risk  assets  including  commercial  paper  (CP), 
corporate bonds, exchange-traded funds (ETFs), and Japanese real estate investment trusts 
(J-REITs). This decision was made in a forward-looking manner to prevent any deterioration 
in business sentiment and heightening of risk aversion in financial markets from adversely 
affecting economic activity. If the financial system had lost its stability this time, the extent of 
the  economic  downturn  would  have  been  much  larger.  Therefore,  it  is  quite  important  to 
secure stability in the financial system. 
Although we have managed to maintain overall financial stability, as I have just described, 
we have also learned some lessons. 
First, a combination of various factors could lead to unexpected trouble. In disaster areas, 
key  social  infrastructures  such  as  electricity,  gas,  communications,  and  transportation 
services  simultaneously  stopped  functioning.  Although  the  offices  of  financial  institutions 
were equipped with in-house power generators to cope with blackouts, the sustainability of 
such  backup  measures  was  threatened  as  disruptions  to  transportation  made  it  difficult  to 
procure  fuel.  Disruptions  to  transportation  and  associated  fuel  shortages  also  made  the 
delivery of cash difficult. 
Second, various rumors spread after the earthquake. For instance, when the yen appreciated 
sharply  immediately  following  the  earthquake,  there  was  a  baseless  rumor  that  Japanese 
insurance  companies  would  sell  foreign  currency  assets  due  to  an  increase  in  insurance 
claim payments. However, these companies actually had no need to conduct such sales in 
order to make the payments, as they held a considerable amount of liquid assets in yen. In 
the week after the earthquake, rumors had spread among some foreign financial institutions 
that the Tokyo financial market would close. To our surprise, there was also a groundless 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
rumor that the Bank of Japan was planning to resort to a backup computer center in Osaka, 
which is located more than 500 kilometers away from Tokyo. Clearly, extreme anxiety in itself 
can proliferate sensitive market reactions. 
Addressing tail risks: measures by financial institutions 
III. 
While specific measures to address tails risks differ depending on the pertinent risk factors, 
conceptually, they could be categorized into ex-ante and ex-post efforts. Before tail events 
take place, efforts should be made to measure tail risks as accurately as possible to make 
the  internalization  of  expected  losses  possible  and  take  actions  accordingly.  If  tail  risks 
unfortunately  materialize,  efforts  should  be  made  to  prevent  the  impact  of  tail  events  from 
spreading.  Such  ex-ante  and  ex-post  efforts  should  be  made  by  individual  financial 
institutions and firms as well as by the government and the central bank. Needless to say, 
there are no perfect solutions to the conundrum of addressing tail risks. At the same time, 
however, we are not allowed the luxury of being fatalists. We must keep thinking about how 
to make things better. 
Holding sufficient amount of capital and liquidity 
Let  me  start  with  ex-ante  measures  by  financial  institutions  to  address  tail  risks.  As 
completely avoiding tail events is not possible, it is indispensable to secure resiliency against 
shocks,  namely  a  sufficient  amount  of  capital  and  liquidity.  Firms  that  are  part  of  supply 
chains  consider  how  much  inventory  they  should  retain  by  striking  a  balance  between 
efficiency in normal times and stability in an emergency. In other words, the balance between 
“just in time” and “just in case.” Financial institutions also face an issue of a similar nature. 
They are confronted by the difficult question of choosing the right balance between efficiency 
and stability. The starting point for making a proper judgment is to grasp the significance of 
tail risks to which they are exposed. Given that tail events occur with very little probability but 
entail  gigantic  losses  once  they  occur,  it  is  extremely  difficult  to  quantify  potential  losses 
using statistical methods. In addition, as was the case both with the global financial crisis and 
the supply-chain disruptions, losses from tail risks could change significantly depending on 
how the concerned parties respond to the initial shock; for example, in terms of whether a 
central bank appropriately plays the role as a lender of last resort. The widely used Value-at-
Risk (VaR) model is useful for managing risks but its shortcomings should also be properly 
recognized. The VaR model has certain limitations in capturing tail risks because it assumes 
a specific probability distribution and relies on data about past events. Moreover, even when 
the VaR model shows that there is a 0.1 percent probability of realizing a certain amount of 
losses,  it  tells  nothing  about  the  more  detailed  probability  distribution  of  losses  within  the 
realm of 0.1 percent probability. 
Given such constraints, in order to capture the impact of tail risks consistent with a unique 
risk  profile  of  individual  financial  institutions,  it  is  useful  to  conduct  a  stress  test  based  on 
various  risk  scenarios  instead  of  solely  relying  on  risk  measurement  techniques  based  on 
assumed  probability.  Taking  the  example  of  an  earthquake,  financial  institutions’  stress 
scenarios could include the loss of business function in some branches, widespread credit 
default,  and  the  collapse  of  market  functioning.  In  the  process  of  constructing  stress 
scenarios and assessing the results of a stress test, the active involvement of management 
is indispensable. For private financial institutions, the extent to which they should prepare for 
tail events is a crucial management decision that will affect their capital plans and investment 
in key infrastructures. 
Avoiding the concentration of risk exposures 
Second, financial institutions need to make efforts to avoid concentration of risk exposures. 
Similar  to  the  problem  of  concentration  risk  in  supply  chains  I  mentioned  earlier,  in  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
context of financial institutions, the concentration of credit risk and liquidity risk has particular 
importance.  Of  course,  prudent  financial  institutions  do  not  intentionally  concentrate  risk. 
What  is  worrisome  is  the  situation  where  financial  institutions  concentrate  risks  without 
knowing they have actually done so. The subprime loans and related securitized products in 
the United States were believed to be safe, protected by sufficient risk diversification. With 
respect to mortgage loans, risk was geographically well diversified based on the assumption 
that  housing  prices  would  not  fall  on  a  national  scale.  Also,  in  Japan,  the  myth  that  land 
prices would never fall was widely believed during the bubble period in the late 1980s. 
Stable business continuity 
Third, on the operational front, financial institutions need to make sufficient preparations for 
possible  physical  damage,  including  that  caused  by  natural  disasters.  In  other  words, 
preparations are required to ensure stable business continuity. To strengthen the resiliency 
of a business continuity plan, it is desirable not to rely solely on the first line of defense, but 
rather to have multilayered safety measures. For example, it is not enough to simply secure 
the sufficient strength of major buildings such as a headquarters and a computer center, nor 
is it enough to just have backup facilities. You also need to have in-house power generators 
to  prepare  for  blackouts  and  always  maintain  a  sufficient  amount  of  fuel  for  them.  When 
diversifying risks, it is important to check the extent of concentration risk on the operational 
front by giving consideration to changes in the environment surrounding financial institutions; 
for  example,  proliferation  in  the  scope  of  financial  business  and  leanings  toward  business 
outsourcing. Based on a thorough examination, financial institutions should take necessary 
measures  to  avoid  concentration  risk  of  business  operations  by  diversifying  essential 
facilities and functions geographically, securing alternative energy sources, and maintaining 
multiple counterparties for business outsourcing. 
Furthermore, of crucial importance to business continuity at a time of crisis are measures to 
strengthen the human infrastructure by regularly reviewing the effectiveness of the existing 
business  continuity  plan  and  providing  staff  with  sufficient  training.  The  other  day  I  had  a 
chance to read a magazine article on an interview with the Dutch Ambassador to Japan, and 
was impressed by how calmly the Dutch Embassy had responded to the recent earthquake. I 
learned that the Embassy had conducted training under the guidance of a crisis management 
consultant  in  November  last  year.  The  training  was  quite  detailed  and  covered  how  to 
evacuate,  how  to  communicate  with  concerned  parties,  how  to  check  the  safety  of  Dutch 
nationals  living  in  Japan,  and  how  to  respond  to  media  inquiries.  This  is  exactly  what  the 
famous slogan “Be Prepared” tells us to do. 
Global risk sharing 
Fourth, it is important to make efforts to share risk, especially on a global scale. We are not 
able  to  avoid  the  materialization  of  the  risk  of  natural  disasters.  However,  it  is  possible  to 
mitigate  casualties  and  losses  to  some  extent  by  signing  in  advance  a  contingent  loss-
sharing contract between insurance companies and investors. In the case of the Great East 
Japan  Earthquake,  physical  and  human  losses  were  covered  not  only  by  Japanese 
insurance  companies  but  also  reinsurance  companies  abroad.  Moreover,  as  significant 
natural  disasters  occurred  one  after  another  recently,  we  have  seen  an  increase  in  the 
issuance of catastrophe bonds as a means of diversifying the risks. Needless to say, to make 
such  risk  transfer  effective,  it  is  necessary  to  further  promote  the  sound  development  of 
markets for products with a risk transfer function. 
Calm and orderly response 
I have discussed ex-ante measures to address tail risks by financial institutions. How about 
ex-post measures? In this regard, there is not much I can offer in terms of generalities. The 
most important thing is to effect a calm and orderly response. Coming back to the interview 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
with the Dutch Ambassador to Japan, the article reported that he was surprised by the fact 
that  the  earthquake  did  not  cause  panic  among  the  Japanese  people.  Although  I  cannot 
make an objective assessment of the calmness exhibited by my fellow Japanese people, I 
can  say  that  being  calm  is  crucial  to  preventing  the  proliferation  of  damage  caused  by  an 
initial  shock.  Another  important  factor  is  cooperation  within  the  private  sector.  As  I  have 
mentioned,  the  restoration  of  supply  chains  has  been  making  swift  progress.  Looking  at 
worksites in the manufacturing industry, various efforts and attempts involved putting aside 
the usual rivalries; for example, firms in the same industry temporarily covered the production 
of disaster-stricken rivals and several manufacturers of final products cooperated in terms of 
sending  staff  to  parts  manufacturers  to  support  their  restoration  efforts.  Private  financial 
institutions  cooperated  in  various  ways.  For  example,  to  help  people  who  evacuated  to 
places  somewhat  distant  from  the  disaster  areas,  financial  institutions  in  the  non-affected 
areas  allowed  for  the  withdrawal  of  deposits  at  affected  financial  institutions  through  a 
simplified  procedure.  In  the  face  of  fuel  shortages,  neighboring  financial  institutions  jointly 
operated cash delivery cars together, so as not to interrupt cash delivery. 
Addressing tail risks: measures by the authorities 
IV. 
Next I would like to consider the case of the authorities, especially the central bank as well as 
the regulatory and supervisory authorities. To address tail risks, while appropriate efforts by 
individual private business firms and financial institutions are undoubtedly necessary, the role 
of the authorities is also crucial. 
First, the involvement of the authorities is indispensable because addressing tail risks entails 
significant costs and placing all of the burden on the private sector could hamper economic 
growth.  This  is  especially  the  case  when  dealing  with  catastrophic  natural  disasters.  The 
second reason why public sector involvement is required relates to the concentration of risk. 
When completely relying on market competition in the private sector, it is difficult to expect 
the complete internalization of extreme tail risk. In that situation, some kind of public sector 
involvement is necessary. Even in that case, however, if the authorities make a commitment 
in  advance  or  are  perceived  as  making  an  advance  commitment,  the  private  sector  would 
stop making efforts to address tail risks. This is a typical moral hazard problem. It is difficult 
to  set  concrete  criteria  with  regard  to  how  much  the  private  sector  should  shoulder  the 
burden and to what extent the authorities should intervene as a last resort. In any case, to 
address tail risks, it is very important to properly design and put in place a society-wide risk 
management framework. 
Resilient payment systems 
In this regard, I would like to highlight the importance of building resilient payment systems 
with  the  cooperation  of  private  financial  institutions  and  central  banks.  Major  payment 
systems should be designed to have sufficient resiliency against tail events including natural 
disasters. Taking the example of the BOJ-NET, the large-value settlement system for funds 
and  government  bonds,  the  main  computer  center  is  proud  of  its  strong  resistance  to 
earthquakes and a backup center is located in Osaka. At the same time, on the operational 
side,  in  order  to  lessen  payment  risk  at  a  time  of  crisis,  major  payment  systems  need  to 
adopt  safe  settlement  features  such  as  Real  Time  Gross  Settlement,  Delivery-versus-
Payment, and Payment-versus-Payment. 
Financial regulation and supervision 
Second, financial regulation and supervision is an important component of a society-wide risk 
management framework. In the wake of the Lehman shock and with the aim of preventing 
another  financial  crisis,  an  agreement  was  reached  on  the  Basel  III  framework,  which 
includes  a  higher  capital  requirement,  a  strengthening  of  liquidity  regulation,  and  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
introduction  of  regulation  on  leveraging.  The  new  framework  requires  the  internalization  of 
tail risks by financial institutions and provides the institutions with more incentives to lessen 
risks. In this context, there are discussions about the issue of “too big to fail.” These cover 
additional loss absorption capacity to reduce the likelihood of the failure of global SIFIs, or 
Systemically  Important  Financial  Institutions,  and  measures  to  remove  obstacles  to  the 
resolvability of global SIFIs, which would enable orderly restructuring and resolution. These 
measures  aim  at  controlling  the  negative  externality  of  global  SIFIs.  When  designing  the 
overall framework, it is important to choose a balance between those measures to promote 
the internalization of risks, such as additional loss absorption capacity, and those measures 
to lessen the externality itself, such as improving resolvability. 
Appropriately conducting monetary policy 
Third, I would like to discuss the appropriate conduct of monetary policy. Before the Lehman 
shock, the prevailing view among academics and the authorities was that aggressive easing 
after the bursting of bubbles could prevent a serious economic downturn. I myself had felt 
uncomfortable with such a view based on my experience following the bursting of bubbles in 
Japan. In the end, the Lehman shock crushed this optimistic view. 
One  important  issue  is  the  possibility  that  an  accommodative  monetary  policy  itself  might 
heighten  tail  risks  endogenously.  In  the  process  of  lowering  interest  rates,  financial 
institutions and institutional investors enjoy an increase in profits due to capital gains, as well 
as widened yield spreads between short-term and long-term interest rates. However, if a low 
interest  rate  environment  continues  for  a  long  time,  financial  institutions  and  institutional 
investors  can  no  longer  enjoy  such  a  profit  increase  because  of  narrower  credit  and  yield 
spreads. As a result, they tend to bet on further declines in long-term interest rates or further 
squeezes in credit spreads, and attempts to profit from leveraging become more evident. In 
other  words,  financial institutions  start  to  pursue  profits  by  bearing  the cost  of  tail  risks  by 
themselves. One of the factors supporting such actions is the perception that a low interest 
rate  environment  will  be  maintained  and  a  situation  of  abundant  liquidity  will  continue.  In 
retrospect, during the periods of credit bubbles preceding financial crises, various financial 
imbalances  were  widely  observed  in  the  economy,  such  as  asset  price  inflation,  credit 
expansion,  increasing  leveraging,  and  a  widening  of  term  mismatch.  A  low  interest  rate 
environment is not the sole cause of these phenomena. But it is also true that these could 
not take place without the expectation that a low interest rate environment would continue for 
long time. The goal of monetary policy is to achieve sustainable growth with price stability. 
But if a central bank maintains a low interest rate environment with too much focus on the 
near-term  inflation  outlook,  this  could  consequently  encourage  the  formation  of  financial 
bubbles. In that sense, a central bank should pursue price stability through the conduct of 
monetary policy with a sufficiently long time horizon. 
Macroprudential perspective 
Fourth, I would like to highlight the importance of a macroprudential perspective. Maintaining 
the soundness of individual financial institutions is important but not sufficient to secure the 
stability of the financial system. For example, the global financial crisis underlined the need 
to enhance the cross-sectional assessment of risk concentration in the financial system. This 
is  very  similar  to  the  case  of  supply-chain  disruptions  in  which  efficient  supply-chain 
management from the perspective of individual firms did not guarantee the risk management 
of  the  economy  as  a  whole.  As  these  examples  demonstrate,  a  risk  assessment  from  a 
macro  perspective  is  very  important.  Someone  has  to  present  analysis  from  such  a 
perspective,  which  I  call  a  macroprudential  perspective.  In  this  regard,  central  banks  use 
their  unique  institutional  culture  of  looking  at  the  system  as  a  whole  when  analyzing  the 
economy  and  financial  markets  through  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  and  various 
operations. In fact, many central banks including De Nederlandsche Bank and the Bank of 
Japan  have  made  their  macroprudential  assessment  public  and  have  devoted  significant 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
resources to assessment of the risk within the financial system as a whole. I am aware that 
such  analysis  alone  cannot  effect  the  internalization  of  tail  risks.  But  I  expect  that  it  could 
help many economic entities to recognize tail risks. 
Lender of last resort 
Fifth, I would like to touch upon the lender of last resort function of a central bank, which is 
related to ex-post measures to address tail risks. Once tail risks materialize, it is extremely 
important  to  secure  stability  in  the  financial  system  in  order  to  avoid  systemic  risk.  In  this 
regard,  central  banks  are  required  to  act  properly  as  a  lender  of  last  resort  through  fund 
provisioning  and  market  operations.  This  is  exactly  what  the  Bank  of  Japan  did  after  the 
earthquake. 
Effective communication 
Sixth, as an ex-post measure, effective communication is essential. As we experienced after 
the recent earthquake, groundless rumors often spread at the time of tail events. To make 
matters worse, in the absence of accurate information, economic entities tend to become too 
cautious.  Therefore,  it  is  essential  for  the  government  and  the  central  bank  to  provide 
effective  communication  so  that  the  public  understands  what  is  happening  as  well  as  the 
basic principles of the authorities’ response to the ongoing events. 
Concluding remarks 
V. 
Today  I  have  shared  with  you  my  own  thinking  on  the  challenging  topic  of  addressing  tail 
risks,  drawing  lessons  from  the  Lehman  shock  and  the  Great  East  Japan  Earthquake. 
Specific causes of tail events have differed according to country and timing. In that sense, we 
should  always  be  humble  by  recognizing  that  our  knowledge  with  regard  to  tail  risks  is 
limited. It is not my intention, however, to finish my remarks on tail risks in a pessimistic tone. 
The materialization of tail risks itself is unfortunate but people are learning from such events. 
Currently, various discussions are taking place to review financial regulation and supervision, 
monetary  policy  conduct,  and  macroprudential  measures.  These  efforts  will  certainly  bear 
fruit in the future. Such a learning process is ongoing not only in terms of policy making but 
also in terms of operations at worksites. In the case of the Bank of Japan, our experience of 
a serious financial crisis in the late 1990s has created an institutional memory and the Bank 
staff have acquired know-how. The specific impacts of earthquakes and financial crises differ 
but they have something in common. As crises always arrive in a different guise, the role that 
humans  play  is  very  important.  In  this  sense,  it  is  crucial  to  promote  cooperation  among 
private  financial  institutions,  between  the  authorities  and  private  financial  institutions,  and 
among  authorities  all  over  the  world.  I  look  forward  to  exchanging  views  with  participants 
today in the following Q&A session. 
Thank you for your kind attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   11
   12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   13
  14 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15
