Alan Bollard: Economic surveillance after the crisis – reflections from a 
small full service central bank 
Speech by Dr Alan Bollard, Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, and Mr Enzo 
Cassino,  Acting  Manager,  Financial  Markets  Research,  to  the  Sim  Kee  Boon  Institute 
Conference on Financial Economics, Singapore, 5 May 2011. 
The speech was delivered by Dr John McDermott, Assistant Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand. 
 Introduction 
Nearly four years after it began, the Global Financial Crisis continues to impact the changing 
behaviour  and  practices  of  the  world’s  central banks.  In  particular,  it has  affected  the  way 
central banks monitor and analyse economic conditions to formulate monetary and financial 
stability  policies.  We  can  describe  this  monitoring  and  analysis  process  as  “economic 
surveillance”. 
Economic surveillance refers to all the various channels we use to obtain information about 
the  financial  system  and  the  economy  to  support  our  decision-making.  This  monitoring 
covers both the global and domestic economies. It also covers a wide spectrum of sources 
and methods, including statistics, financial market data, the functioning of the payments and 
liquidity infrastructure, external commentaries, and intelligence gathered from contacts in the 
financial  and  business  sectors.  Collecting,  analysing  and  interpreting  this  range  of  data 
requires  a  wide  range  of  skills  and  expertise  in  central  banks,  including  macroeconomics, 
financial modelling and market liaison. The financial crisis has led to some changes in the 
way we do economic surveillance and presents new challenges and opportunities for central 
banks. Our perspective on this task at the Reserve Bank of New Zealand comes from being 
a  small  “full  service”  central  bank  responsible  for  both  monetary  policy  setting  and 
supervising the financial system. Our view is also impacted by New Zealand being a small 
open economy. This makes us a price taker in the markets for many tradeable goods and 
also exposes us to the impact of economic and financial shocks in larger economies. It also 
makes it more difficult for us to set standards of regulatory compliance for our financial sector 
in isolation and independently of regulatory developments in larger economies. 
Surveillance before the crisis 
To better understand the impact of the crisis on central banks’ behaviour, it is useful to start 
by  describing  how  monetary  authorities  behaved  before  the  crisis.  In  the  pre-crisis  world, 
monetary  policy  setters  were  often  able  to  inform  their  decisions  using  a  number  of 
reasonably reliable empirical correlations between real or financial variables that had been 
historically quite stable. While structural change and the breakdown of empirical relationships 
still commonly occurred at times, many empirical regularities appeared to be robust enough 
to be useful for forecasting and policy making. One example in the New Zealand context, and 
in many other countries, was the very tight relationship observed between changes in house 
prices  and  household  consumption  spending  through  the  early-mid  2000s,  which  was  of 
considerable  benefit  in  forecasting  domestic  demand.  There  was  also  a  relatively  close 
correlation  between  house  price  growth  and  growth  in  credit  provided  to  the  household 
sector during this period. 
Another  key  feature  of  policy-making  before  the  crisis  was  the  clear  separation  between 
monetary  policy  formulation  and  financial  stability  policy  in  full  service  central  banks.  In 
addition,  independence  between  monetary  and  fiscal  policy  decision  making  was  a  basic 
aspect of central banks’ institutional structure in many countries since the 1980s. As part of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
this  separation,  there  was  usually  separate  monitoring,  with  different  data  sources  and 
analysis for monetary policy and financial stability policy formulation.  
Following the crisis, there have been several significant changes to this structure. First, some 
of  the  historically  stable  empirical  relationships  appear  to  have  become  weaker  during  the 
crisis  compared  to  the  mid  2000s.  For  example,  in  New  Zealand,  house  prices  fell  more 
sharply than consumption during the crisis. Likewise, while house prices declined, household 
credit  continued  to  grow  during  2008–9,  albeit at  a  slower  pace.1  It  is  too  early  to  confirm 
econometrically  whether  these  divergences  represent  permanent  structural  breaks,  or 
whether the historical correlations will be quickly re-established. However, these divergences 
have  at  times  made  it  more  difficult  to  interpret  household  behaviour  and  to  forecast  the 
economic outlook.  
                                                   
1   While  household  credit  has  continued  to  grow,  credit  to  the  business  sector  has  fallen  at  a  historically 
unprecedented rate in New Zealand since the crisis. This has contributed to a sharp slowdown in business 
investment. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 Secondly, the separation of monitoring for monetary and financial stability policies highlighted 
a lack of coordination between these various roles for the identification of issues and risks. 
For example, in 2006 most financial stability reports still identified national financial systems 
as  healthy.2  In  addition,  IMF  commentaries  identified  current  account  imbalances  in  many 
countries, but did not link them to systemic risks in financial systems.3 The instability in the 
global financial crisis and its flow-on effect on the real economy has required much greater 
co-ordination  and  interaction  between  monetary  and  financial  stability  policy  setting  by 
central banks. As a result, the distinction between information flows gathered for monetary 
policy and financial stability purposes is now far less distinct. There is now a greater focus on 
financial  system  information  and  financial  market  data  in  monetary  policy  formulation, 
triggered  by  the  breakdown  in  the  forecasting  performance  of  structural  and  statistical 
models. Likewise, more attention is paid to real economy imbalances and sectoral financial 
positions,  by  looking  at  household  and  business  sector  balance  sheets,  when  assessing 
financial  sector  risks.  As  a  result,  there  is  a  very  active  research  agenda  aiming  to 
incorporate  housing  and  financial  sectors  into  the  dynamic  stochastic  general  equilibrium 
models  used  in  many  central  banks.4  This  broader  outlook  and  greater  overlap  between 
monetary and financial stability policy is reflected in the RBNZ’s “Cobweb” diagram, which is 
                                                 
2   H. Davies and D. Green (2010) Banking on the Future: The Fall and Rise of Central Banking. 
3  
Independent Evaluation Office of the International Monetary Fund (2011) IMF Performance in the run-up to the 
Financial and Economic Crisis: IMF Surveillance in 2004–7. 
4   See  W.  White  (2010)  “Some  Alternative  Perspectives  on  Macroeconomic  Theory  and  Some  Policy 
Implications”, Globalisation and Monetary Policy Institute Working Paper 54, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
used  to  indicate  financial  stability  risks  across  several  different  dimensions.5  In  this 
framework, financial stability risks could be reflected in the global and domestic economies, 
and  in  financial  market  conditions.  All  of  these  areas  are  also  routinely  monitored  for 
monetary policy formulation. 
 Following the crisis, concerns about the sustainability of sovereign debt have risen in many 
countries,  most  notably  in  the  peripheral  euro  zone  economies.  Consequently,  central 
bankers  have  also  needed  to  co-ordinate  their  policies  more  closely  with  fiscal  policy 
decisions. As a result of these changes, policymakers now need a much wider spectrum of 
information  to  set  policy,  and  central  banks  are  now  required  to  have  broader  concept  of 
“economic surveillance” in mind to inform their decisions. The Global Financial Crisis showed 
economic  surveillance  is  more  important  than  ever  and  how  we  go  about  that  has  been 
permanently  changed.  During  the  rest  of  the  discussion,  we  will  consider  how  different 
aspects of surveillance have been altered. 
International financial surveillance 
This crisis was initially about financial institutions and markets and we have learned that it is 
necessary for central banks and regulators to know more about financial market flows, about 
non-traditional  financial  institutions  and  instruments,  and  about  the  inter-connectedness  of 
institutions, especially in the presence of instruments that can go viral. Before the crisis, it 
                                                 
5   A  number  of  other  institutions,  including  the  IMF,  have  introduced  similar  frameworks  or  indices  in  recent 
years  to  measure  financial  stability.  See  P.  Bedford  and  C.  Bloor  (2009)  “A  Cobweb  Model  of  Financial 
Stability in New Zealand”, Discussion Paper DP 2009/11, Reserve Bank of New Zealand. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the 
international 
in  confidence  and  paralysis  across 
was assumed that financial markets were efficient in transmitting changes in policy interest 
rates  through  conventional  financial  instruments  via  the  traditional  banking  system  and 
ultimately  into  the  wider  economy.  Factors  such  as  securitisation  through  leveraged 
derivatives,  often  carried  out  by  “shadow”  banking  institutions,  generally  attracted  little 
attention  in  policy  discussions.  In  addition,  financial  spreads  had  been  historically  stable 
enough to accurately reflect the degree of risk on investments. 
Yet  in  the  crisis  environment  of  September  2008,  financial  prices  failed  to  convey  the 
collapse 
financial  system,  as 
policymakers  and  private  financial  institutions  alike  grappled  to  understand  the  extent  of 
contagion  of  exposure  to  toxic  assets  through  shadow  banks  and  opaque  derivative 
products.  Therefore,  central  banks  had  to  rely  increasingly  on  alternative  sources  of 
information to guide policy in restabilising the system.  
At the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, international financial surveillance has always been 
important,  with  a  particular  focus  on  Australia,  given  the  strong  links  between  our  four 
systemically  important  banks  and  their  Australian  parent  institutions.  However,  despite  an 
active  surveillance  programme  and  the  advantage  of  some  distance  from  northern 
hemisphere financial centres, like other institutions, we were wracked by surprises when the 
crisis began. Being a full service central bank helped. In September 2008 we were seeing 
the  lead  up  and  likely  consequences  of  the  Lehman’s  crisis  through  our  bank  regulator 
reports, our traders’ views of funding markets and our domestic markets analysis of overnight 
bank  trading.  But  information  also  came  from  some  less  typical  sources,  including  our 
Payment and Settlement Systems monitoring of the size of and timing bank payments, which 
provided  a  useful  perspective  on  the  degree  of  nervousness  in  financial  institutions.  Our 
currency manager was also able to relay to us banks’ requests for special deliveries of high 
denomination  bank  notes,  which  warned  us  about  a  growing  nervousness  among  some 
members of the public during the heat of the crisis.  
Using these new sources has expanded our surveillance toolkit in ways that may be useful in 
the future. However, many aspects of international financial surveillance remain unresolved. 
Some key issues include: 
 
What will be the future of high risk instruments similar to sub-prime and how will they 
be monitored?  
What  will  be  the  relationship  between  the  traditional  and  shadow  banking  sectors 
and will there be accurate data transparently available? 
What will Basel III compliance require in terms of new surveillance and what new 
information will it offer?  
  In  this  regard,  the  shift  towards  exchange-based  trading  of  derivative  products  and  away 
from “over-the-counter” markets may be a welcome move towards increased transparency, 
centralised  data  collection  and  better  monitoring.  Electronic  trading  and  data  will  mean 
greater  availability  of  a  wide  range  of  financial  market  data.  These  data  will  provide 
information about market pricing, volumes, liquidity and investors’ appetite for risk. However, 
just  as  important  as  information  gathering  is  filtering,  analysis,  and  transmission  in  forms 
suitable for economic interpretation and forecasting. Much more work will need to be done on 
developing suitable analytical methods to achieve this. 
International economic surveillance 
What  had  been  thought  to  be  a  financial  crisis  turned  into  an  economic  one  in  late  2008 
when  fast-growing  economies  including  Asian  economies  like  Singapore  (which  had  been 
the  subject  of  a  debate  on  international  economic  decoupling),  were  suddenly  hit  with  a 
vicious reduction in trade flows, industrial production and growth. Before the crisis, models of 
the international transmission of economic shocks were based mainly on trade linkages. The 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
crisis reminded us that financial market channels can cause contagion in ways that may not 
always be obvious. 
 Although the possibility of contagion through financial channels has long been recognised, 
macroeconomic models and analysis have typically relied more heavily on trade linkages as 
the  key  transmission  channel  of  shocks  across  countries.  However,  during  the  crisis,  the 
explosion  in  risk  premiums  and  a  changed  pattern  of  capital  flows  transmitted  the  shock 
much  more  quickly  to  many  economies.  As  a  result,  there  has  been  greater  focus  on 
financial market conditions and linkages to understand the impact of international shocks on 
real economies.  
More  recently,  the  rapid  development  of  commodities  as  an  asset  class  has  meant  policy 
easing  by  major  central  banks  can  be  transmitted  through  higher  commodity  prices  to  the 
rest of the world. As easier monetary conditions make funding cheaper and reduce returns 
on fixed income investments like government bonds, investors may look for higher returns on 
riskier assets, such as commodities. This could potentially cause a (temporary) divergence 
between  commodity  prices  and  market  fundamentals,  and  has  prompted  concern  about 
rising inflationary pressures in many countries during recent months. This has provided new 
challenges for understanding transmission channels between economies and for forecasting 
inflation.6 At the same time, however, the stronger relationship between commodity markets 
and investment flows could potentially allow us to use commodity prices as new indicators of 
financial  conditions  in  global  markets,  although  determining  the  precise  nature  of  the 
                                                 
6   For  a  discussion  of  the  increasing  difficulty  in  modelling  and  forecasting  inflation,  see  “Issues  in  Inflation”, 
Global Macro Issues, Deutsche Bank, March 2011. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
relationship  is  still  very  difficult,  given  our  current  level  of  understanding  of  the  market 
linkages.  
Looking  ahead  we  need  to  realise  that  macroeconomics  will  remain  inextricably  linked  to 
financial  market  conditions.  Consequently  our  economic  surveillance  will  need  to  focus  on 
the  macro-financial  and  macroeconomic  interactions  to  a  much  greater  extent  than  in  the 
past. As the crisis demonstrated, sometimes these interactions can be quite complex. 
Domestic economic surveillance 
In  the  domestic  macroeconomic  arena  we  have  learnt  other  lessons  from  the  crisis.  The 
crisis  challenged  traditional  economic  forecasting,  especially  model-based  forecasts.  For 
example, the lack of factors such as balance sheet positions, financing or credit constraints 
in many simple models of consumption based on a single representative agent has proved 
unsatisfactory  in  the  post-crisis  environment.  As  a  result,  we  have  had  to  learn  about 
householders’ new attitudes to consumption and saving as they focus on “deleveraging” and 
rebuilding  savings.  In  this  new  environment  there  has  been  much  greater  attention  to 
modelling the behaviour of different types of consumers, with differing asset holdings, access 
to finance and risk attitudes. This has led to the development of new types of models which 
allow for this heterogeneity. An example of this has been the recent focus in the economics 
literature on “agent-based” computational modelling.7 It has also led to greater reliance on 
alternative data sources such as household balance sheets and more up-to-date indicators 
of spending such as that provided by electronic measures of payments. There has also been 
greater  attention  to  micro-level  survey  datasets  to  obtain  information  about  individuals’ 
consumption  and  saving  behaviour.  Of  course,  these  more  detailed  data  present  new 
challenges  in  terms  of  identifying  signals  from  noisier  data.  As  a  result,  a  range  of  new 
technical tools will be needed to filter and synthesise the data from these new sources.8  
A  further  lesson  for  future  economic  surveillance,  is  the  increased  prominence  that  credit 
flows  and  asset  prices may  play  in  policy  analysis.  In  contrast  to  the  pre-crisis  consensus 
view  that  it  is  difficult  to  identify  an  incipient  asset  bubble,  let  alone  prick  it,  most  central 
banks today are putting a lot of effort into monitoring the housing sector, household balance 
sheets  and  other  assets  in  an  attempt  to  do  just  that.  Before  the  crisis,  monetary  policy 
setting was often characterised as being represented by some form of “Taylor rule” (or some 
inflation-targeting rule), under which policy rates changed only in response to deviations of 
inflation from target and to the output gap, with no direct reaction to asset price movements. 
As The Economist recently described it, “monetary policy took on... the trappings of a quasi-
scientific  discipline:  the  judicious  adjustment  of  the  short-term  interest  rate  could  keep 
inflation low and thus iron out the bumps of the business cycle”.9  
Financial  markets  also  expressed  a  high  level  of  confidence  in  central  banks’  skills,  with 
indicators  of  inflation  expectations  generally  well  anchored  at  central  banks’  inflation 
objectives in most developed economies. This vote of confidence from markets was despite 
warnings from central banks that the era of the “Great Moderation” with steady growth, and 
low stable inflation may not last indefinitely. For example, Bank of England Governor Mervyn 
King,  who  frequently  referred  to  the  Great  Moderation  as  the  NICE  era  (Non-Inflationary 
Consistently  Expansionary),  warned  in  2004  “...the  combination  of  low  and  stable  inflation 
                                                 
7   For a discussion, see J.D. Farmer and D. Foley (2009) “The Economy needs Agent-Based Modelling”, Nature, 
460, 6 August, pp.685–686. 
8   As an example of a recent model to filter information from volatile data, the RBNZ recently started using a 
regime-switching model to analyse exchange rate movements. See E. Cassino and Z. Wallis (2010) “The New 
Zealand Dollar through the Global Financial Crisis”, Bulletin, Vol 73 No.3, Reserve Bank of New Zealand. 
9   “A More Complicated Game”, The Economist, February 19 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
and continuously falling unemployment must come to an end at some point, and may already 
have done so.”10 But since the crisis, there has been vigorous academic debate about the 
ability  of  central  banks  to  identify  asset  price  bubbles  and  their  ability  to  “lean  against  the 
wind” in response.11 However, this requires a great deal of judgement, and better information 
from a wide range of sources. Identifying the equilibrium value of asset prices will be the new 
challenge for central banks, in the same way that identifying potential output or the NAIRU 
was  the  challenge  in  earlier  decades.  Identifying  bubbles  will  require  new  empirical  tools, 
such  as  the  regression-based  methods  being  developed  by  Peter  Phillips,12  but  as  with 
assessing disequilibrium in the goods or labour markets, we will still probably need to rely on 
information  from  a  wide  range  of  qualitative  and  quantitative  sources  to  help  identify  the 
presence of a bubble and understand the nature of it. How successful we will be remains an 
open question. 
The crisis has prompted a revival of interest in money and credit, which in recent decades 
central bankers, including ourselves at the RBNZ, have tended to put less weight on in the 
monetary policy formulation process. Several factors have contributed to this revival. First, 
the  impairment  of  the  flow  of  credit  as  a  result  of  the  financial  crisis  has  led  to  fears  of  a 
creditless recovery, or at least a recovery held  back by less plentiful credit. Second, there 
has been a significant change in money flows during the crisis (with depositors favouring the 
banks over the non-banks). 
Overall,  there  has  also  been  a  recognition  that  credit  growth  over  the  past  decade  was 
excessive and a potential risk to financial stability given the build-up in leverage and rising 
asset prices that accompanied it. We are continuing to build our understanding of money and 
credit at the RBNZ, and its inter-relationship with both sectoral financial decision making and 
potential  risks  for  the  banking  sector.  However,  much  still  needs  to  be  learned  about  the 
relationships,  especially  the  nature  of  causality  and  how  policy  makers  can  utilise  the 
relationships to achieve their goals. 
Inside regulatory institutions 
Within the area of prudential supervision, there has been more focus on the funding markets 
and balance sheets of the main banks, including their debt maturity and risk management 
policies.  This  follows  the  closure  of  international  funding  markets  in  late  2008  and  the 
increased fragility of markets generally. 
At  the  RBNZ,  our  focus  is  particularly  on  the  four  systemically  important  banks  in  New 
Zealand,  which  are  all  subsidiaries  of  Australian  owned  parent  banks.  During  the  Global 
Financial Crisis we learned that much of the mandated disclosure of public information from 
the banks was available with too long a lag and was too general to be much use in predicting 
stress vulnerability. Consequently we have reduced the information we require to be made 
public but are requiring more real time private information about funding, bad debt, deposits, 
loans etc. These receive very close attention from the regulator. 
The need for timely information has required much greater use of financial market data, and 
detailed, up-to-the-minute institutional data in assessing the condition of financial institutions. 
As a result, there has been greater co-ordination between financial market monitoring and 
                                                 
10   Speech at the Eden Project, Cornwall, 12 October 2004. 
11   For  coverage  of  this  debate,  see  S.  Wadhwani  (2008)  “Should  Monetary  Policy  Respond  to  Asset  Price 
Bubbles? Revisiting the Debate”, National Institute Economic Review no. 206, NIESR and W. White (2009) 
“Should  Monetary  Policy  “Lean  or  Clean”?”,  Globalisation  and  Monetary  Policy  Institute  Working  Paper  34, 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas. 
12   See, for example, P. Phillips, Y. Wu and J. Yu (2011) “Explosive Behaviour in the 1990s NASDAQ: When did 
Exuberance Escalate Asset Values?”, International Economic Review, Vo. 52, No. 1. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
bank supervisors. This co-operation between supervisors and financial market monitoring is 
much  easier  in  a  full  service  central  bank  without  institutional  or  legal  impediments  to 
information flows. 
The  Financial  Crisis  has  also  inspired  a  large  international  push  through  the  Basel 
Committee on Bank Supervision and the Financial Stability Board, including Basel III, new 
accounting standards and other forms of bank regulation. The broad aim of these changes 
has  been  to  lead  to  a  more  resilient  banking  sector.  However  the  new  environment  also 
requires  more  oversight  of  banks  and  more  early  warning  systems.  As  a  result,  there  has 
been a resurgence in interest in early warning indicators of financial sector crises, which first 
emerged  in  response  to  the  Asian  Financial  Crisis  in  the  late  1990s.13  More  recent  early 
techniques,  such  as  Contingent  Capital  Analysis  (CCA),14  which  combine 
warning 
information  from  institutional  balance  sheets  and  financial  market  data,  are  being  actively 
investigated by central banks, bank supervisors and other financial regulators. While the aim 
here  is  a  worthy  one,  we  do  need  to  keep  our  expectations  realistic  about  our  ability  to 
develop robust and reliable early warning indicators. 
More generally, within central banks and regulators the crisis means that more attention is 
being paid to the financial markets intelligence function. Information is now being swapped 
much more readily between central banks and regulators. There is much discussion about 
the relative interplay of microfinancial policies, macrofinancial policies and monetary policy. 
Relations with Treasuries and Ministers of Finance have also become closer as government 
funding  has  been  required  for  deposit  guarantee  schemes  and  as  central  banks  take  into 
account  the  more  fragile  state  of  sovereign  funding  markets.  At  the  RBNZ  we  have  also 
strengthened our links with regulators in other countries. Well before the crisis we had strong 
formal  links  with  our  Australian  counterparts  at  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia  and  the 
Australian Prudential Regulation Authority (APRA). These links have continued to develop in 
recent years, with good two-way information flows ensuring that both sides are more alert to 
emerging  prudential  issues.  We  are  also  building  better  ties  with  our  Asian  central  bank 
partners in EMEAP (Executives’ Meeting of East Asia Pacific Central Banks). 
Conclusion 
In a recent article,15 Professor Robert Shiller argued that “the Depression of the 1930s was 
blamed  on  a  lack  of  knowledge...one  result  was  an  improvement  in  our  measurement 
systems”. Shiller notes that the development of national accounts data began as a reaction 
to  the  “information  black  spots”  of  the  Depression.  In  the  same  way,  the  Global  Financial 
Crisis has changed the nature of economic monitoring and surveillance required by central 
banks.  Central  banks  now  require  information  from  a  wider  range  of  sources  and  much 
greater  interaction  between  monitoring  for  monetary  and  financial  stability.  But  economic 
surveillance  is  not  just  about  capturing  developments  –  it  is  about  reading  the  risks  and 
threats to the economy, and the mood of the markets, public and business sector, or, in other 
words, gauging the “atmospherics”. However, despite these innovations, central bankers will 
need to be realistic about their goals. Good surveillance usually will not stop nasty surprises, 
but  it  may  buy  some  lead  time  and  help  policymakers  to  make  better  sense  of  surprises 
when they happen. As ECB President Trichet noted in a recent interview “central banks need 
formidable analytical capacities and skills. You need both state-of-the-art analytical work, as 
deep  and  robust  as  possible,  and  you  need  judgement,  based  on  experience  and  solid 
                                                 
13   See  R.  Caballero  and  P.  Kurlat  (2009)  “The  “Surprising”  Origin  and  Nature  of  Financial  Crises:  A 
Macroeconomic  Policy  Proposal”,  Financial  Stability  and  Macroeconomic  Policy,  Jackson  Hole  Economic 
Symposium. 
14   D. Gray and S. Malone (2008) Macrofinancial Risk Analysis. 
15   R. Shiller (2011) “Needed: A Clearer Crystal Ball”, New York Times, April 30. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
capacity to synthesise all pertinent analyses. This is true in absolutely all circumstances, and 
particularly in times of crisis”.16  
Ultimately, the aim of central bank policy and its main contribution to increasing social well-
being remains, as before the crisis, to maintain macroeconomic stability. However, since the 
crisis it has been increasingly acknowledged that consumer price stability is not, on its own, a 
sufficient condition for overall macroeconomic stability, as was probably assumed during the 
Great  Moderation.  Traditional  policy  tools  need  to  be  augmented  with  macro-prudential 
instruments targeting financial stability goals. Going forward, the aim is to set monetary and 
financial  policy  instruments  to  take  account  of  the  inter-relationship  between  the  financial 
sector  and  the  real  economy,  which  will  require  a  broader  framework  for  economic 
surveillance. 
But  this  new  environment  will  present  new  challenges  for  central  bankers  and  academics. 
New empirical tools will need to be developed to identify the signal from the noise in a vastly 
expanded range of data sources, to make the maximum contribution to policy decisions. The 
quality of the new data, from both official and un-official sources will vary widely, making it 
difficult for policy makers to interpret.17 In addition, understanding the relationship between 
traditional  monetary  policy  tools  and  new  macro-prudential  tools  is  a  key  priority  for  the 
research agenda in order to co-ordinate them effectively. As Professor Shiller argues, “We 
should respond just as we did to the Depression, by starting the long process of redefining 
our measurements so we can better understand the risk of another financial shock. The past 
suggests that this project will take many years to complete. But it will be worth the effort”.  
                                                 
16   Jean-Claude 
Trichet: 
Interview  with  Helsingin  Sanomat 
http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2011/html/sp110426.en.html. 
and  Kauppalehti,  April 
2011, 
17   The crisis has demonstrated that official data are not always entirely reliable, as illustrated by the significant 
revisions to the fiscal deficit in Greece. Initially the Greek government projected a deficit below 3% of GDP for 
2009. This was eventually revised by Eurostat to 15.4% of GDP. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
