K C Chakrabarty: Ten Commandments for a successful banking career 
Address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the ICICI 
Bank  Probationary  Officer  Convocation  2011, 
ICICI  Manipal  Academy,  Bangalore, 
13 December 2011. 
 Assistance provided by Ms.Rakhe Balachandran in preparation of this address is gratefully acknowledged. 
Ms  Chanda  Kochhar,  MD  and  CEO,  ICICI  Bank,  Shri  T.  V.  Mohandas  Pai,  Chairman, 
Manipal Global Education Services, Dr K. Ramnarayan, Vice Chancellor, Manipal University, 
Shri Rajiv Sabharwal, Executive Director, ICICI Bank, other distinguished guests, ladies and 
gentlemen, and my young friends. 
It is indeed a pleasure to be here in your midst today. Young people infuse energy and vigour 
into  any  gathering  but  bright,  young  bankers  like  you  also  make  it  a  learning  experience. 
Convocations  are  always  a  very  special  occasion  as  they  signify  both  an  end  and  a 
beginning. An end – to a formal learning process and, hence, a moment of great satisfaction 
and joy for everyone involved. And a beginning – as it marks the threshold of the next stage 
for  applying  practically  the  knowledge  and  skills  acquired  through  the  formal  learning 
process,  thereby,  acquiring  real  world  learning  and  experience.  I  congratulate  all  the 
graduates of the ninth to eleventh batch of the ICICI Manipal Academy and especially thank 
Ms. Chanda Kochhar for giving me the opportunity to address these young budding bankers. 
The  ICICI  Bank  Probationary  Officer  Programme,  I  am  sure,  is  an  effort  to  “Catch  Them 
Young” and create the bankers of tomorrow – a set of new generation managers for banking 
in newer times. Nowadays, when the financial sector the world over is undergoing a period of 
most rapid acceleration and change, the greatest challenge before all organizations in this 
sector is to build up an institutional architecture that enables and sustains intellectual capital. 
This  is  especially  important  as  in  times  of  “creative  destruction”  –  to  use  Joseph 
Schumpeter’s  classic  phrase  in  his  theory  of  economic  innovation  –  new  ideas,  new 
constructs and new expectations emerge. And this, in turn, makes the role of new generation 
managers  in  these  institutions  more  demanding  than  that  of  bankers  of  yesteryears.  The 
term  “generation”  refers  to  a  common  identity  arising  from  common  experience.  Thus,  the 
identity of Gen Y Managers, that all of you perhaps are, would also arise from the common 
experience of a changing world around us, a product of the wider historical context.  
As you know, financial sector reforms since the year 1991 have heralded a dramatic shift in 
the  way  banks  function  and  operate  in  India.  The  changed  environment  and  the  internal 
compulsions  arising  from  greater  competition  and  the  need  to  improve  their  market  share 
and profitability have given rise to the quest for greater efficiency and the need to reposition 
themselves  given  the  realities  of  the  environment  and  their  internal  strengths  and 
weaknesses. 
But at the same time, the compulsions of business must not take away from the basic tenets 
of good banking. Understanding and inculcating certain qualities will help ensure each one of 
you  becomes  a  successful  banker  in  the  years  ahead  and  this,  incidentally,  would  be  the 
theme  of  my  address  today.  But,  before  I  delve  into  that,  and  knowing  fully  well  that  you 
would have studied about it during your graduation, let me start by explaining banking and its 
importance to the society. 
What is banking? 
Banking, conventionally, is defined as the acceptance of deposits of money from the public 
for  the  purpose  of  lending  or  investment.  These  deposits  are  repayable  on  demand  or 
otherwise and withdrawable by cheque, draft, order or otherwise. Deposits are accepted from 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
individuals as well as from firms. In sum, the nature of banking business can be summarised 
in two words, i.e., “financial intermediation”, which needs to be carried out efficiently (both 
operational  and  allocational)  for  stimulating  the  real  sectors  of  the  economy.  Another 
essential characteristic of Banks is that they are highly leveraged and, hence, special and 
need to be regulated for protecting the interest of depositors. 
As banks are institutions with legal backing and as there is a banking regulator to oversee 
their financial solvency and soundness, it enables the banks to earn the trust and confidence 
of the public. You are also aware that banking in India, as elsewhere, takes diverse forms 
viz., banks formed under special statutes, companies registered under the Companies Act, 
1956  or  foreign  companies  and  co-operative  societies  registered  under  the  Co-operative 
Societies Act. Banks are classified based on their ownership pattern such as public sector 
banks, private sector banks and foreign banks. Some specialized institutions such as ICICI 
have  morphed  to  banks.  Yet  other  institutions  such  as  EXIM  bank,  SIDBI  and  NABARD 
specialize in trade, small industries and agriculture, respectively. 
Apart  from  basic  banking  business,  banks  also  undertake  other  services  such  as  safe 
custody of valuables, granting and issuance of letters of credit to facilitate international trade, 
buying and selling in foreign exchange and collections of bills, among others. Banks also act 
as  agent  of  the  Government  and  other  entities  to  undertake  agency  business.  Extending 
loans and advances to the needy sectors of the economy on a priority basis is a very crucial 
function  of  the  banking  sector.  Keeping  in  view  needs  of  the  Indian  economy,  banks  are 
mandated  to  extend  40  per  cent  of  their  Net  Bank  Credit  to  the  priority  sectors  of  the 
economy.  The  priority  sectors  of  the  economy  include,  inter  alia,  agriculture,  weaker 
sections, small scale industries, education and micro finance. These norms ensure adequate 
flow of funds to the most important and needy sectors of the economy.  
But  as  you  are  also  aware,  over  the  years,  banking  has  transformed.  It  is  no  longer  the  
“3-6-3”  banking.  Banking  sector  has  become  more  liberalized,  more  competitive,  more 
stable,  more  customer  oriented,  more  technologically  advanced  and  also  more  profitable. 
The  prudential  norms  were  implemented,  interest  rates  were  deregulated,  asset  quality 
improved, entry barriers were liberated, new products were introduced, capital was infused 
and risk management was improved. There was also a decline in the concentration of the 
banking business in a few banks. Financial industry is moving towards expanded activities 
driven  by  customer  needs,  financial  innovations,  technological  change,  consolidation, 
convergence, global competition and financial inclusion. Many challenges lie ahead such as 
stiff  competition,  stringent  regulatory  norms,  shareholders  demanding  higher  returns,  and 
also  challenges  of  globalization  and  financial  inclusion.  Thus,  as  prospective  successful 
bankers  of  future,  each  one  of  you  should  have  a  fairly  good  understanding  of  these 
opportunities and challenges to accomplish your job in an efficient way.  
Importance of banking 
In the older days when banking was not prevalent, people were forced to borrow money from 
money  lenders  at  very  high  interest  rates.  Even  today,  in  the  rural  unbanked  areas  of  the 
country, people are dependent on money lenders for credit. Moreover, when people had to 
save, they used to hoard money in their houses despite the risk of robbery. The existence of 
a bank, with its legal sanctity, was a solution to both these issues. Banks extended loans and 
advances  at  affordable  interest  rates  for  productive  as  well  as  consumption  purposes  and 
started accepting deposits from the public. The provision of loans at affordable interest rates 
helped people smoothen their income and expenditure fluctuations on the one hand and start 
remunerative economic activity on the other. Apart from the safety provided by banks to the 
money deposited by the public, the interest offered by banks on deposits of the public acted 
as  an  additional  incentive  for  depositing  money  with  the  banking  sector.  This  inculcated 
saving habits among the public. The savings of the people become a productive part of the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
economy. This is one of the important reasons why the Reserve Bank encourages or nudges 
banks to expand the banking network to all unbanked villages in the country.  
While from a social point of view, distribution of credit at affordable interest rates is the most 
important  argument  for  the  existence  of  banks,  from  an  economic  point  of  view,  it  is  the 
channelisation of savings into investments. Higher savings and investments are important in 
stimulating economic growth. Banks are important conduits for monetary policy transmission 
and play an important role in the payment and settlement systems.  
The  recent  technological  advancements  in  the  banking  sector  through  ATMs,  debit  cards, 
credit  cards  and  electronic  transactions  further  made  the  transfer  of  money  across  the 
financial system easy and convenient for the public. The electronic cards and point-of-sale 
terminals  facilitated  day  to  day  financial  needs  of  customers  without  the  need  for  carrying 
paper money. The internet banking facility offered by banks also help customers to manage 
their  personal  financial  transactions  without  visiting  their  bank  branch.  Along  with  the 
technological advancements, the opening of specialised accounts designed for non-resident 
Indians further facilitated transfer of money from abroad, i.e., remittances.  
Thus, in sum, banking affects all of us. Our lives are dependent on the banking sector in one 
way or another, directly or indirectly. It is the life-blood of the economy, a contamination of 
the same can affect any sector or region of the economy. Thus, as employees of the banking 
system, each one of you is taking up a big responsibility, not only towards the institution for 
which you are working but also towards the entire society. 
Having set out the context, what are the qualities that each one of you should inculcate to 
become a successful banker? Let me explain the Ten Commandments for a successful 
banking career: 
1. 
 
to 
the 
the  available 
financial  services  and 
Thou shalt manage the people with empathy 
Banking  is  essentially  an  art  of  managing  people,  be  it  customers  or  staff.  In  a 
competitive  environment,  customers  have  to  be  treated  as  kings.  Thus,  delivering 
financial services to the satisfaction of customer, and prompt redressal of complaints 
of  customers,  if  any,  are  very  important.  The  complaints  of  customers  should  be 
heard  with  passion  and  remedial  action  should  be  taken  promptly.  The  bankers 
should also take pro-active actions to increase customer awareness with regard to 
charges  applicable 
redressal 
mechanisms. 
Managing  staff  by  providing  them  with  a  comfortable  work  environment  is  also 
germane to ensure the quality of banking services.  
Thou shalt strive to become a knowledge worker 
A knowledge worker is one who apart from knowing how to do a work and what he 
is  doing  also  knows  why  is  he  doing  what  he  is  doing.  We  are  transiting  from  an 
agrarian  society,  through  an  industrial  society  to  a  knowledge  society.  In  the 
knowledge  society,  it  is  the  knowledge  institutions  and  knowledge  workers  who 
would thrive. Just because you have completed your studies and got into a job, you 
should  not  stop  learning.  Your  career  in  the  banking  sector  should  be  a  learning 
experience. Now, while accomplishing your desk work in the bank, definitely you will 
go  through  a  learning  process.  But  that  is  not  enough.  You  should  develop  and 
maintain reading habit to update your knowledge base. Because knowledge is the 
power of an employee and once you lose it, you are nowhere. Thus, there has to be 
a  conscious  effort  from  your  side  to  keep  your  learning  curve  alive  and  be  better 
than  the  rest.  And  do  not  restrict  your  knowledge  base  to  developments  in  the 
banking sector only; rather all of you should develop a fairly good understanding of 
the economy over a period of time. Then only you can become a sensitive banker, 
i.e., a banker who is sensitive to the needs of a growing economy. 
 2. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
3. 
 
4. 
 
5. 
 
6. 
 
7. 
 
4 
 Thou shalt be accountable for all your work 
This  is  the  most  important  quality  which  a  banker  should  have.  There  should  be 
accountability  towards  the  society  because  you  are  working  in  a  public  institution 
and  dealing  with  public  money.  And  whatever  you  do  in  the  bank  as  part  of 
accomplishing  your  responsibilities  are  subject  to  scrutiny.  Many  of  the  financial 
frauds have taken place with the help of bank employees in the past. Thus, if the 
employees of a bank are sincere and committed to their institution and to the society 
as a whole, chances of financial frauds can be minimized. Further, try to know more 
about your customers and their occupations. This will also help in reducing financial 
frauds  as  well  as  financing  of  terrorism  using  bank  funds.  Thus,  a  vigilant  and 
accountable bank employee is an asset to the banking sector. So, try to become an 
asset rather than a liability. 
Thou shalt do hard work 
All  of  you  should  remember  always  that  hard  work  is  the  “mantra”  of  success. 
Nothing can substitute your hard work. And those who do hard work during the initial 
years of their career, will be the ultimate winners in the system. Thus, try to have a 
positive  attitude  towards  work  and  try  to  have  a  good  understanding  about  the 
challenges ahead. Prepare yourself for meeting those challenges and meeting the 
expectations of your institution. At the end of the day you will be rewarded in one 
way or another. So, do not hesitate to take more responsibilities in the initial part of 
your career. Be pro-active and do more work; this will improve your understanding of 
the subject. 
Thou shalt develop the right attitude 
At times, the attitude of the bank staff also keeps rural illiterate customers away from 
the  banking  system.  So,  as  new  entrants  to  the  banking  industry,  try  to  build  up 
friendly customer relationships. Do not discriminate customers based on their caste, 
sex, education and also by financial background. Try to extend fair services to all 
customers  of  the  bank  irrespective  of  their  background.  You  all  should  take  extra 
efforts to bring financially illiterate customers to the bank. This is because a good 
bank should not confine it’s operations to metropolitan areas, it should be willing and 
innovative  enough  to  expand  its  services  to  under  banked  rural  and  semi-urban 
areas. Thus, as employees of the banking sector you have an important role to play 
in furthering financial inclusion, dealing with underprivileged sections of society and 
ensuring adequate flow of credit to activities associated with such people. 
Thou shalt attempt to become a pioneer 
Globalization  opens  up  lot  of  opportunities  for  the  banking  sector  from  across  the 
globe.  However,  to  take  advantage  of  these  opportunities,  banks  have  to  prepare 
themselves.  Banks  will  have  to  work  in  a  multi-cultural  and  multi-linguistic 
environment to compete with the globally active banks. A group of efficient, young 
and well educated employees is a sine qua non for achieving this competitiveness. 
So, as employees of the banking sector, try to improve your communication skills, 
try  to  learn  about  the  developments  in  the  global  banking  sector  and  try  to  learn 
about the emerging opportunities. Be innovative in taking advantage of the emerging 
opportunities. Because, a pioneer has always an advantage over followers. So, try 
to be pioneers rather than followers in your career. 
Thou shalt develop a professional approach 
Do your job with your brain, not your heart. You can be passionate about the needs 
and  grievances  of  customers,  but  do  not  compromise  on  your  logic.  During  the 
course of your careers, you might, at times, be faced with various pressures which 
seek  to  influence  your  decisions.  Develop  the  ability  to  objectively  evaluate 
situations, regardless of external pressures, and take the right decision – always. Do 
BIS central bankers’ speeches
8. 
 
9. 
 
10. 
 not  allow  your  personal  problems  and  relationships  to  influence  your  decision 
making  process.  Be  objective  and  be  efficient.  One  cannot  become  a  true 
professional in any area unless he/ she remains committed to the core principles of 
the profession even under the most adverse circumstances. 
Thou shalt be analytical 
Banking  business,  essentially,  involves  managing  risk.  This  job  of  managing  risk 
cannot be done efficiently without having sharp analytical capability. As employees 
of  the  banking  sector  you  have  an  important  role  to  play  in  shaping  the  financial 
soundness of the banking sector. While doing the banking business, try to analyse 
the financial background and economic activity of the customer thoroughly. This will 
help in limiting the growth of non-performing loans, efficient utilization of capital and 
higher  profitability.  Financial  soundness  is  an  important  aspect  of  a  good  bank, 
especially because banking business involves public money. Further, failure of one 
banking  institution  may  also  trigger  contagion  effect  across  the  banking  sector  as 
financial institutions are highly inter-linked. 
Thou shalt be information literate 
Technological  advancements  have  transformed  class  banking  into  mass  banking. 
With  cost  effective  technologies  banks  were  able  to  change  the  face  of  banking. 
ATMs, debit cards, credit cards, internet banking and phone banking have enabled 
customers  to  do  banking  without  visiting  the  bank  branch.  Further,  the  Business 
correspondent model and mobile banking also depend on the latest technology to 
expand the banking network. The electronic transactions through NEFT, ECS and 
RTGS  have  increased  the  speed  of  fund  transfer  considerably.  A  good  banker 
should  continuously  innovate  and  update  themselves  with  the  latest  technological 
advancements to make banking further easier and convenient to customers. Thus, 
try  to  develop  a  good  understanding  of  the  latest  technological  developments.  A 
bank can implement latest technology safely only with a strong in-house technical 
expertise.  In  this  milieu,  you  must  “be  information  literate”,  i.e.  third  generation 
literate. It is not enough to be a first generation literate, i.e. you know how to read 
and  write,  or  to  be  second  generation  literate,  i.e.  to  be  computer  literate,  but  to 
achieve  information  literacy.  When  transiting  to  a  knowledge  society  and  to  be  a 
successful banker, it is critical to be information literate. 
Thou  shalt  avoid  complacency  during  good  times  and  not  lose  hope  during 
bad times 
This  is  a  very  important  commandment  of  a  good  banker  because  complacency 
hampers  progress  and  may  lead  to  sharp  downfall  and  loss.  Complacency  can 
affect anybody but is all the more relevant to the financial sector. We cannot afford 
to  be  complacent  even  for  a  moment.  You  are  particularly  advised  to  avoid 
complacency  during  good  times  as  otherwise  downturn  may  come  any  time.  It  is 
always  advisable  to  conserve  your  energies  during  good  times  to  be  used  during 
bad times. You should not only be satisfied with your victories but also try to achieve 
something better than whatever you have already achieved. Lastly, life is not easy; it 
is difficult, whether of an individual or an institution. Bad times sometimes will come, 
and sometimes, all bad things may come together. In such times, do not become 
desperate. Wait and Hope. Do not lose hope, but lie low and pray to God because 
good times will return soon. This is my last commandment not only for banking but 
for any career. 
Concluding thoughts 
All  of  you  are  growing  up  in  an  age  of  unprecedented  opportunity.  But  with  opportunity 
comes responsibility. To do things well and be responsible, one needs to cultivate a deep 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
understanding of oneself – not only the strengths and weaknesses but also how one learns, 
how one works with others, what his or her values are and where he or she can make the 
greatest  contribution.  You  can  achieve  excellence  only  if  you  understand,  work  on  and 
operate from your areas of strength. As you pick up the traits of modern trade like leadership 
skills, the ability to multi-task and manage competing imperatives, please do not let go of the 
age-old and time-tested qualities of a desire to learn, a strong sense of professional ethics, 
an enquiring mind, a strategic view, the qualities of humility and empathy, a willingness to 
embrace practical experience and an eagerness to adapt to evolving experiences. 
These  are  exciting  times  and  as  you  stand  on  the  threshold  of  a  new  life  and  a  career  in 
banking, I trust you will continue to cherish the ideals and dreams of youth, after all they are 
what make life worthwhile. 
I wish all of you – tomorrow’s titans – every success in all your future endeavours. Let me 
conclude by wishing each one of you a very bright, promising and challenging career in the 
banking sector.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
