Ewart S Williams: Upgrading financial regulation and supervision – a 
multi-dimensional challenge 
Regulators Round Table Presentation by Mr Ewart S Williams, Governor of the Central Bank of 
Trinidad and Tobago, at the Unit Trust Corporation Investor Conference 2011, Port-of-Spain, 
8–9 September 2011.  
  
The  last  few  years  have  been  a  difficult  period  for  regulators  all  over  the  world.  In 
particular,  the  global  financial  crisis  of  2008/9  exposed  gaps  and  weaknesses  in  the 
international  financial  architecture  as  well  as  in  national  regulatory  systems.  This  situation 
has spawned a series of reform initiatives, directed in the main at the major financial centres, 
but with strong pressures for consequential upgrading of the regulatory systems in emerging 
market and developing countries.  
In the advanced and emerging market countries regulatory reform has focused on:  
 
tightening  prudential  criteria  (through  larger  and  better  quality  capital  and  liquidity 
buffers);  
strengthening  macro-prudential  supervision  to  reduce  pro-cyclicality  and 
guard against a build-up of systemic risk;  
improving international financial standards;  
strengthening crisis resolution mechanisms; and  
broadening the regulatory perimeter to include all systemically-important financial 
institutions.  
  The  G20,  which  has  responsibility  for  the  international  reform  agenda,  has  identified 
 
the priorities for developing countries to include: 
 
 strict  application  of  the  Basel  I  framework  and  adherence  to  the  Basel  Core 
Principles together with the adoption of a clear time-table for moving to Basel II 
and Basel III;  
adherence  to  international  standards  and  codes,  for  example,  IFRS,  FATF 
standards  for  anti-money  laundering  as  well  as  other  standards  applicable  to  the 
insurance and securities sectors; and  
the promotion of regulatory cross-border co-operation on information exchange.  
 
While our financial system as a whole was not directly affected, the global crisis was 
 
one  factor  that  contributed  to  collapse  of  the  region’s  major  conglomerate, 
CL Financial (CLF) and the difficulties faced by its two main financial entities, Colonial Life 
Insurance Company (Clico) and the Clico Investment Bank. In turn, the collapse of CLF had 
contagion effects on financial and non-financial firms that had exposures to the conglomerate 
as well as to other regional economies.  
 
What has turned out to be our domestic financial crisis certainly underscored (if ever 
there  was  doubt)  the  urgent  need  for  modernising  financial  sector  legislation  and 
upgrading financial regulation and supervision.  
 
To be fair, Government had adopted a program of regulatory reform as early as 2004. 
However, the implementation of the program was somewhat slow perhaps in part, because 
of the misplaced perception that there was no urgency.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The sharp slowdown in the economy towards the end of the decade and the Clico crisis 
 
collapse  laid  bare  the  serious  gaps  in  our  legislative  infrastructure  and  in  our  regulatory 
processes.  
 
We took a major step towards upgrading our financial sector legislation with the 
passage  of  a  new  Financial  Institutions  Act  (FIA)  in  December  2008.  While  this  relates 
specifically to the banking system, it is basically framework legislation that establishes the 
principles for the other pieces of financial sector legislation.  
Work to upgrade financial legislation has picked up pace in recent months and it is now 
 
expected  that  the Insurance Bill  would  be  presented  to  Parliament  before  the  end  of  this 
year;  and  new  credit  union  legislation  by  early  next  year;  and  a  separate  law  for 
contributory pension schemes, later in the year. 
 
of the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) will have more to say about this….  
 
I want to make the point that while we are making reasonable progress in upgrading 
our legislation and while, in recent years, the Bank has made important strides in improving 
regulation, like other developing countries there are some critical challenges that we need 
to overcome to significantly improve the effectiveness of our financial regulation. 
 
The challenges have to do with encouraging a culture of good corporate governance: 
getting institutions to buy into higher standards of transparency and disclosure: establishing 
steps  to  promote  market  discipline:  taking  measures  to  promote  market  discipline:  and 
establishing new mechanisms for regulatory co-operation.  
A new Securities and Investments Act is also in the offing and I am sure that Chairman 
Corporate governance 
 
A recent OECD report noted that poor corporate governance is invariably at the 
root of most failures in risk management. In my view, that was the crux of the problem 
with Clico and is a potential problem with many financial institutions in Trinidad and Tobago.  
 
Boards  of  Directors  need  to  insist  that  they  be  given  information  on  the  risks 
their institutions face and on the measures being put in place to mitigate these risks. 
However, to serve as an effective layer of checks and balances, board members need to 
have the requisite industry skills and expertise. In the small Caribbean space this is a 
real concern, given the limited availability of qualified professionals willing or able to sit on 
corporate boards.  
 
working to ensure that this tone is translated throughout the entire organisation.  
 
Boards  need  to  operate  in  a  manner  in which  there is  healthy  tension  between 
themselves and management. While the Board’s job is not to second-guess management, 
effective governance dictates that they act aggressively, responsibly and in a timely manner 
to avoid problems and to resolve problems when they are detected. 
Good  governance  also  imposes  onerous  responsibilities  on  auditors  (both  external 
 
and  internal)  and  actuaries  (in  the  case  of  insurance  companies)  who  are  expected  to 
perform their duties in accordance with industry and international standards of practice.  
Good  governance  is  a  mindset  and  pivots  on  boards  setting  the  right  tone  and 
Greater disclosure 
 
Inadequate  disclosure  is  a  major  challenge  to  effective  regulation  in  Trinidad  and 
Tobago. A recent IMF assessment confirmed that the information now being submitted to the 
regulator  is  grossly  inadequate  for  effective  regulation  and  we  are  working  to  correct  that. 
There is also a problem with the information made available to the public.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Our  system  of  disclosure  leans  heavily  on  the  reporting  of  results  with  invariably 
 
insufficient  detail.  I  am  suggesting  the  need  for  increased  focus  on  qualitative  disclosure 
covering  an  institution’s  governance  and  risk  management  practices  and  the  challenges  it 
faces.  As  regards  timing,  currently  the  law  requires  banks  to  report  annually,  but  many 
report semi-annually on a voluntary basis. There is a case to move to a quarterly cycle as 
obtains in advanced and emerging market economies and to have large institutions publicly 
explain their results to their shareholders and the investing public.  
Market discipline 
Of  course  increased  disclosure  is  critical  to  fostering  market  discipline  which 
 
plays an important role in ensuring proper risk management. Effective market discipline plays 
a part in restraining companies from taking excessive risk. The absence of market discipline 
creates  a  moral  hazard  problem  as  too  much  emphasis  is  placed  on  the  Regulator. 
Regulatory authorities as well as financial institutions could facilitate greater market discipline 
by  promoting  financial  education  programmes  which  increase  the  level  of  financial 
literacy and confidence of the consuming public.  
Regulatory cooperation 
 
We  have  begun  a  fairly  successful  programme  of  regulatory  cooperation  with  our 
Canadian  counterparts  (OSFI)  in  respect  of  the  Canadian  banks  that  operate  in  our 
jurisdiction. We are also setting up similar arrangements with our regional counterparts. We 
need  to  tighten  our  regulatory  co-operation  with  other  domestic  regulators,  including  the 
SEC.  This  would  be  particularly  important  as  steps  are  taken  to  increase  regulation  of 
systemically important institutions such as the UTC, whose operations span both the mutual 
fund and banking industry.  
 
I need to join with Deborah by noting that supervisory capacity, that is, having the right 
skill  sets,  continues  to  be  a  challenge  for  the  Central  Bank  and  perhaps  other  regulators. 
This applies more for insurance than banking supervision.  
I  should  note  that  we  are  making  rapid  progress  in  addressing  these  gaps.  For 
 
example, we now finally have more actuarial support, and in the case of banking supervision, 
we are making use of retired professionals who bring an expertise that could only be gleaned 
from years of experience in the field.  
My parting words are that regulation is a multi-dimensional challenge. It requires all 
 
stakeholders (boards, management, auditors and actuaries) to work both independently and 
collaboratively to be effective. We are gaining ground, but we still have much to do. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
