Barry Whiteside: Prosecuting money laundering crimes 
Closing  speech  by  Mr  Barry  Whiteside,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  at  the 
3rd National Anti-Money Laundering Conference on “Prosecuting money laundering crimes”, 
Suva, 9 November 2011. 
 Introduction 
Members of the National Anti-Money Laundering Council,  
Members of the judiciary, invited speakers and conference delegates.  
A good afternoon to you all.  
We have come to the end of an intense day of discussions and I do not intend to keep you 
seated  for  too  much  longer!  I  trust  that  you  have  all  enjoyed  and  benefited  from  the 
presentations and in-depth discussions at today’s conference.  
This year’s conference theme on prosecuting money laundering crimes is a timely one. 
Thank  you  to  the  panel  of  speakers  for  sharing  with  us  your  valuable  knowledge  and 
experiences on our theme. 
Thank  you  also  Madam  Shameem  for  your  concise  summary  of  today’s  conference 
discussions. 
Yes. The sessions today highlighted a number of important issues relating to the conference 
theme which we all need to ponder over and, more importantly, act on when we return to our 
offices.  
expertise and resource issues; 
interpretation of the money laundering laws in Fiji; and 
effective use of these money laundering laws by the relevant agencies. 
Challenges  
It  is  quite  clear  that  we  face  various  challenges  in  prosecuting  money  laundering  and  in 
tracing and seizing criminal proceeds. 
The speakers have outlined some of these challenges relating to: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
I urge you all to find ways to overcome these challenges. 
Conferences like ours today, provide a perfect opportunity to bring people together to discuss 
strategies  for  dealing  with  these  challenges  and  for  sharing  knowledge  and  experiences. 
(This is our third such annual conference so I do hope we are taking the benefits forward! My 
plea is let’s not see this as a days paid leave away from the office!) 
We also have the National AML Council and its law enforcement working group which can 
facilitate networking and information sharing across agencies. 
Effective use of legal provisions 
I  would  like  to  briefly  touch  on  the  issue  of  effective  use  of  our  money  laundering  laws  to 
prosecute  money  laundering  crimes.  This  is  a  key  challenge  facing  our  investigators  and 
prosecutors. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The AG clearly pointed out to us this morning that if we cannot successfully prosecute these 
crimes, then we signal to the criminal elements that we are not ready and they will continue 
to move in on us. 
Today’s conference has highlighted that we do have the laws to prosecute money laundering 
activities. 
We also have the laws to trace the proceeds of crime and confiscate these proceeds. 
Madam Shameem, in her usual clear way, agreed we have the ammunition, but we fall short 
in key areas when it comes to the implementation. 
The  Turtle  Island  case clearly  showed  that  when  used  effectively,  our  legal  provisions  are 
quite powerful and can send a strong message to the community that money laundering is 
a crime. 
Let us make a concerted effort to use these legal provisions to prosecute money laundering 
crimes and to confiscate criminal proceeds. 
I appreciate that this will not be easy due to many factors. One of these being the fact that, in 
addition to money laundering cases, the police and prosecutors have a whole raft of other 
types of criminal cases to deal with. But let us learn from our combined knowledge shared 
here today on how we can move forward. 
Let us not forget that the ultimate aim of many of the crimes that we are faced with today, 
such as drug trafficking, corruption and fraud, is the desire by the perpetrators to profit from 
their crime. Thus by tackling money laundering, you are tackling other crimes. 
I am sure that once we step up in our prosecution of money laundering cases, this will send a 
strong message to criminals that crime does not pay. 
Financial institutions and the Reserve Bank 
A  key  point  that  this  conference  has  touched  on  is  the  role  of  financial  institutions  in 
prosecuting money laundering crimes. 
Financial institutions have incurred huge costs and made many changes to their systems and 
processes in order to comply with the requirements of the Financial Transactions Reporting 
Act. 
Many  a  time,  financial  institutions  would  question  the  need  to  have  these  comprehensive 
anti-money  laundering  measures  required  by  the  FTR  Act.  One  such  measure  is  the 
requirement for financial institutions to report suspicious transactions to the FIU. 
The  presentation  on  the  Turtle  Island  case  was  very  timely  as  it  clearly  showed  how  a 
suspicious  transaction  report  from  a  financial  institution  can  trigger  an  investigation  and 
prosecution of a money laundering scheme. 
This conference highlighted the important role that financial institutions have in prosecuting 
money laundering crimes. 
Money  laundering  takes  place  through  the  financial  system.  Therefore  financial  institutions 
are best placed to quickly detect money laundering crimes as and when they are happening. 
As the regulator of financial institutions in Fiji we at the Reserve Bank must also step up in 
our role towards ensuring compliance with the FTR Act. However, financial institutions must 
also play their part. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Conclusion 
In  closing,  I  urge  you  all  to  think  about  the  issues  that  have  been  discussed  today.  Think 
about how we can further improve our efforts in combating money laundering. 
Prosecuting money laundering is a key tool in combating money laundering and other crimes 
in Fiji. Let’s come back to the 4th Annual Money Laundering Conference next year with more 
positive stories to share and not have to revisit where we have been falling down! 
Our anti-money laundering laws and the efforts by financial institutions, the Police, FIU and 
other investigative agencies will be in vain if criminals are not being successfully prosecuted 
for money laundering. It will also be in vain if criminals are allowed to live off the profit of their 
illegal activities. 
So  let  us  return  to  our  workplaces  with  clear  and  definite  goals  of  how  we  can  apply  the 
lessons learnt from today’s conference in our respective work areas. 
Our  collaborative  efforts  in  investigating  and  prosecuting  money  laundering  crimes  will 
provide a strong message to criminals and their associates that “crime does not pay.” 
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for your patience and I now have the pleasure of formally 
closing the 2011 3rd National Anti-Money Laundering Conference. 
Vinaka Vakalevu 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
