Már Guðmundsson: Monetary policy 
Keynote address by Mr Már Guðmundsson, Governor of the Central Bank of Iceland, at a 
breakfast meeting of the Iceland Chamber of Commerce, 4 November 2011. 
 The  Iceland  Chamber  of  Commerce  has  a  long-standing  tradition  of  holding  a  breakfast 
meeting  like  this  one  on  economic  developments  and  prospects  and  monetary  policy, 
following  the  publication  of  the  Central  Bank’s  autumn  forecast.  As  before,  I  would  like  to 
thank  the  Chamber  of  Commerce  for  this  initiative,  as  there  is  a  great  need  for  informed 
discourse on monetary matters.  
In my speech a year ago, I discussed the progress made in stabilising the economy as is 
evidenced  by  the  underlying  current  account  surplus,  the  stable  and  subsequently 
strengthening  currency,  and  inflation  that  was  rapidly  approaching  the  Central  Bank’s 
inflation target. I mentioned, however, that robust recovery had not yet taken hold. It seemed 
to me then that the recovery had begun, and this has since been corroborated. At that time, 
GDP  was  projected  to  grow  by  just  over  2%  in  2011  –  which  was  not  considered  terribly 
strong in view of the slack in the economy. I was concerned as well about the low level of 
investment and the prospect of weak export growth in spite of a very low real exchange rate. 
The  inflation  outlook  seemed  much  better,  though,  due  to  a  rising  exchange  rate  and  the 
slack in the economy. Therefore, it was forecast that inflation would fall below 2% as 2011 
progressed and then rise back to target by the end of 2013. As always, it was emphasised 
that the outlook was uncertain – which indeed proved to be the case.  
So where do we stand now, a year later? I think the big picture is this: economic recovery 
has materialised, while stability has proven more elusive.  
GDP growth this year will be slightly over 3%, which is above the forecasts from a year ago, 
largely  due  to  changes  in  inventories  and  a  smaller-than-forecasted  contraction  in  public 
consumption. GDP growth is projected at 2½% annually for the next three years. I wouldn’t 
be surprised if it proves higher for 2011, once final figures are in a few years from now. The 
most  recent  Monetary  Bulletin  contains  a  discussion  of  forecasts  and  forecasting  errors, 
which  shows  that  final  figures  on  investment  and  GDP  growth  tend  to  lie  above  the  first 
figures.  
Employment has been increasing, and unemployment has fallen. It is cause for relief that the 
Directorate  of  Labour’s  analysis  indicates  that  most  people  leaving  the  unemployment 
register at present are going back to work. On the other hand, my concerns from last year 
concerning the low investment level and relatively weak export growth have not disappeared. 
It is true that business investment excluding energy-intensive industry and ships and aircraft 
is  strengthening  and,  according  to  the  forecast,  will  grow  by  8%  this  year,  while  total 
business investment as a share of GDP will rise over the forecast horizon, to about 11% in 
2014.  It  will  still  be  below  the  30-year  average  of  12½%,  however.  On  the  other  hand, 
exports of goods and services will grow by about 2½% this year and by an average of just 
under 2% per year in 2012 and 2013. This is not a very cheery prospect, given that the real 
exchange rate of the króna is currently over 20% below the historical average. It is important 
to bear in mind that low investment levels and weak export growth are related phenomena. A 
large  share  of  Iceland’s  exports  (marine  products  and  aluminium)  are  subject  to  capacity 
constraints,  and  in  some  instances,  increased  export  levels  would  require  substantial 
investment. Thus it is important to facilitate investment in export sectors. Those who believe 
that monetary policy has been a critical factor after the real policy rate fell to the current –1% 
are mistaken, however. Much more important are risk aversion in the markets, limited access 
to  foreign  credit,  an  uncertain  operational  environment,  and  impaired  corporate  balance 
sheets.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
 Chart 1 
Chart 2 
  Chart  1  shows,  on  the  one  hand,  how  the  economic  recovery  looks  so  far  and  how  it 
compares with the Central Bank’s forecast through 2014 and, on the other, developments in 
unemployment over the same period. According to these data, GDP was similar to Q4/2006 
levels in Q3/2011 but will rise back to the peak of the boom years towards the end of the 
forecast horizon. At the same time, unemployment will decline steadily to 4½% near the end 
of  the  forecast  horizon,  and  according  to  the  forecast,  the  slack  in  the  economy  will  have 
vanished by 2014. It is highly uncertain, however, just how much slack exists at this juncture.  
But inflation is the big change from the outlook around this time last year. Instead of falling 
slightly below target and remaining there for some time, inflation has taken quite a jump in 
2011. It did fall below target, but it stayed there only three months before taking off again, 
peaking  at  5.7%  in  September.  That  figure  actually  corresponds  to  over  6%  inflation, 
however, if one takes into account the change in treatment of broadcasting fees earlier in the 
year. According to the Bank’s forecast, inflation will remain at this level until early next year 
and then begin to taper off. It will be reasonably close to the inflation target around the end of 
2012. The inflation target will be fully reached towards the end of 2013, which is broadly in 
line with last year’s forecast. The difference is that the target will be reached from above, and 
not below.  
What  caused  such  a  radical  change?  First  of  all,  there  were  increases  in  oil  and  other 
commodity  prices.  Second,  the  króna  depreciated  by  6½%  in  the  first  half  of  the  year, 
bottoming out in mid-July before reclaiming about 4% of that loss. Third, house prices rose. 
Fourth, wages rose far in excess of productivity increases.  
Early in the year, it was primarily external – and presumably transitory – factors that caused 
the  spurt  in  inflation.  But  as  the  year  progressed,  domestic  cost  pressures  played  a 
progressively larger role – wage increases in particular. For example, unit labour costs are 
expected to increase by 5½% this year and core inflation 3 excluding tax effects was up by 
4½% in October, as opposed to just over 1% at the beginning of the year.  
Now  let  us  look  at  monetary  policy  year-to-date.  At  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee’s  first 
meeting  of  the  year,  in  February,  it  was  decided  to  cut  the  Bank’s  interest  rates  by 
0.25 percentage  points  and  communicate  a  neutral  bias  regarding  the  future  interest  rate 
path. This proved to be the last interest rate cut of the year. What we call the “effective policy 
rate”, which is where the Bank’s interest rate spectrum has maximum effect on short-term 
market rates, was then 3.6%. In 2011, the effective policy rate has been the average of the 
current account rate and the maximum rate on 28-day certificates of deposit. Interest rates 
were then held unchanged and the neutral bias was retained at the MPC meetings in March 
and April. In June, however, the Committee indicated that, other things being equal, it was 
likelier to raise interest rates than to cut them at upcoming meetings, owing to strong wage 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
increases, marked depreciation of the króna, and rising domestic inflation. Consequently, it 
should have taken no one by surprise that the MPC should raise interest rates in mid-August, 
when the Bank’s forecast stated that inflation would gain momentum in coming months and 
the  economic  recovery  would  remain  on  track.  And  indeed,  insightful  analysts  predicted  a 
rate hike. In September, interest rates were kept unchanged and the positive bias was kept. 
It was stressed that the decision did not represent a change in policy. A number of observers 
speculated  that  it  did,  though,  perhaps  motivated  by  the  increasingly  uncertain  global 
situation. This is probably why the Committee’s decision to raise interest rates in November 
took the market more by surprise than might have been expected.  
Before I explore the November interest rate decision further, I must mention two things. First, 
while  Iceland  was  engaged  in  its  IMF-supported  programme,  exchange  rate  stability  was 
given priority over the determination of interest rates based on the domestic inflation outlook 
and economic conditions. This is why interest rates were so high in 2009 and in the first half 
of 2010. On the other hand, as I have previously explained in speeches and papers, it was 
appropriate that emphasis should shift back to the inflation outlook and the economic slack 
as  the  danger  of  further  currency  depreciation  dissipated  and  exchange  rate-linked  loans 
became  less  prominent  in  the  balance  sheets  of  Icelandic  households  and  businesses 
without foreign-denominated income. When the IMF-supported programme concluded at the 
end of August, monetary policy shifted back to the inflation targeting regime provided for by 
law and the March 2001 agreement between the Central Bank and the Government.  
Second, a considerable body of experience and theoretical study indicates that acceptable 
monetary  policy  can  roughly  be  captured  with  an  equation  in  which  the  policy  rate  is 
determined  by  the  deviation  of  inflation  from  target  and  the  output  gap.  In  addition,  the 
nominal interest rate level is determined by the equilibrium real interest rate, which is the real 
interest rate that is consistent with inflation at target and demand in line with potential output. 
This is the so-called Taylor rule. But note that I refer to “acceptable” monetary policy. Truly 
sound monetary policy is always more complex, as it takes account of forecasts of inflation 
and GDP growth, financial market conditions, and a variety of risk factors. But the Taylor rule 
is a good test because, other things being equal, the policy rate should be reasonably well in 
line with it unless there are convincing reasons for a deviation.  
With  this  in  mind,  let  us  turn  to  the  November  interest  rate  decision.  The  Monetary  Policy 
Committee  decided  to  raise  interest  rates  by  0.25  percentage  points.  That  decision,  of 
course, was based on the most recent statistics and the indications in the Bank’s forecast. 
First of all, inflation is far above target and is forecast to continue rising until early in 2012 
before  tapering  off  as  the  year  progresses.  Second,  available  measures  of  inflation 
expectations  indicate  that  longer-term  expectations  are  considerably  above  target.  These 
measures of inflation expectations are flawed, of course – perhaps especially so at this time. 
Survey measures have a tendency to take excessive account of recent inflation, and bond 
market measures of inflation expectations are skewed by a variety of market imperfections at 
present. But flawed though they may be, these are the only measures we have, and it would 
be irresponsible simply to ignore them. Third, indicators suggest that domestic demand was 
strong in Q3 in spite of the global situation, and that the economic recovery is strong enough 
not to be derailed by resistance to inflationary pressures through modest rate interest hikes. 
Fourth, we have the global situation, which is mainly a risk factor at this juncture and has not 
yet had a measurable impact on domestic economic developments.  
But  we  did  not  merely  raise  interest  rates.  We  also  stated  that,  in  view  of  the  economic 
situation and outlook, the current interest rate level appeared broadly appropriate for the next 
several months. In other words, significant new developments would be required for the MPC 
to raise interest rates – or lower them – at upcoming rate-setting meetings. I notice that the 
bond market seems to have realised the implications of this, as yields at the longer end of 
the  market  have  not  risen  since  the  last  interest  rate  announcement.  But  looking  further 
ahead,  it  should  be  clear  to  everyone  that  if  GDP  growth  forecasts  materialise  in  coming 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
years and the slack in the economy disappears, the monetary slack manifested in a negative 
real policy rate of over 1% must be removed over time.  
So where do we stand with respect to the monetary policy stance? Is monetary policy lax or 
tight? Chart 3 shows the Central Bank’s real interest rate measured by the effective policy 
rate and twelve-month inflation. The chart shows that, in spite of two recent rate hikes, the 
real interest rate will be lower in Q4/2011 (assuming unchanged interest rates in December) 
than  at  any  time  since  the  financial  crisis  struck,  with  the  exception  of  Q1/2009,  when 
inflation soared up above 18% and a dramatic disinflation episode was in the offing.  
 Chart 3 
Chart 4 
  But  what  about  the  Taylor  rule,  shown  in  Chart  4?  There  is  a  significant  deviation  at  the 
moment  –  one  that  perhaps  requires  some  explanation.  But  there’s  something  wrong. 
Interest rates are on the wrong side of the argument! They are too low, not too high, even if 
we assume that the equilibrium real interest rate is zero.  
 Chart 5 
Chart 6 
  Neither does international comparison suggest that Iceland is off the charts. Chart 5 shows a 
comparison  of  the  real  policy  rates  in  a  number  of  countries,  based  on  the  most  recent 
interest  rate  decisions  and  the  most  recent  twelve-month  inflation  figures.  Iceland  is 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
somewhere  in  the  middle.  In  Chart 6  we  see several  industrialised  countries.  Iceland  is  at 
about the same level as Sweden. Interest rates are higher in countries that are further along 
in the business cycle and have less slack, and they are lower in countries where the slack is 
greater,  monetary  policy  is  more  credible,  and  long-term  inflation  expectations  are  near 
target in spite of higher current inflation.  
 Chart 7 
Chart 8 
  Finally, I show charts that illustrate, on the one hand, nominal GDP growth as forecasted for 
2011 and, on the other, the current nominal policy rate. Some have posited that monetary 
policy should aim at keeping nominal GDP growth as stable as possible at a level that, in 
equilibrium, would deliver a desirable inflation target. I have certain doubts about how this 
would work in practice, but that is beyond the scope of my speech today. But if such a rule 
were followed, the results would depend on the inflation target and the GDP growth target. If 
the inflation target is perhaps 2½% and potential output growth in the 2½–3% range, it would 
be around 5–6%. In Chart 7, we can see that the countries fall into three categories. First are 
the  countries  significantly  below  this  level.  All  of  them  have  relatively  low  policy  rates  in 
accordance with the rule. Then we have the countries that are more or less on the right track 
and, finally, three countries above that. Iceland is in this last group, and the other two are 
emerging  countries  with  much  more  GDP  growth  potential  than  developed  industrialised 
economies  have.  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  Iceland  is  in  third  place  as  regards  nominal 
GDP growth and in fifth place as regards the policy rate.  
All of this comparison points in the same direction. It simply cannot be argued that Iceland is 
out of sync with other countries because of excessive monetary restraint. Quite the contrary: 
some indicators suggest the reverse.  
I know that I am not addressing all possible criticism with these points, but I hope that those 
listening  to  me  will  begin  to  ponder  whether  some  of  that  criticism  has  perhaps  been 
somewhat unbalanced. Some criticism of monetary policy is more pertinent, however, and I 
would like to address three points.  
It has been asked why the Monetary Policy Committee raised interest rates when the Bank 
has forecast that inflation will subside markedly next year. Does that forecast make the rate 
hike unnecessary? There are two answers to this. First, the rate hike is a part of the forecast, 
and if it is not implemented, the forecasted inflation path will no longer be the most likely one. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Second,  the  inflation  outlook  is  uncertain  and,  in  light  of  current  inflation  expectations,  it 
would be imprudent not to take action.  
It has also been asked whether there is a transmission mechanism in place at present. Do 
higher interest rates reduce inflation? It is a bit paradoxical to say that interest rates have 
little  impact  and  then  make  a  terrific  fuss  about  them.  Be  that  as  it  may,  the  transmission 
mechanism is certainly damaged at the moment, and it was somewhat damaged before the 
crash as well. But there is a transmission mechanism in place. The weight of non-indexed, 
variable-rate  loans  has  increased.  Low  deposit  rates  have  fostered  a  shift  towards 
investment  in  real  estate  in  the  recent  term,  and  some  have  expedited  purchases  of 
consumer durables. Finally, there is some impact on the exchange rate in spite of the capital 
controls, both because of decisions by owners of offshore krónur on whether they expatriate 
their interest and because domestic residentsare subject to a repatriation requirement but not 
a conversion requirement.  
It has been asked why we are raising interest rates when there is no economic overheating 
and investment is at a minimum. It is true that the economy is not overheated, so rate hikes 
do not have the intention of affecting that. But interest rates do affect inflation even though 
the  current  situation  does  not  entail  overheating.  These  effects  come  through  a  stronger 
currency and lower wage drift. Furthermore, it is very common that central banks begin to 
shift towards a neutral monetary stance by raising nominal interest rates before the slack has 
disappeared so as to avoid sharper increases later at the tipping point between slack and 
excess demand. Examples of this are the European Central Bank’s rate hike earlier this year 
and the Swedish Riksbank’s increases in mid-2010, when unemployment in Sweden topped 
8% and the output slack measured almost 4%. Iceland’s output slack is just under 2% this 
year.  
I  will  conclude  my  remarks  now.  I  know  there  are  a  number  of  questions  I  have  not 
answered, and a number of aspects of this complex situation that I have not addressed. My 
answers to the questions you ask me now may fill in some of the gaps. On the other hand, it 
is  important  that  we  discuss  these  matters  calmly  and  try  to  promote  the  best  possible 
understanding of how monetary policy works, as this will make a genuine contribution to the 
current discussion of Iceland’s future monetary policy regime. It is well to remember, though, 
that no monetary policy will be successful if the tools it offers are never used to tighten the 
stance. Naturally, opinion differs on the appropriate monetary stance at any given time, as 
uncertainty is a permanent feature of economic life – not only uncertainty about the future, 
but also about the present and the recent past. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
