Jean-Claude Trichet: Remarks at the farewell event 
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the farewell 
event, European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 19 October 2011. 
 Sehr geehrte Frau Bundeskanzlerin, 
President of the European Parliament, 
President of the European Council, 
President of the European Commission, 
President of the Eurogroup, 
Dear President Giscard d’Estaing, 
Dear Chancellor Helmut Schmidt, 
Ministers, Excellencies, fellow Governors, 
Dear Members of the ECB staff, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It  is  more  than  thirteen  years  since  the  European  Central  Bank  was  founded,  and  almost 
thirteen years since the Euro was launched. As my mandate as President of the ECB draws 
to a close – and throughout my eight years of office – I profoundly feel the high level of trust 
and confidence the European democracies have decided to bestow on the ECB. Our primary 
mandate of preserving price stability, as well as our independence in fulfilling this mandate, 
were given by the people of Europe on a multinational and multipartisan basis.  
In  being  fully  faithful  to  our  mandate,  we  are  faithful  to  the  democratic  will  of  the  Member 
States.  
With my five colleagues of the Executive Board, my twenty-two colleagues of the Governing 
Council, as well as with the dedicated staff of the ECB, we have been called upon to realise 
a long-standing and ambitious idea of the people of Europe. 
The single currency is an ancient idea, which has deep roots in history. Without going back 
to the Roman Empire or the Carolingian Empire, six centuries ago Georges Podiebrad, the 
king of Bohemia, was calling for a common European currency.  
Well  before  the  Werner  report,  published  forty  years  ago,  great  thinkers  of  all  European 
nationalities  have  called  for  unity  with  a  single  market,  a  single  economy  and  a  single 
currency. These historical roots put in perspective the accomplishments of the Euro as a new 
currency,  the  present  challenges  of  the  euro  area  and  the  future  of  the  Economic  and 
Monetary Union.  
The achievements of the Euro as a currency have to be judged against its primary mandate. 
Over nearly thirteen years, and in spite of a series of major global economic and financial 
shocks, average yearly inflation has remained at 2.0% for 332 million fellow citizens. Despite 
the  successive  rises  of  the  price  of  oil  and  commodities,  it  is  the  best  result,  over  such  a 
period of time, of the 50 last years in any large country in Europe. In Germany, with average 
yearly inflation of 1.6% over 13 years, it is a better result than before the Euro. 
Equally important is the low level of the inflation expectations. The ECB Governing Council is 
providing a very solid anchoring of price stability over the next ten years, fully in line with our 
definition: less than 2%, but close to 2%.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The Euro is a credible currency that has proved to be a very good store of value, backed by 
solid fundamentals.  
These last eight years can be divided into two periods of equal duration.  
The first four years were challenging, but no more or less than usual for a central banker. 
The ECB had to preserve stability after the bursting of the dotcom bubble and in the face of 
high and volatile oil and energy prices. We fought hard to preserve the fiscal governance of 
the Euro area, at a time when the three major countries wanted to weaken the Stability and 
Growth Pact. And, as always, we had to take our responsibilities for our own decisions; also 
when  increasing  interest  rates,  which  at  times  did  not  please  many  governments,  market 
participants, or the international financial institutions. The ECB has been fiercely independent 
and will remain so. 
After four years came the financial and economic crisis.  
Not a crisis like many we have known over the last 50 years. Not like the first oil shock of 
1973 or the second oil shock of 1980. Not an event like the sovereign debt crisis of the 1980s 
and beginning of the 1990s. Not like the Asian crisis or the dotcom bubble bursting in the 
early 2000s.  
Since August 2007, we have experienced a crisis of a new kind. A global phenomenon that 
has no equivalent since World War II, in its nature and dimension. For the first time since 
66 years,  the  epicentre  of  the  global  crisis  was  the  financial  system  of  the  advanced 
economies.  
The impact of the crisis on the real economy could have been of the magnitude of a great 
depression,  had  central  banks  and  other  public  authorities  not  reacted  with  rapidity  and 
resolve.  
For  its  part,  since  the  financial  turbulence  began,  on  9  August  2007,  the  ECB  Governing 
Council  has  applied  a  “separation  principle”.  It  has  separated  the  “standard”  measures  
– namely the interest rates designed to deliver price stability over the medium term – from 
the  “non-standard”  measures  –  designed  to  help  restore  a  better  transmission  of  our 
standard measures at times of market disruptions.  
The  credibility  of  the  Euro  and  the  solid  anchoring  of  inflation  expectations  over  the  next 
10 years have been well preserved throughout the crisis. This is because we have kept an 
unwavering sense of our direction – price stability – thanks to our interest rate policy, whilst 
at the same time being alert in taking appropriate non-standard measures – full allotment of 
liquidity at fixed rates, purchase of covered bonds, and the Securities Market Programme. 
And again, all decisions of the Governing Council have been taken in full independence.  
Since the crisis began, I have thought of the qualities expected from central banks as being 
analogous with the two ethical virtues famously suggested by Max Weber nearly a century 
ago: the ethic of conviction and the ethic of responsibility. 
I proposed an analogy, to associate the “standard” measures with the ethic of conviction and 
the  “non-standard”  measures  with  the  ethic  of  responsibility.  It  is  equally  important  to 
preserve integrity between intention and action, and between action and consequences. Our 
“separation principle” proposes a way to preserve both.  
Max Weber said himself: “Das bedeutet nicht, dass eine Gesinnungsethik gleichzusetzen ist 
mit  Verantwortungslosigkeit  oder  dass  eine  Verantwortungsethik  gleichzusetzen  ist  mit 
prinzipienlosem  Opportunismus  […].  Die  Gesinnungs-  und  die  Verantwortungsethik  sind 
keine Gegensätze, sondern ergänzen einander.” “This is not to say that an ethic of ultimate 
ends  is  identical  with  irresponsibility  or  that  an  ethic  of  responsibility  is  identical  with 
unprincipled opportunism (…). The ethic of conviction and the ethic of responsibility are not 
opposites. They are complementary to one another.” 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The  crisis  has  revealed  fault  lines  in  all  major  advanced  economies  of  the  world.  The 
sustainability  of  their  medium  to  long  term  strategies  has  been  put  into  question.  Europe  
–  and  the  Euro  area  in  particular  –  has  shown  positive  fundamentals,  on  a  consolidated 
basis,  in  particular,  as  regards  its  overall  fiscal  situation  and  domestic  and  external 
equilibrium.  But  on  a  country-to-country  basis  the  major  weakness  of  the  Economic  and 
Monetary Union lies in its insufficient governance of the economic union, while the monetary 
union has delivered according to expectations.  
The need to strengthen economic governance is the first lesson from the crisis. On behalf of 
the Governing Council, I have continuously called for a “quantum leap” in governance. The 
“six  packs”  just  approved  represent  a  significant  step.  Implementation  will  show  if  they 
constitute  a  quantum  leap.  I  appreciate,  President  Buzek,  the  resolve  of  the  European 
Parliament in the discussions which took place with the Council.  
What is now necessary is to clarify crisis management in three dimensions: reinforcing the 
EFSF’s  capacity  to  ensure  financial  stability,  based  on  convincing  national  fiscal  and 
structural policies; strengthening the balance sheets of the European banks; and working out 
an appropriate solution for Greece’s medium term adjustment.  
This  clarification  is  urgent.  I  think  the  famous  saying  of  Jean  Monnet  –  «  Les  hommes 
n’acceptent le changement que dans la nécessité et ils ne voient la nécessité que dans la 
crise » “people may accept change when they are faced with necessity, and only recognise 
necessity when a crisis is upon them” – captures the situation well: a global crisis is, indeed, 
upon  us.  A  farewell  is  a  time  for  reflection  on  the  past  and  the  present,  but  it  is  also  an 
opportunity to reflect about the future.  
We  just  had  the  privilege  to  listen  to  the  two  founding  fathers  of  the  European  Monetary 
System, the precursor of the single currency of the Europeans. I thank them very much for 
having been extremely generous in giving us the benefit of their experience and their great 
wisdom.  
I will take the risk of expressing personal views and not necessarily views of the Governing 
Council  of  the  ECB.  In  the  long-term  historical  perspective,  Europe  is  called  upon  to 
complete  the  design  of  what  it  calls  “Economic  and  Monetary  Union”.  As  I  already  said, 
would  it  be too  bold, in this  future Economic  and  Monetary  Union,  with  a  single market,  a 
single  currency  and  a  single  central  bank  to  envisage  also  an  executive  branch?  Not 
necessarily a ministry of finance that administers a large federal budget. But one that would 
exert direct responsibilities in at least three domains: first, the rigorous surveillance of both 
fiscal policies and competitiveness policies with the capacity, in exceptional cases, to take 
decisions  immediately  applicable  in  a  particular  economy  that  puts  the  euro  area  financial 
stability  in  danger;  second,  all  the  typical  responsibilities  of  the  executive  branches  as 
regards  the  union’s  integrated  financial  sector,  so  as  to  accompany  the  full  integration  of 
financial  services;  and  third,  the  representation  of  the  union  in  international  financial 
institutions.  
Jean Monnet again once wrote: « Personne ne peut encore dire aujourd’hui la forme qu’aura 
l’Europe  que  nous  vivrons  demain,  car  le  changement  qui  naîtra  du  changement  est 
imprévisible  ».  “Nobody  can  say  today  what  will  be  the  institutional  framework  of  Europe 
tomorrow  because  the  future  changes,  which  will  be  fostered  by  today’s  changes,  are 
unpredictable.” 
I trust that today’s changes, triggered by the global crisis, are precisely one of those changes 
that Jean Monnet expected able to foster a new institutional framework.  
In any case, these are decisions which can be taken only by our democracies, by the people 
of Europe to which we are accountable.  
Whatever the future holds, you can be sure that the ECB Governing Council will continue to 
be  faithful  to  its  primary  mandate  and  that  the  ECB,  together  with  the  Eurosystem,  will 
continue to be an anchor of stability and of confidence.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
I present my best and warmest wishes to Mario Draghi, my successor, who has given the 
Governing Council the benefit of his wisdom and experience during these last years. He has 
taken  with  all  of  us  our  collegial  decisions.  His  eminent  qualities  will  make  his  future 
captainship  of  the  European  monetary  team,  together  with  the  Executive  Board  and  the 
Governing Council, a great success.  
Let me draw to a close on a personal note and express my thanks to all the people I have 
worked  with  over  the  years  on  the  project  of  Europe’s  Economic  and  Monetary  Union.  In 
particular today, I would like to pay tribute to my colleagues here at the ECB, the current and 
former Executive Board, Governing Council and General Council members. I would like to 
pay tribute to all ECB staff. All members of staff have been decisive in the achievement of 
our  primary  goal.  They  deserve  full  appreciation  and  gratitude  for  all  their  dedication, 
commitment, professionalism and very hard work.  
The present calls for immediate action. The future calls for a vision of where we are going, a 
sense of direction.  
Immediate action. Goethe famously said: “Wissen ist nicht genug; wir müssen es anwenden. 
Wollen ist nicht genug; wir müssen es tun!” 
“Knowing  is  not  enough;  we  must  apply.  Willing  is  not  enough;  we  must  do.”  I  think  this 
applies admirably to the sense of action which should inspire Europe in the coming days.  
And sense of direction. Jean Monnet had for us, for our future, this exclamation: « Continuez, 
continuez,  il  n’y  a  pas  pour  les  peuples  d’Europe  d’autre  avenir  que  dans  l’union  ». 
“Continue, continue. There is no future for the people of Europe other than in union.” And 
Alcide  De  Gasperi:  “è  la  volontà  politica  di  realizzare  l’Unione  che  deve  essere  il  fattore 
determinante,  la  forza  di  propulsione”.  “The  most  important  factor,  which  must  prevail  on 
others, is the political will to build the Union.” 
I thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
