Mario Draghi: The euro, monetary policy and the design of a fiscal 
compact 
Speech by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the Ludwig Erhard 
Lecture, Berlin, 15 December 2011. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I am honoured to have received the invitation from Professor Hans Tietmeyer to deliver this 
year’s Ludwig Erhard lecture.  
When  I  was  working  at  the  Italian  Treasury  in  the  1990s,  Professor  Tietmeyer  and  I  had 
many  opportunities  to  work  together.  I  vividly  remember  many  of  our  exchanges  over  the 
course  of  the  two  decades  since  the  Maastricht  Treaty.  And  I  am  very  grateful  that  he 
remains  in  close  contact  with  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  as  adviser  to  our  audit 
committee.  
Ludwig  Erhard’s  legacy  in  shaping  Germany’s  post-war  recovery  stretches  far  beyond  his 
own country and far beyond his own times. His conception of the social market economy was 
visionary. And he even held cherished views about central bankers, stressing the importance 
of  price  stability:  “Die  soziale  Marktwirtschaft  ist  ohne  eine  konsequente  Politik  der 
Preisstabilität nicht denkbar.” I think we cannot formulate this idea any better today. 
Ludwig Erhard also helped to enshrine the principle of central bank independence. When in 
the early 1950s the independence of the German central bank system was not yet settled, he 
as minister of the economy argued that the government should not issue instructions to the 
central bank. You all know that the statutes of the ECB inherited this important principle and 
that central bank independence and the credible pursuit of price stability go hand in hand. 
Current circumstances remain demanding, with economic, financial and fiscal issues deeply 
intertwined with challenges at the political level in many countries and in the supra-national 
European sphere.  
Last week two sets of important decisions have been taken, which are going to be the focus 
of  my  remarks  today.  First,  I  will  elaborate  on  the  motivation  for  the  monetary  policy 
measures that the ECB announced last Thursday and what we expect from them. Second, I 
would  also  like  to  share  with  you  some  views  on  last  week’s  European  Council  summit’s 
decisions, which brought some very important new elements to our economic and monetary 
union.  
Monetary policy decisions for the euro area  
To explain our recent monetary policy measures, let me recall the particular role of banks in 
the euro area economy. The flow of credit to firms and households in the euro area works 
largely through banks. During recent years, about three quarters of firms’ external financing 
have come from that source.  
This  means  that  any  impairment  in  the  bank  lending  channel  will  have  stronger 
consequences  in  the  euro  area  than  in  other  economies  where  firms’  external  financing 
comes largely from corporate bond markets.  
Banks  in  the  euro  area  have  recently  come  under  pressure  both  as  regards  their  capital 
bases and their funding conditions.  
The plan to strengthen their capital bases is an attempt to reinforce their standing in financial 
markets,  but  this  is  not  an  easy  process.  There  are  essentially  three  options  for  banks  to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
pursue to raise their capital ratios as demanded by the European Banking Authority: they can 
raise their capital levels, sell assets or reduce their provision of credit to the real economy.  
The first option is much better than the second, and the second option is much better than 
the third. But raising capital levels is expensive in a depressed market and faces resistance 
from shareholders. Selling assets is less preferable and curtailing credit to the real economy 
is even worse. Therefore, public authorities ought to cushion the impact on the real economy 
and  banks  should  consider  restraining  dividends  and  ad  hoc  compensation  to  strengthen 
buffers.  
Banks  are  also  facing  problems  in  raising  longer-term  funding  in  financial  markets.  The 
resulting shortening of their funding leads in turn to maturity mismatches on balance sheets 
of  the  kind  that  caused  the  financial  crisis.  At  the  same  time,  shortages  of  collateral  are 
beginning to emerge in some segments of the financial system especially for the small and 
medium sized banks.  
In addition to identifying these particular strains in the banking sector, our regular economic 
and monetary analysis has indicated that the intensified financial market tensions continue to 
dampen  economic  activity  in  the  euro  area  and  the  outlook  remains  subject  to  high 
uncertainty  and  substantial  downside  risks.  In  such  an  environment,  cost,  wage  and  price 
pressures  in  the  euro  area  should  remain  modest  over  the  policy-relevant  horizon.  At  the 
same time, the underlying pace of monetary expansion remains subdued. 
In these conditions, and faithful to our mandate to maintain price stability over the medium 
term, the ECB’s Governing Council has taken a number of far-reaching decisions.  
The  Council  decided  to  reduce  its  key  interest  rates  by  another  25  basis  points  to  1%.  In 
normal financial market conditions, a policy rate reduction is a potent instrument of inflation 
control and demand support. The rate cut works its way through a long chain of downward 
adjustments  in  financial  returns.  At  the  end  of  the  process,  the  yield  on  large  spectrum  of 
securities declines and promotes broad-based policy accommodation.  
In the present conditions, this process turns out to be hampered, so that the impact of a rate 
cut  by  itself  is  weakened.  Banks  limit  their  lending  to  other  banks  and  potentially  to  the 
broader economy, and they hold on to precautionary balances of cash as self-insurance.  
Therefore, the Governing Council last week decided on three other measures, each of which 
provides additional support in order to bring the necessary monetary policy impulse to the 
real economy.  
The current package should be felt tangibly in the financial sector and the real economy over 
the coming weeks and months. Of course, it comes against strong headwinds generated by 
deleveraging.  
We  established  very  long-term  refinancing  operations  with  a  maturity  of  three  years.  This 
duration is a novelty in ECB monetary policy operations.  
The extension of central bank credit provision to very long maturities is meant to give banks 
a longer horizon in their liquidity planning. It helps them to avoid rebalancing the maturities of 
their assets and liabilities through a downscaling of longer-term lending. Incidentally, we want 
to  make  it  absolutely  clear  that  in  the  present  conditions  where  systemic  risk  is  seriously 
hampering the functioning of the economy, we see no stigma attached to the use of central 
banking credit provisions: our facilities are there to be used.  
Banks  will  be  able  to  refinance  term  lending  with  the  Eurosystem  and  thus  preserve  their 
long-term exposures to the real economy. After the first year, banks will have the option to 
terminate  the  operation.  So  they  can  flexibly  adapt  to  changing  liquidity  conditions  and  a 
normalising market environment. 
Our second measure will allow banks to use loans as collateral with the Eurosystem, thereby 
unfreezing a large portion of bank assets. It should also provide banks with an incentive to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
abstain from curtailing credit to the economy and to avoid fire-sales of other assets on their 
balance sheets.  
The goal of these measures is to ensure that households and firms – and especially small 
and  medium-sized  enterprises  –  will  receive  credit  as  effectively  as  possible  under  the 
current circumstances. Of course, we have to screen the collateral carefully so as to protect 
our balance sheet.  
The third measure we announced last week is to reduce the required reserves ratio from 2% 
to 1%. This measure frees up liquidity of the banking sector by about 100 billion euro. Along 
with  other  measures,  this  reduction  in  the  reserve  requirements  should,  too,  help  revive 
money market activity and lending. 
You will notice that I referred repeatedly to small and medium-sized enterprises. The reason 
for  drawing  your  attention  to  these  businesses  is  that  they  are  a  significant  part  of  our 
economy, accounting for about 70% of employment in the euro area and 60% of the turnover 
of all firms. We believe that the measures introduced last Thursday will provide support for 
this sector and indirectly also support much-needed investment, growth and employment.  
Foundations for a stable economic and monetary union 
Let me now shift my attention to last week’s European Council summit. For more  than 12 
years, Europe’s economic and monetary union has been haunted by concerns about national 
budgets. Within a common currency area during normal times, the fiscal policies of individual 
countries typically face less pressure from financial markets. It was for this reason that at the 
very beginning of Europe’s single currency, the Stability and Growth Pact was established to 
provide a control mechanism for fiscal policy.  
Next year, the euro area as a whole will have a government primary budget deficit close to 
zero. This compares with primary deficits projected at around 5% of GDP in Japan, the UK 
and the US.  
Yet the implementation of the Stability and Growth Pact has not been good enough. As the 
Federal Chancellor of Germany recently remarked, the Pact has been broken 60 times over 
the past 12 years. So we clearly have work to do to prevent this happening again. 
The new set of rules for economic and fiscal surveillance known as the six-pack – which was 
approved  by  the  European  Parliament  earlier  this  year  –  will  certainly  strengthen  the 
implementation of the rules. But while these changes were being planned, the entire fiscal 
cohesion and credibility of the euro area was weakened.  
We have now begun the process of re-designing Europe’s fiscal framework on three fronts.  
The first lies with the countries concerned: they have to put their policies back on a sound 
footing.  I  believe  that  they  are  now  on  the  right  track  and  they  are  right  in  implementing 
budgetary consolidation resolutely. The unavoidable short-term contraction may be mitigated 
by  the  return  of  confidence.  But  in  the  medium  term,  sustainable  growth  can  be  achieved 
only by undertaking deep structural reforms that have been procrastinated for too long.  
The second pillar of a response to the crisis consists of a re-design of the fiscal governance 
in  the  euro  area,  what  I  called  the  fiscal  compact.  The  fiscal  compact  is  a  fundamental 
restatement  of  the  rules  to  which  national  budgetary  policies  ought  to  be  subject  so  as  to 
gain credibility beyond doubt.  
Last week’s summit committed to  enshrine these rules in the primary legislation. They will 
foresee that the annual structural deficit should not exceed 0.5% of nominal GDP. Euro area 
Member  States  will  implement  such  a  rule  in  their  national  legal  frameworks  at  a 
constitutional level, so that it is possible to avoid excessive deficits before they arise, rather 
than trying to control them after they have emerged. Prevention is better than cure.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Rules will also foresee an automatic correction mechanism in case of deviation. Moreover, 
the leaders agreed on a numerical benchmark for annual debt reduction to bring down debt 
levels.  They  also  agreed  to  sanctions  that  will  apply  automatically  to  euro  area  Member 
States in breach of the 3% reference value for deficits.  
The European Court of Justice may be asked to verify the implementation of these rules at 
national level.  
Taken together, I believe that these decisions are capable of making public finances in the 
euro area credibly robust.  
But  restoring  financial  markets’  confidence  also  requires  that  investors  be  reassured  that 
government  debt  will  always  be  repaid  and  timely  serviced.  Greece  will  remain  a  unique 
case, and a credible stabilisation mechanism, a firewall, will be in place and can be activated 
when needed subject to proper conditionality. The leaders unambiguously agreed to assess 
the adequacy of the firewall by next March. Its objective is to address the threats to financial 
stability, and especially the risk of contagion between different sovereign debt markets.  
The  leaders  decided  to  deploy  the  leveraging  of  the  European  Financial  Stability  Facility 
(EFSF) at the earliest opportunity. At the same time they agreed that the EFSF’s successor, 
the European Stability Mechanism, should come into force by July 2012.  
It is crucial that the EFSF be fully equipped and be made operational as soon as possible. 
With  this  goal  in  mind,  last  Thursday,  the  Governing  Council  decided  that  the  ECB  would 
stand ready to act with its technical infrastructure and know-how as an agent for the EFSF in 
carrying out its market operations.  
Conclusion  
Let me conclude. The decisions of the European Council summit, together with the six-pack 
approved recently by the European Parliament, are a breakthrough for clear fiscal rules in 
our monetary union.  
However,  the  crisis  has  not  ended  yet.  It  is  now  important  not  to  lose  momentum  and  to 
swiftly  implement  all  those  decisions  that  have  been  taken  to  put  the  euro  area  economy 
back on course.  
The monetary policy measures taken last week by the ECB’s Governing Council will support 
the flow of credit to firms and households in the euro area economy.  
Ludwig Erhard faced a situation that was much more difficult than what we face today. Still, 
he was able to look through the challenging present and to work hard to build a future that he 
never doubted would be brighter. The European policy makers might well be inspired by his 
style: “Den Strom der Zeit können wir zwar nicht lenken, aber wir werden unser Schiff sicher 
steuern.” 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
