Yaseen Anwar: Leadership challenges for business success 
Speech  by  Mr  Yaseen  Anwar,  Governor  of 
12th Management Association of Pakistan Convention, Karachi, 14 December 2011. 
the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan,  at 
the 
 Honorable delegates, members of MAP, ladies and gentlemen,  
It is indeed a pleasure for me to be with you today, on the occasion of the 12th Management 
Association  of  Pakistan  (MAP)  Convention  on  “Leadership  Challenges  for  Business 
Success”. First of all, I must express my gratitude to MAP for inviting me to this gathering 
and providing me an opportunity to share my thoughts with the country’s business leaders. 
At  the  outset,  I  would  like  to  commend  MAP  for  its  role  over  the  last  four  decades  in 
disseminating  management  knowledge  that  has  helped  in  elevating  the  overall  leadership 
aptitude of our managers. The quality of business leadership and human resources play a 
significant  role  in  sustaining  growth  and  competitiveness.  MAP  has  facilitated  this  by 
providing a platform to business leaders and professional managers to deliberate managerial 
developments  and  establish  strong  social  and  professional  networking.  This  yearly 
convention  on  key  issues  provides  an  opportunity  for  participants  to  meet  exchange  and 
learn from each other’s experience.  
The  theme  of  this  convention  is  most  appropriate,  revolving  around  the  concepts  of 
Leadership and its role in business progression in a turbulent time. Leadership itself is a wide 
and crucial topic that can be discussed throughout the duration of this convention. Having 
worked with leading global financial organizations in different markets, including now at the 
State Bank, I understand the issues and challenges facing businesses and their leadership, 
particular  during  these difficult times.  Answers to  all  our  problems  are  certainly  not  readily 
available to us. However, conventions such as these enable us to share our experiences and 
arrive at some shared conclusions.  
The  world  today  is  passing  through  a  turbulent  phase  that  requires  a  realignment  of  our 
leadership  approach  to  managing  a  business.  Today’s  business  leader  is  faced  with  a 
multitude of challenges, both on external and internal fronts. The complexities arising in the 
eco-system  of  any  business  may  arise  in  the  shape  of  macro  economic  imbalances  that 
include  sagging  demand,  inflation,  volatility  in  financial  markets  etc.  While  demanding 
situations  on  the  internal  front  arise  from  personnel  management,  investment  decisions, 
alignment and realignment of business objectives, there should be no ambiguity that there 
are  always  complex  matrices  linking  external  challenges  with  internal  ones  and  therefore, 
successful  business  leaders  will  never  make  internal  business  decisions  in  isolation.  An 
uninformed business leader is a leader without a vision and quite likely without any success.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, we meet today at a challenging time with many headwinds going 
forward.  The  global  economy  is  on  a  downhill  path  and  financial  turbulence  continues  to 
affect  the  masses  across  the  globe.  All  this  started  in  2007/2008  as  the  private  debt 
subprime crises related to the US housing market transformed into a systemic financial crisis 
that spread from the US to the Euro area. More recently, this has turned into a sovereign 
debt crisis. The crisis, now in its fifth year, has morphed into a new phase of a political crisis. 
In  the  Euro  region,  important  steps  have  been  taken  to  address  the  current  problems. 
However,  political  differences  within  economies  undergoing  adjustment  and  among 
economies  providing  support  have  impeded  achievement  of  a  lasting  solution.  We  have 
already  witnessed  causalities  of  these  crises.  Similarly  the  political  processes  in  the 
United States and Japan are facing challenges in reaching consensus on medium term fiscal 
adjustments. What we have seen is a complete transformation resulting from the worst crisis 
of  modern  times.  All  these  events  have  challenged  the  approach  of  financial  leadership, 
business leadership, Economic Managers and Political leaders.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Notwithstanding, we also have some bright spots in the form of emerging market economies 
with positive growth prospects. This is primarily because these economies have dealt with 
relatively more frequent, though small scale crises on their domestic fronts. Of the advanced 
countries,  Australia  and  Canada  have  been  least  affected  by  the  Global  Financial  Crisis 
because  of  their  relatively  stricter  regulatory  regimes  and  handson  approach.  The 
approaches of these economies and their leaders seem more practical and proactive, a trait 
necessary for leadership and a necessary part of a vision about the future.  
As mentioned earlier, this conference is significant in the sense that it comes at a time when 
the financial services sector across the world is in the midst of a crises. Since the disruption 
has become acute, there is a debate over a number of issues relating to management and 
supervision of the financial services industry. In order to be effective, the concern and tone 
for risk management must start at the top. You would agree that while the management may 
get  influenced  by  business  targets  and  short  term  profitability,  the  Board,  representing 
owner’s perspective, always targets for long term viability and sustained growth of the bank. 
By virtue of this different perspective and its legal powers, the board is better positioned to 
enhance the role of risk management in a bank. That is why SBP has always emphasized 
the involvement of the Board and made it accountable for establishing enterprise wide risk 
management framework.  
While the overall responsibility of risk management rests with the Board of Directors, it is the 
duty of the CEO to display leadership and transform the strategic direction set by the Board 
in the shape of policies and procedures and to institute an effective hierarchy to execute and 
implement those policies. SBP desires a more active role of the Board in setting the strategic 
direction of a bank as well as to bring them under accountability. The formulation of policies 
relating to risk management only would not solve the purpose unless these were clear and 
effectively  communicated  down  the  line.  The  CEO  as  a  leader  must  ensure  that  these 
policies are embedded in the culture of the organization. For the value of risk management to 
be  realized,  integration  is  essential.  Therefore,  the  emphasis  should  be  on  integrating  risk 
management into the existing management structure and processes, rather than operating 
as an appendage. 
The above discussion highlights four key areas that have contributed to the crisis and remain 
relevant  for  both  financial  and  non-financial  firms;  weaknesses  in  corporate  governance 
arrangements; excessive risk taking for short term gains, inadequate Accounting standards 
and  regulatory  requirements  in  some  areas,  and  mismatch  between  the  remuneration 
systems and strategy and risk appetite of the company. Most of the multilateral agencies and 
financial  regulators  have  now  increased  focus  on  building  a  more  resilient  financial 
framework including developing new standards for addressing the above challenges.  
Like any real life crisis, the present turmoil in the financial sector provides an opportunity to 
learn from the financial world’s mistakes and overzealousness. This gives us the opportunity 
to look back and see what went wrong and structure our own financial houses so that this 
does not happen to us, or so severely affect the world again. In this regard I feel the most 
significant lesson that we have learnt from recent events is the importance of fundamentals 
in risk management. For instance there is a basic rule since inception of banks which says 
“do not put all your eggs in one basket”. Had this simple rule been followed, many institutions 
could have avoided huge losses.  
The  challenges  posed  by  the  Global  Financial  Crisis  have  impacted  leaders  of  all  major 
businesses.  Elevating  corporate  governance  should  not  be  confined  to  banks,  but 
commercial  concerns  must  also  do  the  same.  We  all  know  the  pace  of  globalization  has 
accelerated,  resulting  in  increased  domestic  and  global  economic  integration.  Today  we 
cannot just shrug off failures within a particular sector or sometimes even a single entity if it 
has  global  linkages.  Gone  are  the  days  when  a  financial  or  political  crisis  in  one  country 
could be contained to that country; now there are several contagion effects at different levels.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
So how do we address these challenges for a country like ours that is subject to exogenous 
shocks  and  maintain  steady  economic  and  social  growth?  Our  visionary  business  and 
political leaders must be alert to the challenges they face now and are likely to face in the 
future due to developments in other parts of the globe. On the domestic front, we need to 
manage  our  macro-economic  fundamentals.  Both  our  economic  and  political  leadership  is 
faced with multiple challenges of trade imbalance, inflation, unemployment, power crises and 
security situation. The challenges for making good decisions on these fronts requires political 
will and a clear long term vision. There are no shortcuts to sustained economic development. 
We need to develop the right strategies and then translate these strategies into action.  
Similarly the challenges for business leaders, though at a micro level, are by no means less 
critical.  These  challenges  range  from  the  survival  of  businesses  in  a  stagnant  business 
environment  to  developing  strategies  for  further  growth  through  developing  new  business 
models, new products or restructuring and re-engineering. We need to understand the issues 
and accept that in implementation we will make mistakes, but in the long run with continuous 
improvement  we  can  be  on  the  road  to  recovery.  This  is  by  no  means  an  easy  task.  It  is 
important  to  recognize  the  true  nature  of  any  problem,  and  develop  workable  solutions  to 
these problems in a timely manner. Leaders with perseverance and vision will tackle these 
issues successfully and emerge as the business leaders of today.  
Effective leadership must also include skills to manage people and teams. Management of 
human resources is extremely critical to the success of any business across the globe. An 
important challenge during difficult times is to ensure employees’ performance is maintained 
at a high standard. Owing a crisis, institutions must recognize they still need to retain their 
critical workforce.  
Here I would like to underscore the importance of women representation in the work force. 
Women represent almost half of the population of Pakistan and a significant talent pool that 
is ignored. How can we as a nation progress if 50% of our work force is in a non-productive 
capacity.  
Given Globalization and the crises we all face, let’s recap the traits of effective leadership 
that  are  universally  applicable.  Leaders  must  be  visionary  to  see  future  trends,  anticipate 
institutional bottlenecks, remain competitive and be able to adapt rapidly to changes. They 
should be continuous learners, a necessity for enhancing leadership skills. Leaders need 
also  to  take  into  account  their  corporate  social  responsibility  so  that  profit  seeking  is 
balanced  against  the  objective  of  social  service  and  well  being  of  society.  Leadership 
success  requires  strong  conviction  and  belief.  Yet  having  humility  and  recognizing  the 
need to reinvent and inspire their organization to adapt to new challenges remain an integral 
part of successful leaders. This is vital if businesses want to remain at the forefront of new 
innovations,  critical  for  longterm  competitiveness.  All  these  and  more  comprise  the 
necessary  characteristics  for  dynamic  leaders  that  push  the  frontiers  of  excellence.  Such 
corporate leaders fuel the drive towards long-term growth and stability.  
In  conclusion,  the  challenge  is;  have  we  learned  from  our  past  mistakes  and  prepared 
ourselves  for  taking  advantage  of  expected  opportunities?  I  would  like  to  quote  here  what 
Nelson Mandela said about leadership “It is better to lead from behind and to put others in 
front, especially when you celebrate victory when nice things occur. You take the front line 
when there is danger. Then people will appreciate your leadership”. So it’s the time for all 
business leaders and managers to take the lead.  
Thank you.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
