Jean-Paul Redouin: A French and central banker point of view of the 
current situation 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Paul  Redouin,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France,  at  the  first 
anniversary of Bank of France’s reserve management facility, New York, 11 October 2011. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, dear friends,  
It is a great pleasure to welcome you in this fascinating place. We were gathered here one 
year ago, for the opening of BANQUE DE FRANCE premises in New York.  
 
BANQUE  DE  FRANCE  has  a  long  history  of  being  present  in  New  York,  and 
deploying a reserve management desk within our own office is a logical conclusion 
of this lasting presence. In the context of the present turmoil this new organization 
helps us manage our portfolios efficiently and improves our understanding of market 
developments. I would like here to thank our team for its dedication and skill in this 
challenging  responsibility.  It  gives  me  also  the  opportunity  to  share  with  you  my 
understanding of the Eurozone and the way it works.  
The  first  anniversary  of  our  reserve  management  facility  in  New  York  happens  to 
coincide  also  with  the  end  of  my  tenure  as  Deputy  Governor  of  BANQUE  DE 
FRANCE, in a few months. For me both events are closely associated: I happen to 
be among the “happy few” that have been offered the opportunity to spend a year In 
New York representing BANQUE DE FRANCE at the Fed and vis a vis the financial 
community thirty years ago. At that time the Fed devoted a lot of studies on financial 
innovations  and  I  remember  my  participation  in  a  G  X  Central  Bank  study  group 
chaired by Sam Y. CROSS on innovation in banking. Financial stability was already 
at  the  center  of  the  stage.  I  would  like  to  stress  here  how  this  long  standing 
relationship and mutual trust with the Federal Reserve is of importance nowadays.  
Allow me now to offer you a French and central banker point of view of the current 
situation.  
  These last months brought important changes to the world economy. To name a few, growth 
perspectives in advanced economies have significantly worsened, markets are increasingly 
volatile, and confidence has shrunk.  
The downward revision of US growth has certainly played a role. But, most significantly, two 
other shocks have occurred. In the US, reaching an agreement to raise the debt ceiling has 
been  difficult.  And,  in  Europe,  it  has  been  recognized  that  Greece,  a  euro  and  OECD 
country,  would  not  be  able  to  fully  honor  its  signature,  without  a  voluntary  private  sector 
involvement.  In  the  eyes  of  the  market,  this  has  had  significant  implications  for  other 
European sovereigns.  
A challenging question is now being asked: Over the last 50 years, financial markets have 
developed  on  the  assumption  that  public  debt was  considered  risk  free.  The  certainty  that 
debt  would  be  paid  in  full  strongly  anchored  market  views.  Now  that  this  certainty  is 
questioned, debt sustainability may rest on a more fragile and volatile basis.  
No immediate consequences have been felt so far in the US debt market which remains the 
most  liquid  one  and  the  ultimate  benchmark  for  assessing  risk.  However,  a  pervasive 
uncertainty has been created, which might be responsible for the decline in confidence that 
has occurred over the last weeks. In Europe, on the contrary, sovereign credit risk has had 
immediate and dramatic consequences.  
It is difficult to foresee how, in the longer run, markets will assess debt sustainability.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
But let me challenge some current analyses about debt sustainability in Europe.  
– 
internal  exchange 
First competitiveness. In the UK, for instance, the effective real exchange rate has 
depreciated by 23% over the last four years and its exports have grown by a healthy 
15%, year-to-year over the first semester of 2011. But Italy, Spain and Greece have 
done better, with exports growing respectively by 16%, 19% and 37% over the same 
period,  with,  of  course,  no 
rate  adjustment.  Linking 
competitiveness  with  exchange  rate  depreciation  is  therefore  too  simplistic. 
Improving  competitiveness  can  be  achieved  by  proper  domestic  reforms  with  a 
lasting result.  
Second,  the  euro  is  the  only  major  currency  area  with  its  external  accounts  in 
balance, which is a strong guarantee of long-term solvency.  
Third, the euro area’s aggregate budget deficit will stand at around 4.1% in 2011, 
less than half that of the UK or the US. The same holds true for public debt, which 
amounts to 85% in the euro area while it will soon cross the 100% mark in the US. 
Many Countries are improving their fundamentals. The primary deficit of Spain for 
2011 will be around 4.7%, half that of the US and the UK. Italy will be one of the 
very few advanced economies to have a primary surplus, around 0.5%. The IMF has 
recently acknowledged, and even praized, these efforts and commitments.  
  In short, if good fundamentals are an absolute necessity, it is not a sufficient condition. Now 
can  we  let  liquidity  spirals  lock  a  country,  just  like  a  financial  institution,  into  a  bad 
equilibrium? We faced that question in 2009 when dealing with financial institutions. We are 
now facing the same question regarding sovereign risk.  
Our answer is twofold. First, get the fundamentals right. For European countries, it means 
reverting  to  a  sustainable  fiscal  position  which  requires  a  significant  primary  surplus.  And 
second, there is a need for a liquidity backstop to ensure that bad equilibria will not develop.  
Where  that  backstop  is  coming  from  is  a  key  question.  Unconventional  monetary  policies 
have  led  many  central  banks  to  purchase  significant  amounts  of  Government  debt:  those 
purchases  amount  to  51%  of  the  total  debt  issued  since  2009  in  the  UK,  21%  in  the  US 
versus 7.5% in the euro area – where they were fully sterilized. These policy stances have 
contributed to giving markets an insurance against a potential dry-up in liquidity.  
At the present time, the insurance provided by many monetary authorities may look cheap 
because inflation is projected to stay low and markets seem to reward those countries which 
liquefy public debt. However this equilibrium could be unstable and market makers, aware of 
some inflation “tail risks”, are hedging themselves through gold or currencies like the Swiss 
franc whose exchange rates have reached historical highs.  
By contrast, purchases of sovereign debt by the Eurosystem remained very limited and will 
stay  so.  Our  objective  is  simple:  avoid  disruptions  in  the  monetary  policy  transmission 
mechanism. Any lasting liquidity backstop has to come from the governments. This is why 
we are asking for more flexibility in the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF). Whether 
amounts are big enough is a matter of opinion but one could envisage to leverage existing 
commitments to provide greater intervention capacity.  
At  this  stage,  the  euro area  is  paying  a  double  price.  One for  its  mistakes  and  one  for  its 
virtues. The mistakes were to allow the piling up of debt through unsustainable fiscal policies 
over a decade, and then to create ex nihilo a doubt as to their ability to pay those debts. But 
we are also paying a price for our virtue as we refuse to liquefy our debt through massive 
monetization of our fiscal deficits.  
Will our virtue be rewarded at the end? I strongly believe so and I will explain why. In the next 
decade, the world can be grouped in two categories: on the one hand, advanced economies, 
with high absorption capacity, low savings and high debt with ratios close to 100%. On the 
other, emerging economies, with high savings, low debt (around 30% GDP on average) and 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
less  absorption  capacity.  Our  common  prosperity  will  therefore  depend  on  our  ability  to 
create stable channels of financial intermediation between those two parts of the world. That, 
in turn, will crucially depend on the existence of assets that can be considered safe stores of 
value. But, as I have argued from the start, public debt may not be able to play that role to 
the same extent as before. The ultimate safe asset, therefore, could be the currency itself. 
Markets will trust currencies that are managed with one overriding priority: preserving price 
stability and the intrinsic value of the currency unit. On this fundamental basis, we can look at 
the future of the euro with realistic optimism. I see the recent decision by the Swiss central 
bank to peg the Swiss franc to the euro as an illustration of this conviction.  
 A few words now on the French banking sector. First, banks have been hit in all advanced 
economies by the downward revision of growth prospects. This reaction can be explained by 
the  fact  that  slower  growth  means  lower  profits,  thus  lower  dividends.  At  the  same  time, 
banks  are  required  to  build  additional  capital  buffers,  which  further  constrain  their  pay-out 
ratio.  So  dividend  prospects  are  doubly  affected  and  that  explains  why  share  prices  are 
reacting to negative news on growth. This movement has been more pronounced for French 
banks which are suffering from two specific vulnerabilities, one real, one exaggerated.  
The  real  vulnerability  is  their  dependence  on  dollar  funding,  due  to  the  scale  of  their 
international activities, which they may have been initially too slow to address effectively. It is 
currently  being  dealt  with  through  a  combination  of  deleveraging  and  consolidation.  In  the 
meantime, in order to ease this transition, the Eurosystem, together with other central banks 
across  the  world,  has  decided  to  conduct  US  dollar  liquidity-providing  operations  with  a 
maturity of three months.  
A more exaggerated concern about French banks is their exposure to sovereign risk. Let me 
just point out some facts: total exposure of  major French banks to the sovereign risk of so-
called “peripheral countries” amounts to 60€bn. To take an extreme – and from my view point – 
totally  unrealistic  scenario  –  a  50%  haircut  on  Greece  and  25%  haircut  on  Italy  and  Spain 
would  result  in  a  12%  loss  of  core  Tier  One  capital.  In  terms  of  liquidity,  the  Eurosystem 
refinancing policy provides for an unlimited provision on an extended period and the collateral 
held by French banks in eligible assets is much above their present needs.  
French  banks  do  not  have  so  called  “toxic  assets”  in  their  balance  sheets  but  sovereign 
exposures on countries which are part of a monetary union. Some of these exposures need 
to be provisioned. These provisions will be increased for Greece. And all these risks are fully 
disclosed according to the European Banking Authority (EBA) templates.  
Despite the deleveraging taking place, their profitability remain strong and will enable them to 
face, in due time, the increase of capital requested by the new regulatory environment.  
the 
I  would 
these  so-called  “vulnerabilities”  are  mainly 
consequence of the internationalization of banking activities. And there is a certain paradox 
in a situation where these globalized banks, with diversified activities and balanced business 
models, are perceived riskier than more specialized institutions.  
therefore  emphasize 
that 
 To conclude: in these turbulent times, Europe has a special responsibility. Currently, at the 
epicenter  of  the  crisis we  are  fully  aware  of  the  necessity  to  take  and  implement  vigorous 
decisions.  However  the  interaction  between  markets  and  governments  has  become  more 
complex. We live in democracies and have to accept that political decisions follow their own 
process  and  obey  their  own  constraints.  In  all  our  countries,  rising  public  debt  and  the 
unstable state of public finances is creating enormous anxiety, which, in turn, makes it more 
difficult to reach the necessary decisions.  
There are, however, some reasons for optimism. On the supply side, our economies remain 
robust and dynamic. Corporate balance sheets  are strong. Emerging economies will enjoy 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
sustainable growth in the years to come. Above all, in Europe, the community of nations are 
willing to face the extraordinary challenges they are confronted with and to build the lasting 
solutions  needed  towards  greater  integration  within  the  Eurozone.  Central  banks  are 
constantly cooperating in monitoring the situation and acting as they have done recently to 
provide dollar funding to international banks. This spirit of cohesion is a strong asset. It is 
deeply  rooted  in  our  dual  role  of  preserving  monetary  and  financial  stability.  BANQUE  DE 
FRANCE is, for its part, strongly committed to overcome this challenge.  
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
