Lars Nyberg: Monetary policy and financial crises – some reflections 
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  Nyberg,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  Danske  Bank, 
Stockholm, 21 December 2011. 
 On the first of January 1999, thirteen years ago, Sweden gained a new central bank act. Six 
people were given the privilege of independently deciding on something that interests almost 
everyone  in  Sweden,  namely  the  interest  rate.  These  six  people  were  forbidden  to  take 
instructions from anyone – that is, politicians – and it was also forbidden for outsiders to give 
them instructions. I had the privilege of being one of the six who started in 1999, and I have 
thus been here ever since. This means that I have been a member of the Executive Board 
more  than  twice  as  long  as  any  of  the  other  current  members  and  more  than  four  years 
longer than any other person who has been on the Board. Whether this longer experience is 
then  reflected  in  a  correspondingly  greater  wisdom  on  central  bank-related  matters  is  of 
course less certain. In any case, I shall leave this to others to decide. 
An eventful period  
But  there  is  no  doubt  that  these  thirteen  years  have  been  eventful.  There  have  been  the 
usual cyclical ups and downs, but also a number of crises in various parts of the world and, 
of  course,  the  global  financial  crisis  and  the  ensuring  sovereign  debt  crisis  that  we  are 
currently in the midst of.  
The  way  we  conduct  monetary  policy  has  also  changed  over  the  past  thirteen  years.  The 
inflation-targeting policy introduced in 1993 has of course always been the nucleus, but it has 
developed in various ways. Work in my particular field of interest, financial stability, has also 
been  refined  in  many  ways.  For  obvious  reasons,  this  is  an  area  that  has  come  under 
particular focus in recent years. One might say that if the task of maintaining financial stability 
had  previously  tended  to  be  overshadowed  by  the  usually  more  attention-grabbing  task  of 
maintaining  price  stability,  the  situation  has  almost  been  reversed  during  the  crisis.  The 
financial stability work has in any case gained a more prominent position and become more 
on a par with monetary policy.  
Now I do not intend to devote my last speech as member of the Executive Board to outlining 
my central bank memoirs. I have always been more interested in looking ahead than looking 
back, and I intend to do so today. More specifically, I intend to take up some areas that I 
believe  will  feature  in  the  discussions  on  central  banks  and  their  activities  in  the  coming 
years. They are all connected with the financial crisis in one way or another; it is difficult to 
avoid it in this context. In brief, I will talk about two themes: The importance of indebtedness 
not  becoming  too  high  and  the  importance  of  having  crisis  management  mechanisms  in 
place before the event. 
The most important lesson: Don’t allow too much debt to build up! 
Of course, the financial crisis was due to many factors acting together. But one of the most 
important  lessons  was  that  one  should  beware  of  allowing  debts  to  grow  too  much.  This 
applies  equally  to  households,  companies  and  governments.  This  is  neither  a  particularly 
surprising nor especially new lesson; over several hundred years, financial crises have often 
been  preceded  by  periods  when  the  attitude  to  credit  granting  and  lending  has  been  too 
carefree. But it seems as though this is a lesson that we must experience again and again – 
at least once a generation, and perhaps even more often.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
A rapid and substantial credit expansion can cause many different problems. If the expansion 
is  characterised  by  an  exaggerated  optimism  and  an  underestimation  and  underpricing  of 
risk, large loan losses may arise in the banks when the sentiment changes. This can lead to 
banks failing and ultimately to a financial crisis. We experienced this in the 1990s, and Spain 
and Ireland are experiencing it now. 
Once the economy has entered a recession after a period of rapidly-increasing indebtedness 
and rising asset prices, the recovery from this level may be very slow. The reason is that the 
economy then often enters what is known as a balance sheet recession.1 Put briefly, what 
this  means  is  that  the  economic  agents  need  time  to  adjust  their  balance  sheets  if,  for 
example, property prices have fallen. Their incomes will for some time to come be used for 
amortisation rather than consumption and investment. Monetary policy stimulation has less 
effect than normal and developments in the economy as a whole are weak. Studies show 
that this type of mechanism largely explains why the recovery in the United States has been, 
and still is, so slow.2 
A financial crisis may also have other consequences. For instance, one can claim that the 
sovereign debt crisis we are currently in the midst of is in many ways a consequence of the 
financial crisis, and thus of the credit expansion that preceded it. Bank crises and sovereign 
debt  crises  are  often  connected.  Public  finances  in  many  countries  have  weakened 
substantially because demand has fallen and in some cases also because they have needed 
to support a precarious banking system. Moreover, in many countries the credit expansion 
concealed the need for structural reforms in the labour market and in public administration, 
which meant they were ill-equipped when the recession came. So, all in all, there are many 
good reasons to try to avoid a situation where credit and lending accelerate out of control. 
Various perceptions of the link between monetary policy and financial stability policy 
So what should we do to prevent, or at least reduce the risk of, this type of development in 
the future? Opinion is currently divided on this question. The role central banks should play 
has  been  debated  a  lot,  and  in  particular  whether  rate-setting  should  be  used  to  subdue 
credit expansion.  
At one end of the spectrum are those who say that the crisis has meant that the dividing line 
between monetary policy and financial stability policy has in many ways been erased, or at 
least become less evident. If the central bank does not already have the clear and express 
task of maintaining financial stability, it should be given this – in addition to the natural task of 
acting as “lender of last resort” in a crisis. Monetary policy should be regarded as a legitimate 
tool in the financial stability toolbox.3  
At the other end of the spectrum we find those who say that monetary policy and financial 
stability policy are distinct policies that should not be confused with one another. They claim 
that monetary policy and financial stability policy differ in the same way that monetary policy 
and fiscal policy differ, and they have different targets and methods. The policy rate should 
therefore not be regarded as an instrument for financial stability policy. Both types of policy 
should react to one another, but they should not be coordinated and conducted together as 
                                                 
1  The concept “balance sheet recession” was introduced a few years ago as an explanation for developments in 
Japan  and  its  “lost  decade”;  see  Koo,  R.C.,  Balance  Sheet  Recession:  Japan’s  Struggle  with  Unchartered 
Economics and its Global Implications, Wiley, 2003. 
2  See,  for  instance,  Eggertsson,  G.  and  P.  Krugman,  “Debt,  Deleveraging,  and  the  Liquidity  Trap”,  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  Working  Paper,  February  2011  and  Mian,  A.,  K.  Rao  and  A.  Sufi,  “Household 
Balance Sheets, Consumption, and the Economic Slump”, Chicago Booth Working paper, November 2011.  
3  See,  for  instance,  Eichengreen,  B.,  R.  Rajan  and  E.  Prasad,  “Central  banks  need  a  bigger  and  bolder 
mandate”, Financial Times, 24 October 2011. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
there is then a risk that both will become unclear. The outcome may also be poorer and it 
may be more difficult to hold policymakers accountable.4 
The problems are exaggerated by those who believe that both types of policy must be 
coordinated…  
I  can  understand  both  points  of  view,  but  I  believe  that  both  have  exaggerated  their 
arguments  somewhat.  Those  who  say  that  monetary  policy  and  financial  stability  policy 
should be integrated to a greater extent sometimes give the impression that they believe the 
central  bank  should  at  every  monetary  policy  meeting  both  determine  the  policy  rate  and 
activate  a  number  of  macroprudential  supervisory  levers  to  find  a  policy  mix  that  is 
appropriate for both monetary policy and financial stability.  
I do not believe that this is the way things will be done – I believe that this way of thinking is 
too  coloured  by  recent  events.  After  all,  it  is  not  as  though  problems  arise  from  over-
generous  credit  granting  during  every  economic  cycle.  Most  cycles  are  ”normal”,  with  no 
financial  imbalances  or  balance-sheet  problems.  Of  course,  one  must  remain  vigilant  and 
constantly assess the risks – and try to reduce them when necessary. But it is probably quite 
rare that one will actually need to use macroprudential tools, or the policy rate, to subdue a 
credit  boom  and  thus  reduce  the  risk  of  a  crisis.  Growth  in  lending  is  normally  something 
positive. It is, of course, difficult to say how often problems may arise, but one can conclude, 
for instance, that we in Sweden have experienced two financial crises with not quite twenty 
years between them, and this is regarded as unusually often. For the great majority of the 
time  the  central  bank  will  thus  be  able  to  conduct  its  monetary  policy  in  a  normal  way. 
Monetary  policy  and  financial  stability  policy  have,  so  to  say,  slightly  different  time 
dimensions. 
…and by those who say they should be entirely separate 
But I also believe that the problems are exaggerated by those who warn against integrating 
monetary policy and financial stability policy. For example, I believe that one can decide on 
both the policy rate and macroprudential supervisory measures at the same time and in a 
coordinated way, without either monetary policy or financial stability policy being perceived 
as less clear. I believe, for instance, that it would be fully possible for the Riksbank to explain, 
together  with  Finansinspektionen  (the  Swedish  Financial  Supervisory  Authority),  that  the 
mortgage ceiling is being lowered to counteract excessive credit expansion and rising prices 
in the housing market, at the same time as the Riksbank holds the policy rate unchanged 
because  this  is  justified  by  events  in  the  economy  as  a  whole.  Of  course,  this  makes 
considerable demands on the authorities’ communication, but I believe that it is fully possible 
to put this message across and gain understanding.  
I can also imagine that under certain circumstances it might be difficult in a purely practical 
manner to avoid some amount of coordination between monetary policy and financial stability 
policy. Some countries have chosen to place the main responsibility for maintaining financial 
stability  with  the  central  bank.  Other  countries  have  created  some  form  of  cooperation 
between  the  central  bank  and  the  supervisory  authority  and  I  believe  that  this  would  be  a 
good  model  for  Sweden,  too.  Macroprudential  supervision  entails  to  a  large  extent  using 
traditional  supervision  instruments  with  the  focus  on  the  entire  financial  system  instead  of 
individual financial institutions. 
                                                 
4  See, for instance, Svensson, L., “Monetary policy after the crisis”, speech at the Federal Reserve Bank of San 
Francisco, 29 November 2011, Sveriges Riksbank. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
In any case, the central bank becomes deeply involved also in macroprudential supervision. I 
believe  that  it  may  be  difficult  in  practice  to  make  the  monetary  policy  decisions  on  the 
assumption that the financial stability policy is regarded as given, and vice versa.5 
Let me also say, in this context, a few words in general about whether monetary policy and 
financial stability  policy should  be  regarded  as different  types  of  policy  with  different  goals 
and means. When regarded as principles and concepts it is of course the case that financial 
stability is quite different from stability in the inflation rate and the real economy, that is, what 
central banks with flexible inflation targeting strive to achieve. Logically, one could thus argue 
that monetary policy and financial stability policy are two different types of policy that should 
be conducted quite separately. 
But  I  am  not  sure  how  meaningful  this  distinction  is  in  practice.  Personally,  I  have  not 
regarded financial stability as merely a goal, but just as much a means, or a condition, for 
attaining  a  stable  real  economy  and  stable  inflation.  Assessments  of  developments  in  the 
financial  sector  must,  as  far  as  possible,  be  included  in  the  macroeconomic  assessments. 
Financial  unrest  and  instability  often  lead  to  demand  in  the  economy  being  too  low  and 
inflation  undershooting  the  target.  If  one  considers  that  there  are  both  ”normal”  economic 
cycles  and  less  frequent  credit  and  debt  cycles,  the  upturns  in  both  cycles  are  not 
necessarily synchronised. However, it is often the case that a rapid fall in a credit and debt 
cycle  entails  a  corresponding  fall  in  the  normal  economic  cycle  –  and  not  uncommonly  a 
balance-sheet  recession.6  Monitoring  the  credit  and  debt  cycle  thus  becomes  a  way  of 
stabilising the normal economic cycle. With this view, it is less obvious that financial stability 
policy and monetary policy should be conducted separately. But, once again, it is probably 
quite rare that there will be reasons to coordinate them. 
The policy rate will probably need to support financial stability policy 
With regard to the question of the role of the policy rate in financial stability policy, it is my 
personal  opinion  that  one  must  always  be  prepared  to  use  it  to  slow  down  an  excessive 
expansion in credit, or to “lean against the wind” as it is usually called. Hopefully, it will be 
possible to find a set of macroprudential tools that are efficient enough so we do not need to 
use the policy rate for this purpose. Hopefully it will also be possible to find appropriate forms 
as to when they shall be used and by whom.  
But  my  feeling  is  that  even  when  we  have  a  proper  framework  for  macroprudential 
supervision,  situations  may  arise  where  support  is  needed  from  monetary  policy  “leaning 
against  the  wind”.  One  reason  is  that  experience  shows  that  it  is  difficult  to  construct 
regulations that can never be circumvented. The policy rate is a blunt instrument, as it has a 
broad impact on the economy. But at the same time, this may be a strength compared with 
the macroprudential tools, simply because it is difficult to “avoid” a policy rate increase.  
I am also convinced that quite regardless of what formal responsibility the central bank bears 
for  financial  stability,  it  will  always  receive  a  large  share  of  the  blame  if  a  financial  crisis 
arises. When all is said and done, the interest rate is the price of credit and as the central 
bank controls this price, at least regarding shorter maturities, I believe that the general public 
will  hardly  absolve  the  central  bank  of  blame  if  a  financial  crisis  arises  after  a  period  of 
                                                 
5 The comparison with fiscal policy, which is regarded as a foregone conclusion in monetary policy discussions, 
falters somewhat, as I see it. Fiscal policy is formulated by politicians with varying goals and we are probably 
wise to regard it as a foregone conclusion. However, regarding the relationship between monetary policy and 
macroprudential  supervision  in  a  similar  way  may  function  as  a  conceptual  model,  but  would  not  work  in 
practice. 
6  For  a  recently-published  study  of  the  importance  of  credit  and  debt  for  the  economic  cycle,  see  Jordà, 
Ò, M. Schularick  and  A.M.  Taylor,  “When  Credit  Bites  Back:  Leverage,  Business  Cycles,  and  Crises”, 
NBER Working Paper No. 17621.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
cheaper credit. It will probably therefore be difficult in practice to conduct a monetary policy 
that does not take into account financial stability. 
We should continue to develop flexible inflation targeting  
So, what conclusions should one draw from developments in recent years? How much do we 
need to reconsider and how much must we modify the monetary policy framework? I would 
reply:  Somewhat,  but  perhaps  less  than  one  sometimes  might  think.  I  am  fairly  convinced 
that the flexible inflation-targeting policy conducted in many parts of the world has essentially 
been the right path to take, although it has not solved all of the problems. It appears to solve 
the problems it is intended to solve, without any serious side effects. 
I think that it is difficult, particularly with regard to Sweden, to overestimate the role played by 
inflation targeting in attaining better macroeconomic stability – together, of course, with far-
reaching  changes  especially  in  the  fiscal  policy  area.  Economic  policy  is  now  more 
disciplined and we were able to benefit from the stability and credibility this has provided in 
the most recent crisis.  
But it is also clear that the financial crisis highlighted some weaknesses and that the work on 
further developing the inflation-targeting policy must continue, both in the academic field and 
in central banks. For example, it is evident that there is reason to try to get to grips with and 
model the interaction between financial markets and the macro economy in a better way than 
before. Financial factors, and in particular credits and indebtedness, should play a larger role 
than before in our models and our thinking. 
Given  the  impressive  amount  of  studies  produced  every  month  in  these  areas  since  the 
financial crisis broke out, I am fairly hopeful that it will be possible to gradually incorporate 
these  aspects  in  a  fruitful  manner  into  practical  inflation-targeting  policy.7  But  there  clearly 
remains a lot to do. 
But  what  is  important  is  that  this  is  all  about  continuing  to  develop  the  inflation-targeting 
policy. The financial crisis should not be regarded, as some would appear to claim, as a sign 
that the inflation-targeting policy has been an unsuccessful monetary policy “experiment” and 
a blind alley – this is not the case.  
Important to plan crisis management in advance, but this is rarely the case 
I have so far mainly talked about preventing crises and in particular what role monetary policy 
should  play.  Let  me  now  go  on  to  focus  on  the  challenges  with  regard  to  managing  the 
situation once a crisis has occurred. How one manages cross-border financial crises – or not – 
is a question that is very topical right now and will probably remain so for a long time to come. 
My first thesis here is that when one allows a financial system to grow and the dependence 
between the financial agents in different countries increases, one should carefully consider 
what regulations and institutions are needed to manage different crisis situations. As well as 
making it easier to resolve the crisis itself, clarity in this respect also affects how banks and 
other  financial  institutions  develop  their  operations  and  also  how  supervision  of  them  can 
best  be  shaped.  Instead  of  thinking  in  terms  of  the  sequence  integration  –  supervision  – 
crisis  management,  one  should  see  it  in  the  other  direction,  that  is,  crisis  management  – 
supervision – integration (Figure 1). My second thesis is that it is unfortunately very rare that 
this is done in practice.  
                                                 
7  For an example of a theoretical analysis of how consideration for financial stability can be built into a model for 
inflation  targeting,  see  Woodford,  M.,  “Inflation  Targeting  and  Financial  Stability”,  forthcoming  in  Sveriges 
Riksbank Economic Review. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Bank regulation should be based on reverse induction 
Figure 1 
 Timing 
of
events
Integration
Supervision
Crisis
management
Logic of
incentive
analysis
Crisis
management
Supervision
Integration
 Inadequate planning for crisis management in the monetary union  
This reasoning can also be applied to nations, not just to their financial systems. During the 
autumn, we have seen yields on government bonds soar in a number of euro area countries, 
particularly those with sovereign debt problems. It is quite clear that the euro area lacks the 
necessary institutions to manage such a crisis situation. In the United Kingdom, on the other 
hand,  yields  have  not  risen  in  the  same  way,  despite  weak  public  finances  there  too 
(Figure 2).  There  may  be  several  explanations  for  this,  for  instance,  that  investors  have 
confidence that the United Kingdom will manage to consolidate its budget successfully. But I 
believe that it is mainly because the euro area countries lack the defence mechanism that 
the United Kingdom has.8 
The reasoning is as follows: When investors in, for instance, Italian government bonds are 
concerned over Italy’s creditworthiness they sell their bonds and buy something else, such 
as German government bonds. Then the Italian bond yields rise at the same time as liquidity 
leaves the country. Other investors become worried that the yields will rise further – which is 
the same as the value of their bonds falling – and therefore sell their holdings, which means 
that yields continue to rise. This becomes a spiral of falling liquidity and rising yields, which is 
difficult  to  stop.  The  Italian  central  bank  is  unable  to  do  very  much,  as  it  cannot  create 
liquidity in euro. Only the European Central Bank, ECB, in Frankfurt can do this. The Italians 
can ask for help, but they cannot do very much themselves – at least not in the short term. 
And the investors are aware of this, of course. 
                                                 
8  See,  for  instance,  De  Grauwe,  P.,  “The  Governance  of  a  Fragile  Eurozone”,  CEPS  Working  Document 
No. 346, May 2011. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Figure 2 
Government bond yields, 10-year maturity 
Per cent 
Italy
UK
08
09
10
11
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Source: Reuters EcoWin. 
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
 is 
the 
that 
Italy, 
like  Argentina,  has 
fundamental  problem 
This situation is very similar to the one experienced by Argentina, for instance, when they 
had a “currency board” that firmly tied their domestic currency to the US dollar. In the event 
of a crisis there has been no central bank that could create currency – in other countries with 
similar problems the physical currency has run out and the only solution has been to fly in 
dollar bills from the Federal Reserve. 
Now,  of  course, 
lost 
competitiveness, had a deficit on its current account and built up debt until the market has 
gradually  lost  confidence  and  demanded  higher  and  higher  interest  rates.  Competiveness 
then needs to be restored through some form of internal devaluation. This is unavoidable, but 
it takes a long time and does not help the acute liquidity crisis. 
The situation is different in the United Kingdom. If investors are concerned over the British 
credit worthiness they will sell their government bonds as in the example above. They will 
then  receive  British  pounds  and  they  may  also  sell these  too  if  they wish  to  get rid  of  the 
British credit risk. But liquidity in the UK is not affected in the same way as in Italy – there are 
just  as  many  pounds  in  the  UK  as  there  were  before.  What  happens  is  that  the  pound 
declines  in  value  in  relation  to  other  currencies  until  the  UK  government  bonds  are  once 
again regarded as worth their price. Moreover, the Bank of England can create liquidity by 
buying UK government bonds if this should prove necessary. There is no risk of a spiral of 
falling liquidity and rising interest rates in the same way as in the Italian example. In addition, 
British competitiveness will be helped by the weaker pound. And investors know this too. So 
UK bond yields will not rise in the same way as the Italian ones. 
On the basis of these examples, one might conclude that it is easier to manage a financial 
crisis if one is not involved in a monetary union. This is true, but fairly trivial and one should 
beware  of  making  the  related  conclusion  that  currency  unions  are  harmful.  The  euro 
cooperation has offered major benefits to its members, although these are not mentioned so 
much  now.  However,  when  it  comes  to  crisis  management  in  a  currency  union  there  are 
some important conclusions to draw. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
The first is that one must of course have regulations in a monetary union that enable one to 
avoid a crisis of the proportions we are seeing now. This was what the creators of the union 
were thinking when they initiated the Stability and Growth Pact. However, the pact did not 
work  very  well  and  intensive  discussions  are  therefore  underway  as  to  how  it  can  be 
supplemented  with  new  regulations  that  will  guarantee  that  no  members  have  excessive 
budget deficits or can build up excessive debt burdens. Hopefully these discussions will bear 
fruit.  However,  it  is  far  from  certain  that  the  developments  we  are  seeing  now  could  have 
been avoided even if the Stability and Growth Pact had been upheld. Low interest rates have 
meant  that  not  only  governments,  but  also  companies  and  households  have  built  up  their 
debt.  But  an  efficient  regulatory  system  would  probably  have  made  the  crisis  more 
manageable. 
A second conclusion is that when one refrains from the crisis resolution mechanism inherent 
in a national currency, one must replace it with something else. Because crises that entail 
concern  over  a  member  state’s  creditworthiness  are  always  a  risk.  One  must  have  an 
institutional framework to manage the investors’ concerns regarding rising bond yields in, for 
instance, Italy now that there is no Italian currency that can depreciate and the Banca d’Italia 
cannot  create  the  necessary  liquidity.  If  there  is  an  institutional  framework  that  is  credible 
from  the  start,  it  will  not  need  to  be  used  in  most  cases.  It  is  to  some  extent  this  type  of 
framework that the European Financial Stability Facility, EFSF, is meant to become. It will be 
able to buy government securities issued by euro  area countries. However, it is difficult to 
restore market confidence when it is already seriously damaged. The institutional framework 
must  be  in  place  and  have  credibility  before  the  crisis  breaks  out.  This  makes  the  crisis 
easier to manage and one might even prevent it arising at all. 
It is probably the case here that politicians in the EU have helped increase market distrust 
because of the way they have handled the crisis. For example, it is understandable from a 
political point of view that they have wanted to force private lenders to write off their loans to 
Greece. But from an economic perspective – and in the longer run also political – this is not 
such a good idea. This has meant that Italy and Spain have had to pay much higher interest 
rates than before – not primarily because one perceives a risk that Italy and Spain will be 
unable to service their debts, but because the market has become uncertain as to whether 
the politicians intend to take similar coercive measures here. 
If one suffers an acute crisis, whether one has created it oneself or not, one must consider 
carefully  how  it  should  be  managed.  If  one  has  not  created  a  credible  crisis  resolution 
mechanism in good time and does not manage to do so during the crisis, there is finally only 
one last resort, and that is the ECB. The ECB is the monetary union’s central bank and can 
do in a crisis what the union’s national central banks are unable to do. It can always create 
liquidity and buy securities as needed and therefore in principle it can also attain the same 
credibility as the Bank of England has in the United Kingdom. The problem is that the ECB 
does  not  have  an  indisputable  mandate  to  do  this,  and  that  the  EU  member  states  have 
differing views as to whether it should be given such a mandate. The ECB should not save 
countries from making necessary adjustments in legislation and public finances, many quite 
rightly point out. But this also risks having the consequence that one refrains from the only 
remaining mechanism that can manage an acute crisis.  
Obstacles to setting up crisis management mechanisms 
One  reason  why  it  appears  difficult  to  set  up  clear  frameworks  for  managing  a  crisis  in 
advance is, as I mentioned earlier, that crises occur so rarely. “There will be no more crises 
during my mandate period,” a politician said to me after the Swedish crisis in the early 1990s, 
when we were to discuss new crisis legislation. And he was right, of course. It took almost 
20 years until the next crisis occurred, and by then he had left politics long ago.  
There is another important reason, particularly when several countries are involved. If one is 
to create a framework to manage crises, one will unavoidably face the question of how the 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
costs  are  to  be  divided,  and  it  is  almost,  if  not  completely,  impossible  to  agree  on  this  in 
advance. All crises are different. It may be possible to agree on how to act when the problem 
arises,  for  instance,  who  should  negotiate  and  how.  One  can  thus  decide  on  “ex  ante 
preparations for ex post burden-sharing”, but not on “ex ante burden-sharing”. 
Given  this,  it  is  interesting  to  note  that  with  regard  to  the  ECB  there  is  actually  a  crisis 
resolution mechanism in the form of an implied agreement on “ex ante burden-sharing”. It is 
written  into  the  Treaty  on  European  Union  exactly  how  the  national  central  banks  should 
recapitalise the ECB if this were necessary. If the securities the ECB purchased were to fall 
in value so that the ECB needed more capital, it is thus clearly stipulated to what extent the 
different countries shall contribute. It may be because of this that some countries do not want 
to  allow  the  ECB  to  buy  government  bonds,  while  others  think  it  is  an  excellent  idea.  So, 
paradoxically, it may be the actual crisis resolution mechanism that in this case leads to a 
deadlock that risks aggravating the crisis. 
Crisis management mechanisms equally important in the banking system 
Let  me  now  change  focus  from  countries  to  banking  systems.  But  both  of  the  theses  I 
mentioned earlier are the same: When cross-border integration progresses it is important – 
and profitable from society’s point of view – to create credible crisis resolution mechanisms in 
advance. But this is rarely or never done. 
One  sometimes  talks  of  Europe’s  “financial  trilemma”.9  We  in  Europe  want  to  achieve  a 
continued financial integration and increased financial stability, but at the same time we want 
to retain each country's national sovereignty. The problem is that it is possible to attain two of 
the goals, but very difficult to attain all three. If we want to combine financial integration with 
continued national sovereignty over, for instance, supervision and crisis management, as we 
have done so far, it will be difficult to achieve meaningful financial stability – the crisis we are 
currently going through provides a good example of this (Figure 3).  
       Figure 3 
Financial stability 
Financial integration 
National sovereignty 
 
If, on the other hand, we want to prevent cross-border crises and at the same time maintain 
national  sovereignty,  we  must  accept  reduced  financial  integration  –  for  example,  stricter 
regulations as to how banks can move financial assets between countries (Figure 4). One 
can see clear tendencies in this direction in the current discussions. If one wishes, as a third 
alternative,  to  retain  integration  but  at  the  same  time  reduce  the  risk  of  crises  spreading 
across  national  borders,  one  must  consider  letting  go  of  national  sovereignty  and  allowing 
                                                 
9 Schoenmaker, D., “The Financial Trilemma”, Economics Letters 111, 2011, pp. 57–59.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
more supervision and crisis management at European level (Figure 5). However, this is not a 
path that is considered politically viable at present. 
 
 
 
Figure 5 
Figure 4 
Financial stability 
Financial stability 
     Financial integration 
National sovereignty 
Financial integration 
National sovereignty 
 
The Larosière group, which was given the task after the financial crisis of proposing how the 
financial system in Europe should be managed, tried to suggest a compromise: Continued 
integration,  but  slightly  less  national  sovereignty  and  slightly  more  joint  responsibility  for 
supervision  work.  This  led  to  the  earlier  “level  3”  committees  on  banking,  insurance  and 
market supervision being transformed into authorities. The idea was to give them as much 
power as possible without changing the Treaty on European Union. At the same time, the 
European  Systemic  Risk  Board,  ESRB,  was  created.  This  can  give  warnings  or 
recommendations when members – central bank governors and supervisory heads – assess 
that financial risks are building up in Europe. It is possible in both to vote in the authorities 
and the ESRB and the majority opinion applies.10 This has proved important in preventing the 
deadlocks that the otherwise common method of a consensus decision can entail. Both the 
force and speed of action has increased substantially. But all of this concerns how one can 
avoid crises, not how they should be managed once they occur. 
Nor did the Larosière group discuss, other than marginally, crisis management or winding up 
insolvent banks. However, the European Commission’s newly-published proposal does deal 
with this, and so do new UK and US legislation that have arisen since the crisis. This is, of 
course,  an  important  step  in  the  right  direction.  Greater  clarity  with  regard  to  how  banks 
should be wound up will to a great extent affect both how the supervision is designed and 
how the banks act. As I said, it is wise to begin at the other end.11 
…but difficult with cross-border agreements 
However, the focus in the legislation, naturally enough in the UK and US legislation, but also 
the European proposal, is on how to manage national banks in distress. The cross-border 
problems are avoided to a great extent, even in the Commission’s report. The fact that an 
integrated financial system in Europe also requires methods to resolve cross-border crises 
remains to be discussed. And of course this is connected to what I mentioned earlier, namely 
that it is much too sensitive an issue to discuss how the costs should be divided. 
                                                 
10  The  supervisory  heads  do  not  have  the  right  to  vote  in  the  ESRB.  A  2/3  majority  is  required  for 
recommendations and decisions on publishing warnings and recommendations. 
11  The  crisis  legislation  also  relates  to  another  topical  question,  namely  how  much  venture  capital  a  bank  is 
considered to need. If both authorities and banks know what will happen in a crisis, this should also affect the 
need  for  risk-bearing  capital  in  the  banks.  The  desire  to  be  able  to  manage  uncertainty  in  a  crisis  is  an 
important motive behind the increased capital requirements in the Basel III Accord. If uncertainty is reduced, 
the capital need will decline. But the Basel Committee has not made this connection. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
But  if  one  is  unable  to  manage  even  the  preparations  and  procedures  surrounding  the 
distribution of costs in a crisis – what is known as ex ante preparations for ex post burden 
sharing – this will also have consequences. If nothing is discussed in advance, the natural 
consequence  –  what  is  known  as  the  default  option  –  will  be  that  a  cross-border  bank  in 
distress  will  be  divided  along  national  boundaries,  regardless  of  how  it  is  organised.  The 
branch  network  in  one  country  may,  for  instance,  suddenly  find  itself  entirely  without  IT 
systems and other central administrative functions, which are very costly to build up. The fact 
that this becomes irrational and can substantially increase the total cost of winding up the 
bank  becomes  a  problem  that  cannot  be  resolved.  Fortis  and  Dexia,  at  the  most  recent 
reconstruction in the autumn, can be said to be good examples of this from the recent crisis. 
They  were  both  divided  up  according  to  national  boundaries,  and  at  least  with  regard  to 
Fortis  most  appear  to  be  agreed  that  this  was  not  a  good  solution.  In  any  case,  it  was  a 
solution that cost the tax-payers an unnecessary large amount of money. 
What  conclusions  can  be  drawn  from  this?  I  believe  that  if  one  cannot  agree  between 
different nations on how to manage cross-border banks in distress, it is probably just as well 
to realise that the most likely event is that a bank will be divided up along national boundaries 
in the event of a crisis. This insight will affect the thinking with regard to supervision, which 
should in turn affect the demands made of the banks. Perhaps one should ultimately require 
that  each  bank  is  organised  so  that  the  national  units  can  operate  entirely  independent  of 
one another? Of course, this is not in line with what has been agreed on up to now in Europe 
with regard to the banks’ possibility to operate over national boundaries, but it is a natural 
consequence of not being able to discuss more rational solutions in advance. 
This reasoning is of course highly relevant to us in Sweden, too. We have a number of banks 
in  the  Nordic  and  Baltic  countries  that  have  significant  and  important  cross-border 
operations. I believe that one can require from both authorities and politicians – in all of the 
countries concerned – that they should be able to agree on a slightly better way of winding 
up  a  bank  in  distress  than  cutting  it  up  along  national  boundaries.  But  if  this  becomes  an 
overly heavy political burden we must expect the countries concerned to quite simply take 
over the part of the bank that is in their own country – even if this solution will be much more 
expensive in total for the tax-payers. 
Now,  however,  there  is  hope.  Just  a  few  weeks  ago  the  Financial  Stability  Board,  which 
consists  of  ministries  of  finance,  central  banks  and  financial  supervisory  authorities  in  the 
G20  countries,  published  new  norms  for  managing  crises  in  cross-border  banks.  For 
instance, they discussed how to make bondholders bear their share of the costs in the event 
of a crash. When all of this has been translated into legislation that is applied by all of the 
countries, we will have managed important problems faced in winding up large, cross-border 
banks.  But  it  still  remains  to  be  seen  whether  one  can  actually  find  princples  for  how  the 
costs should be allocated between the different countries. 
In  the  current  debate  on  how  much  capital  the  banks  need,  it  may  also  be  worth 
remembering  that  the  better  legislation  one  has  for  winding  up  banks  in  distress,  the  less 
capital they will need to hold. The capital can be regarded as the buffer necessary to avoid 
tax-payers  having  to  bear  the  costs  in  a  crisis.  If  one  has  regulated  how  various  lenders 
should contribute, the need for a buffer is reduced. 
With these reflections, it is time for me to wind up. Not just my speech here today, but in a 
few days my time as a member of the Executive Board of the Riksbank. As I said, it has been 
thirteen  very  eventful  years.  At  present  the  international  debate  is  intensive  and  there  are 
many tricky questions to be resolved – not least in crisis management and supervision of the 
financial  markets.  The  job  is  still  interesting.  But  there  is  a  time  for  everything,  and  we  all 
know that it is best to stop when you are still having fun. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
