H R Khan: Financial inclusion and financial stability: are they two sides 
of the same coin? 
Address  by  Shri  H  R  Khan,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  BANCON 
2011,  organized  by  the  Indian  Bankers  Association  and  Indian  Overseas  Bank,  Chennai, 
4 November 2011. 
 The  speaker  acknowledges  the  valuable  contributions  of  Dr.  Rabi  N  Mishra,  Ms.  Dimple  Bhandia, 
Ms. V. Vinitha and Mr. Surajit Bose in preparation of this presentation. 
It  is  always  a  pleasure  to  be  a  part  of  such  a  confluence  of  bankers  and  researchers  on 
contemporary issues in banking and finance but to choose to speak on an area which needs 
to  be  either  “wholesomely  new”  or  “extensively  revised”  at  such  a  forum  becomes  a 
challenge. I thank the organizers, the CMD of Indian Overseas Bank and the Chairman of 
IBA  for  offering  me  this  opportunity  to  share  my  own  thoughts  on  a  topical  issue  that  has 
engaged attention of policy makers in India and abroad in the recent times. 
The  Reserve  Bank  is  intimately  involved  in  efforts  to  ensure  both  financial  inclusion  and 
financial stability in India. Being a part of this institution, I have had a very large intellectual 
as  also  operational  canvas  to  roam  around.  That  in  fact,  encouraged  me  to  avail  of  this 
opportunity to discuss these two important dimensions of the economic issues which have 
shaped the tone and tenor of financial sector policy space globally over the last decade or 
so. The more one deals with them in juxtaposition, the more their mutual exclusiveness gets 
demystified. Let me explain, how? 
The importance of financial inclusion based on the principle of equity and on inclusive growth 
with  stability  has  engaged  the  renewed  attention  of  policy  makers  internationally  in  recent 
years.  It  is  being  increasingly  recognized  that  despite  tremendous  growth  in  the  banking 
sector and significant improvements in all areas relating to financial viability, profitability and 
competitiveness,  the  glass  remains  half-full.  There  remain  concerns  that  banks  have  not 
been able to include vast segments of the population, especially the underprivileged sections 
of the society, into the fold of basic banking and financial services.   
The recent global financial crisis has also brought the focus on financial stability to the centre 
stage.  The  debate  has  been  quite  wide-ranging  encompassing,  inter  alia,  the  definition  of 
financial  stability  and  the  implication  of  financial  stability  for  growth  and  welfare.  Many 
lessons  have  been  learnt.  One,  that  financial  stability  can  be  jeopardized  even  if  there  is 
price  and  macroeconomic  stability.  Two,  that  financial  stability  has  to  shift  from  being  an 
implicit variable to an explicit variable of economic policy and three, that a threat to financial 
stability anywhere in the world is potentially a threat to financial stability everywhere. Fourth 
and most importantly, we have learnt that while financial instability can hurt even the most 
advanced economies, the damage it can cause in poor and developing economies can be 
particularly severe. People with low levels of income have no headroom to bear downside 
risks, and their livelihoods can be disrupted by financial instability. It is therefore even more 
important that countries such as ours pay particular attention to preserving financial stability 
even as we deepen and broaden our financial sector at home and integrate with the rest of 
the world1. 
The developments in the recent years have ensured that the pursuit of financial inclusion and 
the pursuit of financial stability are no longer policy options but policy compulsions. The key 
challenges emerging from this conclusion is how to achieve the goal of financial inclusion, 
                                                 
1   “Financial Stability: Issues and Challenges”, D. Subbarao, September 2009. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
i.e., providing basic financial facilities to a wider segment of society while ensuring that the 
stability of the financial system is not compromised. An important question which emerges is 
whether increased and wider access to the formal financial services works in tandem with 
policies  aimed  at  enhancing  financial  stability  or  does  it  work  at  cross  purposes  and 
jeopardize financial stability, i.e., are financial inclusion and financial stability two sides of the 
same coin or are they two different disparate goals.  
These are some of the issues I have picked up to enunciate. First, I will share my thoughts 
on  how  financial  inclusion  and  financial  stability  must  co-exist  and  that  it  is  difficult,  in  the 
longer term, to envisage prevalence of one without the other. Next, I will discuss the various 
ways in which financial stability and financial inclusion complement each other, going on to 
discuss the ways that they may be in conflict and work at cross purposes. I will then touch 
upon how a suite of enabling regulatory framework, effective policies for consumer protection 
and  greater  financial  awareness  and  literacy  can  work  together  to  exploit  the  synergies 
between financial inclusion and financial stability. Finally, I will briefly outline the manner in 
which financial stability considerations have been woven into the Reserve Bank’s initiatives 
towards greater financial inclusion. 
Financial inclusion and financial stability: mandatory co-existence 
The first point I would like to make as I explore the relationship between financial stability and 
financial inclusion is that the two must co-exist. Financial inclusion may be difficult without 
the stability of the financial system while it is difficult to envisage continuing financial stability 
when  an  increasing chunk  of  the socio-economic  system  remains  financially  excluded.  Let 
me elucidate. 
Financial  inclusion  has  been  defined,  by  the  Committee  on  Financial  Inclusion,  as  the 
process  of  ensuring  access  to  financial  services  and  timely  and  adequate  credit  where 
needed  by  vulnerable  groups  such  as  weaker  sections  and  low  income  groups  at  an 
affordable  cost2.  It  primarily  represents  access  to  a  bank  account  backed  by  deposit 
insurance, access to affordable credit and the payments system. 
There has been significant, albeit, slow progress towards greater financial inclusion around 
the  world  in  recent  years.  According  to  estimates  by  an  ADB  Working  Paper3,  in  Africa, 
Kenya  has  pioneered  an  interesting  process  of  financial  inclusion  through  mobile  phone 
payment solutions. Latin American countries such as Peru and Bolivia have attempted to put 
in  place  some  very  enabling  regulatory  environments  for  microfinance.  In  these  two 
countries,  rapid  growth  over  the  past  seven  years  has  included  six  million  clients  in  the 
formal  financial  system.  Brazilian  policymakers  achieved  universal  coverage  of  over  5,500 
municipalities  by  enabling  banks  to  use  retail  agents.  This  new  low-cost  delivery  channel 
triggered expansion of formal financial services to 12 million clients in only six years. Latin 
America  has  also  demonstrated  the  potential  of  conditional  cash  transfers  into  simplified 
bank  accounts  as  a  way  to  connect  beneficiaries  to  formal  finance  while  simultaneously 
lowering delivery costs to the government. Transfer challenges motivated the use of agents 
in Brazil. In Mexico, beneficiaries increased savings and investment with more than 90 per 
cent of households started to use banking services. 
The  benefits  from  financial  inclusion  are  well  understood  and  well  documented.  Financial 
inclusion, more particularly when promoted in the wider context of economic inclusion, can 
uplift  financial  conditions  and  improve  the  standards  of  lives  of  the  poor  and  the 
disadvantaged.  Access  to  affordable  financial  services  would  lead  to  increasing  economic 
                                                 
2   As defined by the Committee on Financial Inclusion (Chairman: C. Rangarajan, 2008). 
3   ADBI Working Paper Series No. 259 – “Financial Inclusion and Financial Stability: Current Policy Issues” (Dec 
2010). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
activities and employment opportunities for rural households with a possible multiplier effect 
on the economy. It could enable a higher disposable income in the hands of rural households 
leading to greater savings and a wider deposit base for banks and other financial institutions. 
It will enable the Government to provide social development benefits and subsidies directly to 
the beneficiary bank accounts, thereby drastically reducing leakages and pilferages in social 
welfare schemes. Thus, financial inclusion could be an instrument to provide monetary fuel 
for  economic  growth  and  is  critical  for  achieving  inclusive  growth.  Further,  expanding  the 
reach of financial services to those individuals who do not currently have access would be an 
objective that is fully consistent with the people-centric definition of inclusive growth which 
attempts to bridge the various divides in an economy and society, between the rich and the 
poor, between the rural and urban populace, and between one region and another. 
An  analysis  of  World  Bank  Development  Indicators  implies  a  strong  link  between  financial 
access (measured in terms of commercial bank branches per 100,000 adults and deposits 
per 1000 adults) and economic development. Empirical evidence indicates a distinct rise in 
income  level  of  the  countries  with  higher  number  of  branches  and  deposits  of  commercial 
banks.  Higher  number  of  bank  branches  per  100,000  adults  and  more  number  of  deposit 
accounts per 1000 adults are observed in high income countries than countries in the low 
and middle income categories. Though the cause-effect relationship could be the subject of 
detailed  research,  the  fact  that  there  is  a  progressive  increase  in  income  levels  of  the 
countries as financial access increases is empirically evident. 
Source: World Development Indicators 2010, World Bank 
 Just  as  it  is  difficult  to  envisage  continuing  financial  stability  without  financial  inclusion, 
especially in the long term, it is difficult to envisage the success of policy efforts to expand 
the reach of financial services unless banks and other financial services providers are sound, 
the financial markets are functioning smoothly and financial market infrastructure is robust. A 
recent  World  Bank  report  shows4  that  nearly  60  percent  of  the  economies  experienced  a 
contraction  in  real  per  capita  income  in  2009  as  a  result  of  the  deepening  of  the  global 
financial crisis. Worldwide volume of deposits and loans shrank, with a median decrease of 
12  percent  in  the  ratio  of  deposit  value  to  Gross  Domestic  Product  (GDP)  and  a  median 
decrease of 15 percent in the ratio of value of loans to GDP. 
I  have  discussed  how  financial  inclusion  and  financial  stability  need  to  co-exist  if  policy 
measures pursuing either objective have to achieve any degree of success. Let me return 
now  to  the  key  question  I  flagged  at  the  outset  –  whether  financial  inclusion  and  financial 
                                                 
4   “Financial Access: The State of Financial Inclusion through the Crisis”, Consultative Group to Assist the Poor 
(CGAP)/The World Bank Group , 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
stability  are  two  sides  of  the  same  coin  and  mutually  reinforce  each  other  or  are  they 
disparate goals that would contradict each other and work at cross purposes. There are, in 
fact, several ways in which financial inclusion can contribute to maintaining a sounder and 
more stable financial system. 
Financial inclusion and financial stability: working in tandem 
First, financial inclusion can improve the efficiency of the process of intermediation between 
savings and investments while facilitating change in the composition of the financial system 
with regard to the transactions that take place, the clients that use the various services, the 
new risks created, and possibly the institutions that operate in newly created or expanded 
markets.  As  the  balance  sheet  of  the  financial  sector  grows  more  diversified  and 
encompasses  a  broader  spectrum  of  economic  agents,  its  contribution  to  a  more  resilient 
economy is commensurately higher. 
Second, for financial institutions, especially banks, financial inclusion helps provide a more 
stable  retail  base  of  deposits.  As  the  recent  global  crisis  also  demonstrated,  stable  retail 
sources  of  funding  as  against  reliance  on  borrowed  funds  can  greatly  enhance  the 
soundness and resilience of financial institutions and can reduce volatility in earnings. Low 
income  savers  and  borrowers  tend  to  maintain  steady  financial  behaviour  through  the 
business  cycle  both  in  terms  of  deposit  keeping  and  borrowing.  Thus,  during  periods  of 
systemic crises, deposits from low income clients typically act as a continued source of funds 
even as other sources of credit dry up or become difficult to roll over. Small customers, thus, 
provide big opportunities to garner stable deposits. In the absence of such deposits, financial 
institutions may  find  it  difficult  to  continue  lending.  This  credit  channel  has  the  potential  to 
aggravate the impact of the crisis on the local economy than would otherwise be the case. 
Third, financial inclusion facilitates greater participation by different segments of the economy 
in  the  formal  financial  system.  The  presence  of  a  large  informal  sector  can  impair  the 
transmission of monetary policy as a significant segment of financially excluded households 
and  small  businesses  make  financial  decisions  independent  of,  and  un-influenced  by,  the 
monetary  policy  actions  of  the  central  bank.  As  the  share  of  the  formal  financial  sector 
increases  through  greater  financial  inclusion,  it  yields  an  important  positive  externality  by 
making monetary policy transmission more effective. 
Fourth, to the extent that financial inclusion helps people move from the cash economy to 
bank  accounts  which  can  be  monitored,  it  helps  facilitate  implementation  of  Anti-Money 
Laundering and Combating the Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT) guidelines and makes it 
possible  to  deploy  suspicious  transactions’  monitoring  and  reporting  to  a  larger  share  of 
financial transactions in the economy. Recent Financial Action Task Force (FATF) Guidance 
on5  “Anti-Money  Laundering  and  Terrorist  Financing  Measures  and  Financial  Inclusion” 
concluded that financial exclusion undermines the effectiveness of an AML/CFT regime and 
recommended that a country’s level of financial inclusion and initiatives to expand financial 
inclusion  should  be  considered,  when  the  effectiveness  of  their  AML/CFT  regime  is 
assessed. 
Fifth, financial inclusion can contribute to enhanced financial stability through contributing to 
the improved health of the household sector, of small businesses and, to some extent, that of 
the  corporate  sector.  The  health  of  the  household  sector  is  improved  through  improved 
economic  linkages,  reducing  reliance  on  the  costly  informal  sector  and  through  improved 
ability to make and receive payments. The benefits of this cannot be overstated given that for 
the household sector the implications of a lack of access to banking services can be severe. 
                                                 
5   FATF Guidance on “Anti-Money Laundering and Terrorist Financing Measures and Financial Inclusion”, June 
2011. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Lack of access affects the ability of a household to receive government transfers, or to make 
payments  or  to  accumulate  cash  surpluses  for  planned  expenses  or  emergencies. 
Individuals who have no option but to carry cash are exposed to security risks. Such access 
also  reduces  the  cost  of  making  payments.  Social  benefits  include  protection  against  loss 
due to theft, improved mechanisms for social transfers and other remittances (including tax 
and  benefit  remittances)  and  improved  economic  linkages  for  the  rural  and  deprived 
communities6.The lack of access to or availability of a vehicle for saving could also result in 
households,  especially  low  income  households,  resorting  to  expensive  short-term  debt. 
There  are  many  anecdotal  instances  of  high  interest  rates  leading  to  households  being 
caught in a debt trap in our own country while the impact on financial stability of increased 
leverage of households was succinctly demonstrated by the recent crisis in the microfinance 
sector. 
Financial inclusion can improve the access to finance and the quality and cost of the service 
that  small  businesses  receive  from  banks.  These  factors  are  key  to  the  profitability  and 
prosperity of these businesses and that of the economy. Research has revealed increased 
formal savings can help reduce cost of credit and facilitate business expansion, for example, 
through increased availability of low cost deposits. This has the collateral benefit of improving 
resilience of small businesses, even large businesses. 
Sixth, in most cases, efforts to include an increasingly larger section of the population within 
the  fold  of  formal  banking  and  financial  services  have  resulted  in  the  deployment  of 
innovative  solutions  and  outsourcing  arrangements.  Such  financial  innovations  have  the 
potential of reducing costs and thereby contributing to increasing the overall efficiency of the 
economy and the financial stability. They may also, through faster information dissemination 
and more efficient functioning of the financial markets, contribute to improving the efficiency 
of  transmission  of  monetary  policy.  Of  course,  financial  innovations  and  outsourcing 
arrangements come with their own set of risks which could pose challenges for the overall 
policy framework for the pursuit of financial stability. But I will discuss this a little later. 
Finally, financial inclusion, through careful policy orientation, may help facilitate reduction in 
income  inequalities  and,  by  bridging  the  gap  between  the  prosperous  and  the  poor,  can 
foster social and political stability.  
Financial inclusion and financial stability: working at cross purposes 
This is not to say that there are no risks to financial stability emanating from greater financial 
inclusion. One only has to recall the savings and loan crisis in the US in 1980s to appreciate 
that even financial institutions geared to cater to the retail investors and, thereby, to foster 
financial inclusion, could be a source of financial instability. 
The recent crisis in US subprime markets is another case in point. Policy makers have often 
endorsed marketing to subprime borrowers as a means of financial inclusion7. With hindsight, 
it seems clear that such over-extension of credit has the potential to affect the quality of the 
credit portfolio of banks and financial institutions and could have sown the seeds of financial 
fragility,  and  ultimately  of  financial  instability.  The  position  may  be  further  aggravated  by 
regulatory or governmental forbearance which has the potential to vitiate the credit culture 
amongst  the  target  group.  As  elucidated  by  Prof.  Raghuram  Rajan8,  “easy  credit”  as  a 
response  to  bridge  the  gap  between  the  haves  and  the  have-nevers  could  prove  to  be  a 
                                                 
6   “Financial Access and Financial Stability” – Paper written by P. Hawkins, FEASibility Limited South Africa for 
BIS (2010). 
7   Collard,  S.  and  Kempson,  E.  (2005),  Affordable  Credit:  The  Way  Forward,  York:  Joseph  Rowntree 
Foundation. 
8   Rajan G., Raghuram (2010), Fault Lines : How Hidden Fractures Still Threaten The World Economy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
costly way of redistribution and create a fault line along the financial sector where enormous 
stresses could build up and lead to an instability in the system akin to the subprime crisis of 
recent times. 
Our  own  experience  with  local  entities,  such  as,  cooperative  banks,  deposit  taking  non-
banking financial companies and Regional Rural Banks – which are largely geared to meet 
the  needs  of  the  poor  and  the  un-banked  –  has  highlighted  the  risks  of  poor  governance, 
connected lending, geographic concentration leading to vulnerability to natural calamities and 
downturns.  The  recent  experience  of  the  microfinance  industry  is  another  example  of  an 
initiative to foster financial inclusion resulting in financial stress to the very institutions which 
are  promoting  inclusion.  Hence,  the  risks  for  financial  institutions  catering  to  the  less 
developed and low-income markets need to be well understood. 
First,  these  markets  typically  involve  a  large  number  of  low  ticket  clients/transactions  with 
commensurate burden on operating costs. Second, these segments are typically associated 
with informational inefficiencies with most borrowers unable to produce any collateral or to 
provide  an  adequate  track  record  of  repayments.  Third,  financial  institutions  venturing  into 
these  segments  for  the  first  time  often  need  to  incur  substantial  costs  as  they  adjust  their 
business practices and processes to the fresh rules of the game. Fourth, financial services 
can be used to launder illegally obtained funds as well as fund terrorist activities. This could 
be accentuated if for expansion of finance access too much of regulatory forbearance by way 
of relaxed KYC norms is given even for large volume/high frequency transactions. While, as 
discussed  above,  greater  financial  inclusion  can  facilitate  monitoring  of  a  larger  share  of 
suspicious transactions, the emergence of payment services, in particular person to person 
remittance facilities, to cater to the needs of an increasing large base of retail clients may 
also  provide  opportunities  for  illegal  activities.  Conversely,  there  are  challenges  posed  by 
AML-CFT  requirements  to  the  goal  of  achieving  financial  inclusion  and,  hence,  the  FATF 
Guidance states there is a need to “take account of the nexus between financial integrity and 
financial inclusion and the cross-reinforcement between these two objectives”.  
Fifth,  outsourcing  of  activities  by  banks,  including  for  financial  inclusion,  also  poses 
reputational, financial and fidelity risks which may impact the health of the institution and of 
the  financial  system9.  In  particular,  the  reputation  risks  associated  with  outsourcing  may 
impact the activities of the entire bank and not just the outsourced activities in case of any 
mishap  or  misdemeanour  by  the  outsourced  agents.  There  are  also  systemic  risks 
associated  with  the  entire  banking  industry  relying  on  a  single  or  a  few  vendors,  as  is 
frequently  the  case,  especially  in  the  early  stages  of  innovations/outsourcing.  These  risks 
need  to  be  carefully  managed  by  banks,  in  particular,  through  a  system  of  checks  and 
balances which could, inter alia, involve well defined contractual arrangements, standards for 
due  diligence,  exposure  monitoring,  cash  and  other  limits,  rating  of  the  agents/Business 
Correspondents  (BCs),  periodic  audit/inspection,  etc.  and 
information, 
communication and technology (ICT), for managing operational and financial risks. Further, 
the  design  of  appropriate  compensation  structures,  including  performance  based  features, 
can ensure a reasonable fee to the agents while ensuring adequate incentives for preventing 
misuse of the system by the agents. 
Sixth, risks would also arise out of the business model of specialised non-bank institutions 
{e.g.  Micro  Finance  Institutions  (MFIs)}  which  cater  exclusively  to  the  needs  of  the  low 
income group. These institutions face concentration and funding risks which can contribute to 
overall systemic risks as has been amply demonstrated by the recent experiences in Andhra 
Pradesh. The greater involvement of commercial banks in the provision of services to the low 
the  use  of 
                                                 
9   The Report of the Internal Group to Examine Issues relating to Rural Credit and Microfinance (Chairman: Shri. 
H. R. Khan), Reserve Bank of India, July 2005 (Khan Committee). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
income group and with institutions catering to the low income segment can go a long way 
towards mitigating the risks. 
Finally,  as  I  discussed  earlier,  the  pursuit  of  financial  inclusion  has  often  been  attempted 
through  low  cost  delivery  channels,  innovative  products  and  outsourcing  agencies.  These 
developments come with their own set of risks which could jeopardize financial stability. For 
example, during times of stress, financial innovation can further complicate the transmission 
of monetary policy. In any case, during periods of financial instability, it may be difficult to 
predict  the  consequences  of  financial  innovations  thereby  adding  an  additional  element  of 
uncertainty to an already uncertain economic environment. 
Facilitating financial inclusion with financial stability: financial regulations and literacy 
& consumer protection 
Let me quickly sum up the discussions so far. It is clear that there are some potential costs of 
financial  inclusion.  There  are  also  some  important  benefits  which  play  out  over  cycles  of 
booms and busts and through periods of financial crises. The end result is a deeper, more 
diversified and resilient financial system as well as healthier corporate and household sectors 
which  can  enhance  financial  stability.  There  are  risks  to  the  financial  institutions  from 
financial  inclusion.  There  is,  however,  not  enough  evidence  that  these  risks  are  hugely 
systemic in nature. On the contrary, savers and borrowers in the lower segment have been 
evidenced  to  maintain  more  consistent  financial  behaviour  during  financial  crises  as 
compared  to  customers  in  other  segments.  To  this  extent,  they  add  to  the  resilience  of 
financial institutions. In any case, the risks prevalent at the institutional level are manageable 
with known regulatory & prudential tools, greater financial awareness and literacy and with 
more effective customer protection practices. 
As  highlighted  at  the  very  outset,  achieving  greater  financial  inclusion  and  maintaining 
financial  stability  are  now  complementary  policy  compulsions.  The  challenge  is  to  ensure 
both while exploiting the synergies between the two policy objectives. The answer arguably 
lies  in  a  facilitative  regulatory  and  supervisory  structure  which  ensures  that  the  formal 
financial system delivers affordable financial services to the excluded population with greater 
efficiency  without  compromising  on  the  acceptable  levels  of  safety  and  soundness.  In  this 
connection,  an  important  role  can  be  played  by  credit  information  bureaus  that  provide  a 
database  to  capture  all  outstanding  loans  for  individual  borrowers  and  in  prevention  of 
multiple-lending  and  over  borrowing10.  Also  important  is  a  regulatory  environment  which 
facilitates  the  promotion  of  new  lines  of  businesses  with  idiosyncratic  risk  profiles  whose 
contribution to systemic risks is relatively low. 
An  effective  consumer  protection  policy  framework  is  also  a  critical  component  of  any 
regulatory environment which aims at meeting the goal of financial inclusion while promoting 
the  soundness  and  resilience  of  institutions  and  of  the  financial  system.  For  the  entire 
framework to be effective, greater financial literacy and awareness would remain very critical. 
There are a range of cross country experiences which testify to the efforts underway for the 
achievement  of  a  balance  between  financial  inclusion  and  financial  stability  through  a 
facilitating regulatory framework, especially relative to consumer protection and reputational 
risk  mitigation.  Let  me  briefly  recount  some  such  experiences  which  have  supported  an 
accessible and stable financial sector environment in their respective jurisdictions: 
a. 
Brazil,  new  regulations  have  been  attempted  to  achieve  universal  access  by 
enabling  partnerships  between  banks  and  third-party  agents.  Brazil  was  the  early 
leader 
introduction  of  “banking 
in  agent  banking 
large-scale 
through 
the 
                                                 
10   Report of the Sub Committee of the Central Board of Directors of the Reserve Bank of India to Study Issues 
and Concerns in the MFI Sector (Chairman: Shri Y H Malegam), January 2011 (Malegam Committee). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
correspondents” to distribute welfare grants to unbanked Brazilians. The oversight is 
focused on the financial institution with the central bank getting access to all data on 
the agents while attempting to also give the financial institution enough freedom to 
articulate the relationship with the agents on their own terms.  
Kenya and the Philippines, where central banks have had a key role in supporting 
mobile  phone  payment  schemes  and  allowed  regulatory  space  to  mobile  phone 
operators.  In  Kenya,  the  e-money  transfer  service  M-PESA  offered  by  mobile 
network operator Safaricom has achieved impressive progress thus far.  
Philippines  launched  the  first  successful  mobile  payment  service  in  a  developing 
country  in  2004.  Once  market  innovation  and  learning  satisfied  the  needs  of 
regulators and mobile operators, regulation was created and implemented to provide 
legal certainty and create a level playing field to allow new players. 
Bolivia and Uganda, which also demonstrated that micro-deposit-taking can flourish 
in  the  regulated  financial  system  with  timely  and  appropriate  policies.  Regulators 
have  incorporated  non-profit  innovators  into  the  formal  system  by  creating  legal 
paths  toward  a  license.  New  laws,  specially  designed  for  previously  unregulated 
NGOs, were passed, whereby they will keep their non-profit status and be allowed 
to collect deposits and offer extra financial services. 
Indonesia,  which  has  proved  how  public-owned  financial  institutions  may  become 
the  driving  force  behind  economic  development  in  rural  areas.  The  government 
owned  development  bank,  Bank  Rakyat  Indonesia  (BRI),  which  specializes  in 
microfinance is the biggest provider of rural financial services within Indonesia. Even 
when  the  Indonesian  banking  system  collapsed  during  the  Asian  financial  crisis, 
BRI’s micro-banking division remained relatively profitable 11. 
It is, however, important to note all these experiences need to be evaluated in the country 
specific context and their replication in other jurisdiction has to be carefully thought through. 
The lesson, however, is that prudential regulation has an important role to play in ensuring 
the initiatives taken to provide basic financial services do not themselves become a source of 
risk  or  fraud.  Prudential  regulations  which  ensure  the  soundness  of  financial  institutions 
providing basic financial services to the excluded, on the one hand, and which put in place 
robust consumer protection guidelines, on the other, bolster public confidence in the various 
initiatives taken to ensure greater financial inclusion. 
If regulations are to foster financial inclusion, they need to be commensurate with risks. A 
recent  BIS  paper12  highlights  the  need  for  regulation  of  financial  innovations  for  financial 
stability  to  be  calibrated  to  the  nature  and  risks  of  each  different  service/innovation.  In 
calibrating  the  regulatory  framework  for  basic  financial  services  according  to  their 
contribution to systemic risks for the entire financial system it will be necessary to ensure that 
financial regulation itself does not become a cause for exclusion. 
The Indian experience 
Let  me  now  briefly  describe  the  Indian  experience  with  financial  stability  and  financial 
inclusion. 
Financial stability is not a mandate of the Reserve Bank of India as per its statute. Financial 
stability considerations have, however, always been taken note of by the Reserve Bank in its 
                                                 
11   ADBI Working Paper Series No. 259 and “Small Customers, Big Market:Commercial Banks in Microfinance” 
by Malcolm Harper and S S Arora (2005). 
12   On harnessing the potential of financial inclusion by Peter Dittus and Michael Klein: BIS, May 2011. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
policy  making  process.  This  is  particularly  so  in  the  period  since  the  balance  of  payments 
crisis in the early 1990s. Since 2004, financial stability has been formally added as a policy 
objective of the Reserve Bank of India along with price stability and inclusive growth. More 
recently, financial stability is being pursued explicitly by the Reserve Bank with the setting up 
of a Financial Stability Unit with the remit to conduct continuous macroprudential surveillance 
of the economy. 
Financial  inclusion  has also  been  a  major  policy  objective  in  the  Indian  context  since  long 
though the term financial inclusion has come to the forefront only of late. In fact, the Reserve 
Bank  is  perhaps  the  only  central  bank  in  the  world  which  attempts  to  reach  the  remotest 
locations of the country in a bid to create awareness and promote inclusion. The objective of 
achieving  greater  financial  inclusion  in  India  has  been  pursued  in  a  regulated  space.  The 
framework for financial inclusion has been bank led to a large extent and banks are closely 
regulated  and  supervised  entities  in  the  Indian  context.  Non-Banking  Financial  Companies 
(NBFCs)  engaged  in  activities  which  facilitate  financial  inclusion  are  also  largely  regulated 
while  a  regulatory  framework  for  the  Micro  Finance  Institutions  (MFIs)  is  also  under 
contemplation13. Importantly, the broad compulsions of the health and resilience of financial 
institutions and that of financial stability have not been lost sight of even as financial inclusion 
has been pursued with vigour. It is pertinent to note at this point that the remit of the recently 
established  Financial  Stability  and  Development  Council  (FSDC)  which  is  the  apex  level 
inter-institutional body for financial stability in the country also includes financial inclusion. 
The  foundation  for  promoting  greater  financial  access  in  the  country  can  be  traced  to  the 
findings of the all-India Rural Credit Survey in the early 1950s. The findings of the Survey 
indicated that, out of the total borrowings of farmers in 1951–52 estimated at Rs. 7.5 billion, 
commercial banks provided less than one per cent while moneylenders provided 70 per cent. 
The  distribution  of  bank  branches  was  also  highly  skewed  in  favour  of  urban  and 
metropolitan/port centres in 1969. Even in terms of distribution of bank credit, the share of 
private  corporate  business  exhibited  an  overwhelming  increase,  from  44  per  cent  during 
1957–61 to over 60 per cent for the quinquennium ending 196914. 
These  disturbing  features  brought  out  by  the  survey  culminated  in  the  process  of 
nationalization of major public sector banks with a view to leveraging the banking system as 
a tool for promoting a slew of social objectives of which inclusion was one. The initiatives in 
this direction included the requirement that banks could open a branch in a location with one 
or more branches only if they had opened four in a location with no or a few branches. The 
branch licensing policy of the Reserve Bank of India has undergone a sea change since then 
in  terms  of  liberalisation  but  the  cornerstone  of  the  policy,  till  date,  remains  one  of 
encouraging banks to open an increasing number of branches in the less banked regions of 
the  country  by  linking  of  the  regulatory  framework  for  opening  branches  to,  inter  alia, 
penetration in un-banked areas. The extensive branch network of many Indian banks have 
today  provided  them  with  a  strong  base  of  stable  core  deposits  –  widely  recognised  as  a 
critical  element  for  the  resilience  of  the  banking  system  to  the  headwinds  of  any  financial 
instability.  
Mandated  priority  sector  lending  (40  per  cent  of  lending  in  case  of  domestic  banks  and 
32 per cent in case of foreign banks) was another policy initiative aimed at ensuring flow of 
affordable  credit  to  the  less  privileged  sections  and  segments.  Importantly,  there  is  no 
interest  subvention  involved  in  the  lending  by  the  banks  to  priority  sectors  (except  for  the 
insignificant percentage of loans extended under the Differential Rate of Interest scheme to 
                                                 
13   On December 2, 2011, Reserve Bank of India has issued a circular wherein a new category of NBFC – Non 
Banking Financial Company – Micro Finance Institutions has been introduced. The regulatory directions for 
NBFC-MFIs have also been issued along with the circular. 
14   “Financial Inclusion and Financial Fragility: An Empirical Note”, S. Ghosh, 2008. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
the  most  disadvantaged  people  and  Government’s  interest  subvention  in  respect  of 
agricultural 
loans).  The  usual  norms  of  capital  adequacy,  asset  classification  and 
provisioning  apply  to  such  lendings,  implying  thereby  that  the  quality  of  the  credit portfolio 
was to be maintained and the soundness of institutions was not compromised with even as 
financial inclusion was promoted. 
The concept of no frills accounts with low or zero minimum balance was introduced in 2005 
to  enable  a  larger  section  of  the  poor  and  under-priviledged  section.  Simpler  KYC  norms 
were  introduced  for  this  section  of  society  with  a  view  to  ensuring  that  people  without 
documentary proof of address and /or identity are not deprived of banking facilities while at 
the same time ensuring that the minimum requirement for the proper identification of each 
customer  is  complied  with.  The  recently  introduced  “Aadhar”  project  by  the  Unique 
Identification  Authority  of  India  (UIDA)  will,  by  providing  a  clear  proof  of  identity  for  all 
residents,  pave  the  way  for  the  entry  of  under-priviledged  citizens  into  the  formal  banking 
system within the ambit of prevalent regulation. 
Following the recommendations of the Khan Committee, Reserve Bank of India paved the 
way for branchless banking (through the business correspondents/Business facilitator model) 
in 2006 in recognition of the fact that it would be difficult to provide access to banking facility 
for  every  household  in  around  600,000  villages  in  the  country  through  brick  &  mortar 
branches.  Simultaneously,  sufficient  safeguards  in  the  form  of  biometric  identification  of 
customers, guidelines for the appointment and functioning of agents, including stipulation of 
distance criterion from a base branch, same or next day accounting of customer transactions 
and  adherence  to  the  risk  mitigation  norms  for  outsourcing  of  activities  have  been  put  in 
place from the perspective of consumer protection to address the risk of reckless selling of 
products and services by agents working to earn commission. 
Non-banking and non-financial entities have been permitted into the financial inclusion space 
in a calibrated manner largely to help banks in offering customized payment and remittance 
services  to  customers  with  adequate  safeguards.  Payment  services  operated  by  the  non-
banks were brought under regulation of the Reserve Bank of India after the notification of the 
Payment and Settlement Systems  Act, 2007 and the broad approach has been that these 
entities  will  provide  fee  based  services  without  obtaining  access  to  customer  funds  (for 
example,  mobile  wallets  provided  by  non-banks  through  the  mechanism  of  the  escrow 
account with a bank).  
The Self Help Group-Bank Linkage Program introduced in the 1990s facilitated the formation 
of  tremendous  synergies  between  the  formal  financial  sector  and  the  informal  sector. 
Provision  of  banking  services  to  the  poor  households  was  achieved  without  relaxation  of 
capital adequacy and other prudential norms for microfinance entities and other institutions.  
Consumer  protection  issues  have  remained  at  the  forefront  even  as  the  drive  for  financial 
inclusion  remained  at  the  top  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India’s  policy  agenda.  In  2005,  the 
Reserve  Bank  facilitated  the  establishment  of  the  Banking  Codes  and  Standards  Board  of 
India (BCSBI) in order to ensure that a comprehensive code of conduct for fair treatment of 
customers is evolved and the adherence of banks to the code is monitored on a continuous 
basis.  Recent  initiatives  have  focused  on  the  reports  of  excessive/usurious  interest  rates 
being  charged  by  the  MFIs  in  a  non-  transparent  manner/  and  other  questionable 
practices/processes including coercive recovery methods. A regulatory framework aimed at 
MFIs  is  being  contemplated  by  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  and  will  be  issued  shortly15.  A 
comprehensive  financial  literacy  programme  aims  to  equip  the  hitherto  unbanked  and 
unaware  to  make  best  use  of  the  increasing  access  to  financial  services,  even  as  the 
Banking  Ombudsman  System  has  been  established  to  provide  a  forum  for  grievance 
redressal.  In  fact,  the  cornerstone  of  the  Reserve  Bank’s  Platinum  Jubilee  celebrations  in 
                                                 
15   Refer to footnote 11. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
2009–2010 was an outreach programme aimed at educating low income groups, preferably 
in  the  remote  areas,  to  demand  financial  services  and  at  encouraging  banks  to  supply 
financial  services  needed  by  the  poor.  The  initiative  continues  to  be  an  ongoing  endeavor 
well after the completion of the Platinum Jubilee year.  
Recent policy initiatives to drive financial inclusion, including formulation of a board approved 
Financial Inclusion Policy (FIP) by the banks, also attempt to strike a balance between the 
requirements of financial inclusion and that of soundness of financial institutions and stability 
of the financial system. 
The  Malegam  Committee  has  made  a  series  of  recommendations  to  address  reports  of 
excessive interest rates, over-borrowing, ghost borrowers and coercive recovery practices in 
the microfinance sector. Some of these recommendations have been implemented and will 
aid  in  ensuring  that  the  industry  continues  to  play  a  facilitative  role  in  achieving  greater 
financial inclusion16. 
The Business Correspondent/Business Facilitator (BC/BF) model of branchless banking has 
been introduced as a possible solution to overcome barriers of geography posed for financial 
inclusion. For success of this model it has been envisaged that appropriate technology need 
to be adopted on a sufficiently large scale to make the system viable and fail proof. While 
suggesting that alternative delivery channels need to be explored and adopted to expand the 
banking outreach, the Reserve Bank of India has advised banks to not to lose focus on brick 
& mortar structures in unbanked villages. These structures could represent simple low cost 
intermediate entities comprising minimum infrastructure for operating customer transactions 
and  supporting  up  to  8–10  BCs  at  a  reasonable  distance  of  2–3  kms.  This  will  lead  to 
efficiency in cash management, documentation and redressal of customer grievances. This 
will also provide a supervisory mechanism over the operations of the BCs/BFs. Another very 
important  aspect  that  is  being  impressed  upon  the  banks  is  that  for  the  BC/BF  model  to 
succeed,  the  agents,  who  are  the  first  level  of  contact  for  customers,  have  to  be 
compensated adequately so that they too see this as a business opportunity for reasonable 
earnings and do not indulge in unethical practices. 
The wide range of policy initiatives undertaken in the country has yielded rich dividends and 
there  has  been  tremendous  progress  in  bringing  an  increasingly  growing  share  of  the 
populace closer to financial systems. Over 50,000 villages with a population of over 2000 are 
covered by banking services and nearly 75 million no frills accounts have been opened till 
March  2011.  A  recent  Reserve  Bank  Working  Paper17  arrived  at  an  index  of  financial 
inclusion  (IFI)  as  a  measure  of  financial  inclusion  for  the  country  using  data  on  three 
dimensions of financial inclusion viz. banking penetration, availability of banking services and 
usage.  Based  on  data  from  2006–07  to  2009–10,  the  paper  categorised  the  majority  of 
Indian states as states with low levels of financial inclusion. These findings are confirmed by 
empirical evidence. As per recent statistics, only 57 per cent of the population has a bank 
account and only 30,000 of the 600,000 habitations in the country have a commercial bank 
branch. As against this, in UK three per cent of households are unbanked, in Sweden less 
than two per cent of the adult population did not have an account in 2000, in Germany, the 
figure was around three per cent and less than four per cent of adults in Canada and five per 
cent in Belgium lacked a bank account. A lot therefore needs to be achieved further in order 
to  realize  the  goal  of  inclusive  growth  with  stability.  In  particular,  we  should  also  not  lose 
focus  that  financial  inclusion  is  part  of  the  wider  concept  of  economic  inclusion  and  that 
effective risk mitigants have to be in place while we pursue the financial inclusion objectives 
vigorously so that the efforts are viable and sustainable overtime. 
                                                 
16   Refer to footnote 4. 
17   RBI WP series no. 8/2011 “Financial Inclusion in India” by S K Chattopadhyay. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
Concluding thoughts 
Let me now conclude with a few final observations. 
Financial  inclusion  is  the  key  to  inclusive  growth  with  its  motto  of  empowerment  of  poor, 
underprivileged and low income/skilled rural/urban households. Amartya Sen18 convincingly 
argued  that  poverty  is  not  merely  insufficient  income  rather  the  absence  of  wide  range  of 
capabilities,  including  security  and  ability  to  participate  in  economic  and  political  systems. 
Financial  inclusion  is  designed  to  bring  about  the  capability  to  participate  and  contribute 
among the economically and socially excluded people by creating equal opportunities. 
Achieving  sustainable  financial  inclusion  will  require  a  systemic  effort  which  leverages 
technology, viable business models and appropriate regulatory framework cohesively. While 
further  research  is  needed  to  better  understand  the  transmission  channels  and  potential 
feedback loops between financial stability and financial access and to identify policy solutions 
aiming  to  balance  both  objectives  in  a  sustainable  manner,  it  is  evident  that  financial 
inclusion  and  financial  stability  need  to  coexist.  The  Indian  experience  has  proved  that 
financial  inclusion  can  work  within  the  framework  of  financial  stability  given  an  enabling 
regulatory  environment.  Also  providing  testimony  to  this  are  the  experiences  of  a  host  of 
other  countries,  some  of  which  I  have  briefly  described  earlier.  A  combination  of  viable 
business  strategies  targeted  towards  the  population  at  the  bottom  of  the  pyramid,  lower 
transactions  costs  with  technological  innovations  and  appropriate  regulatory  environment 
have  helped  foster  greater  financial  inclusion  with  stability.  The  twin  objectives  of  financial 
stability  and  financial  inclusion  are  arguably  two  sides  of  a  coin  but  it  is  imperative  that  a 
robust risk-mitigating framework which exploits their complementarities while minimising the 
conflicts is adopted to ensure that they do not work at cross purposes.  
                                                 
18   Sen, Amartya, (2000): “Development as Freedom”, Anchor Books, New York, 2000. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
