Charles I Plosser: Outlook and a perspective on monetary policy 
Text  of  the  Farash  Distinguished  Lecture  by  Mr  Charles  I  Plosser,  President  and  Chief 
Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, at the Zell/Lurie Real Estate 
Center Fall Members’ Meeting, Wharton, 12 October 2011. 
 Good afternoon. Thank you for the opportunity to be here at the Zell/Lurie Real Estate Center 
Fall  Members’  Meeting.  Your  founding  director,  Peter  Linneman,  and  I  were  graduate 
students together at the University of Chicago – a long time ago – and so I am especially 
delighted to be part of your program today. 
I am also honored to have the opportunity to deliver the Farash Distinguished Lecture. Max 
Farash, who died last year at age 95, was a Rochester-based real estate pioneer, and I had 
the honor of knowing Max over the years, especially when I served as dean of the Simon 
School of Business at the University of Rochester. 
Today, I’d like to share with you some thoughts on the nation’s economy. I will also discuss 
my  views  on  monetary  policy.  As  always,  these  are  my  views  and  do  not  necessarily 
represent  the  views  of  the  Federal Reserve  Board  or  my  colleagues  on  the  Federal  Open 
Market Committee. 
Economic outlook 
The U.S. economy has not lived up to expectations this year. Indeed, in July we learned from 
the  revisions  to  the  government’s  economic  data  that  the  recession  was  deeper  and  the 
recovery  was  weaker  than  we  had  previously  thought.  Some  of  this  weakness  is  perfectly 
understandable,  given  the  unanticipated  shocks  we  experienced.  We  began  the  year  with 
severe  snowstorms  in  the  East,  then  the  earthquake  and  ensuing  disasters  in  Japan, 
followed by the unrest in the Middle East and North Africa that led to a run-up in oil prices, 
and a renewed concern about European sovereign debt. And all of that occurred before May. 
Over the summer, the economy faced more challenges, with the further deterioration of the 
European sovereign debt crisis, as well as our own fracas in Washington over fiscal policy 
and the debt ceiling. These events weighed heavily on business and consumer confidence. 
While many of these factors are transitory, and each will wane in time, the cumulative effect 
has served to feed uncertainty and inhibit growth. 
Indeed, growth in the first half of 2011 was less than 1 percent, reflecting a very weak first 
quarter, and while the second quarter improved, growth remained well below the longer-term 
trend.  In  light  of  this  performance,  most  forecasters  have  revised  down  their  forecasts  for 
overall growth for the full year. I now expect GDP growth to be less than 2 percent in 2011, 
with an acceleration to around 3 percent in 2012.  
Although the downside risks around this forecast are apparent, I do not believe we are on the 
verge of a double-dip recession. Indeed, many of my business contacts suggest that while 
growth is very sluggish and uneven, they do not see the precipitous declines that many news 
accounts would suggest. Perhaps the greatest uncertainty today surrounds the outcome of 
financial events in Europe. The sovereign debt crisis is not resolved. Financial markets seem 
very sensitive to news from Europe, even to the point of discounting positive news on the 
U.S.  economy.  Resolution  or  greater  clarity  on  the  path  forward  in  Europe  would  be  most 
helpful for the U.S. and world economic growth prospects. 
Yet as our economy recovers, we must realize the financial crisis was a severe shock that 
affected  many  economies  around  the  world  and  led  to  a  recession  of  great  depth  and 
structural imbalances. Prior to the recession, some sectors, such as financial services and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
real estate, had grown to historically high shares of U.S. GDP. As the economy rebalances, 
they may not return to those pre-recession highs, nor should we necessarily seek or expect 
them to do so. 
Consumer and business spending 
Now, let me turn to consumer and business spending. One of the more striking aspects of 
this  recession  is  the  continued  weakness  in  consumer  spending  relative  to  previous 
recoveries. There were modest increases last year, but spending decelerated over the first 
half of this year in the face of higher oil prices and the continued deleveraging of household 
balance sheets. Consumers continue to pay down debt and work to rebuild their net worth by 
saving more and consuming less. This is a perfectly natural and rational reaction to events. 
Until  these  households  perceive  that  they  have  restored  a  balance  to  their  long-run 
consumption  and  saving  patterns  commensurate  with  their  earnings  prospects,  they  will 
remain conservative in their spending patterns. Moreover, the more uncertain they are about 
their own future earning power, the more reluctant households will be to spend and the more 
they will feel the need to save to protect their families against unforeseen events. 
A brighter spot has been business investment spending, which has been supported by solid 
growth  in  corporate  earnings.  Looking  beyond  the  month-to-month  volatility,  spending  on 
equipment and software has continued to expand. The new orders data suggest continued 
growth,  although  perhaps  not  at  the  same  pace.  Indications  from  some  of  the  regional 
business  surveys,  like  the  Philadelphia  Fed’s  Business  Outlook  Survey  of  manufacturers, 
suggest some weakness relative to earlier in the year. 
Many  commentators  have  taken  note  of  the  weakness  in  our  monthly  survey,  since  it  has 
proven to be a useful gauge for national trends in manufacturing. In August and September, 
the measures of current activity were negative. But our polling in August took place in the 
midst of market volatility after Standard & Poor’s downgrade of U.S. debt, and the September 
survey occurred just days after the hurricanes and the severe flooding in New Jersey and 
Pennsylvania. Measures of future activity, however, have remained positive, and September 
was stronger than August, suggesting that firms expect activity to pick up over the next six 
months. 
Nevertheless, the volatility in the financial markets over the last few months has contributed 
to  sharp  declines  in  business  and  consumer  sentiment.  With  many  businesses  and 
consumers  uncertain  about  future  taxes,  regulations,  and  the  financial  ramifications  of  the 
European  sovereign  debt  situation,  it  is  no  wonder  that  sentiment  is  flagging.  This  high 
degree of uncertainty dampens current growth and poses added risk to the forecast. 
Labor markets 
Conditions  in  labor  markets  remain  a  serious  challenge.  Given  the  weak  growth  in 
employment  so  far  this  year,  we  have  not  made  even  the  modest  progress  on  reducing 
unemployment  rates  that  many  forecasters  had  anticipated.  The  September  employment 
report,  including  revisions  to  July  and  August,  was  a  bit  of  positive  news.  Firms  added 
287,000 jobs to their payrolls in the third quarter, comparable to the second quarter. But this 
pace  is  below  what  is  needed  to make  significant  progress  in  reducing  the  unemployment 
rate, which has remained stubbornly high at 9.1 percent. 
The challenges facing the employment situation are underscored by the fact that more than 
40 percent of the unemployed, or some 6 million people, have been out of work for 27 weeks 
or longer. This suggests we should not expect an easy solution to the problems in the labor 
market.  Millions  of  unemployed  workers  may  take  longer  to  find  jobs  because  their  skills 
have depreciated, or they may need to seek employment in other sectors or in other parts of 
the country. These sorts of adjustments will take time to resolve. Jobs and workers will need 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
to be reallocated across the economy and across the country, which is likely to be a long and 
slow process. 
Thus, while I expect a moderate recovery to continue and to strengthen over time, I expect to 
see only modest declines in the unemployment rate, with probably little change over the rest 
of this year, and then gradually falling to a range of 8 to 8½ percent by the end of 2012. 
Inflation 
Let me now turn to my outlook for inflation. Just as growth has been weaker this year than 
many forecasters had anticipated, inflation has been higher than expected. Monthly changes 
in inflation have moderated slightly from those seen earlier in the year as the prices of oil and 
other  commodities  have  come  down.  However,  measured  on  a  year-over-year  basis,  both 
total  inflation  and  core  inflation  continue  to  advance.  I  do  anticipate  that  with  many 
commodity  prices  now  leveling  off  or  falling,  and  inflation  expectations  relatively  stable, 
inflation will moderate in the near term. 
Our focus should not be so much on the near term as on the medium term. Looking further 
ahead,  we  must  continue  to  monitor  this  situation  very  carefully,  particularly  in  this 
environment  of  very  accommodative  monetary  policy.  Inflation  most  often  develops 
gradually, and if monetary policy waits too long to respond, it can be very costly to correct. 
Indeed, it is good to remember that the current inflationary environment is quite different from 
the one we faced a year ago when we embarked on the so-called QE2 policy to purchase 
$600  billion  of  long-term  U.S.  Treasuries.  At  the  time,  inflation  was  falling  and  there  were 
concerns about deflation – year over year, PCE inflation was running about 1.2 percent and 
core PCE inflation (excluding food and energy) was under 1 percent. Today, PCE inflation is 
2.9  percent  and  core  PCE  is  running  nearly  1.7  percent.  I  would  also  note  that 
unemployment was 9.8 percent last fall compared to 9.1 percent today. Thus, with inflation 
higher and unemployment lower, it is not so surprising that some might question the need for 
the additional accommodation the FOMC undertook in August and September – a point I will 
return to shortly. 
In this environment, I think it is very important that we refrain from actions that risk fueling a 
steady rise in inflation or inflation expectations over the medium term. We must not become 
too sanguine that high unemployment will lead to low inflation. The lesson of the 1970s is 
clear – high unemployment or low resource utilization is not sufficient to prevent high rates of 
inflation.  The  current  environment  in  the  United  Kingdom  should  also  be  a  warning.  The 
unemployment rate in Britain is near 8 percent, having risen sharply during its recession, yet 
inflation is now approaching 5 percent and has been steadily rising for nearly two years. 
Monetary policy 
This  brings  me  to  a  discussion  of  the  recent  policy  actions  the  Fed  has  taken,  why  I 
dissented  from  these  actions  in  August  and  September,  and  what  I  believe  should  be  the 
long-term framework of monetary policy. 
As I noted at the beginning of my remarks, the economic conditions of the past few years 
have led to  extraordinary  monetary  policy accommodation. To date, our actions have kept 
the federal funds rate – the traditional instrument of monetary policy – near zero for almost 
three  years.  The  Fed’s  balance  sheet  has  grown  more  than  threefold,  from  nearly 
$900 billion before the crisis to about $2.9 trillion today. Moreover, the asset composition has 
shifted significantly from mostly short-term Treasuries to longer-term Treasuries, mortgage-
backed securities, and agency debt. This extraordinary degree of monetary accommodation 
has played a role in supporting the recovery thus far, and it continues to do so. 
In August, the FOMC changed its guidance about its expectations for the future path of the 
federal  funds  rate.  In  particular,  it  stated  that  economic  conditions  were  “likely  to  warrant 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
exceptionally  low  levels  for  the  federal  funds  rate  at  least  through  mid-2013.”  At  its  late 
September meeting, the FOMC announced additional accommodative action. In an effort to 
reduce long-term Treasury yields from already historically low levels, the FOMC intends to 
purchase  $400  billion  of  longer-term  Treasury  securities  and  to  sell  an  equal  amount  of 
shorter-term Treasuries by the end of June 2012. This action will not increase the size of the 
Fed’s balance sheet, but it will lengthen the maturity of the Fed’s holdings. In addition, the 
FOMC will be reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency 
mortgage-backed  securities  in  mortgage-backed  securities  rather  than  Treasuries.  This 
action was intended to help support mortgage markets. 
I dissented from both of these decisions. As I noted earlier, given that inflation was notably 
higher and unemployment lower than it was last fall when we embarked on our second round 
of asset purchases, it wasn’t clear that further accommodation was called for. In addition, I 
believe these actions will do little to improve the near-term prospects for economic growth or 
employment,  but  they  do  pose  some  real  risks.  Policy  actions  are  not  free  and  should  be 
evaluated based on the costs and benefits. 
Based  on  our  experience  with  Operation  Twist  in  the  1960s  and  with  last  year’s QE2,  the 
reduction in long-term rates from our actions in September is likely to be less than 20 basis 
points for the 10-year Treasury yield, which is currently only 2 percent. The pass-through to 
the  rates  at  which  consumers  and  businesses  actually  borrow  is  likely  to  be  considerably 
less. Thus, I am skeptical that this will do much to spur businesses to hire or consumers to 
spend, given the ongoing adjustments occurring in the economy and the uncertainties posed 
by the fiscal challenges both here and abroad. 
In addition to having little benefit, the actions come with significant potential costs. We have 
provided  a  great  deal  of  monetary  accommodation  to  the  economy,  and  given  the 
stubbornness  of  the  unemployment  rate  in  responding  to  these  efforts,  we  should  be 
cautious and vigilant that our accommodative policies do not translate into a steady rise in 
inflation over the medium term even while the unemployment rate remains elevated. Creating 
an  environment  of  stagflation,  reminiscent  of  the  1970s,  will  not  help  businesses,  the 
unemployed, or the consumer. It is an outcome we must carefully guard against. 
We  also  need  to  ensure  that  Fed  policy  remains  credible.  Economic  theory  and  historical 
experience  tell  us  that  a  central  bank’s  ability  to  maintain  price  stability  and  promote 
economic growth hinges on its credibility. Actions that undermine credibility can put at risk 
the effectiveness of a central bank’s ability to achieve its objectives. In my view, the actions 
taken  in  August  and  September  risk  undermining  the  Fed’s  credibility  by  giving  the 
impression that we think such policies can have a major impact on the speed of the recovery. 
It is my assessment that they will not. We should not take actions simply because we can. To 
address  our  economic  ills  we  must  apply  the  appropriate  remedies.  A  doctor  who 
misdiagnoses  a  disease  and  prescribes  the  wrong  medicine  can  make  the  patient  worse. 
The  ills  we  currently  face  are  not  readily  resolved  through  ever  more  accommodative 
monetary policy. If we act as if the Fed has the ability to solve all our economic problems, our 
credibility  will  be  undermined.  The  loss  of  that  credibility  and  the  loss  of  the  public’s 
confidence could be costly to the economy because it will make it much harder for the Fed to 
implement effective monetary policy in the future. 
Credibility was also at the center of my opposition to changing the forward policy guidance in 
August. I was concerned that tying monetary policy to the calendar could be misinterpreted 
by  the  public;  it  could  suggest  that  monetary  policy  is  no  longer  contingent  on  how  the 
economic outlook evolves. This could lead to a loss of credibility should economic conditions 
develop in a way that requires the federal funds rate to be adjusted prior to mid-2013. And in 
my view, given the outlook, economic conditions will likely warrant that the Fed begin to raise 
rates  before  then.  If  such  a  move  is  required  and  we  don’t  act,  our  credibility  to  control 
inflation would be severely damaged. Yet, if we do act, our credibility will also be damaged 
because we encouraged the public to believe we would not act before mid-2013. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Finally,  the  actions  taken  at  our  last  meeting  will  make  our  exit  from  this  period  of 
extraordinary  accommodation  more  complicated.  Since  we  will  have  more  long-term 
Treasury  securities  and  mortgage-backed  securities  in  our  portfolio,  the  time  it  will  take  to 
unwind  and  get  back  to  our  stated  goal  of  returning  to  an  all-Treasuries  portfolio  and 
shrinking  our  balance  sheet  may  need  to  be  extended  and  may  put  at  risk  our  ability  to 
control inflation over the medium term. 
This  does  not  mean  that  I  see  no  circumstances  in  which  further  monetary  policy  action 
should  be  taken.  Should  the  developments  in  the  euro  area  lead  to  significant  financial 
market  disruptions,  the  Fed  would  need  to  respond  in  its  role  of  lender  of  last  resort  to 
support financial stability and the payments system. Or if deflationary fears were to become a 
real threat again and we saw signs that the economy was moving to a sustained disinflation 
with  declining  inflation  rates  and  inflation  expectations,  then  we  would  need  to  consider 
further action to stabilize inflation expectations. 
The past three years have proven to be challenging times for monetary policymakers both 
here  and  abroad.  We  are  in  unprecedented  territory  in  terms  of  policy  tools  and  actions 
employed.  This  creates  difficulties  not  only  for  policymaking  but  also  for  the  Fed’s 
communications. In my view, a high priority for the Fed must be to strengthen our monetary 
policy  framework  and  articulate  that  framework  to  the  public  so  that  they  will  better 
understand the basis for our decisions and be better able to formulate expectations of future 
policy actions. 
I  believe  that  this  communication,  and  our  accountability  to  the  public,  could  be  greatly 
enhanced were the Fed to adopt an explicit numerical inflation goal. For nearly 20 years, I 
have advocated that the Fed make explicit its commitment to a numerical inflation objective 
in support of its full mandate. I believe that now is an opportune time to do so. 
Having such an objective in place would prove particularly useful in the current environment 
in which the Fed is providing monetary stimulus using new tools that are not as familiar to the 
public and when some may view the fiscal situation as threatening the independence of the 
Federal  Reserve  and  its  ability  to  maintain  price  stability.  And  it  will  help  in  the  future  by 
keeping 
these 
extraordinarily accommodative measures. 
inflation  expectations  well  anchored  during 
the  eventual  exit 
from 
Conclusion 
In summary, the U.S. economic recovery will continue and gradually strengthen over time. I 
expect  annual  growth  of  less  than  2  percent  this  year  to  gradually  accelerate  to  around 
3 percent next year. As the economy strengthens, prospects for labor markets will continue 
to improve and the unemployment rate will gradually decline, undoubtedly too gradually for 
many of us. 
As we move forward in this time of change, the Federal Reserve remains committed to its 
long-run  statutory  goals  of  price  stability  and  maximum  employment.  And  it  is  a  credible 
commitment to price stability that provides the surest path for monetary policy to successfully 
promote economic growth and employment. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
