Mark Carney: Summary of the latest Monetary Policy Report 
Opening  statement  by  Mr  Mark  Carney,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  the  press 
conference following the release of the Monetary Policy Report, Ottawa, 26 October 2011. 
 Good  morning.  Tiff  and  I  are  pleased  to  be  here  with  you  today  to  discuss  the  October 
Monetary Policy Report, which the Bank published this morning. 
 
less 
favourable  external  environment  affecting  Canada 
The  global  economy  has  slowed  markedly  as  several  downside  risks  to  the 
projection  outlined  in  the  Bank’s  July  MPR  have  been  realized.  Volatility  has 
increased  and  there  has  been  a  generalized  retrenchment  from  risk-taking  across 
markets.  The  combination  of  ongoing  deleveraging  by  banks  and  households, 
increased  fiscal  austerity  and  declining  confidence  is  expected  to  restrain  growth 
across the advanced economies.  
The Bank now expects that the euro area – where these dynamics are most acute – 
will  experience  a  brief  recession.  The  Bank’s  base-case  scenario  nonetheless 
assumes  that  the  euro-area  crisis  will  be  contained,  although  this  assumption  is 
clearly subject to downside risks.  
In the United States, real GDP growth is expected to be weak through the first half 
of 2012, reflecting diminished household confidence, tighter financial conditions and 
increased fiscal drag.  
Growth in China and other emerging-market economies is projected to moderate to 
a  more  sustainable  pace.  These  developments,  combined  with  recent  declines  in 
commodity prices, are expected to dampen global inflationary pressures. 
The  outlook  for  the  Canadian  economy  has  weakened  since  July,  with  the 
significantly 
through 
financial, confidence and trade channels. Although Canadian growth rebounded in 
the  third  quarter  with  the  unwinding  of  temporary  factors,  underlying  economic 
momentum  has  slowed  and  is  expected  to  remain  modest  through  the  middle  of 
next year. 
Domestic  demand  is  expected  to  remain  the  principal  driver  of  growth  over  the 
projection  horizon.  Household  expenditures  are  now  projected  to  grow  relatively 
modestly  as  lower  commodity  prices  and  heightened  volatility  in  financial  markets 
weigh on the incomes, wealth and confidence of Canadian households.  
Business  fixed  investment  is  still  expected  to  grow  solidly  in  response  to  very 
stimulative  financial  conditions  and  heightened  competitive  pressures,  although  it 
will be dampened by the weaker and more uncertain global economic environment.  
Net exports are expected to remain a source of weakness, owing to sluggish foreign 
demand and ongoing competitiveness challenges, including the persistent strength 
of the Canadian dollar. 
Overall,  the  Bank  expects  that  growth  in  Canada  will  be  slow  through  mid-2012 
before  picking  up  as  the  global  economic  environment  improves,  uncertainty 
dissipates and confidence increases.  
The weaker economic outlook implies greater and more persistent economic slack 
than previously anticipated, with the Canadian economy now expected to return to 
full capacity by the end of 2013. As a result, core inflation is expected to be slightly 
softer  than  previously  expected,  declining  through  2012  before  returning  to 
2 percent by the end of 2013.  
         BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
    The  projection  for  total  CPI  inflation  has  also  been  revised  down,  reflecting  the 
recent reversal of earlier sharp increases in world energy prices as well as modestly 
weaker core inflation. Total CPI inflation is expected to trough around 1 per cent by 
the middle of 2012 before rising with core inflation to the two per cent target by the 
end of 2013, as excess supply in the economy is slowly absorbed. 
There are several significant risks to the inflation outlook in Canada.  
The  three  main  upside  risks  relate  to  the  possibility  of  stronger-than-expected 
inflationary  pressures  in  the  global  economy,  stronger  momentum  in  Canadian 
household  spending,  and  the  possibility  of  a  faster-than-expected  rebound  in 
business and consumer confidence, due to more decisive policy action in the major 
advanced economies. 
The  three  main  downside  risks  relate  to  sovereign  debt  and  banking  concerns  in 
Europe,  the  increased  probability  of  a  recession  in  the  U.S.  economy,  and  the 
possibility  that  growth  in  household  spending  in  Canada  could  be  weaker  than 
projected. 
Reflecting  all  of  these  factors,  the  Bank  yesterday  maintained  the  target  for  the 
overnight rate at 1 per cent. With the target interest rate near historic lows and the 
financial system functioning well, there is considerable monetary policy stimulus in 
Canada.  The  Bank  will  continue  to  monitor  carefully  economic  and  financial 
developments in the Canadian and global economies, together with the evolution of 
risks,  and  set  monetary  policy  consistent  with  achieving  the  2  per  cent  inflation 
target over the medium term. 
With that, Tiff and I would be pleased to take your questions. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
