Stanley Fischer: Global economic developments – implications for 
Israel’s economy 
Summary of an address by Professor Stanley Fischer, Governor of the Bank of Israel, at a 
press  conference  on  the  occasion  of  the  departure  of  the  Bank  of  Israel  delegation  to  the 
annual  meeting  of  the  IMF  and  World  Bank  in  Washington,  Bank  of  Israel,  Jerusalem, 
18 September 2011. 
 This meeting is being held on the occasion of the departure of the Bank of Israel delegation 
to the annual meeting of the IMF and the World Bank, which will discuss global economic 
developments. I will therefore start with a description of the situation in that area. The global 
economy is experiencing a slowdown, which was a surprise mainly in the US, for which the 
forecasts  of  growth  have  been  reduced  by  more  than  1.5  percentage  points  since  March. 
The data for the first quarter were revised downwards, so that in total the US economy grew 
by  less  than  one  percent  in  the  first  half  of  the  year.  The  President  presented  a  program, 
amounting to some 3 percent of GDP, to support economic growth, but despite that program 
growth is still expected to be low. The Fed may announce a program of quantitative easing, 
this  time  based  on  especially  long-term  bonds.  Such  a  program  is  expected  to  be 
controversial, but the Fed does not currently have at its disposal the standard tools for coping 
with the slowdown. 
Europe is facing a serious problem of government debts, and insurance against the default of 
various countries has become significantly more costly – while Israel’s CDS (credit default 
swap) spread is 188 basis points (b.p.) (1.88 percent), Greece’s has risen above 5,000 b.p. 
(50  percent),  and  Spain’s  is  about  400  b.p.  The  slowdown  in  Europe  so  far  has  been 
relatively  moderate,  but  the  problems  are  expected  to  affect  growth  mainly  in  2012,  when 
growth  in  the  eurozone  is  expected  to  be  only  1  percent.  Initial  estimates  suggest  a 
slowdown also in world trade, with trade in goods at a standstill since March. This standstill 
leads  to  a  slowdown  also  in  Israel’s  exports,  which  constitute  one  of  the  most  important 
engines of growth for the economy. 
The  above  developments  are  taking  place  against  the  background  of  a  very  interesting 
process in which the center of gravity of the global economy is moving towards Asia. The 
scenario we are currently witnessing – with the Europeans speaking with the Chinese and 
with other BRIC (Brazil, Russia, India, China) countries about the support those countries will 
make available to help stabilize the markets in Europe – was unimaginable a mere 15 years 
ago. 
The  global  slowdown  has  implications  for  Israel’s  economy.  Interest  rates  in  the  major 
economies are expected to remain low for several years, and this will affect Israel’s monetary 
policy. The slowdown has a direct impact on the demand for Israel’s exports. The situation in 
Europe  is  likely  to  have  a  negative  effect  on  financial  stability  there,  and  hence  on  global 
financial stability too. This concern has already been reflected in the price of bank shares in 
Israel. Nevertheless, Israel’s economy has reached this situation in a good condition: GDP 
has grown at good rates in the last several quarters, and unemployment is at its lowest level 
in about 30 years. The exchange rate of the shekel against the dollar has weakened in the 
last  few  months,  and  is  expected  to  help  exports.  The  trends  in  the  current  account  are 
changing: after growing accustomed to a surplus in the last few years, we now expect the 
current account to be more or less balanced next year. Israel’s economy can certainly exist 
in  the  environment  of  a  balanced  current  account,  but  it  is  a  new  situation  with  which  we 
must  familiarize  ourselves.  The  interest  rate  in  Israel  is  higher  than  those  in  the  large 
advanced economies, and there is space for an interest rate cut should the need arise. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Israel’s economy received a well deserved recognition for its successful achievements in the 
last  eight  years,  expressed  by  the  recent  improved  credit  rating.  In  the  statement 
accompanying  the  revised  rating,  the  rating  agency  stressed  Israel’s  robust  budget  policy 
and  wise  monetary  policy,  as  well  as  the  determined  supervision  of  the  banking  system. 
Nonetheless,  the  statement  also  emphasized  the  threats  on  the  horizon,  and  we  must 
continue  to  adhere  to  the  correct  policies  that  will  justify  the  higher  rating  we  have  been 
afforded, and persist in supporting the economy’s strength in the future. 
The issues that led to the outbreak of the recent demonstrations and to the formation of the 
Trajtenberg Committee are serious ones, and reflect serious problems in Israel’s economy. 
Many  of  the  issues  relate  to  the  high  cost  of  living.  Professor  Manuel  Trajtenberg  is  an 
excellent  economist,  and  he  is  experienced  in  formulating  policy  recommendations.  His 
appointment as head of the Committee was an excellent decision, as was his choice of the 
other members of the Committee to work with him, including, of course, the Deputy Governor 
of the Bank of Israel, Dr. Karnit Flug. It is premature at this stage to refer to the Committee’ 
recommendations, as it is due to meet several times more before it formulates its proposals 
and  publicizes  them.  We  do  know,  however,  that  the  recommendations  are  expected  to 
remain within the budget framework, and not deviate from it. In this context we must point out 
that for two years we have been stating in the Bank of Israel Annual Report that from 2013 
the various fiscal rules are inconsistent with each other, as the planned tax reductions are 
not consistent with the planned path of an increase in expenditure and reduction in the deficit 
– growth of close to 5 percent will be needed to avoid exceeding the target deficit. 
The Committee for Examining and Encouraging Competition is also currently active and is 
expected  to  publish  its  recommendations  shortly.  This  too  is  a  serious  and  professional 
committee, and Karnit Flug represents the Bank of Israel on it, together with the Supervisor 
of Banks, David Zaken. I expect that this committee will provide a good, although not simple, 
solution to the problem of concentration in the economy, and will demand a lot of work from 
policy makers in the implementation of its recommendations. 
The  geopolitical  situation  is  definitely  worrying,  and  the  negative  scenarios,  should  they 
occur, are liable to have negative consequences for Israel’s economy. These scenarios do 
not depend on the Bank of Israel’s policies, but yet we have to be prepared for the possible 
impact on the economy, and we hope that in the end, the negative scenarios will not unfold. 
What should we do, then, in the future? We must maintain the fiscal framework. It is possible 
that there will be an increase in the deficit as a result of the automatic stabilizers in the case 
of a sharp drop in GDP growth, but it would not be correct to take the initiative to increase the 
deficit beyond the possible activity of automatic stabilizers. Monetary policy will have to take 
into account developments in inflation, growth, interest rates abroad, the exchange rate, and 
balance of payments. Next week we will have to make an interest rate decision against the 
background  of  all  these  factors,  and  it  will  not  be  an  easy  decision.  Likewise,  we  must 
continue  our  determined  policy  of  supervision  of  the  banking  system,  through  cooperation 
with  the  banks.  In  connection  with  this,  concerns  are  growing  about  the  credit  repayment 
ability of several companies in the economy, and we must be aware of that. 
Many are now asking if the current situation is worse than what happened in 2008. In some 
respects, there is a similarity-now, like the eve of the crisis of 2008, we are seeing negative 
scenarios in the global economy, but we don’t know if they will develop to the same level of 
severity as in 2008. In any case, we are refreshing the policy tools and the scenarios which 
we faced in 2008, but we must take into account that the next crisis, if it happens, will not be 
identical  to  the  previous  one,  and  we  will  need  to  adjust  the  policy  response  where 
necessary. 
I would like to raise two points in conclusion: 
The  first  point  relates  to  the  discussions  regarding  concentration.  A  lot  is  said  about  the 
people described as “tycoons”. It should be remembered that the “tycoons” are acting within 
the  existing  legal  framework,  and  they  have  done  nothing  criminal.  Referring  to  them  as 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
people  who  have  committed  a  crime  is  populistic  –  a  populism  which  is  easy  in  the  short 
term, but dangerous in the long term. 
The second point is that the economic reality in the near future will not be simple. With that, 
the Israeli economy is in a strong position, and we have the ability to deal with the reality 
which we face. It is important that we continue to take responsible policy steps as we prepare 
for this encounter. 
A happy and sweet new year! 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   3
  4 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   5
   6 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
