Perks M Ligoya: “Financing Africa – through crisis and beyond” 
Opening  remarks  by  Dr  Perks  M  Ligoya,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Malawi,  at  the 
launch  of 
through  crisis  and  beyond”,  Lilongwe, 
7 November 2011. 
“Financing  Africa  – 
the  book 
 Ms Sandra Bloemenkamp, Country Manager for Malawi, World Bank 
Mr. Douglas Arbuckle, Mission Director, USAID Malawi 
Richard Dictus, Resident Coordinator, UNDP 
Distinguished Resource Persons 
Workshop Participants 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Opening Remarks 
I  am  honoured  to  join  you  this  evening  at  the  launch  of  a  flagship  publication,  Financing 
Africa: Through the Crisis and Beyond. 
This publication is a milestone study on the financial sector in Africa. It takes a fresh look at 
Africa’s financial systems in the light of major changes that have taken place in the global 
financial structure in the wake of the 2008 global financial crisis. The study covers Africa’s 
challenges in developing and safeguarding the current financial system. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, the main barriers to financial sector development in Africa include 
access to finance and high cost of loans. To grow and improve its productivity, the African 
financial system needs more competition and be more innovative. The increased competition 
would  promote  financial  innovations  and  adoption  of  new  technologies;  this  would  ensure 
better services to customers and an expansion of these services to new clients. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  financial  innovations  comprise  a  variety  of  new  products.  Recent 
examples in Africa include mobile banking (access to basic payment services through mobile 
phones),  and  new  players  in  the  financial  systems  such  as  deposit  taking  microfinance 
institutions, and agency banking (where banks are allowed to engage third parties to provide 
certain banking services on their behalf without having to put up brick and mortar). 
Ladies and Gentlemen, this expansion must be done while paying attention to the users of 
financial  services.  Adequate  financial  literacy  should  be  infused  to  both  businesses  and 
households  through  development  of  financial  skills  and  establishment  of  frameworks  for 
consumer protection. 
The book contains a series of indicators on access, size, and efficiency of financial services 
in Africa. Today, African banking systems are stable, well-capitalized, and have good liquidity 
levels.  However,  they  lack  depth,  because  they  are  too  dominated  by  banks.  The 
transactions  are  mostly  short-term,  which  is  hardly  conducive  to  business  development. 
Financial systems also lack momentum, and penetration of the bank branches per capita is 
well  below  world  averages.  Furthermore,  banking  services  are  expensive  and  limit 
households’ access to basic financial services. It is therefore encouraging to note initiatives 
by some banks to reach out to the “unbanked” populations. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Finally, may I assure you that the Reserve Bank of Malawi will always strive to provide an 
enabling  legal  and  regulatory  framework  to  encourage  innovations  by  all  players  in  our 
financial  sector  in  order  to  enhance  access  to  financial  services.  In  this  regard,  we  will 
continue to work with stakeholders to put in place an enabling environment for business to 
thrive. 
I thank you for your kind attention, and God Bless you all. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
