Mario Draghi: ECB press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  and 
Mr Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  Frankfurt  am  Main, 
3 November 2011. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, welcome to our press conference. Today is the first time that I have 
had the privilege and pleasure of chairing the meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB. I 
am delighted to proceed now with our well-established practice of real-time communication 
and to report on the outcome of our meeting, together with the Vice-President.  
Based  on  its  regular  economic  and  monetary  analyses,  the  Governing  Council  decided  to 
reduce the key ECB interest rates by 25 basis points. While inflation has remained elevated 
and  is  likely  to  stay  above  2%  for  some  months  to  come,  inflation  rates  are  expected  to 
decline further in the course of 2012 to below 2%. At the same time, the underlying pace of 
monetary expansion continues to be moderate. After today’s decision, inflation should remain 
in line with price stability over the policy-relevant horizon. Owing to their unfavourable effects 
on financing conditions and confidence, the ongoing tensions in financial markets are likely to 
dampen the pace of economic growth in the euro area in the second half of this year and 
beyond. The economic outlook continues to be subject to particularly high uncertainty and 
intensified  downside  risks.  Some  of  these  risks  have  been  materialising,  which  makes  a 
significant  downward  revision  to  forecasts  and projections  for  average  real  GDP  growth  in 
2012 very likely. In such an environment, price, cost and wage pressures in the euro area 
should also moderate; today’s decision takes this into account. Overall, it remains essential 
for monetary policy to maintain price stability over the medium term, thereby ensuring a firm 
anchoring of inflation expectations in the euro area in line with our aim of maintaining inflation 
rates  below,  but  close  to,  2%  over  the  medium  term.  Such  anchoring  is  a  prerequisite  for 
monetary  policy  to  make  its  contribution  towards  supporting  economic  growth  and  job 
creation in the euro area. 
The provision of liquidity and the allotment modes for refinancing operations will continue to 
ensure that euro area banks are not constrained on the liquidity side. All the non-standard 
monetary policy measures taken during the period of acute financial market tensions are, by 
construction, temporary in nature. 
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
Real  GDP  growth  in  the  euro  area,  which  slowed  in  the  second  quarter  of  2011  to  0.2% 
quarter on quarter, is expected to be very moderate in the second half of this year. There are 
signs  that  previously  identified  downside  risks  have  been  materialising,  as  reflected  in 
unfavourable evidence from survey data. Looking forward, a number of factors seem to be 
dampening the underlying growth momentum in the euro area, including a moderation in the 
pace  of  global  demand  and  unfavourable  effects  on  overall  financing  conditions  and  on 
confidence resulting from ongoing tensions in a number of euro area sovereign debt markets. 
At  the  same  time,  we  continue  to  expect  euro  area  economic  activity  to  benefit  from 
continued positive economic growth in the emerging market economies, as well as from the 
low short-term interest rates and the various measures taken to support the functioning of the 
financial sector.  
In the Governing Council’s assessment, the downside risks to the economic outlook for the 
euro area are confirmed in an environment of particularly high uncertainty. Downside risks 
notably  relate  to  a  further  intensification  of the  tensions  in  some  segments  of  the  financial 
markets  in  the  euro  area  and  at  the  global  level,  as  well  as  to  the  potential  for  these 
pressures to further spill over into the euro area real economy. They also relate to the impact 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
of  the  still  high  energy  prices,  protectionist  pressures  and  the  possibility  of  a  disorderly 
correction of global imbalances. 
With  regard  to  price  developments,  euro  area  annual  HICP  inflation  was  3.0%  in  October 
according to Eurostat’s flash estimate, unchanged from September. Inflation rates have been 
at  elevated  levels  since  the  end  of  last  year,  mainly  driven  by  higher  energy  and  other 
commodity  prices.  Looking  ahead,  they  are  likely  to  stay  above  2%  for  some  months  to 
come, before falling below 2% in the course of 2012. Inflation rates are expected to remain in 
line with price stability over the policy-relevant horizon. This pattern reflects the expectation 
that,  in  an  environment  of  weaker  euro  area  and  global  growth,  price,  cost  and  wage 
pressures in the euro area should also moderate.  
The  Governing  Council  continues  to  view  the  risks  to  the  medium-term  outlook  for  price 
developments as broadly balanced, taking also into account today’s decision. On the upside, 
the main risks relate to the possibility of increases in indirect taxes and administered prices, 
owing to the need for fiscal consolidation in the coming years. In the current environment, 
however, inflationary pressure should abate. The main downside risks relate to the impact of 
weaker  than  expected  growth  in  the  euro  area  and  globally.  In  fact,  if  sustained,  sluggish 
economic growth has the potential to reduce medium-term inflationary pressure in the euro 
area.  
Turning  to  the  monetary  analysis,  the  annual  growth  rate  of  M3  increased  to  3.1%  in 
September  2011,  up  from  2.7%  in  August.  The  annual  growth  rate  of  loans  to  the  private 
sector, adjusted for loan sales and securitisation, was 2.7% in September, unchanged from 
August. As in August, inflows into M3 also reflect the heightened tensions in some financial 
markets.  In  particular,  inflows  into  money  market  fund  shares/units,  as  well  as  into 
repurchase  agreements  conducted 
to  have 
significantly affected monetary developments in September.  The annual growth rate of M1 
increased to 2.0% in September, from 1.7% in August. 
On the counterpart side, the annual growth rate of loans to non-financial corporations and to 
households  in  September,  adjusted  for  loan  sales  and  securitisation,  remained  broadly 
unchanged  compared  with  August,  at  2.2%  and  2.6%  respectively.  These  figures  do  not 
signal that the heightened financial market tensions have affected the supply of credit up to 
September. However, as such effects can manifest themselves with lags, close scrutiny of 
credit developments is warranted in the period ahead. Taking the appropriate medium-term 
perspective  and  looking  through  short-term  volatility,  underlying  broad  money  and  loan 
growth  have  stabilised  over  recent  months.  Overall,  the  underlying  pace  of  monetary 
expansion thus remains moderate.  
The  overall  size  of  monetary  financial  institutions’  balance  sheets  remained  broadly 
unchanged over the past few months. The soundness of bank balance sheets will be a key 
factor  in  reducing  potential  negative  feedback  loop  effects  related  to  tensions  in  financial 
markets, thereby facilitating an appropriate provision of credit to the economy over time. We 
therefore welcome the agreement of the European Council to proceed with the increase in 
the  capital  position  of  banks  to  9%  of  core  Tier  1  by  the  end  of  June  2012.  We  also  fully 
support  the  call  to  national  supervisors  to  ensure  that  banks’  recapitalisation  plans  do  not 
lead to excessive deleveraging. 
To sum up, based on its regular economic and monetary analyses, the Governing Council 
decided  to  reduce  the  key  ECB  interest  rates  by  25  basis  points.  While  inflation  has 
remained elevated and is likely to stay above 2% for some months to come, inflation rates 
are expected to decline further in the course of 2012 to below 2%. A cross-check with the 
information  from  our  monetary  analysis  confirms  that  the  underlying  pace  of  monetary 
expansion continues to be moderate. After today’s decision, inflation should remain in line 
with  price  stability  over  the  policy-relevant  horizon.  Owing  to  their  unfavourable  effects  on 
financing conditions and confidence, the ongoing tensions in financial markets are likely to 
dampen the pace of economic growth in the euro area in the second half of this year and 
through  central  counterparties,  appear 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
beyond. The economic outlook continues to be subject to particularly high uncertainty and 
intensified  downside  risks.  Some  of  these  risks  have  been  materialising,  which  makes  a 
significant  downward  revision  to  forecasts  and projections  for  average  real  GDP  growth  in 
2012 very likely. In such an environment, price, cost and wage pressures in the euro area 
should also moderate; today’s decision takes this into account. Overall, it remains essential 
for monetary policy to maintain price stability over the medium term, thereby ensuring a firm 
anchoring of inflation expectations in the euro area in line with our aim of maintaining inflation 
rates  below,  but  close  to,  2%  over  the  medium  term.  Such  anchoring  is  a  prerequisite  for 
monetary  policy  to  make  its  contribution  towards  supporting  economic  growth  and  job 
creation in the euro area. 
Turning  to  fiscal  policies,  all  euro  area  governments  need  to  show  their  inflexible 
determination  to  fully  honour  their  own  individual  sovereign  signature  as  a  key  element  in 
ensuring financial stability in the euro area as a whole. The Governing Council takes note of 
the  fiscal  commitments  expressed  in  the  Euro  Summit  statement  of  26  October  2011  and 
urges all governments to implement fully and as quickly as possible the measures necessary 
to  achieve  fiscal  consolidation  and  sustainable  pension  systems,  as  well  as  to  improve 
governance. The governments of countries under joint EU-IMF adjustment programmes and 
those of countries that are particularly vulnerable should stand ready to take any additional 
measures that become necessary.  
It is crucial that fiscal consolidation and structural reforms go hand in hand to strengthen 
confidence, growth prospects and job creation. The Governing Council therefore calls upon 
all  euro  area  governments  to  accelerate,  urgently,  the  implementation  of  substantial  and 
comprehensive  structural  reforms.  This  will  help  the  euro  area  countries  to  strengthen 
competitiveness,  increase  the  flexibility  of  their  economies  and  enhance  their  longer-term 
growth  potential.  In  this  respect,  labour  market  reforms  are  essential  and  should  focus  on 
measures  to  remove  rigidities  and  to  enhance  wage  flexibility,  so  that  wages  and  working 
conditions can be tailored to the specific needs of firms. More generally, in these demanding 
times,  moderation  is  of  the  essence  in  terms  of  both  profit  margins  and  wages.  These 
measures should be accompanied by structural reforms that increase competition in product 
markets,  particularly  in  services  –  including  the  liberalisation  of  closed  professions  –  and, 
where appropriate, the privatisation of services currently provided by the public sector. At the 
same  time,  the  Governing  Council  stresses  that  it  is  absolutely  imperative  that  euro  area 
national  authorities 
the  measures  announced  and 
recommended in the Euro Summit statement of 26 October 2011. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
rapidly  adopt  and 
implement 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
