Már Guðmundsson: The fault-lines in cross-border banking: lessons 
from the Icelandic case 
Keynote address by Mr Már Guðmundsson, Governor of the Central Bank of Iceland, at the 
Banking Law Symposium 2011, OECD, Paris, 4 October 2011. 
 Let me begin by thanking the OECD and other organisers and sponsors for inviting me to 
speak in this symposium. The title of your symposium is “Crisis management and the use of 
government guarantees”. This was a highly relevant issue when three cross-border banks in 
Iceland collapsed in early October 2008, and that is probably why I am here.1 
In  the  panic  that  gripped  global  financial  markets  after  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers, 
these banks – like so many internationally active banks around the world – were faced with a 
wholesale  run  on  their  foreign  currency  liabilities,  and  were  therefore  heading  towards  a 
default  on  them  in  the  absence  of  lender  of  last  resort  assistance  in  foreign  currency. 
However, given the size of the balance sheets involved (10 times GDP overall, with over two-
thirds  in  foreign  currency),  it  was  impossible  for  the  Icelandic  authorities  to  provide  such 
assistance on their own. It would indeed have been catastrophic if they had made a full-scale 
attempt to do so.  
The  background  to  these  events  was  that  the  Icelandic  banking  system  expanded  very 
rapidly in just under five years. Its balance sheet grew from under 2 times GDP at the end of 
2003 to almost 10 times GDP by mid-2008. At the same time, it extended across national 
borders. Just before its collapse, the three major cross-border banks that constituted the bulk 
of the banking system had over 40% of their total assets in foreign subsidiaries, 60% of total 
lending was to non-residents, 60% of income was from foreign sources, and over two-thirds 
of total lending and deposits were denominated in foreign currencies.  
How did this happen, and why was it allowed? I do not think we yet have the research and 
the  consensus  to  provide  a  reasonably  undisputed  list  of  the  main  causal  factors  in  this 
process;  however,  I  think  four  factors  will  rank  highly  on  that  list.  These  are  Iceland’s 
membership  in  the  European  Economic  Area  (EEA)  in  1994,  privatisation  of  the  Icelandic 
banking system in the early 2000s in a manner that placed the major banks in the hands of 
risk-loving investment bankers, the global conditions of ample and cheap credit that prevailed 
in  the  years  prior  to  the  international  financial  crisis,  and  the  tendency  in  Iceland  both  to 
adopt international and EU regulations without critical analysis of Iceland-specific risks and to 
base  supervision  to  a  significant  degree  on  mechanical  checks  of  adherence  to  those 
regulations.  
Let me expand a bit on the EEA part, as it is highly relevant to my topic. The EEA Agreement 
provides a legal and regulatory framework based on European Union Directives, including a 
framework for free movement of capital and provision of financial services. The underlying 
principles  are  those  of  home  licensing  for  operation  anywhere  in  the  area  and  of  a  level 
playing  field  for  competition  where  size  and  location  are  not  supposed  to  matter.  This 
European “Passport” enabled the Icelandic banks to operate throughout the EEA, including 
through branches in other EEA countries.  
                                                 
1   Some  of  the  topics  discussed  in  this  speech  are  dealt  with  at  greater  length  in  the  following  two  sources: 
Gudmundsson, Már & Thorsteinn Thorgeirsson (2010). “The fault lines in cross-border banking: lessons from 
the Icelandic case.” SUERF Studies – 2010/5 Contagion and Spillovers: New Insights from the Crisis. On-line 
source:  http://suerf.org/index.php?option=com_k2&view=item&id=177&Itemid=133  and  Gudmundsson,  Már 
(2010). “The fault lines in cross-border banking”, speech at the FIBE meeting in Bergen on 7 January 2011. 
On-line source: http://www.bis.org/speeches/sp0702525.htm 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
I will discuss the flaws in this setup as regards banking later in my remarks, but in order to 
provide a proper perspective on the story, I must make two points. First, it goes against the 
grain  of  the  underlying  principles  of  the  European  Passport  to  consider  the  size  of  banks 
relative to GDP as a metric for concern, as is now rightly in fashion. Second, we should see 
this  more  in  the  nature  of  a  necessary  rather  than  a  sufficient  condition,  and  it  does  not 
exonerate Icelandic banks and authorities of blame for their part in the story.  
The  financial  crisis  revealed  major  fault  lines  in  cross-border  banking,  the  most  important 
being  large  foreign  currency  balance  sheets  with  significant  maturity  mismatches  but  with 
limited  lender  of  last  resort  facilities  in  foreign  currency.  The  nature  and  magnitude  of  this 
phenomenon were not well understood before the crisis.2 
Maturity mismatches are, of course, the bread and butter of modern banking, although they 
make  banks  vulnerable  to  runs.  In  the  case  of  solvent  institutions,  we  have  known 
theoretically since Thornton (1802) – and probably over a century, as a practical policy – how 
to  deal  with  that  vulnerability  in  a  domestic  setting:  with  central  bank  lender-of-last-resort 
(LOLR) operations, later complemented by deposit insurance. In the current setting, it is far 
from guaranteed that this process can be replicated at the international level. Of course, in 
normal  times  and  with  developed  capital  markets,  banks  can  use  foreign  exchange  swap 
markets  to  convert  domestic  liquidity  into  foreign  exchange  liquidity  swiftly  and  relatively 
cheaply.  However,  this  process  broke  down  almost  completely  during  the  global  run  on 
cross-border non-US bank liabilities in the immediate aftermath of the Lehman collapse.  
In a situation like this, the home central bank’s ability to assist banks in acquiring the foreign 
liquidity  denied  them  on  the  market  and  thus  avoid  a  failure  to  deliver  on  their  foreign 
currency payments, is limited by the size of its reserves or the willingness of the central bank 
issuing  the  international  currency  in  question  to  help.  Although  the  provision  of  foreign 
currency liquidity through reserves was clearly important during the crisis, most studies seem 
to support the conclusion that dollar swap lines made the pivotal difference, especially when 
they were uncapped vis-à-vis some key central banks. To a significant degree, this was the 
domestic LOLR process replicated at the international level.  
Does this mean that we have the solution? At the conceptual level, yes, but at the practical 
level, maybe not. At present, such swap lines are not a permanent and reliable feature of the 
international monetary system, and there are important unresolved governance issues, such 
as who should decide which countries get a swap line and which do not.  
Let us now move back to the EU/EEA level, where we have the contradiction between the 
European  Passport,  on  the  one  hand,  and  national  supervision,  a  national  safety  net  of 
deposit insurance and LOLR, and national crisis management and resolution regimes, on the 
other.  The  crisis  revealed  that  this  framework  is  deeply  flawed.  First,  it  ignores  the  FX 
liquidity risk that I discussed earlier. Banks from small countries with independent currencies 
are more exposed to this risk than, for instance, banks within the euro area. Second, country 
size and bank size relative to countries are important factors in the viability of bailout options. 
The Icelandic banks are a good example of this.  
Keeping in mind what I have said about the fault lines in cross-border banking, let us go back 
to the collapse of the Icelandic banks. What where the options facing the authorities? At that 
time, the official view was that the banks were solvent but faced a foreign currency liquidity 
problem.  Their  published  CAD  ratios  were  well  above  the  8%  limit,  and  as  late  as  August 
                                                 
2   My former colleagues at the BIS have been doing important research in this area, see, for example, McGuire, 
Patrick and Goetz von Peter (2009). “The US dollar shortage in global  banking and the international  policy 
response”,  BIS  Working  Papers,  No.  291;  Baba,  Naohiki,  Frank  Packer  and  Teppei  Nagano  (2008).  “The 
spillover  of  money  market  turbulence  to  foreign  exchange  swap  and  cross-currency  swap  markets”,  BIS 
Quarterly Review, March, 73–86; and Baba, Naohiki and Frank Packer (2008). “Interpreting deviations from 
covered interest parity during the financial market turmoil of 2007–08”, BIS Working Papers, No. 267. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
2008,  the  Icelandic  Financial  Supervisory  Authority  had  deemed  them  able  to  withstand 
severe  capital  shocks.  Now,  however,  we  know  that  this  was  probably  not  truly  the  case. 
Even if they had been solvent in the sense that equity was positive, in the aggregate they 
were below the 8% threshold when corrected for “weak” capital in the form of equity financed 
by lending from themselves. Furthermore, we know that, over time, an unchecked liquidity 
problem will turn into a solvency problem.  
Be  that  as  it  may,  with  the  solvency  assumption  in  mind,  the  authorities  had  tried  to  build 
defences  against  potential  foreign  currency  liquidity  problems  at  the  banks  by  negotiating 
swap lines and by tapping foreign capital markets, in both cases with limited success. The 
problem was surely exacerbated by the handling of a LOLR request from one of the banks in 
late September 2008. The announced solution was to nationalise the bank. This would have 
been  a  disaster  if  it  had  been  carried  out  because  it  would  have  made  the  Government 
responsible for refinancing a bleeding foreign currency balance sheet, which it did not have 
the resources to do. FX reserves and swap lines amounted to only 35% of GDP, and at that 
point the Government itself was shut out of international capital markets. Nationalising the 
bank would have turned a bank foreign currency refining problem into a sovereign problem 
with  the  serious  risk  that  the  sovereign  might  have  defaulted  on  such  foreign  currency 
payments. The decision was, however, never implemented because of the ensuing full-scale 
run  on  the  foreign  liabilities  of  the  banks  and  the  domino  effects  inside  the  Icelandic 
economy. But the time to consider the options was rapidly running out.  
Given the lack of international co-operation, the Icelandic authorities were forced at this point 
to consider radical solutions. Although they were not necessarily articulated fully at the time, 
these solutions had several goals: to preserve a functioning domestic payment system, ring-
fence the state in the case of bank failures, limit the socialisation of private sector losses, and 
create the conditions for rebuilding a domestic banking system.  
The  adopted  solution  incorporated  several  elements.  The  Government  declared  that  all 
deposits  in  Iceland  were  safe.  Second,  on  6  October  the  so-called  Emergency  Act  was 
rushed through Parliament, giving the Financial Supervisory Authority broad-based powers to 
intervene in failing institutions, granting all deposits seniority over other unsecured claims in 
case  of  bank  failures,  and  giving  permission  for  Government  capital  injections  into  new 
domestic banks.  
The  Emergency  Act  thus  allowed  new  domestic  banks  to  be  created  when  the  old  cross-
border  banks  failed  and  were  placed  in  special  resolution  regimes  followed  by  winding-up 
proceedings.  In  essence,  the  old  banks  became  the  property  of  the  creditors,  which  were 
mostly foreign. The new banks were created by carving the domestic assets and liabilities 
out of the old banks, so it was not a good bank–bad bank split. The idea, then, was that the 
Government would recapitalise the banks and place compensation bonds in the estates of 
the failed banks. However, valuing the assets and liabilities proved a complicated process in 
the middle of an economic and financial crisis, and a solution emerged where the creditors of 
the failed banks became majority owners of two of the banks and kept a small equity stake in 
the  third.  This  saved  the  Government  significant  expense  in  recapitalising  the  banks.  The 
new banking system amounted to 1.7 times GDP.  
As a result, the domestic payment system functioned more or less seamlessly throughout, 
and  customers  had  continuous  access  to  their  deposits.  The  run  on  the  domestic  banks 
stopped,  but  at  its  peak,  demand  for  cash  tripled  and  the  Central  Bank  almost  ran  out  of 
banknotes. Nonetheless, international payment flows were seriously affected by the freezing 
order imposed by the UK, and the British authorities’ suspicion that Iceland would not honour 
deposit insurance in UK branches of the failed Landsbanki and by general distrust among 
foreign  counterparties.  With  heavy  Central  Bank  involvement,  international  payment  flows 
were gradually restored in the months that followed.  
I have expanded at some length on the measures taken when the banks failed, as there are 
still a number of misconceptions about the process. Some have claimed that the banks were 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
nationalised. They were not. The old banks are private companies. They are in winding-up 
proceedings  governed  by  law;  they  are  not  under  the  control  of  the  Government.  The 
Government has a majority stake in only one of the new banks. Others have claimed that 
Iceland defaulted and got away with it. The opposite is true. The credit of the sovereign was 
preserved, and all debt obligations have been paid on time. This is why the sovereign was 
able to tap international capital markets last summer, and why its CDS spread is currently 
around 300 points.  
Before  leaving  the  topic  of  crisis  management  and  resolution  in  the  case  of  the  Icelandic 
banks, I would like to say a few words about deposit guarantees. Why did the Government 
give a verbal blanket guarantee only for domestic deposits and not the deposits in the banks’ 
foreign  branches?  After  all,  this  distinction  probably  added  fuel  to  the  fire  of  the  so-called 
Icesave  dispute  about  the  settlement  of  deposit  guarantees  in  Landsbanki’s  Dutch  and 
British branches. The short answer is that such a guarantee would never have been credible. 
As  a  result,  it  would  not  have  stopped  the  run  on  these  deposits  and,  if  attempted,  might 
have  bankrupted  the  Government.  At  the  time,  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland’s  FX  reserves 
amounted to 2½ billion euros, while the foreign currency deposits in Landsbanki’s Dutch and 
British  branches  totalled  11½  billion  euros  and  payment  of  the  EU  minimum  deposit 
insurance  would  have  required  4½  billion  euros.  In  economic  terms,  given  that  these 
deposits were used to a significant degree to finance illiquid assets in these same countries, 
such a payment would have amounted to a net transfer of resources from Iceland to these 
countries at a time when Iceland was going through its deepest financial and economic crisis 
in the post-war period! That made no sense, and the only solution was for the governments 
concerned to pay out the insurance in their own currency with the aim of settling later with 
Iceland. There are legal arguments about the merit of such claims that I will not comment on 
here.  The  fact  of  the  matter  is,  however,  that  the  Icelandic  Government  made  three  good 
faith attempts to close the issue through negotiated settlements but got caught up in political 
dynamics and the case might be on its way to the EFTA Court. But the financial risks for the 
parties involved are dwindling, as it now appears that the estimated recovery from the estate 
of Landsbanki will cover almost 100% of all deposits in the foreign branches. And of course, 
the priority given to deposits in the Emergency Act is of vital importance to that result.  
Let us now turn to some of the lessons learnt from the crisis.  
First,  as  regards  the  EU/EEA  framework,  the  bottom  line  is  that  we  cannot  have  a  level 
playing field in banking, except perhaps in risk-adjusted terms, as long as the EU passport is 
not  matched  by  EU  supervision  and  an  EU-wide  safety  net,  which  is  the  logical  solution. 
Furthermore,  EU-active  banks  from  small  countries  with  their  own  currencies  should  have 
reduced  passport  rights  and/or  face  higher  capital  charges,  as  they  have  a  less  credible 
LOLR and are therefore more risky, other things being equal. Subjecting all banks in the EU 
to  supervision  by  an  EU  supervisor  is  probably  too  much,  and  in  practical  terms,  it  might 
make  sense  to  have  two  types  of  bank  licences.  In  that  case,  national  authorities  would 
licence and supervise domestic banks, which would face significant restrictions on the type 
and scope of their cross-border activities. Their deposits would be insured by the domestic 
deposit insurance system, and the national central bank would be their LOLR. Banks wanting 
a European passport would be licensed and supervised by an EU authority; they would be 
part of an EU-wide deposit insurance system, and in most cases, their LOLR would be the 
ECB.  
Second, at the national level the key issue is that, as long as global risks and EU flaws are 
not dealt with, individual countries are forced to take action to protect themselves: action that 
might  contribute  further  to  the  retreat  of  cross-border  banking.  Such  action  might  take  the 
form of restricting international activities of home banks and placing much stricter prudential 
limits  on  foreign  currency  maturity  mismatches.  For  example,  when  Iceland  lifts  its  current 
capital controls on outflows, it will probably impose restrictions on the size and composition 
of the foreign currency balance sheets of home-headquartered banks. Some might see such 
restrictions as capital controls in another form, but I see them as prudential rules.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Finally,  deposit  insurance  and  the  LOLR  are  logically  related  and  should  be  in  the  same 
currency. Part of the rationale behind them is to prevent and stop runs. In the final analysis, it 
only works if the bank liabilities are flowing into a central bank that has the duty, willingness, 
and capacity to recycle them against collateral and expand its balance sheet as needed. The 
question therefore arises whether national deposit insurance systems should cover domestic 
deposits only and the payout should likewise be in domestic currency only, even for foreign-
denominated deposits.  
In closing, let me note that the saga of the financial crisis in Iceland and its interaction with 
the  European  and  global  financial  system  is  a  complex  one.  My  remarks  today  have  only 
given you glimpses here and there. But as with other sagas, Icelanders will be writing about 
this for decades, if not centuries, and I think we can be confident that they will be better at 
writing about it than at running and supervising cross-border banks.  
Thank you very much.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
