Glenn Stevens: On the use of forecasts 
Address by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the Australian 
Business Economists Annual Dinner, Sydney, 24 November 2011. 
 Thank you for the invitation to return to this platform.  
This being a forecasting conference, you will have spent much of your time contemplating 
the outlook for 2012. The Reserve Bank set out its views on the outlook only a few weeks 
ago,  and  I  will  not  canvass  any  changes  to  them  on  this  occasion.  Instead,  I  propose  to 
return to a theme I have covered on some previous occasions, namely, the nature and use of 
forecasts for policy purposes. A couple of important points that have been illustrated over the 
past two or three years are worth drawing out.  
To begin, I would like to draw some observations from another kind of forecast. I do a bit of 
aviation in my spare time. Hence I am a serious user of weather forecasts and there are very 
detailed forecasts prepared on a frequent basis for the aviation community, in order to make 
flying more predictable and safer.  
I want to give an example. A couple of months ago, a pilot I know had planned to fly in a light 
aircraft from Bankstown airport in Sydney’s west to Armidale, about 90 minutes flight time to 
the north, pick up some people and return to Bankstown.  
On  the  relevant  day  (25  September),  pertinent  excerpts  from  the  forecasts  for  the  two 
aerodromes were as follows:  
YSBK (Bankstown) 
15015G25KT 9999 LIGHT SHOWERS OF RAIN FEW 012 SCT020 BKN030 
TEMPO 2500/2506 3000 SHOWERS OF RAIN BKN008  
YARM (Armidale) 
16012 9999 LIGHT SHOWERS OF RAIN SCT030 
INTER 2501/2508 4000 SHOWERS OF RAIN BKN010 
PROB30 INTER VRB20G30KT 3000 THUNDERSTORMS WITH RAIN SCT 045CB  
It  was  windy  and  wet  in  Sydney  that  day,  one  of  those  days  when  strong  south  easterly 
winds  bring  in  moisture  from  the  Tasman  Sea  and  dump  it  on  the  Sydney  basin.  The 
Bankstown forecast indicated that for much of the day, there were expected to be periods of 
reduced visibility and heavy, low cloud. Conditions could thus be quite marginal for a landing 
on the return flight, and it was possible they would be below the legal minimum for a landing 
off an instrument approach during those periods of time. This meant a requirement to have 
extra fuel on board in case of the need to hold prior to landing, waiting for the weather to 
improve. The Armidale forecast showed some similar periods of weather, also requiring extra 
fuel.  More  significantly,  the  Armidale  forecast  indicated  that  there  was  a  probability 
(assessed as 30 per cent) of thunderstorms in the area, which could persist for up to half an 
hour at a time. Thunderstorms at the airport amount to very dangerous conditions in which to 
attempt  a  landing  because  of  the  potential  for  very  strong  winds  and  windshear  near  the 
ground,  not  to  mention  heavy  rain  or  hail.  Even  large  aircraft  avoid  landing  in  such 
circumstances. Again, this meant a requirement to have additional fuel in case of the need to 
hold prior to landing, waiting for the storm to pass. 
Apart  from  that,  the  general  conditions  between  the  two  airports  were  forecast  to  include 
isolated  thunderstorms,  rain  and  areas  of  low  cloud,  all  produced  by  the  south  easterly 
airstream  operating  across  much  of  NSW.  The  route  goes  more  or  less  along  the  Great 
Divide, which means that terrain effects on weather conditions are an issue to keep in mind.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
These  conditions  did  not  necessarily  preclude  the  flight,  which  could  have  been  legally 
commenced, provided the requisite additional fuel was carried. It is very likely that it could 
have been safely completed. For professional pilots, who fly every day in a multi person crew 
environment  in  high  performance  aircraft,  dealing  with  these  conditions  would  be  seen  as 
reasonably  routine,  if  a  bit  tedious.  The  main  question  was  whether  it  was  prudent  for  an 
amateur  single  pilot  flying  a  light  aircraft  to  conduct  the  flight  on  this  occasion.  It  was 
observable that at the intended time of departure from Bankstown, conditions there were at 
least as bad as forecast, while a phone call from Armidale indicated that there were in fact 
storms present at that time. It did not look like a day on which the forecasters had been too 
pessimistic. The pilot in question decided to stay on the ground.  
The point of this little diversion into aviation is to make a few observations about the nature 
and use of forecasts, which I think have some relevance in the economic sphere.  
The first is that the weather forecasters had understood what I would call the “big forces”. In 
this case, there was a high pressure system over Tasmania, and a low pressure system off 
the north-east coast of NSW. This combination fed very moist air over the south-east of the 
continent, resulting in cloud and rain.  
In  fact,  meteorologists  know  a  lot  about  how  weather  works.  They  have  pretty  long  time 
series of observations and increasingly frequent real time observations of conditions. They 
have highly developed models. The combination of real time data, understanding of how the 
dynamics  of  weather  occur  and  their  experience,  enabled  the  forecasters  to  get  the  big 
picture right, and give a very useful forecast for those planning on venturing into the skies 
that day.  
The second point of note is that some elements of the forecast were probabilistic in nature. 
This  was  explicit  in  the  use  of  the  term  “PROB30”.  Weather  forecasters  know  they  are 
dealing  with  a  very  complex,  non  linear  system,  and  are  careful  to  present  their  forecasts 
accordingly.  They  are  able  to  observe  the  unstable  atmospheric  conditions  that  are 
conducive to storms – mainly heat and moisture, with a role played by terrain as well. They 
cannot say for sure that there will be storms over a particular location, but they know enough 
about likely conditions in an area to assess a probability. On the day in question, there would 
almost certainly have been some storms to avoid somewhere along the route.  
The  third  observation  is  that  forecasts  are  used  in  particular  ways.  In  aviation,  lives  can 
depend on the way a forecast is used. Professional pilots in large, well equipped aircraft that 
fly  above  most  of  the  weather  still  carefully  study  forecasts  and  make  the  requisite 
amendments to their plans. They carry additional fuel, have a plan B for an alternate airport 
and  so  on  as  needed,  in  response  to  the  forecast  conditions.  Many  of  us  have  had  the 
experience of fog induced delays in Canberra in winter, for example, where the runway is not 
fully visible at the legal minimum on approach and so the aircraft cannot land and must go 
somewhere  else.  International  flights  into  Sydney  very  occasionally  end  up  in  Brisbane  or 
Melbourne  because  of  fog,  having  been  required  by  the  forecast  to  carry  the  necessary 
additional fuel. They may have carried it all the way across the Pacific, at non-trivial cost.  
Despite  the  criticism  aimed  at  weather  forecasters,  the  forecasts  I  have  seen  in  use  for 
aviation  are  generally  pretty  good.  And  the  saying  that  economic  forecasters  are  there  to 
make weather forecasters look good has something going for it. Of course one big difference 
in economics is that some decisions based on forecasts may alter the outcomes – as in the 
case of economic policy decisions, or spending decisions by businesses and households – 
whereas our response to a weather forecast will not actually alter the weather. That factor 
makes economic forecasting more difficult than weather forecasting. Still, some aspects of 
the process of weather forecasting are valuable in the economic sphere. 
One is that the most useful economic forecasts, like weather forecasts, are those that are 
based on a good sense of the “big forces”, as well as on an understanding of the dynamics of 
how economies typically behave. In addition, we should admit that economic forecasts have 
a margin of error – they are a point in a distribution of possible outcomes.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
On  the  latter  point,  often  much  is  made  about  small  changes  to  forecasts,  or  small 
differences in two forecasters’ numbers. But when consideration is given to the real margin 
for  error  around  central  forecasts,  such  differences  are  often,  for  practical  purposes, 
insignificant. For example, in the case of a year ended forecast for growth of real GDP four 
quarters ahead, experience over the past couple of decades is that the probability of a point 
forecast  being  accurate  to  within  half  a  percentage  point  is  about  one  in  five.  For  year 
average forecasts the accuracy is better, but still the margins for error are non trivial. So any 
point  forecast  will  very  likely  not  be  right.  The  likelihood  of  some  outcome  other  than  the 
central forecast is actually quite high. When comparing forecasts, if we are not talking about 
differences of at least half a percentage point, the argument is not worth having.  
In any event, the question is not really whether the forecasts will turn out to be exactly right. 
The question is whether they form a reasonable basis for sensible analysis or decisions at 
the  time.  When  the  forecast  turns  out  to  be  not  exactly  correct,  as  is  very  likely,  that  is 
actually not much of a basis on which to criticise the decision makers who used the forecast 
(or, for that matter, the forecaster).  
For monetary policy operating a medium term inflation target, we are naturally interested in 
our  ability  to  forecast  inflation.  Experience  over  the  inflation  targeting  era  (since  1993) 
suggests that the probability of the CPI outcome being within half a percentage point of the 
central  forecast  is  roughly  two  in  five  at  either  a  one  year  or  a  two  year  horizon.  For 
underlying  inflation,  the  probability  of  the  forecast  being  within  half  a  percentage  point  is 
about two in three at one year and just over one in two at two years. The smaller forecasting 
errors for underlying inflation reflect the inherently more stable properties of the underlying 
measure, which of course is by design.  
Hence, if the central forecast for CPI inflation at a two  year horizon was 2½ per cent, the 
chances of the outcome being between 2 and 3 per cent, based on this historical experience, 
would be about two in five. The chances of being between 1½ and 3½ per cent would be 
three in five. I note in passing that, if this is a reasonable description of forecast accuracy, it 
suggests that the configuration of the inflation target is a pretty good one (though I hasten to 
add that, when it was first set out, we did not really have a great deal of confidence in the 
accuracy of inflation forecasts).  
It would, in my judgement, be vastly preferable for discussions of forecasts to be couched in 
more probabilistic language than tends to be the case in practice, and for there to be more 
explicit  recognition 
the  particular  numbers  quoted  are  conditional  on  various 
assumptions.  Careful  observers  will  have  noted  that  the  latest  forecasts  published  by  the 
Bank actually have a range for growth and inflation at the horizon. Moreover, there is more 
extensive discussion these days of the ways in which things could turn out differently from 
the central forecast. This goes at least some way to recognising the inherent uncertainties in 
the forecasting process, and is also important in relating the forecast to the policy decision.  
Taking  account  of  the  accuracy  statistics  I  have  quoted  above,  we  can  characterise  the 
RBA’s latest published outlook as suggesting that, absent large shocks to oil prices or the 
Australian dollar, or further extreme weather events, or the world economy taking a serious 
turn for the worse (say because of events in Europe), Australia’s inflation rate in 2012 has a 
pretty good chance of being between 2 and 3 per cent. The chances of a similar outcome in 
2013 are also reasonable, though with slightly greater probability that inflation would end up 
above 3 per cent in that year than seems the case for 2012. That is, the point forecast is a 
little higher in the second year. Even so, a margin of uncertainty is inevitable. A big change in 
any  of  the  variables  subject  to  assumptions  would  quite  easily  push  outcomes  away,  and 
maybe a long way away, from the forecast.  
This degree of uncertainty can of course be quite disconcerting. It is only natural to desire 
certainty. Everyone wants to know what will happen. We all want to believe that someone, 
somewhere, does know and can tell us what to expect. But the truth is that the best we can 
that 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
do  when  talking  about  the  future  is  to  speak  about  likelihoods  and  possible  alternative 
outcomes.  
This is not a counsel of despair. It is not as though we can say absolutely nothing about likely 
performance. We know something about average rates of growth through time, and we know 
something about the long run forces that work to produce them (productivity and population 
growth).  We  know  that  there  have  been,  and  will  be  again,  periods  of  recession  and 
recovery, though our ability to forecast the timing of those episodes is limited. We know from 
experience some things about the nature of inflation, including its characteristic persistence, 
and the things that can push it up or down. We know some of the “big forces” at work on the 
global and local outlooks – a once in a century terms of trade event, for example, and a once 
in a century deleveraging event in major countries. We know that our country is exposed to 
both forces – the expansionary effects of the rise in the terms of trade, and the dampening 
effects of a mild degree of deleveraging in our household sector (and indirect effects of the 
more intense deleveraging in some other countries). We also know that the terms of trade 
change  is  a  large  shift  in  relative  prices,  which  will  bring  about  changes  to  economic 
structure.  
So  there  is  a  good  deal  we  can  say  about  the  things  that  are  relevant  to  our  future,  and 
economists’ understanding about these forces will be helpful in making sense of what occurs 
over time. We simply have to recognise the limits on our capacity to predict their net impact 
with any precision.  
This in turn has implications for the way policymakers use numerical forecasts. In the case of 
monetary policy, forming a forecast is unavoidably part of the process, simply because the 
evidence  suggests  that  monetary  policy  changes  take  time  to  have  their  full  effect.  So  we 
have to use forecasts – but not unquestioningly. We have to form a view about the big forces 
at work, but also operate with due recognition of the limitations of numerical forecasts. The 
extent to which policy should respond to forecasts will therefore always have some element 
of judgement.  
The  conduct  of  policy  over  the  past  few  years  has  exhibited  these  features.  The  Bank’s 
assessment of the very broad major forces at work has been central. Policy was tight in a 
period  in  which  the  economy  was  very  fully  employed,  confidence  was  high,  the  terms  of 
trade were rising and inflation was picking up. The very large and rapid easing of monetary 
policy late in 2008 and early 2009 was a response to a major change in the outlook, which 
occurred because the “big forces” changed direction very quickly, due to the financial events 
at  that  time.  Among  other  things,  this  saw  strong  growth  in  Asia  go  into  sharp  retreat, 
appetite for risk and willingness to lend sharply curtailed and confidence slump. The changes 
to  monetary  policy  beginning  in  the  latter  months  of  2009,  designed  to  restore  “normal 
settings”, occurred when it had become clear that the risk of a major economic contraction in 
Australia had passed. In fact the “big forces” in the expansionary direction had reasserted 
themselves, after an unexpectedly short absence: resurgent Asian growth helped to push the 
terms of trade to new highs. In that world, leaving interest rates at 50-year lows would have 
been imprudent.  
Over  the  past  18  months  or  so,  policy  changes  have  been  much  less  frequent,  but  the 
process of decision making has nonetheless not been dull. A year ago, the then current data 
on inflation showed nothing particularly alarming. The analysis of the Bank’s staff suggested, 
however,  that  the  fall  in  inflation  we  had  been  seeing  since  2008  would  probably  not 
continue, but instead inflation would probably begin to rise, albeit quite gradually. The Board 
took the view that, on the basis of that outlook and in the circumstances prevailing, it would 
be prudent for policy to exert some mild restraint, and so it decided late last year to raise the 
cash rate by 25 basis points.  
The  inflation  data  for  the  first  half  of  2011  do  indeed  show  some  increase  in  underlying 
inflation (though after a sequence of revisions, this is not quite as large as it looked a few 
months ago). As of May this year, the central forecast was for inflation to pick up further over 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the  ensuing  couple  of  years,  eventually  rising  to  be  clearly  in  excess  of  3  per  cent.  This 
carried a simple message. As the Bank said in the May Statement on Monetary Policy:  
“The central outlook sketched above suggests that further tightening of monetary 
policy is likely to be required at some point for inflation to remain consistent with 
the 2–3 per cent medium-term target.”  
But there was still a matter of judging how to respond to that message. The Board did not 
tighten policy at that time, nor did it do so three months later when the forecasts for inflation 
still looked similar to those in May. It certainly considered whether that course of action would 
be appropriate, but elected to sit still, watching unfolding events. Eventually, last month, far 
from  tightening,  the  Board  actually  eased  policy  slightly  –  though  by  then,  of  course,  the 
forecasts had changed materially from those of six months earlier.  
This  was  not  a  repudiation  of  the  forecasts,  nor  a  sign  that  forecasts  are  not  useful.  The 
process of forming forecasts remains key to the forward-looking conduct of policy. In electing 
to  take  time  in  considering  their  response  to  signs  of  an  increase  in  inflation,  and  central 
forecasts  of  further  increases,  the  policymakers  were  simply  recognising  the  inherent 
uncertainties of the situation and the difficulties the forecasters face, and giving those factors 
due consideration.  
It  is,  in  my  view,  entirely  appropriate  that  there  be  this  degree  of  limited  discretion  for  the 
policymakers  in  their  response  to  changes  in  numerical  central  estimates.  It  is  not  that 
forecasts  should  be  ignored.  But  neither  should  the  decision  be  rigidly  and  mechanically 
linked to forecasts. Were that to be so, the policymakers would in effect have delegated the 
policy decision to the forecasters, which is not what policymakers are supposed to do.  
So the relationship between the formal forecasts and the policy decision can sometimes be a 
subtle  one.  Ultimately,  the  policymakers  have  to  make  a  judgement  call,  based  partly  on 
what the central forecast says but conditioned also by the degree of confidence they have in 
it. At the same time it must be emphasised that policymakers can be in a position to make 
the  sorts  of  judgements  I  have  just  been  describing  only  if  they  have  generally  acted  in  a 
timely, forward-looking way in earlier decisions.  
In my view, these judgements over the past year were the right calls. But in truth we will not 
know for a while – such are the lags in monetary policy. As always, more data will help the 
process of evaluation, though they might also provide evidence of new shocks (that is, things 
the forecasters could not predict). Such is the nature of the forecasting game.  
In conclusion, to those of you here who do not have to make forecasts, I hope you realise 
how fortunate you are! To those who do, I offer my sympathy – and best wishes for clear 
vision over the year ahead.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
