Ardian Fullani: Recent economic and monetary developments in Albania 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the press conference on 
the  Monetary  Policy  Decision  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  Supervisory  Council,  Tirana, 
29 September 2011. 
 Today, on 29 September 2011, the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania reviewed and 
approved  the  monthly  Monetary  Policy  Report.  Based  on  the  analysis  of  Albania’s  latest 
economic and financial developments and following discussions on the performance outlook, 
the  Supervisory  Council  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  decided  to  cut  the  key  interest  rate  by 
0.25 percentage  points.  Following  this  decision,  the  interest  rate  for  one  week  repurchase 
agreements is 5.00 per cent. This cut in the key interest rate reflects contained inflationary 
pressures,  anchored  expectations  of  economic  agents,  and  a  more  prudent  fiscal  policy 
during  the  period  ahead.  The  easing  of  monetary  policy  aims  at  providing  appropriate 
monetary conditions to meet the medium-term inflation target and promote economic activity 
through stimulating consumption and investments in Albania.  
(Let  me  now  proceed  with  an  overview  of  economic  developments  and  main  issues 
discussed at today’s meeting of the Supervisory Council.)  
 The month of August was characterised by a sharp decline in inflationary pressures. Annual 
inflation rate was 3.1%, or 0.4 percentage points lower than in July. In addition to decreased 
foreign  price  shocks,  during  this  month,  inflation  contribution  on  regulated  prices  dropped 
and contribution of prices of bread and grains curbed. Furthermore, the seasonal effect of 
domestic agriculture production supply was stronger this year, leading to further reduction of 
food items annual inflation. 
During 2011, consumer prices in Albania were subject to supply shocks, materialised in high 
imported prices. This effect was more moderate during July–August and, in the absence of 
sudden  shocks,  it  is  expected  to  subdue  even  further  in  the  months  ahead.  Moreover, 
second-round  effects  are  contained,  under  the  influence  of  controlled  expectations  of 
economic agents on inflation. The domestic economic setting produced controlled inflationary 
pressures.  Aggregate  demand  slowdown  led  to  spare  capacities  of  production  factors  and 
controlled long-term inflationary pressures on the economy.  
Therefore, core inflation was 2.9% in July, showing a downward trend, and was close to our 
inflation target. 
New economic data obtained in September are scarce. Following our earlier analysis and 
based  on  new  available  information,  the  Bank  of  Albania  deems  that  the  Albanian 
economy  continued  to  grow  during  2011.  Economic  activity  relied  primarily  on  public 
spending  and  exports  surge,  while  the  private  sector  demand  had  a  slow  positive 
performance. Consumption and investments were supported by crediting, but their upsurge 
is conditioned by hesitation to spend. 
Following the revised budget, the fiscal behaviour during the last two months is characterised 
by lower spending pace and lower budget deficit increase. Fiscal stimulus was present in 
the first quarter, while in the following months the fiscal policy was more contained, which is 
reflected in lower annual deficit increase.  
Until August, public spending posted annual growth of 5.2% in annual terms, while revenues 
slowed down, growing only by 2.2%. Budget deficit was ALL 30.6 billion as at end-August.  
Foreign demand continues to support Albanians economic growth. Exports’ annual growth 
was  28.8%  in  July.  On  the  other  hand,  imports  continued  their  downturn  trend  that  had 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
started in the second quarter of the year, increasing by 4.6% in annual terms. Export uptrend 
and import slowdown materialised in narrowed trade deficit in July, contracting by 6.0% year-
on-year.  However,  the  economy’s  external  position  remains  a  structural  weakness  of  the 
Albanian  economy,  which  reflects  the  need  for  higher  competitiveness  of  our  products  in 
global markets and conditions the effectiveness of stimulating macroeconomic policies. 
Indirect  indicators  analysis  of  private  consumption  reveals  its  moderate  performance. 
Consumption continues to suffer from perceived uncertainty by Albanian families, leading to 
higher saving although aggregate revenues increased. Private investment slowed down in 
this period, but it retained positive growth rates.  
This is supported by good performance of foreign direct investments, up by 38% during the 
second quarter, and higher import of capital goods, which suggest higher private investment 
in the economy. Nonetheless, this hike is conditioned by the fact that many businesses are 
operating below their production capacities, limiting their needs for new investments. 
Monetary  inflationary  pressures  remain  controlled  in  the  medium  run.  Annual  growth  of 
money supply, M3, which resulted 11.2% in July, retained the average rates recorded last 
year. Money demand was affected by a moderate upward private sector demand for funding. 
Lending to private sector increased by 12.5% in July, triggered by the relatively stable 
increase of lending to private businesses and resurgence of lending to households. Although 
the banking system has eased lending standards, the Bank of Albania deems that there is 
still room for further easing, especially as regards credit for private investments. 
Developments  in  financial  markets  indicate  downward  risk  premiums  and  liquidity.  In  the 
interbank market, trade volume expanded further and interest rates dropped, remaining close 
to  the  key  rate  and  displaying  low  volatility.  Moderate  government  demand  for  funding  is 
reflected  in  refrained  upward  trend  of  government  bill  yields  in  the  primary  market. 
Additionally,  the  yields  trend  retained  its  trajectory,  showing  low  inflation  expectations  by 
financial market agents. 
At the end of H1 2011, the situation of the financial system and banking sector was stable. 
The banking sector, expanded its activity and broadened its share in the country’s economy. 
Liquidity  situation  is  good  while  the  deposits  by  the  public  increased  at  satisfactory  rates; 
they cover more than once the value of credits and borrowing from non-residents is low.  
Data indicate that lending growth rate is improving, but the credit portfolio quality continued 
to drop. The banking sector retains stable growth rates of net interests revenue and gross 
operational profit.  
However, tightened capital requirement to cover credit risk, led to lower net financial results 
of the banking sector compared to a year earlier. However, financial performance continues 
to be positive and concentrated. The capital adequacy ratio followed a downward trend, even 
though it remains clearly above the minimum level required by the regulatory framework.  
Analysis  of  resilience  to  various  shocks  and  risks  indicates  that  credit  risk  is  the  primary 
source of banking sector risk. Furthermore, the banking system is more protected from direct 
market  risks,  but  it  continues  to  be  exposed  to  the  effect,  on  credit  quality,  of  undesirable 
exchange rate and interest rates fluctuations. Therefore, in its supervisory capacity, the Bank 
of Albania requested commercial banks to timely and properly identify non-performing loans, 
establish  relevant  reserve  funds  and  take  determined  action  to  recover  loans  through 
execution  of  collateral.  These  actions,  combined  with  reduced  operational  costs,  would 
establish  gradually  the  conditions  for  a  positive  and  stable  financial  position,  which  would 
support better the banking sector’s need for capital.  
In a shorter term, the Bank of Albania has requested the banking sector to strengthen activity 
capitalisation, through increased shareholders capital. The Bank of Albania has oriented and 
monitored  this  process  closely,  so  that  it  takes  place  in  compliance  with  the  development 
strategy and relevant risks performance. The process to strengthen capitalisation indicators 
in the banking sector includes creation of adequate capital above the required minimum. The 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
process  continues  in  line  with  specifications  that  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  discussed  and 
communicated  with  the  banking  sector.  As  a  result  of  this  measures,  the  banking  sector 
would remain stable and establish conditions for its higher contribution to Albania’s economic 
growth. 
Our assessments on economic outlook suggest a continuation of economic growth for the 
rest  of  the  year.  Foreign  demand  and  public  sector  demand  continue  to  provide  positive 
contribution  to  aggregate  demand  upsurge,  although  more  moderately  than  a  year  earlier. 
Private  sector  demand  remains  an  important  factor  to  determine  economic  growth  in  the 
future.  
Fiscal consolidation measures and the unfavourable situation in global markets and our trade 
partners  will  shift  the  short-term  focus  of  economic  growth  to  the  internal  demand:  private 
consumption and investments.  
The  capacity  of  these  aggregates  to  compensate  for  the  slowdown  of  the  two  main 
promoters  of  the  insofar  growth,  will  condition  Albania’s  economy  performance  over  the 
upcoming 2–3 quarters. In the longer run, the performance of the Albanian economy shall be 
determined by its competitiveness and productivity as well as expansion of Albanian goods 
and services in foreign markets. This requires intensification of structural reforms at macro- 
and microeconomic level as well as financial and macroeconomic stability in the country. 
 Taking into account the information set out above, the Supervisory Council of the Bank of 
Albania  deemed  that  inflationary  pressures  are  downward  and  remain  controlled  in  the 
medium  run.  Developments  in  the  Albanian  economy  will  continue  to  generate  weak 
inflationary  pressures,  as  a  result  of  the  negative  output  gap  action.  On  the  other  hand, 
pressures  generated  by  developments  in  global  economy  are  expected  to  be  downward. 
Economic agents inflation expectations remain anchored around the Bank of Albania target.  
At the conclusion of discussions, the Supervisory Council decided to cut the key interest rate 
by 0.25 percentage points, down to 5.00 per cent. This decision serves to comply with the 
inflation  target  in  the  medium  run  and  provides  the  necessary  monetary  conditions  to 
stimulate  economic  activity.  The  Bank  of  Albania  remains  heedful  to  future  economic  and 
financial developments, with a view to take the right steps for the fulfilment of its mandate.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
