Manuel Sánchez: Mexico’s economic integration and outlook 
Remarks  by  Mr  Manuel  Sánchez,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mexico,  at  the 
United States-Mexico  Chamber  of  Commerce,  California  Regional  Chapter,  Los  Angeles, 
9 December 2011. 
 It  is  an  honor  to  be  in  Los  Angeles  to  address  the  United  States-Mexico  Chamber  of 
Commerce. I would like to thank the organizers of the 14th Annual Mexico Economic Review 
and Political Outlook 2011 for the invitation to speak to you today.  
Because California is one of the U.S. states most interconnected to Mexico, it is natural to 
begin my review of the Mexican economy by examining its ever-increasing integration with 
that of the United States. After that, I would like to describe the effects of current international 
conditions on Mexico and discuss its economic outlook.  
My main message is that, while the strength of the current economic upturn in Mexico may 
be  limited  by  that  of  the  United  States,  the  benefits  of  its  long-term  association  with  its 
northern neighbor continue to be substantial. Also, Mexico will realize its upside potential for 
sustained  economic  growth  if  it  strengthens  its  fundamentals  and  promotes  pending 
structural  reforms.  As  usual,  my  remarks  are  entirely  my  own  responsibility  and  do  not 
necessarily reflect those of the Bank of Mexico.  
to 
through 
trade.  Ever  greater  openness  has  been  achieved 
Expanding economic integration 
During  the  last  three  decades,  Mexico  has  been  undergoing  a  process  of  expanding 
economic  integration  with  the  United  States.  Deeper  relations  between  the  two  countries 
have been built on their geographic proximity, especially as a result of the opening up of the 
Mexican  economy,  which  began  in  1983  with  a  phase  of  unilateral  reduction  of  tariffs  and 
other  barriers 
the 
North American  Free  Trade  Agreement  (NAFTA)  since  1994,  which  included  Canada,  the 
United States  and  Mexico.  Despite  the  important  role  that  Canada  plays  in  intraregional 
transactions,  in  what  follows  I  will  focus  on  the  growing  economic  links  between  the 
United States and Mexico. 
Enhanced economic integration between these two countries is multifold. The most dramatic 
reflection of this relation is the consistently high growth of their bilateral trade in goods and 
services,  which  surpasses  that  of  their  respective  GDPs.  Specifically,  highly  dynamic 
Mexican  exports  to  the  United  States  have  implied  markedly  more  Mexican  imports  from 
north  of  the  border.  Additionally,  bidirectional  tourism  has  been  increasing,  and  workers’ 
remittances from the United States are an important source of inflows in Mexico’s balance of 
payments. At the same time, foreign direct investment between the two countries and from 
other nations has being growing in view of advantages from business opportunities arising 
from their greater commercial interaction.1 
The benefits of this association have accrued to both nations, but being the less developed 
economy,  Mexico  has  profited  in  particular.  One  direct  effect  of  Mexico’s  opening  to  trade 
has been a trend towards product specialization and efficiency, a result of fiercer competition 
from abroad as well as multiplied opportunities to send goods to the world’s largest market. 
                                                 
1  From 1980 to 2010, Mexican exports to the United States rose from 5.0 percent of GDP to 23.1 percent, while 
Mexican imports from the United States increased from 5.7 percent of GDP to 14.0 percent. During the same 
period, FDI from the United States to Mexico grew by more than 1.8 times in constant dollars, while workers’ 
remittances, most of which come from the United States, increased 32 times. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Of  course,  this  transformation  has  not  been  a  zero-sum  game,  as  suggested  by  the 
complementary roles that the two countries have played in certain expanding sectors, such 
as Mexico’s in-bound maquiladora and auto industries. More importantly, and as predicted by 
theory,  both  economies  have  benefited  from  a  wider  availability  of  goods  and  services  at 
lower prices.2 
Mexico’s economic integration with the United  States has not prevented it from expanding 
transactions with other nations and regions. In fact, the rapid growth of flows to and from the 
United States has coincided with a decline in the relative importance of the United States as 
a  trade  and  investment  partner.  This  observation  is  consistent  with  a  previous  finding  that 
any possible trade diversion stemming from NAFTA has been more than surpassed by total 
trade creation.3 
An implication of the tight links between the two nations is that the Mexican economy is very 
cyclically  synchronized  with  the  United  States,  especially  in  manufacturing  production,  for 
which the correlation is more than 0.9. This effect has been enhanced during the last fifteen 
years, a time period in which Mexico has undertaken sounder fiscal and monetary policies, 
thus avoiding previously recurrent currency crises. 
The global financial turmoil in 2008 and 2009, the epicenter of which was the United States, 
affected Mexico more profoundly than many other emerging markets, given its close ties with 
the  larger  country.  The  persistence  of  some  structural  problems  and  the  unusually  weak 
ongoing  recovery  in  the  United  States  have  led  some  to  advocate  the  diversification  of 
Mexico’s international economic relations away from its northern neighbor. While this notion 
may be sensible if it is the result of a natural market evolution, it becomes risky if it implies 
the application of policy measures that introduce distortions and inefficiency.  
Some diversification of Mexico’s trade and investment relations may continue to occur as a 
natural  outcome  of  more  global  trade  opening  and  better  transport  and  communications 
possibilities. However, being next to the largest and most diversified economy of the world is 
a strong advantage that should not be artificially limited. 
Financial volatility and economic rebound 
Since  the  end  of  August  2011,  international  financial  markets  have  been  buffeted  by 
heightened  risk  aversion  and  a  generalized  flight  to  quality  resulting  from  the  perceived 
worsening of the financial and fiscal problems in the euro area and, to a lesser extent, the 
fear  of  another  recession  in  the  United  States.  The  general  result  has  been  a  tendency 
toward volatility and lower asset prices in many stock, bond and currency markets.  
In the case of Mexico, the most notable financial impact has been increased instability and 
substantial depreciation of the Mexican peso against the U.S. dollar. From the end of August 
to the end of November 2011, Mexican peso depreciation reached more than 10 percent, a 
rate that is similar to that experienced by other currencies, such as the New Zealand dollar 
and the Brazilian real. Against the backdrop of widespread risk aversion, very few currencies 
other than the U.S. dollar have played the role of safe havens. 
                                                 
2  Kehoe and Ruhl (2010) demonstrate that welfare from foreign trade in Mexico has increased more than the 
real GDP data indicate. See Kehoe, T. J. and K. J. Ruhl, (2010), “Why Have Economic Reforms in Mexico Not 
Generated Growth”, Journal of Economic Literature 48(4): 1005–1027. 
3  As  a  proportion  of  Mexico’s  total  exports,  exports  to  the  United  States  rose  from  56.4  percent  in  1982  to 
almost  90  percent  in  2000,  but  fell  to  about  80  percent  in  2010.  Magee  (2008)  shows  that  in  the  case  of 
NAFTA and other regional trade agreements, trade creation considerably surpasses any trade diversion. See 
Magee,  C.S.P,  (2008),  “New  Measures  of  Trade  Creation  and  Trade  Diversion”,  Journal  of  International 
Economics 75: 349–362. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the 
than 
to  a  much 
lesser  degree 
The  international  financial  turbulence  has  also  negatively  affected  the  peso  bond  market, 
although 
foreign  exchange  market.  During  
September–November  2011,  the  domestic  yield  curve  tended  to  move  up  and  to  steepen 
slightly, but this movement was not continuous, as it was interrupted by downward shifts. In 
any case, interest rates for tenors of one year and longer remain below the maximum levels 
observed in the first half of the year.  
The relatively minor impact of the financial instability on Mexico’s yield curve seems to reflect 
the  high  proportion  of  long-term  bonds  within  foreign  holdings  of  peso-denominated 
government  securities.  Furthermore,  during  the  last  few  months,  the  amount  of  long-term 
bonds  held by  foreigners  increased  slightly  more  than  a  reduction  observed  in  holdings  of 
short-term  securities.  The  important  role  played  by  long-term  investors  in  the  government 
securities market seems to reflect their confidence in the sound management of public debt 
as well as the flexible exchange rate regime. Two additional possible factors explaining the 
prevalence of contained long-term interest rates are a decline in projected economic growth, 
and stable and moderate inflation expectations in recent months.4 
During 2011, the Mexican economy has continued a recovery process after surpassing, by 
the  beginning  of  the  year,  the  maximum  levels  of  economic  activity  observed  prior  to  the 
global financial crisis. Indeed, GDP quarterly growth has been successively rising and, in the 
third quarter, the change in output was positive for each of the economy’s three sectors. On 
a year-over-year basis, GDP grew 4.4 percent in the third quarter. 
The  services  sector,  which  accounts  for  about  two-thirds  of  Mexican  GDP,  was  highly 
dynamic in the first nine months of the year, and particularly in the third quarter. This growth, 
along  with  extraordinarily  high  agricultural  production,  more  than  compensated  for  a  slight 
deceleration in industrial activity in the third quarter. 
Lower industrial growth reflected, notably, a slowdown in manufacturing production, which in 
turn responded to lower growth from Mexican non-oil exports, particularly non-auto products, 
to the United States. Apparently, a slowing of manufacturing production in the United States 
had an almost instantaneous impact on Mexico’s manufacturing production. October data on 
foreign trade suggests that this deceleration has probably continued in the fourth quarter of 
2011. 
Domestic demand, as reflected by retail sales and investment, continued showing high rates 
of  growth,  although  investment  levels  remain  below  those  observed  before  2008,  mainly 
because  of  a  virtual  stagnation  in  the  construction  industry.  Retail  sales  growth  seems  to 
have been fueled by a recovery in employment, real wages, and consumer credit.  
Monetary policy and outlook 
During 2011, monetary policy continued to be consistent with the 3 percent inflation target 
established by the Bank of Mexico at the end of 2003. The policy interest rate has been kept 
at 4.5 percent since July 2009. As a result, in 2011 annual inflation has remained relatively 
stable and close to, though slightly above, the target.5 
                                                 
4  Government  securities 
in 
the  hands  of 
terms  during  
September–November 2011; as of the end of this last month, more than 80 percent of government securities 
held  by  foreigners  corresponded  to  tenors  longer  than  one  year,  and  total  government  securities  held  by 
foreigners  accounted  for  25  percent  of  total  government  securities  outstanding.  According  to  the  Bank  of 
Mexico’s survey of private-sector analysts, the growth forecast for Mexico’s GDP for 2012 fell from 4.1 percent 
in July 2011 to 3.3 percent in November, while expected inflation for 2012 stayed at 3.7 percent in the same 
period. 
increased  0.9  percent 
foreigners 
in  peso 
5  Up to November, average annual inflation in 2011 was 3.4 percent. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
The  Governing  Board  of  the  Bank  of  Mexico  has  repeatedly  stated  that  it  will  continue  to 
implement  a  monetary  policy  stance  that  fosters  the  convergence  of  inflation  to  the 
permanent target. Risks must be closely monitored. At the moment, the main threat seems to 
come  from  the  possibility  that  a  weaker  Mexican  peso,  for  example  affected  by  continued 
uncertainty in the euro zone, may translate into generalized inflation pressures. Although the 
pass-through  from  exchange  rate  movements  to  inflation  has  fallen  in  recent  years,  the 
potential impact of a considerable depreciation of the Mexican peso is unknown.  
Other  risks  include  the  possible  worsening  of  inflation  expectations  stemming  from  the 
disappearance  of  favorable  nonrecurring  factors,  such  as  low  increases  in  agricultural 
product prices, which this year have supported benign inflation. Another important challenge 
for  monetary  policy  continues  to  be  the  need  to  anchor  inflation  expectations  around  the 
3 percent permanent target. To date, measures of expected inflation for all time periods, as 
reflected in analyst surveys and the bond market, remain above the target. 
Finally, the Bank of Mexico estimates that GDP growth will settle between 3.5 percent and 
4 percent in 2011 and between 3 percent and 4 percent in 2012. This forecast assumes fairly 
stable,  moderate  growth  in  the  United  States.  Revised  economic  prospects  in  the  U.S. 
economy would likely trigger an adjustment in the same direction for Mexico’s GDP growth.  
Despite the significance of its close links to the United States, which are especially important 
to cyclical economic activity, Mexico’s potential long-term economic growth has substantial 
upside  if  the  nation  continues  to  fortify  its  fundamentals,  which  include  healthy  fiscal 
finances, low inflation, and a liquid and well-capitalized banking system. Its upside potential 
will also be greater if it promotes pending structural reforms fostering productivity growth and 
investment. 
Concluding remarks 
The increasing economic integration of Mexico with the United States during the last three 
decades  has  benefited  both  countries  significantly.  Advantages  to  Mexico  include  greater 
product  specialization  and  efficiency,  and  for  both  nations,  a  wider  variety  of  goods  and 
services at lower prices. Being next to the largest and most diversified economy in the world 
is a strong advantage for Mexico which should not be underestimated. 
Recently,  international  financial  instability  has  affected  Mexico  mainly  through  substantial 
currency depreciation, similar to that experienced by other emerging market currencies, and, 
to a lesser extent, through slightly higher interest rates. Meanwhile, the Mexican  economy 
has continued a recovery process which has included more moderate growth in the industrial 
sector, mainly reflecting slower exports to the United States.  
Mexico’s  economic  outlook  remains  dependent  on  the  strength  of  the  U.S.  economy,  but 
long-term upside potential can be realized if Mexico’s fundamentals are strengthened, and 
pending structural reforms approved. Finally, monetary policy will continue to be consistent 
with preserving the convergence of inflation to the permanent 3 percent target.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
