Mark Carney: Growth in the age of deleveraging  
Remarks  by  Mr  Mark  Carney,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada  and  Chairman  of  the 
Financial Stability Board, to the Empire Club of Canada/Canadian Club of Toronto, Toronto, 
Ontario, 12 December 2011. 
 Introduction 
These are trying times. 
In our largest trading partner, households are undergoing a long process of balance-sheet 
repair. Partly as a consequence, American demand for Canadian exports is $30 billion lower 
than normal. 
In Europe, a renewed crisis is underway. An increasing number of countries are being forced 
to pay unsustainable rates on their borrowings. With a vicious deleveraging process taking 
hold in its banking sector, the euro area is sinking into recession. Given ties of trade, finance 
and confidence, the rest of the world is beginning to feel the effects. 
Most  fundamentally,  current  events  mark  a  rupture.  Advanced  economies  have  steadily 
increased leverage for decades. That era is now decisively over. The direction may be clear, 
but the magnitude and abruptness of the process are not. It could be long and orderly or it 
could  be  sharp  and  chaotic.  How  we  manage  it  will  do  much  to  determine  our  relative 
prosperity. 
This is my subject today: how Canada can grow in this environment of global deleveraging. 
How we got here: the debt super cycle 
First, it is important to get a sense of the scale of the challenge. 
Accumulating  the  mountain  of  debt  now  weighing  on  advanced  economies  has  been  the 
work of a generation. Across G-7 countries, total non-financial debt has doubled since 1980 
to 300 per cent of GDP. Global public debt to global GDP is almost at 80 per cent, equivalent 
to levels that have historically been associated with widespread sovereign defaults.1  
The debt super cycle has manifested itself in different ways in different countries. In Japan 
and Italy, for example, increases in government borrowing have led the way. In the United 
States and United Kingdom, increases in household debt have been more significant, at least 
until recently. For the most part, increases in non-financial corporate debt have been modest 
to negative over the past thirty years. 
In  general,  the  more  that  households  and  governments  drive  leverage,  the  less  the 
productive  capacity  of  the  economy  expands,  and,  the  less  sustainable  the  overall  debt 
burden ultimately is. 
Another general lesson is that excessive private debts usually end up in the public sector one 
way or another. Private defaults often mean public rescues of banking sectors; recessions 
fed by deleveraging usually prompt expansionary fiscal policies. This means that the public 
                                                 
1  C. M. Reinhart and K. S. Rogoff, “A Decade of Debt,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 
No. 16827, Cambridge, 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
debt of most advanced economies can be expected to rise above the 90 per cent threshold 
historically associated with slower economic growth.2  
The cases of Europe and the United States are instructive. 
Today, American aggregate non-financial debt is at levels similar to those last seen in the 
midst  of  the  Great  Depression.  At  250  per  cent  of  GDP,  that  debt  burden  is  equivalent  to 
almost US$120,000 for every American (Chart 1).3  
 Several  factors  drove  a  massive  increase  in  American  household  leverage.  Demographics 
have  played  a  role,  with  the  shape  of  the  debt  cycle  tracking  the  progression  of  baby 
boomers through the workforce. 
The stagnation of middle-class real wages (itself the product of technology and globalisation) 
meant households had to borrow if they wanted to maintain consumption growth.4  
Financial innovation made it easier to do so. And the ready supply of foreign capital from the 
global savings glut made it cheaper. 
Most  importantly,  complacency  among  individuals  and  institutions,  fed  by  a  long  period  of 
macroeconomic  stability  and  rising  asset  prices,  made  this  remorseless  borrowing  seem 
sensible. 
From  an  aggregate  perspective,  the  euro  area’s  debt  metrics  do  not  look  as  daunting.  Its 
aggregate public debt burden is lower than that of the United States and Japan. The euro 
area’s current account with the rest of the world is roughly balanced, as it has been for some 
time. But these aggregate measures mask large internal imbalances. As so often with debt, 
distribution matters (Chart 2). 
                                                 
2  C.  M.  Reinhart  and  K.  S.  Rogoff,  “Growth  in  a  Time  of  Debt,”  American  Economic  Review  100,  no. 2 
(May 2010): 573–78. 
3  These figures, daunting as they are, actually understate the extent of the problem. They do not include the 
liabilities  stemming  from  the  pension  and  health  care  promises  made  by  governments  but  not  yet  funded, 
which some estimate to be even larger than the current explicit stock of debt. 
4  R.  G.  Rajan,  Fault  Lines:  How  Hidden  Fractures  Still  Threaten  the  World  Economy  (Princeton:  Princeton 
University Press, 2010). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 Europe’s problems are partly a product of the initial success of the single currency. After its 
launch, cross-border lending exploded. Easy money fed booms, which flattered government 
fiscal positions and supported bank balance sheets. 
Over  time,  competitiveness  eroded.  Euro-wide  price  stability  masked  large  differences  in 
national inflation rates. Unit labour costs in peripheral countries shot up relative to the core 
economies,  particularly  Germany.  The  resulting  deterioration  in  competitiveness  has  made 
the continuation of past trends unsustainable (Chart 3). Growth models across Europe must 
radically change. 
It’s the balance of payments, stupid! 
For  years,  central  bankers  have  talked  of  surplus  and  deficit  countries,  of  creditors  and 
debtors. We were usually ignored. Indeed, during a boom, the debtor economy usually feels 
more  vibrant  and  robust  than  its  creditors.  In  an  era  of  freely  flowing  capital,  some  even 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
thought current account deficits did not matter, particularly if they were the product of private 
choices rather than public profligacy. 
When  the  leverage  cycle  turns,  the  meaning  and  implications  of  these  labels  become 
tangible.  Creditors  examine  more  closely  how  their  loans  were  spent.  Foreign  financing 
constraints suddenly bind. And to repay, debtors must quickly restore competitiveness.5  
Financial  globalisation  has  provided  even  greater  scope  for  external  imbalances  to  build 
(Chart  4).  And  its  continuation  could  permit  larger  debt  burdens  to  persist  for  longer  than 
historically  was  the  case.  However,  experience  teaches  that  sustained  large  cross-border 
flows usually presage liquidity crunches.6  
 The global Minsky moment has arrived 
Debt tolerance has decisively turned. The initially well-founded optimism that launched the 
decades-long credit boom has given way to a belated pessimism that seeks to reverse it. 
Excesses of leverage are dangerous, in part because debt is a particularly inflexible form of 
financing. Unlike equity, it is unforgiving of miscalculations or shocks. It must be repaid on 
time and in full. 
While debt can fuel asset bubbles, it endures long after they have popped. It has to be rolled 
over, although markets are not always there. It can be spun into webs within the financial 
sector,  to  be  unravelled  during  panics  by  their  thinnest  threads.  In  short,  the  central 
relationship between debt and financial stability means that too much of the former can result 
abruptly in too little of the latter. 
                                                 
5  Japan illustrates the importance of whether one’s creditors are domestic or foreign. The public and total non-
financial  debt  burdens  in  Japan  have  risen  well  beyond  levels  that  have  proved  unsustainable  in  other 
countries, owing largely to the fact that the preponderance of that debt is owed domestically. From an external 
perspective, Japan is the largest net creditor in the world. 
6  See M. Carney, “Global Liquidity,” a speech delivered to the Canada-United Kingdom Chamber of Commerce 
in London, United Kingdom, 8 November 2011. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Hard experience has made it clear that financial markets are inherently subject to cycles of 
boom and bust and cannot always be relied upon to get debt levels right.7 This is part of the 
rationale for micro- and macroprudential regulation. 
It  follows  that  backsliding  on  financial  reform  is  not  a  solution  to  current  problems.  The 
challenge for the crisis economies is the paucity of credit demand rather than the scarcity of 
its supply. Relaxing prudential regulations would run the risk of maintaining dangerously high 
leverage – the situation that got us into this mess in the first place. 
The implications of deleveraging 
As a result of deleveraging, the global economy risks entering a prolonged period of deficient 
demand.  If  mishandled,  it  could  lead  to  debt  deflation  and  disorderly  defaults,  potentially 
triggering large transfers of wealth and social unrest. 
History  suggests  that  recessions  involving  financial  crises  tend  to  be  deeper  and  have 
recoveries  that  take  twice  as  long.8  The  current  U.S.  recovery  is  proving  no  exception 
(Chart 5).  Indeed,  it  is  only  with  justified  comparisons  to  the  Great  Depression  that  the 
success of the U.S. policy response is apparent. 
 Such  counterfactuals  –  it  could  have  been  worse  –  are  of  cold  comfort  to  American 
households. Their net worth has fallen from 6 ½ times income pre-crisis to about 5 at present 
(Chart 6). These losses can only be recovered through a combination of increased savings 
and, eventually, rising prices for houses and financial assets. Each will clearly take time. 
In Europe,  a tough combination of necessary fiscal austerity and structural adjustment will 
mean  falling  wages,  high  unemployment  and  tight  credit  conditions  for  firms.  Europe  is 
                                                 
7  See A. Turner, “Debt and Deleveraging: Long Term and Short Term Challenges,” a speech delivered to the 
Centre for Financial Studies, Frankfurt, Germany, 21 November 2011. Turner argues, in fact, that the current 
situation is the result of “decades of cumulative, massive policy errors,” particularly the over reliance on free 
markets, (p. 6). 
8  See  C.  M.  Reinhart  and  V.  R.  Reinhart,  “After  the  Fall,”  Macroeconomic  Challenges:  The  Decade  Ahead, 
Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City  2010  Economic  Policy  Symposium.  Available  at: 
<http://www.kansascityfed.org/publicat/sympos/2010/reinhart-paper.pdf>. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
unlikely to return to its pre-crisis level of GDP until a full five years after the start of its last 
recession (Chart 7). 
   Managing the deleveraging process 
Austerity is a necessary condition for rebalancing, but it is seldom sufficient. There are really 
only three options to reduce debt: restructuring, inflation and growth. 
Whether we like it or not, debt restructuring may happen. If it is to be done, it is best done 
quickly. Policy-makers need to be careful about delaying the inevitable and merely funding 
the private exit. Historically, as an alternative to restructuring, financial repression has been 
used to achieve negative real interest rates and gradual sovereign deleveraging. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Some have suggested that higher inflation may be a way out from the burden of excessive 
debt.9  
This is a siren call. Moving opportunistically to a higher inflation target would risk unmooring 
inflation  expectations  and  destroying  the  hard-won  gains  of  price  stability.  Similarly, 
strategies such as nominal GDP level targeting would fail unless they are well understood by 
the public and the central bank is highly credible.10, 11  
With no easy way out, the basic challenge for central banks is to maintain price stability in 
order to help sustain nominal aggregate demand during the period of real adjustment. In the 
Bank’s  view,  that  is  best  accomplished  through  a  flexible  inflation-targeting  framework, 
applied symmetrically, to guard against both higher inflation and the possibility of deflation. 
The  most  palatable  strategy  to  reduce  debt  is  to  increase  growth.  In  today’s  reality,  the 
hurdles are significant. 
Once  leverage  is  high  in  one  sector  or  region,  it  is  very  hard  to  reduce  it  without  at  least 
temporarily increasing it elsewhere. 
In  recent  years,  large  fiscal  expansions  in  the  crisis  economies  have  helped  to  sustain 
aggregate demand in the face of private deleveraging (Chart 8). However, the window for 
such Augustinian policy is rapidly closing. Few except the United States, by dint of its reserve 
currency status, can maintain it for much longer. 
In  most  of  Europe  today,  further  stimulus  is  no  longer  an  option,  with  the  bond  markets 
demanding the contrary. 
                                                  
9  K. Rogoff, “Inflation Is Now the Lesser Evil,” Project Syndicate, December 2008. 
10  See J. Hatzius, Z. Pandl, A. Phillips, and S. J. Stehn, A. Tilton, S. Wu, and M. Acosta-Cruz, “The Case for a 
Nominal GDP Level Target,” US Economics Analyst, No: 11/41; Goldman Sachs Global ECS Research, 2011; 
and C. Romer, “Dear Ben: It’s Time for Your Volcker Moment,” New York Times, 29 October 2011. 
11  Indeed, if inflation is both higher and more uncertain, a higher inflation risk premium might result, prompting an 
increase in real interest rates that would exacerbate unfavourable debt dynamics. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
There  are  no  effective  mechanisms  that  can  produce  the  needed  adjustment  in  the  short 
term.  Devaluation  is  impossible  within  the  single-currency  area;  fiscal  transfers  and  labour 
mobility are currently insufficient; and structural reforms will take time. 
Actions  by  central  banks,  the  International  Monetary  Fund  and  the  European  Financial 
Stability Facility can only create time for adjustment. They are not substitutes for it. 
To repay the creditors in the core, the debtors of the periphery must regain competitiveness. 
This will not be easy. Most members of the euro area cannot depreciate against their major 
trading partners since they are also part of the euro. 
Large  shifts  in  relative  inflation  rates  between  debtor  and creditor  countries  could  result  in 
real exchange rate depreciations between euro-area countries. However, it is not clear that 
ongoing  deflation  in  the  periphery  and  higher  inflation  in  the  core  would  prove  any  more 
tolerable than it did between the United Kingdom and the United States under the postwar 
gold standard of the 1920s and 1930s. 
The  route  to  restoring  competitiveness  is  through  fiscal  and  structural  reforms.  These  real 
adjustments  are  the  responsibility  of  citizens,  firms  and  governments  within  the  affected 
countries,  not  central  banks.  A  sustained  process  of  relative  wage  adjustment  will  be 
necessary, implying large declines in living standards for a period in up to one-third of the 
euro area. 
We welcome the measures announced last week by European authorities, which go some 
way to addressing these issues. 
With deleveraging economies under pressure, global growth will require global rebalancing. 
Creditor nations, mainly emerging markets that have benefited from the debt-fuelled demand 
boom in advanced economies, must now pick up the baton. 
This  will  be  hard  to  accomplish  without  co-operation.  Major  advanced  economies  with 
deficient  demand  cannot  consolidate  their  fiscal  positions  and  boost  household  savings 
without support from increased foreign demand. Meanwhile, emerging markets, seeing their 
growth  decelerate  because  of  sagging  demand  in  advanced  countries,  are  reluctant  to 
abandon  a  strategy  that  has  served  them  so  well  in  the  past,  and  are  refusing  to  let  their 
exchange rates materially adjust. 
Both sides are doubling down on losing strategies. As the Bank has outlined before, relative 
to a co-operative solution embodied in the G-20’s Action Plan, the foregone output could be 
enormous: lower world GDP by more than US$7 trillion within five years (Chart 9). Canada 
has a big stake in avoiding this outcome. 
8 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
To summarize thus far 
The market cannot be solely relied upon to discipline leverage. 
It is not just the stock of debt that matters, but rather, who holds it. Heavy reliance on cross-
border flows, particularly when they fund consumption, usually proves unsustainable. 
As a consequence of these errors, advanced economies are entering a prolonged period of 
deleveraging. 
Central  bank  policy  should  be  guided  by  a  symmetric  commitment  to  the  inflation  target. 
Central  banks  can  only  bridge  real  adjustments;  they  can’t  make  the  adjustments 
themselves. 
Rebalancing global growth is the best option to smooth deleveraging, but its prospects seem 
distant. 
What it means for Canada 
Canada has distinguished itself through the debt super cycle (Chart 10), though there are 
some recent trends that bear watching. Over the past twenty years, our non-financial debt 
increased  less  than  any  other  G-7  country.  In  particular,  government  indebtedness  fell 
sharply, and corporate leverage is currently at a record low (Chart 11). 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
In the run-up to the crisis, Canada’s historically large reliance on foreign financing was also 
reduced to such an extent that our net external indebtedness was virtually eliminated. 
Over  the  same  period,  Canadian  households  increased  their  borrowing  significantly. 
Canadians have now collectively run a net financial deficit for more than a decade, in effect, 
demanding funds from the rest of the economy, rather than providing them, as had been the 
case since the Leafs last won the Cup. 
Developments since 2008 have reduced our margin of manoeuvre. In an environment of low 
interest rates and a well functioning financial system, household debt has risen by another 13 
percentage points, relative to income. Canadians are now more indebted than the Americans 
or the British. Our current account has also returned to deficit, meaning that foreign debt has 
begun to creep back up. 
The  funding  for  these  current  account  deficits  has  been  coming  largely  from  foreign 
purchases  of  Canadian  portfolio  securities,  particularly  bonds.  Moreover,  much  of  the 
proceeds  of  these  capital  inflows  seem  to  be  largely,  on  net,  going  to  fund  Canadian 
household expenditures, rather than to build productive capacity in the real economy. If we 
can take one lesson from the crisis, it is the reminder that channelling cheap and easy capital 
into unsustainable increases in consumption is at best unwise. 
Canada’s relative virtue throughout the debt super cycle affords us a privileged position now 
that  the  cycle  has  turned.  Unlike  many  others,  we  still  have  a  risk-free  rate  and  a  well-
functioning financial system to support our economy. It is imperative that we maintain these 
advantages.  Fortunately,  this  means  largely  doing  what  we  have  been  doing  –  individuals 
and  institutions  acting  responsibly  and  policy-makers  executing  against  sound  fiscal, 
monetary and regulatory frameworks. 
It cannot entirely be business as usual. Our strong position gives us a window of opportunity 
to  make  the  adjustments  needed  to  continue  to  prosper  in  a  deleveraging  world.  But 
opportunities are only valuable if seized. 
First and foremost, that means reducing our economy’s reliance on debt-fuelled household 
expenditures. To this end, since 2008, the federal government has taken a series of prudent 
and  timely  measures  to  tighten  mortgage  insurance  requirements  in  order  to  support  the 
long-term stability of the Canadian housing market. Banks are also raising capital to comply 
with  new  regulations.  Canadian  authorities  are  co-operating  closely  and  will  continue  to 
monitor the financial situation of the household sector. 
To eliminate the household sector’s net financial deficit would leave a noticeable gap in the 
economy.  Canadian  households  would  need  to  reduce  their  net  financing  needs  by  about 
$37 billion per year, in aggregate. To compensate for such a reduction over two years could 
require  an  additional  3  percentage  points  of  export  growth,  4  percentage  points  of 
government spending growth or 7 percentage points of business investment growth. 
Any  of  these,  in  isolation,  would  be  a  tall  order.  Export  markets  will  remain  challenging. 
Government cannot be expected to fill the gap on a sustained basis. 
But  Canadian  companies,  with  their  balance  sheets  in  historically  rude  health,  have  the 
means to act – and the incentives. Canadian firms should recognize four realities: they are 
not  as  productive  as  they  could  be;  they  are  under-exposed  to  fast-growing  emerging 
markets; those in the commodity sector can expect relatively elevated prices for some time; 
and they can all benefit from one of the most resilient financial systems in the  world. In a 
world  where  deleveraging  holds  back  demand  in  our  traditional  foreign  markets,  the 
imperative is for Canadian companies to invest in improving their productivity and to access 
fast-growing emerging markets. 
This  would  be  good  for  Canadian  companies  and  good  for  Canada.  Indeed,  it  is  the  only 
sustainable  option  available.  A  virtuous  circle  of  increased  investment  and  increased 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
productivity would increase the debt-carrying capacity of all, through higher wages, greater 
profits and higher government revenues. This should be our common focus. 
The Bank of Canada is doing its part by fulfilling its mandate to keep inflation low, stable and 
predictable so that Canadian households and firms can invest and plan for the future with 
confidence.  It  is  also  assisting  the  federal  government  in  ensuring  that  Canada’s  world-
leading  financial  system  will  be  there  for  Canadians  in  bad  times  as  well  as  good  and  in 
pushing the G-20 Action Plan because it is in Canada’s interests. 
Conclusion 
It  makes  sense  to  step  back  and  consider  current  challenges  through  the  longer  arc  of 
financial history. Today’s venue is an appropriate place to do so. A century ago, when the 
Empire Club and the Canadian Club of Toronto would meet, the first great leveraging of the 
Canadian  economy  was  well  under  way.  During  the  three  decades  before  the  First  World 
War, Canada ran current account deficits averaging 7 per cent of GDP. These deficits were 
largely  for  investment  and  were  principally  financed  by  long-term  debt  and  foreign  direct 
investment. 
On the eve of the Great War, our net foreign liabilities reached 140 per cent of GDP, but our 
productive capacity built over the decades helped to pay them off over time. Our obligations 
would again swell in the Great Depression. But in the ensuing boom, we were again able to 
shrink our net liabilities. 
When we found ourselves in fiscal trouble in the 1990s, Canadians made tough decisions, so 
that on the eve of Lehman’s demise, Canada was in the best fiscal shape in the G-7. 
We must be careful, however, not to take too much comfort from these experiences. Past is 
not  always  prologue.  In  the  past,  demographics  and  productivity  trends  were  more 
favourable  than  they  are  today.  In  the  past,  we  deleveraged  during  times  of  strong  global 
growth.  In  the  past,  our  exchange  rate  acted  as  a  valuable  shock  absorber,  helping  to 
smooth  the  rebuilding  of  competitiveness  that  can  only  sustainably  be  attained  through 
productivity growth. 
Today, our demographics have turned, our productivity growth has slowed and the world is 
undergoing a competitive deleveraging. 
We might appear to prosper for a while by consuming beyond our means. Markets may let us 
do so for longer than we should. But if we yield to this temptation, eventually we, too, will 
face painful adjustments. 
It  is  better  to  rebalance  now  from  a  position  of  strength;  to  build  the  competitiveness  and 
prosperity worthy of our nation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
