Vítor Constâncio: Securities settlement in 2020 – T2S and beyond 
Speech by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the ECB’s 
conference  on  “Securities  settlement  in  2020  –  T2S  and  beyond”,  Frankfurt  am  Main, 
4 October 2011. 
 I  am  very  pleased  for  the  opportunity  to  be  with  you  here  today.  As  you  might  know,  the 
President’s visit to the European Parliament for the last Monetary Dialogue of his tenure was 
rescheduled at the last minute, so it was not possible for him to participate tonight. He sends 
his apologies and wishes you a very interesting and fruitful conference.  
In my remarks this afternoon, I would like to focus on the importance of strengthening the 
Single Market, the various initiatives currently being pursued for this purpose, and how T2S 
fits into the wider picture.  
The Single Market, and the Single Financial Market in particular, has been one of the great 
success  stories  of  the  EU.  Since  the  project  began  with  Jacques  Delors’s  White  Paper  in 
1985  and  almost  20  years  since  the  1992  programme  was  completed,  it  has  delivered 
enormous economic, financial and social benefits to the citizens of Europe.  
The euro has played a major role in delivering the benefits of a Single Market. It has ensured 
price stability, removed exchange rate uncertainty and reduced transaction costs. All this is 
conducive to an integrated market. 
In times of urgency, we may sometimes take for granted the benefits that the Single Market 
has  already  brought.  Freedom  of  goods,  freedom  of  services,  freedom  of  capital,  and 
freedom of people. 
Indeed,  in  recent  years  we  have  been  observing  sometimes  less  focus  on  the  need  for 
further  progress  in  the  Single  Market  and  even  protectionist  tendencies,  which  were  also 
exacerbated by concerns raised by the financial crisis. However, the financial crisis should 
instead serve as a powerful reminder that only a fully fledged integrated single market can 
provide  the  resilience  that  we  need  to  withstand  future  shocks.  The  Single  Market  Act, 
launched in April by the European Commission is therefore very much welcomed to provide 
impetus to the reinforcement of the project. This is also what is wished by citizens, since the 
very recent Eurobarometer survey of 26 September shows that there are still important gaps 
between expectations and the reality of the single market: information gaps affecting citizens 
and authorities, gaps in the implementation of European policy, and gaps in the European 
legislative framework. 
Against this background, I would like to highlight the progress made in the Single Financial 
Market. Some initiatives were started before the crisis and are still in progress. Others have 
been launched since the outbreak of the crisis. I would like to briefly mention just some of 
these important developments. 
First, Europe’s new supervisory structure, based on the European Systemic Risk Board and 
the  three  European  supervisory  authorities,  is  a  major  step  forward  in  ensuring  that  the 
financial  system  as  a  whole  is  supervised  in  a  more  harmonised  and  coherent  fashion.  It 
reflects the full acknowledgement that the externalities deriving from the financial system are 
no  longer  national.  They  are  increasingly  interconnected  across  the  European  market  and 
beyond. 
Second,  there  is  also  a  new  set  of  new  legislation  to  reform  financial  markets.  It  is  a 
comprehensive package covering not only the trading level, but also – for the first time – the 
infrastructures for clearing and settlement. Nothing is being missed out. MiFID – which deals 
with  trading  and  investment  services  –  is  currently  being  updated.  A  new  regulation  on 
clearing  houses  –  called  the  European  Market  Infrastructure  Regulation  (EMIR)  –  is  also 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
being  proposed.  The  objective  of  MiFID  and  the  EMIR  is  not  only  to  make  markets  safer, 
sounder and more transparent in the wake of the financial crisis; they also aim to create a 
level playing field in Europe, to remove barriers to competition, and ultimately, to strengthen 
the financial market integration process.  
On  the  settlement  and  issuer  services  side,  a  proposal  for  a  new  legislation  on  CSDs  is 
expected soon. This will help to ensure a level playing field between the different business 
models  operating  across  Europe.  And  on  the  custody  side,  the  proposed  Securities  Law 
Directive will also help provide legal certainty and facilitate cross-border business. 
T2S fits extremely well into the financial market reform process. It very much complements 
the regulatory initiatives being pursued by the European authorities to significantly strengthen 
the Single Financial Market and its infrastructure. T2S will – for the first time – create a single 
market in the settlement services space. Combined with legislation on CSDs and CCPs as 
well as MiFID, T2S will stimulate a new competitive environment in post-trading. 
Over the longer term, T2S will deliver significant benefits to the European economy. 
First, in T2S it will be as easy to settle cross-border transactions as domestic ones. This will 
enhance the ability of issuers and investors to reach across national borders. It will lower the 
cost of capital for issuers. It will allow investors to diversify their investments. 
Second, T2S will be an indispensable tool for banks to optimise their collateral management. 
It  will  eliminate  the  need  to  hold  multiple  buffers  of  collateral  across  various  CSDs.  It  will 
eliminate  the  need  to  shift  securities  across  borders  in  order  to  use  them.  The  savings  in 
collateral will be very significant. This is, of course, a huge benefit for market participants at a 
time when demand for collateral is ever increasing.  
Third, T2S will foster harmonisation in the post-trade world. The T2S platform is, of course, 
not sufficient in itself. But it is a necessary condition. And it will play a crucial catalyst role 
going forward. 
The Governing Council made an initial proposal for T2S back in 2006. After receiving positive 
feedback  from  the  market,  it  decided  to  go  ahead  with  developing  the  platform  in  2008.  I 
want to emphasise that the Governing Council remains as committed as ever to delivering 
T2S as a key component of the European market infrastructure, particularly for the purpose 
of the adequate implementation of the single monetary policy.  
Accordingly, let me reassure you that the Governing Council will do all it can to make sure 
that T2S will be a resounding success.  
I am happy to say that, during the crisis, the current market infrastructures in Europe proved 
their  resilience.  In  the  future,  T2S  will  be  a  core  part  of  Europe’s  financial  market 
infrastructure. It must, therefore, also be extremely robust and resilient. As a central bank, we 
have all the incentives to make this so.  
Because T2S is a single platform settling in central bank money, it will further promote the 
financial stability of market infrastructures. It will provide additional resilience to cross-border 
settlement, which is still somewhat lacking today. And settlement in central bank money is 
the safest form of cash settlement. T2S will only settle in central bank money. 
To be a success, the economics underlying the business case for the project must also be 
favourable. T2S must deliver the cost efficiencies that we have promised. I am very confident 
that,  in  the  longer  term,  T2S  will  produce  significant  reductions  in  post-trading  costs.  Not 
least because of the new element of competition that T2S will create in the market and its 
dynamic  effects.  Over  time  I  expect  settlement  costs  to  decrease  to  levels  comparable  to 
those in the United States. 
But  even  more  important  than  delivering  such  cost  efficiencies,  T2S  will  create  new 
opportunities for “value creation”.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
T2S will standardise and commoditise settlement. Private sector companies will now be in a 
position to innovate products that add more value for their clients. It will lead to the creation 
of  new  products  that  have  not  even  been  thought  of  today.  Ultimately,  this  stimulation  to 
innovation and a higher quality of service could be the real benefits of T2S. 
The overall theme of the conference is what we envisage for “Securities settlement in 2020: 
T2S and beyond”. As you well know, the Europe 2020 strategy launched by the Commission 
in  March  2010  aims  at  delivering  a  European  economy  with  high-levels  of  employment, 
research  and  innovation,  education,  environmental  and  energy  standards,  with  much  less 
poverty and social exclusion. A much stronger economic governance framework should also 
ensure closer fiscal integration and sound public finances as a pillar of EMU. Accordingly, I 
very much hope that your reflections in this conference will help developing the key features 
of the securities market infrastructure that we need in 2020 to support our economy, as well 
as safeguarding financial stability. 
I hope you enjoy the rest of the conference. Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
