William C Dudley: The national and regional economic outlook 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  before  the  Bronx  Chamber  of  Commerce  at  the  New  York 
Botanical Garden, Bronx, New York, 24 October 2011. 
 Good  morning.  I  am  very  pleased  to  be  at  the  New  York  Botanical  Garden  to  speak  to 
members of the Bronx Chamber of Commerce this morning. The Garden is one of the jewels 
of the Bronx and it is always a pleasure to speak with the business leaders of a community 
as vibrant as the Bronx.  
Over the past 20 months, I have been engaged in a series of outreach meetings all across 
my  Federal  Reserve  District.  I  consider  these  visits  just  as  important  as  my  trips  to 
Washington, D.C., to help formulate monetary policy or to Switzerland to shape international 
bank regulation. The understanding that I gain today will help ensure that my policy decisions 
reflect the public interest in the broadest sense. 
Each visit within the region helps me deepen relationships with the people I represent. As 
you may know, the New York Fed’s District includes all of New York State; 12 counties in 
northern New Jersey; Fairfield County, Connecticut; Puerto Rico; and the U.S. Virgin Islands. 
This  year  I  have  met  with  community  leaders,  businesses and  elected  officials  around  the 
region. 
Although the Bronx is the city’s second smallest borough, it has 1.4 million residents – equal 
to  the  combined  population  of  three  to  four  average  U.S.  cities.  You  host  world-class 
institutions  such  as  the  Yankees,  the  New  York  Botanical  Garden,  the  Montefiore  Medical 
Center and the Hunts Point Market. You also are home to the largest Dominican population 
in  the  city  and  sizable  groups  from  around  the  globe.  In  sum,  the  Bronx  is  a  major 
metropolitan area and economic force all on its own. 
What the New York Fed does 
By way of introduction, I will briefly review what the New York Fed does and what makes my 
job so interesting. As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily 
those of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee, also known as 
the FOMC. 
I serve as Vice-chair of the FOMC – a Federal Reserve committee that meets eight times a 
year  in  Washington,  D.C.,  to  set  interest  rates  and  make  other  decisions  about  monetary 
policy.  At  FOMC  meetings,  each  Committee  member  presents  a  current  regional  and 
national  outlook.  For  these  assessments,  we  consult  our  researchers  and  add  critical 
information  that  we  learn  from  our  boards  of  directors,  regional  councils  and  community 
leaders, such as you. 
At the New York Fed, we continually track conditions in our District and have created tools 
for  that  purpose.  For  example,  my  staff  produces  monthly  indexes  of  economic  activity  
– essentially local measures of output – for the city, New Jersey and New York. We have 
also started a consumer panel to track local household credit conditions. 
In addition, we have a new survey about credit and financing for small businesses. Almost 
900 regional businesses responded to our May 2011 poll – nearly 10 percent from the Bronx. 
If you, as part of a small business, would like to participate in our January poll, please pass 
your card to my colleagues in the audience. 
This December we will host a workshop for the New York City metro area’s small businesses 
–  to  provide  information  about  credit  enhancements  and  loans  from  the  Small  Business 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Administration. I will send your president, Mr. Caro, details about how to register. I hope to 
see you in at the New York Fed in lower Manhattan in December. 
As you know, even states as wealthy as New York have large pockets of poverty. So, we 
target some key initiatives specifically to low- and moderate-income groups. We have worked 
hard to help neighborhoods, including some in the Bronx, that face high foreclosure rates. 
Later  today,  I’ll  tour  some  hard-hit  areas  with  the  city’s  commissioner  of  Housing 
Preservation and Development. 
To share what we learn about our diverse District, we have a rich website. I invite you to visit 
newyorkfed.org to explore our detailed maps and information on small business, credit and 
housing conditions. 
Finally,  and  crucially,  in  the  aftermath  of  the  financial  crisis,  we  are  working  with  Fed 
colleagues and other agencies to help put the nation’s financial system on a firmer footing. 
Yet,  much  remains  to  be  done  and  we  are  determined  to  keep  at  it.  I  recognize  fully  that 
there can be no return to pre-crisis business as usual – whether on the part of the financial 
sector or on the part of regulators like ourselves. 
All in all, there is a lot to keep my colleagues busy. 
National economic conditions 
Now, let me update you on national economic conditions. 
Put  simply,  growth  in  2011  has  been  disappointing.  We  entered  the  year  with  some 
momentum, spurred by fiscal and monetary policy stimulus. U.S. economic output grew at a 
3  percent  annual  rate  from  mid-2009  through  2010.  While  hardly  a  blistering  pace,  it  was 
sufficient  to  reduce  the  unemployment  rate  by  a  half  percentage  point  during  2010.  Then, 
during the first half of 2011, growth slowed so much that the unemployment rate rose back 
up to 9.1 percent. 
Growth slowed partly because of temporary factors. As these factors have subsided, growth 
has picked up. But the consensus expectation for 2.4 percent annualized growth in the third 
quarter is still disappointing. 
Looking  forward,  I  regard  continued  modest  growth  as  the  most  likely  outcome.  This 
sluggishness  convinces  me  that  other,  more  persistent  factors  must  also  be  holding  back 
growth.  And,  given  the  depressed  level  of  household  and  business  confidence  and  the 
fragility evident in financial markets, I also conclude that there remain significant downside 
risks. 
It  is  worth  elaborating  on  these  points.  First,  what  are  the  temporary  factors  that  slowed 
growth in early 2011? Of the items noted by the FOMC, two bear special mention: 
 
Energy  and  commodity  prices  rose  sharply  over  the  six-month  period  ending  in 
May 2011.  This  sapped  households’  real  purchasing  power  here  and  abroad,  so 
they responded by both consuming less and cutting savings. 
April’s tragic earthquake in Japan disrupted many global supply chains. Many goods 
assembled here contain Japanese-made parts. When Japan was unable to produce 
parts, U.S. production and sales slowed. I am certain that parts shortages affected 
many sectors here and abroad. 
 These temporary factors are now waning. Nonetheless, four factors are preventing a more 
vigorous recovery: 
 
First,  problems  in  the  housing  market  are  a  serious  impediment  to  a  stronger 
economic  recovery.  Residential  construction  –  which  typically  boosts  economic 
activity during a recovery – is at a standstill. Moreover, many homeowners are now 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
     consuming less because the decline in house prices reduced their wealth and they 
are concerned that the decline in home values and wealth may not be over. 
Mortgage rates are at record lows and house prices no longer appear overvalued on 
affordability measures. But obstacles to refinancing and access to credit for home 
purchases  are  limiting  the  support  provided  by  low  rates  to  house  prices  and 
consumption. Meanwhile, the large supply of foreclosed homes for sale – and the 
prospect  that  unemployment  and  negative  equity  will  continue  to  feed  the 
foreclosure pipeline – continues to put downward pressure on home values. The risk 
of further house price declines in turn discourages would-be buyers from entering 
the market. 
Continued house price declines could lead to even more defaults, foreclosures and 
distressed  sales,  undermining  wealth,  confidence  and  spending.  Breaking  this 
vicious cycle is one of the most pressing issues facing policymakers. 
Next,  cutbacks  in  employment  and  spending  by  state  and  local  governments 
intensified in 2011 and are likely to continue. Looking forward, states are likely to cut 
spending further as the federal government stimulus aid to states peters out. 
In  addition,  by  current  law,  in  2012  the  federal  government  will  end  much  of  the 
support it has been providing to the economy through stimulus programs. As these 
measures expire, households will be able to consume less and businesses will have 
less  incentive  to  invest  for  a  while.  Plus,  the  new  Budget  Control  Act  calls  for 
additional sharp cuts in federal spending. Our nation needs to get its public finances 
in order. Done correctly, with a focus on the long term, this could support confidence 
and growth. But it is very important to avoid excessive short-term cutbacks or tax 
increases that could harm the recovery. 
Finally,  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  in  Europe  has  weakened  the  outlook  for  global 
growth and with it, U.S. exports. To date, these effects have been much more acute 
in Europe than here, but spillovers to the United States may occur, so we need to 
monitor them carefully. 
Thus, our economy continues to face some serious headwinds. Without robust growth, the 
economy is more vulnerable to negative shocks, which unfortunately seem to keep coming. It 
is  like  riding  a  bicycle  –  at  a  slow speed,  the  bicycle  wobbles  and  the risk  of falling  rises. 
Politics have not helped. The intense debate around raising the debt ceiling took a toll on 
confidence. More recently, the difficulties in Europe and lower U.S. growth prospects made 
investors less inclined to take risks, spurring a major stock market sell-off and widening credit 
spreads. All these events increase the downside risks to growth. 
Let  me  turn  now  to  the  inflation  outlook.  As  you  may  know,  the  FOMC  has  two  charges: 
promoting stable prices and sustainable growth. This has been a tough year on both counts. 
Unemployment remains too high. At the same time, inflation has risen more than expected. 
Nevertheless, because monetary policy works with a lag, we have to make policy based not 
on  where  inflation  is  today,  but  where  it  is  headed  in  the  future.  I  believe  that  underlying 
fundamentals will help to subdue inflation over the next few quarters. 
As  of  August,  the  12-month  change  for  a  broad  measure  of  consumer  prices  was 
2.9 percent, almost double the change in the year before. However, the bulk of that increase 
was due directly to the run-up of energy and commodity prices, which tend to bounce around 
a  lot.  Measures  of  the  underlying  rate  of  inflation  have  moved  up  too,  but  by  less  and  to 
levels  broadly  consistent  with  price  stability.  I  expect  those  to  subside  soon,  as  well.  It  is 
important to remember that a year ago the worry was that deflation – meaning a persistent, 
widespread  decline  in  prices  –  might  take  hold.  Deflation  tends  to  inhibit  growth  because 
people and companies have a harder time paying down debt and may defer investments and 
purchases  when  prices  and  wages  are  falling.  Avoiding  outright  deflation  is  a  very  good 
thing. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Thus,  barring  more  energy  price  jumps,  I  expect  inflation  to  fall  late  this  year  and  next. 
Moreover  –  and  this  is  crucial  –  households’  inflation  expectations  remain  well  anchored. 
Low and stable inflation expectations help us to deliver low and stable inflation. 
In light of the current weak outlook, the FOMC has announced that we expect to keep short-
term  interest  rates  exceptionally  low  at  least  through  mid-2013  and  will  change  the 
composition of the assets the Fed holds to provide additional support for growth. In addition, 
we  have  discussed  the  range  of  policy  tools  available  to  promote  a  stronger  economic 
recovery even as we keep inflation pressures in check. 
Just  like  interest  rate  cuts  in  normal  times,  our  monetary  policy  provides  support  through 
lower  interest  rates  that  encourage  private-sector  business  investment  and  household 
spending.  This  policy  tool  should  not  be  confused  with  fiscal  stimulus  or  government 
spending. 
I believe that the actions we have taken recently will be helpful in supporting growth and jobs. 
However,  I  do  not  think  that  monetary  policy  is  all-powerful.  To  get  the  strongest  possible 
recovery we need reinforcing action in areas such as housing and fiscal policy. 
 
Stabilizing the housing sector is particularly important because housing equity is an 
important  part  of  household  wealth.  This  calls  for  a  comprehensive  approach  to 
housing policy, starting with an urgent effort to remove the obstacles that make it 
difficult for all borrowers to refinance at today’s low mortgage rates, but extending 
beyond  this  to  tackle  other  problems  weighing  on  housing.  Taken  together,  such 
efforts  could  help  shift  people’s  expectations  about  future  house  prices.  If 
prospective homeowners no longer fear that prices could decline further, they will be 
more  willing  to  enter  the  market  to  take  advantage  of  reduced  prices  and  low 
financing costs, and existing homeowners will feel more confident about spending. A 
vicious cycle could be replaced by a virtuous circle, in which stabilization in house 
prices  supports  spending,  growth  and  jobs.  Today,  the  Federal  Housing  Finance 
Agency (FHFA) set out plans to address one element of the problem – obstacles to 
refinancing for borrowers with high loan-to-value ratios. I welcome this as a step in 
the right direction and hope that more will follow. 
On the fiscal side, it is important that we see progress in Washington in addressing 
the long-term fiscal challenges facing the country in a manner that is credible and 
supports economic recovery. Not only is this important to reassure households and 
business  that  the  U.S.  budget  is  on  a  sustainable  path,  but  also  this  would  be 
important from a larger confidence perspective – demonstrating to our citizens and 
the  world  that  the  political  process  can  still  work  to  make  tough  choices  in  the 
national  interest.  In  this  regard,  the  ability  of  the  so-called  Congressional  “Super 
Committee” to reach agreement on a way forward is an important opportunity that I 
hope is not squandered. 
 Regional economic conditions 
Now,  how  has  the  region  fared  during  the  downturn  and  its  aftermath?  Based  on  the 
New York Fed’s indexes,1 the downturn in the economy in New York City ended in November 
of 2009. Since then, the city’s economy has been on the mend and, as of September, the 
recovery continues at a healthy clip. 
The  local  economy  has  fared  better  than  the  nation  during  this  deep  recession  and  slow 
recovery. Employment fell by a smaller percentage in the city than it did nationally. During the 
recovery, New York City has already regained half of the net jobs lost during the recession. 
                                                 
1  Regional Indexes of Coincident Economic Indicators 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
This has happened without much help from the securities industry (Wall Street), a key driving 
force  behind  past  local  economic  recoveries.  The  strongest  job  growth  has  been  in 
professional and business services, leisure and hospitality, and – importantly for the Bronx – 
education and health services. 
Although  closely  linked  to  the  rest  of  the  city,  the  borough  has  its  own  vibrant  economy. 
Some manufacturing takes place here, particularly in food, apparel and textiles. In addition, 
Hunts Point may be the world’s largest food distribution center. However, the largest sectors 
– health and education services – account for nearly half of all private jobs in the borough. In 
education, the Bronx hosts Fordham University and the Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 
among  others.  As  for  health  services,  numerous  facilities  include  the  Montefiore  Medical 
Center, now the borough’s largest employer. 
I am pleased to report that the Bronx, unlike the nation and the city overall, sustained almost 
no net job loss during the recession. While national employment remains well below its pre-
recession peak, the Bronx has added 10,000 jobs since the recession began. Some of this 
resilience is due to the borough’s concentration in health and education – the only sectors 
that grew nationally during the recession. Another factor is that Bronx residents largely rent 
their homes, so they were less vulnerable to the fallout from the housing crisis. 
This is not to say that all is well here. Some 12 percent of the Bronx workforce – a painfully 
high share – is jobless and less than a fifth of its adult population hold a college degree. The 
seeming disconnect between the pace of job creation here and high unemployment reflects 
commuting patterns. Many Bronx residents work in Manhattan and other places where job 
trends have been less favorable. In addition, not all jobs in the Bronx are filled by borough 
residents. 
High  unemployment  and  low  average  levels  of  education  help  explain  why  the  per  capita 
income here is less than two-thirds of the national average. A quarter of the population here 
lives  below  the  poverty  line,  more  than  double  the  national  rate.  Reducing  poverty  and 
raising the graduation rate are clearly major challenges for policymakers here,2 even though 
the Bronx, like the city, seems headed in a promising direction. 
How are families here doing in reducing their debt to more sustainable levels? Let me tell you 
what our special consumer credit panel reveals about the Bronx.3 Families here, as renters, 
carry  relatively  little  debt.  However,  it  worries  me  that  in  contrast  to  falling  debt  levels 
elsewhere, Bronx residents have not reduced their indebtedness during the last two years. 
Also troubling is the 17 percent of household debt in the Bronx that is seriously delinquent: 
roughly  double  the  rate  in  the  state  and  nation.  Plus,  the  number  of  delinquencies  is  still 
climbing here, even though they are falling in the state and nation. All of this tells me that 
Bronx households have a considerable way to go before they reach more comfortable debt 
levels. 
Conclusion 
To sum up, over the first half of 2011, the slowing of economic growth in the nation and the 
weak  labor  market  has  been  a  major  disappointment.  Recently,  growth  has  picked  up 
modestly, but not enough to reduce unemployment. Despite some bright spots in the U.S. 
economy,  strong  headwinds  are  preventing  a  more  vigorous  recovery.  Inflation,  which  has 
risen in recent months, is poised to slow soon. The Fed is doing – and will continue to do – 
everything within its power to promote jobs and price stability. 
                                                 
2  See, for additional discussion of this topic, William Dudley. 2011. “Job Creation in the Region”. Remarks at the 
Quarterly Regional Economic Press Briefing, New York City. August 12. 
3  Quarterly Report on Household Debt and Credit, August 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
High poverty, unemployment and delinquency rates suggest that the Bronx faces a number 
of  challenges.  However,  the  continued  job  growth  in  the  Bronx  and  rest  of  the  city  should 
create  more  opportunities  for  Bronx  residents  to  improve  their  incomes  and  personal 
finances. 
Going forward, the key challenge for the Bronx will be to prepare its residents for the best 
jobs being created in the region. The Bronx must strive to build the human capital – that is, 
education and skills – of its workforce. A region’s human capital determines a large part of its 
economic success. The Bronx needs to ensure that it can attract and train workers for the 
broad range of tasks that an advanced economy demands. In addition, expanding education 
and skills goes a long way to broaden participation in the economy to all residents. 
Thank you for your kind attention. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
