Narayana Kocherlakota: The importance of teaching teachers 
Speech  by  Mr  Narayana  Kocherlakota,  President  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Minneapolis,  at 
the  Minnesota  Council  on  Economic  Education  50th Anniversary, 
Minneapolis, Minnesota, 20 October 2011. 
 I thank Doug Clement, David Fettig, Dick Todd and Jenni Schoppers for their helpful thoughts and comments. 
Let  me  begin  by  welcoming  all  of  you  to  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Minneapolis  to 
celebrate this auspicious event – the 50th anniversary celebration of the Minnesota Council 
on Economic Education (MCEE). Congratulations to all of you, including you teachers who 
have  been  a  part  of  the  Minnesota  Council’s  programs  over  the  years,  but  especially  to 
Claudia Parliament, who has served as director for nearly 20 of those 50 years, and who has 
done  so  with  absolute  commitment  and  professionalism.  Indeed,  it  is  hard  to  imagine  the 
Minnesota Council without Claudia, but I understand that she will soon be leaving her post 
and handing her baton to her successor. Claudia, we thank you for your service and we wish 
you the best. 
We are truly honored to host this event and are pleased that so many of you could make it 
here this evening. The Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis has long been a partner of the 
Minnesota  Council  in  its  efforts  to  aid  teachers  in  the  often  challenging  task  of  teaching 
economics.  I  call  economic  education  a  “challenging  task”  not  just  to  make  all  of  you  feel 
special, but because we at the Federal Reserve know those challenges well. We face them, 
too;  namely,  how  to  explain  often  complicated  ideas  in  a  clear  and  concise  manner.  The 
Federal  Open  Market  Committee,  under  the  leadership  of  Chairman  Ben  Bernanke,  has 
made  communication  a  top  goal,  and  as  I  will  describe  in  a  moment,  I  am  on  record  as 
strongly  supporting  this  initiative.  In  many  respects,  communication  is  another  word  for 
education. The better we communicate, the more we educate about the Federal Reserve’s 
responsibilities and its actions. And before I begin, I should remind you that my comments 
here  tonight  reflect  my  views  alone,  and  not  necessarily  those  of  others  in  the  Federal 
Reserve System, including my FOMC colleagues. 
So speaking with teachers and the MCEE is especially rewarding to me, because you are the 
unsung but vital allies in the Federal Reserve System’s efforts to communicate about policy. 
Effective policy implementation requires public support and, therefore, public understanding. 
Public  understanding  of  policy  decisions,  in  turn,  requires  clear  communication  between 
policymakers  and  the  public.  In  my  view,  the  bulk  of  the  responsibility  for  clear 
communication  falls  on  policymakers  themselves.  With  this  in  mind,  I  have  strongly 
supported  Federal  Reserve  System  initiatives  toward  greater  transparency  about  our 
decisions and the logic behind them. In my speeches, articles and video statements on our 
website – as well as via the Bank’s Twitter and YouTube channels, its Facebook page and its 
smartphone delivery system – I try to clearly outline my own thinking about policy. 
Now,  although  policymakers  have  the  primary  responsibility  for  effectively  communicating 
their  decisions,  the  task  becomes  easier  when  the  general  public  has  a  basic  grasp  of 
economic  and  financial  principles.  In  my  frequent  dialogues  with  audiences  in  the  Ninth 
Federal  Reserve  District,  I  am  often  impressed  by  their  interest  in  and  understanding  of 
policy  issues.  Their  perceptiveness  bolsters  my  belief  in  the  importance  and  possibility  of 
clear communication about policy. Everyone benefits from a better public understanding of 
basic economic concepts. It helps policymakers in their efforts to successfully convey policy 
decisions, and it allows voters to more effectively hold policymakers accountable. 
These benefits should not be taken for granted, however. They are the result of an effective 
system  of  general  education  that  relies  on  elementary,  secondary  and  college  teachers  to 
provide  training  in  economics,  personal  finance  and  related  social  sciences.  With  that  in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
mind, I want to express my sincere appreciation not only to the instructors who teach these 
concepts, but especially, in the context of MCEE’s 50th anniversary, to those who support 
and prepare them to teach.  
More broad than deep 
The objective of general economic and personal finance education is more broad than deep. 
In  particular,  it  need  not  aim  at  preparing  students  to  be  professional  economists,  even 
though some of them will follow that path. I know this from experience. Despite having little 
exposure  to  economics  instruction  until  I  was  a  college  undergraduate,  I  was  not 
disadvantaged  in  my  subsequent  pursuit  of  an  economics  Ph.D.  It  remains  the  case  that 
many successful professional economists and current economics graduate students had little 
formal  training  in  economics  before  college  or,  in  some  cases,  graduate  school.  In  other 
words, the primary aim of K-12 education in economics and finance is to prepare students to 
be  thoughtful  individuals,  good  citizens  and  intelligent  workers,  but  not  necessarily 
economists. 
These aims can be largely met by successfully conveying a small set of basic economic and 
finance  concepts.  We  economists  are  notorious  for  our  arguments  and  disagreements,  of 
course,  but  the  fact  is  we  generally  agree  on  the  basic  concepts  that  underlie  economic 
reasoning. Fortunately, economists and economic educators have already translated these 
core concepts into standards for K-12 instruction, including the Voluntary National Content 
Standards  in  Economics  from  the  MCEE’s  national  partner,  the  Council  for  Economic 
Education1  and  the  Minnesota  Department  of  Education’s  proposed  new  social  studies 
standards.2  
So the good news is that these concepts and more have already been written into proposed 
or actual standards for K-12 social science education, and there are additional proposed and 
actual  standards  in  personal  finance.  In  other  words,  appropriate  specific  objectives  for 
K-12 economic and personal finance education are pretty well understood.  
The  challenge,  however,  is  to  meet  those  objectives.  Although  parents  and  other  mentors 
and non-school experiences play an important role, especially in personal finance learning, 
effective K-12 teaching is critical to achieving a broad base of public understanding of basic 
economic and finance concepts. The mission of the MCEE and its sister organizations stems 
from  the  idea  that  effective  teaching  is  based  on  good  material  and  a  well-prepared 
instructor. 
The MCEE has long provided a full range of materials organized to help teachers teach to 
standards, including full curricula and lesson plans from the Council for Economic Education, 
other state councils on economic education and organizations such as Junior Achievement 
and  the  National  Endowment  for  Financial  Education.  On  its  own,  the  MCEE  has  taken  a 
leading  role  in  delivering  materials  and  hosting  student  competitions  for  the  Cargill  Global 
Food Challenge, a curriculum that teaches students how supply and demand factors interact 
to determine equilibrium prices and quantities in a global market while also covering policy 
issues  related  to  agriculture,  trade  and  food  security.  The  widely  used  Seas,  Trees,  and 
Economies environmental economics curriculum was developed by Curt Anderson, director 
of the MCEE’s center at the University of Minnesota Duluth. Anderson and the MCEE are 
also in the process of disseminating a new set of personal finance materials. For classroom 
teachers developing their own materials, the MCEE provides workshops and mentoring as 
well as awards for outstanding new lesson plans in economics and personal finance, funded 
                                                 
1   See the Council for Economic Education web site. 
2   See the Minnesota Department of Education proposed new social studies standards. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
by  3M  and  Thrivent,  respectively.  Of  course, one  of  the  reasons  we are  here  tonight  is  to 
witness the presentation of those awards, which will occur shortly.  
Preparing teachers 
Teaching materials are important, but only if they are taught, and especially if they are taught 
by a well-trained teacher. Ideally, all teachers would be trained in the content and pedagogy 
of their subject areas in their undergraduate or graduate courses, but the reality is that many 
K-12 teachers teach subjects they did not study extensively in college. When the subject is 
economics or personal finance, a common reaction is panic, often followed by a call for help 
to  the  MCEE  or  a  similar  organization.  To  meet  the  needs  of  both  new  and  experienced 
teachers  at  all  grade  levels,  the  MCEE  offers  an  array  of  courses,  ranging  from  Using 
Children’s  Literature  to  Teach  Economics  and  Personal  Finance  to  Enhancing  the  Social 
Studies Curriculum with Economics and Preparing to Teach High School Economics. 
Scott  Wolla’s  story  illustrates  that  the  results  can  be  impressive.  Wolla  became  a  social 
studies  teacher  at  Hibbing  (Minn.)  High  School  in  1996.  When  the  opportunity  to  teach 
economics opened in 2001, Wolla volunteered, but soon decided he needed help, despite 
having a degree in social studies education. Like many others in this situation, he turned to 
the MCEE for instruction on suitable materials and lessons plans. Before long, he was not 
only confident, but proficient. Wolla coached his students to the national championships in 
the  Council  for  Economic  Education’s  Economics  Challenge  competition  three  times, 
culminating  in  a  national  championship  in  2006;  his  students  have  also  won  the  Cargill 
Global Food Challenge.  
Wolla  went  on  to  develop  his  own  lessons  plans,  winning  the  MCEE’s  3M  Innovative 
Economic Educator Award in 2003. In 2006, he was named Minnesota’s high school social 
studies teacher of the year and won MCEE’s 3M Economic Educator Excellence award for 
career  achievement.  Along  the  way,  Wolla  completed  a  master’s  degree  in  economics  for 
educators. He now serves as one of my colleagues, as an economic education specialist at 
the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. 
The transition from panic to proficiency taken by Wolla has been repeated by many others. 
As  those  of  you  who  attend  EconFest  regularly  already  know,  a  number  of  Wolla’s  fellow 
recipients of the MCEE’s 3M and Thrivent Innovative Educator awards have related similar 
tales. But the case is backed up by research as well as anecdotes. 
A recent study by Wendy Way and Karen Holden of the University of Wisconsin documents a 
gap in readiness to teach personal finance among K-12 educators from across the country.3 
Almost  90  percent  of  the  K-12  teachers  who  responded  to  Way  and  Holden’s  survey 
expressed moderate to strong agreement with the idea that “students should be required to 
take a financial literacy course or pass a literacy test for high school graduation,” and about 
30 percent had actually taught financial literacy concepts (usually integrated into a course on 
another or broader topic). Nonetheless, the respondents reported a large gap in knowledge 
about how to teach personal finance. Only 3 percent of K-12 teachers had taken a college 
course that covered how to teach personal finance, and just 7 percent to 11 percent felt well 
qualified  in  areas  such  as  integrating  financial  literacy  concepts  into  their  disciplines, 
developing examples to explain financial literacy concepts and assessing students’ financial 
literacy  understanding.  These  findings  corroborate  the  anecdotes  of  panic  that  lead  many 
new teachers of economics and personal finance to seek out the MCEE and its affiliates. 
                                                 
3   Way,  Wendy  L.,  and  Karen  C.  Holden.  2009.  “Teachers’  Background  and  Capacity  to  Teach  Personal 
Finance: Results of a National Study.” Journal of Financial Counseling and Planning 20 (2). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
for 
the  students  receiving 
Proficient students 
Research  also  supports  the  anecdotes  of  student  proficiency  achieved  through  teacher 
training  on  economics  and  personal  finance  pedagogy.  Two  scholars  associated  with  the 
MCEE’s center at St. Cloud State University, Rich MacDonald and Ken Rebeck, teamed with 
the University of Nebraska’s William Walstad to assess how much a well-prepared teacher 
using  a  well-designed  curriculum  could  enhance  students’  acquisition  of  personal  finance 
knowledge.4 They worked with 15 teachers in four states who were trained to use the Council 
for Economic Education’s Financing Your Future curriculum.  
After  being  trained,  these  teachers  used  the  curriculum  to  instruct  hundreds  of  students. 
Those  students  and  a  control  group  of  similar  students  who  received  no  instruction  were 
tested  both  before  and  after  the  instruction,  and  the  results  were  clear.  Before  instruction 
began,  both  groups  of  students  correctly  answered  just  under  50  percent  of  the  test 
questions. Afterward, performance was unchanged for the control group, but rose to almost 
69 percent  correct 
instruction,  a  statistically  significant 
improvement. 
In short, well-trained teachers using sound curricula make a difference. That logic lies behind 
the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Minneapolis’  long  partnership  with  the  MCEE,  the  Montana 
Council  on  Economic  Education  and  other  economic  and  personal  finance  education 
organizations. Our senior officers and economists have worked with the MCEE and others 
since  at  least  the  1960s.  We  value  the  opportunities  the  MCEE  provides  for  talking  with 
K-12 educators about macroeconomics, monetary policy, financial supervision and the role of 
the Federal Reserve System, and their help in publicizing and building participation for our 
annual economic essay contest. And each April we are honored – and honestly, get a huge 
kick  out  of  –  hosting  teams  from  across  Minnesota  in  the  final  rounds  of  the  MCEE’s  two 
state high school quiz-bowl-like championships, the Economics Challenge and the Personal 
Finance Decathlon.  
So,  on  behalf  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Minneapolis,  let  me  thank  all  of  those  who 
teach economics and personal finance as well as all those who support, prepare and train 
them,  with  a  special  nod  to  our  long-term  partner,  the  Minnesota  Council  on  Economic 
Education,  on  the  occasion  of  its  50th  anniversary  celebration  this  October.  Let’s  keep 
working  together  to  prepare  students  to  be  thoughtful  individuals,  good  citizens,  intelligent 
workers and, sometimes, teachers and economists.  
                                                 
4   Walstad,  William  B.,  Ken  Rebeck  and  Rich  MacDonald.  2010.  “The  Effects  of  Financial  Education  on  the 
Financial Knowledge of High School Students.” Journal of Consumer Affairs 44 (2). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
