Muhammad Al-Jasser: “Assessment” project of small and medium size 
enterprises 
Opening speech by His Excellency Dr Muhammad Al-Jasser, Governor of the Saudi Arabian 
Monetary  Agency  (SAMA),  at  the  inauguration  ceremony  of  the  “Assessment”  project  of 
small and medium size enterprises, Saudi Company for Credit Information (SIMAH), Riyadh, 
8 October 2011. 
 Your Excellencies and Dear audience, 
I am pleased to participate with you in celebrating the launching of the “Assessment” Project 
of Small and Medium Enterprises. First, I would like to express my thanks and appreciation 
to the colleagues at the Saudi Company for Credit Information (SIMAH) for the development 
of this important project, which I hope will be provided with all necessary means of support 
by all entities concerned for its success. 
Dear brothers and sisters, 
The national economy consists of a large and integral variety of public and private institutions 
that use available human and material resources to produce continuous flows of goods and 
services  to  meet  the  domestic  community’s  needs  and  a  part  of  the  external  demand.  Of 
course, domestic enterprises differ in size based on various criteria, the most important of 
which  are:  the  number  of  workers,  the  amount  of  capital,  sales  and  others.  One  of  the 
misconceptions  is  that  large  enterprises  are  the  main  impetus  of  economic  activity.  This 
belief has arisen from the good news repeatedly published about those institutions in various 
mass media. However, the actual reality emphasizes that small and medium size enterprises 
play  an  important  role  in  the  economic  activity  in  both  the  developed  and  developing 
countries, through their absorptive capacity in employing the workforce of the different levels 
of training and education. A study by the Riyadh Economic Forum on “the Saudi Business 
Sector and Meeting the Economic Challenges” showed that the average number of workers 
in the Saudi private sector stood at 8.4 workers per one single institution, and, consequently, 
90  percent  of  the  institutions  in  the  Kingdom  is  considered  within  the  scope  of  small  and 
medium size enterprises. 
Small  and  medium  size  enterprises  are  considered  the  best  efficient  and  effective  tool  for 
accelerating  economic  and  social  development,  especially  in  remote  areas  with  the  least 
opportunities  for  development.  They  also  provide  a  fertile  field  for  training  workers  and 
developing  their  skills.  To  this  end,  governments  have  paid  great  attention  to  such 
enterprises  and  established  the  basic  regulatory  framework  needed  for  their  growth  and 
development,  particularly  after  having  proved  their  ability  to  reduce  pressure  on  the 
government sector in providing job opportunities and training. Governments also helped big 
enterprises in the marketing process and in providing raw materials and primary commodities 
at  the  different  production  phases.  It  is  noted  that  most  regional  and  international  aid 
donating agencies and organizations have a growing tendency to provide financial resources 
and  technical  assistance  aimed  at  assisting  such  small  and  medium  size  enterprises  to 
depend  upon  themselves  and  play  their  anticipated  role  in  the  economy.  We,  in  Saudi 
Arabia, have the same tendency. The Kingdom has attached great importance to this sector 
and encouraged all authorities concerned to support such enterprises. Several government 
initiatives  have  been  taken  to  support  and  finance  small  and  medium  size  enterprises,  as 
clearly evidenced by the contributions made by government development funds. However, in 
spite of substantial government support, the private sector, in particular finance companies 
should  seize  such  opportunities  to  achieve  the  goals  of  the  financial  sector  and  the  Saudi 
economy in general.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Dear Brothers and Sisters, 
Some may wonder what are small and medium size enterprises, and how can we distinguish 
between them; and is there an international definition for them. Indeed, there is a substantial 
difference at the international level in their definition. If we rely on capital as a standard, for 
example, we will find that a facility with a capital of 10 million euros, is considered a small-
size enterprise in the European Union, while it is considered a medium-size enterprise and 
perhaps large-size enterprise in some developing countries. The terms “small” and “medium” 
are comparative words and have relative concepts that vary from one sector to another and 
from one country to another. However, the general practice in each country or region is to 
rely  on  a  set  of  criteria  intended  to  define  medium  and  small  size  enterprises.  Among  the 
most  important  criteria  are:  the  amount  of  labor,  capital,  annual  sales,  and  the  overall 
financial position at the end of a period. In the European Union, a small-size enterprise has 
about  50  workers,  and  the  volume  of  its  activity  is  around  10  million  euros.  Medium-size 
enterprises  are  defined  as  those  which  employ  about  250  workers  and  their  annual 
commercial  activity  is  around  50  million  euros.  In  Saudi  Arabia,  the  Saudi  Industrial 
Development  Fund  adopts  the  annual  sales  standard  to  identify  small  and  medium  size 
enterprises for the purpose of funding by “Kafalah” program. They are defined as enterprises 
with  annual  sales  not  exceeding  Rls  30  million.  The  World  Bank  has  conducted  a 
questionnaire and distributed it to commercial banks to establish a definition for small and 
medium  size  enterprises.  The  result  has  shown  differences  between  banks  in  their 
definitions,  but  it  can  be  concluded  from  that  survey  that  small-size  enterprises  are  those 
whose  annual  sales  range  from  Rls  100  thousand  to  Rls  5  million,  and  employ  2  to 
49 workers.  The  medium-size  enterprises  are  those  with  a  turnover  of  Rls  5  million  to 
Rls 50 million per annum, and employ from 50 to 200 workers. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
SMEs have various advantages, such as their easy establishment due to low capital required 
for  their  establishment  and  operation,  their  easy  establishment  procedures,  and  low 
establishment and administrative expenditures due to their simple organizational structures. 
They  are  also  characterized  by  management  independence  by  their  owners,  who  seek  to 
achieve the best possible success. Moreover, they are characterized by low administrative 
and marketing costs, low employees’ salaries, easiness of procedures within their structure, 
high  effective  communications  and  quick  access  to  information  required  for  work,  and  the 
use  of  non-sophisticated  production  and  operation  means.  They  are  also  able  to  adapt  to 
changes, especially in keeping up with consumers’ desires and preferences or change in the 
structure  of  labor  force  or  policies  of  production,  marketing  and  finance,  enabling  them  to 
overcome  economic  changes  and  cycles.  SMEs  are  also  characterized  by  the  freedom  to 
enter and exit the market, thanks to their fixed and total assets and liabilities. Finally, they are 
flexible in geographic spread. 
Regardless of these advantages, growth and development of SME sector faces a number of 
challenges that might be greatly similar, not only at the level of a single country, but at the 
global one as well. The most important of these challenges are the high cost of capital due to 
high interest rates compared to large enterprises, difficulties in obtaining adequate finance 
due to lack of guarantees and their modest credit record, inability to compete and influence 
market forces and utilize economies of scale, inability of applying and facilitating government 
procedures to expand their activities, humble financial expenditure on development research, 
non-separation between ownership and management (80 percent of SMEs are run by their 
owners).  These  advantages  and  disadvantages,  however,  represent  an  opportunity  for  the 
financial  sector  to  further  focus  on  financial  support  through  financing  these  enterprises, 
commensurate with risk level that  must be taken into consideration when financing SMEs, 
and to set appropriate finance prices commensurate with risk levels. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Business  Enterprises  have  witnessed  significant  growth  in  recent  years.  The  number  of 
enterprises subscribing to the Social Insurance System went up from about 121.5 thousand 
in 1426H to approximately 218.4 thousand in 1430H, recording an annual average growth of 
16  percent.  Individual  proprietorship  firms  represented  93.1  percent  of  the  total  of  annual 
average growth, limited liability Enterprises 4.7 percent and holding Enterprises 0.6 percent. 
Economic  activity  of  these  enterprises  was  focused  in  three  areas:  commercial  activity 
34.3 percent,  construction  and  building  32.3  percent  and  manufacturing 
industries 
14.6 percent. Small Enterprises with less than 5 employees accounted for the largest share 
of  55.5  percent  of  the  total  number  of  enterprises  at  the  end  of  1430H,  while  the  rest, 
enterprises  with  more  than  60  employees  represented  3.8  percent.  These  data  show  that 
most of the enterprises in the Kingdom are small, in terms of the number of workers. SMEs’ 
contribution  to  the  Kingdom’s  GDP  is  very  low,  accounting  for  33  percent,  while  SMEs 
constituted  64.3  percent  of  Japan’s  GDP,  43.3  percent  of  Spain’s  GDP,  56  percent  of 
France’s GDP, 44 percent of Austria’s GDP, 43 percent of Canada’s GDP and 33 percent of 
Australia’s  GDP.  SMEs’  contribution  to  the  U.S.A’s  GDP  is  more  than  50  percent.  The 
insignificant  contribution  of  SMEs  to  the  Kingdom’s  GDP  may  be  due  to  the  Oil  and 
Governmental sector which represent the major impetus of economic activity.  
Dear Brothers and Sisters, 
SMEs  are  facing  clear  challenges  in  gaining  the  necessary  funding  for  meeting  their 
expansion needs due to various reasons including poor management, and lack of adequate 
guarantees and, subsequently, the difficulty of obtaining the necessary funding. In order to 
overcome this problem in the Kingdom, the Ministry of Finance, in collaboration with Saudi 
banks, established a guarantee program (Kafalah) for financing SMEs. The program, with a 
capital  of  Rls  200  million,  is  managed  by  Saudi  Industrial  Development  Fund  to  cover  a 
proportion of the risk of the financing entity in case of the failure of the guaranteed activity in 
repaying the finance or part thereof. The program also aims at encouraging banks to finance 
SMEs that have the constituents for success, but at the same time, they cannot present the 
necessary guarantees or accounting records to prove their eligibility for funding. The program 
has recorded good performance since its inception in 2006 until 1-Oct-2010, as the number 
of guarantees approved by the Ministry of Finance during that period reached 1,668 with a 
total  value  of  Rls  644  million,  while  loans  granted  by  banks  under  the  umbrella  of  the 
program  amounted  to  Rls  1.6  billion,  benefiting  about  1,113  SMEs.  This  is  in  addition  to 
financing  loans  granted  by  Saudi  Credit  and  Saving  Bank  to  young  people  and  small 
businesses, as well as the financial support of the Centennial Fund and the program of “Bab 
Rizq Jameel” of Abdul Latif Jameel which provides material support to the youth’s projects 
and training courses. 
Dear Brothers and Sisters, 
Today,  SIMAH  project  for  assessment  of  SMEs  emerges  as  an  important  plan  in  order  to 
encourage banks to finance these enterprises in a scientific and systematic way that takes 
into consideration the prevention of risks related to its financing, and helps banks to diversify 
their  portfolios,  which  adds  a  new  area  to  the  main  finance  areas  in  the  Kingdom.  For 
example, the corporate finance granted by banks exceeded Rls 800 billion at the end of the 
2nd  quarter  of  2011,  the  individuals’  finance  was  Rls  217.5  billion  and  the  public  sector’s 
finance  amounted  to  Rls  250.5  billion  at  the  same  period.  Today,  through  this  project,  we 
endeavor to make the SMEs’ finance a tributary of finance in the banking sector to achieve 
the development objectives that the Kingdom seeks to realize for its economy. It is needless 
to stress the importance of the diversification of the banking sector’s loans to all segments of 
the  economy  and  the  business  sector,  which  can  decrease  lending  risks,  enhance  the 
efficiency of funding in the economy in general and increase banks’ efficiency in determining 
the quality of these enterprises’ assets, giving it the opportunity of obtaining finance that will 
contribute to the development of the private sector. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
I would like to emphasize that the status of the MSEs in the Kingdom still needs a lot of care 
and insuring a suitable environment so that they can play their required role in the economy, 
especially in the field of job creation and Saudization. This project may be the real start for 
combining  efforts  to  help  this  important  sector  to  overcome  one  of  the  most  important 
obstacles facing its development, namely, obtaining the required finance to fulfill its financial 
needs. 
Thank you all for listening, and I wish you success. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
