Thomas Jordan: Financial stability developments of relevance 
Introductory remarks by Mr Thomas Jordan, Vice-Chairman of the Governing Board of the 
Swiss National Bank, at the end-of-year media news conference, Berne, 15 December 2011. 
 In my introductory remarks today, I would like to look at the most important developments in 
the area of financial stability that have taken place since the publication of our most recent 
Financial  Stability  Report  in  June  of  this  year.  Our  latest  analysis  reaffirms  the  need  for 
action  which  we  had  already  identified  back  then.  Firstly,  in  view  of  the  high  level  of  risk 
associated with the current global economic environment, the big banks must – to the extent 
possible  –  push  quickly  ahead  with  the  expansion  of  their  loss-absorbing  capital  base. 
Secondly,  given  the  medium-term  risks  in  the  real  estate  market,  which  are  particularly 
affecting  domestically  focused  banks,  it  is  vital  that  an  effective  macroprudential  policy 
framework be developed.  
International developments of relevance for financial stability 
The global economic and financial conditions which affect the stability of the Swiss financial 
system  worsened  in  the  second  half  of  2011.  As  my  colleague,  Philipp  Hildebrand,  has 
already mentioned, the outlook for global growth is currently subdued. A major reason for this 
is the sovereign debt crisis which has been building up in peripheral euro area countries for 
the last two years or so and is now threatening to spill over into the core countries of the euro 
area.  The  European  banking  sector  is  particularly  affected,  as  investors  fear  losses  from 
write-downs on government bonds. The ensuing loss of confidence in the banking system is 
resulting once again in a sharp fall in activity on the interbank market, which in turn is leading 
to  higher  refinancing  costs  and  liquidity  bottlenecks.  Meanwhile,  the  European  banks 
themselves are holding back economic activity with their restrictive lending practices. Weak 
economic  activity  is  further  hampering  efforts  by  the  affected  nations  to  restructure  their 
budgets. All of these developments have caused a steep rise in credit risk premia in financial 
markets.  
In response to this serious situation, euro area countries have adopted additional measures 
to strengthen fiscal discipline in a sustainable way and to restore confidence in the European 
banking sector and the financial markets. The actual implementation of these measures is 
essential if the financial markets are to be convinced in the long term.  
On the whole, we expect that the international environment will probably remain fraught with 
considerable  uncertainty  for  some  time  to  come;  the  risks  to  financial  stability  will  remain 
correspondingly high.  
Situation of Swiss big banks 
The  deterioration  in  the  global  economic  environment  has  not  left  the  Swiss  big  banks 
unscathed.  In  the  second  half  of  2011,  their  profitability  suffered  from  the  volatile  financial 
market situation as well as from low customer activity levels. Against this backdrop and given 
the enhanced regulatory requirements, UBS and Credit Suisse have announced that they will 
be significantly reducing their risk exposure for the next few years. In addition to this, they 
have further expanded their loss-absorbing capital base.  
The Swiss National Bank welcomes these measures and sees them as further steps towards 
achieving a sounder capital situation. Additional efforts are necessary, however, because the 
loss-absorbing capital of big banks is still low, given their risk profile and the considerable 
uncertainty in the international environment. In order for them to be better equipped to deal 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
with a possible worsening of current economic conditions, the big banks must further improve 
their capital situation. They can achieve this by retaining earnings. Another measure would 
be  to  issue  contingent  convertible  bonds  or  contingent  capital  instruments  with  write-off 
features, an essential element of the “too big to fail” regulations. They can also strengthen 
their capital base by accelerating the announced reduction of their risk exposure. By making 
use  of  these  options,  the  big  banks  could  quickly  and  substantially  improve  their  capital 
situation.  
Situation of domestically focused banks 
Allow me now to move on to the situation of banks with a domestic focus. The capitalisation 
of most domestically focused banks remains good. Profitability – as measured by the ratio of 
gross profits to assets – dropped slightly, however; not least because of the low interest rate 
margins.  At  the  same  time,  domestically  focused  banks  are  having  to  contend  with  two 
significant risk factors, namely interest rate risk, which has remained unchanged at a high 
level, and credit risk, which has risen further.  
Interest rate risk measures the potential for loss which results from a mismatch between the 
term  structure  of  a  bank’s  assets  (e.g.  mortgages)  and  that  of  its  liabilities  (e.g.  customer 
deposits).  While  the  term  structure  of  assets  gets  increasingly  longer,  that  of  liabilities 
remains very short.  
The rise in credit risk was due, on the one hand, to the deterioration in the outlook for the 
Swiss  economy.  A  slowdown  in  economic  growth  in  Switzerland  could  have  a  negative 
impact on domestic credit quality, with the result that banks would face the prospect of write-
offs on their assets. On the other hand, the continued strong rise in mortgage loans and real 
estate  prices  has  also  caused  credit  risk  to  increase  further  in  the  past  few  months. 
Furthermore, the results of our mortgage lending surveys suggest a high risk appetite on the 
part of individual banks.  
In this regard, the Federal Department of Finance (FDF) submitted two important measures 
for consultation which should counter potential imbalances in the real estate and mortgage 
markets: more risk-sensitive capital requirements for mortgage lending and a countercyclical 
capital buffer.  
With  more  risk-sensitive  capital  requirements,  incentives  for  mortgage  lending  should  be 
structurally improved. The countercyclical buffer is a component of the Basel III framework 
and  represents  a  variable  capital  requirement  which  is  only  activated  in  the  event  of 
excessive  credit  growth.  As  soon  as  credit  growth  weakens  again,  the  buffer  can  be 
deactivated. It is thus not a permanent instrument for boosting capital, but rather a temporary 
requirement to be employed in exceptional circumstances.  
The  countercyclical  buffer  is  an  important  element  in  the  macroprudential  toolkit.  I  would 
therefore now like to take a brief look at the progress made in the area of macroprudential 
policy in Switzerland from the SNB’s perspective.  
Progress in structuring the macroprudential policy framework 
At its news conference one year ago, the SNB drew attention to the absence of an adequate 
set of instruments in the area of macroprudential policy. This was in response to a request by 
the Parliament’s Control Committees to evaluate our mandate and set of instruments relating 
to  financial  stability.  So  what  are  the  key  milestones  that  have  been  achieved  this  year  in 
establishing  a  framework  for  macroprudential  oversight  in  Switzerland,  in  relation  both  to 
instruments and to the division of responsibilities?  
Firstly, with regard to the above-mentioned countercyclical buffer, the financial stability task 
force  led  by  the  FDF  has  taken  concrete  steps  towards  implementing  an  important 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
macroprudential instrument. In addition, the proposed structure of this buffer provides for a 
clear division of responsibilities: After consulting with FINMA, the SNB submits a request to 
the Federal Council regarding the activation and the level of the buffer. The Federal Council 
then makes the final decision.  
Secondly,  in  the  context  of  the  implementation  of  the  “too  big  to  fail”  regulations,  the 
decision-making  authority  with  regard  to  systemic  importance  was  clearly  defined.  The 
proposed legislation gives the SNB the authority to determine which banks and which bank 
functions are systemically important.  
Thirdly,  the  SNB  should  be  given  improved  access  to  information  that  is  necessary  for 
macroprudential analysis. In this context, the Federal Council announced that it would look 
into  ways  in  which  the  SNB  could  gain  better  access  to  information  from  banks  in  cases 
where FINMA does not have the requisite data available. To the extent that the existing legal 
basis does not provide adequately for this, the Federal Council intends to submit a proposal 
to Parliament in the near future.  
The SNB welcomes the progress made in the area of macroprudential policy in Switzerland. 
What is crucial now is that the appropriate measures are indeed implemented. This is all the 
more important in view of the fact that the risk of imbalances in the mortgage and real estate 
markets  has  increased  over  this  past  year.  Moreover,  owing  to  its  focus  on  the  minimum 
exchange  rate,  monetary  policy  is  currently  unable  to  react  to  potential  imbalances  in  the 
mortgage market using the traditional instruments. We will therefore continue to work within 
the  relevant  committees  towards  a  rapid  implementation  of  an  appropriate,  streamlined 
macroprudential policy framework. The decision as to what framework will ultimately apply in 
Switzerland lies, however, with the policymakers.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
