Jürgen Stark: Globalisation and monetary policy – from virtue to vice? 
Speech by Mr Jürgen Stark, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, Dallas, 29 November 2011. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I  am  very  honoured  to  be  here  today.  Reading  about  the  origins  of  the  Globalisation  and 
Monetary Policy Institute, I came to learn that it was established in 2007 in order to promote 
a  deeper  understanding  of  the  global  environment  in  which  US  monetary  policy  operates. 
The establishment of the Institute could not have been more timely, as the deep-seated and 
systemic nature of the current crisis is certain to provide numerous interesting questions for 
researchers to explore in the years to come.  
The good news, therefore, is that we live in challenging times and that for those of you who 
work in the Institute this will mean important and policy relevant work today and in the future. 
The bad news is that the crisis is still on-going, and insofar as this is the case and its ultimate 
outcome remains uncertain, there is an inherent peril to provide analysis and possible policy 
prescriptions on the basis of events which are either happening in real time or have recently 
elapsed.  
We have seen many dimensions of the crisis since it started in August 2007, spreading from 
the  periphery  of  the  financial  system  to  its  core,  and  then  onto  sovereigns  with  weaker 
balance sheets, which in turn contributed to increasing the vulnerability of the core financial 
system even further. In recent months, this negative and self-reinforcing dynamic of adverse 
feedback  loops  between  weak  sovereign  and  financial  sector  balance  sheets  has been  all 
too  apparent  in  parts  of  the  euro  area.  At  every  step  of  this  process  entailing  the 
transformation  of  risk  from  one  party  to  another,  policymakers  in  various  domains  
– regulatory, financial, fiscal, monetary – had to search for workable solutions. At a minimum, 
the evolving character of the crisis has forced policy makers to work on an effective response 
under exigent circumstances.  
In  the  remainder  of  my  remarks  today,  I  would  like  to  shed  light  on  the  on-going  policy 
response from the point of view of a monetary policy practitioner in a central bank. I will do 
this by drawing on the relationship between globalisation and monetary policy in recent years 
and  considering  the  extent  to  which  both  variables  have  influenced  each  other  in  either  a 
“virtuous” or “vicious” manner. This will not only be useful to understand what has happened 
in the recent period but also to frame the challenges that might lie before us as a result of the 
changed global environment under which monetary policy must operate.  
Before going any further, I think two disclaimers are in order. First, I will not purport to be 
exhaustive  but  selective  in  my  discussion  of  the  factors  conditioning  monetary  policy 
frameworks in the global environment. Second, I do not intend to be taxative but reflective, 
as  the  assessment  of  monetary  policy  frameworks  will  necessarily  continue  even  if  the 
aftermath of the crisis. 
The road to virtue 
1. 
The road to virtue between globalisation and monetary policy was built on two inter-related 
premises. First, that the process of globalisation itself was largely irreversible. And second, 
that  the  by-products  of  such  a  process  complemented  improvements  in  monetary 
policymaking  such  that  the  battles  of  yesteryear  had  been  decisively  won  in  a  durable 
manner  and  the  new  challenges  appeared  to  be  manageable.  The  relationship  between 
monetary  policy  and  globalisation  could  thus  be  best  described  as  one  which  was  both 
symbiotic in nature and mutually beneficial. I will review these arguments in turn.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The perceived inevitability of globalisation 
First, asserting the irreversibility of globalisation in the midst of a systemic crisis such as the 
one we are currently experiencing may seem far-fetched. However, if one were to look back 
at  the  enthusiasm  which  prevailed  in  both  the  economics  and  international  relations  fields 
during  the  early  1990s,  this  appeared  as  an  inescapable  conclusion.  The  growth  of  world 
merchandise  export  volumes  had  already  consistently  outpaced  that  of  real  GDP  for 
decades1, while the world stock of outward FDI had dramatically increased in the period from 
1980-19902. These favourable trends looked set to receive a further boost on account of the 
expected integration of central and eastern European economies as well as the states of the 
former Soviet Union and China into the mainstream of the world economy. Many observers 
therefore agreed with Francis Fukuyama that this marked “the end of history”3. 
The intensified scope and depth of economic and financial exchanges in the global economy 
which followed seemed to confirm this premise. But “globalisation” as a concept was – and 
remains – elusive to define even within the narrower remit of economics and finance, such 
that  observers  interpreted  these  developments  in  a  slightly  different  manner.  On  the  one 
hand,  theorists  such  as  Ohmae  (1990)4  tended  to  focus  on  the  globalisation  of  production 
and  the  shifts  in  global  finance  that  underpinned  this  trend  to  argue  that  a  new  capitalist 
system would progressively emerge, with the relevance of nation states as economic actors 
dwindling in importance. In contrast, other observers saw the growing internationalisation of 
the world economy as part of a broader and longer-dated trend where sharp intensifications 
in  trade  and  financial  exchanges  underpinned  by  growing  economic  liberalism  were  not 
without  historical  precedent  (for  example  during  the  period  ranging  from  1870  to  1913)5. 
These observers were thus more bullish as regards the ability of nation states to retain their 
economic  power  going  forward,  consolidating  this  inter  alia  through  strategic  alliances  in 
economic blocks6. In spite of these nuances, the common thread between the two views was 
that the underlying economic forces were seen as inevitable in the international (or global) 
domain. 
Complementarities between globalised economic performance and policymaking 
Second, following the broad acceptance of the premise that the globalised world would be 
durable  in  nature,  academics  and  policymakers  devoted  their  attention  to  fleshing  out  the 
practical  implications  of  globalisation  in  different  policy  environments.  Insofar  as  monetary 
policy was concerned, the debate was broadly captured by the relative weight of improved 
policymaking versus globalised factors in accounting for successful economic outcomes.  
A first dimension in this regard was backward looking in nature and stemmed from the sharp 
reduction in the variability of both inflation and output during the 1990s. This phenomenon, 
which  became  known  as  “the  great  moderation”,  coincided  with  both  the  intensification  of 
                                                 
1  According to WTO data, the average growth of world merchandise export volumes per annum was 15% from 
1960 to 1990 inclusive, as compared to average real GDP growth per annum of 8% over the same period. 
2  According  to  UNCTAD  data,  the  world  stock  of  outward  FDI  increased  from  USD  564  billion  in  1980  to 
USD 1763 billion in 1990. 
3  See The End of History and the Last Man, book by F. Fukuyama (1992). 
4  See The Borderless World (1990) and The End of the Nation-State (1995) , books by K. Ohmae 
5  See for example Globalisation, History and Development: a tale of two Centuries, article by D. Nayyar (2006). 
The author notes that export shares in GDP for selected industrialised countries (e.g. UK, Germany, Japan) 
were broadly comparable in 2000 relative to 1913, and that the relative increase in export shares to GDP for 
these same countries between the periods 1900–1913 and 1973–2000 was also comparable. In addition, the 
stock of FDI as a proportion of world GDP was about 9% in the mid-1990s, similar to the ratio in 1913. 
6  See for example Globalisation in Question, book by P. Hirst and G. Thompson (1999) and Globalization: A 
Short History, book by J. Osterhammel and P. Petersson (2005). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
that 
for  macroeconomic  stability,  with  some  also  suggesting 
globalisation in its broadest possible interpretation (namely the growth of cross-border trade 
in goods, services and financial assets, complemented by improvements in information and 
technology  transfer)  as  well  as  with  the  establishment  of  price  stability-oriented  monetary 
policy frameworks under independent central banks. In principle, each of these factors could 
help to account for improved macroeconomic performance. On the one hand, globalisation 
and the associated increase in international flows of capital, goods and services should have 
resulted in greater pressure towards price equalisation and convergence as well as greater 
shock  resilience  of  our  economies.  On  the  other  hand,  an  independent  and  price  stability 
oriented monetary policymaking should contribute to overall greater macroeconomic stability 
with  lower  output  and  inflation  volatility.  A  debate  ensued  among  policymakers  and 
academics  to  assess  the  relative  merits  and  contributions  of  globalisation  and  monetary 
policy 
the 
improved 
macroeconomic performance was only accidental in nature reflecting “good luck”7.  
I  will  not  try  to  settle  this  debate  today,  which  is  bound  to  continue  in  both  academic  and 
policy  quarters,  although  –  not  surprising  for  a  central  banker  –  I  personally  believe  that 
monetary  policymakers  deserve  significant  credit  to  this  end,  not  least  as  inflation  is 
ultimately a monetary phenomenon and hence ultimately determined by monetary policy. But 
the more fundamental point which I would like to make is that there seemed to be a large 
degree  of  positive  complementary  between  globalisation  outcomes  and  monetary 
policymaking. Whether one thought that policy frameworks largely managed to keep inflation 
in check once it was already low with the aid of global factors, or alternatively considered that 
the  low  inflation  responded  to  policy  frameworks  successfully  harnessing  the  forces  of 
globalisation, both trends appeared to be working in the same “virtuous” direction. 
A  second  dimension  of  the  debate  involving  monetary  policymaking  in  a  globalised 
environment was more forward-looking in nature, relating to the perceived ability of monetary 
authorities to continue to deliver on their price stability mandates. The main concerns in this 
regard  had  to  do  with  the  possible  effects  of  globalisation  in  domestic  product  and  labour 
markets as well as financial conditions, and the extent to which these should be incorporated 
into the central bank’s reaction function so as to ensure the effectiveness of monetary policy 
in a changed environment.  
As  regards  product  and  labour  markets,  observers  differed  on  whether  from  a  theoretical 
vantagepoint  globalisation  should  make  the  short  run  Phillips  curve  either  (i)  steeper  as  a 
result of greater price responsiveness to shifts in demand (e.g. Rogoff 20068); or (ii) flatter as 
a  result  of  other  factors  including  increased  openness  reducing  the  responsiveness  of 
inflation  to  the  domestic  output  gap  or  squeezed  profit  margins  due  to  competition  from 
labour abundant countries (e.g. Bean 20069). Yet other observers (e.g. Taylor 200810) argued 
that  the  correlation  between  globalisation  and  the  sort  of  effects  which  were  purported  to 
have on policy response functions were spurious in nature. Empirical studies (e.g. Borio and 
Filardo, 200711) showed some support for a flattening of the Phillips curve and that measures 
of global slack had become relatively more important to account for domestic inflation relative 
to domestic ones, albeit not in the case of the euro area.  
                                                 
7  For a review  of the arguments in this regard, see The Great Moderation, speech by B. Bernanke Board of 
Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 2004 . 
8  See Impact of Globalisation on Monetary Policy, article by K. Rogoff (2006). 
9  See Globalisation and Inflation, Speech by C. Bean, Bank of England , October 2006. 
10  See The Impacts of Globalisation on Monetary Policy, article by J. Taylor (2008). 
11  See  Globalization  and  inflation:  New  Cross-Country  Evidence  on  the  Global  Determinants  of  Domestic 
Inflation, article by C. Borio and A. Filardo, BIS, (2007). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
The  integration  of  low  cost  and  labour  abundant  producers  such  as  China  into  the  global 
system led to the common perception that such emerging markets were “exporting deflation”. 
This view, however, downplayed the cost-push factor which those same emerging markets 
could have on relative prices, for example through rising demand for commodities, working 
their  way  into  short-run  fluctuations  of  headline  inflation.  Therefore,  it  is  clear  that  the 
widespread  presumption  of  favourable  “tail-winds”  from  globalisation  on  inflation  is  turning 
more and more into “head-winds” posing challenges to the maintenance of price stability. In 
addition,  policymakers  can  choose  to  act  to  dampen  the  effect  of  these  relative  price 
changes on the absolute price level to the extent that they are able to distinguish between 
temporary shocks and permanent inflation trends. 
Concerning financial globalisation, the main source of concern for policymakers in the run-up 
to the crisis stemmed from the potential impact of more integrated financial markets on the 
monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism,  for  example  by  increasing  the  sensitivity  of 
investors  to  (now  lower)  interest  rate  differentials.  From  a  theoretical  point  of  view,  some 
observers  argued  that  key  determinants  of  long-term  interest  rates  –  such  as  the  global 
riskless real rate of interest and the real risk premium – had indeed been influenced by the 
globalised environment12. 
In these circumstances, the ability of short-term interest rate changes to influence long-term 
rates  could  be  more  problematic  than  would  otherwise  be  the  case.  There  was  some 
empirical evidence pointing to this end for a number of advanced economies including the 
euro area13, as well as to suggest that global factors had become increasingly important in 
the  determination  of  national  real  bond  yields14.  At  the  same  time,  there  was  also  some 
evidence to suggest that the responsiveness of longer-term yields to unanticipated changes 
in short-term rates remained unhindered15.  
Public remarks by policymakers in the run-up to the crisis show that officials were cognisant 
of the increased challenges for monetary policy brought about by financial globalisation. The 
remarks by former Federal Reserve Chairman Greenspan noting that the diverging evolution 
of short-term versus long-term rates in the US represented a “policy conundrum”16 received 
ample media attention in this regard. In a speech in March 2007, current Federal Reserve 
Chairman  Bernanke  also  acknowledged  that  the  central  bank’s  analysis  of  financial  and 
economic  conditions  was  becoming  more  complex17.  Former  ECB  vice-President 
Papademos  noted  similar  challenges  to  the  central  bank’s  monetary  analysis  in  another 
speech  in  June  200718.  However,  these  same  public  interventions  also  show  that 
policymakers  at  either  side  of  the  Atlantic  remained  confident  on  the  ability  of  monetary 
policy to continue to effectively transmit monetary impulses to financial markets and the real 
                                                 
12  See Globalization’s Effect on Interest Rates and the Yield Curve, article by T. Wu, Federal Reserve Bank of 
Dallas (2006). 
13  See Panel remarks at the Thirteenth International Conference “Financial Markets and the Real Economy in a 
Low Interest Rate Environment” by L. Reichlin (2006). 
14  See The Equilibrium Level of the World Real Interest Rate, article by D. Giannone, M. Lenza and L. Reichlin 
(2007) 
15  See  for  example  The  High-Frequency  Response  of  Exchange  Rates  and  Interest  Rates  to  Macroeconomic 
Announcements, article by J. Faust, J. Rogers, S. Wang and J. Wright (2007). 
16  See Testimony of Chairman Alan Greenspan Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, 
U.S. Senate, Federal Reserve Board’s semi annual Monetary Policy Report to the Congress, February 2005 
17  See Globalisation and Monetary Policy, speech by B. Bernanke, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System, March 2007. 
18  See The Effects of Globalisation on Inflation, Liquidity and Monetary Policy, speech by L. Papademos, ECB, 
June 2007. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
economy, notably through well-anchored inflation expectations, effective communication, and 
medium-term orientation of monetary policies. 
Overall,  the  “virtuous”  view  of  the  relationship  between  globalisation  and  monetary  policy 
prevailing  in  the  run-up  to  the  crisis  was  one  where  the  potential  challenges  to  policy 
frameworks posed by more integrated product, labour or financial markets appeared to be 
manageable. This view was partly conditioned by the favourable experience during “the great 
moderation”,  with  stability  oriented  monetary  policymaking  and  globalisation 
trends 
seemingly complementing each other to yield a stable macroeconomic environment.  
The seeds of vice 
2. 
As we now know, the “virtuous” view of the relationship between globalisation and monetary 
policy came to an abrupt end in September 2008 as a result of the Lehman bankruptcy and 
the  events  which  have  followed  to  the  present  day.  With  the  benefit  of  hindsight,  it  has 
become evident that while policymakers in different areas of the economy thought to have 
things  under  control,  a  “perfect  storm”  was  simmering  beneath  the  surface.  The  policy 
failures  in  many  domains,  notably  supervisory  and  regulatory  regimes  as  well  as  risk 
management and compensation practices by financial institutions, were significant in the run-
up to the crisis. And once the crisis hit and public balance sheets were burdened with the 
respective  costs  of  supporting  financial  sectors,  fiscal  stimulus  and  the  operation  of 
automatic stabilisers in a sharp economic downturn, other vulnerabilities emerged. 
However,  it  is  legitimate  to  ask  about  the  relative  responsibility  of  monetary  authorities  in 
contributing  to  the  crisis,  whether  actively  or  inactively.  I  would  thus  like  to  highlight  three 
elements which helped to sow the seeds of a vicious relationship in this regard.  
Complacency and insufficient medium-term orientation of monetary policy 
The  first  was  complacency.  With  inflation  seemingly  under  control  following  “the  great 
moderation”  of  the  1990s  amid  intensified  globalisation,  many  observers  thought  that 
monetary  policy  had  greater  degrees  of  freedom  to  devote  to  short-term  demand 
management.  Proponents  of  this  view  referred  to  this  as  “fine-tuning”19,  whose  theoretical 
counterpart  was  a  form  of  “flexible  inflation  targeting”  with  an  added  emphasis  on  output 
stabilisation beyond inflation stabilisation. The pre-crisis focus on the output gap was in many 
ways  paradoxical  insofar  as  consensus  macroeconomics  had  run  full  circle  back  to  the 
intellectual  climate  of  the  1970s,  where  policymakers’  exaggerated  real  time  measures  of 
economic slack was at the root of many policy failures. This was the same environment that 
had favoured the Great Inflation. 
Too much emphasis on short run economic developments, or – in my view – an insufficient 
medium-term orientation of monetary policies has certainly contributed in part to the build-up 
of  monetary  and  financial  imbalances.  Although  monetary  policy  frameworks  oriented 
towards the medium-term could probably not have completely prevented the current crisis, I 
am convinced that they would have helped to make it less disruptive. As you know, the ECB 
has  never  subscribed  to  the  view  that  monetary  policy  has  a  primary  role  to  play  in  the 
management of aggregate demand and we think that this element of the pre-crisis monetary 
policy paradigm should be revised on the basis of subsequent events. 
Underappreciation of monetary and credit dynamics 
A second element fostering a vicious relationship between monetary policy and globalisation 
in recent years was the underappreciation of monetary and credit dynamics on the part of 
                                                 
19  See Economic Performance in the Greenspan Era: the Evolution of Events and Ideas, article by A. Blinder and 
R. Reis (2005). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
policymakers. In hindsight, the crisis has been a sober reminder that the seeds of financial 
instability are often alike, including high leverage, rapid growth of financial institutions, and 
balance sheet mismatches. Some of these trends can be picked up when closely looking at 
monetary  and  credit  variables,  even  if  such trends  may  not  be  addressed  by  conventional 
monetary policy tools and require macro-prudential action instead.  
As you know, liquidity and money lie at the core of the ECB’s second pillar in its monetary 
policy strategy, but this emphasis was seen by mainstream modellers as somewhat of a relic 
of the past. However, the crisis has shown that liquidity and various definitions of money are 
critical elements in the transmission mechanism. The use of these indicators at the ECB has 
proved  useful  during  the  crisis,  for  example  by  providing  insights  into  bank  behaviour, 
financing  conditions  and  the  overall  state  of  the  business  cycle  (Papademos  and  Stark 
201020).  There  is  evidence  to  suggest  that,  without  taking  such  monetary  analysis  into 
account,  inflation  in  the  euro  area  would  have  been  distinctly  higher  at  times  of  financial 
exuberance  and  would have  fallen deep  into  negative  territory  in  the wake  of  the  financial 
markets’ collapse21. We thus think that this is one reason to revisit the role of monetary and 
credit variables in monetary policy strategies going forward.  
Moreover,  disregard  for  monetary  and  financial  phenomena  by  policymakers  had  a  more 
profound  implication  insofar  as  found  a  theoretical  underpinning  in  the  risk  management 
approach to asset price trends. The consensus view in the run-up to the crisis – to which the 
ECB did not subscribe to – was that the best that central banks could do was to “clean-up” 
following  a  bubble  burst  through  a  loosening  of  the  monetary  policy  stance.  Subsequent 
events have shown that these “bubble bursts” can be very costly and that aggressive ex post 
action may not suffice. This is because the expectation that the central bank will aggressively 
protect the markets from “tail events” in bad times can encourage markets’ tendency towards 
risky strategies, over-exposures and exuberance (Stark 2010)22.  
In my view, this asymmetry in responding to shocks where downside risks to the economy 
received a greater weight in central bankers’ “policy preferences” than upside risks to price 
stability  contributed  to  the  build-up  of  financial  imbalances  in  some  advanced  economies. 
The main ex ante policy tools to prevent such situations from developing in the first place are 
surely to be found in the regulatory and supervisory domain, which is at times not under the 
authority of the central bank. However, without prejudice to this, a greater focus on monetary 
phenomena  by  central  banks  through  closely  scrutinising  credit  and  money  developments 
inspires  a  “leaning-against-the  wind”  stance  which  can  help  smooth  financial  cycles  and 
stabilise the economy in the medium term. 
Confusing “known knowns” with “known unknowns” 
A  third  element  of  vice  in  the  relationship  between  monetary  policy  and  globalisation  in 
recent years has been the failure of policymakers to think through the possible ways in which 
they might be called to act as a result of situations which they have helped to bring about. In 
their  well-cited  book,  Reinhart  and  Rogoff  (2009)  make  a  compelling  case  to  show  that 
financial  bubbles  throughout  history  have  shared  a  number  of  common  elements,  such  as 
rising home prices and financial innovation. Yet as these authors point out, in spite of these 
common traits, policymakers have at times fallen prey of the “this time is different”23 illness.  
                                                 
20  See Enhancing Monetary Analysis, book edited by L. Papademos and J. Stark, ECB, 2010. 
21  See Lessons for Monetary Policy Strategy from the Recent Past, article by S. Fahr, R. Motto, M, Rostagno, 
F. Smets and O. Tristani, ECB (2010). 
22  See In Search of a Robust Monetary Policy Framework, speech by J. Stark, ECB, November 2010. 
23  See This Time is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly, book by C. Reinhart and K. Rogoff (2009). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Moreover, the record shows that as far back as 2004 both policymakers and academics were 
alerting on some of the emerging tail risks which have subsequently materialised. To name a 
few examples, Borio and White (2004)24 cautioned on the greater prominence of credit and 
asset price boom-and-bust cycles even in a low inflation environment; Rajan (2005)25 did a 
careful  review  of  some  worrying  trends  associated  with  globalised  financial  markets;  and 
Rogoff (2006)26 noted that the “great moderation” had not been associated with lower asset 
price volatility. The record also shows that monetary authorities echoed many of these and 
other  concerns  (such  as  the  possible  disorderly  unwinding  of  global  imbalances)  in  their 
public discourse, including through speeches and official publications27. Thus, even if novel, it 
is not correct to say that policymakers were unaware of the potential risks associated with a 
globalised environment. 
So  why  did  such  risks  still  materialise  in  the  end?  Part  of  the  answer  was  the  insufficient 
policy traction with the authorities that were competent to heed such warnings. However, it is 
also true that while the onset of the crisis can be largely seen as the result of vulnerabilities 
and imbalances which had been growing steadily and which had been identified fairly early 
on  in  the  process,  they  combined  in  ways  that  few  would  have  anticipated.  This  was 
especially  the  case  as  regards  the  functioning  of  the  financial  system  as  its  wider 
interconnections.  Policymakers  thus  confused  risks  which they  thought  they  knew  (“known 
knowns”) with risks which they knew they didn’t know (“known unknowns”). This is what the 
IMF and others have deemed as a “failure to connect the dots”28.  
Insofar as monetary authorities are concerned, this “failure to connect the dots” refers to the 
unanticipated burdens on central banks resulting from their own contribution to the creation 
of global excess liquidity and the latter’s role in the development of asset price boom-and-
bust cycles. The burst of the bubble and the chain of events set in motion as a result would 
ultimately reverberate back on central bank activity by impinging on the price stability outlook 
through  severe  threats  to  financial  stability.  This  was  the  case  regardless  of  whether 
monetary  authorities  were  formally  responsible  for  safeguarding  financial  stability  or  not, 
which is one reason why monetary policy should systematically incorporate financial analysis 
into  its  assessment  of  the  risks  to  price  stability  (Moutot  and  Vitale,  2009)29.  In  addition, 
threats to price stability through severe strains on governments’ fiscal solvency also arose in 
some  cases.  This  would  call  for  unprecedented  central  bank  action  at  the  limit  of  policy 
mandates in response to exceptional and exigent circumstances.  
Overall, the seeds of vice in the relationship between monetary policy and globalisation in 
recent years – including complacency, underappreciation of monetary and credit dynamics 
and the confusion of “known knowns” with “known unknowns” – have a common thread: the 
potential  for  unintended  consequences.  I  would  therefore  like  to  outline  some  of  the 
challenges we may expect in this context in the period ahead. 
                                                 
24  See  Whither  Monetary  and  Financial  Stability?  The  Implications  of  Evolving  Policy  Regimes,  article  by 
C. Borio and W. White, BIS, 2004. 
25  See The Greenspan Era: Lessons for the Future, speech by R. Rajan, IMF, August 2005. 
26  K. Rogoff (2006), op. cit. 
27  For example, the ECB’s Financial Stability Report consistently alerted on the vulnerabilities that were building 
up  in  the  financial  system,  including  through  the  significant  underpricing  of  risks  across  a  variety  of  asset 
classes, while official policy meetings (G7, G20, BIS-based) routinely warned on the possibility of a disorderly 
unwinding of global current account imbalances. 
28  See Initial Lessons from the Crisis, IMF, February 2009. 
29  See Monetary Policy Strategy in a Global Environment, article by P. Moutot and G. Vitale, ECB, 2009. In the 
EU,  we  have  since  attempted  to  correct  for  this  “failure  to  connect  the  dots”  with  the  establishment  of  the 
European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) as the main body for macro-prudential oversight and surveillance of 
EU financial markets. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Globalisation and monetary policy in the period ahead 
3. 
The nature of the relationship between monetary policy and globalisation must be redefined 
in the period ahead to maintain its virtues while correcting its vices. Let me give you the key 
policy elements needed for this to be successful.  
What kind of global system will emerge in the aftermath of the crisis? 
First,  we  should  not  take  the  process  of  globalisation  for  granted.  Measures  introduced  in 
response to the crisis have in some cases reversed aspects of globalisation. Contrary to the 
experience of the Great Depression, we have not seen a rise in trade protectionism in recent 
years. However, we have witnessed a broad-based increase in financial protectionism that is 
equally  if  not  more  worrying.  For  example,  banking  systems  have  been  renationalised  in 
some  advanced  economies,  including  in  the  euro  area,  and  other  market  segmentations 
have been re-introduced along national lines. If this trend were to be sustained in the future, 
the  euro  area  could  be  particularly  affected  as  financial integration  is a  key  aspect  for  the 
smooth functioning of monetary union and the broader viability of the single market. Another 
prominent case of rising financial protectionism in recent years has been the introduction of 
measures to curb capital inflows in some emerging economies. This was partly done in an 
effort to contain the fallout from too easy monetary policy in key advanced economies.  
In  their  landmark  publication,  Rajan  and  Zingales  (2003)30  offer  powerful  insights  into  the 
nature and functioning of financial markets. The authors warn that the establishment might 
exploit the wave of public anger during economic downturns in order to restrict competition 
and access to capital. The authors also note that open borders help to keep economic and 
political elites in check and preserve competitive markets. These policy prescriptions should 
be heeded if the mistakes of the 1930s (or similar ones) are not to be repeated. This is also 
why the G20 process to achieve a level playing field with uniform rules of the game in the 
global financial and economic system, including as regards capital flow management, is so 
important.  
Once we accept that globalisation is not an irreversible or uniform process, the need to invest 
in  better  governance  through  co-operative  outcomes  at  a  global  scale  will  follow. 
Policymakers at all levels should internalise this concept and act accordingly.  
Shock transmission and policy degrees of freedom in a globalised era 
Second,  I  would  argue  that  globalisation  (and  in  particular  financial  globalisation)  has 
changed  the  risk  and  reward  matrix  associated  with  policy  failures  and  successes, 
respectively. Globalisation may be initially more forgiving with policy mistakes on account of 
higher  thresholds  of  tolerance,  for  example  as  regards  current  account  or  public  debt 
positions. However – as the crisis has forcefully taught us – by enabling these imbalances to 
remain  unaddressed  for  longer,  the  eventual  cost  of  adjustment  of  unsustainable  policies 
would be higher than would otherwise be the case – and the adjustment may occur in a very 
swift manner.  
It  is  the  sudden  operation  of  these  centripetal  (as  opposed  to  centrifugal)  forces  of 
globalisation  enabling  the  rapid  propagation  of  shocks  across  borders  which  has  led 
observers such as Rogoff to deem the euro area “the ultimate contagion machine”31. The key 
policy  elements  to  restore  normalcy  in  the  euro  area  thus  require  (i)  redressing  the 
macroeconomic  imbalances  and  unsustainable  fiscal  policies  that  lie  at  the  heart  of  the 
sovereign debt crisis in the euro area; (ii) much greater economic policy co-ordination among 
                                                 
30  See Saving Capitalism from the Capitalists: Unleashing the Power of Financial Markets to Create Wealth and 
Spread Opportunity, book by R. Rajan and L. Zingales, (2003). 
31  See the interview of K. Rogoff in the Frankfurter Allgemeiner Zeitung, September 2011. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
monetary union members; and (iii) ensuring that there is an effective governance framework 
in  place  which  can  guard  against  similar  instances  from  occurring  in  the  future,  inter  alia 
through macroeconomic and fiscal surveillance and early correction mechanisms. 
Emerging challenges to monetary policy frameworks 
Third, as regards the challenges for monetary policy looking forward, central banks are likely 
to be subject to greater peer and public scrutiny in a world of higher interconnectedness. At 
the same time, however, monetary authorities are also more liable to be burdened with the 
spillovers resulting from the actions of other parties. Crucial challenges in this regard include 
the  risk  that  monetary  policy  is  overburdened  by  fiscally  dominant  regimes  caused  by 
government’s irresponsible fiscal behaviour and unsustainable public finances. There is also 
the risk that monetary policy is dominated by financial stability concerns, implying that price 
stability would be subjugated by financial stability.  
Monetary  policy  frameworks  have  to  be  made  robust  against  the  challenges  ahead  and  I 
believe  a  number  of  principles  for  robust  monetary  policy  frameworks  should  be  strongly 
reaffirmed as a result.  
First, we should recognise the centrality of price stability for monetary policy. This is the best 
contribution that monetary authorities can make to overall economic welfare. Price stability 
should thus remain the primary task and the key “deliverable” for central banks in the period 
ahead.  The  crisis  has  confirmed  the  importance  of  a  clearly  defined  objective  for  price 
stability by contributing to anchor expectations during periods of turbulence when otherwise 
the  private  sector  would  become  disoriented.  There  is  also  a  “credibility  premium”  to  be 
obtained from an undisputable definition of price stability during such turbulent periods and 
we have to concentrate all our efforts in preserving the hard earned credibility over the last 
decades.  
Second, central bank independence under a clear mandate and transparent communication 
policies to anchor expectations will continue to be instrumental in the pursuit of price stability 
by monetary authorities. 
Third, globalisation implies a greater emphasis on the necessary medium-term orientation of 
monetary policies designed to maintain price stability. This is a concept which the ECB has 
espoused  since  its  inception  and  we  think  that  the  limits  of  short-termism  in  policies  have 
been fully exposed by the crisis. 
Conclusion 
4. 
In conclusion, the crisis has been a sobering experience for policymakers, forcing them to 
rethink  many  priors  in  different  realms.  Insofar  as  monetary  policy  is  concerned,  we  have 
learned  that  the  perceived  virtues  which  seemed  to  underpin  its  interactions  with  an 
increasingly  globalised  environment  could  in  fact  mask  significant  vices.  Monetary  policy 
making  in  the  run  up  to  the  crisis  was  too  complacent  to  macroeconomic  stability,  lacked 
sufficient  medium-term  orientation  and  under-appreciated  the  role  of  monetary  and  credit 
dynamics  in  monetary  frameworks,  also  in  view  of  identifying  financial  imbalances  and 
globally interconnected risks. 
The relationship between monetary policy and globalisation will have to be redressed in the 
years  to  come.  The  process  of  globalisation  should  not  be  seen  as  irreversible  and 
policymakers should actively invest in better governance at all levels. Monetary policymaking 
will remain challenging, not only due to the nature of the interactions in a global setting but 
also as a result of the burdens and demands that might be placed by other parties on central 
banks. Fiscal dominance and the subjugation of price stability to financial stability concerns 
appear as two distinctive risks in this regard. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
In this environment, the key task for central bankers in the years to come is the continuous 
strive  to  make  our  monetary  policy  frameworks  more  robust  against  the  vices  mentioned 
earlier.  In  this  process,  we  need  to  reaffirm  the  principles  which  have  been  at  the  core  of 
modern central banking and have served us well during the crisis, namely the centrality of 
price  stability  for  monetary  policy,  and  the  importance  of  central  bank  independence  and 
effective communication in the consecution of this goal. Lastly, monetary authorities should 
remind other parties that there are reasonable limits to what monetary policy can do so as to 
extricate the global economy from a predicament which needs to be solved at its roots.  
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
