Yaseen Anwar: Micro-credit and the financing of small businesses 
Introductory remarks by Mr Yaseen Anwar, Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, on the 
occasion of the 18th Zahid Husain Memorial Lecture, Karachi, 22 December 2011. 
 Honorable  Chief  Guest,  learned  Guest  Speaker,  distinguished  guests,  ladies  and 
gentlemen! 
1. 
It  is  my  honor  to  offer  these  introductory  remarks  on  the  occasion  of  the  Zahid 
Husain  Memorial  Lecture.  These  lectures,  as  you  know,  are  organized  as  our  tribute  to 
Mr. Zahid Husain – the first Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan. Before introducing our 
Chief Guest and Lecturer for the day, I would like to briefly dwell upon the personality that 
was, and the splendid role played by, Mr. Zahid Husain. You may have heard on this topic 
earlier but it is always heartening to recall stories of success, particularly those that tell of 
victories  achieved  while  overcoming  daunting  problems  and  of  the  hardships  of  passing 
through difficult paths. 
2. 
A close aide of Quad-e-Azam Muhammad Ali Jinnah, Mr. Zahid Husain was a man 
who  possessed  abundant  amounts  of  talent  and  repute.  His  illustrious  career  started  from 
British India and culminated in Pakistan, by serving the country at the highest levels of its 
hierarchy. He taught at Aligarh Muslim University, he was Pakistan’s first High Commissioner 
to  India,  the  first  Chairman  of  Taxation  Inquiry  Committee,  and  the  first  Chairman  of  the 
Planning Commission Board, thereby authoring the first Five-year Plan for Pakistan. 
3. 
Another feather in his cap was his appointment as the first Governor of the State 
Bank  of  Pakistan,  which  was  formally  declared  open  by  Quaid-e-Azam  Muhammad  Ali 
Jinnah on 1st July, 1948. As the skipper of the country’s Central Bank, which was described 
by Quaid-e-Azam as the symbol of the country’s financial sovereignty, Mr. Zahid Husain aptly 
displayed his potential as an economic administrator. 
4. 
In  addition,  he  anticipated  the  prevailing  as  well  as  future  economic  problems  for 
Pakistan and the importance of economists for their resolution. Accordingly, he made efforts 
to  equip  the  Bank  with  the  adequate  expertise  so  as  to  effectively  manage  the  economic 
development of the country. His efforts, in this regard, bore fruit and he was able to recruit a 
stellar group of economists at State Bank of Pakistan. 
5. 
It is a testament to Mr. Zahid Husain’s ability to recognize and recruit talent that many 
of these economists served the nation as key policymakers and also displayed their brilliance 
at international financial institutions. One of these economists was Dr. Mahbub ul Haq whose 
work and achievements are exemplary. Besides being an excellent economist, he has been 
described as “the most articulate and persuasive spokesman” for the developing world. He is 
famous for his pioneering work in Human Development Theory, for the invention of Human 
Development  Index,  for  the  creation  of  Human  Development  Report,  and  for  the 
establishment of Human Development Centre in Pakistan. He served as Pakistan’s Minister 
of  Finance,  Planning  and  Commerce  during  1982–88,  besides  serving  as  the  Director  of 
Policy Planning at the World Bank and Special Advisor to the United Nations. The respect 
that he commanded at the international level could be gauged when Mr. Kofi Annan, the then 
Secretary General of the U.N., said of his demise that “Mahbub ul Haq’s untimely death is a 
loss to the world ...”. 
6. 
There are other professionals too who started out under the patronage of Mr. Zahid 
Husain  and  reached  respectable  positions  in  international  financial  institutions  such  as 
Dr. Pervez Hasan, etc. It is a matter of pride for me that the example set by the first Governor 
of SBP has been followed by his successors. A number of SBP economists have served the 
IMF and reached its highest echelons. One such economist was Dr. Muhammad Yaqub, who 
spearheaded  the  Central  Bank  during  one  of  the  most  challenging  times  in  the  country’s 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
history and Mr. Muhammad Ashraf Janjua, who was a former Deputy Governor of the State 
Bank  of  Pakistan.  This  is  in  addition  to  a  considerable  number  of  non-economist 
professionals from the State Bank of Pakistan who have served their respective professions 
on the national as well as on the international stage. 
7. 
Those of us witnessing Pakistan’s current progress may find it hard to imagine the 
challenging times that the country bore shortly after its birth and through its infancy stages. 
Without quoting specific examples here, it is suffice to say that those were really very testing 
times.  Although  resources  available  to  the  nation  then  were  quite  low,  the  courage  and 
passions of our founding fathers pulled the country through. They devoted their body, soul 
and personal resources, in entirety, during the journey from scratch to sky-scraper. Mr. Zahid 
Husain was amongst those great personalities. 
He never hesitated in accepting the challenging tasks and, in the same spirit, led the 
8. 
Central Bank successfully in those testing periods of our country’s history. The nation also 
recognized  his  commendable  efforts  and  has  tried  to  repay  her  debt  to  him  for  the 
meritorious  services  rendered  for  the  country.  Accordingly,  on  the  occasion  of  the  Silver 
Jubilee  of  State  Bank  of  Pakistan  in  1973,  it  was  decided  to  institute  an  annual  series  of 
lectures and to name the series in commemoration of Mr. Zahid Husain. 
9. 
Since  then,  we  have  organized  17  lectures  in  the  series  and  invited  eminent 
economists and financial experts from around the globe as Guest Speakers. The latest one 
took  place  in  the  year  2010  wherein  Mr.  Kent  Mathews,  Sir  Julian  Hodge  Professor  of 
Banking and Finance, Cardiff Business School, United Kingdom shared his thoughts with the 
audience on “Banking Efficiency in Emerging Market Economies”. These lectures provided 
an excellent opportunity for the participants to share ideas on issues of topical importance. 
10. 
Before  moving  forward,  I  would  like  to  express  my  sincere  gratitude  to  Justice 
(Retired) Nasir Aslam Zahid – the son of Mr. Zahid Husain – for his attendance. He scarcely 
needs an introduction. He is one of the most prominent personalities of the country – not only 
due to his status and accomplishments in the judiciary but also for his postretirement service 
to the nation. He served all of the judiciary’s vital organs – he was the Chief Justice of Sindh 
High Court, then a judge of the Federal Shariah Court, before finally serving the Supreme 
Court of Pakistan. He enjoys an untarnished reputation within and outside the judicial circle. 
Even  after  retirement,  he  has  continued  serving  the  nation  with  his  involvement  in  human 
rights issues and education. He is currently the Dean, Faculty of Legal Studies and the Head 
of the Hamdard School of Law at the Hamdard University, Karachi. I am thankful that he has 
very  kindly  accepted  our  invitation  and  spared  the  time  to  grace  the  occasion  with  his 
presence today. 
11. 
Now,  before  introducing  our  speaker  for  the  day,  allow  me  to  humbly  add  a  few 
words  about  the  role  played  by  State  Bank  of  Pakistan  with  regard  to  today’s  subject  – 
“Micro-Credit  and  Financing  of  Small  Business”.  First,  our  own  research  department  has 
been engaged in documenting, through national surveys, the workings of the product, labor 
and  credit  markets  of  the  informal  sector  –  with  a  particular  focus  on  the  manufacturing 
sector.  The  results  of  these  surveys  have  started  to  trickle  down.  Secondly,  you  may 
remember that the 5th Pakistan Microfinance Country Forum was recently held in Karachi on 
2nd  December,  2011.  Some  details  concerning  the  issue  were  given  in  my  Inaugural 
Address  at  that  Forum.  Since  there  has  been  hardly  any  change  in  factual  position  since 
then,  I  would  like  to  avoid  repetition  as  much  as  possible  and  limit  myself  to  a  few  words 
about the developmental role of State Bank of Pakistan. 
12. 
As you are aware, Central Banks of developing countries are supposed to perform 
both  traditional  as  well  as  developmental  functions,  in  order  to  achieve  macroeconomic 
goals; and SBP is no exception. The nontraditional or promotional functions, performed by 
the  State  Bank,  include  the  development  of  financial  frameworks,  the  institutionalization  of 
savings  and  investment,  the  provision  of  training  facilities  to  bankers,  and  the  provision  of 
credit  to  priority  sectors.  In  this  regard,  SBP  has  always  endeavored  to  meet  the  genuine 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
credit needs of different sectors of the economy, thereby serving as a catalyst to the process 
of  economic  development.  As  I  have  mentioned  earlier  in  my  speeches,  efforts  to  bring 
Microfinance  into  the  mainstream  formal  financial  system  started  in  2000  &  2001  in  the 
aftermath  of  the  promulgation  of  the  Microfinance  Ordinance  and,  since  then,  we  have 
witnessed  the  establishment  of  new  microfinance  banks,  the  transformations  of  large 
microfinance institutions, the diversification of funding sources, the development of inclusive 
financial  services,  the  emergence  of  alternative  delivery  channels,  and  the  piloting  of 
“Microfinance – Credit Information Bureau” (MCIB). Against this backdrop, a Small & Medium 
Enterprise  (SME)  Finance  Department  was  established  in  State  Bank  of  Pakistan  in  July 
2008 to focus on providing an enabling regulatory framework for SMEs, assessing their credit 
needs,  capacity  development  of  Banks  and  DFIs  and  for  building  awareness  through 
seminars  and  conferences,  along  with  the  promotion  of  financial  services  for  export-led 
industrial growth. 
13. 
Regarding the regulatory approach of SBP, I would like to quote short excerpts here 
from my speech at the Pakistan Microfinance Country Forum: “In developing regulations for 
microfinance, the State Bank has pursued a bottom-up approach, along with use of strong 
analytical  and  problem  solving  skills  and  industry  consultation.  Since  the  inception  of 
microfinance  banking  in  Pakistan,  our  goal  has  been  to  determine  the  proportionality  of  a 
regulation before it is put in place. Hence, the regulatory approach has remained gradual and 
in  line  with  the  evolution  of  the  sector…”  “In  the  new  Microfinance  Strategic  framework  
2011–15, SBP has laid out a detailed strategy to promote sustainable growth of the sector. 
The strategy’s effectiveness and success hinges on growth dynamism fundamentally coming 
from  microfinance  operators  themselves.  The  role  of  SBP  is  to  develop  the  banking 
infrastructure,  to  encourage  the  use  of  successful  global  practices,  and  to  provide  the 
regulatory  and  supervisory  mechanism  that  enable  MFBs  to  develop  viable  business 
models”. 
14. 
We  shall  soon  have  the  pleasure  of  hearing  our  distinguished  speaker,  Professor 
Banerjee’s,  thoughts  on  this  subject.  I  am  sure  his  lecture  today  will  introduce  us  with 
something special on the topic, not only because of his extensive research on the subject but 
also because of candidness of his approach. Perhaps, not many of us will have witnessed this 
openness and honesty of thoughts earlier – the kind that is evident from the last sentence of 
the concluding chapter of his most recent book titled “Poor Economics”. Let me quote that very 
sentence  for  you:  “At  least  we  can  stop  pretending  that  there  is  some  solution  at  hand  and 
instead join hands with millions of well-intentioned people across the world – elected officials 
and bureaucrats, teachers and NGO workers, academics and entrepreneurs – in the quest for 
the many ideas, big and small, that will eventually take us to that world where no one has to 
live on 99 cents per day”. 
15. 
Now let’s turn to our guest speaker himself. Ladies and gentlemen, we are honoured 
to have with us, Dr. Abhijit Vinayak Banerjee, the Ford Foundation International Professor of 
Economics at  the  Massachusetts Institute  of  Technology,  USA.  His  teaching  and  research 
have won him accolades the world over and he stands as a giant in his profession. Just to 
introduce  him  to  our  guests  here,  Dr.  Banerjee  has  attended  the  University  of  Calcutta, 
Jawaharlal Nehru University and Harvard University, successfully earning his Ph.D from the 
latter. 
16. 
During 1988 to 1992, he taught as an Assistant Professor of Economics at Princeton 
University.  He  moved  to  Harvard  University  in  1992  as  Assistant  Professor  of  Economics, 
before  joining  the  M.I.T.  in  1993  as  Pentti  J.K.  Kouri  Career  Development  Associate 
Professor  of  Economics.  He  became  Associate  Professor  of  Economics  in  1994  and  then 
Professor of Economics in 1996. He is the co-founder of Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty Action 
Lab (J-PAL) at M.I.T, which runs field experiments aimed at measuring different ways to save 
the world. In 2009, J-PAL won the BBVA Foundation “Frontier of Knowledge” Award in the 
development cooperation category. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Professor  Banerjee’s  general  research  areas  include  economic  development, 
17. 
information theory, theory of income distribution, and macroeconomics. 
18. 
As you know, an economist’s caliber – particularly an academic one’s – is primarily 
judged by the quality of his publications; and to date Dr Banerjee has published no less than 
60 papers in the world’s leading economic journals. The important lesson from this volume of 
research  is  that  it  has  focused  on  real  world  issues  with  real  world  solutions.  His  latest 
research is based on studying economic interventions on the basis of “randomized controlled 
trials.”  The  idea  is  simple  enough  –  to  compare  groups  of  people  with  and  without  policy 
intervention over a period of time; akin to the trials of new drugs. 
19. 
In addition to his scholarly work, he has authored three books, including his recent 
one called “Poor Economics”, which has received the attention of scholars across the globe. 
And this is not the all; he is an ex-president of the Bureau for the Research in the Economic 
Analysis of Development, a Research Associate of the NBER, a CEPR research fellow, an 
International Research Fellow of the Kiel Institute, a fellow of the American Academy of Arts 
and  Sciences  and  the  Econometric  Society  and  has  been  a  Guggenheim  Fellow  and  an 
Alfred  P.  Sloan  Fellow.  He  has  also  been  a  recipient  of  the  Infosys  Prize  2009  in  Social 
Sciences and Economics. 
20. 
Dr.  Banerjee  and  his  colleagues  at  J-PAL  have  worked  with  a  global  network  of 
researchers  to  conduct  experiments  in  the  poorest  places  of  the  world  and  have  derived 
conclusions that are believed to have challenged economists’ and policy makers’ thoughts 
about  impoverished  areas.  Their  findings  have  concluded beyond  broad  generalizations  to 
show that the poor do not always act in ways that conform to the views and programs of well-
meaning  relief  agencies,  revealing  a  portrait  of  poverty  as  complex  as  the  movements  of 
financial markets. 
21. 
Professor Banerjee will be delivering his lecture today on the topic of “Micro-Credit 
and  Financing  of  Small  Business”.  Needless  to  emphasize  that  it  is  an  important  topic, 
particularly when seen in the backdrop of the challenges faced by the poor in gaining access 
to  formal  financial  services.  Although  much  has  been  done  in  this  regard,  the  stage  of 
absolute resolution has yet to be reached. 
Here,  we  should  not  forget  to  mention  the  names  of  Dr.  Akhtar  Hameed  Khan  in 
22. 
Pakistan  and  Professor  Muhammad  Yunus  in  Bangladesh  for  their  pioneering  work  in  the 
subject area – providing a substantial source of assistance to the poor community – and their 
efforts for the alleviation of poverty and increases in the standard of living. 
23. 
I would like to avail this opportunity to thank Dr. Banerjee on behalf of this forum for 
taking out the time from his extremely busy schedule and taking the trouble to fly from USA 
to join us here in Pakistan. 
Before I conclude my remarks, I would also like to thank you all for joining us here 
24. 
and for participating in today’s knowledge-sharing event. I am sure that Professor Banerjee’s 
lecture  today  will  be  of  immense  utility  for  the  audience,  since  it  will  enlighten  us  with  the 
latest thoughts, developments and trends regarding the subject. 
25. 
It gives me immense pleasure to introduce and invite Professor Banerjee. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
