José De Gregorio: Price and financial stability in modern central banking 
Keynote speech by Mr José De Gregorio, Governor of the Central Bank of Chile, at the joint 
Latin  American  and  Caribbean  Economic  Association  (LACEA)-Latin  American  Chapter  of 
the  Econometric  Society  (LAMES)  Conference  2011,  University  Adolfo  Ibáñez,  Santiago, 
11 November 2011. 
 I  would  like  to  thank  Rodrigo  Cifuentes,  Luis  Oscar  Herrera,  Alejandro  Jara  an  Enrique  Orellana  for  valuables 
discussions and comments. 
Introduction 
It is a pleasure to address this audience at the main gathering of Latin American economists, 
which brings together not only the best and more promising from our region, but also great 
scholars from other parts of the world.  
During my professional life I have had many challenges and jobs. I was in politics as Minister 
in three portfolios a decade ago, and had of course to deal with politically sensitive issues. 
Then I moved to the Central Bank. Many people tend to think that life in a central bank is a 
quiet one. It is true, it is very low key compared to politicians’, but requires hard work. During 
my tenure as Governor we have had to deal with  rising inflation, then the largest financial 
crisis in the postwar period, followed by an earthquake, a change of the government coalition 
after twenty years, and, more recently, inflationary shocks, exchange rate pressures and now 
the European crisis and an increasingly weakened global economy.  
This preamble is not to give my biography, but just to mention some of the things I have done 
in my professional life, and to add that one of my most difficult and rewarding jobs so far was 
to  organize  the  LACEA  conference  in  1999.  As  a  university  professor  we  have  access  to 
limited funds, so fundraising becomes a tedious, but necessary task. Then, organizing the 
program and all the details is tough, and above all it is a task that has a strict deadline and 
everything has to happen in just a few days. I had the privilege to meet and work with the co-
chairman, Dominique Hachette, an extraordinary economist and friend. Our weekly meetings 
in his house were really a pleasure, and we miss him a lot. 
So,  let  me  start  by  expressing  my  sincere  congratulations  and  gratitude  to  the  organizers. 
However, I will not talk about organizing conferences, but about central banking. In particular, 
I will refer to the new challenges facing central banks after the crisis and their role in securing 
price and financial stability. 
Central banks and price stability 
Many years ago we reached consensus that central banks should focus mainly on ensuring 
low  inflation.  Moreover,  there  were  some  scholars  and  practitioners  that  argued  that  price 
stability should be the only objective of central banks, so the goal would be more credible 
and  monetary  policy  more  effective  in  achieving  stability.  However,  we  didn’t  know  how 
exactly or operationally to achieve this target. Some central banks tried to target monetary 
aggregates,  others  to  peg  nominal  exchange  rates,  and  others  to  use  an  eclectic  mix  of 
indicators.  Two  decades  ago,  some  central  banks  started  conducting  monetary  policy 
targeting  a  specific  value  or  range  for  the  rate  of  inflation.  This  trend  started  with  New 
Zealand in 1990, and was followed by Canada, the United Kingdom, Australia and Sweden in 
the  early  1990s.  This  is  a  case  in  which  policy  development  led  academic  advances. 
Progress in the academic front provided further impetus to the adoption of inflation targets as 
new models were developed to provide the theoretical underpinnings of inflation targets and 
the basis to conduct empirical work (Galí and Gertler, 2007). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
This  view  was  further  justified  by  the  success  of  monetary  policy  around  the  world  in 
providing  stability,  not  only  in  the  inflation  front,  but  also  in  activity  and  employment.  The 
evidence that output volatility declined significantly in the US since the mid eighties was first 
reported  by  Kim  and  Nelson  (1999),  and  later  called  the  Great  Moderation  by  Stock  and 
Watson (2003).1 Several factors could be behind this fact, such as technical progress, better 
policies,  deeper  financial  markets,  and  sheer  good  luck.  Although  there  is  no  final  verdict, 
there is evidence that points to the role of better macro policies (Galí and Gambetti, 2009). 
However,  it  is  interesting  to  note  that  emerging  market  economies  also  enjoyed  a  Great 
Moderation,  but  it  came  in  the  second  half  of  the  1990s,  much  later  than  in  developed 
economies, which coincides also with the time in which inflation was conquered, supporting 
the hypothesis that it was good policies rather than good luck (De Gregorio, 2008). It is easy 
to discredit the Great Moderation in the current juncture. However, the resilience of emerging 
market  economies  to  the  global  crisis  was  impressive.  Indeed,  emerging  markets  had  a 
recession, but much milder than in the past and with a remarkable recovery. And this was, of 
course, the consequence of much better macroeconomic management.  
The case of Chile illustrates this point. We did suffer a recession, but the size of the initial 
impact  and  the  speed  of  the  recovery  were  quite  different  from  previous  episodes.  In  the 
second  half  of  1998,  affected  by  the  Asian  Crisis,  Chilean  GDP  fell  by  4.3%  quarter  to 
quarter.  Returning  to  the  initial  GDP  level  took  us  one  year.  But,  comparatively,  the 
unemployment  rate  more  than  doubled  between  the  beginning  of  1998  and  mid-1999, 
reaching  almost  12%  and  staying  high,  around  9.5%,  until  2005.  The  effects  of  the  
2008–2009  crisis  were  very  different.  Economic  activity  fell,  but  less  than  in  the  previous 
episode, by 3% between the end of 2008 and mid-2009. The recovery was much faster and 
only two quarters after the downturn, by the end of 2009, GDP was comparable to the pre-
crisis level. The growth rate after having recovered the initial output level was also different. 
Considering the first six quarters after having reached this point, in the beginning of 2000, the 
economy grew at an average annual rate of 4.4%, whereas between the first quarter of 2010 
and mid-2011 the economy grew an average annual rate of 6.3%.  
The behavior of the unemployment rate was totally different as well. After having risen from 
around  7.5%  in  mid-2008  to  levels  close  to  11%  in  mid-2009,  it  began  a  period  of  fast 
decrease,  returning  to  levels  around  7%  to  7.5%  at  the  beginning  of  this  year.  The  policy 
regime  was  crucial  in  this  result.  Fiscal  policy  implemented  a  sizeable  economic  stimulus 
package. Monetary policy also added a significant impulse to the economy, as the Bank took 
the  monetary  policy  interest  rate  to  its  minimum  and  implemented  additional  measures  to 
ensure  the  effectiveness  of  its  actions.  The  effects  of  the  2008–2009  crisis  were  very 
significant,  but  the  resilience  of  the  Chilean  economy  and  the  effectiveness  of  its 
macroeconomic policies were even stronger. 
Over time, inflation targeting regimes have evolved to what is now known as flexible inflation 
target (FIT). In this scheme, the central bank sets an inflation target, which is intended to be 
achieved in a given time horizon. As shown by Svensson (1997), inflation targeting implies 
inflation  forecast  targeting.  Thus,  the  central  bank’s  inflation  forecast  at  the  policy  horizon 
becomes the intermediate target.2 In the case of Chile, our inflation target is three percent, 
and the time horizon is two years. As long as this target is credible, monetary policy will not 
only achieve inflation stability, but will also reduce the volatility of the business cycle. 
Analytically,  the  FIT  regime  is  based  on  the  idea  that  the  policymaker  minimizes  a  loss 
function that penalizes both inflation deviations from the target and deviations of output from 
full  employment.  Therefore,  what  the  FIT  does  is  to  optimize  the  tradeoff  between  output 
                                                 
1   A predecessor was Taylor (1998) who called this period the “long boom.” 
2  
In order to avoid indeterminacy or multiple equilibria, the forecast must be the central bank’s forecast and not 
that of the market (Bernanke and Woodford, 1997). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
volatility and inflation volatility. The time horizon is what makes this scheme “flexible.” The 
target is not achieved in the short run since it also takes the output costs of achieving the 
target into account. A rigid inflation target is one in which the central bank only cares about 
inflation, and hence the horizon would be the shortest possible, enough for monetary policy 
to affect output. The longer the time horizon, the higher the weight of output volatility in the 
loss function (De Gregorio, 2007). The time horizon typically extends to two years, or a more 
ambiguous  definition  as  “medium  term.”  As  long  as  medium-term  inflation  expectations 
remain anchored, the monetary policy helps to reduce the volatility of other variables.  
In addition, a FIT regime also requires a flexible exchange rate, so monetary policy can be 
conducted  independently.  However,  a  proper  FIT  should  help  to  stabilize  the  currency  as 
long  as  monetary  policy  should  move  leaning  against  the  wind.  For  example,  a  persistent 
depreciation  of  the  currency,  other  things  equal,  should  increase  the  inflation  forecast, 
although much more moderately than in rigid exchange rate systems. This effect should call 
for a tightening of monetary conditions, reducing pressures against the currency. 
Many  times  it  has  been  argued,  especially  in  non-professional  discussions,  that  inflation 
targets ignore output fluctuations. As I just argued, this is a mistake. Flexible inflation targets 
take  into  account  activity  and  employment,  and  this  is  implicit  in  the  choice  of  the  time 
horizon. Moreover, a credible inflation target is efficient in terms of minimizing the tradeoff 
between  output  and  inflation  fluctuations,  and  also  helps  to  reduce  real  exchange  rate 
volatility. Indeed, a flexible inflation targeting regime can maximize welfare and perform much 
better than an exchange rate or monetary target.  
What variables should a central bank consider when setting the interest rate? In the regime I 
just described, the answer to this question is pretty simple: anything affecting inflation over a 
two-year  horizon.  Variables  such  as  inflation  expectations,  wages,  output,  unemployment, 
the  exchange  rate,  commodity  prices,  and  so  on,  have  important  effects  on  inflationary 
forecasts and must be taken into account when deciding the future path of monetary policy. 
However, it is also important that investors, wage and price setters understand and share the 
importance of these variables for the inflation process. Communication is essential, and that 
is  the  role  of  Monetary  Policy  or  Inflation  Reports,  monetary  policy  statements,  minutes, 
projections, speeches, and so forth. 
A key question during the financial crisis was to which extent central banks should react to 
asset prices, such as housing or stocks prices. The answer from the perspective of inflation 
target should be: as long as they affect the forecast of inflation, they should be considered in 
the reaction function of monetary policy.  
Asset price bubbles or distortions that may threaten financial stability should be considered 
when evaluating financial vulnerabilities, but not influence monetary policy if they do not have 
an  impact  on  inflation.  It  is  not  clear  that  an  increase  in  interest  rates  will  be  capable  of 
stopping an increase in asset prices. The required adjustments might be so large that they 
could  end  up  unnecessarily  generating  high  unemployment  and  an  undesired  drop  in 
inflation.  Under  inflation  targeting,  any  interest  rate  movements  that  is  inconsistent  with 
inflation  converging  to  the  target  may  undermine  the  credibility  of  monetary  policy, 
destabilizing inflationary expectations and weakening the effectiveness of monetary policy.  
Using  monetary  policy  to  burst  a  bubble  in  asset  prices  is  particularly  complicated  in 
emerging market economies, since bubbles in domestic assets generally take the form of an 
exchange  rate  appreciation  caused  by  large  capital  inflows.  Tightening  monetary  policy  to 
burst  the  bubble  may  have  perverse  effects,  since  it  induces  further  capital  inflows  and 
strengthens  the  currency.  In  this  case,  the  interest  rate  is  not  the  appropriate  instrument. 
Exchange rate intervention could be a better policy tool. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Bringing back financial stability to central banking 
With the global financial crisis, there was a renewed discussion on the role of central banks 
in securing financial stability. This is not new. The first central banks (Sweden and the UK) 
were created in the 17th century, but no proper role for central banks was established, and 
indeed  the  Bank  of  England  was  founded  to  finance  the  war  with  France  in  the  late 
17th century  (Davies  and  Green,  2010).  It  was  not  until  the  19th  century  that  the  Bank  of 
England was given the monopoly for the issue of banknotes and assigned the role of lender 
of  last  resort.  Therefore,  in  the  origins  of  central  banking,  its  role  was  to  secure  the 
functioning of the payment system. Thus, financial stability was not new, although it was a 
secondary  issue  compared  to  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  which  gradually  turned  to 
focus on price stability. Indeed, having central banks mainly one instrument, the interest rate 
or the money supply, but not both, financial stability was mostly ignored. 
This is not the case of emerging market economies, where after many financial crises, the 
role of financial stability was always central in policymaking. Indeed, the most relevant aspect 
of  financial  stability  was  in  the  international  financial  transactions  area.  For  this  purpose, 
central banks, most usually, manage exchange rate policies, hold international reserves and 
dictate  norms  to  avoid  currency  mismatches  and  external  payment  crises.  In  Chile,  the 
Central  Bank’s  objectives  are  price  and  financial  stability.  The  Constitutional  Law  explicitly 
establishes that “the Bank shall have as its purposes to look after the stability of the currency 
and the normal functioning of internal and external payments.”  
Indeed,  the  resilience  of  financial  systems  in  emerging  markets  during  the  global  financial 
crisis  owes  much  to  the  fact  that  financial  stability  was  already  an  important  piece  of  the 
policy framework.  
Three issues I would like to discuss regarding financial stability and monetary policy: 
First, was the crisis caused by monetary policy?  
 
Second, what are the instruments for financial stability?  
 
 
And third, what are the interactions between financial stability and monetary policy? 
Regarding the cause of the crisis, I do not think monetary policy, conducted, for example, on 
the  basis  of  a  Taylor  rule  was  the  main  culprit.  Very  low  interest  rates  in  advanced 
economies induced high risk-taking as financial institutions were searching for yields. Excess 
liquidity may sow the seeds for asset price bubbles and financial vulnerabilities,3 but to cause 
a huge financial crisis, some serious distortions in the financial system are required. Indeed, 
countries  like  Australia  or  Canada  had  very  low  interest  rates,  but  their  financial  systems 
responded  appropriately  to  the  financial  crisis.  Chile  also  followed  an  interest  rate  cycle 
similar to that of the US and did not suffer a financial crisis. In some countries there could 
have been even a housing bubble, but there was not the degree of leverage as in the US, 
which was central in triggering the crisis. Indeed, it is useful to recall that asset price bubbles 
do not necessarily cause a financial crisis, as was the case with the tech bubble in the early 
2000s. The bad combination is asset price bubbles with high leverage in the banking system.  
However, monetary policy played a role in the crisis in the way it dealt with bubbles, deviating 
from the prescriptions to pursue price stability. This was the so-called “Greenspan put.” The 
rule  followed  by  the  Fed  was  not  to  react  to  the  formation  of  a  bubble,  but  to  mop-up  its 
effects after the bubble burst. This was done by providing unlimited amount of liquidity and 
sharp  reductions  of  interest  rates.  Recent  evidence  confirms  that  including  asset  price 
deflation improved the fit of the Taylor rule (Hall, 2011), and hence markets were expecting 
an  easing  of  monetary  conditions  when  asset  prices  declined  significantly.  This  point  was 
already  raised  almost  ten  years  ago  by  Miller  et  al.  (2001),  who  argued  that  eliminating 
                                                 
3   See, for example, Acharya and Naqvi (2010).  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
downside risk of asset prices feeds the bubble, so more bubbles were not only the result of 
irrational exuberance but was also “exaggerated by the faith in the stabilizing powers of Mr. 
Greenspan.” 
Regarding  the  second  question,  on  the  instruments  for  financial  stability,  this  is  what  has 
been  termed  macroprudential  tools,  as  opposed  to  the  microprudential  regulation,  which 
targets  the  health  of  specific  financial  institutions.  One  of  the  first  tools  used  for  financial 
stability was the dynamic provisions to housing loans implemented in Spain in 2000. It is still 
too early to have a full evaluation of this instrument, since it did not avoid a housing bubble, 
many small institutions dedicated to housing finance, the “cajas”, went bust during the crisis, 
but the overall Spanish financial system fared well through it all.  
On the time dimension, the idea of macroprudential tools is to avoid the buildup of financial 
vulnerabilities in the upturn of the business cycle, and to have a cushion for the downturn. 
Financial  systems  tend  to  be  procyclical,  and  hence  some  break  system  should  be 
implemented  to  avoid  excessive  risk-taking.  This  has  been  underlying  the  new  rules  in 
Basel III, especially in the definition of the countercyclical buffer of new capital requirements. 
On the cross-section dimension, extra capital has been proposed for systemic institutions in 
order  to  make  them  more  resilient  to  financial  turbulences.  But,  the  definition  of  systemic 
institutions is still blurred, and given the evolution of financial innovation, what today may be 
a  non-systemic  institution  may  eventually  become  systemic.  Indeed,  a  non-systemic 
institution  on  a  worldwide  basis  could  be  systemic  from  the  point  of  view  of  particular 
economies. 
Again, these issues are not new in emerging market economies, which in general have more 
capitalized banks. In Chile, most of the industry already satisfies the requirements that are 
supposed  to  be  in  place  by  2019.  Moreover,  there  are  larger  requirements  for  banks  that 
have high market share. 
There are other areas where we have already made significant progress, such as restrictions 
on  currency  mismatches,  liquidity  management  and  the  use  of  derivatives.  In  all  of  these 
cases, the Central Bank of Chile has authority to set prudential regulation. For banks, these 
relate with authorizing the use of derivatives, regulation regarding market and liquidity risk, 
among others. In other areas, the Central Bank also has a say in “systemic” regulation, such 
as  overall  limits  for  Pension  Funds.  This  scheme  accommodates  recent  policy  concerns, 
since it avoids the conflict of interests that arises from mixing the micro supervisor with the 
monetary authority, while preserving an institution that provides a broad look at the stability 
of the financial system. This being said, however, there is a need to continue strengthening 
coordination instances with other regulators. In this sense, the recent creation of a Financial 
Stability Committee in Chile should improve coordination among regulators and have a view 
on  financial  stability  and  risks.  Over  time,  and  as  learning  takes  place,  some  legislation 
should be introduced in order to enhance the effectiveness of the Committee. In the Central 
Bank,  evaluation  of  financial  vulnerabilities  and  strengths  is  performed  bi-annually  in  our 
Financial Stability Report.  
Finally, regarding the interactions between macroprudential policies and monetary policy, I 
would  like  to  make  some  comments.4  The  traditional  view  has  been  influenced  by  the 
Tinbergen principle, by which there should exist as many instruments as policy targets. This 
view  is  reinforced  by  the  fact  that,  as  I  argued  above,  the  interest  rate  is  too  blunt  of  an 
instrument  to  deal  with  asset  price  bubbles  and  financial  dislocations.  Therefore,  we  can 
think of a separation between the interest rate – the monetary policy instrument to achieve 
the inflation target – and macroprudential tools to deal with financial stability. 
                                                 
4   See also Bernanke (2011) for discussion on these issues. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
However, and perhaps unfortunately, the separation is not that clear. As I discussed before, 
actions of monetary policy, such as the Greenspan put, may create financial instability. The 
financial  crisis  also  showed  that  it  has  effects  on  the  business  cycle  and,  hence,  it  has 
implications  on  monetary  policy.  Moreover,  the  transmission  channels  of  monetary  policy 
could  be  broken  down  during  a  crisis.  Therefore,  the  state  of  the  financial  system  should 
have  implications  on  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  of  economies  following  a  FIT  regime 
since it affects the transmission channels and the business cycle. 
Another issue is whether macroprudential tools may be used to complement monetary policy. 
For  example,  adjusting  capital  requirements  over  the  cycle  or  introducing  dynamic 
provisioning may have effects on the output gap, inflation and interest rates. This is similar to 
the  case  of  automatic  stabilizers  of  fiscal  policy,  which  of  course  have  implications  on 
monetary policy. Therefore, there should not be conflicts between financial stability and price 
stability tools, as long as financial regulation reduces the procyclicality of the banking system. 
From  the  point  of  view  of  the  inflation  target,  this  is  just  part  of  the  environment  in  which 
decisions have to be made. 
Perhaps  a more  controversial  issue  is the  use  of  macroprudential  tools  as  a  substitute  for 
monetary  policy.  A  recent  case  in  some  emerging  markets  has  been  the  use  of  banks’ 
reserve requirements to tighten credit by reducing the need to increase the interest rate, and 
collateral effects on asset prices, especially the exchange rate.  
The advantage of using the interest rate for monetary policy is that we have relatively good 
knowledge of the transmission channels. Changes in monetary policy interest rates affect the 
cost  of 
the  availability  of  credit.  The  macroeconomic 
consequences  of  changing  regulation  are  less  well  understood.  Tightening  restrictions  on 
banks may create disintermediation and move credit to unregulated segments of the market. 
In addition, the latitude of changes in regulation is much more limited than that of interest 
rates. A more constructive approach may be to design rule-based countercyclical regulation 
with  a  clear  purpose  to  minimize  the  risk  of  financial  crisis.  Nevertheless,  we  still  need  to 
learn more about the interactions between monetary and financial policies.  
financing,  asset  prices  and 
Final remarks 
A natural reaction to a crisis is to think that everything is wrong and that all must be changed. 
Emerging  markets,  and  in  particular  Chile,  performed  well  during  the  crisis,  and  above  all 
during  the  recovery.  Therefore,  a  first  lesson  must  be  on  the  factors  that  produced  these 
good results, and macroeconomic management was certainly central to the rapid recovery. 
The  financial  system  was  resilient,  which  shows  that  the  regulatory  framework  was 
appropriate. However, our role is not to congratulate ourselves for our achievements in the 
past, but to look at strengthening our macroeconomic framework. 
As  development  proceeds,  new  challenges  arise  due  to  financial  innovation,  and  it  is 
extremely important to look for lessons while the crisis unfolds, to take advantage of financial 
development  without  risking  financial  stability.  There  is  a  need  to  study  the  interactions 
between  monetary  and  financial  policies  further,  especially  given  the  challenges stemming 
from the global outlook.  
Implementing  monetary  policy  in  a  flexible  inflation  targeting  framework  has  shown  its 
benefits;  incorporating  financial  frictions  and  the  appropriate  policies  should  help  us  to 
navigate better in a very uncertain world. 
The crisis also left some lessons for the profession and the way we use our highly stylized 
models in policy-making. The narrow view is to think they are a precise description of how 
the world works, when in truth it is much more complicated. However, the other extreme view 
–  and  a  very  bad  one  for  policy-making  –  is  disregarding  all  that  we  have  learned  from 
academic work. We need to be humble about the extent of our knowledge, but we also have 
to be rigorous and serious about policies. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
References 
Acharya V. and H. Naqvi (2010), “The Seeds of a Crisis: A Theory on Ban Liquidity and Risk-
Taking over the Business Cycle,” mimeo, NYU. 
Bernanke,  B.  (2011),  “The  Effects  of  the  Great  Recession  on  Central  Bank  Doctrine  and 
Practice,” speech at the Federal Reserve of Boston 56th Economic Conference. 
Bernanke, B. and M. Woodford (1997), “Inflation Forecast and Monetary Policy,” Journal of 
Money, Credit, and Banking, Vol. 29, No. 4, part 2, pp. 653–684. 
Davies,  H.  and  D.  Green  (2010),  Banking  on  the  Future.  The  Fall  and  Rise  of  Central 
Banking, Princeton University Press. 
De  Gregorio,  J.  (2007),  “Defining  Inflation  Targets,  the  Policy  Horizon  and  the  Output-
Inflation Tradeoff,” Working Paper N° 415, Central Bank of Chile. 
De Gregorio, J. (2008), “La Gran Moderación y el Riesgo Inflacionario: Una Mirada desde las 
Economías Emergentes,” Estudios Públicos, N° 110, pp. 5–20, otoño. 
Galí,  J.  and  L.  Gambetti  (2009),  “On  the  Sources  of  the  Great  Moderation,”  American 
Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, Vol. 1, No. 1, pp. 26–57. 
Galí, J. and M. Gertler (1999), “Macroeconomic Modelling for Monetary Policy Evaluation,” 
Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 21, No. 4, pp. 25–45.  
Hall,  P.  (2011),  “Is  There  Evidence  of  a  Greenspan  Put?,”  Swiss  National  Bank  Working 
Paper, 2011-6. 
Kim, C.-J. and C. Nelson (1999), “Has the U.S. Economy Become More Stable? A Bayesian 
Approach  Based  on  a  Markov  Switching  Model  of  the  Business  Cycle,”  The  Review  of 
Economics and Statistics, Vol. 81, N° 4, pp. 608–616. 
Miller, M., P. Weller and L. Zhang (2001), “Moral Hazard and the US Stock Market: Analyzing 
the Greenspan Put,” CSGR Working Paper 83/01, The University of Warwick. 
Stock,  J.  and  M.  Watson  (2003),  “Has  the  Business  Cycle  Changed  and  Why?,” 
Macroeconomics Annual 2002, MIT Press. 
Svensson,  L.E.O.  (1997),  “Inflation  Forecast  Targeting:  Implementing  and  Monitoring 
Inflation Targets,” European Economic Review, Vol. 41, pp. 1111–1146. 
Taylor, John B. (1998), “Monetary Policy and the Long Boom: The Homer Jones Lecture,” 
Review, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, November/December, pp. 3–11. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
