Ryuzo Miyao: Economic activity and prices in Japan and monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Ryuzo Miyao, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting 
with business leaders, Hakodate, 14 September 2011. 
 Introduction 
Thank  you  for  giving  me  this  opportunity  to  exchange  views  with  people  representing 
southern Hokkaido, particularly the area around Hakodate. And I would like to express my 
gratitude to everyone for your cooperation in the various business operations of the Bank of 
Japan’s Hakodate Branch. 
Japan’s  economy  temporarily  suffered  a  steep  decline  after  the  Great  East  Japan 
Earthquake occurred on March 11. I am aware that the Hakodate area was no exception and 
was  likewise  affected  by  the  disaster.  Nevertheless,  the  efforts  of  all  parties  concerned  to 
work  toward  economic  recovery  are  paying  off  in  a  number  of  ways.  The  challenge  will 
continue for the time being, and the Bank will do its utmost to support the efforts being made. 
Today, I will present an overview of economic activity and prices in Japan, which is in the 
process of recovery, followed by remarks on monetary policy. In my conclusion, I will touch 
on the economy of southern Hokkaido, particularly the area around Hakodate. 
I. 
Economic activity and prices in Japan 
Overview 
A. 
Japan’s  economic  activity  has  been  picking  up  steadily  while  the  supply-side  constraints 
caused by the disaster have been mostly resolved and, in particular, production and exports 
have recently been on an increasing trend. On the demand side, business fixed investment, 
housing investment, and public investment are expected to increase, on the way to restoring 
capital  stock.  Private  consumption  is  picking  up  as  household  sentiment  has  improved. 
Japan’s economy is expected to return to a moderate recovery path  as production activity 
increases  with  the  resolution  of  supply-side  constraints.  While  the  current  solid  recovery, 
mainly  in  production,  is  welcome  if  it  continues  this  autumn  onward,  there  are  also  some 
concerns. These include a slowdown in overseas economies, prolonged appreciation of the 
yen, a rise in electricity costs, and possible protraction of deflationary expectations.  
In the following, I will give an overview of overseas economies and then Japan’s economy, 
which  is  in  the  process  of  recovery,  and  discuss  points  to  note  in  the  current  and  future 
situations. 
Overseas economies 
B. 
Let me first talk about the U.S. economy. Although the economy is recovering, the pace is 
slowing remarkably. Since the Lehman shock, the United States has been suffering balance-
sheet adjustments in the household sector, a problem in which households incur excessive 
debts  and  a  protracted  period  is  required  for  resolution.  In  addition,  since  April  2011,  a 
bottleneck in supply chains associated with the Great East Japan Earthquake has surfaced 
in the form of disruption of supply in automobiles and automobile-related parts, and gasoline 
prices have surged reflecting a hike in international commodity prices. Moreover, a cutback 
in local government spending has proceeded. As a result, consumption has been contained 
due to a slowdown in real income, production has slowed, and employment has grown at a 
sluggish  pace.  Of  course,  positive  developments  have  also  occurred.  Exports,  corporate 
profits, and business fixed investment have been firm, benefiting from emerging economies 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
whose domestic demand is robust as well as the U.S. dollar’s depreciation, and stock prices 
have  been  at  a  relatively  high  level.  However,  real  GDP  for  the  April-June  quarter  on  an 
annualized  quarter-on-quarter  basis,  announced  at  the  end  of  July,  was  1.3  percent  (later 
revised  downward  to  1.0  percent)  and  real  GDP  for  the  January-March  quarter  was 
0.4 percent,  reflecting  a  rapid  slowdown  in  private  consumption.  An  annual  revision 
conducted at the same time showed that real GDP has yet to recover to the level prior to the 
Lehman shock. 
Particularly since late July, markets have become highly volatile, as seen in a plunge in stock 
prices, and household and business sentiment has declined due to various events such as 
political  turmoil  over  the  federal  debt  ceiling,  a  series  of  deteriorating  economic  indicators 
such as ISM manufacturing and nonmanufacturing indexes and consumer spending, and a 
downgrading of U.S. Treasuries by Standard and Poor’s from triple A to double A plus. Long-
term  interest  rates  have  also  been  declining.  In  response  to  this  situation,  at  the  Federal 
Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC)  meeting  held  on  August  9,  the  Federal  Reserve  Board 
stated that the current economic conditions were likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of 
0–0.25  percent  for  the  federal  funds  rate  at  least  through  mid-2013.  While  volatility  in  the 
financial  markets  has  been  contained  to  some  extent,  many  of  the  economic  indicators  of 
consumer  and  business  confidence  have  remained  weak.  In  addition,  in  a  situation  where 
concern  over  the  European  sovereign  debt  problem  has  been  reignited,  it  seems  that  the 
trend of risk aversion in the financial markets is continuing. 
Meanwhile, one after another, private research institutes have revised downward their real 
GDP outlook for the second half of 2011 and for 2012. Judging from employment statistics 
and  a  manufacturing  survey  for  August  2011,  the  pace  of  economic  recovery  is  likely  to 
remain very moderate. At the FOMC meeting in late September, it is expected that the Fed 
will deepen discussions on additional easing by extending the duration of the meeting from 
one day to two, and the Fed’s potential actions have been drawing attention. 
The  European  economy  grew  strongly  at  3.4  percent  on  an  annualized  quarter-on-quarter 
basis in the first quarter of 2011, but slowed to 0.6 percent in the second quarter. As in the 
United States, the European economy was affected by the surge in international commodity 
prices  and  partly  by  the  disaster  in  Japan,  but  the  main  reason  for  the  decline  was  the 
economic  slowdown  in  Germany  and  France,  which  had  been  driving  growth  in  the  euro 
area. In the second quarter, Germany’s growth was 0.5 percent on an annualized quarter-on-
quarter  basis,  versus  5.5  percent  in  the  first  quarter,  and  France’s  growth  was  minus 
0.0 percent, compared to 3.6 percent in the first quarter. The slowdown seems to reflect a 
drop  in  exports  to  the  United  States  and  Asian  countries,  and  therefore  it  is  a  matter  of 
concern  whether  growth  in  both  countries  will  recover  in  the  third  quarter,  given  that 
European  peripheral  countries  have  been  subject  to  low  or  negative  growth  due  to  fiscal 
austerity. 
Since  July,  economic  activity  in  the  euro  area  has  been  lacking  signs  of  resilience,  as 
confirmed  by  various  economic  indicators  such  as  business  confidence  indexes,  industrial 
output, and the unemployment rate. As for the European sovereign debt problem, additional 
support  for  Greece  was  decided  at  the  European  Union  leaders’  summit  on  July  21  and 
sovereign  bonds  spreads  against  German  government  bonds  and  the  credit  default  swap 
(CDS)  rate  temporarily  narrowed  significantly;  however,  since  the  root  cause  of  the  debt 
problem was not addressed, tensions spilled over to Italy and Spain, resulting in a spike in 
government  bond  yields  in  both  countries,  and  financial  markets  became  destabilized. 
Against  this  backdrop,  the  European  Central  Bank  decided  on  August  4  to  reinstate  a 
liquidity-providing  supplementary  longer-term  refinancing  operation  with  a  maturity  of 
approximately  six  months,  and  to  restart  bond  purchases  under  the  Securities  Markets 
Programme.  Some  countries  –  France,  Italy,  Spain,  and  Belgium  –  started  to  restrict 
speculative moves, and on August 11 they decided to ban short selling of financial stocks, 
with  Italian  and  Spanish  government  bond  yields  declining  as  a  result.  European  financial 
markets  have  remained  unstable,  however,  with  a  rise  again  in  Greek  government  bond 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
yields and a decline in stock prices, mainly of financial institutions. Since the outbreak of the 
Greek crisis in May 2010, the number of countries targeted by the markets has increased. 
While support by the monetary and fiscal authorities has expanded during this time, tensions 
have spread even to Italy and Spain, and thus risks associated with the European sovereign 
debt problem seem to be on the rise. 
Concern  from  now  on  is  the  spillover  of  the  European  sovereign  debt  problem  to  the 
financial/banking  sector  and  economic  activity.  As  this  spillover  appears  to  have  partly 
surfaced in the form of a rise in financial institution CDSs and a widening in corporate bond 
spreads, further developments should be monitored carefully. 
Asian emerging economies have been growing at a high rate, led by China, and medium- to 
long-term  growth  expectations  appear  to  have  remained  high.  However,  due  partly  to 
monetary tightening conducted with a view to containing inflation, recent economic indicators 
have  been  showing  signs  of  a  slowdown.  This  can  be  seen,  for  example,  in  the  declining 
trend  in  China’s  manufacturing  purchasing  managers  index.  In  addition,  Japan’s  disaster 
adversely affected ASEAN countries in the April-June quarter. 
While the effects of the disaster appear to have almost run their course as of July, external 
demand might slow down from now on reflecting a slowdown in the recovery in the United 
States and Europe. Domestic demand is robust, but, given continued concern over inflation, 
further monetary tightening is necessary. For example, while China has been intermittently 
raising  bank  lending  and  deposit  rates  as  well  as  the  reserve  requirement  ratio  since  the 
beginning  of  2011,  year-on-year  growth  in  the  consumer  price  index  (CPI)  has  remained 
high,  at  5.5  percent  in  May,  6.4  percent  in  June,  6.5  percent  in  July,  and  6.2  percent  in 
August. Whether the Chinese economy can make a soft landing will be critical in ensuring 
the  sound  development  of  the  global  economy,  and  therefore,  developments  in  China 
continue to warrant close attention. 
Besides the problem of inflation, it should be noted that there is a risk in China that part of 
the  large-scale  investment  made  through  local  government  investment  vehicles  might 
become  nonperforming.  In  other  words,  considering  China’s  economic  outlook  from  a 
somewhat  longer-term  perspective,  the  high-growth  track  led  by  investment  is  likely  to 
continue  for  the  time  being.  However,  if  such  large-scale  investment  continues  for  a  long 
time,  some  of  it  might  become  excessive  in  inefficient  areas  and  financial  institutions’ 
massive loans might become nonperforming. I will pay close attention to whether China can 
maintain a  balance between price  stability and economic growth from a somewhat longer-
term perspective. 
Japan’s economy 
C. 
Japan’s economy is on the path to recovery following a plunge in growth due to the effects of 
the  March  11  disaster.  The  real  GDP  growth  rate  in  the  second  quarter  on  an  annualized 
quarter-on-quarter  basis,  was  minus  2.1  percent,  marking  three  consecutive  quarters  of 
negative growth – that is, minus 2.5 percent in the fourth quarter of 2010, minus 3.6 percent 
in the first quarter of 2011, and minus 2.1 percent in the second quarter of 2011. After the 
earthquake, firms’ production activity plunged, consumer sentiment worsened, and labor and 
income  conditions  deteriorated,  due  mainly  to  the  constraints  of  supply  chains  and  the 
nuclear accident. As a result of strenuous efforts by the parties concerned, the economy has 
recently been recovering, mainly in production, at a high pace. Production and exports have 
nearly  returned  to  their  levels  prior  to  the  earthquake,  and  private  consumption  has  been 
gradually recovering due partly to demand stemming from the transition to digital terrestrial 
transmission  and  power  saving.  Business  fixed  investment  has  also  been  picking  up,  and 
household and business sentiment has been generally improving. In the meantime, the Bank 
enhanced monetary easing on March 14 following the earthquake, and on April 7 decided to 
introduce the funds-supplying operation to support financial institutions in the disaster areas. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
The real GDP growth rate on an annualized quarter-on-quarter basis in the third quarter is 
likely to turn positive, according to private surveys. Production, mainly that of automobiles, 
continues  to  be  at  full  capacity,  and  recovery  demand  is  likely  to  gradually  increase. 
Following the removal of the supply constraints, moderate economic recovery, generated by 
production and exports, is likely to continue. 
Having said that, the future scenario for economic recovery is associated with the following 
concerns and thus warrants vigilance. 
First,  as  already  stated,  there  is  a  possibility  that  overseas  demand  will  be  weaker  than 
initially  envisaged  amid  the  slowdown  in  the  economic  recovery  in  the  United  States  and 
European  advanced  economies,  and  this  might  make  Japan’s  economic  recovery  weaker 
than expected. 
Second,  the  prolonged  appreciation  of  the  yen.  If  the  appreciation  of  the  yen  continues  in 
response to the events such as downgrading of U.S. Treasuries, conditional maintenance of 
the U.S. zero interest rate policy until mid-2013, and the renewed European sovereign debt 
problem, concern will grow regarding the hollowing out of domestic industries. 
There are both positive and adverse effects of the yen’s appreciation on economic activity, 
and  the  basic  response  to  it  should  be  to  maximize  the  positive  benefits  and  mitigate  the 
adverse effects as much as possible. In this regard, one can point to such positive effects as 
providing firms and consumers with imported raw materials, products, and commercial goods 
at lower prices, as well as facilitating domestic firms’ equity investment and acquisitions of 
overseas  firms  and  projects,  thereby  raising  the  domestic  firms’  productivity.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  adverse  effects,  needless  to  say,  include  exposing  domestic  automakers  and 
electrical machinery manufacturers to severe price competition with overseas firms and thus 
lowering profitability. 
The important point here is that, while the prices of various goods and services have been 
steadily  rising  in  the  markets  to  which  Japanese  firms  export  –  including  Asian  emerging 
economies  and  the  United  States  –  automobiles  and  electrical  machinery  products  have 
been  competing  severely  with  overseas  products  and  their  prices  have  been  declining 
markedly in these markets. Therefore, Japanese exporters of these products will be forced to 
fiercely compete without being able to mitigate the impact of the yen’s appreciation through 
inflation  in  the  export  destinations.  As  developments  in  exports  are  linked  with  domestic 
production  and  thus  have  a  substantial  impact  on  Japan’s  economy,  downward  pressure 
from  the  yen’s  appreciation  tends  to  become  strong.  In  addition,  if  the  yen’s  appreciation 
leads to a relocation of key factories as well as research and development (R&D) bases, the 
adverse  effects  on  the  economy’s  potential  growth  are  a  concern.  Based  on  this 
consideration, I believe it is meaningful that the government is considering support for R&D 
in the manufacturing sector and small and medium-sized subcontractor firms, to alleviate the 
pain  associated  with  the  yen’s  appreciation  and  prevent  the  hollowing  out  of  domestic 
industries. 
Third, a rise in electricity costs. This summer, the shortage of electricity did not substantially 
affect the production level, thanks to firms’ creativity and endurance as well as individuals’ 
efforts to save electricity. As a shift from nuclear power to alternative energy sources is likely 
from  a  long-term  perspective,  corporate  profits  could  come  under  persistent  pressure  and 
some firms might have to shift their businesses overseas if electricity costs – including the 
imports of alternative energy sources – increase. 
Fourth,  protracted  deflationary  expectations.  In  August  2011,  the  base  year  for  calculating 
the CPI was switched from 2005 to 2010, and as a result the year-on-year rate of change in 
the  CPI  components  (all  items  less  fresh  food)  was  revised  downward  by  0.5  to 
0.8 percentage point. The year-on-year rate of change in the new 2010-base CPI (all items 
less fresh food) was minus 0.2 percent in April, minus 0.1 percent in May, minus 0.2 percent 
in June, and 0.1 percent in July. Private research institutes had originally forecasted that the 
year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items less fresh food), because of the change in 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the base year, would decline from the recent level of around 0.6 percent to around 0 percent. 
The Bank’s forecasts were almost within the same range, and it has been confirmed that it 
will still take some time to achieve price stability. 
If expectations for the continuation of the zero interest rate become protracted in a situation 
where more time is needed to achieve price stability, there is a risk that people’s deflationary 
expectations  will  intensify  in  a  self-fulfilling  manner.  If  by  any  chance  deflationary 
expectations  prevail,  it  will  become  difficult  to  change  the  behavior  of  people  who  are 
reluctant to take risks; people might postpone spending, and growth expectations would be 
unlikely to increase. There is a risk that the economy will be unable to escape from such a 
situation, which might be called a “deflation and low-growth trap.” At present, even following 
the change in the base year, it is still the case that the economy is emerging from deflation 
amid the narrowing output gap, and careful attention should be paid to any possible changes 
in people’s inflation expectations. 
In this regard, there are factors, including an incremental rise in commodity prices, that will 
push up the actual price trend with a lag. From October 2011 onward, the effects stemming 
from  a  rise  in  tobacco  tax  and  an  increase  in  non-life  insurance  rates  will  disappear.  Due 
attention should be paid to whether these factors will again put downward pressure on the 
CPI. 
In  the  meantime,  at  the  Monetary  Policy  Meeting  held  on  August  4,  the  Bank  decided  to 
enhance  monetary  easing  by  increasing  the  total  size  of  the  Asset  Purchase  Program  by 
about 10 trillion yen: 5 trillion yen for the fixed-rate funds-supplying operation against pooled 
collateral and 5 trillion yen for asset purchases. While Japan’s economic activity is picking up 
steadily mainly in production, its economic outlook entails various downside risks. Taking into 
account  such  downside  risks,  including  uncertainty  about  overseas  economies  and  effects 
stemming  from  the  base-year  change  in  the  CPI,  the  Bank  decided  to  further  enhance 
monetary easing, thereby ensuring a successful transition from the recovery phase following 
the  earthquake  disaster  to  a  sustainable  growth  path  with  price  stability.  The  Bank  will 
continue to take proper measures if necessary. 
II. 
Monetary policy 
Monetary policy at the zero interest rate 
A. 
Now let me summarize the efforts taken to enhance monetary easing in a general context. 
If  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  which  controls  the  ordinary  policy  interest  rate  (the 
uncollateralized overnight call rate in the case of Japan) is defined as “traditional monetary 
policy,”  monetary  policy  that  is  pursued  while  the  policy  interest  rate  approaches  the  zero 
bound  is  often  called  “unconventional  monetary  policy.”  When  the  policy  interest  rate  is 
lowered  to  around  0  percent,  it  becomes  difficult  to  further  enhance  monetary  easing. 
Instead, there are other policy measures to further exert powerful monetary easing effects, 
such as committing to continue the zero interest rate policy into the future or increasing the 
size of a central bank’s assets, or changing the composition of its asset portfolio. 
The  “comprehensive  monetary  easing”  implemented  in  Japan  from  October  2010  can  be 
interpreted  precisely  as  an  “unconventional  monetary  policy  package”  that  includes  all  the 
elements just mentioned. Namely, the Bank has confirmed that it will maintain the virtually 
zero interest policy until it judges that price stability is in sight, and it has been purchasing 
various  financial  assets  such  as  government  securities,  corporate  bonds,  CP,  exchange-
traded  funds  (ETFs),  and  Japan  real  estate  investment  trusts  (J-REITs).  Successive 
monetary policy measures in the United States conducted following the Lehman shock were 
similar in that they included large-scale asset purchases such as mortgage-backed securities 
and government securities, changes in the composition of assets, and the continuance of the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
zero federal funds rate policy, at least through mid-2013 given the conditions of economic 
activity and prices. 
All these measures are expected to work on firms’ and households’ spending and investors’ 
portfolio selection by encouraging a decline in longer-term market interest rates and various 
risk premiums, and to ultimately influence economic and price conditions. 
Regarding  the  effects  of  comprehensive  monetary  easing,  as  far  as  financial  market 
developments are concerned, we at the Bank believe that it has had certain positive effects. 
Credit spreads on CP and corporate bonds have declined, and stock and J-REIT prices have 
been  firm  on  the  whole.  We  consider  these  effects  have  played  a  role  in  underpinning 
economic activity and prices. 
With  regard  to  the  unconventional  policy  measures  in  the  United  States,  particularly  the 
large-scale  government  bond  purchase  program  –  the  so-called  “quantitative  easing  II,” 
implemented  from  November  2010  to  June  2011  –  there  has  been  controversy  about  the 
effects of the policy measures. Supporters of the effects have pointed out that the measures 
have  dispelled  deflationary  concern,  raised  stock  prices,  improved  consumer  confidence, 
promoted  exports  due  to  the  U.S.  dollar  depreciation,  and  enabled  prompt  repayment  of 
injected public capital through a rise in stock prices. On the other hand, critics of the effects 
have indicated that economic indicators including employment have not improved markedly, 
a mini-bubble in stock prices has formed and burst, a surge has been induced in international 
commodity prices such as crude oil and gasoline, real income of low-income families (who 
are unlikely to benefit from the surge in asset prices) has been reduced, and inflation has 
been exported to emerging countries. Assessments of the policy measures are diverse, in 
that  some  emphasize  the  positive  effects  of  the  measures  while  others  cast  doubt  on  the 
policy  effects  or  claim  that  unexpected  side  effects  were  far  too  large.  The  controversy 
seems to suggest that it is difficult to grasp and foresee the size and channels of the policy 
effects in advance. 
B.  
Effects of monetary policy measures: a comparison of traditional and 
unconventional policies 
Is there a substantial difference between traditional and unconventional policies concerning 
monetary policy effects and their transmission channels? 
In traditional monetary policy, an expected transmission mechanism is to work on borrowing 
costs,  various  asset  prices  including  stock  prices  and  foreign  exchange  rates,  and  bank 
credits both through the interest rate channel and the portfolio adjustment channel. These, in 
turn,  influence  firms’  and  households’  spending  behavior  and  ultimately  economic  activity 
and prices. 
Such a transmission mechanism of traditional monetary policy, in theory, also holds true for 
unconventional  policy.  Influencing  longer-term  interest  rates  and  various  risk  premiums  is 
nothing more than the interest rate channel and the channel through portfolio adjustments 
and asset prices, both of which I have mentioned above. Almost all of the aforementioned 
controversy  over  the  policy  effects  in  the  United  States  can  be  explained  in  terms  of  the 
traditional transmission channels. 
On the other hand, some arguments remain to be specifically pointed out about transmission 
mechanisms in unconventional policy, even though the qualitative mechanism in traditional 
and unconventional policies is the same. 
The first is about the effect of stabilizing financial systems and financial markets. This is the 
effect  of  soothing  anxiety  about  financial  systems  by  supplying  ample  liquidity  to  financial 
institutions, or the effect of stabilizing financial markets by central bank interventions when 
the  markets  become  excessively  risk  averse  and  the  market  mechanism  deteriorates, 
resulting  in  a  surge  in  risk  premiums.  By  preventing  financial  anxiety  and  preventing  the 
markets from plunging, adverse effects on economic activity can be prevented. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The second is about the effect of international spillover. With expectations for a protracted 
zero interest rate, global investors will search for yield or become active in the carry trade 
and  risk  taking,  and  capital  will  flow  into  high-interest-rate  and  commodity-exporting 
countries.  This  will  then  expand  economic  activity  and  raise  stock  prices  in  overseas 
emerging economies. As a result, there will be an effect that spills over to domestic economic 
activity  and  prices  through  an  increase  in  exports  to  the  emerging  economies  and  an 
improvement in profits of global firms. 
The third is about the effect through the expected rate of inflation. This is the effect that, in 
addition  to  the  existing  channel  of  influencing  demand,  by  attaching  an  expectation  that  a 
central bank’s balance sheet will expand for a protracted period, the expected rate of inflation 
will rise and real interest rates will decline, thereby affecting economic activity and prices. 
While these transmission mechanisms of monetary policy effects can be considered, the side 
effects will be a source of concern if monetary easing becomes excessive. As for the first 
effect I mentioned, if a central bank excessively intervenes in the markets and suppresses 
risk premiums too much, this might ruin the intrinsic function of the markets of making prices 
according  to  risks.  In  addition,  financial  institutions’  profits  might  be  compressed.  By 
encouraging excessive risk taking, the second effect could induce economic overheating or a 
credit bubble in the countries receiving the capital inflows and subsequently cause a serious 
economic downturn. As for the third effect, if excessive balance-sheet expansion continues, 
the expected rate of inflation might rise unexpectedly or the markets might realize that the 
balance-sheet  expansion  is  an  undisciplined  monetary  increase  or  the  monetization  of 
government debts, leading to a surge in government bond yields. 
It is necessary to take due account of the possibility that unconventional monetary easing will 
be associated with such unique side effects. 
Points to keep in mind 
C. 
Based on the summary I have just given, there are several points to keep in mind. 
First,  as  the  transmission  channels  of  the  monetary  policy  effects  overlap  or  are  mutually 
related,  it  is  quite  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to  recognize  each  transmission  channel 
separately  or  measure  its  quantitative  effects.  In  particular,  policymakers  lack  experience 
with  respect  to  the  effects  and  side  effects  of  unconventional  policy.  And  an  economic 
situation  that  requires  such  a  policy  often  occurs  in  the  midst  of  severe  and  protracted 
economic  stagnation  following  a  financial  crisis,  in  which  firms  and  households  have 
shouldered  excessive  debts.  Therefore,  it  could  indeed  be  an  economic  environment  in 
which a normal transmission mechanism cannot function properly. Taking into account that 
there is limited experience with unconventional policy and such a policy is bound to face a 
difficult economic environment, it becomes crucial to make a comprehensive and deliberate 
judgment  that  requires  vigilance  for  unexpected  side  effects,  while  referring  to  prior  policy 
experience. 
Second,  in  a  financial  and  economic  environment  after  the  effects  of  unconventional 
monetary policy spread in a desirable way, interest rates will rise in a positive sense. When 
somewhat longer-term interest rates decline or risk premiums fall by way of accommodative 
monetary policy, funds’ borrowers – for example, firms – can increase borrowing based on 
low interest rates, or can purchase many more capital goods by issuing new shares thanks to 
a  rise  in  stock  prices,  thereby  increase  business  fixed  investment.  As  a  result,  economic 
activity and prices will rise. In the aggregate, stock prices will rise, and bond prices will fall 
and  the  interest  rate  will  increase.  As  for  investors,  they  feel  discouraged  by  a  decline  in 
profitability due to the initial decline in interest rates, and they will try to sell low yield bonds 
and purchase other assets including stocks. As a result, asset prices including stock prices 
will increase and bonds will be sold and interest rates will rise. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Consequently, at the transmission channel in which monetary policy effects surface gradually 
and the economy grows steadily, it is natural that longer-term interest rates initially will fall 
and then rise in due course. On the contrary, if longer-term interest rates remain low, this 
would imply prolonged low growth, given that inflation expectations are unchanged. 
As a footnote, let me point out that one needs to be careful in discussing the effects on an 
economy of a case in which interest rates are increasing in a desirable way. For example, in 
case  of  fiscal  consolidation,  if  the  assumed  interest  rate  level  rises,  it  will  increase  the 
interest burden in public finance. On the other hand, an increase in revenue can be expected 
from a rise in economic growth. Thus, it is important to discuss fiscal consolidation by taking 
account of these two effects. 
Third,  desirable  strengthening  of  growth  potential  cannot  be  achieved  by  monetary  policy 
alone. To begin with, it is understood that strengthening of an economy’s growth potential will 
be promoted primarily by structural reform efforts in the private sector and the government’s 
growth  strategy  to  support  such  efforts.  Having  said  that,  monetary  policy  might  have 
medium-  to  long-term  effects  on  the  economy,  in  addition  to  an  effect  of  containing  short-
term  and  cyclical  swings  in  economic  activity.  In  an  ideal  case,  monetary  easing  might 
contribute to strengthening productivity and growth potential by promoting quality business 
fixed  investment  as  well  as  R&D  investment.  In  an  undesirable  case,  there  is  a  risk  that 
monetary  easing  will  amplify  swings  in  the  economy  in  the  medium  to  long  term  by 
encouraging  excessive  risk  taking  and  excessive  business  fixed  investment,  or  that 
undisciplined monetary easing will induce the erosion of confidence in the currency with an 
unexpected timing and induce a surge in interest rates. Therefore, it is important to recognize 
that  potential  effects  of  monetary  policy  could  have  both  positive  and  negative  effects  on 
medium- to long-term economic growth. 
In relation to strengthening the medium- to long-term growth potential, the Bank has been 
conducting  the  Fund-Provisioning  Measure  to  Support  Strengthening  the  Foundations  for 
Economic Growth since June 2010. With this measure, the Bank supplies long-term funds  
– with an initial duration of one year and a maximum duration of four years – at a low interest 
rate of 0.1 percent to qualifying financial institutions. The measure has already reached the 
initial total amount of 3 trillion yen and has been playing the role of a catalyst. In addition, in 
June 2011 the Bank decided to introduce a new line of credit of 500 billion yen. Through this, 
the  Bank  provides  long-term  funds,  with  an  initial  duration  of  two  years  and  a  maximum 
duration  of  four  years,  at  a  low  interest  rate  of  0.1  percent  to  financial  institutions  that 
undertake  equity  investments  and  asset-based  lending.  The  Bank  expects  that  the  new 
measure  will  further  enhance  financial  institutions’  efforts  to  strengthen  the  foundations  for 
economic growth through the use of a wider range of financial techniques including asset-
based lending. 
I have talked about the transmission channel of monetary policy effects and some points that 
should  be  kept  in  mind.  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  when  conducting  actual  monetary  policy, 
deliberate  and  decisive  actions  are  required  while  considering  carefully  various  conditions 
and possibilities and identifying the timing and measures that will produce maximum positive 
effects  and  keep  side  effects  to  a  minimum  overall.  In  a  highly  uncertain  economic 
environment, the Bank will continue to consistently make contributions as the central bank, 
by  pursuing  powerful  monetary  easing  consisting  of  comprehensive  monetary  easing, 
ensuring  financial  market  stability,  and  providing  support  to  strengthen  the  foundations  for 
economic growth. 
Concluding remarks 
In my concluding remarks, I would like to say a few words about the economic potential of 
southern Hokkaido, particularly the area around Hakodate. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
There  has  been  downward  pressure  on  economic  activity  in  the  region,  mainly  in  the  key 
industry  of  tourism,  due  to  the  effects  of  the  Great  East  Japan  Earthquake.  Recently,  as 
pressure  stemming  from  the  disaster  decreases,  there  have  been  signs  of  improvement 
mainly in tourism, private consumption, and production. 
The region offers a number of tourist attractions, such as a superb night view from Mount 
Hakodate – which is considered to be among the top three such views in the world – historic 
and  cultural  heritage  sites  such  as  Fort  Goryokaku,  fresh  seafood,  and  numerous  hot 
springs.  It  is  famous  as  one  of  Japan’s  leading  tourist  destinations,  attracting  10  million 
visitors each year from home and abroad. In the revised second Japanese-language edition 
of Michelin Green Guide Japon, released in May 2011, the region as a whole received a high 
rating, with the night view from Mount Hakodate awarded three stars (worth a journey) and 
six sites including Fort Goryokaku awarded two stars (worth a detour). There are also many 
other positive aspects related to tourism, including the opening of Shin-Hakodate station on 
the Hokkaido Shinkansen Line planned in fiscal 2015. I sincerely hope that people here will 
take advantage of such opportunities. 
The  region  is  characterized  by  abundant  marine  resources  and  marine-related  industries, 
such as seafood processing that utilizes such resources and the shipbuilding industry, and 
many related academic organizations. I have learned that efforts to take advantage of these 
characteristics  and  promote  the  concept  of  “International  Fisheries  and  Ocean  City 
Hakodate” have been underway through the collaboration between industry, academia, and 
government. 
I  strongly  hope  that  the  efforts  to  vitalize  the  region,  by  utilizing  its  characteristics  and 
advantages, will lead to the further development of southern Hokkaido. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
