Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Asia’s role as an important growth centre in the global 
economy 
Opening address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 
First  Asian  Central  Banks’  Watchers  Conference,  organised  by  the  Official  Monetary  and 
Financial  Institutions  Forum  (OMFIF)  and  the  Lafferty  Group,  Kuala  Lumpur,  1  November 
2011. 
 It  is  with  great  pleasure  that  I  welcome  you  to  the  first  Asian  Central  Banks’  Watchers 
Conference organised by the Official Monetary and Financial Institutions Forum (OMFIF) and 
the Lafferty Group. Bank Negara Malaysia is very pleased to host this event here in Kuala 
Lumpur.  
Central  banks  have  generally  been  the  most  watched  organisations  given  the  significance 
and  far  reaching  implications  of  their  actions  on  financial  systems,  the  economy  and  the 
economic well being of the public at large. This is even more so during periods of financial 
stress and economic distress. During such periods, central banks have generally been at the 
forefront in managing such crisis and its consequences. Indeed, this current global crisis has 
prompted  central  banks  in  the  United  States  and  Europe  to  be  closely  watched  given  the 
impact of their actions on not only their own national economies but also on the rest of the 
world. 
With the growing significance of the emerging economies in the world economy, our policy 
actions  have  increasingly  drawn  significant  interest.  In  particular,  given  Asia’s  role  as  an 
important growth centre in the global economy and the growing significance of the financial 
markets in Asia as a destination for global financial flows, there has been increased focus on 
central banks in Asia.  
Asian  economies  for  several  decades  have  established  strong  financial  and  economic 
linkages with the rest of the world. In this recent decade in particular, Asia has experienced 
significant  structural  changes  that  have  altered  the  dynamics  of  the  global  economy  and 
growth  patterns.  Since  2000,  per  capita  income  levels  in  Asia  have  risen  twofold.  With  a 
growing  middle  class  population  that  will  reach  3.3  billion  by  2030,  Asia  is  projected  to 
become  the  world’s  largest  market  for  consumer  goods  and  services.  Low  unemployment 
and a resilient financial sector has reinforced this trend. Domestic demand has continued to 
strengthen  while  the  growth  in  intra-regional  economic  and  financial  activities  has  been 
sustained. Intra-regional trade now represents more than 50% of total trade, increasing from 
32%  in  1995.  Similarly,  intra-regional  portfolio  investments  have  risen  from  20%  of  total 
assets holdings in 2001 to 28% today. The growth in cross-border trade and investments in 
Asia has not only provided the impetus for the development of the domestic economies, but 
also enabled the region to emerge as an important economic bloc.  
A  more  recent  phenomenon  is  the  effort  to  promote  greater  regional  financial  integration 
through  increased  cross-border  banking  and  financial  activities  within  the  region.  Financial 
institutions  in  Asia  are  increasingly  turning  their  focus  to  strengthening  their  regional 
presence  taking  advantage  of  Asia’s  enormous  growth  prospects.  Malaysian  banks,  for 
example, operate in 13 countries across Asia, with total foreign assets expanding from only 
USD1  billion  ringgit  to  more  than  USD100  billion  between  the  period  2002  and  2010.  Our 
payment and settlement systems are also being linked to facilitate more cost-effective cross-
border and efficient investment flows. Efforts are currently underway to establish a Pan-Asian 
Central  Securities  Depository  Alliance  which  will  provide  seamless  accessibility  to  Asian 
securities by international investors.  
The acceleration of regional financial integration in Asia is contributing to the more effective 
intermediation  of  funds  from  the  region  to  be  channeled  towards  meeting  the  investment 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
the  region.  Over 
the  next  decade,  Asia’s  projected 
infrastructure 
requirements  of 
development  expenditure  alone  will  be  twice  the  estimated  savings  within  the  region.  This 
provides investors with new investment horizons and significant diversification opportunities. 
In  charting  the  future  for  a  more  integrated  Asia,  the  developments  surrounding  the 
sovereign debt crisis in Europe provides us with important lessons. Despite having common 
rules and established institutional arrangements, achieving consensus and coordination have 
proven  to  be  a  major  challenge  in  an  environment  in  which  there  are  also  many  national 
priorities.  These  differences  in  priorities  become  even  more  pronounced  during  a  crisis. 
Given that Asia is a far more diverse region, a different approach to economic and financial 
integration  is  being  pursued.  The  aim  is  to  put  in  place  elements  that  will  facilitate  the 
deepening  of  trade  and  investment  linkages  within  Asia  while  also  collectively  working 
towards strengthening Asia’s resilience and stability.  
Asia’s economic transformation, comprehensive financial sector reforms and fiscal prudence 
have provided important support to Asia’s resilience and ability to withstand the destabilising 
spill-over effects of the current ongoing global financial and economic crisis. In addition, the 
regional surveillance mechanisms are being reinforced by financial support facilities and an 
integrated framework for crisis resolution.  
Every  financial  crisis  has  prompted  a  review  of  the  role,  function  and  authority  of  central 
banks. Indeed, developments in this recent four years have had profound implications on the 
central banks of crisis affected countries. The mandate of central banks for financial stability 
has  generally  been  strengthened  considerably  to  deal  more  effectively  with  risks  in  the 
financial  system  and  economy.  This  has  been  accompanied  by  a  fundamental  review  of 
governance arrangements and regulatory reforms at the international level. At the extreme, 
responses  of  central  banks  to  the  crises  in  the  US  and  Europe  have  ventured  beyond 
conventional approaches.  
In the area of surveillance, existing monitoring frameworks have been extended to capture 
risks and vulnerabilities emerging from areas beyond the traditional perimeters of regulated 
financial institutions and markets. In this respect, effective coordination between the macro-
prudential  and  micro-prudential  surveillance  functions  have  become  more  important,  given 
that supervisory interventions and crisis management measures are now being applied to a 
wider set of institutions and markets.  
The need for central banks to have a broad range of instruments, including macroprudential 
measures,  to  achieve  financial  stability  policy  objectives  is  now  generally  accepted.  Focus 
has  also  been  on  the  efficacy  of  different  policy  instruments  that  are  needed  to  preserve 
financial  stability,  the  structure  and  design  of  decision  making  frameworks  and  the 
accountabilities in regard to financial stability.  
For  Asia,  these  considerations  have  been  very  much  a  part  of  the  evolution  of  financial 
stability  frameworks  in  the  region  in  this  recent  decade,  in  particular  following  the  Asian 
financial crisis. By virtue of being also responsible for bank supervision, the majority of Asian 
central banks have a clear mandate for financial stability, whether implied or explicit. In the 
case  of  Malaysia,  this  has  supported  the  close  coordination  of  the  macro  and  micro 
surveillance  functions,  and  more  comprehensive  assessments  and  analyses  of  the 
interactions between monetary and financial stability policies.  
Many  central  banks  in  the  region  also  have  considerable  experience  in  implementing 
macroprudential  measures,  such  as  lending  concentrations,  loan-to-value  limits  and  some 
form of “dynamic” reserving or provisioning policies. The intensification of regional monetary 
and  financial  cooperation  among  central  banks  in  the  Asian  region  has  also  served  to 
strengthen  regional  surveillance  and  crisis  management  arrangements,  as  well  as  in  the 
supervision of financial institutions with cross-border operations in the region. 
As  Asia  rises  and  expectations  increase,  the  two  billion  Asians  now  at  the  margins  of  the 
consumption  economy  will  radically  transform  global  demand  and  supply  for  limited 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
resources.  Considerations  of  climate  change,  environmental  damage  and  the  depletion  of 
natural resources have become a higher priority, and therefore needs to be also integrated 
with financial and economic policies, for example through the implementation of policies on 
sustainable financing.  
Finally, given the higher degree of connectivity not only within the domestic financial system 
and economy, consistent policies and coordination becomes key. Clarity on the governance 
process for greater interface among regulators becomes important, including that involving 
cross border interface. For the Asian region, the East Asian central banks have since 2007 
established a Monetary and Financial Stability Committee to discuss assessments of risk and 
vulnerabilities to macroeconomic and financial stability in the region. 
The strategy for policymakers in Asia has been to build a higher degree of resilience to be 
better  positioned  to  withstand  external  shocks  and  to  provide  an  enabling  environment  to 
achieve a sustainable economic performance. For central banks, the focus is on preserving 
monetary  and  financial  stability.  Of  equal  importance  is  the  development  of  the  domestic 
financial infrastructure. 
Important in the policy design of central banks is that the policies are anticipatory. Delays in 
policy  action  or  exit  will  invariably  result  in  higher  costs,  over  adjustment  and  other 
unintended  consequences.  A  second  aspect  of  policy  is  that  rule  based  policies  such  as 
inflation targeting does not give the policy space to take into account sources of instability 
and other trends that may work to diminish the extent of such instability. Rigid parameters, 
imposed  by  multilateral  agencies  and  sometimes  by  rating  agencies  and  the  market  also 
contribute towards reinforcing these conventions. Current and future conditions are likely to 
be highly complex and varying and therefore not lending itself to rigid rules.  
In  an  environment  that  will  continue  to  remain  challenging  for  some  time,  this  Conference 
provides an important opportunity to discuss a wide range of issues from Asia’s perspective, 
thereby  contributing  to  the  international  discussions  and  understanding  of  the  issues  and 
their business and policy implications. Asia’s experience will also provide additional insights 
in  contributing  towards  the  solutions  for  building  a  more  resilient  international  financial 
system. I wish you an engaging and productive discussion.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
