Ardian Fullani: Educating and inspiring Albania’s young generation 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  2011  end-year 
reception, Tirana, 21 December 2011. 
 regards  decision-making, 
Honourable Minister,  
Your Excellencies Ambassadors,  
Honourable Members of Parliament,  
Dear representatives of the banking system and the media,  
Dear participants,  
I would like to welcome and thank you for your participation.  
Your presence today is a special pleasure for me personally and the Bank of Albania.  
My  special  thanks  go  to  the  former  members  of  the  Supervisory  Council  of  the  Bank  of 
Albania,  whose  term  in  office  has  ended.  I  personally  appreciate  the  seriousness  and 
commitment they have dedicated to their work, a precious contribution to Bank of Albania’s 
institutional furtherance.  
Thanking  them  once  again  for  their  professional  work,  allow  me  to  welcome  the  newly 
appointed  members  of  the  Supervisory  Council  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  renowned  public 
figures  with  an  unquestionable  professional  career.  They  come  from  diverse  fields  of 
professional careers and will bring in added value to the Bank of Albania, contributing to a 
wider coverage of the institution’s functions.  
I  am  confident  that  the  Bank  of  Albania,  in  its  activity,  will  continue  to  incorporate  best 
international  standards  as 
independence,  accountability, 
transparency and governance.  
I believe that a healthy economy that generates stable growth needs a developed financial 
sector  in  terms  of  its  depth  and  width;  a  flexible  banking  system,  which  manages  public’s 
deposits  cautiously  and  channels  them  efficiently  to  fund  the  economy.  Today,  from  this 
modest ceremony, I would like to assure you that we are fully responsible for this as useful 
as difficult mission. The Bank of Albania will be always attentive to ensure macroeconomic 
and financial stability for the country.  
In  the  spirit  of  end-year  celebrations,  I  cannot  help  focusing  on  the  Albanian  young 
generation, an inspiration to our work and a fruit of our investments for a better future.  
Following  its  established  tradition,  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  the  pleasure  to  announce  the 
Governor’s Award for the best diploma theses in 2011”. This year, we decided to announce 
this  award  in  this  important  activity,  in  the  presence  of  friends  and  colleagues.  This  is  an 
expression  of  our  appreciation  for  research  by  these  today’s  students  –  tomorrow’s 
colleagues.  
The  Bank  of  Albania  pays  particular  attention  to  the  young  generation,  especially  to  its 
education.  
When I look back and see how we started financial education five years ago, I recall what 
may  be  a  naive  but  a  significant  comparison;  Neil  Armstrong’s  landing  on  the  moon.  In 
addition to his famous quote “...That’s one small step for (a) man, a giant leap for mankind” 
he said “...the surface is fine and powdery. I only go in a fraction of an inch, maybe 1/8 of an 
inch, but I can see the footprints of my foot from the trail”.  
Looking back, we may spot our footprints. The reward of an excellent work in an unknown 
domain  is  the  6900  students  who  have  chosen  to  attend  as  an  elective  subject  “Personal 
finance in your hands” published by the Bank of Albania. In cooperation with the Ministry of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Education  and  Science,  we  are  endeavouring  to  make  this  book  available  in  every  school 
and  to  each  student  with  the  ultimate  goal  for  them  to  be  educated  financially  and 
empowered to manage personal finance. Only in this academic year, high-school students in 
36  districts  of  Albania  chose  this  book  as  an  elective  subject,  making  us  optimistic  and 
forward-looking.  
We strongly believe that the today’s young generation will be the protagonists of tomorrow’s 
economic life. For this purpose, we need to make our utmost investment for their formation, 
in order to ensure not only their future, but also the country’s future.  
The youth are eager and capable to assimilate, process and convey information, habits, or 
new products in any field of life. They are the transmitters of innovation, the most energetic 
and  progressive  segment  of  the  society.  It  is  our  moral,  professional  and  institutional 
responsibility to invest for a qualitative education of the young generation.  
To us, enhancing financial literacy is crucial. A well-educated nation guarantees its country’s 
welfare and progress. Therefore, we have decided to choose the young generation as our 
strategic partner to realize this challenge. We believe in their idealism, positive energy and 
pure spirit.  
I  take  this  opportunity  to  extend  my  special  thanks  to  the  media  and  congratulate  this 
community for its work. The media has transmitted the decision-making and activity of the 
Bank of Albania in a timely and reliable fashion to the public.  
Year 2011 was a complex year for the entire global economy, especially the European one, 
to  which  the  Albanian  economy  is  more  sensitive.  From  this  perspective,  the  role  of  the 
media  takes  special  significance.  I  am  happy  to  affirm  that  in  Albania,  the  media  has 
expanded its broadcast time dedicated to economy and finance-related issues and especially 
to transmission of information from the Bank of Albania, whose decisions were covered 
professionally. The media has been active also in promoting reflection by stakeholders.  
Media has supported Bank of Albania policies, forestalling dissemination of uncertainties 
amongst  the  public.  The  self-adjusting  attitude  has  been  another  important  element  in 
media’s activity. The alarming effect has been cancelled successfully by thorough analysis of 
news items, providing nuances of the truth beyond excesses and speculations.  
A fresh example of this responsible behaviour is the EUR/ALL exchange rate fluctuation at 
the beginning of December this year. Some “panic” was caused amongst the public by earlier 
media  reports  and  analysis,  which  were  later  considered  by  the  media  itself  as  an  unreal 
exchange rate volatility.  
Dear participants,  
At the conclusion of my address today, I would like to draw your attention on a consolidated 
annual  publication  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  –  our  Calendar  2012,  the  jubilee  year  of  the 
100th anniversary of Albania’s Declaration of Independence.  
Calendar  2012  features  a  cycle  of  contemporary  works  of  art,  which  elegantly  combine 
traditional  and  modern  elements.  This  artistic  ingenuity  provides  a  varicoloured  and  loyal 
depiction of the long and toilsome journey of the Bank of Albania and the Lek through good 
and bad days, times of war and peace, subtle and radical changes. These fellow travellers 
have always succeeded in renewing and strengthening their shared foundation, which is your 
trust and confidence. This thread sews together in this calendar, art and the Bank of Albania, 
as two components that create, uphold and promote values.  
The  Calendar  is  an  artful  portraying  of  our  central  banks  traits  such  as  stability, 
independence, confidence, transparency and financial literacy, which nourish our dream of a 
common European future. This future rests in our hands like a golden globe of prosperity and 
happiness.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Thanking  you  for  your  attention,  allow  me  to  announce  the  winners  of  the  Best  Diploma 
awards for 2011:  
 
The third prize is awarded to Ardit Azizaj, an MA student of the New York University 
in Prague, for his dissertation “What Albania’s possibilities are, in future, regarding 
the  world  division  of  labour?”  His  dissertation  focuses  on  the  impossibility  of  a 
country  to  transform  its  economy  successfully  from  a  poor  and  centralised  to  a 
developed economy.  
The  second  prize  is  awarded  to  Ledia  Sulejmani,  a  student  of  the  University  of 
Tirana  for  her  dissertation  “Economic  developments  in  Western  Balkans,  future 
challenges.”  Her  dissertation  describes  distinctions  and  characteristics  of  Western 
Balkan countries as regards economic indicators, in light of a common area and its 
future challenges.  
The  first  prize  is  awarded  to  Borana  Angjeli,  an  MA  student  of  Marin  Barleti 
University in Tirana for her dissertation “Pension systems”. Drawing on results from 
a survey to employees close to their retirement, the thesis points out some of the 
shortcomings  of  the  pension  system  in  Albania  and  makes  recommendations  on 
changes  to  the  actual  pension  scheme,  in  line  with  European  principles,  without 
being a heavy burden for the state budget.  
  Thank You! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
