Mugur Isărescu: Enhancing the role of governance in international 
business 
Address by Mr Mugur Isărescu, Governor of the National Bank of Romania, at the 37th EIBA 
Annual Conference, Palace of Parliament, Bucharest, 8 December 2011. 
 Ladies and gentlemen,  
Distinguished audience, 
It is an honour and, at the same time, a great pleasure to address the 37th edition of the 
Annual Conference of the European Academy of International Business.  Allow  me  to 
join  the  organisers  in  addressing  all  participants  a  warm  welcome.  I  am  delighted  that 
Bucharest  is  hosting  today  such  a  momentous  event  attended  by  so  many  guests  from 
among world-famous professionals. 
I am also glad to welcome you this evening to the reception offered by the National Bank of 
Romania.  Throughout  its  131  years  of  existence,  the  NBR,  established  in  1880  as  the 
16th central bank in the world, has constantly supported and developed strong ties with the 
academic  community,  hosting  numerous  conferences,  encouraging  debates  and  building 
partnerships  aimed  at  enhancing  financial  education.  In  this  context,  we  are  happy  to 
contribute these days to the annual gathering of your organisation.  
Today’s theme – governance – is quite a vast topic, and was clearly brought to the spotlight 
by the recent global economic and financial crisis. 
When  talking  about  governance,  one  cannot  ignore  the  times  we  live  and  the  major 
economic  and  financial  uncertainties  we  all  are  grappling  with.  Therefore,  it  is  essential  to 
look at trends and changes in the governance in the light of the lessons to be learned from 
the global financial crisis. It would be an unpardonable mistake by exiting the crisis without 
learning all its lessons. 
Governance  can  generally  be  seen  as  the  manner  of  exercising  power  in  a  country’s 
economic and social resource management to ensure its development. It should also apply 
to the regional and global context. 
We  all  know  that  good  governance  means  drafting  appropriate  policies,  programmes  and 
regulations that must thereafter be transposed into legislation. The role of the governments, 
that  is  of  politicians,  is  obvious  here,  and  institutions  play  a  major  part  in  a  country’s 
governance,  as  the  American  Nobel  laureate  Douglas  North  noted.  I  cannot  help 
emphasising this, the more so as our host today is a citadel of legislative power.  
There are many aspects one can approach when talking about governance. I would like to 
say a few words about three levels: macrogovernance, corporate governance and also one 
of the key themes of these days – governance in the European Union. 
Let me begin with macroeconomic governance which is closer to my area of concern. 
I do believe that approaching governance in a broader economic context could prove both 
relevant  and  useful.  In  this  context,  I  cannot  stop  short  of  underlying  how  important 
consistent  economic  policies  are  for  ensuring  a  sustainable  development,  and  to 
repeat my belief that there is no substitute for consistent, sound and stability-oriented 
economic policies. 
Therefore, I will share with you some of the lessons from my own experience. 
First, I will refer to the importance of having a good fiscal and monetary policy mix. If fiscal 
policy is relaxing, then the natural reaction is to tighten monetary policy. But one should take 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
the 
recent  crisis,  which 
today  wreaks  havoc  given 
into account that monetary policy cannot always be a substitute to a sound fiscal policy. In 
other words, not always and in any circumstances can monetary policy steps compensate for 
fiscal policy measures. 
Secondly,  I  will  touch  upon  the  risks  related  to  pro-cyclical  fiscal  policies.  We  have 
experimented  this  in  Romania  and  are  fully  aware  on  the  risks  related  to  the  boom-bust 
cycles.  During  booms,  as  budget  revenues  pick  up  there  is  a  strong  temptation  to  spend 
more and no appetite to publicly debate the issue of structural deficits. On the other hand, 
when bust emerges one realize how limited your toolkit is and that all measures to address 
the situation translates in to a prolonged recession and GDP volatility. 
Last but not least, I will refer to the monetary policy by underlining how essential financial 
stability is to help achieve our overriding goal which is price stability. As I said before, it is my 
belief that the two are not conflicting; they may be compatible if your measures are carefully 
implemented. Over the past few years the NBR has used all its available instruments to fulfil 
its tasks in the area of achieving price stability, seeking to ensure a low volatility of the 
exchange rate – an exchange rate which is set by the market. In short, all our steps have 
focused on maintaining stability and rebuilding confidence. 
In  conclusion,  over  the  past  10–15  years  most  economists  have  discovered  good 
governance  –  with  its  four  pillars:  transparency,  accountability,  predictability  and 
participation  –  as  a  major  determinant  of  economic  growth.  Thus,  economic  governance 
implies  the  need  to  ensure  stable,  transparent  and  predictable  rules  that  encourage 
competition and fair access to public services. It is achieved through a country’s public and 
private sector institutions and the civil society. 
Moreover, 
the  structural 
interdependencies  worldwide,  has  underscored  the  need  for  an  in-depth  reform  of 
economic  governance  at  global  levels.  As  Mr.  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  the  former  ECB 
President, said, in light of the global crisis, “International interdependencies are too large for 
purely national or regional rules to be optimal and there is a clear need to strengthen global 
governance, in particular in the financial field.” 
I would also like to share with you a few thoughts about corporate governance. I’m sure the 
debates on this topic will be comprehensive during all these days and you, as specialists, will 
be able to unveil its very generous facets. 
These  principles  on  corporate  governance  are  largely  part  of  those  adopted  in  1999  and 
subsequently  revised  by  the  OECD  in  2004.  They  include  equal  rights  and  a  level-playing 
field  for  shareholders,  the  role  of  stakeholders,  disclosure  and  transparency,  and  board 
accountability.  Corporate  governance  has  direct  implications  on  the  behaviour  of  the 
organisation  towards  its  employees,  shareholders,  customers,  partners,  banks  included. 
Poor governance reduces the potential and, worse though, can lead to financial distress and 
even fraud, while well-governed companies will usually be more competitive than their rivals 
and  will  be  able  to  bring  in  investors  who  will  invest  their  money  in  the  companies’  future 
growth. 
I will also add that no matter how relevant formal rules are to the proper functioning of an 
economy,  it  is  essential  to  trust  in  business  partners’  word  given  and  their  honesty. 
Whenever  this  is  missing,  not  only  dealings  in  goods  and  services,  but  also  financial 
transactions are hit hard. Given that integrity, confidence and reputation weigh heavily on the 
economy, everyone pins his hopes on the business sector. Future wealth depends now more 
than ever on how this issue is dealt with. 
This  is  why  we  can  assert  that,  in  extenso,  good  corporate  governance  underpins  the 
integrity  and  efficiency  of  financial  markets.  Moreover,  for  the  banking  field,  in  light  of 
recent developments, I truly believe that increased ethics is to be welcomed. Thus, good 
practices  in  corporate  governance  are  an  essential  ingredient  of  wealth  and  sustainable 
growth. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
this  context,  the  need  for  principles  of  the  above-mentioned 
international 
In 
organisations  to  be  supported  and  adhered  to  by  both  private  and  public  sectors 
becomes increasingly clear. This should be done by adopting and implementing codes of 
conduct at corporate level and industry-wide, as well as by improving the legal, institutional 
and regulatory framework pertaining to corporate governance. 
Let me now turn to Europe. 
In the case of the European Union, the crisis has exposed fundamental weaknesses of the 
European economy, revealing growing internal imbalances. The functioning of the European 
Monetary  Union  has  been  under  particular  stress  as  the  existing  surveillance  procedures 
proved  to  be  not  comprehensive  enough.  One  point  that  has  been  neglected  was  the 
relevance  of  current  account  deficits.  I  believe  that  within  the  EU,  the  external  deficits  of 
Member  States  are  relevant  as  they  reveal  discrepancies  related  to  competitiveness,  and 
therefore inconsistent and weak coherence of the economic policies. 
The accumulation of imbalances has triggered a slow pace of recovery in Europe. The crisis 
took  its  toll  on  productivity,  and  prices  and  competitiveness  remain  key  issues.  Also,  the 
functioning  of  the  European  Monetary  Union  caused  headaches  because  of  insufficient 
comprehensive preventive and supervisory procedures. 
Moreover, sovereign debt crisis has brought in the limelight not the crisis of the euro per se 
but  of  the  institutions  that  governs  the  eurozone.  In  this  context,  I  will  repeat  what 
Douglas North said: Institutions play a pivotal role in governance. And also recall the 
words of ECB chief economist, Mr Otmar Issing. When he departed the institution, in front 
of  400  strong  audience  Mr.  Issing  reminding  us  that  “Euro  is  an  unfinished  project”, 
stressing that it relied on the monetary pillar, while enhanced fiscal policies and economic 
cooperation were still needed. 
Therefore, as the recent developments also show, a more effective economic governance 
in the EU and the euro area is within reach  through  fiscal  discipline,  broader economic 
oversight,  closer  coordination,  a  more  robust  framework  for  crisis  management,  stronger 
institutions and a decision-making based on clear and strict rules. 
In the particular case of the interdependent economies across the EU, enhanced governance 
will boost economic growth and job creation. At the same time, developing a culture of values 
and professional conduct and ethics can make a very important contribution to the smooth 
functioning of markets and this is a prerogative of the corporate sector, the private sector in 
general. 
I’m  confident  Europe  will  find  the  right  way  to  move  forward,  given  the  common 
cultural  values,  with  measures  and  policies  that  should  avoid  both  asymmetric  and 
side effects. We all know how harmful sudden and large capital swings are. 
Europe’s governance raises also the issue at a more global level. In fact, international 
affairs and corporate governance are an integral part of this picture. 
High-profile international  financial  institutions  such  as  the  IMF  are  concerned  and involved 
particularly  in  economic  governance  issues,  as  they  provide  assistance  in  two  key  areas: 
improving public resource management and supporting the development and maintenance of 
a stable and transparent economic and regulatory environment so as to foster private sector 
activities.  
Other  institutions  such  as  the  OECD  and  the  World  Bank  are  involved  in  corporate 
governance, with the latter formulating a set of principles such as ethics and transparency, 
as well as accountability. 
To sum  up, I should emphasise that corporate  governance at present is a matter of 
greatest concern to the business environment, just the same as we, those involved in 
formulating  macroeconomics,  are  concerned  more  broadly  with  economic 
governance. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
I believe that emphasis now should be placed primarily on discipline, fiscal discipline 
in particular, but also on a shift in culture. I also like to add two words that I see essential 
when  speaking  about  economic  governance:  stability  and  confidence.  In  my  view,  all 
efforts these days should be targeted to maintaining stability and restore confidence.  
Thank you all! 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
