Kiyohiko G Nishimura: Overseas economies under persistent stress, and 
the current situation and challenges for Japan’s economy 
Speech by Mr Kiyohiko G Nishimura, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting 
with business leaders, Kyoto, 30 November 2011. 
 Introduction 
I am privileged to be here today to exchange views with business leaders in Kyoto. Also I 
would  like  to  express  my  sincere  gratitude  for  your  cooperation  in  interviews  and  surveys 
conducted by the Kyoto branch of the Bank of Japan. Information from these interviews and 
surveys  is  invaluable  and  utilized  fully  in  assessing  economic  and  financial  developments 
and conducting monetary policy.  
Before we start to exchange views, let me talk about economic and financial developments 
both in Japan and abroad and about the Bank’s thinking on the conduct of monetary policy. I 
will then speak briefly about financial institutions’ efforts to strengthen the medium- to long-
term growth potential of Japan’s economy. 
Overseas economies under persistent stress 
I. 
Let me start with overseas economic and financial developments that could affect Japan’s 
economy. 
Since this summer, an extremely nervous situation has continued in global financial markets 
due to developments in the sovereign debt problem in Europe – namely, investors have been 
busily  shifting  back  and  forth  between  optimism  (“risk  on”  mode)  and  pessimism  (“risk  off” 
mode)  within  a  short  period  of  time.  In  Europe,  government  bond  yields  have  risen 
considerably  in  countries  experiencing  serious  fiscal  concern,  especially  Greece,  and  this 
development has recently spread to major European countries such as Spain and Italy. As a 
result,  European  banks  with  significant  exposure  to  such  government  bonds  have  faced 
difficulty in liquidity funding in markets due to a rising concern for creditworthiness, and they 
have  been  forced  to  restrain  their  lending  to  ensure  their  on-hand  liquidity.  As  such,  in 
Europe a feedback loop among fiscal balances, the financial system, and the real economy 
is now operating in an undesirable way: that is, a decline in confidence in public finances has 
caused a high degree of concern over stability in the financial system, and this has adversely 
affected economic activity, including sentiment. 
The increasingly critical sovereign debt problem in Europe is basically caused by the fact that 
having already enjoyed most of the benefits arising from European monetary unification, euro 
area  countries  are  now  being  asked  to  pay  the  price.  For  some  peripheral  European 
countries such as Greece, the main benefit of unification was a dramatic decline in funding 
costs such as government bond yields. In exchange for the decline in funding costs, these 
countries were expected to enhance their growth potential and solvency through the conduct 
of reforms in the labor markets, as well as tax and administration systems. In other words, 
the euro area was supposed to become a sustainable system only after going through such a 
process. These peripheral countries, however, expanded government spending excessively 
relying on low funding costs, and as a result public debt increased considerably, going far 
beyond their capacity to repay. On the other hand, Germany has continued to steadily record 
current account surpluses by increasing exports to these peripheral European countries and 
to  increase  credit  to  such  countries.  Thus,  the  essence  of  the  problem  is  imbalances 
between euro area countries that have developed since monetary unification. Therefore, it is 
necessary to fully understand that there is no immediate remedy to solve the sovereign debt 
problem  and  postponing  the  resolution  of  the  problem  will  never  bring  back  the  pre-crisis 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
situation.  In  short,  some  peripheral  European  countries  need  to  seriously  consider  long-
lasting policy responses that would strengthen their medium-to long-term growth potential. 
How will the sovereign debt problem develop for the time being? Given the extremely high 
degree of uncertainty it is difficult to predict future developments. Many market participants 
seemingly hold the view that euro area countries will buy time and contain overreaction of the 
financial  markets,  which  currently  tend  to  be  ruled  by  extreme  pessimism,  by  gradually 
presenting  a  roadmap  for  fiscal  transfer  and  fiscal  integration  and  finding  some  way  to 
compromise  with  one  another  to  deal  with  individual  domestic  political  problems.  If  the 
situation develops in accordance with this view, it is necessary to acknowledge that the high 
stress in global financial markets caused by the sovereign debt problem in Europe will persist 
for a long time. The risk of some kind of shock triggering the spread of credit contraction also 
warrants attention. 
Turning to the United States, an increasing number of recently released economic indicators 
have turned out to be better than market expectations and concern about a possible double 
dip  or  a  negative  spiral  has  receded  compared  with  early  spring  and  summer.  However, 
improvement  in  the  employment  situation  has  remained  slow  and  the  pace  of  economic 
recovery has remained extremely moderate. In such a situation where the average growth 
rate has declined, various economic indicators have shown large fluctuations and differences 
among industries and firm size. Therefore, it has become difficult to capture the underlying 
trend.  This  difficulty  has  heightened  uncertainty  regarding  the  U.S.  economy,  and  is  one 
reason  for  the  increasing  short-term  fluctuations  of  sentiment.  In  any  case,  the  pace  of 
growth in the U.S. economy is likely to remain modest reflecting the limited room for further 
fiscal  and  monetary  stimulus  and  the  lingering  adjustment  pressure  on  households’  and 
financial  institutions’  excessive  debts.  It  is  important  to  bear  in  mind  that,  despite  the 
deteriorating situation in Europe, the market’s view on the outlook for overseas economies 
has  not  yet  become  too  pessimistic,  reflecting  the  improved  outlook  for  the  U.S  economy. 
Therefore, attention should be paid to the possibility that if the outlook for the U.S. economy 
becomes cautious again, disruptions in global financial markets could spread rapidly. 
As for emerging economies, the pace of growth has decelerated somewhat due to the effects 
of  monetary  tightening  and  the  decline  in  exports  reflecting  the  slowdown  in  advanced 
economies.  In  fact,  in  China,  the  driving  force  of  the  global  economy,  tax  revenues,  the 
amount of electric power, and imports – indicators that are considered to be fairly reliable – 
have continued to be weak from around the middle of this year compared with the previous 
trend  of  high  growth.  If  European  financial  institutions  reduce  their  assets  more  as  the 
sovereign  debt  problem  deteriorates  further,  lending  to  emerging  countries  could  be 
restrained and trade financing affected. On the other hand, it is encouraging that the room 
left for monetary easing in emerging countries including China has increased, reflecting the 
recent pause in the rise in consumer prices, particularly food prices. As I have stated, there 
are both positive and negative factors for emerging economies. Attention should continue to 
be  paid  to  whether  the  economies  can  make  a  soft-landing  by  realizing  price  stability  and 
growth at the same time. 
Before  I  turn  to  the  next  topic,  let  me  point  out  that  recently  two  significant  changes  are 
proceeding, albeit gradually, in the global economy. 
The  first  change  includes  the  aging  of  the  population  profile  and  a  decrease  in  working 
population in advanced countries, and an increasing mismatch between job seekers and job 
offers. This increasing mismatch reflects not only the change in the skills required of workers 
due to the rising importance of information technology in economic activity. It also reflects the 
fact  that  inter-regional  labor  mobility  has  become  less  smooth  than  before  as  workers 
experience increasing difficulty in buying and selling their homes due to the sharp decline in 
housing prices after the collapse of the housing bubble. These changes in the labor markets 
could exert downward pressure on the growth potential of advanced countries, and therefore 
delay adjustments in the excessive debts of U.S. households and European governments. If 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the  structural  unemployment  rate  rises  due  to  the  increase  in  this  mismatch,  wages  and 
prices become less likely to decline even if a high unemployment rate continues. In fact, I 
think that such trend has recently appeared in the United States and Europe. 
The second change is that emerging economies with currencies that are de facto pegged to 
the U.S. dollar have an increasing presence in the global economy, and such countries, the 
so-called “U.S. dollar-pegged bloc”, play a major role in the dynamics of the global economy. 
In such a situation, the effects of monetary easing in the United States have spread to the 
U.S. dollar-pegged bloc as a whole through fixed foreign exchange rates. As a result, prices 
of commodities such as crude oil tend to trend upward since commodities are traded in U.S. 
dollars and underlying demand from emerging economies tends to be strong.  
It is uncertain how long these two changes will persist. The mismatch in the labor markets is 
expected to ease as proper employment policy measures are implemented and post-bubble 
adjustments  in  excessive  debts  proceed.  Some  emerging  countries  are  apparently  making 
adjustments  to  their  exchange  rates,  albeit  slowly,  in  the  awareness  that  importing  easy 
monetary  conditions  from  the  United  Sates  by  pegging  to  the  U.S.  dollar  will  further 
exacerbate inflationary pressure. If the situation does not change dramatically and promptly, 
however, it is highly likely that in advanced economies, where growth potential is declining 
and  inflationary  pressures  are  tending  to  rise,  the  pace  of  recovery  will  continue  to  be 
restrained even under expansionary policies to stimulate aggregate demand. 
II. 
Moderate pace of recovery in Japan’s economic activity and price 
developments 
In 
important 
increasingly 
for  Japan’s  economic  prospects. 
Now I will talk about recent developments in Japan’s economic activity and prices.  
Japan’s economic activity plunged after the Great East Japan Earthquake in March, mainly 
on  the  production  and  export  sides.  As  constraints  on  the  supply  side  were  resolved, 
economic activity recovered in the summer at a faster pace than originally anticipated. As the 
supply-side constraints are now almost fully resolved, demand-side developments are once 
more  becoming 
these 
circumstances, Japan’s economic activity has continued picking up but at a more moderate 
pace, mainly due to the effects of a slowdown in overseas economies. 
As  for  domestic  demand,  business  fixed  investment  has  been  increasing  moderately  as 
demand  related  to  reconstruction  after  the  earthquake  disaster  has  been  gradually 
materializing. In particular, orders for construction machinery have recently marked a large 
increase  due  to  demand  for  restoration  of  disaster-stricken  buildings.  Private  consumption 
has  been  firm.  Although  services  consumption  took  somewhat  longer  to  recover  from  the 
earthquake  disaster,  it  is  now  picking  up  as  evidenced  by  the  fact  that  sales  in  the  food 
service industry and outlays for travel have more or less returned to their pre-quake levels. 
Exports  and  production  continue  to  increase  partly  due  to  the  restoration  of  the  level  of 
overseas  inventories,  which  declined  after  the  earthquake.  However,  the  pace  of  their 
increase has become moderate due to effects of the slowdown in overseas economies. The 
effects  of  the  slowdown  in  overseas  economies  are  particularly  apparent  in  exports  of  IT-
related goods such as semiconductor manufacturing equipment. 
As for the outlook, for the time being, Japan’s economy will face an adverse effect from the 
slowdown  in  overseas  economies  and  the  appreciation  of  the  yen,  as  well  as  from  the 
flooding in Thailand. After that, the economy is expected to return to a moderate recovery 
path  as  the  pace  of  recovery  in  overseas  economies  picks  up,  led  by  emerging  and 
commodity-exporting economies that basically maintain their growth mechanism of domestic 
demand,  and  as  reconstruction-related  demand  after  the  earthquake  disaster  gradually 
materializes. 
The year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items less fresh food) has recently been at 
around 0 percent. It will remain at around 0 percent for the time being but will gradually rise 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
to around 0.5 percent toward fiscal 2013, along with an improvement in the aggregate supply 
and demand balance. 
The baseline scenario for Japan’s economy is that it will eventually return to a sustainable 
growth path with price stability in the longer run. There are, however, various risk factors to 
such a baseline scenario. Needless to say, the risk factor that should cause most concern is 
future  developments  in  the  sovereign  debt  problem  in  Europe  and  their  effects  on  global 
financial  markets  and  the  global  economy.  As  I  have  stated  earlier,  the  debt  problem  has 
largely affected the global economy already, but it could result in weaker growth, not only in 
the  European  economy  but  also  in  the  global  economy,  particularly  through  its  effects  on 
global financial markets. 
As global financial markets continue to be under stress, global investors have tended to be 
increasingly  risk  averse,  and  to  purchase  the  yen,  which  is  considered  a  relatively  safe 
currency.  While  the  U.S.  dollar-pegged  bloc  expands,  the  yen  is  one  of  the  major  free-
floating currencies with high liquidity. There is a risk that if investors are attracted by such 
characteristics  of  the  yen  this  will  lead  to  a  sharp  appreciation  of  the  yen  that  diverges 
considerably from economic fundamentals. This may cause a sharp increase in the shift of 
production overseas by Japanese firms beyond a critical level. If not just a shift of a factory to 
abroad, but a shift of the entire manufacturing, or monozukuri, system – including suppliers – 
occurs, Japan’s manufacturing would find it hard to recover even if the yen depreciated in the 
future.  The  essence  of  monozukuri  is  not  efficiently  producing  goods  at  the  lowest  cost. 
Rather, it is the repeatedly occurring innovation that generates value-added in various ways, 
in which all the parties concerned cooperate but compete with one another at the same time. 
Innovation can sometimes be the identification and avoidance of unnecessary procedures in 
production, or it can be an effort to adapt goods to customers’ changing needs. In order to 
continue  to  innovate  in  the  monozukuri  system,  it  is  vital  to  maintain  a  system  that  can 
respond immediately and flexibly to changes in the situation. That said, we should continue 
to carefully monitor developments in foreign exchange and global financial markets from the 
standpoint  of  whether  they  will  cause  irreversible  shifting  of  the  monozukuri  system  to 
overseas locations. 
Bank’s conduct of monetary policy 
III. 
I would now like to talk about the Bank’s conduct of monetary policy, taking into account the 
financial and economic situation in Japan and abroad.  
The  Bank  has  been  pursuing  powerful  monetary  easing  under  the  new  monetary  policy 
framework introduced in October 2010 – “Comprehensive Monetary Easing”. This framework 
is composed of three measures. 
First, the Bank sets the policy rate at 0 to 0.1 percent, which can be deemed a virtually zero 
interest rate. Second, the Bank is publicly committed to continuing this virtually zero interest 
rate policy until it judges that price stability is in sight. And third, as an exceptional measure 
for a central bank, it purchases from the markets not only long- and short-term government 
bonds but also risk assets such as CP, corporate bonds, exchange-traded funds (ETFs), and 
Japan  real  estate  investment  trusts  (J-REITs).  The  aim  of  the  Bank’s  purchases  is  to 
encourage a decline in longer-term interest rates and risk premiums. 
A  program  for  purchasing  financial  assets,  called  the  Asset  Purchase  Program  started  at 
35 trillion yen, but has been repeatedly expanded in size on a significant scale. Recently, on 
October  27,  the  Bank  decided  to  increase  the  size  by  a  further  5  trillion  yen,  to  about 
55 trillion  yen,  and  to  designate  this  increase  for  the  purchase  of  Japanese  government 
bonds (JGBs). This decision was based on the recognition that considering the slowdown in 
overseas  economies  and  the  appreciation  of  the  yen,  some  more  time  will  be  needed  to 
confirm  that  price  stability  is  in  sight  and  due  attention  should  be  paid  to  the  risk  that  the 
economic  and  price  outlook  will  further  deteriorate  depending  on  developments  in  global 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
financial markets and overseas economies. The outstanding amount of the Asset Purchase 
Program is slightly over 40 trillion yen, and the Bank will further accumulate another 15 trillion 
yen to reach the targeted amount of 55 trillion yen. 
Over a year has passed since the Bank started to conduct comprehensive monetary easing 
in  October  2010.  Meanwhile,  Japan’s  economy  and  financial  conditions  have  continued  to 
face  strong  headwinds,  including  the  earthquake  disaster  and  heightening  uncertainty 
regarding the global economy triggered by the sovereign debt problem in Europe. In such a 
severe  situation,  the  comprehensive  monetary  easing  has  encouraged  a  decline  in  firms’ 
funding costs and eased investors’ risk aversion. And therefore, I believe that the easing has 
been effective in realizing an accommodative financial environment. Now I will explain about 
the positive effects by referring to some indicators. 
First,  interbank  rates  have  been  declining  moderately  in  Japan,  although  they  have  been 
rising considerably in the United States and the euro area since this summer when tension 
regarding  the  sovereign  debt  problem  in  Europe  heightened.  Yields  on  treasury  discount 
bills, including those with a one-year maturity, have remained at 0.1 percent, and those on 
longer-term  government  bonds,  up  to  those  with  a  two-year  maturity,  have  been  at  an 
extremely low level of around 0.1 percent. Against the background of such developments in 
market  rates,  firms’  funding  costs  have  shown  a  steady,  though  moderate,  decline.  The 
average  contracted  interest  rates  on  new  loans  and  discounts  are  on  a  declining  trend. 
Various surveys show that firms consider financial institutions’ lending attitudes as being on 
an improving trend and that the financial positions of firms are on an improving trend. 
As for risk assets, credit spreads on CP and corporate bonds widened somewhat soon after 
the  earthquake.  However,  they  declined  rather  quickly  encouraged  by  the  Bank’s  outright 
purchases. Issuing conditions for corporate bonds have remained favorable: credit spreads 
on  corporate  bonds  have  remained  stable  at  low  levels  and  the  variety  of  corporate  bond 
issuers has increased. New issuance of corporate bonds has recently been steady except for 
industries related to electric power, which have faced difficulties with new issuance due to 
uncertainty concerning their business environment. Japan’s situation is quite different from 
that  in  the  United  States  and  Europe  where  credit  spreads  have  widened  remarkably  and 
new issuance has decreased sharply since summer. 
Although comprehensive monetary easing was introduced last fall, stock prices and J-REITs 
have  not  risen,  partly  due  to  a  deterioration  in  the  external  environment.  However,  some 
market participants have observed that the Bank’s purchases of ETFs and J-REITs helped 
markets to support some confidence right after the earthquake and also during the period of 
high uncertainty since this summer. As I have stated, comprehensive monetary easing has 
been effective in that it has encouraged a decline in longer-term interest rates and helped 
market  participants  from  becoming  too  pessimistic.  I  believe  that  this  is  one  reason  why 
Japan’s financial conditions have been stable compared to those in the United States and 
Europe. 
IV. 
Financial institutions’ efforts to strengthen the medium- to long-term growth 
potential of Japan’s economy 
Let  me  use  the  remaining  time  to  talk  about  efforts  made  by  financial  institutions  to 
strengthen the medium- to long-term growth potential of Japan’s economy. I will share with 
you  some  examples  of  regional  financial  institutions  supporting  firms’  movement  toward 
renewed growth with the cooperation of research institutions. 
I  brought  up  this  topic  because  I  think  that  firms’  positive  efforts  in  high-growth  business 
areas  are  necessary  in  order  to  strengthen  the  medium-  to  long-term  growth  potential  of 
Japan’s  economy.  The  decline  in  the  medium-  to  long-term  growth  potential  of  Japan’s 
economy  is  also  part  of  the  background  to  a  protracted  period  of  stagnant  demand  and 
ensuing  prolonged  deflation,  notwithstanding  an  extremely  accommodative 
financial 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
environment. Based on this recognition, since last summer, the Bank has been supporting 
the private sector’s efforts to strengthen the medium- to long-term growth potential of Japan’s 
economy  through  the  provision  of  long-term  funds  at  a  low  interest  rate  to  financial 
institutions under the new framework of the Growth Foundation Strengthening Facility (Fund-
Provisioning  Measure  to  Support  Strengthening  the  Foundations  for  Economic  Growth). 
Financial  institutions  are  now  requested  not  only  to  meet  demand  for  funds  from  existing 
mature  firms,  but  also  to  actively  identify  efforts  made  by  newer,  growth-oriented  firms, 
making use of the Bank’s framework. 
Let  me  share  with  you  one  example  in  which  a  new  business  in  the  lumber  industry  was 
established using a lending method called asset-based lending (ABL). It has been pointed 
out for a long time that one of the structural problems of the lumber industry was a shortage 
of funds. There seem to be many firms that have abundant inventories of lumber but have a 
limitation in the amount of lumber that they can process and the amount that they can ship 
due  to  cash  flow  constraints.  To  deal  with  this  problem,  a  project  team,  consisting  of  a 
regional  financial  institution,  a  furniture  manufacturing  firm,  and  a  university’s  laboratory, 
came up with an idea to use ABL for establishing a new business. Under ABL, a financial 
institution  will  take  receivables  and  movable  properties  that  are  closely  tied  to  the  firm’s 
business cash flow, such as accounts receivable and goods in stock, as collateral for a loan. 
This  lending  method,  which  finds  value  in  corporate  activities  on  their  own  terms,  enables 
firms  that  do  not  own  enough  real  or  personal  assets  to  raise  the  financial  resources 
necessary to run their business.  
In  order  to  raise  funds  through  ABL,  there  is  a  hurdle  to  clear.  Specifically,  the  financial 
institution  that  adopts  this  measure,  in  addition  to  making  collateral  assessment  of  say, 
accounts  receivable  and  goods  in  stock  upon  extension  of  credit,  needs  to  keep  track  of 
subsequent  changes  in  their  value  in  order  to  manage  credit  risk.  The  firm  is  required  to 
provide  this  information  regularly  to  the  financial  institution.  In  this  way,  both  the  financial 
institution  and  the  firm  incur  costs  in  monitoring  and  providing  information,  and  this  is 
considered to be the crux of ABL. But in this example, the project team treated the cherry 
wood  used  for  furniture  manufacturing  as  movable  property  and  reduced  such  costs  by 
attaching an IC tag to the wood to ensure traceability. 
This  attempt  has  just  started  but  it  deserves  attention  in  that  a  structural  problem  of  an 
industry  was  solved  by  financial  efforts.  So  far  ABL  has  tended  to  be  perceived  with  a 
negative  image  as  a  lending  facility  for  small  firms  with  little  real  estate  collateral  and 
insufficient financial resources. As I have stated, however, ABL is a lending facility that can 
be used for starting up a new business and project financing. If such understanding is more 
widely  shared,  ABL  has  large  potential  to  become  a  more  popular  facility  without  any 
negative  image.  The  outstanding  balance  in  the  Japanese  ABL  market  is  still  very  limited 
compared to the total size of accounts receivable and goods in stocks of small firms in Japan 
and also small relative to the outstanding balance in other advanced countries such as the 
United  States.  Going  forward,  I  expect  this  method  to  be  utilized  widely  through  active 
cooperation between financial institutions and firms. 
Next  I  would  like  to  introduce  an  attempt  made  mainly  by  regional  financial  institutions  to 
send monozukuri or manufacturing instructors to small firms. “Competitiveness at worksites”, 
or  genbaryoku,  of  monozukuri  proved  effective  in  the  process  of  rebuilding  from  the 
earthquake disaster. In order to boost the growth potential of Japan’s economy by utilizing 
this  strength,  it  is  necessary  to  spread  to  other  worksites  the  know-how  of  people  who 
worked  in  the  front-runner  firms  that  lead  the  industry.  Also,  it  is  important  to  pass  on  the 
advantages of genbaryoku to the next generation. With that in mind, some local governments 
and universities have been training as monozukuri instructors people in their 50’s and 60’s 
who  have  retired  from  manufacturing  firms  and  sending  those  instructors  to  small  firms  to 
spread  and  pass  on  special  techniques  to  others.  In  such  a  process,  regional  financial 
institutions play a major role. From the standpoint of small firms, some of them feel reluctant 
to accept instructors who have built up a long-term career in another firm. However, in cases 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
where regional financial institutions match the right instructor and the right workplace using 
the trust between institutions and firms that they have been fostering every day, small firms 
tend to accept instructors much more easily. An example such as this has also been seen in 
Shiga, Kyoto’s neighboring prefecture. 
Due to limited time, I have only touched upon two examples today. But I want to emphasize 
that,  in  either  of  the  examples,  not  only  industry,  government,  and  academia  but  also 
financial institutions are collaborating and making efforts in their respective roles to boost the 
productivity and competitiveness of the region. I hope that such steady efforts, together with 
the  accommodative  financial  environment,  will  support  the  enhancement  of  regions  and 
industries, and consequently spread to Japan’s economy as a whole. 
Concluding remarks 
Kyoto is a special place for me. I was born in Tokyo, but during my childhood I often visited 
my uncle’s house in Kamigamo, Kyoto. He was chief librarian of the Kyoto Prefectural Library 
at that time. The history and the culture that I saw and experienced at my visits have formed 
the basis of the way I look at things. Also, when I was in graduate school, I was able to study 
on  the  east  coast  of  the  United  States  thanks  to  a  scholarship  that  had  been  newly 
established by a benevolent entrepreneur in Kyoto. It is not too much to say that I am now 
here today because I have been supported by the culture in Kyoto and the industries that 
developed in Kyoto. 
Culture,  or  the  vernacular  wisdom,  and  industry,  or  making  one’s  living  assiduously,  are 
actually the two most important factors in solving the problems Japan’s economy faces. To 
solve the pressing problem of enhancing Japan’s growth potential, which I have been talking 
about in this speech, it is important that research institutions, private firms, and governments, 
together with financial institutions, use the wisdom that they have developed from their daily 
work and make steady progress. In Kyoto, active collaboration between industry, academia, 
and  government  is  fostered  and  firms,  universities,  and  the  government  are  closely  tied 
together since firms with advanced techniques and leading universities are based in Kyoto. 
Financial institutions have also made various efforts to support firms’ activities. 
Kyoto Chamber of Commerce and Industry is proposing to create a “Wisdom Industry” so as 
to  expand  domestic  demand  by  using  Kyoto’s  unique  characteristics  and  strength.  Kyoto 
Prefecture has been promoting the plan to make Kyoto a capital of the Wisdom Industry. The 
City of Kyoto has established the Center for Integrated Sensible Industry. Kyoto as a whole is 
promoting “City of Wisdom Industry – Kyoto”. 
Kyoto’s economic environment is not particularly favorable due to the appreciating yen and 
aging population profile. However, Kyoto is an attractive city with one of the highest potential 
abilities  in  the  world  as  shown  by  the  cutting-edge  mentality  that  produced  many  venture 
firms  in  Kyoto,  fine  traditions  and  tourism  resources,  as  well  as  advanced  research 
institutions.  I  hope  that  the  latent  strengths  of  the  Kyoto  economy  will  become  further 
activated as a center of the Wisdom Industry through the efforts of the people of Kyoto. 
Thank you for your kind attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
