Klaas Knot: Monetary policy and the Great Financial Crisis 
Speech by Mr Klaas Knot, President of the Netherlands Bank, at the Third Annual Nyenrode 
Finance Day, Breukelen, 28 October 2011. 
 The  past  four  years  have  been  tumultuous  for  the  global  financial  system  and  the  global 
economy in an unprecedented way for all of us. The eruption of a systemic financial crisis of 
quite unusual intensity and international reach has been compared to the widespread shut-
down  of  international  capital  markets  on  the  eve  of  the  First  World  War.  The  violent 
unraveling of events has shaken many beliefs in the economics profession. And the threat of 
a  collapse  of  the  world  economy  similar  to  the  Great  Depression  has  prompted 
unprecedented policy responses. Monetary policy makers reacted to the crisis by deploying 
both conventional and unconventional tools.  
In this speech, I want to discuss how the conduct of monetary policy in the euro area has 
evolved during the different stages of the crisis and the challenges it is currently facing.  
To put this discussion in perspective, let me start by recalling the ECB’s mandate to deliver 
price stability, as is anchored in the Maastricht Treaty. Pursuing this mandate requires that a 
number of elements are in place. 
First, there has to be a credible commitment to price stability as a primary goal of monetary 
policy. A credible commitment implies that the public’s long-run expectations about inflation 
are anchored by the ECB’s definition of price stability – HICP inflation below but close to 2%.  
Second,  monetary  policy  has  to  be  transparent  and  monetary  authorities  must  be 
accountable for their decisions. This implies a need for clear and effective communication. 
Third,  monetary  policy  decisions  have  to  be  taken  in  full  independence  from  political 
influence. This principle is laid down in the Maastricht Treaty. It implies the strict prohibition 
of monetary financing. 
Fourth, monetary policy has a medium-term orientation, given the long and variable lags of 
the monetary transmission mechanism.  
Fifth, monetary policy is underpinned by a comprehensive analytical framework, which rests 
on two pillars: the economic analysis and the monetary analysis. I should note that the crisis 
has  shown  how  the  monetary  analysis  can  play  an  important  role  in  signalling  financial 
imbalances and vulnerabilities. It is an important input in a strategy of “leaning against the 
wind”. 
Finally,  monetary  policy  follows  a  so-called  “Separation  principle”,  which  distinguishes 
decisions about the monetary stance aimed at achieving price stability from tools directed at 
implementing monetary policy decisions through liquidity management. 
With these principles in mind, let me turn to the monetary policy responses to the crisis. At a 
very  general  level,  the  ECB  used  conventional  tools  –  an  aggressive  easing  of  the  policy  
rate – to counter deflationary pressures and unconventional tools, which aimed at restoring a 
well-functioning transmission mechanism. These policies were pursued in four phases.  
1. 
Between  July  2007  and  the  fall  of  2008,  the  ECB  responded  to  disruption  in 
interbank markets by expanding its liquidity provision to commercial banks.  
Between the fall of 2008 and end-2009, as the financial crisis escalated and turned 
from a liquidity crisis into a solvency crisis, the ECB lowered its policy rate in quick 
steps  to  an  unprecedentedly  low  level.  In  addition,  it  also  employed  a  range  of 
unconventional  tools  –  such  as  fixed-rate  full-allotment  at  the  weekly  tenders, 
longer-term refinancing operations. 
2. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
3. 
4. 
The  third  phase  extends  from  end-2009  to  mid-2011.  As  the  macroeconomy 
rebounded and financial market conditions improved in late 2009, the ECB started a 
gradual exit from its unconventional measures. When the sovereign crisis hit euro 
area bond markets in the early months of 2010, the Eurosystem responded to an 
increasingly  dysfunctional  monetary  transmission  mechanism,  by  activating  a 
Special Markets Program (SMP). 
When  the  sovereign  crisis  intensified  in  August  2011,  the  gradual  exit  from 
unconventional was stalled. Also, additional unconventional measures were taken to 
support the monetary transmission mechanism. 
These policy responses went a long way in supporting the ECB’s goal of price stability, and 
to address problems in the monetary transmission mechanism.  
At the same time, these measures – and the SMP in particular – entailed a number of risks. 
As I mentioned in earlier speeches and interviews, I see four main risks.  
First,  these  measures  tended  to  reduce  pressure  that  markets  exerted  on  governments  to 
pursue fiscal discipline.  
Second, treading further along the path of interventions in government bond markets implies 
increasing risks of monetary financing of fiscal debt.  
Third,  purchases  of  assets  in  markets  under  stress  implies  a  financial  risk  for  the 
Eurosystem’s balance sheet, which may eventually lead to fiscal transfers.  
Fourth,  there  is  a  risk  that  the  Eurosystem  will  enter  political  waters,  which  will  make  the 
conduct of monetary policy more difficult. 
With our experience during the crisis and the connected risks in mind, we need to rethink the 
role and set-up of monetary policy after the crisis. Where are we headed? And how do we 
get there? 
I  see  three  main  elements  of  monetary  policy  after  the  crisis.  For  the  monetary  policy 
framework,  the  crisis  has  shown  that  the  monetary  analysis  can  play  an  important  role  in 
signaling  financial  imbalances  and  vulnerabilities.  It  is  an  important  input  in  a  strategy  of 
“leaning against the wind”. 
For  the  operational  framework  for  monetary  policy,  it  is  crucial  that  after  the  crisis  we  will 
return to the principles that guided the framework before the crisis. In particular, we need to 
return to a clear and transparent separation principle between monetary policy stance, on the 
one hand, and liquidity management, on the other hand.  
Finally, there is a clear need for a sustainable institutional framework for the euro area. This 
framework will need to center on budgetary discipline and sound economic governance. In 
the  long-run,  as  a  closing  piece,  I  see  joint  financing  through  euro  bonds  as  the  only 
sustainable  solution  to  self-fulfilling  liquidity/solvency  problems  in  individual  member  states 
and domino-effects/contagion between euro area member states. 
How do we get there? In a transition to a post-crisis monetary policy, it is important to exit 
gradually from unconventional and conventional instruments that are being used during the 
crisis. In this phase, communication will play a very important role. And fiscal and prudential 
policies need to play a primary role in addressing problems that originate in the fiscal and 
financial spheres. 
Let  me  conclude.  As  Stan  Fischer  said  in  a  recent  Tinbergen  Lecture  in  Utrecht,  the  big 
question monetary authorities face in these times is – what do you do if policymakers that 
should  tackle  problems  do  not  act  sufficiently?  My  answer  is  that  monetary  policy  cannot 
solve the crisis, since it is rooted in fiscal policy and the vulnerability of the banking system. 
All monetary policy can do is to buy time, at the cost of stretching its mandate to the limit, if 
not beyond. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
