Masaaki Shirakawa: Globalization and population aging – challenges 
facing Japan  
Speech  by  Mr  Masaaki  Shirakawa,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  to  the  Board  of 
Councillors of Nippon Keidanren (Japan Business Federation), Tokyo, 22 December 2011. 
 Introduction 
I  am  honored  to  have  this  opportunity  to  address  the  representatives  of  Japan’s  economy 
gathered here today. 
We have just over a week left in a year in which the most notable event for our nation was 
definitely the Great East Japan Earthquake of March 11. Speaking only about the economic 
impact  of  this  terrible  event,  Japan’s  economy  suddenly  faced  enormous  downward 
pressures  arising  from  damage  to  production  facilities,  disruptions  in  supply  chains,  and 
shortages in electricity supply. Thanks to tremendous efforts by company managers and by 
employees in the field, these supply-side problems were resolved by the summer, which was 
faster  than  expected.  However,  just  as  the  prospects  gradually  began  to  look  good  for 
Japan’s  economy  to  overcome  the  problems  caused  by  the  disaster,  the  sovereign  debt 
crisis  in  Europe  triggered  new  problems  –  a  slowdown  in  overseas  economies  and  the 
appreciation of the yen. As a result, after a sharp rebound, the pick-up in Japan’s economic 
activity has gradually slowed and is currently at a pause. 
According  to  the  Tankan  (Short-Term  Economic  Survey  of  Enterprises  in  Japan)  released 
last week, business conditions deteriorated for large manufacturing enterprises, as has been 
extensively reported in the newspapers, but improved for large nonmanufacturing enterprises 
(Chart  1).  As  for  SMEs,  business  conditions  improved  both  for  manufacturing  and 
nonmanufacturing enterprises. As such, although overall business conditions have improved, 
the pace of improvement has slowed. As can be seen from the results of the Tankan, there 
are currently two opposing forces in operation: on one hand, exports and production remain 
more or less flat due to a slowdown in overseas economies and the appreciation of the yen; 
on  the  other,  in  terms  of  domestic  demand,  private  consumption  remains  firm  and  post-
earthquake  rebuilding  and  reconstruction  demand  is  expected  to  materialize.  The  Bank  of 
Japan judges that Japan’s economy will be more or less flat for the time being as the former 
force prevails. Beyond that phase, it is our judgment that the economy will gradually return to 
a moderate recovery path, reflecting a pick-up in growth of overseas economies, especially 
emerging economies. Having said that, we are fully aware that this outlook is attended by 
various  uncertainties.  The  most  significant  risk  is,  of  course,  the  impact  of  the  European 
sovereign debt crisis on our economy through  its effects on international financial markets 
and the global economy. 
Although  the  economic  outlook  is  important,  I  have  already  discussed  it  on  various 
occasions. Today, instead, I would like to give my thoughts on the challenges facing Japan’s 
economy and its central bank from a medium- to long-term perspective, as I believe the end 
of the year is good timing for doing so.  
I. 
Japan’s economy during the past 15 years 
Progress in globalization 
In  order  to  understand  the  medium-  to  long-term  challenges  that  lie  ahead  for  Japan’s 
economy, I will first compare how it is today to how it was back in 1995. I have chosen that 
particular  year  as  a  comparison  point  because  of  its  similarities  with  this  year,  as  in  1995 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Japan experienced the Great Hanshin-Awaji Earthquake (or Kobe Earthquake as it is also 
known) and an appreciation of the yen, which peaked that year at under 80 yen against the 
U.S. dollar.  
There have been many changes over the past 15 years. First, we saw further globalization of 
goods,  capital,  and  people  (Chart  2).  For  goods,  global  trade  volume  in  real  terms  after 
excluding the effects of price fluctuations is expected to rise from an index level  of 100 in 
1995  to  253  by  2011.  This  implies  that  global  trade  volume  continued  to  expand  at  an 
annualized  rate  of  6.0  percent,  a  pace  much  faster  than  the  real  GDP  growth  rate  of 
3.7 percent during the period. This increase was essentially caused by the end of the Cold 
War  and  subsequent  transition  of  regions  worldwide  to  market  economies.  This  increased 
opportunities for an international division of labor, which led to more optimal production by 
combining the technology and capital of advanced economies with the ample labor forces of 
emerging economies. Emerging economies, particularly China, India, and Brazil, grew rapidly 
in this process (Chart 3). 
For capital, the average amount of daily transactions in foreign exchange markets worldwide 
was  1.5  trillion  dollars  as  of  1998  –  which  is  as  far  back  as  we  can  go  in  making  such  a 
comparison – and grew to 4 trillion dollars, corresponding to almost 20 times world GDP per 
day, in 2010 (Chart 2). 
For people, tourists traveling abroad have increased substantially from 530 million in 1995 to 
940  million  in  2011.  The  number  of  first-generation  immigrants  has  also  increased  from 
170 million in 1995 to 210 million in 2010 (Chart 2). 
Rapid population aging 
Second,  Japan’s  population  has  continued  to  age  rapidly  (Chart  4).  The  working-age 
population,  or  in  other  words  the  population  aged  from  15  to  64,  has  been  declining  after 
peaking  in  1995.  The  working-age  population  in  2010  declined  by  7  percent  compared  to 
15 years previously in 1995, or by 0.5 percent on a yearly basis. Meanwhile, the percentage 
of people 65 or older accounted for about 15 percent of the total population in 1995, but rose 
to about 25 percent in 2010. 
This globally unprecedented rapid population aging has had far-reaching and various effects 
on Japan’s economy. The first of these effects is on the economy’s potential growth rate. The 
working-age  population  plays  a  central  role  in  economic  activity.  Its  decline  has  reduced 
labor supply and thus has pushed down economic growth. The second effect is on the fiscal 
balance.  At  a  time  when  it  has  become  difficult  to  increase  tax  revenues  through  labor 
income, pressure has been increasing to expand the fiscal deficit, given that social security 
expenses – including pension costs and medical and nursing care expenses – increase as 
the population ages as long as the current level of benefits are maintained. The third effect is 
the diversification of consumer needs and services. Given the diverse lives and lifestyles of 
the elderly population, individuals have a wide range of unique needs, not only in terms of 
medical  and  nursing  care  but  also  in  wider  contexts  such  as  living  fulfilling  lives  after 
retirement, which encompasses hobbies and continued learning. To put it another way, the 
continued population aging is, in a sense, a market expansion that cannot be considered in 
mass terms. 
Japan’s delayed response to change 
We  can  see  that  the  environment  has  changed  significantly  over  the  past  15  years,  with 
globalization  and  rapid  population  aging.  Change  at  any  point  in  time  always  provides  a 
country with both difficulties and opportunities, and the capability of a society as a whole to 
adapt to this change largely affects its economic performance. On this point, both Japan’s 
government  and  its  firms  have  responded  in  various  ways.  Unfortunately,  however,  the 
economic growth rate has continued to decline and prices have continued to fall moderately 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
as  a  result.  Furthermore,  government  debt  has  increased  substantially  during  this  period. 
Faced with these facts, we cannot deny that Japan’s economic system has not managed to 
respond swiftly and sufficiently to the big changes in the environment. 
One  reason  for  the  decline  in  the  growth  rate  is  the  aftereffects  of  the  unprecedented 
economic bubble in the late 1980s. The effects of that bubble were considerable. Prior to the 
Lehman shock, an optimistic view prevailed among economists and policy authorities in the 
United  States  –  that  a  significant  economic  downturn  following  a  bubble  period  could  be 
avoided  through  implementation  of  powerful  monetary  and  fiscal  policies  once  the  bubble 
burst. That optimistic view is no longer prevalent today. Economic activity remains stagnant 
until excesses in production capacity and debt that have been built up during a bubble period 
are  resolved  (Chart  5).  Such  balance-sheet  adjustments,  however,  no  longer  acted  as 
constraints on Japan’s economy at least by sometime between 2003 and 2004. The more 
essential  reason  for  the  subsequent  downturn  in  Japan’s  economy  was  Japan’s  delayed 
response to the significant changes in the environment, namely, globalization and population 
aging. Going back to my earlier reference to 1995, Japan around that time was desperately 
looking for ways to recover from the collapse of the bubble economy. At that stage, I recall 
that  not  many  of  us  understood  the  significance  of  globalization  and  population  aging  for 
Japan’s economy as well as we later came to realize. In other words, it is better to attribute 
the delay in responding to an inability to fully recognize the seriousness of the problem itself 
than  to  difficulties  implementing  solutions  despite  knowing  what  they  were.  I  believe  the 
same  could  happen  in  the  next  15  years  (Chart  6).  For  instance,  how  will  Japan’s  rapid 
population aging alter the course of Japan’s future economic growth and fiscal conditions? 
Will Japan’s economy be able to maintain its longstanding current account surplus? 
II. 
Setting the agenda for Japan’s economy 
Serious consequences of leaving situation unchanged 
Regarding the first question, even if we focus on demographics, which are relatively easy to 
predict going forward, we can confirm that the conditions that the underlying factors affecting 
Japan’s growth are going to change dramatically. The average growth rate has declined from 
4.3 percent in the 1980s to 1.5 percent in the 1990s and further to less than 1 percent in the 
2000s (Chart 7). 
The economic growth rate consists of two components: the rate of growth in the number of 
workers  and  the  rate  of  growth  in  labor  productivity,  which  represents  an  increase  in  the 
value added by each worker. We can project future growth rates by forecasting these two 
components. Of the two, the rate of growth in the number of workers started to decline in the 
2000s,  and  decreased  at  an  annual  rate  of  0.3  percent  on  average  during  that  decade. 
Based  on  long-term  projections  of  demographic  trends  and  assuming  that  current  labor 
participation  rates  by  gender  and  by  age  group  will  not  change,  the  rate  of  decline  in  the 
number of workers will increase further to 0.6 percent in the 2010s, 0.7 percent in the 2020s 
and 1.3 percent in the 2030s. The impact of such population decline is serious, especially in 
regional  economies  (Chart  8).  As  for  the  other  component,  labor  productivity,  the  average 
growth rate over the past 20 years has been around 1.0 percent. Excluding the 1990s, during 
which the economy was significantly affected by the legacy of the bursting of the bubble, and 
choosing  a  period  characterized  by  relatively  favorable  economic  conditions,  the  labor 
productivity  growth  rate  was  1.5  percent  from  2000  to  2008.  Given  that  there  are  no 
significant differences in productivity growth rates among advanced economies, we may be 
able  to  assume  that  the  average  productivity  growth  rate  in  Japan  will  stay  between 
1.0 percent  and  1.5  percent.  Assuming  this  and  that  the  rate  of  decline  in  the  number  of 
workers  will  be  as  just  described,  the  annual  rate  of  economic  growth  in  the  2010s  will 
remain somewhere between 0.5 percent and 1.0 percent and become around zero percent in 
the  2030s.  Medium-  to  long-term  growth  rates  will  have  a  significant  impact  on  the  fiscal 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
situation.  The  sovereign  debt  crisis  in  Europe  provides  us  with  an  important  lesson  –  that 
fiscal credibility  can  change  in  a  discontinuous manner  (Chart  9).  We  must  work  seriously 
with strong determination to strengthen our growth potential. 
Need to work and create value added 
How can we strengthen our growth potential? I have just explained that the rate of growth in 
the  number  of  workers  and  the  rate  of  growth  in  labor  productivity  together  constitute  the 
economic  growth  rate.  As  for  the  number  of  workers,  it  is  difficult  to  expect  a  dramatic 
improvement  unless  demographic  trends  change.  However,  it  is  still  possible  to  slow  the 
pace  of  the  decline  in  the  number  of  workers  by  making  it  easier  for  elderly  people  and 
women to participate in the workforce. As for the second variable, raising labor productivity 
growth means increasing the value added per worker. The key, therefore, is to continuously 
capture potential needs and to provide more goods and services that people will find worth 
purchasing. 
More specifically, there are three important aspects to be considered. First, it is important to 
make the best use of the major trend towards globalization. It goes without saying that it is 
important  to  aggressively  capture  demand  overseas,  especially  in  fast-growing  emerging 
economies.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  important  to  take  active  steps  to  open  up  markets  and 
society.  With  more  inflows  and  outflows  of  people,  goods,  and  capital,  there  are  more 
chances of coming up with new ideas and business opportunities. 
Second,  efforts  to  cultivate  new  domestic  demand  are  also  critically  important.  Senses  of 
values and lifestyles have been diversifying not only for the elderly, as explained earlier, but 
also for all generations. It is important that businesses expand domestic markets by working 
to capture such potential demand and measures such as deregulation are taken to prepare 
the environment for firms to take on these challenges. 
Third, in order to dynamically implement a dual strategy of expanding business globally and 
exploring domestic demand, it is necessary to shift labor and capital smoothly to businesses 
with high growth potential. This means more effective use of human resources and capital 
within  firms  and  improvement  in  economic  metabolism  on  a  macroeconomic  basis.  To 
mobilize  resources  in  such  a  way  without  causing  social  stresses,  it  will  be  necessary  to 
strengthen  outplacement  support  schemes,  make  it  easier  to  start  new  businesses,  and 
improve safety nets. More than anything, it will be important to share a sense of values within 
Japanese  society,  which  should  include  acceptance  of  the  need  to  improve  the  economic 
metabolism and support for people taking on new challenges. 
“Hollowing out of domestic industries”? 
I  would  like  to  briefly  touch  upon  recent  concerns  about  a  hollowing  out  of  domestic 
industries, which are also related to the economic metabolism. 
To start with, expansion of production overseas is not unique to the current phase but rather 
a  trend  that  has  played  out  over  the  past  twenty  years  (Chart  10).  Until  the  middle  of  the 
1980s, Japan increased its global market share by expanding exports. Since the second half 
of the 1980s, Japanese firms have increased their overseas production partly as a response 
to  intensifying  trade  friction.  Thereafter,  they  have  continuously  reviewed  their  global 
production networks to optimize the division of work between home and abroad while taking 
into  consideration  changes  in  demand  structure  and  cost  structure  as  a  consequence  of 
globalization.  As  a  result  of  such  management  decisions  by  firms,  the  pace  of  expanding 
production overseas increased and this trend continues today. 
This  shift  of  production  sites  overseas  has  decreased  domestic  employment  in  the 
manufacturing sector. We need to create more employment opportunities in the economy as 
a whole by enhancing growth in domestic demand-related sectors, such as service sectors 
that create more employment than other sectors, by making use of the resultant idle labor 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
force  (Chart  11).  Within  the  manufacturing  sector,  given  the  significant  gap  in  labor  costs 
between home and abroad, it is necessary to promote a division of labor, with production and 
assembly sites for mass production expanded overseas and domestic operations focusing on 
more profitable businesses as well as cutting-edge technologies and business ideas. 
We must, of course, pay due attention to the risk that the expansion of production overseas 
will adversely affect the domestic economy. For example, the shift could suddenly accelerate 
for certain reasons, including the appreciation of the yen, such that its pace surpasses a rate 
consistent  with  a  trend  increase  in  overseas  demand.  Another  risk  is  that  core  firms  and 
factories abandon domestic production sites. 
It is true that the appreciation of the yen creates a need for serious adjustments to export 
industries.  At  the  same  time,  there  are  also  benefits  from  the  yen’s  appreciation.  For 
example, the appreciation has clearly caused a reduction in the cost of imports, which have 
increased significantly due to increased imports of crude oil and LNG after Japan’s nuclear 
plants  stopped  operations.  We  have  also  seen  more  Japanese  firms  availing  of  the  yen’s 
appreciation  to  make  strategic  moves  to  expand  business  globally,  as  evidenced  by  an 
increase  in  outbound  M&A  activity  (Chart  12).  Credits  of  foreign  direct  investment  income 
currently total 3.4 trillion yen per year, 0.7 percent of nominal GDP. Although such income 
has somewhat increased compared to the past, the amount of overseas investment and the 
rate  of  return  are  still  small  compared  to  other  countries  (Chart  13).  When  domestic 
investment opportunities are limited, it is vitally important to improve returns from overseas 
investment,  particularly  foreign  direct  investment.  In  any  case,  the  negative  impact  of  the 
yen’s appreciation tends to be noticed more than positive effects in Japan because domestic-
demand related firms, which are natural beneficiaries of the yen’s appreciation, have failed to 
develop  successful  business  plans  to  reap  such  benefits.  In  other  words,  in  order  to 
overcome concerns about a hollowing out of domestic industries, ultimately we must work to 
strengthen our medium- to long-term growth potential. 
Making accommodative financial environment lead to growth 
As is clear from what I have said so far, strengthening of growth potential will be achieved by 
substantive  efforts  to  work  and  increase  value  added.  In  this  regard,  some  argue  that 
“stopping  deflation  comes  first  and  that  can  be  achieved  easily  through  monetary  easing.” 
However,  a  rise  in  inflation  without  a  pick-up  in  real  growth  rates  will  not  improve  living 
standards  or  fiscal  balances.  The  real  issue  is  how  to  raise  the  real  growth  rate.  Past 
experiences show that prices rise later, after economic growth picks up in real terms. To use 
the analogy of the human body, prices are like its temperature, while growth potential is its 
fundamental strength. Raising the temperature without improving the fundamental strength is 
not  possible.  Even  if  it  were  successfully  done  temporarily,  there  would  be  side-effects.  In 
fact, in Japan, a strong correlation has been observed between the potential growth rate and 
the expected rate of inflation (Chart 14).  
In  the  past  even  some  prominent  academic  economists  in  the  United  States  have  argued 
that “stagnant growth and deflation in Japan can be solved easily by implementing significant 
monetary  easing.”  After  experiencing  difficulty  restoring  U.S.  economic  growth  after  the 
Lehman  shock,  however,  they  revised  their  understanding  on  the  issue  considerably  and 
even apologized and withdrew their past criticisms of Japan.  
In  any  case,  Japan’s  financial  conditions  are  extremely  accommodative.  Nominal  interest 
rates and even actual funding rates of firms, such as real interest rates on corporate bonds 
adjusted  using  inflation  expectations,  are  lower  in  Japan  compared  to  those  in  the  United 
States and Europe (Chart 15). In a related context, some argue that “insufficient provision of 
money by the Bank of Japan is the cause of deflation and the yen’s appreciation,” citing the 
size of the monetary base, which is the total amount of currency provided by a central bank. 
As  Chairman  Bernanke  of  the  U.S.  Federal  Reserve  has  also  pointed  out,  I,  too,  do  not 
consider the monetary base to be an appropriate indicator for monetary easing. Still, even 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
the size of the monetary base as a proportion of nominal GDP is larger in Japan than in the 
United States and Europe (Chart 15). As all of you present today must sense through your 
business activities, we are not in a situation where business fixed-investment and purchases 
of foreign currency-denominated assets are constrained by the amount of cash and deposits 
or the level of interest rates. The bottom line when it comes to our problem is how to make 
use  of  the  current  extremely  accommodative  financial  conditions  in  order  to  strengthen 
growth potential. 
The roles and challenges of central banks 
III. 
The Bank of Japan is not alone: other central banks of advanced economies are in a similar 
situation. Europe is dealing with the sovereign debt problem and the United States is in the 
process of balance sheet repair. In such circumstances, both Chairman Bernanke of the U.S. 
Federal  Reserve  and  President  Draghi  of  the  European  Central  Bank  have  repeatedly 
pointed  out  that  central  bank  measures  are  not  a  panacea.  Having  said  that,  I  am  not 
denying the importance of the role played by central banks. On the contrary, there are many 
things that only central banks can do. What is important is that the government, the private 
sector, and the central bank play their respective roles properly. What, then, are the roles of 
a central bank? 
Financial globalization and central banks 
In  recent  years,  it  is  becoming  increasingly  important  for  a  central  bank  to  have  a  global 
perspective when seeking to conduct monetary policy appropriately to achieve price stability. 
Coming back to the basics of how monetary easing stimulates demand, one channel is to 
bring future demand forward by urging firms to make investments now while interest rates 
are low. Another channel, if lower interest rates result in the depreciation of the currency, is 
to capture overseas demand.  
Once interest rates fall to almost zero, however, it becomes difficult to increase the benefit of 
making investments now. Moreover, when interest rates in other advanced economies are 
also  close  to  zero  as  in  the  current  situation,  there  is  limited  room  left  to  make  use  of 
overseas  demand,  at  least  among  the  advanced  economies.  In  sum,  the  two  channels  of 
monetary  policy  both  become  less  effective.  Given  that  emerging  economies  have  high 
growth rates and interest rates, monetary easing in advanced economies is expected to have 
stimulative effects through an increase in exports to emerging economies if the currencies of 
advanced economies depreciate against those of emerging economies on the whole. At the 
present  time,  however,  many  emerging  countries  adopt  fixed  foreign  exchange  rates  with 
currencies  pegged  to  the  U.S.  dollar  and  the  United  States  faces  balance-sheet  repair 
problems. What actually happened was that monetary easing in the United States, instead of 
stimulating  domestic  economic  activity,  contributed  to  overheating  in  emerging  economies 
and  a  rise  in  international  commodity  prices,  which  resulted  in  more  inflationary  pressures 
and adverse effects on private consumption in the U.S. economy. 
In this way, in an increasingly globalizing world, there is a possibility that a central bank will 
find that unintended effects of its monetary policy eventually come back on itself through their 
effects  on  overseas  economies  and  financial  markets.  In  the  end  central  banks  should 
conduct monetary policy based on their assessment of economic and price developments in 
their respective countries and regions. At the same time, it is also becoming more important 
than ever to make decisions after considering the complex interdependence of the different 
parts of the global economy. 
Against  a  backdrop  of  increasing  globalization,  the  task  of  maintaining  financial  system 
stability is equally important as monetary policy for a central bank. As can be seen in foreign 
exchange  trading  volumes,  massive  capital  flows  are  moving  around  the  globe  beyond 
national borders. Even without actual movements of capital, derivatives transactions transfer 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
risks  across  borders.  Although  some  see  such  financial  transactions  negatively,  given  the 
progress  in  globalization  in  terms  of  the  real  economy  and  associated  needs  to  hedge 
various  risks  associated  with  economic  transactions,  such  as  interest  rate  risk,  foreign 
exchange risk and credit risk, simply dismissing financial transactions will not help to improve 
the  situation.  In  addition,  as  evidenced  by  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  in  Europe,  the  very 
credibility  of  sovereign  states  is  being  questioned  this  year.  In  such  circumstances, 
maintaining  stability  in  the  global  financial  system  is  becoming  the  most  important 
prerequisite  for  global  economic  growth.  On  the  topic  of  global  financial  system  stability, 
while  strong  commitment  by  national  governments  is  necessary,  central  banks  have  also 
been doing their utmost in this regard. One example is the coordinated actions by six central 
banks, including the Bank of Japan, regarding U.S. dollar liquidity, which were announced at 
the end of November. As a contingency measure, the central banks also agreed to establish 
bilateral swap arrangements so that liquidity in non-domestic currencies other than the U.S. 
dollar could also be provided in each jurisdiction. I should also add that central banks are 
contributing to the ongoing efforts to revise financial regulation and supervision frameworks 
to prevent recurrence of financial crises like the one in 2008, by preventing the accumulation 
of financial imbalances. 
The bank’s policy conduct 
Finally, I will explain the Bank’s recent conduct of monetary policy (Chart 16). 
First,  the  Bank  has  been  pursuing  powerful  monetary  easing  under  the  comprehensive 
monetary  easing  framework  implemented  in  the  fall  of  last  year.  The  Bank  has  also 
repeatedly expanded the size of the Asset Purchase Program and intends to proceed with 
additional purchases of approximately 13 trillion yen over the next year. 
Second, the Bank has been doing its utmost to ensure financial market stability. Its provision 
of  ample  funds  immediately  following  the  earthquake  as  well  as  the  U.S.  dollar  funds-
supplying operations I have just mentioned are good examples of such efforts.  
Third,  in  an  extraordinary  measure  for  a  central  bank,  the  Bank  is  proceeding  with  fund 
provision to provide support for strengthening the foundations for economic growth. This is 
aimed  at  encouraging  firms  to  make  use  of  the  accommodative  financial  environment,  by 
providing  financial  institutions  with  long-term  funds  at  a  low  interest  rate  and  taking 
advantage of their expertise in identifying business opportunities. 
Concluding remarks – importance of adapting to changes and strengthening growth 
potential 
I have almost used up my time. My message today can be summarized into the following five 
points. First, we need to recognize that Japan currently faces major changes – globalization 
and  rapid  population  aging  –  which  have  a  significant  impact  on  its  economy.  Second,  in 
order to maintain existing living standards in Japan for the next generations, our economy 
must  strengthen  its  capacity  to  adapt  to  these  major  changes  and  strengthen  its  growth 
potential. Third, deflation will be overcome by strengthening growth potential. Fourth, in order 
to strengthen growth potential, firms’ willingness to take on challenges is vital and there is a 
need to prepare the environment to encourage firms to do so. Fifth, the Bank of Japan will 
also  continue  to  consistently  make  contributions  from  the  monetary  side  with  the  aim  of 
achieving sustainable growth with price stability. 
Incidentally,  in  October  next  year,  Japan  will  host  the  Annual  Meetings  of  the  World  Bank 
Group  and  International  Monetary  Fund.  This  is  a  big  event  with  more  than  ten  thousand 
participants from the existing 187 member countries. Japan hosted these meetings in 1964 
when the country was still an emerging economy filled with the energy associated with high 
growth. In that year there were a series of historic events in Japan which enhanced people’s 
confidence: becoming a member of the OECD on April 28; hosting the Annual Meetings of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
the World Bank Group and International Monetary Fund from September 7 to 11; launching 
the  Tokaido  Shinkansen  on  October  1;  and  holding  the  opening  ceremony  of  the  Tokyo 
Olympic Games on October 10. Almost half a century has passed since then and, in the fall 
of next year, Japan will again provide the venue for discussion among global leaders tackling 
various problems, this time as a mature advanced economy. Japan experienced the bursting 
of  a  bubble  twenty  years  ago  and  currently  faces  rapid  population  aging  ahead  of  other 
countries. In that sense, Japan is well positioned to present a new growth model to the rest 
of the world as a mature economy and the global frontrunner in terms of population aging. I 
sincerely  hope  that,  in  2012,  Japan  will  show  the  rest  of  the  world  its  vision  and 
determination to continue to shine as a mature economy and, more than anything else, the 
people of Japan will regain hope and courage. In this regard, the Bank of Japan will do its 
utmost in close cooperation with you. Thank you for your attention. 
 
 
 
 8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   9
 10 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   11
  12 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   13
 14 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   15
 16 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
