Nils Bernstein: The European debt crisis – from a Danish perspective 
Speech  by  Mr  Nils  Bernstein,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Denmark,  at  the  seminar 
“Europe in the times of crisis – are we looking for solutions or parachutes?”, at Danske Bank, 
Copenhagen, 14 December 2011. 
The slides can be found on the website of the National Bank of Denmark.  
 Thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  speak  here  today.  I  will  touch  upon  the  European  debt  crisis 
from a Danish perspective. 
The  world  economy  has  lost  momentum  since  last  spring  and  short-term  outlook  has 
worsened. The European economies, especially in the euro area, have seen the strongest 
slowdown.  But  there  are  considerable  differences  from  country  to  country.  Germany  and 
France  continued  to  enjoy  solid  growth  in  the  3rd  quarter,  whereas  growth  in  the  most 
indebted countries, the five GIIPS countries i.e. Greece, Italy, Ireland, Portugal and Spain, 
has been close to zero or even negative (slide 2 – real GDP).  
There  is  a  clear  division  among  the  EU  Member  States:  countries,  with  relatively  sound 
public finances and external balances before the crisis, are performing better than countries 
with internal and external imbalances (slide 3 – General government balance).  But over 
the past couple of months even euro area Member States with sound economies have been 
affected by rising interest rates. There is considerable volatility, and three groups in the euro 
area  seem  to  have  been  formed.  The  first  group  with  the  narrowest  spreads  to  Germany 
includes Finland, the Netherlands, Austria and France. The second group consists, among 
others,  of  Belgium,  Spain  and  Italy  and  the  third  group  is  Ireland,  Portugal  and  Greece. 
Denmark stands out by having a negative yield spread of 15–20 basis points to Germany. 
In  the  five  GIIPS  countries,  a  substantial  share  of  government  debt  is  held  by  foreign 
investors, and the short-term public debt issuance requirement is high. In combination with 
high  current  account  deficits,  resulting  from  lack  of  competitiveness,  this  leaves  these 
countries especially vulnerable to changes of sentiment in the international capital markets 
(slide 4 – current account).  
Despite marked differences between the economies with high debt ratios in the euro area, 
they all saw a significant reduction in the risk premium – and thus the level of interest rates – 
following  the  introduction  of  the  single  currency  in  1999  (slide  5  –  yield  spreads).  This 
immediately eased the financing burden on their very substantial government debt. But this 
advantage was not used to consolidate government finances, but rather to increase public 
spending. At the same time, high wage inflation led to an erosion of competitiveness. The 
rest is history. The economies are left with an even higher government debt burden and a 
private  sector  with  lacking  competitiveness.  Most  of  the  countries  have  an  urgent  need  of 
broad-based structural reforms: in the labour market, the pension system, public enterprises 
and elsewhere. They are facing massive pressure from the markets and the EU to introduce 
such structural reforms. But any steps are met with fierce public opposition – and the political 
will also seems to be lacking in some of the countries. 
To some extent, the introduction of the euro in 1999 eliminated the normal market reactions 
towards  euro  area  Member  States  with  high  government  debt.  The  markets  regarded  the 
euro as a safe haven and yield spreads narrowed significantly. Italy is a case in point – its 
government debt is high, but has been stable for a long period of time. There has been only 
a  slight  increase  over  the  past  decade.  At  the  same  time,  Italy  –  as  opposed  to  the  other 
GIIPS  countries  –  has  a  primary  government  budget  surplus.  In  other  words,  the  actual 
deficit  can be  attributed  to  legacy debt.  Finally,  Italy’s  growth  has  been  stagnant  for  many 
years (slide 6 – general government debt).  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Italy provides a good example of the change in the markets’ assessment of sovereign debt 
risks, and it is fair to ask: Why did the markets not react sooner? The build-up of government 
debt  is  not  mainly  the  result  of  the  most  recent  financial  crisis  but  has  occurred  gradually 
over the past 15–20 years.  
In the current situation, policymakers are, to some extent, pointing the guns at the markets 
and  rating  agencies.  This  means  shooting  the  messenger  rather  than  addressing  the 
underlying imbalances. In fact, it is positive that the market reaction forces policymakers to 
take action. In other words, the problem is not that the markets are reacting by demanding 
higher  interest  rates;  the  problem  is  that  they  did  not  react  sooner  –  before  the  problems 
escalated to the current level.  
 We  are  caught  in  a  dilemma.  On  the  one  hand,  fiscal  stimulus  to  the  economy  –  by 
expanding  government  spending  –  seems  reasonable.  But  market  pressure  makes  this 
strategy untenable. The market demands fiscal consolidation, and that the states address the 
structural  shortcomings  of  their  economies.  And  there  is  no  doubt  as  to  which  stance  will 
prevail:  that  of  the  markets.  But  that  is  not  necessarily  a  bad  thing.  If  policymakers  react 
properly, this can boost consumer, business and investor confidence – and the current crisis 
is,  to  a  large  extent,  also  a  crisis  of  confidence.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  there  is  a  lack  of 
political action, the volatility will spread to more and more countries. 
The  decisions  made  at  the  EU  and  at  the  euro  summits  in  October  were  important  steps 
towards  containing  the  crisis  and  preventing  the  occurrence  of  future  crises.  The  key 
elements  were  the  agreement  on  voluntary  restructuring  of  Greece’s  sovereign  debt,  the 
recapitalisation  of  the  banking  sector  and  the  barriers  to  prevent  the  sovereign  debt  crisis 
from spreading. A cause for concern is that since the details are still being debated at the EU 
level, implementation has remained uncertain for so long. 
Despite the steps over the past year and a half to improve economic governance in the euro 
area and the adoption of new measures to contain the sovereign debt crisis, market tensions 
have  increased.  In  order  to  address  these  tensions,  steps  were  taken  at  the  European 
Council  meeting  last  week  to  move  towards  a  stronger  economic  union.  (slides  7+8  – 
European Council decisions). 
The plan contains two elements:  
A new fiscal compact and stronger economic and political coordination. And the development 
of stabilisation tools to face short term challenges.  
At  the  meeting  there  was  a  wish  to  include  the  fiscal  compact,  in  the  Treaty.  As  will  be 
known, the UK was against this. On this background the head of states or governments of 
the euro area decided to make a separate international agreement in order to implement the 
new fiscal compact. A number of non-euro countries have indicated that they will consider 
participate in the process after consultation with their respective parliaments. 
The Danish government has stated that it will be decisive for an eventual Danish participation 
that  it  does  not  conflict  with  our  euro  opt-out,  which  can  only  be  changed  by  means  of  a 
referendum. 
I  will  not  at  this  junction  speculate  over  possible  legal  and  pure  political  aspects  but  only 
comment on the aspects concerning the economic policy. 
If  the  euro  Member  States  decide  between  themselves  a  stronger  and  more  binding 
framework  for  the  economic  policy,  including  fiscal  policy,  then  Denmark  as  a  small  open 
economy with a fixed exchange rate regime vis-a-vis the euro has no other option than either 
to take part in as much of the agreement as we can, respecting our euro opt-out, or place us 
as close as possible at the new euro compact without formal participation. 
In other words, a stronger discipline in the economic policy in the euro Member States should 
result  in  just  as  tough  conditions  for  Denmark  irrespective  of  whether  or  not  we  decide  to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
participate  in  the  new  agreement.  In  reality  we  will  hardly  get  a  higher  degree  of 
manoeuvrebility in the economic policy by staying outside – quite the contrary.  
If we decide to stay outside, we have to make sure that it is not mistakenly seen as a signal 
of less commitment to sustainable economic policy. 
With  respect  to  financial  resources  for  the  short  term  crisis  fighting,  the  ceiling  of  the 
EFSF/ESM will be reassessed in March 2012 and the financial resources to the IMF will be 
increased substantially through bilateral loans. The commitment is up to 200 billion euro. The 
Danish  part  will  be  up  to  40  billion  Danish  kroner  which  will  be  taken  from  the  foreign 
exchange reserves.  
 For close to 30 years, the fixed-exchange-rate policy (slide 9 – the krone rate) has been a 
cornerstone of Danish economic policy – and has served Denmark well. Inflation and interest 
rates are in line with those of the best-performing euro area Member States, and the Danish 
level of prosperity matches that of our neighbouring countries.  
Prior to the pegging of the Danish krone to the D-mark, the situation in Denmark was similar 
to that of the problem economies in the euro area today. Denmark had been through a period 
of slow growth and large imbalances as regards government budgets, the current account 
and the labour market, which was affected by high unemployment throughout the 1970s in 
the wake of the oil crises. In 1982, inflation reached 12 per cent and interest rates 22 per 
cent. The government yield spread to Germany peaked at 12 percentage points (slide 10 – 
long-term yields). This level of interest rates would be devastating to any economy.  
The  pegging  of  the  Danish  krone  to  the  D-mark  in  1982  marked  the  beginning  of  a  long 
period in which structural imbalances in the economy and fiscal inadequacies were gradually 
addressed politically. But this was not without setbacks.  
The Danish economy has performed relatively well – also after the introduction of the euro in 
1999.  This  can  be  attributed  to  a  stability-oriented  economic  policy  with  a  medium-term 
focus, and to the implementation of structural reforms in the labour market and elsewhere 
during the 1990s. It is also a fact that, in practice, the economic policy pursued outside the 
euro area must be at least as tight as that pursued in the euro area in order to safeguard the 
credibility  of  the  fixed-exchange-rate  policy.  The  conclusion  is  clear.  The  credibility  of  the 
economic policy pursued is more important than the choice of exchange-rate regime. This 
also  applies  if  fixed-exchange-rate  policy  is  introduced  in  the  form  of  participation  in  a 
monetary union. 
Thanks  to  our  relatively  solid  starting  point,  Denmark  has  been  less  affected  by  the  debt 
crisis  than  many  other  countries.  The  most  important  real  economic  issue  is  that  Danish 
economic growth is low partly due to poor consumer and business confidence. The steady 
stream of negative stories from the euro area is no doubt a contributing factor, but is far from 
the only reason. The Danish economy was severely overheated from 2006 to 2008, with very 
strong credit growth and a housing bubble. We are now struggling with the repercussions of 
the overheating. The situation was aggravated by the financial and debt crises, but these are 
far from the only reasons for the lack of consumer and investor confidence that is currently 
hampering economic growth.  
In  addition  to  a  negative  impact  on  confidence,  weak  growth  in  our  key  export  markets 
obviously  has  an  impact  on  Danish  growth.  Denmark  is  a  small,  open  economy  that  is 
heavily dependent on foreign trade. Close to 50 per cent of Danish exports go to the euro 
member states. 
Thanks to market participants’ confidence in Danish economy in general and monetary and 
exchange-rate  policies  in  particular,  Denmark  has  not  been  affected  by  the  increase  in 
interest  rates,  seen  in  many  euro  area  Member  States.  Danish  government  bonds  are 
AAA-rated. This benefits the Danish market for mortgage bonds, which is one of the largest 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
and  most  liquid  in  the  world  due  to  our  mortgage  credit  system.  This  is  greatly  to  the 
advantage of Danish home buyers at the moment, as a home purchase may be financed at 
short-term interest rates below 1½ per cent. This level of interest rates helps to protect the 
economy in the current highly uncertain climate. 
Many euro  area Member States fear that the  sovereign debt crisis will turn into a banking 
crisis, as the banking sector holds a large percentage of the government bonds of the highly 
indebted countries. Again, Denmark is not severely affected. The exposure of Danish banks 
to the most debt-ridden euro area Member States is limited and even major write-downs of 
sovereign debt would be manageable.  
In addition to the aspects already mentioned, I will draw attention to a third area where the 
crisis  is  leaving  its  mark:  the  management  of  economic  policy.  I  believe  that  Danish 
politicians as a whole have been well and truly scared by the turn of events in Europe. They 
have  seen  the  implications  of  excessive  indebtedness  and  irresponsible  fiscal  policy.  This 
has  suddenly  become  very  tangible.  It  remains  to  be  seen  how  long  this  experience  will 
remain in our minds. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
