V K Sharma: Short-term cooperative credit structure and financial 
inclusion 
Keynote address by Mr V K Sharma, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
Central  Zone  Cooperative  Conference  on  “Short-term  cooperative  credit  structure  and 
financial  inclusion”,  organized  by  the  National  Cooperative  Union  of  India  in  collaboration 
with  Chhattisgarh  State  Cooperative  Union  Ltd.,  Raipur,  Chhattisgarh  State, 
India, 
11 December 2011. 
 The views expressed are those of the author and not of the Reserve Bank of India. 
Shri  Charan  Das  Mahant,  Hon’ble  Minister  of  State  for  Agriculture  &  Food  Processing, 
Government  of  India,  Shri  Gouri  Shanker  Bisen,  Hon’ble  Minister  for  Co-operation, 
Government  of  Madhya  Pradesh,  Shri  Chandra  Sekhar  Sahu,  Hon’ble  Minister  for 
Agriculture, Government of Chhattisgarh, Dr. Chandra Pal Singh Yadav, President, National 
Cooperative Union of India, distinguished invitees and guests, ladies and gentlemen. 
I  indeed  deem  it  an  honour  and  a  privilege  to  be  addressing  today  this  very  august  and 
distinguished audience on issues, concerns and challenges that the rural cooperative credit 
structure faces at its current stage of evolution. 
As  you  may  perhaps  be  aware,  the  United  Nations  has  declared  the  year  2012  as  the 
International  Year  of  Cooperatives  and,  to  my  mind,  this  is  precisely  what  makes  today’s 
Central Zone Cooperative Conference, both contextually and topically, very relevant and it 
will  culminate,  I  am  sure,  in  most  desired  outcomes  going  forward  !  And  it  will  be  no 
exaggeration  to  say  that  India  has  been  among  the  pioneering  nations  in  the  matter  of 
genesis, and democratic evolution, of agricultural and rural co-operatives, truly informed, and 
inspired,  by  the  tenets  and  principles  of  cooperation.  Given  the  extensive  and  widespread 
financial  exclusion  in  the  country,  both  the  Government  of  India  and  the  Reserve  Bank, 
decided to put financial inclusion on the top of their policy and strategy agenda. As part of 
this veritable watershed policy and strategy initiative, the Government and the Reserve Bank 
enjoined upon Scheduled Commercial Banks and Regional Rural Banks to roll out, in a time-
bound  manner,  Board-approved,  Top-Management-owned,  business-plan-integrated, 
mission-mode-driven  and  Government  &  RBI-monitored,  BC-ICT-CBS 
(Business 
Correspondent  –  Information  &  Communication  Technology  –  Core  Banking  Solution)-
leveraged  Financial  Inclusion  Plans  for  door-step  delivery  of  a  bouquet  of  basic  financial 
services in the hitherto financially-excluded rural areas. But I must hasten here to add that 
the idea is not to compete with, but complement, rural and agricultural cooperatives in their 
ever critical and central “niche” role in delivering on financial inclusion ! 
I  hardly  need  to  belabour,  before  this  learned  and  distinguished  audience,  the  point  that, 
along its sojourn through time, the cooperative movement came to be  bedevilled by some 
unfortunate developments undermining its vibrancy. To my mind, at the margin, this explains 
the imperative of a complementary role for commercial banks.  
But having said that, as regards the national challenge of delivering, credibly and effectively, 
on financial inclusion agenda, it would be very instructive to put in perspective the relative 
potential of the rural cooperative credit structure. Specifically, considering that compared to 
Commercial  Banks  and  Regional  Rural  Banks  (RRBs),  which,  between  them,  currently 
account  for  33000  rural  branches,  33  State  Cooperative  Banks  with  953  branches, 
371 District Central Cooperative Banks (DCCBs) with 12858 branches and 1,09,000 Primary 
Agricultural Credit Societies (PACS), between them, account for a total of 1,22,590 service 
outlets, the penetrative outreach of the command area of the rural cooperative structure is 
simply formidable ! Indeed, it is precisely because of this formidable penetrative outreach of 
the rural cooperative structure that the Reserve Bank of India has not only allowed PACS to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
from 
act as Business Correspondents of commercial banks but also allowed treatment of loans by 
commercial banks to farmers through PACS, Farmers’ Service Societies (FSS) and Large-
sized  Adivasi  Multipurpose  Societies  (LAMPS)  as  priority  sector  lending  in  the  indirect 
finance category. Although under the Financial Inclusion Plan initiatives, Commercial Banks 
and  RRBs  will,  through  both  brick  and  mortar  branches  and  business  correspondents, 
provide  banking  outlets  in  around  3,50,000  villages  by  2013,  it  is  because  of  the  huge 
potential  and  promise  that  the  rural  co-operative  credit  structure  represents  for  financial 
inclusion  that  the  Government  and  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  thought  it  fit  to  revive  the 
financially  haemorrhaged  Short  Term  Cooperative  Credit  Structure  (STCCS)  by  setting  up 
the  Vaidyanathan  Committee  and  accepting  its  comprehensive  recommendations  for 
implementation in a business like manner. 
Based  on  the  recommendations  of  the  Vaidyanathan  Committee  and  after  reaching 
consensus  with  Chief  Ministers,  Finance  Ministers  and  Cooperation  Ministers  of  States, 
Government  of  India  decided  to  provide  massive  financial  assistance  (since  revised  to 
Rs.19,330  crores  (Rs.  193  Billion) 
the  originally  estimated  Rs.13,596  crores 
Rs. 136 Billion) to the financially haemorrhaged Short Term Cooperative Credit Structure but 
also,  only  appropriately,  made  it  conditional  upon  rigorous  and  stringent  compliance  with, 
and  progress  on,  pre-specified  critical  parameters  like  facilitating  regulatory  powers  of  the 
RBI, limiting equity participation of State Governments in cooperative banks to 25%, limiting 
the  powers  of  State  Governments  to  supersede  the  boards,  removing  State  Government 
intervention  in  all  financial  and  internal  administrative  matters,  special  audits  of  PACS, 
District Central Cooperative Banks (DCCBs), and State Cooperative Banks (SCBs), conduct 
of  Statutory  Audit  by  Chartered  Accountants  (CAs),  timely  election  of  Board  of  Directors, 
appointment/co-option  of  professionally  qualified  Directors  and  appointment  of  Chief 
Executive  Officers  (CEOs)  in  accordance  with  the  RBI-prescribed  fit-and-proper  criteria, 
training and Human Resources Development, computerization, Common Accounting System 
(CAS)  and  Management  Information  System  (MIS),  by  amendment  of  State  Co-operative 
Societies Acts and amendment of Rules and adoption of appropriate Bye-Laws. 
In  this  context,  it  is  encouraging  to  note  that  25  States  have  since  signed  the  MoUs  for 
implementation  of  the  Revival  Package.  These  are  Andhra  Pradesh,  Arunachal  Pradesh, 
Assam,  Bihar,  Chattisgarh,  Gujarat,  Haryana,  Jammu  &  Kashmir,  Jharkhand,  Karnataka, 
Madhya  Pradesh,  Maharashtra,  Manipur,  Meghalaya,  Mizoram,  Nagaland,  Orissa,  Punjab, 
Rajasthan,  Sikkim,  Tamil  Nadu,  Tripura,  Uttarakhand,  Uttar  Pradesh  and  West  Bengal. 
Between them, they cover more than 96% of the STCCS units in the country. The financial 
assistance  under  the  Package  is  released  only  on  the  implementation  of  legal  and 
institutional reforms. NABARD has, as on 31 October, 2011, has already released an amount 
of Rs 9002.98 crore (Rs. 90 Billion) towards Government of India’s share for recapitalisation 
of  PACS  in  seventeen  States  while  State  Governments  have  released  Rs.855.53 
(Rs. 8.5 Billion)crore as their share. 
It  is  also  very  encouraging  to  note  that  21  States  have  amended  their  respective  State 
Cooperative  Societies  Acts  and  these  are  Andhra  Pradesh,  Arunachal  Pradesh,  Bihar, 
Gujarat,  Haryana,  Karnataka,  Jammu  &  Kashmir,  Jharkhand,  Madhya  Pradesh, 
Maharashtra,  Manipur,  Mizoram,  Meghalaya,  Nagaland,  Orissa,  Rajasthan,  Sikkim,  Tamil 
Nadu, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal.  
The corner-stone of this realignment exercise was to overhaul and re-engineer governance 
and  management  in  the  rural  co-operative  credit  structure  with  a  view  to  preventing 
recurrence  of  such  financial  haemorrhaging.  And,  significantly,  to  reinforce,  and  sustain, 
overhauled and re-engineered governance in such financially rejuvenated and renewed co-
operative credit structure, effective and credible supervision and regulation is a sine qua non. 
As the distinguished audience is aware, while NABARD supervises the co-operative credit 
institutions,  Reserve  Bank  regulates  them.  This  supervisory  and  regulatory  framework 
involves  RBI  framing  and  issuing  regulatory  instructions  and  guidelines  and  NABARD 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
examining their actual compliance during inspection. Currently, these regulatory instructions 
and guidelines are scattered across individual circulars containing them. The imperative of 
consolidating all the existing regulatory guidelines and instructions has long been felt both by 
NABARD and the supervised co-operative credit institutions. Accordingly, the Reserve Bank 
is in the process of consolidating all such instructions and guidelines in the form of a Master 
Circular and which, I assure this audience, will be in the public domain very soon. It will serve 
as a ready recokner for the rural co-operative institutions facilitating their compliance with the 
regulatory instructions and guidelines in force.  
I would also take the present opportunity to share with you the recent decision to waive the 
signing of MoU as a pre-condition for opening of branches by State Co-operative Banks in 
the  States  which  do  not  need  the  re-capitalisation  assistance  under  the  Revival  Package, 
provided they comply with all other conditions. 
The  committee  on  Financial  Sector  Assessment  (Chairman:  Dr.  Rakesh  Mohan  and  Co-
Chairman: Shri Ashok Chawla) had recommended that rural co-operative banks, which fail to 
obtain  licence  by  March  2012,  should  not  be  allowed  to  operate.  Accordingly,  it  was 
proposed in the Annual Policy Statement of April 2009 to work out a roadmap for licensing of 
unlicensed  state  and  central  co-operative  banks.  For  this  purpose,  in  consultation  with 
National  Bank  for  Agriculture  and  Rural  Development  (NABARD),  revised  guidelines  on 
licensing  of  these  banks  were  issued.  All  Regional  Offices  of  RBI  were  advised  to  issue 
licences to banks, which meet the prescribed criteria. It is expected that a large number of 
co-operative banks will be licensed by 2012. The Revival Package based on Vaidyanathan 
Committee is under implementation which would also help the StCBs/CCBs to improve their 
financials and be eligible for licensing. 
In this context, it is important to note that as on 30th November 2011, out of 31 State Co-
operative  Banks  (SCBs)  and  371  District  Central  Co-operative  Banks  (DCCBs)  in  the 
country, 6 SCBs and 117 DCCBs were unlicensed compared to 17 SCBs, and 296 DCCBs, 
as on 31st March 2009. 
I take the present opportunity to share with this distinguished audience the latest status of 
licensed  and  unlicensed  StCBs  and  DCCBs  in  the  four  States  of  Chhattisgarh,  Madhya 
Pradesh, Uttarkhand and Uttar Pradesh which is as under: 
 
Thus,  while  in  Uttarakhand,  the  SCB  is  yet  to  be  licensed,  in  the  states  of  Chhatisgarh, 
Madhya Pradesh, Uttarakhand and Uttar Pradesh, out of 104 DCCBs, 42 DCCBs are yet to 
be licensed. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
As announced in the Annual Policy Statement of April, 2010, a study on well-run rural co-
operatives  including  Primary  Agricultural  Credit  Co-operative  Societies  (PACS),  Large 
Adivasi Multipurpose Co-operative Societies (LAMPS), Farmers Service Societies (FSS) and 
Thrift and Credit Co-operatives was undertaken by the Reserve Bank  in collaboration with 
NABARD and State Governments as part of its undivided policy focus on the “niche” role of 
rural  credit  co-operatives  in  financial  inclusion.  For  the  study,  208  well-run  co-operatives 
operating in 21 States were selected. Of these, 71 were operating under Parallel Self-Reliant 
Co-operative Societies Acts with the rest under respective State Co-operative Societies Acts. 
The broad objectives of the study as set out by the Reserve Bank were: 
a) 
To  study  the  functioning  of  well-run  thrift  and  rural  credit  co-operatives,  including 
PACS,  LAMPS,  FSS  and  other  new  financial  co-operatives,  set  up  under  the 
Parallel  Self-Reliant  Co-operative  Societies  Acts  to  assess  their  potential  to 
contribute to financial inclusion and the local economy; 
To  study  the  member,  borrower  and  depositor  profiles,  saving  mobilization  and 
credit extended to tenant farmers, oral lessees and agricultural labourers; 
To  study  the  quality  of  actual  management  and  governance  and  external 
impediments that come in the way of good governance/management; 
To study and analyse the impact of functioning of such co-operatives on the local 
economy/populace; 
To suggest measures necessary to effectively encourage the emergence of many 
more  such  institutions  across  the  country,  if  the  study  indicated  that  they  have  a 
significant contribution to make to financial inclusion. 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
The  study  was  completed  in  November  2011  and  after  its  due  examination,  the  Reserve 
Bank will take the findings and recommendations forward. 
We  are  at the  threshold  of  the  Second  Green  Revolution which  envisages,  and will  entail, 
shift  in  focus  and  attention  to  pulses,  fruits,  vegetable,  live-stock,  fisheries,  poultry  and 
horticulture and raising their production and productivity with a view to ensuring national food 
security and sustainable high levels of growth. With these words, I conclude my address and 
wish today’s Conference all success that it so very much deserves !  
Thank you all so very much indeed. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
