Mark Carney: Renewing Canada’s monetary policy framework 
Remarks  by  Mr  Mark  Carney,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada  and  Chairman  of  the 
Financial Stability Board, to the Board of Trade of Metropolitan Montreal, Montreal, Quebec, 
23 November 2011. 
 Over  the  past  twenty  years,  Canadians  have  enjoyed  a  more  stable  and  prosperous 
economic environment. Even during the recent crisis, the Canadian economy proved more 
resilient and recovered faster than our advanced-economy peers. The strength and relative 
stability of our economy have been due, in part, to Canada’s inflation-targeting regime, which 
was first adopted in 1991. Earlier this month, the Government of Canada and the Bank of 
Canada  jointly  announced  the  renewal  of  the  target  for  five  more  years  –  re-affirming  its 
important role in enhancing the well-being of Canadians. 
In  my  remarks  today,  I  will  discuss  what  went  into  this  decision,  while  addressing  three 
important issues that the crisis brought into sharp relief. I will conclude by providing a brief 
summary of how we apply this framework to today’s circumstances. 
Canada’s monetary policy regime has proved its worth in both turbulent and tranquil 
times 
The  effectiveness  of  Canada’s  inflation-targeting  regime  is  well  established.  Since  its 
adoption, inflation has averaged 2 per cent, as measured by the consumer price index (CPI), 
and  its  standard  deviation  has  fallen  by  roughly  two-thirds,  compared  with  the  1970s  and 
1980s. Greater price stability has allowed Canadians and their businesses to manage their 
finances  with  greater  confidence.  Interest  rates  have  also  been  lower  in  both  nominal  and 
real  terms  across  a  range  of  maturities.  As  a  consequence  of  these  developments,  low, 
stable and predictable inflation has encouraged more solid economic growth and lower and 
less-variable unemployment. 
The global economic and financial crisis of 2008–09 delivered the largest shock in decades, 
putting the regime to an unprecedented test. 
It passed. 
The experience re-affirmed the strength of Canada’s monetary policy framework, including 
the value of the regime’s inherent flexibility. Nonetheless, the Bank has sought to draw the 
appropriate lessons from the debacle, particularly from the experiences of others for whom 
price stability proved insufficient to prevent economic and financial disaster. 
Our  work  has  provided  important  insights  into  the  management  of  our  regime,  as  well  as 
potential  lessons  for  other  countries  where  trying  circumstances  have  raised  questions 
regarding their monetary policy frameworks. 
What is the optimal level of inflation? 
There  is  an  ongoing  debate  regarding  the  “right  number”  for  the  inflation  target.  We  have 
been targeting 2 per cent total CPI inflation, in recognition of the benefits of a slightly positive 
inflation rate in facilitating economic adjustments, and of the potential operational challenges 
associated with a lower target rate.1  
                                                 
1  The lower the inflation target, the more likely it is that some nominal wages will occasionally need to decline to 
facilitate  economic  adjustment.  If  workers  are  reluctant  to  accept  these  declines,  the  process  of  real 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Targeting an inflation rate lower than 2 per cent is intuitively appealing, since achieving the 
target still causes the price level to double roughly every 35 years, which may contribute to 
money  illusion  and  more  generally  complicate  inter-temporal  decision-making.  A  lower 
inflation target could also further reduce the costly distortions associated with inflation, such 
as  those  stemming  from  difficulties  in  distinguishing  between  absolute  and  relative  price 
changes, the cost of infrequent price and wage adjustments, and the disincentives to hold 
money.  The  Bank’s  research  has  generally  found  that  the  further  benefits  from  reducing 
these distortions imply an optimal rate of inflation closer to, or even slightly below, zero. 
In a perfect world, we would pursue those gains through a lower inflation target. But we do 
not live in a perfect world. Even the models that we employ to quantify the additional benefits 
of a lower inflation target – models that aspire to an economist’s utopia – disagree on how 
material those benefits would be. Moreover, these models have typically abstracted from the 
very real-world costs and risks associated with very low rates of inflation, the most important 
of which is the risk associated with the zero lower bound (ZLB) on interest rates. At this level, 
conventional monetary policy can no longer be used to stimulate the economy – a risk that 
was brought into stark relief during the recent crisis. 
The lower the inflation target, the lower the “equilibrium” nominal policy interest rate will be, 
and  thus  the  greater  the  likelihood  that  shocks  will  push  interest  rates  to  the  ZLB  during 
“normal” times. Research at the Bank and elsewhere suggests that encounters with the ZLB 
should be quite rare with a 2 per cent inflation target, but may be more than four times more 
likely with a 1 per cent target and at least 16 times more likely with a zero per cent target. 
Indeed, with a target below 2 per cent, it is likely that the ZLB will be encountered through the 
ordinary course of the business cycle. 
The  costs  of  hitting  the  ZLB  depend  on  the  effectiveness, reliability  and  costs  of  available 
unconventional  policy 
tools  –  conditional 
commitments, quantitative easing and credit easing – have provided additional stimulus, the 
magnitudes of the benefits and of the costs associated with their use will only be known over 
time.  These  costs  could  include  financial  market  distortions,  difficulties  in  unwinding  large 
holdings  of  securities,  and 
the  political 
independence and credibility of the central bank. 
With these risks now better appreciated, some have suggested that central banks ought to 
target an inflation rate higher than 2 per cent. There are essentially two arguments. First, a 
higher inflation target might reduce the frequency and severity of encounters with the ZLB.2 
Second,  a  higher  inflation  target  may  be  a  way  out  from  the  burden  of  excessive  debt  in 
those countries struggling with deleveraging.3  
To the Bank of Canada, these are siren calls. Moving opportunistically to a higher inflation 
target would risk de-anchoring inflation expectations and destroying the hard-won gains that 
have  come  from  the  entrenchment  of  price  stability  in  these  economies.  This  is  especially 
risky if a very sudden and large inflation “surprise” is needed, as might be the case given the 
relatively short duration of government debt portfolios in many of these countries. Moreover, 
if  inflation  is  both  higher  and  more  uncertain,  a  higher  inflation  risk  premium  might  result, 
prompting an increase in real rates that would exacerbate unfavourable debt dynamics. 
the  extreme,  potential  compromises 
these  unconventional 
instruments.  While 
to 
in 
                                                                                                                                                      
adjustment in the labour market will be impeded, inhibiting the efficient functioning of the economy. In other 
words, a positive inflation target “greases the wheels” of the economy. 
2  O.  Blanchard,  G.  Dell’Ariccia  and  P.  Mauro,  “Rethinking  Macroeconomic  Policy,”  IMF  Staff  Position  Note 
SPN/10/03, 2010. 
3  K. Rogoff, “Inflation Is Now the Lesser Evil,” Project Syndicate, December 2008. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Could targeting the price level be superior? 
So  in  our  view,  moving  to  a  higher  inflation  target  would  be  risky.  However,  for  foreign 
countries with high levels of indebtedness and that are already at the ZLB, there might be 
other  mechanisms  to  achieve  higher  nominal  price  paths,  while  maintaining  long-term 
inflation expectations. 
The  Bank’s  research  suggests  that  targeting  a  path  for  the  level  of  prices  might  work.  In 
contrast  to  an  inflation-targeting  regime  where  bygones  are  bygones,  under  price-level 
targeting  (PLT),  monetary  policy  would  seek  to  make  up  for  past  deviations  in  order  to 
restore  the  price  level  to  a  predetermined  path.  For  example,  following  a  period  of  below-
target  inflation,  policy  would  seek  a  period  of  above-target  inflation  in order  to  ensure  that 
average  inflation  corresponds  to  targeted  inflation  (the  desired  rate  of  change  in  the  price 
level) over time. The more the price level were to undershoot the target, the more the central 
bank  would  need  to  stimulate  the  economy  to  make  up  the  undershoot,  and  the  more 
inflation expectations would thus be expected to rise and real interest rates to fall, supporting 
spending and prices. This “automatic” provision of added stimulus could be particularly useful 
when  conventional  monetary  policy  is  exhausted  at  the  ZLB,  while  the  rise  in  near-term 
inflation  expectations  would  be  self-limiting  by  design,  unwinding  as  the  price  level 
approached the desired path. 
PLT  may  merit  consideration  as  a  temporary  unconventional  policy  tool  in  countries  faced 
with  extraordinary  circumstances,  notably  those  with  policy  at  the  ZLB  and  with  a  heavy 
burden  of  debt.4  However,  it  is  not  clear  that  it  would  help  much  under  the  current 
circumstances faced by the crisis economies. This is because the trend in the price level in 
these countries since the onset of the global crisis has not, in fact, been all that weak.5 So 
while PLT may help combat future disinflationary pressures in these countries, it is unlikely to 
be effective in providing additional stimulus now. 
Accordingly, some have proposed a related framework that could better harness the power 
of  expectations  in  getting  these  economies  back  on  track  right  now  –  nominal  GDP  level 
targeting.  In  this  case,  the  central  bank  would  seek  to  make  up  for  the  undershoot  in  the 
trend in the value of national output.6 That undershoot has been dramatic, reaching 10 per 
cent in the United States and 11 per cent in the United Kingdom – or nearly 2 trillion dollars 
combined  –  relative  to  the  level  that  would  have  been  attained  with  trend  growth.7  Those 
gaps are set to widen even further ahead, with real growth projected to remain slow and the 
inflation  rate  to  fall.  Committing  to  restore  the  level  of  nominal  GDP  to  its  pre-crisis  trend 
could lend the powerful boost to expectations needed to reduce real debt burdens and more 
generally provide added stimulus to the economy through lower real interest rates. 
There are, without question, risks to this approach. For PLT or nominal GDP level targeting 
to be effective, the expectations channel has to work in practice the way it does in theory. 
This  requires  that  people  be  forward-looking,  fully  conversant  with  the  implications  of  the 
                                                 
4  See C. Evans, “Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Environment: Developing a State-Contingent Price-Level 
Target”,  Remarks  delivered  to  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Boston's  55th  Economic  Conference,  Boston, 
Mass: 16 October 2010. 
In the third quarter, the level of the headline and core PCE price indexes in the United States stood 0.6 per 
cent and 1.3 per cent respectively below the level that would have been attained with 2 per cent inflation since 
the onset of the recession in the fourth quarter of 2007. The level of the headline CPI in the United Kingdom in 
the third quarter stood 5.5 per cent above the level that would have been attained had inflation met the United 
Kingdom’s 2 per cent target since the onset of the recession in the first quarter of 2008. 
5 
6  See J. Hatzius and S. Stehn. “The Case for a Nominal GDP Level Target,” US Economics Analyst, Goldman 
Sachs  Global  ECS  Research,  Issue  No:  11/41,  2011,  and  C.  Romer,  “Dear  Ben:  It’s  Time  for  Your  Volker 
Moment,” The New York Times, 29 October 2011. 
7  Assuming nominal GDP had grown at a 4½ per cent annual rate in the United States and United Kingdom 
from the level prevailing just prior to the onset of recession in these countries. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
regime and trust policy-makers to live up to their commitment. As Bank research has shown, 
if these conditions do not fully hold, these approaches could in fact prove destabilizing to the 
economy and damaging to the central bank’s credibility.8  
Moreover, there are reasons why central banks have preferred to support employment and 
output by targeting price stability, rather than more directly through an approach like nominal 
GDP  targeting.  Central  banks  can  neither  determine  the  appropriate  path  for  these  real 
variables nor control them over the long run, and pretending they can could have negative 
consequences for economic stability and central bank credibility. 
Indeed,  one  of  the  major  insights over  the  past  three  decades  of  monetary  policy  practice 
has been that targeting employment can create an incentive for surprise inflation, which in 
turn  leads  to  higher  unemployment.  The  best  contribution  monetary  policy  can  make  to 
sustainable job creation is low, stable and predictable inflation. 
The Bank found that the potential benefits of adopting PLT are less valuable under ordinary 
circumstances, relative to the current inflation-targeting regime. But the risks that the regime 
might not be well understood or fully credible look no less daunting. Accordingly, the Bank 
could not comfortably endorse the adoption of a PLT regime as Canada’s monetary policy 
framework.  As  is  the  case  with  unconventional  monetary  policy  tools,  however,  the 
experience of others may provide valuable insights for Canada in the future. 
How to address financial imbalances? 
The global economic and financial crisis has made it clear that a central bank pursuing price 
stability without due regard for financial stability risks achieving neither. Even though Canada 
did not experience a home-grown financial crisis, it is necessary for the Bank to understand 
better the lessons painfully learned elsewhere. 
As  we  have  all  been  reminded  at  great  cost,  low,  stable  and  predictable  inflation  and  low 
variability  in  activity  can  breed  complacency  among  financial  market  participants,  as  risk-
taking  adapts  to  the  perceived  new  equilibrium.  Indeed,  risk  appears  to  be  at  its  greatest 
when measures of it are at their lowest. The tendency to overreach is particularly marked if 
there is a perceived certainty about the stability of low interest rates. In short, complacency 
can lead to extremes and, ultimately, crisis. 
The first line of defence against a buildup of financial imbalances is responsible behaviour by 
individuals and institutions. The more people recognize that they will bear the consequences 
of their actions, the fewer the problems that will arise. 
Next  comes  effective  “microprudential”  regulation  and  supervision.  Canada  has  a  strong 
track record in this area, and our experience is being reflected in major international reforms 
of regulatory and supervisory frameworks for banks. 
This  approach  is  being  enhanced  by  the  adoption  of  a  system-wide  perspective.  The 
Government of Canada has already made three timely and prudent adjustments to the terms 
of  mortgage  finance.  Additional  measures,  such  as  the  counter-cyclical  capital  buffer  and 
through the cycle margining, are under development. 
These  defences  will  go  a  long  way  to  mitigate  the  risk  of  financial  excesses,  but  in  some 
cases, monetary policy may still have to take financial stability considerations into account. 
This is most obviously the case when financial imbalances affect the near-term outlook for 
output and inflation. 
                                                 
8  Bank  research,  using  ToTEM  and  other  models,  suggests  that,  as  the  proportion  of  agents  with  forward-
looking  expectations  declines  toward  50  per  cent,  the  advantages  of  PLT  over  inflation  targeting  appear  to 
diminish  quickly.  S.  Murchison,  “Consumer  Price  Index  Targeting,”  Bank  of  Canada  Working  Paper 
(forthcoming). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
In some exceptional circumstances where imbalances pose an economy-wide threat and/or 
where the imbalances themselves are being encouraged by a low interest rate environment, 
monetary  policy  might  itself  be  the  appropriate  tool  to  support  financial  stability.  Monetary 
policy has a broad influence on financial markets and on the leverage of financial institutions 
that cannot easily be avoided. This “bluntness” makes monetary policy an inappropriate tool 
to deal with imbalances that matter only to a specific sector, but a potentially valuable tool in 
addressing imbalances that may eventually have economy-wide implications. Furthermore, a 
general  understanding  that  monetary  policy  will  be  used  to  counteract  pre-emptively  the 
buildup of such imbalances is likely to enhance the stabilizing impact of this approach. 
But  this  last  point  should  not  be  overstated.  The  paramount  goal  of  monetary  policy  in 
Canada  has  been,  and  remains,  price  stability.  The  primary  tools  to  deal  with  financial 
stability  are  micro-  and  macroprudential  regulation  and  supervision.  Macroprudential  tools 
are not a substitute for monetary policy in controlling inflation, and monetary policy cannot 
substitute  for  proper  micro-  and  macroprudential  supervision  and  regulation  in  maintaining 
financial stability. 
Confirming Canada’s flexible inflation-targeting regime 
Armed  with  these  insights,  the  Bank  and  the  Government  have  renewed  the  inflation-
targeting  regime  that  has  served  Canada  so  well  over  the  past  two  decades.  The  core 
elements  of  the  regime  remain  unchanged.  The  Bank  will  continue  to  conduct  monetary 
policy aimed at keeping inflation, as measured by the total consumer price index (CPI), at 
2 per cent, with a control range of 1 to 3 per cent around this target. 
The  inflation  target  is  symmetric,  which  means  that  the  Bank  is  equally  concerned  about 
inflation rising above or falling below the 2 per cent target. The Bank continues to use core 
inflation as an operational guide for its monetary policy because it is an effective indicator of 
the underlying trend in CPI inflation. Core inflation, along with other measures of inflationary 
pressures,  is  monitored  to  help  achieve  the  target  for  total  CPI  inflation;  it  is  not  a 
replacement for the latter. 
A flexible exchange rate is also a core element of Canada’s monetary policy framework. A 
floating Canadian dollar plays a key role in the transmission of monetary policy and allows 
the Bank to pursue an independent monetary policy. It also helps to absorb shocks to the 
economy. 
The  inflation-targeting  framework  has  always  been  flexible.  Typically,  the  Bank  seeks  to 
return inflation to target over a horizon of six to eight quarters. However, over the past twenty 
years,  there  has  been  considerable  variation  in  the  horizon,  in  response  to  varying 
circumstances  and  economic  shocks.  This  flexibility  is  required  because,  when  taking 
monetary  policy  actions  to  stabilize  inflation  at  target,  the  Bank  must  also  manage  the 
volatility that these actions may induce in the economy. These trade-offs will differ depending 
on the nature and persistence of the shocks buffeting the economy. 
There are limits to this flexibility. The Bank’s scope to exercise it is founded on the credibility 
built up through its demonstrated success in achieving the inflation target. This reinforces the 
importance  of  continuing  the  Bank’s  relentless  focus  on  achieving  the  2  per  cent  inflation 
target over time. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude with a quick illustration of how we are applying the framework under current 
circumstances.  As  recently  as  July,  markets  were  expecting  the  near-term  withdrawal  of 
monetary policy stimulus in Canada. At that point, the policy interest rate had remained near 
historic lows for the better part of a year, even after Canada had recovered both all of the 
jobs  and  all  of  the  output  lost  during  the  recession.  This  degree  of  stimulus  was  in  part 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
necessitated  by  the  considerable  external  headwinds  facing  the  Canadian  economy, 
including weak U.S. activity and the persistent strength of the Canadian dollar. Since then, 
the  Canadian  economy  has  been  hit  by  major  shocks.  The  global  economic  outlook  has 
weakened  considerably and  financial  market  volatility  has  increased,  owing  in  particular  to 
the ongoing European sovereign debt crisis. European authorities have announced important 
plans to provide time to refound their monetary union, but acute strains persist. At this point, 
the crisis appears barely contained. 
In Canada, total CPI inflation is near the top of the target range, and preliminary evidence 
suggests that economic growth in the second half of the year will be slightly stronger than the 
Bank  had  projected  in  the  October  Monetary  Policy  Report.  However,  as  outlined  in  the 
October Report, a weaker external outlook is expected to dampen growth in Canada through 
financial,  confidence  and  trade  channels.  Domestic  demand  is  expected  to  remain  the 
primary  driver  of  growth  in  Canada,  but  these  shocks  from  abroad  imply  more  subdued 
growth  in  household  expenditures  and  less  vigorous  growth  in  business  investment.  As  a 
result, the Bank continues to expect excess supply in the economy to persist well into 2013. 
This, along with the reversal of earlier sharp increases in food and energy prices, is expected 
to push total CPI inflation toward the bottom of the target range by the middle of next year. 
In  this  environment,  the  Bank  judges  it  appropriate  to  maintain  the  considerable  monetary 
stimulus in place. This stimulus has been further enhanced by the sharp fall in global risk-
free  yields,  which  is  providing  further  support  to  the  Canadian  economy  through  our  well-
functioning  financial  system.  The  Bank  will  continue  to  monitor  carefully  economic  and 
financial developments in the Canadian and global economies, together with the evolution of 
risks, and set monetary policy consistent with achieving the 2 per cent inflation target over 
the medium term. 
In a perfect world, there would be no further shocks, and those that have hit us would have 
precisely the effects that we anticipate. Then again, in a perfect world, these shocks wouldn’t 
have happened in the first place. We make monetary policy in the real world, where shocks 
are a fact of life. That is why the Bank responds with a flexible approach, taking decisions 
guided by considered analysis and informed judgment rather than mechanical rules. It is our 
job to anticipate potential shocks, analyse their impact on economic activity and inflation in 
Canada, and set monetary policy consistent with achieving the 2 per cent inflation target over 
time.  This  ultimately  remains  the  best  contribution  that  monetary  policy  can  make  to  the 
economic well-being of Canadians. 
 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
