Narayana Kocherlakota: Further thoughts on making monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Narayana  Kocherlakota,  President  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Minneapolis, to the Harvard Club of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, 21 October 2011. 
 I thank Doug Clement, David Fettig, Terry Fitzgerald and Kei-Mu Yi for their helpful comments. 
Thank you very much for that generous introduction. It is a special pleasure to meet with this 
group so soon after the announcement that two of your fellow alums have been awarded the 
2011 Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel. I am referring, of course, to 
Thomas  Sargent  and  Christopher  Sims,  and  I  would  like  to  begin  my  remarks  by 
congratulating  Tom  and  Chris  on  this  well-deserved  honor.  In  the  1970s,  in  independent 
research, they developed systematic approaches to distinguishing between cause and effect 
in  macroeconomic  data.  Now,  almost  40  years  later,  their  thinking  informs  the  making  of 
macroeconomic policy around the world.  
I  am  especially  pleased  to  acknowledge  Chris  and  Tom’s  achievement  because  of  their 
connection  to  the  state  of  Minnesota.  After  earning  their  Ph.D.s  in  economics  at  Harvard, 
where Chris also received his undergrad degree in mathematics, Tom and Chris went on to 
do much of their Prize-winning work right here in Minneapolis, as professors at the University 
of  Minnesota  and  consultants  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Minneapolis.  I’m  sure  that 
many of you in the room today followed that same career path, from an education at one of 
America’s oldest colleges to accomplishing great things here in the North Star State.  
In my remarks today, I’d like to touch on several topics. I’ll begin with a quick description of 
the  structure  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  and  the  deliberative  process  of  the  Federal 
Open Market Committee – the Committee that makes monetary policy for the nation. Then I’ll 
describe  the  FOMC’s  objectives  and  discuss  how  the  FOMC  makes  decisions  so  as  to 
achieve  those  objectives.  I’ll  close  with  a  discussion  of  my  dissents  on  recent  FOMC 
decisions and some perspectives on monetary policy going forward. After that, I’ll be pleased 
to  answer  any  questions  you  may  have.  And  before  I  begin,  I  should  remind  you  that  my 
comments  here  today  reflect  my  views  alone,  and  not  necessarily  those  of  others  in  the 
Federal Reserve System, including my FOMC colleagues. 
Some FOMC basics  
The Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis is one of 12 regional Reserve banks that, along 
with the Board of Governors in Washington, D.C., make up the Federal Reserve System. Our 
bank represents the ninth of the 12 Federal Reserve districts, and by area, we’re the second 
largest. Our district includes Montana, the Dakotas, Minnesota, northwestern Wisconsin and 
the Upper Peninsula of Michigan.  
Eight times per year, the FOMC meets to set the path of monetary policy over the next six to 
seven weeks. All 12 presidents of the various regional Federal Reserve banks – including me 
–  and  the  seven  governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Board,  including  Chairman  Bernanke, 
contribute to these deliberations. (Currently, there are only five governors – two positions are 
unfilled.) However, the Committee itself consists only of the governors, the president of the 
Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  and  a  group  of  four  other  presidents  that  rotates 
annually.  Right  now,  that  last  group  consists  of  the  presidents  from  the  Minneapolis, 
Philadelphia, Dallas and Chicago Federal Reserve Banks.  
I’ve said that the FOMC meets (at least) eight times per year. But how do these meetings 
work? At a typical meeting, there are two so-called go-rounds, in which every president and 
every governor has the opportunity to speak without interruption. The first of these is referred 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
to  as  the  economics  go-round.  It  is  kicked  off  by  a  presentation  on  current  economic 
conditions  by  Federal  Reserve  staff  economists.  Then,  the  presidents  and  governors 
describe their individual views on current economic conditions and their respective outlooks 
for future economic conditions. The presidents typically start by providing information about 
their district’s local economic performance. We get that information from our research staffs, 
but also from our interactions with business and community leaders in industries and towns 
from across our districts.  
The chairman speaks at the end of the first go-round. He briefly but thoroughly summarizes 
the  preceding  16  perspectives.  I  can  assure  you  that  this  is  no  easy  task  –  and  the 
chairman’s  balanced  and  thoughtful  treatment  of  our  remarks  is  one  of  the  many  reasons 
that he commands such respect among his colleagues. He then provides his own views on 
the economy.  
The Committee next turns to the second go-round, which focuses on policy. Again, the staff 
begins, with a presentation of policy options. After that, each of the 17 meeting participants 
has  a  chance  to  speak  on  what  each  views  as  the  appropriate  policy  choice.  This  set  of 
remarks is followed by a summary by the chairman, in which he lays out what he sees as the 
Committee’s consensus view for future policy. The voting members of the FOMC then cast 
their votes on this policy statement and thereby set monetary policy for the next six to seven 
weeks. 
I  hope  that  this  description  of  an  FOMC  meeting  conveys  two  things.  First,  the  meeting 
participants  view  monetary  policy  as  a  largely  technocratic  exercise  that  is  fundamentally 
apolitical.  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  our  policy  discussions  are  largely  based  on  information-
gathering and model analyses by meeting participants and their staffs. I would say that the 
tone of the discussion is pretty much in accord with its rather technical substance. There is 
disagreement, of course. How could there not be in such challenging and unusual economic 
times? But, as a relative newcomer, I’ve been impressed with how the dialogue within the 
meeting room is always fundamentally grounded in a deep respect for the job at hand and for 
each other.  
Second,  my  description  of  an  FOMC  meeting  highlights  how  the  structure  of  the  FOMC 
mirrors the federalist structure of our government. Representatives from different regions of 
the  country  –  the  various  presidents  –  have  input  into  FOMC  deliberations.  And,  as  I’ve 
described,  their  input  relies  critically  on  information  received  from  district  residents.  In  this 
way,  the  Federal  Reserve  System  is  deliberately  designed  to  give  the  residents  of  Main 
Street a voice in national monetary policy. 
FOMC objectives 
I’ve  said  that  FOMC  participants  seek  to  adopt  what  they  view  as  the  appropriate  policy 
choice. That provides a natural segue into my next topic: the policy objectives of the FOMC. 
The FOMC has a dual mandate, established by Congress: to set monetary policy so as to 
promote price stability and maximum employment. In my view, the heart of implementing the 
price stability mandate is to formulate and communicate an objective for inflation. The central 
bank  then  fulfills  its  price  stability  mandate  by  making  choices  over  time  so  as  to  keep 
inflation close to that objective.  
Of course, the central bank’s job is complicated by economic shocks that may lower or raise 
inflationary pressures. The central bank provides additional monetary accommodation – like 
lower interest rates – in response to the shocks that push down on medium-term inflation. It 
reduces accommodation in response to the shocks that push up on inflation. By doing so, it 
works to ensure that inflation stays close to its objective.  
It  is  not  enough  to  have  an  objective  –  the  Federal  Reserve  must  also  communicate  that 
objective  clearly  and  credibly.  That  communication  serves  to  anchor  the  public’s  medium- 
and  long-term  inflationary  expectations.  Put  another  way,  without  clear  communication  of 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
objectives,  the  public  can  only  guess  at  the  intentions  of  the  FOMC,  and  inflationary 
expectations and inflation itself will inevitably end up fluctuating – and perhaps by a lot. It is 
possible to undo these shifts in expectations, but doing so entails significant economic cost. 
The nation saw this all too clearly in the early 1980s, when tighter monetary policy necessary 
to rein in high inflation resulted in painful employment losses.  
The  Federal  Reserve  communicates  its  objective  for  inflation  in  a  number  of  ways.  For 
example, at quarterly intervals, FOMC meeting participants publicly reveal their forecasts for 
inflation in the longer run (maybe five or six years), assuming that monetary policy is optimal. 
Those forecasts usually range between 1.5 percent and 2 percent per year. They are often 
collectively referred to by saying that the Federal Reserve views inflation as being “mandate-
consistent” if it is running at “2 percent or a bit under.” 
Congress has also mandated that the FOMC set monetary policy so as to promote maximum 
employment. Some see an intrinsic conflict between the FOMC’s price stability mandate and 
maximum  employment  mandate.  But  there  is  actually  a  deep  sense  in  which  the  price 
stability and maximum employment mandates are intertwined. Imagine that inflation runs at 
3 or  4  percent  per  year  for  three  or  four  years.  The  public  will  then  start  to  doubt  the 
credibility  of  the  Fed’s  stated  commitment  to  a  2-percent-or-a-bit-under  objective.  The 
public’s medium-term inflationary expectations will consequently begin to rise. As we saw in 
the  latter  part  of  the  1970s,  these  changes  in  expectations  can  serve  to  reinforce  and 
augment the upward drift in inflation. At that point, the Federal Reserve will have to tighten 
policy considerably if it wishes to regain control of inflation. But we learned in the early 1980s 
that the resultant tightening – while necessary – generates large losses in employment. In 
other  words,  failing  to  meet  its  price  stability  mandate  can  also  lead  the  FOMC,  over  the 
medium and long term, to substantial failure on its employment mandate.1 
An important and ongoing communications challenge for the FOMC is that it is much harder 
to quantify the maximum employment mandate than the price stability mandate. Changes in 
minimum  wage  policy,  demography,  taxes  and  regulations,  technological  productivity,  job 
market efficiency, unemployment insurance benefits, entrepreneurial credit access and social 
norms all influence what we might consider “maximum employment.” Trying to offset these 
changes  in the  economy  with  monetary  policy  can  lead  to  a  dangerous  drift  in  inflationary 
expectations and ultimately in inflation itself. 
Over the past year, the FOMC has communicated through its statements that it perceives the 
current unemployment rate to be elevated relative to levels that it views as consistent with its 
dual mandate. In this situation, there is a trade-off involved in the making of monetary policy. 
On  the  one  hand,  adding  monetary  accommodation  reduces  unemployment.  On  the  other 
hand, adding accommodation increases the risk of generating inflation markedly higher than 
the Committee’s objective of 2 percent for a significant period of time. In choosing whether to 
add monetary stimulus or not, the Committee must resolve this trade-off between the fall in 
unemployment and the increase in the risk of inflation.  
I’ve described the relevant trade-off in the traditional way as being one between employment 
gains and inflation risks. This description emphasizes a tension between the two mandates 
of the Federal Reserve. But, as I explained earlier, if the public observes inflation running at 
more  than  2  percent  for  multiple  years,  their  inflation  expectations  may  drift  upward.  This 
increase in expectations can give rise to a need for monetary tightening that may generate 
large  employment 
thinking  about  adding  monetary 
In  other  words,  when 
losses. 
                                                 
1  The  discussion  in  this  paragraph  is  largely  consistent  with  the  following  quote  from  Chairman  Bernanke’s 
response  to  a  reporter’s  question  in  April  about  the  Fed’s  ability  to  lower  the  rate  of  unemployment  more 
rapidly: “even purely from an employment perspective – that if inflation were to become unmoored, inflation 
expectations were to rise significantly, that the cost of that in terms of employment loss in the future, as we 
had  to  respond  to  that,  would  be  quite  significant.”  (See  transcript  of  Chairman  Bernanke’s  April  27,  2011, 
press conference, p. 14.) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
accommodation, the Federal Reserve confronts a basic trade-off that can be framed without 
reference to its price stability mandate: a trade-off between short-term employment gains and 
the risk of larger longer-term employment losses. 
Making monetary policy: responding to a mandate dashboard 
The FOMC’s dual mandate, as I’ve said, is to keep inflation at 2 percent or a bit under and to 
promote  maximum  employment  –  that  is,  to  keep  unemployment  low.  But  how  does  the 
FOMC make its choices at each meeting so as to achieve these goals? I believe that it is 
useful to think of a driver who is trying to maintain a car speed. To do so, he’ll vary pressure 
on  the  accelerator  in  response  to  changes  in  road  conditions,  current  and  expected:  hills, 
valleys, rough pavement, headwinds. In the same way, the FOMC varies its chosen level of 
monetary  accommodation  in  response  to  changes  in  current  and  expected  economic 
conditions.  
This  kind  of  systematic  response  to  changing  economic  conditions  is  an  essential  part  of 
good  monetary  policy  for  at  least  two  reasons.  First,  there  is  a  great  deal  of  empirical 
evidence and theoretical support for the idea that following a policy rule, as economists call 
it, is what enables the Committee to achieve its dual mandate goals. Second, and perhaps 
more importantly, actions speak louder than words. The Committee can claim that it intends 
to make monetary policy so as to fulfill its dual mandate. But the public can and does watch 
its actions carefully in this regard. If the Committee fails to reduce its immense amount of 
accommodation  in  a  timely  fashion,  the  public  may  well  begin  to  doubt  the  Committee’s 
claims about its goals.  
Right  now,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  multiple  forms  of  accommodative  monetary  policy  in 
place. For example, the FOMC is targeting a fed funds rate of between 0 and 25 basis points 
– that is, between 0 percent and 0.25 percent. This kind of accommodation – keeping short-
term interest rates extremely low – is an entirely conventional response to unduly low levels 
of inflation and unduly high levels of unemployment. By keeping market interest rates low, 
the  policy  encourages  companies  to  invest  in  hiring  and  business  expansion,  and  it 
encourages  households  to  spend  more.  The  Committee  has  announced  that  it  anticipates 
that conditions will be such that the fed funds rate will stay between 0 and 25 basis points for 
at least 20 more months.  
The second kind of accommodation is less conventional. The Fed has bought over $2 trillion 
of longer-term government securities and has announced its intention to buy still more. The 
goal of this form of accommodation is to raise the prices of longer-term securities and lower 
longer-term yields. In so doing, more long-term investments – like building factories or hiring 
workers – become more attractive to businesses. 
This  combined  package  of  accommodation  is  really  unprecedented.  As  I’ve  described  at 
some length in earlier speeches, I believe that it has been critical in keeping inflation from 
falling lower and unemployment from rising higher.2 But, as economic conditions improve, the 
FOMC will need to reduce the amount of accommodation that it is providing. What conditions 
are relevant? Again, I think that it’s useful to think of a car driver who is trying to maintain his 
speed. To know how much (or how little) acceleration to provide, the driver would certainly 
like  to  know  his  current  speed.  As  well,  he  would  like  to  know  how  future  road  conditions  
– like hills – are likely to affect his future speed.  
The FOMC’s problem is quite similar. Just like the driver needs to know his current speed, 
the FOMC needs an accurate measure of current inflation and unemployment. Just as the 
                                                 
2  See,  most  recently,  my  Oct.  13,  2011,  speech,  “Making  Monetary  Policy”  and  my  Sept.  6,  2011,  speech, 
“Communication,  Credibility  and  Implementation:  Some  Thoughts  on  Current,  Past  and  Future  Monetary 
Policy.” 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
driver  needs  an  estimate  of  his  future  speed,  based  on  anticipated  road  conditions,  the 
FOMC should have an assessment of the future levels of inflation and unemployment.  
I find it helpful to summarize the relevant information in what I term a mandate dashboard. 
For  reasons  that  will  become  clear  later  in  my  remarks,  I  think  that  it’s  useful  to  start  by 
looking  at  the  dashboard  from  early  November  2010  –  that  is,  from  about  a  year  ago.  I’ll 
explain  the  dashboard  starting  with  the  inflation  side.  The  first  cell  from  the  left  is  current 
inflation. The second cell is what inflation is projected to be in one year’s time. Finally, the 
third  cell  contains  a  forecast  for  inflation  in  two  years’  time.  The  unemployment  side  is 
similar.  The  first  cell  from  the  left  represents  current  unemployment.  The  second  cell 
represents a forecast for unemployment in one year’s time, and the third cell represents a 
forecast for unemployment in two years’ time.  
 Of course, I have to be a little more precise in what I mean by inflation and unemployment. 
By “inflation,” I mean the change in the personal consumption expenditure (PCE) price index 
over the preceding four quarters, excluding changes in the prices of food and energy. Hence, 
my  measure  of  inflation  in  the  dashboard  is  what  is  commonly  called  “core  inflation.”  I’m 
using core inflation because I view it as a good measure of overall inflationary pressures over 
the next two to three years. 
By “unemployment,” I mean the unemployment rate averaged over the three months in the 
current quarter. The forecasts for future inflation and unemployment are the midpoints of the 
central tendencies of the projections of FOMC participants that they released in November.  
Just  as  a  driver  should  adjust  acceleration  according  to  information  provided  by  his 
dashboard,  the  FOMC  should  vary  the  level  of  monetary  accommodation  in  response  to 
changes  in  the  mandate  dashboard.  The  exact  quantitative  response  will  depend  on  the 
precise movements of the six variables and on how the FOMC is resolving the trade-off that I 
mentioned earlier between inflation risks and unemployment reductions. But the qualitative 
direction of the response is typically easier to determine. For example, the November 2010 
dashboard  shows  that  the  FOMC  expected  the  unemployment  rate  to  fall  over  time  
– slowly – and the inflation rate to rise – slightly. As that happens, the FOMC should respond 
by slowly lowering its immense level of monetary accommodation.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Recent inconsistency in monetary policy actions 
I picked November 2010 as a good base date because at that point in time, the FOMC added 
considerably to the level of monetary policy accommodation. The Committee undertook the 
purchase of $600 billion of long-term Treasuries over the following eight months, in what was 
called QE2. I supported this action within the meeting and then later publicly. The Committee 
took no further significant policy action until the last two meetings in August and September 
2011, at which the FOMC added considerably more accommodation.  
I dissented from the FOMC decisions at these last two meetings. My thinking behind those 
dissents  is  grounded  in  the  evolution  of  the  mandate  dashboard  over  the  past  year.  The 
entries for November 2010 are exactly what I’ve already shown you, and they’re based on 
the FOMC’s economic projections. The FOMC’s most recent 2011 projections date back to 
June, and so the entries for October 2011 are based on my own forecasts. The fourth quarter 
is not yet complete, but it looks like fourth-quarter-over-fourth-quarter PCE core inflation in 
2011 will be around 1.9 percent. I expect it to rise over the next couple of years to slightly 
above 2 percent. At the same time, unemployment is 9.1 percent. I expect it to fall slowly to 
around 8 percent by the end of 2013. I should say that private sector forecasts for inflation 
over the next two years are probably closer to 1.6 percent rather than 2.1 percent. However, 
my forecasts for unemployment are roughly similar to those of private sector forecasters.  
 Notice that the second cell for the November 2010 row is the forecast for inflation over the 
course of 2011, and the second cell for the October 2011 row is the forecast for inflation over 
the course of 2012. We generally think that monetary policy operates with a one- or two-year 
lag. Accordingly, the dashboard keeps track of what we expect the economy to be like in a 
year or two.  
Regardless of whether my forecasts or the private sector forecasts are used, inflation – and 
the outlook for inflation – has risen markedly since last November. Unemployment – and the 
outlook for unemployment – has fallen. These changes in the mandate dashboard suggest 
that  the  Committee  should  have  lowered  the  level  of  monetary  accommodation  over  the 
course  of  the  year.  Instead,  the  Committee  chose  to  raise  the  level  of  monetary 
accommodation. The Committee’s actions in the last two meetings are thus inconsistent with 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the  evolution  of  the  economy  in  2011.  Given  this  inconsistency  between  the  Committee’s 
actions and the evolution of the economy, I decided to dissent in August and September.  
I want to be clear about one important point. Like many private sector forecasters, the FOMC 
has  overestimated  the  strength  of  the  recovery  over  the  past  two  years.  Some  have 
suggested  that  the  unexpected  slowness  of  the  recovery  is  a  justification  for  the  FOMC’s 
increasing  the  level  of  monetary  accommodation  over  the  past  couple  of  months.  But  I 
disagree  with  this  argument.  I’ve  just  described  why  the  FOMC  should  respond  to 
improvements in economic conditions and outlook with a reduction in the level of monetary 
accommodation. Logically, if the economy recovers much more slowly than expected, then 
the  FOMC  should  respond  by  reducing  the  level  of  monetary  accommodation  much  more 
slowly  than  expected.  The  FOMC  should  only  increase  accommodation  if  the  economy’s 
performance and outlook, relative to the dual mandate, actually worsens over time.  
Conclusions 
Let me wrap up with some final thoughts about 2011 and a look ahead to 2012. Earlier in my 
speech, I set forth what I see as a key trade-off involved in the making of monetary policy. 
There is a benefit to adding monetary accommodation: It reduces unemployment. There is a 
cost to adding monetary accommodation: It increases the risk of inflation running above the 
Committee’s objective of 2 percent for multiple years. The FOMC’s actions in 2011 suggest 
that  the  Committee  is  resolving  this  key  benefit-cost  trade-off  differently  in  2011  from 
however it viewed the trade-off in 2010. In particular, it appears that the Committee is now 
more tolerant of the risk of higher-than-2-percent inflation than it was in 2010.  
Moreover,  as  I  explained  earlier,  one  can  reframe  this  trade-off  in  a  way  that  is  entirely 
separate from the price stability mandate. Higher-than-2-percent inflation over multiple years 
might lead to an upward drift in inflationary expectations. The Fed found in the 1970s that 
this upward drift could only be retarded by large medium- and long-term employment losses. 
Thus, I view the basic unemployment-inflation trade-off in the making of monetary policy as 
really  being  about  short-term  employment  gains  and  the  risk  of  larger  longer-term 
employment  losses.  The  FOMC’s  actions  in  2011  suggest  that  it  is  resolving  this  trade-off 
differently  from  however  it  viewed  the  trade-off  in  2010.  In  particular,  it  appears  that  the 
Committee  has  reduced  the  weight  that  it  is  putting  on  the  long  term  and  increased  the 
weight that it is putting on the short term. 
Now, I should be clear: I don’t view the Committee’s current resolution of this trade-off as 
being intrinsically problematic. Nor did I view the Committee’s resolution of this trade-off in 
2010 as being intrinsically problematic. What I do see as problematic is that the Committee’s 
resolution of this trade-off appears to be changing over time. In particular, the Committee’s 
actions in 2011 suggest that it is more willing to tolerate inflation risks – and the concomitant 
medium-term and long-term employment losses – than it was in 2010. If this drift in inflation 
risk tolerance were to persist, or were expected to persist, it could give rise to a damaging 
increase  in  inflationary  expectations.  It  is  exactly  in  this  sense  that  I  have  said  in  earlier 
speeches that the Committee’s actions in 2011 served to weaken the Committee’s credibility.  
But  enough  about  the  past  –  what  about  the  future?  I  believe  that  the  FOMC’s  decision-
making in 2011 has introduced a lack of clarity about its monetary policy mission. I believe 
that this lack of clarity can and should be addressed in two steps. First, the FOMC should 
explain how it plans to resolve the trade-off between inflation and unemployment in making 
its  future  decisions.  Second,  on  an  ongoing  basis,  the  Committee  should  provide  explicit 
communication about how its chosen actions are indeed consistent with its pre-announced 
resolution of the inflation-unemployment trade-off. Here, I believe that the use of metrics like 
the mandate dashboard provides a useful form of discipline – both on our own actions and 
on the public’s understanding of those actions.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
In  a  speech  he  gave  last  May,  Chairman  Bernanke  stated,  “Transparency  regarding 
monetary policy … not only helps make central banks more accountable, it also increases 
the  effectiveness  of  policy.”3  I  agree  completely  with  this  sentiment.  And  I  see  my  two 
recommended future steps – clearer communication about trade-offs and the explicit use of 
metrics  like  the  mandate  dashboard  –  as  promoting  exactly  the  kind  of  transparency  that 
Chairman Bernanke was describing.  
Thank you for listening. I look forward to taking your questions.  
                                                 
3  See  Chairman  Bernanke’s  May  25,  2010,  speech,  “Central  Bank  Independence,  Transparency,  and 
Accountability.” 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
