Duvvuri Subbarao: Financial regulation for growth, equity and stability in 
the post-crisis world 
Inaugural address by Dr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
First Centre for Advanced Financial Research and Learning (CAFRAL)-Bank for International 
Settlements (BIS) international conference on “Financial sector regulation for growth, equity 
and stability in the post-crisis world”, Mumbai, 15 November 2011. 
 Let me start by telling you about the motivation for the conference theme. 
Failure  of  regulation,  by  wide  agreement,  was  one  of  the  main  causes  of  the  2008  global 
financial crisis. It is unsurprising therefore that reforming regulation has come centre stage 
post-crisis. The progress in regulatory reforms over the last two years has been impressive, 
but  the  agenda  ahead  remains  formidable.  Regulation  will  bring  in  benefits  by  way  of 
financial stability, but it also imposes costs. There are some ball park numbers for what the 
Basel III package might entail in terms of growth, but there has been no rigorous thinking on 
what the whole gamut of regulatory reforms currently on the agenda might mean for growth, 
equity and stability in terms of costs and benefits over time and in different regions of the 
world. Thinking through these vital and complex issues is the main motivation for the theme 
of this conference – Financial Sector Regulation – Equity, Stability and Growth in the Post-
crisis World. 
There was another strong motivation for the choice of the conference theme. The crisis, as 
we all know, was brewed in the advanced economies, and much of the post-crisis reforms 
are accordingly driven by the need to fix what went wrong there. The reform proposals were 
discussed at international forums like the FSB and the BCBS. What has struck me though is 
that  the  agenda  and  the  deliberations  have  been  dominated  by  advanced  economy 
concerns.  As  emerging  economies,  we  have  had  a  seat  at  the  table  in  these  international 
forums,  but  we  haven’t  been  able  to  engage  meaningfully  in  the  debate  as  we  have  not 
related to the issues. The stability of the advanced economy financial sectors is, of course, 
important  to  us.  After  all  we  live  in  a  globalizing  world,  and  what  happens  anywhere  has 
impact everywhere. What concerns us, though, is that these global standards are going to be 
applied uniformly but their implications for EMEs will be different given the different stages of 
our  financial  sector  development  and  our  varied  macroeconomic  circumstances.  We  hope 
that this conference will provide a forum for generating an emerging economy perspective on 
issues  of  growth,  equity  and  stability  in  the  context  of  the  post-crisis  thinking  on  financial 
sector regulation. 
I have great pleasure in welcoming all the delegates to this first CAFRAL-BIS international 
conference. You have travelled from around the country and across the world to be present 
here,  and  we  value  your  participation  in  this  conference.  I  would  like  to  acknowledge,  in 
particular, the presence here of Mr. Jaime Caruana, General Manager of BIS and the co-host 
of this conference, Mr. Andrew Sheng, Ms. Stephanie Griffith Jones and Mr. John Lipsky, all 
three  eminent  thought  leaders,  who  will  be  chairing  the  various  sessions,  and  my 
predecessor at the Reserve Bank, Dr. Y.V. Reddy who, during his term in office, earned a 
formidable reputation as a zealous guardian of financial stability. 
I struggled to determine what I should say in this inaugural address. One option would be to 
attempt  a  comprehensive  overview  of  all  the  issues  that  might  come  up  in  the  subject 
sessions. Such double guessing would clearly be presumptuous on my part given the depth 
and breadth of experience you bring to this forum. I will attempt something less ambitious. 
What I will do is raise five questions straddling the three dimensions of the conference theme 
– growth, equity and stability in the context of financial regulation – and sketch out an answer 
to  each  of  them  in  the  hope  that  we  will  get  more  informed  answers  by  the  end  of  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
conference. I will fall back on the Indian experience, which I know best, to illustrate some of 
what I say. I believe our experience will be relevant and applicable across a broad swathe of 
emerging and developing economies.  
Question 1: If financial sector development is good, is more of it better? 
Development  experience  evidences  a  strong  correlation  between 
financial  sector 
development  and  economic  growth,  with  the  causation  possibly  running  both  ways. 
Economic  growth  generates  demand  for  financial  services  and  spurs  financial  sector 
development. In the reverse direction, the more developed the financial sector, the better it is 
able to allocate resources and thereby promote economic development. 
In India, we have experienced causation in both directions. We embarked on wide ranging 
economic reforms following a balance of payment crisis in 1991. Very soon we realized that 
the growth impulses generated by the liberalizing regime could not be sustained unless we 
also undertook financial sector reforms. That is an illustration of growth triggering financial 
sector  development.  For  an  example  of  the  causation in  the  reverse direction,  we  have  to 
look no further than India’s remarkable growth acceleration in the period 2003–08 when we 
clocked growth of 9+per cent. Many factors have been cited as being responsible for this – 
higher  savings  rates,  improved  productivity,  growing  entrepreneurism  and  external  sector 
stability.  But  one  of  the  unacknowledged  drivers  of  that  growth  acceleration  has  been  the 
impressive  improvement  in  the  quality  and  quantum  of  financial  intermediation  in  India, 
evidencing how financial sector can spur growth. 
Given the historical experience, it is tempting to believe that if financial sector development 
aids growth, more of it must be better. I am afraid that will be misleading. We must look for a 
more nuanced response, especially in the light of the lessons of the crisis. 
In  the  world  that  existed  before  the  crisis  –  a  benign  global  environment  of  easy  liquidity, 
stable  growth  and  low  inflation  –  the  financial  sector  kept  delivering  profits,  and  everyone 
became  enticed  by  a  misleading  euphoria  that  profits  would  keep  rolling  in  forever.  Herb 
Stein,  an  economist,  pointed  out  the  truism  that  “if  something  cannot  go  on  forever,  it  will 
eventually  stop”.  But  no  one  paid  attention.  The  financial  sector  just  kept  growing  out  of 
alignment with the real world. 
It will be useful to put some numbers on how, across rich countries, this misalignment kept 
on increasing. Take the case of the United States. Over the last 50 years, the share of value 
added  from  manufacturing  in  GDP  shrank  by  more  than  half  from  around  25  per  cent  to 
12 per cent while the share of financial sector more than doubled from 3.7 per cent to 8.4 per 
cent.  The  same  trend  is  reflected  in  profits  too.  Over  the  last  50  years,  the  share  of 
manufacturing sector profits in total profits declined by more than two thirds from 49 per cent 
to 15 per cent while the share of profits of the financial sector more than doubled from 17 per 
cent to 35 per cent. The large share of the financial sector in profits, when its share of activity 
was so much lower, tells a compelling story about the misalignment of the real and financial 
sectors. 
The world view before the crisis clearly was that the growth of the financial sector, in and of 
itself, was desirable, indeed that real growth can be got by sheer financial engineering. Our 
faith in the financial sector grew to such an extent that before the crisis, we believed that for 
every real sector problem, no matter how complex, there is a financial sector solution. The 
crisis has made us wiser. We now know that for every real sector problem, no matter how 
complex,  there  is  a  financial  sector  solution,  which  is  wrong.  In  the  pre-crisis  euphoria  of 
financial alchemy, we forgot that the goal of all development effort is the growth of the real 
economy, and that the financial sector is useful only to the extent it helps deliver stronger 
and more secure long term growth.  
How  does  financial  sector  regulation  come  into  all  this?  It  comes  in  because  the  financial 
sectors of emerging economies are still under development. How should they respond to the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
lessons of  the  crisis,  particularly  in  reshaping  their  regulations?  Is  a  larger  financial  sector 
necessarily better for growth? For equity? Is there such a thing as a “socially optimal” size for 
the  financial  sector?  What  are  the  weights  to  be  attached  to  growth  and  stability  in  the 
objective function of regulation? Are the weights stable over time, or if they should vary, on 
what basis? As we seek answers to this long list of questions, the basic tenet that must guide 
our thinking is that it is the real sector that must drive the financial sector, not the other way 
round.  
Question 2: Financial sector regulation, yes, but at what cost? 
Even  as  efficient  financial  intermediation  is  necessary  for  economic  growth,  the  financial 
sector  cannot  be  allowed  an  unfettered  rein;  it  needs  to  be  regulated  so  as  to  keep  the 
system stable. This we knew even before the crisis. What we have learnt after the crisis is 
that the quantum and quality of regulation matters much more than we thought.  
In the years before the crisis – indeed even before the Great Moderation – a consensus was 
building around the view that if the burden of regulation is reduced, the financial sector will 
deliver  more  growth.  That  consensus  has  nearly  dissolved.  We  now  know  that  financial 
markets do not always self-correct, that signs of instability are difficult to detect in real time, 
and that the costs of instability can be huge. Global income, trade and industrial production 
fell more sharply in the first twelve months of the Great Recession of 2008/09 than in the first 
twelve months of the Great Depression of the 1930s. Three years on, the crisis is still with 
us;  it  has  just  shifted  geography.  And  there  is  still  enormous  uncertainty  about  when  we 
might  see  its  end  and  with  what  final  tally  of  costs  in  terms  of  lost  output  and  foregone 
welfare. 
So, the emphasis of post-crisis regulatory reforms on making the financial system stable is 
understandable. But a relevant question is, where do we strike the balance between growth 
and  stability?  In  other  words,  how  much  growth  are  we  willing  to  sacrifice  in  order  to  buy 
insurance against financial instability? 
For illustrative purposes, let us take the Basel III package. A BIS study estimates that a one 
percentage  point  increase  in  the  target  ratio  of  tangible  common  equity  (TCE)  to  risk-
weighted assets (RWA) phased in over a nine year period reduces output by close to 0.2 per 
cent. It is argued though that as the financial system makes the required adjustment, these 
costs  will  dissipate  and  then  reverse  after  the  adjustment  period,  and  the  growth  path  will 
revert to its original trajectory. A BCBS study estimates that there will be net positive benefits 
out of Basel III because of the reduced probability of a crisis and reduced volatility in output 
in response to a shock. An IIF study, however, estimates a higher sacrifice ratio – that the G3 
(US,  Euro  Area  and  Japan)  will  lose  0.3  percentage  points  from  their  annual  growth  rates 
over the full ten-year period 2011–2020. 
What are the implications of these numbers relating to growth sacrifice for EMEs? Let me 
take the example of India. Admittedly, the capital to risk weighted asset ratio (CRAR) of our 
banks, at the aggregate level, is above the Basel III requirement although a few individual 
banks  may  fall  short  and  have  to  raise  capital.  But  capital  adequacy  today  does  not 
necessarily  mean  capital  adequacy  going  forward.  As  the  economy  grows,  so  too  will  the 
credit demand requiring banks to expand their balance sheets, and in order to be able to do 
so, they will have to augment their capital. 
In a structurally transforming economy with rapid upward mobility, credit demand will expand 
faster  than  GDP  for  several  reasons.  First,  India  will  shift  increasingly  from  services  to 
manufactures whose credit intensity is higher per unit of GDP. Second, we need to at least 
double our investment in infrastructure which will place enormous demands on credit. Finally, 
financial inclusion, which both the Government and the Reserve Bank are driving, will bring 
millions  of  low  income  households into  the  formal  financial  system  with  almost  all  of  them 
needing  credit.  What  all  this  means  is  that  we  are  going  to  have  to  impose  higher  capital 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
requirements  on  banks  as  per  Basel  III  at  a  time  when  credit  demand  is  going  to  expand 
rapidly. The concern is that this will raise the cost of credit and hence militate against growth.  
A familiar issue in monetary policy is an inflexion point beyond which  there is no trade-off 
between  growth  and  price  stability.  Is  there  a  similar  inflexion  point  in  the  growth-financial 
stability equation? If there is, how do we determine that point?  
Question 3: Does regulation have a role in achieving equity? 
That takes me to my third question: does regulation have a role in achieving equity? 
The dichotomy between growth and equity is standard stuff of development economics. For a 
long time, the orthodoxy was that if we took care of growth, equity followed automatically a la 
a high tide raising all boats. Experience has taught us that reality is more complex. Received 
wisdom today is that growth is a necessary, although not a sufficient, condition for equity. To 
achieve equity, we need growth that is poverty sensitive – that is growth to which the poor 
contribute and growth from which the poor benefit. 
How does this standard question translate in the context of financial sector regulation? This 
is  a  question  that  we  in  India  struggle  with.  Should  stability  be  the  sole  objective  of  our 
regulation, with other instruments being deployed to achieve equity? Or should equity be a 
variable in the objective function of regulation?  
To  seek  answers,  we  must  ask  a  variant  of  the  above  questions.  Is  the  financial  sector 
inherently equity promoting, or at least equity neutral? Our experience in India has been that 
left to itself, the financial sector does not have a pro-equity bias. Indeed, it is even possible to 
argue that the financial sector does not necessarily reach out to the bottom of the pyramid. 
Our response to counter this bias has been to use regulation to encourage socially optimal 
business  behaviour  by  financial  institutions.  Let  me  just  list  a  few  of  our  affirmative  action 
regulations.  We  have  a  directed  credit  scheme,  called  priority  sector  lending,  whereby  all 
banks are required to ensure that at least 40 per cent of their credit goes to identified priority 
sectors  like  agriculture  and  allied  activities,  micro,  small  and  medium  industries,  low  cost 
housing and education1. We have a “Lead Bank” scheme under which there is a designated 
commercial bank identified for each of the over 600 districts in the country with responsibility 
for ensuring implementation of a district credit plan that contains indicative targets for flow of 
credit  to  sectors  of  the  economy  that  banks  may  neglect.  We  have  largely  deregulated 
licencing of bank branches; banks are now free to open branches freely in population centres 
of less than 100,000 – with two stipulations: first at least a quarter of the branches should be 
located  in  unbanked  villages  with  a  maximum  population  of  10,000;  and  second,  their 
performance  in  financial  penetration  will  be  a  criterion  for  giving  banks  branch  licences  in 
metro and large urban centres. 
By  far  our  most  high  profile  campaign  in  recent  years  has  been  our  aggressive  pursuit  of 
financial  inclusion.  Why  is  financial  inclusion  important?  It  is  important  because  it  is  a 
necessary condition for sustaining equitable growth. There are few, if any, instances of an 
economy  transiting  from  an  agrarian  system  to  a  post-industrial  modern  society  without 
broad-based financial inclusion. As people having comfortable access to financial services, 
we all know from personal experience that economic opportunity is strongly intertwined with 
financial  access.  Such  access  is  especially  powerful  for  the  poor  as  it  provides  them 
opportunities  to  build  savings,  make  investments  and  avail  credit.  Importantly,  access  to 
financial services also helps the poor insure themselves against income shocks and equips 
them  to  meet  emergencies  such  as  illness,  death  in  the  family  or  loss  of  employment. 
                                                 
1   The ratio and the composition of the priority sector are different for foreign banks in consideration of the fact 
that they do not get “full national treatment” on some regulatory aspects. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Needless  to  add,  financial  inclusion  protects  the  poor  from  the  clutches  of  the  usurious 
money lenders. 
The extent of financial exclusion is staggering. Out of the 600,000 habitations in India, less 
than 30,000 have a commercial bank branch. Just about 40 per cent of the population across 
the country have bank accounts, and this ratio is much lower in the north-east of the country. 
The proportion of people having any kind of life insurance cover is as low as 10 per cent and 
proportion having non-life insurance is an abysmally low 0.6 per cent.  
These statistics, distressing as they are, do not convey the true extent of financial exclusion. 
Even where bank accounts are claimed to have been opened, verification has often shown 
that  the  accounts  are  dormant.  Few  conduct  any  banking  transactions  and  even  fewer 
receive  any  credit.  Millions  of  households  across  the  country  are  thereby  denied  the 
opportunity to harness their earning capacity and entrepreneurial talent, and are condemned 
to marginalization and poverty. 
Over  the  last  few  years,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  launched  several  initiatives  to  deepen 
financial inclusion. Our goal is not just that poor households must have a bank account, but 
that the account must be effectively used by them for savings, remittances and credit. Our 
most  ambitious  initiative  has  been  the  “Business  Correspondent”  model  or  branchless 
banking which, leveraging on technology, helps reach banking services to remote villages at 
a low overhead cost.  
In  the  context  of  this  conference  theme,  the  issue  is  the  following.  Financial  inclusion  is 
equity  promoting.  Banks,  however,  may  see  this  more  as  an  obligation  rather  than  as  an 
opportunity. Given that scenario, should we pursue financial inclusion through moral suasion 
or issue a regulatory fiat? What combination of regulatory incentives and disincentives would 
be optimal? 
As I leave this topic, I must also add that using regulation, or political direction in a larger 
sense,  for  achieving  equity  has  not  been  a  practice  unique  to  emerging  and  developing 
economies. It is quite common in rich societies as well. In his bestselling book, Fault Lines, 
Raghuram  Rajan  persuasively  argues  that  America’s  growing  inequality  and  thin  social 
safety-nets  created  tremendous  political  pressure  to  encourage  easy  credit  and  keep  job 
creation robust, no matter the consequences to the long-term health of the financial system. 
That is a thought we must ponder over. 
Question 4: Should we make banking boring? 
Post-crisis,  there  is  a  deluge  of  ideas  and  suggestions  on  reforming  banks,  banking  and 
bankers. Analysts with a historical perspective believe that the seeds of the 2008 crisis were 
sown  when  the  separation  of  banking  from  securities  dealing  was  undone.  What  really 
contributed  to  the  disproportionate  growth  of  the  financial  sector  relative  to  the  real  sector 
that  I  spoke  about  earlier  was  investment  banking  and  securities  dealing.  It  is  the  huge 
leveraging by this segment that fuelled the crisis. Hence, as the noted economist and Nobel 
laureate  Paul  Krugman  has  argued,  the  way  to  reform  banking  is  to  once  again  make  it 
boring. It is worth exploring this question as it has implications for growth, stability and equity. 
Taking  a  long  term  historical  view,  Krugman  argues  that  there  is  a  negative  correlation 
between  the  “business  model”  of  banking  and  economic  stability.  Whenever  banking  got 
exciting and interesting, attracted intellectual talent and bankers were paid well, it got way 
out  of  hand  and  jeopardized  the  stability  of  the  real  sector.  Conversely,  periods  when 
banking was dull and boring were also periods of economic progress. 
To support his thesis, Krugman divides American banking over the past century into three 
phases.  The  first  phase  is  the  period  before  1930,  before  the  Great  Depression,  when 
banking  was  an  exciting  and  expanding  industry.  Bankers  were  paid  better  than  in  other 
sectors and therefore banking attracted talent, nurtured ingenuity and promoted innovation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
The second phase was the period following the Great Depression when banking was tightly 
regulated,  far  less  adventurous  and  decidedly  less  lucrative  –  in  other  words  banking 
became  boring.  Curiously,  this  period  of  boring  banking  coincided  with  a  period  of 
spectacular  progress.  The  third  phase,  beginning  in  the  1980s,  saw  the  loosening  of 
regulation  yielding  space  for  innovation  and  expansion.  Banking  became,  once  again, 
exciting  and  high  paying.  Much  of  the  seeming  success  during  this  period,  according  to 
Krugman,  was  an  illusion;  and  the  business  model  of  banking  of  this  period  had  actually 
threatened  the  stability  of  the  real  sector.  Krugman’s  surmise  accordingly  is  that  the  bank 
street should be kept dull in order to keep the main street safe. 
Krugman’s  thesis  of  “boring  banking”  is  interesting,  but  debatable.  It  raises  two  important 
questions.  Is  making  banking  boring  a  necessary  and  sufficient  solution  to  preventing  the 
excesses of the pre-crisis period? And what will be the cost of making banking boring? Both 
questions cause much confusion, the first because it has too many answers and the second 
because  it  has  too  few.  The  Dodd-Frank  Act  of  the  US  is  a  response  to  the  excesses  of 
investment  banks.  In  Europe,  the  responses  are  somewhat  different.  Abstracting  from  the 
specifics, I will argue that it is neither possible nor desirable to make banking boring. 
The narrow banking of the 1950s and 1960s was presumably safe and boring. But that was 
in  a  far  simpler  world  when  economies  were  largely  national,  competition  was  sparse, 
pressure for innovation was low, and reward for it even lower. Bankers of the time, it is said, 
worked on a 3 – 6 – 3 formula: pay depositors 3 per cent interest, lend money at 6 per cent 
and head off to the golf course at 3 pm. From the 24/7/365 perspective of today, that may 
appear romantic but is hardly practical. 
The  boring  banking  concept  does  not  appear  persuasive  even  going  by  more  recent 
evidence and on several counts. First, recall that during the crisis, we saw the failure of not 
only  complex  and  risky  financial  institutions  like  Lehman  Brothers  but  also  of  traditional 
banks  like  Northern  Rock.  What  this  demonstrates  is  that  a  business  model  distinction 
cannot be drawn between a utility and a casino; and if it can, it does not coincide with the 
distinction between what has to be safe and what need not be. Second, in an interconnected 
financial sector, how can a “boring” bank realistically ring-fence itself from what is happening 
all  around  given  all  the  inter-connections?  Third,  will  not  the  co-existence  of  utilities  and 
casinos open up arbitrage opportunities? During “tranquil” periods, financial institutions with 
higher  risk  and  reward  business  models  will  wean  away  deposits  from  narrow  banks.  But 
when problems surface and stresses develop in the financial sector, the position will reverse 
with  the  deposits  flowing  back  into  the  so  called  “boring  banks”,  triggering  procyclicality. 
Finally  and  most  importantly,  what  will  be  the  cost  of  boring  banking  in  economic  terms? 
Does  restraining  banking  to  its  core  function  just  to  keep  it  safe  not  mean  forgoing 
opportunities for growth and development? 
What  is  the  lesson  from  this  discussion  of  “boring  banking”  for  the  EMEs  where  universal 
banking is in early stages and trading of the kind witnessed in the North Atlantic systems is 
nowhere comparable? It is important for the EMEs to draw the right lessons – markets may 
not  be  self-correcting  but  they  cannot  be  substituted  by  central  planning  and  micro 
management. Making markets competitive, open and transparent while putting in safeguards 
to curb excessive trading can help EMEs to enable financial markets to play their rightful role 
in efficient allocation of resources.  
Question 5: Why is burden sharing across countries still off the reform agenda? 
The  last  question  I  want  to  raise  concerns  cross-border  equity,  in  particular  the  burden 
sharing on account of the external spillovers of domestic regulatory policies. Why is cross-
border  equity  still  off  the  agenda  in  any  international  meeting?  I  know  I  am  asking  that 
question somewhat provocatively, but that is deliberate. Let me explain. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The  crisis  challenged  many  of  our  beliefs,  and  among  the  casualties  is  the  decoupling 
hypothesis. The decoupling hypothesis, which was intellectually fashionable before the crisis, 
held  that  even  if  advanced  economies  went  into  a  downturn,  EMEs  would  not  be  affected 
because  of  their  improved  macroeconomic  management,  robust  external  reserves  and 
healthy  banking  sectors.  Yet  the  crisis  affected  all  EMEs,  admittedly  to  different  extents, 
discrediting the decoupling hypothesis. 
The decoupling hypothesis was never persuasive given the forces of globalization. But the 
forces  of  globalization  are  asymmetric.  What  happens  in  systemically  important  countries 
affects  EMEs  more  than  the  other  way  round.  The  regulatory  policies  that  the  advanced 
economies pursue have knock-on impact on the growth and stability of EMEs. I need hardly 
elaborate  –  capital  flows  engineered  by  the  multi-speed  recovery  and  the  consequent 
volatility in exchange rates, the spike in commodity prices triggered by their financialization, 
the shortage of the reserve currency because  of the flawed international monetary system 
and the constant threat of protectionism.  
As  all  these  problems  confronting  EMEs  are  a  consequence  of  the  spillover  of  advanced 
economy policies, should their solution remain the exclusive concern of EMEs? Isn’t there a 
case for sharing the burden of adjustment? How do we evolve a code of conduct for building 
in cross-border equity concerns into financial regulation? I do hope these questions will figure 
in our discussions over the next two days. 
If financial sector development is good, is more of it better?  
Financial sector regulation, yes, but at what cost?  
Does financial regulation have a role in achieving equity?  
Should we make banking boring?  
Why is burden sharing across countries still off the reform agenda?  
Conclusion 
Let me now conclude. I have raised five questions straddling growth, equity and stability in 
the context of the post-crisis approach to regulation: 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
I realize I have raised more questions than answers. For considered answers, I look to the 
insights and intelligence of the delegates at this conference. 
One  last  thought.  Even  as  I  have  annotated  my  five  questions  from  the  perspective  of 
emerging economies, I realize that these concerns are not unique to them. We only have to 
look around the world. What began with demonstrations in Madrid this spring has coalesced 
into something on a much grander scale. The discontent has traversed from southern Europe 
across  the  Atlantic  and  has  inspired  the  “Occupy  Wall  Street”  movement  in  New  York’s 
Zuccotti Park and beyond. Despite its amorphous nature and its refusal to formulate a set of 
demands, the protest campaign across the world is fired by a simple, but powerful idea – that 
the elite cannot go on doing obscenely well even as the rest keep moving backwards. The 
message from this collective rage is that growth itself can be destabilizing if it has no equity 
dimension. That is a sobering thought. 
Before I leave this platform, let me place on record my deep appreciation for the intellectual 
and logistic effort that has gone into organizing this conference by the team at CAFRAL led 
by Usha Thorat and the counterpart team at BIS led by Philip Turner. We owe them a great 
deal. 
I wish the deliberations over the next two days all success.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
