Charles I Plosser: Strengthening our monetary policy framework through 
commitment, credibility, and communication 
Speech  by  Mr  Charles  I  Plosser,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, at the Global Interdependence Center’s 2011 Global Citizen 
Award Luncheon, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 8 November 2011. 
 The views expressed today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 
Good afternoon. I am deeply honored to be this year’s recipient of the GIC Global Citizen’s 
Award. For the past five years, I have had the pleasure of observing and participating with 
the  GIC  in  its  efforts  to  foster  an  international  dialogue  on  economic  matters  of  global 
importance.  I  have  been  very  impressed  with  the  breadth  and  reach  of  the  programs  the 
center has put together. 
The  GIC’s  efforts  to  promote  such  a  dialogue  have  been  especially  timely  as  the  world 
economy continues to wrestle with the consequences of a financial crisis and a severe global 
recession. The GIC’s convening of central bankers, policymakers, and business leaders from 
different  nations  and  different  industries  has  created  opportunities  to  leverage  knowledge 
and experiences in these challenging times. Yet even as the world economy recovers, we all 
have learned that our economies are increasingly intertwined, and therefore, I believe these 
GIC programs will remain relevant and valuable in the years to come. 
In the past few years, the global financial crisis has led central bankers around the world into 
uncharted  territory  as  extraordinary  disruptions  in  financial  markets  led  them  to  take 
extraordinary  actions.  However  necessary  these  actions  may  have  been,  unusual  and 
unexpected policy choices do shape the public’s views and expectations about future policy, 
even if policymakers do not intend to do so. This is especially true when policymakers take 
unusual or highly discretionary policy actions without communicating a clear framework for 
those actions. 
For  example,  the  rescue  of  Bear  Stearns’  creditors  in  March  2008  led  many  investors  to 
expect  that  other  investment  banks  would  receive  similar  treatment  should  they  run  into 
trouble,  even  though  no  such  promise  was  made  or  intended.  This  belief  probably 
encouraged  investors  and  firms  to  take  more  risks,  perhaps  excessive  risks,  which  they 
might not otherwise have undertaken. This likely led to unexpected losses with the failure of 
Lehman  Brothers  in  September  2008,  adding  to  the  turmoil  in  the  markets.  Thus,  taking 
highly  discretionary  policy  actions  without  communicating  to  the  public  the  implications  of 
those actions for the conduct of future policy can be problematic and destabilizing. 
More  generally,  economic  research  in  the  past  30  years  has  shown  that  setting  monetary 
policy  in  a  systematic  or  rule-like  manner  leads  to  better  economic  outcomes  –  lower  and 
less volatile inflation and greater economic stability in general.1 As I have discussed on many 
occasions, there is value in conducting policy in a systematic manner in both good times and 
bad.2  Systematic  policy  helps  the  public  and  markets  better  understand  how  policy  will  be 
conducted  in  the  future  and  thus  enables  them  to  make  better  decisions  today.  But  the 
benefit  depends  on  the  public’s  understanding  of  the  policymaking  framework  being  used, 
and that requires commitment, credibility, and effective communication by the central bank.  
Today, I would like to step back and discuss specific ways to strengthen the framework for 
U.S. monetary policy through enhanced commitment, credibility, and communication and, in 
                                                 
1   See Kydland and Prescott (1977). 
2   See, for example, Plosser (2008) or Plosser (2010). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
so doing, improve economic stability. Of course, these are my views and do not necessarily 
represent  the  views  of  the  Federal Reserve  Board  or  my  colleagues  on  the  Federal  Open 
Market Committee. 
The goals and objectives of monetary policy 
In order to discuss the framework for achieving our policy goals, we need to have a clear 
understanding  of  those  goals.  Congress  set  the  goals  of  monetary  policy  in  a  1977 
amendment  to  the  Federal  Reserve  Act  and  then  reaffirmed  them  in  2000.  This  mandate 
requires the Federal Reserve to conduct monetary policy “to promote effectively the goals of 
maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates.” 
Many  people  think  these  objectives  conflict  with  one  another,  but  in  fact,  they  are 
complementary.  Economists  have  come  to  understand  that  achieving  price  stability  is  the 
most  effective  means  for  monetary  policy  to  promote  the  other  two  goals.  Price  stability 
contributes to the economy’s growth and employment prospects in the longer term and helps 
to moderate variability of output and employment in the short to medium term. Price stability 
allows the economy to function in a more efficient and a more productive manner by giving 
individuals and businesses more confidence that the purchasing power of the dollar will not 
erode. 
Failing to maintain price stability can often lead to more instability in employment and output. 
One way to see this is to recognize that if inflation rises to unacceptable levels, as it did in 
the  1970s,  monetary  policy  may  be  forced  to  react  to  restore  price  stability.  This,  in  turn, 
could  lead  to  an  increase  in  unemployment  as  it  did  in  the  recession  early  in  the  1980s. 
Thus, increases in inflation in the near term risk creating unemployment in the future – as a 
result, we end up with less stability, not more. 
Price stability also helps to foster financial stability and moderates long-term interest rates by 
minimizing the inflation premium that investors demand to hold long-term assets. Because 
moderate  long-term  interest  rates  follow  so  directly  from  the  price  stability  mandate,  many 
people  have  come  to  refer  to  the  Fed  as  having  a  “dual  mandate”  –  price  stability  and 
maximum employment. 
Yet, the price stability and the employment goals are materially different in nature. The most 
significant difference is that the level of prices and thus inflation is a monetary phenomenon 
over the intermediate to longer term, and so the inflation rate can be chosen and controlled 
through monetary policy. The same cannot be said for the goal of maximum employment or 
the unemployment rate. These are largely determined by factors that are beyond the direct 
control of monetary policy.  
In the long run, maximum employment depends on such things as demographics, taxes and 
regulations, labor productivity and skills, unemployment benefits, minimum wage laws, and a 
host  of  other  factors.  This  means  that  maximum  employment  will  fluctuate  over  time. 
Monetary  policy  cannot  and  should  not  be  used  to  offset  these  longer-run  changes  in 
maximum  employment.  Even  in  the  near  term,  the  modern  approach  to  macroeconomics 
recognizes that employment will fluctuate with forces that affect supply and demand, such as 
oil  price  shocks,  earthquakes,  or  decisions  by  households  to  save  more,  or  deleverage, 
perhaps due to a fall in the stock market or in house prices. In this framework, it is neither 
desirable  nor  efficient  for  monetary  policy  to  try  to  prevent  market  forces  from  making  the 
necessary  adjustments  to  such  disturbances,  even  if  they  have  consequences  for 
employment.  Instead,  monetary  policy  should  be  set  in  a  way  that  allows  the  economy  to 
efficiently use its resources given the economic disturbances it has experienced – it allows 
for the best economic outcome given the environment. 
Because monetary policy can deliver price stability, I believe it makes sense for the central 
bank  to  be  clear  in  setting  a  numerical  objective  for  medium-term  inflation.  But  because 
employment is affected by many other factors in both the long and the short run, it does not 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
for 
the  Fed 
to  set  explicit  numerical  objectives 
for  employment  or 
make  sense 
unemployment. By creating an environment of low and stable inflation, monetary policy will 
make a valuable contribution to maximum employment in the short and long run. A credible 
commitment to price stability helps anchor inflation expectations and affords the central bank 
the flexibility to adjust monetary policy to support output and employment adjustments in the 
face of economic disturbances. 
Flexible inflation targeting 
What I have just described is the modern textbook view of how to conduct monetary policy. It 
is commonly referred to as flexible inflation targeting. This approach combines a credible 
commitment to a medium-term inflation objective, which, in turn, allows monetary policy to 
adjust  to  economic  shocks  in  a  manner  that  helps  promote  the  return  of  output  or 
employment  to  a  more  desirable  value  without  undermining  inflation  expectations.  It 
emphasizes clear and transparent communication with the public about policymakers’ views 
of current economic conditions, the economic outlook, and its decision-making framework. 
Flexible inflation targeting is widely practiced by major central banks around the world. While 
details  often  differ,  key  themes  include  a  commitment  to  an  explicit  medium-term  inflation 
objective  and  transparent  communication  about  the  economic  outlook,  the  policy  process, 
and  how  policy  decisions  relate  to  changes  in  economic  conditions.  It  is  important  to 
recognize  that  by  being  more  explicit  about  its  objectives  and  more  transparent  and 
systematic  about  its  decision-making  framework,  the  central  bank  enhances  its  credibility. 
This also increases its accountability to the public. It is harder to make commitments that you 
will be unable or unwilling to keep, if you know the public can call you to task for failing to 
meet your commitments. 
Improving the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy framework 
The  Federal  Reserve  has  not  explicitly  adopted  a  flexible  inflation  targeting  framework. 
Indeed,  monetary  policymaking  in  the  U.S.  has  historically  been  conducted  on  a  highly 
discretionary  basis,  and  the  Fed  has  resisted  adopting  a  specific  framework  or  numerical 
objective. Yet, over the last two decades or so, Fed policymakers have gradually taken steps 
toward  the  more  mainstream  approach  of  flexible  inflation  targeting.  In  particular,  the  Fed, 
especially under Chairman Bernanke, has become increasingly transparent and has worked 
to  improve  its  communications  with  the  public  and  the  markets.  It  has  recognized  and 
stressed the importance of keeping inflation expectations well anchored. It has become more 
transparent  regarding  the  Committee’s  economic  outlook  over  both  the  short  and  the 
intermediate term through the publication of its Summary of Economic Projections, or SEP 
for short, which is published four times a year. 
All of these efforts have moved us closer to having an explicit monetary policy framework. Of 
course, such a framework does not solve all of our difficult policy choices. A good deal of 
judgment  needs  to  be  used  in  setting  appropriate  monetary  policy.  Still,  having  an  explicit 
framework  within  which  to  consider  our  policy  choices  in  a  systematic  way  would  improve 
monetary  policy’s  effectiveness  in  meeting  our  mandated  objectives  while  increasing 
transparency and accountability. Yet, I believe there is more the Fed could and should do to 
further improve and strengthen its approach to policymaking. The minutes of the September 
FOMC  meeting,  for  example,  indicated  that  most  participants  favor  taking  steps  to  further 
increase the transparency of monetary policy. This includes providing more information about 
our longer-term policy objectives and factors that influence our policy decisions. So, let me 
offer my own views about the steps we could take. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
First, let’s clarify and make explicit our inflation objective. 
The effectiveness of monetary policy in achieving its dual mandate is enhanced if the public 
understands and finds credible the Fed’s inflation objective. The FOMC’s inflation mandate 
has  been  interpreted  as  being  2  percent  or  a  bit  less.  This  interpretation  arises  from  the 
quarterly  SEP,  in  which  the  majority  of  participants  have  said  that  under  “appropriate 
monetary policy,” 2 percent is their longer-run “forecast” of inflation.3 So I see no reason for 
the  FOMC  not  to  simply  make  explicit  that  its  longer-term  inflation  objective  is  2  percent. 
Making such a clear and explicit statement should give the public confidence that the Fed’s 
commitment to its price stability mandate is a credible one. Being explicit about our inflation 
objective is fully consistent with the Fed’s statutory dual mandate. Given that dual mandate, 
the  structure  of  the  economy,  and  the  magnitude  and  frequency  of  typical  economic 
disturbances, I would anticipate that when inflation deviates from the objective in the short 
term, it could be brought back to 2 percent within two to three years or less. But the timing 
would depend on the size and nature of the shocks to the economy. In deciding how quickly 
to  move  toward  the  inflation  objective,  the  FOMC  would  always  take  into  account  the 
implications 
financial  stability  and  would  continue 
to 
appropriately use its judgment in setting policy to promote fulfillment of the dual mandate. 
Being  explicit  about  our  inflation  objective  would  help  anchor  expectations  and  reduce 
uncertainty  about  future  policy  steps.  Also,  stabilizing  inflation  expectations  and  increasing 
the credibility of the central bank to maintain stable prices can actually change the inflation 
process  itself.  In  particular,  inflation  will  become  less  responsive  or  sensitive  to  short-run 
supply  and  demand  disturbances.  This  means  less  volatility  in  monetary  policy  and  less 
volatility in output and employment.  
for  near-term  economic  and 
Second, let’s provide more information about the expected path of policy. 
Many  central  banks  that  set  explicit  inflation  targets  also  provide  information  about  the 
expected  path  of  policy.  For  example,  Norway,  Sweden,  and  New  Zealand  all  do  so, 
although they each do it in their own way.  
The Fed has also, at times, provided information about the expected path of policy, albeit in 
less effective ways. The Fed has used phrases like “extended period,” or, in the Greenspan 
era,  the  Committee  talked  about  policy  moving  at  a  “measured  pace.”  More  recently,  the 
Committee indicated that rates were likely to be kept low until “mid-2013.” These examples 
illustrate  ways  of  communicating  what  central  bankers  call  “forward  guidance.”  Yet  such 
approaches  are  not  very  satisfactory.  “Extended  period”  is  vague  and  can  be  interpreted 
differently by Committee members or market participants. I believe policy should always be a 
function of the state of the economy, rather than an “extended period” or a specific calendar 
date. Indeed, one of the reasons for my dissent in August was over the use of the “mid-2013” 
language. I was concerned that this would be misinterpreted by the markets as suggesting 
that monetary policy was no longer contingent on how the economy evolved. In my view, it 
was the wrong way of communicating forward guidance.  
The Summary of Economic Projections provides a better and more natural way to convey the 
Committee’s  sense  of  the  future  path  of  policy.  Currently,  the  SEP  indicates  individual 
policymakers’  forecasts  of  the  key  economic  variables,  including  output,  inflation,  and 
unemployment conditional on each policymaker’s assessment of “appropriate policy” in the 
absence of further shocks. I think a more appropriate and meaningful way for the Committee 
to  convey  forward  guidance  would  be  to  report  information  about  Committee  members’ 
underlying  view  of  “appropriate  policy.”  This  additional  information  would  provide  a  useful 
picture of the range of views of future policy as envisioned by the policymakers. These views 
                                                 
3   The  SEP  reports  the  longer-run  forecast  of  the  year-over-year  change  in  the  overall  personal  consumption 
expenditure (PCE) chain-weighted price index. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
would not constitute a commitment to follow a particular path but would evolve as economic 
conditions  changed.  This  information  would  add  a  useful  signal  to  the  markets  as  to  the 
thinking of the Committee on an ongoing basis.  
Third, let’s be more explicit about the Committee’s reaction function. 
Policymakers  can  promote  greater  economic  stability  if  the  public  is  better  able  to  predict 
future  policy  actions.  Because  policymakers  do  not  know  with  certainty  how  economic 
conditions  will  evolve,  they  cannot  say  with  certainty  what  policy  will  be  in  the  future.  But 
policymakers can provide information on what factors will influence their policy decisions. I 
have long argued for more rule-like or systematic policymaking. This means making policy 
decisions using available economic information in a consistent and predictable manner. We 
don’t  know  what  the  future  holds,  but  we  can  be  more  systematic  about  how  we  use 
economic data in formulating our policy. 
Currently, the FOMC looks at a variety of information in formulating policy, including several 
different versions of monetary rules. We are some ways from choosing one rule or reaction 
function as a guide for policy. Yet, research has found that some simple rules perform fairly 
well in a variety of models. These rules involve policy responding aggressively to deviations 
of inflation from its target and also responding to deviations of output from some concept of 
potential. In addition, the rules tend to involve some smoothing of the policy rate over time 
rather than sharp jumps in rates. 
The practice of looking at a variety of rules or reaction functions and what they tell us about 
appropriate  policy  imposes  an  important  discipline  on  policymaking.  We  made  some 
progress  in  November  2009  when  the  Committee  indicated  in  its  statement  that  we  were 
conditioning  policy  decisions  on  measures  of  inflation,  inflation  expectations,  and  resource 
utilization. This was a good first step, but we should go further. In addition to describing the 
set  of  conditioning  variables  that  we  consider  as  we  formulate  policy,  we  should 
communicate  our  policy  decisions  in  terms  of  the  changes  in  these  important  conditioning 
variables.  If  the  Fed  chooses  a  consistent  set  of  variables  and  sticks  to  them,  the  public 
would  better  understand  our  reaction  function  and  thus  have  a  greater  ability  to  form 
judgments about the likely course of policy. This approach would reduce uncertainty about 
policy actions and promote stability. 
What not to do 
I have spent some time discussing how I would strengthen our monetary policy framework by 
completing our move to flexible inflation targeting. This would include an explicit numerical 
objective for inflation. Given the current state of the economy, there has been some recent 
public discussion of the perceived benefit of having the Fed aim for an inflation rate higher 
than 2 percent. Some have argued that since the unemployment rate is higher than anyone 
would  like  and  since  the  federal  funds  rate  is  stuck  at  the  zero  bound,  we  should  target 
higher  inflation  as  a  means  to  reduce  unemployment.  Others  have  suggested  that  higher 
inflation  could  inflate  away  the  debt  overhang  problem.  Sometimes  these  arguments  are 
opportunistically couched in terms of alternative policymaking frameworks, such as nominal 
GDP targeting, or price-level targeting. Regardless of the name, though, I believe the main 
motivation for many is to raise inflation.  
By increasing inflation, some argue that we could lower the real rate of interest and increase 
monetary accommodation for as long as it takes to bring the unemployment rate down by a 
substantial amount. At that point, the goal would be to return inflation to a lower, more stable 
level. But for this strategy to work, the public must have complete confidence that the Fed will 
be able and willing to bring down inflation in the future. If that confidence wanes and inflation 
expectations begin to drift up, this strategy will fail. And the consequence could easily be a 
repeat of the 1970s, when monetary policymakers’ effort to target a lower unemployment rate 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
allowed inflation to steadily drift upward. The outcome was a steady rise in inflation with no 
commensurate  fall  in  unemployment.  To  pursue  such  a  strategy  would  be  very  risky.  The 
effort  to  try  to  chase  the  unemployment  rate  in  the  1970s  ultimately  failed,  leading  to  a 
severe recession and even higher unemployment rates as policy worked to bring down the 
inflation  rate.  This  is  a  clear  example  in  which  price  stability  and  employment  are 
complementary to each other.  
Others argue that we should strive for a higher rate of expected inflation as a means to drive 
down  short-term  and  longer-term  real  interest  rates.  Moreover,  a  higher  rate  of  inflation 
would begin a process of inflating away many of the bad debts that people think are holding 
back economic recovery. Here, too, I am very skeptical of such a strategy. In the aftermath of 
the financial crisis and the severe recession, some people and businesses do indeed face 
losses, including the many mortgages that remain under water. However, in my view, using 
inflation  to  assign  winners  and  losers  associated  with  these  bad  debts  is  poor  monetary 
policy. It is probably poor fiscal policy too, but it would undoubtedly mix monetary policy and 
fiscal  policy  in  a  way  that  could  undermine  the  independence  of  the  central  bank  and  its 
ability to maintain price stability. 
Summary 
Over the last couple of decades, the Fed has taken steps toward a flexible inflation targeting 
framework for monetary policy decisions that aim to achieve our statutory dual mandate of 
long-run price stability and maximum employment. The Fed has stressed the importance of 
keeping inflation expectations well anchored and has strived to improve its communications 
with the public and the markets about the monetary policy decision-making process. 
It is time for the Fed to explicitly adopt the flexible inflation targeting framework and in doing 
so take three steps to strengthen its approach to policymaking. First, clarify and make explicit 
that  our  long-run  inflation  objective  is  2  percent  year-over-year  PCE  inflation.  Second, 
publish information about the individual FOMC participants’ assessments of the appropriate 
monetary  policy  that  underlie  their  economic  projections  in  the  FOMC’s  Summary  of 
Economic Projections. Third, provide information on the FOMC’s reaction function. That is, 
communicate policy decisions in terms of changes in the economic conditions that the FOMC 
is  using  to  formulate  policy.  By  helping  the  public  to  better  understand  the  policymaking 
process and better anticipate policy changes, these three steps can make monetary policy 
more effective in promoting economic stability in accordance with our dual mandate. 
References 
Kydland, Finn E., and Edward C. Prescott. “Rules Rather Than Discretion: The Inconsistency 
of Optimal Plans,” Journal of Political Economy, 85 (January 1977), pp. 473–91. 
Plosser,  Charles.  “The  Benefits  of  Systematic  Monetary  Policy,”  speech  to  the  National 
Association  for  Business  Economics,  Washington  Economic  Policy  Conference,  March  3, 
2008. 
Plosser, Charles. “Credible Commitments and Monetary Policy After the Crisis,” speech to 
Swiss National Bank Monetary Policy Conference, Zurich, Switzerland, September 24, 2010. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
