Dimitar Bogov: Modern payment systems’ impact on monetary policy 
and financial stability 
Welcome  speech  by  Mr  Dimitar  Bogov,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  the  Republic  of 
Macedonia,  at  the  16th  International  Conference  of  Clearing  Institutions  in  Central  and 
Eastern Europe (ICCI), Skopje, 12 October 2011. 
 Mr. Chairman, Dear Participants and Guests, 
It is an honour and pleasure to give a welcome speech to such a distinguished audience. I 
thank Klirinski Interbankarski Sistemi Skopje (KIBS) for this opportunity. My topic will be the 
link  of  payment  systems  with  the  two  main  central-bank  tasks  of  monetary  policy  and 
financial stability.  
While  money  needs  to  circulate  freely  through  the  economy,  without  imposing  excessive 
burdens, other economic agents also need to be confident that commercial banks will honour 
their  sight  liabilities  by  converting  them  into  banknotes,  i.e.  central-bank  money,  at  their 
demand. The central bank allows commercial banks to transfer among them funds held in 
accounts  with  the  central  bank.  The  development  of  a  payment  system  is  thus  part  of  the 
development of a central bank and out of this operational capacity grew the cooperation with 
the commercial banking system when setting-up the facilities it operates and overseeing the 
facilities other participants operate.  
This  pivotal  role  of  the  central  bank,  unmatched  by  any  other  participant,  does  make  us 
humbly  aware  of  the  strong  link  between  payment  systems  and  monetary  policy  on  one 
hand, and payment systems and financial stability on the other. Let me devote the central 
part of this welcome speech to these different, yet interrelated links. 
Monetary policy impulses are transmitted from those financial institutions that have a direct 
relationship  with  the  central  bank  to  other  institutions  and  households.  The  central  bank 
typically  conducts  its  monetary  policy  only  with  designated  financial  institutions,  mostly 
commercial  banks  rather  than  with  other  economic  agents.  As  a  result  other  economic 
agents  rely  on  the  designated  financial  institutions  that  have  a  direct  relationship  with  the 
central bank. The functioning of the transmission relies on the smooth functioning of payment 
infrastructures  enabling  transactions  of  these  institutions  with  the  central  bank,  as  well  as 
amongst themselves at the interbank market. 
If  the  operation  of  payment  systems  is  underdeveloped,  these  designated  financial 
institutions  choose  to  keep  a  relatively  large  buffer  of  central-bank  money  to  help  them 
manage their liquidity, which in turn leads to weaker than intended monetary-policy impulses 
from  the  central  bank.  But  in  general,  after  the  payment  systems  in  the  economy  have 
reached a certain threshold, the influence of the payment systems on monetary policy needs 
to be assessed not by efficiency alone, but by reference to the velocity of money, defined as 
the  average  frequency  with  which  a  unit  of  money  is  spent  in  a  specific  time,  under  the 
assumption of a given money supply.  
Velocity of money circulation is endogenously determined by the economic agents’ decisions 
regarding  liquidity  holding,  lending,  borrowing,  investing,  consumption  and  labour.  Yet  an 
increase  in  the  efficiency  of  payment  systems  increases  the  velocity  of  money  circulation 
exogenously.  From  a  monetary  policy  point  of  view  it  becomes  important  to  estimate  the 
quantitative and qualitative impact of this exogenous change. 
An  increase  in  the  efficiency  of  payment  systems  results  in  an  increase  in  the  use  of 
accounts relative to the use of banknotes and coins. Less time is required for each peace of 
money or securities to lie unused in an account between two successive payments, leading 
to  a  shorter  time  period  between  inflow  and  outflow,  i.e.  to  a  higher  velocity  of  money  in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
circulation.  The  new  situation  is  reflected  in  a  higher  turnover  in  markets,  provided  that 
economic agents are able to use the electronic forms of payment, are able to monitor their 
cash  flow  and  are  confident  that  the  increased  efficiency  does  not  compromise  security  in 
terms of fraud.  
The task of the central bank is to facilitate a more efficient management of liquid funds. An 
efficient management of liquid resources enables economic agents to use cashless payment 
systems not only as a signal for their willingness to pay, but also to pay for the exact amount 
they  owe.  Cash  payments,  in  contrast,  make  economic  agents  incur  costs  in  the  form  of 
interest foregone and increased security risks 
However,  the  increase  in  the  velocity  of  money  circulation  is  not  linear.  As  technological 
advances in payment systems are seldom used at their maximum capacity, the increase in 
their efficiency is a gradual, rather than spasmodic process. In order to better estimate the 
impact of technology-driven change on the velocity of money in circulation and thereby on 
monetary policy, central banks thus need to use data from a variety of sources 
In sum, payment systems are an essential precondition for the implementation of operational 
monetary  policy  and  their  degree  of  sophistication  has  a  direct  impact  on  the  velocity  of 
money circulation, thereby influencing monetary policy itself 
Turning  to  financial  stability,  there  is  a  strong  link  between  efficient  payment  systems  and 
financial  stability.  Financial  stability  implies  that  the  financial  system  is  robust  to  systemic 
risk, i.e. the risk that problems in one financial institution lead to problems in other previously 
sound institutions. Financial stability allows the financial system to withstand shocks without 
giving  way  to  cumulative  processes  which  impair,  first,  the  processing  of  payments  in  the 
economy,  and  second,  the  allocation  of  savings  to  investment  opportunities.  A  robust  and 
resilient market infrastructure is essential for financial stability 
The provision of credit to commercial banks led the central bank to establish a function to 
control  the  creditworthiness  of  the  borrowers.  This  function  eventually  developed  into 
“banking supervision”. A commercial bank can be the source of financial instability if it faces 
technical  difficulties  or  if  it  fails  to  repay  funding.  This  funding  can  come  either  from  the 
regular  operations  of  the  central  bank  or  from  other  depositors.  Such  an  occurrence  can 
affect other economic agents. They may face illiquidity and even insolvency, affecting market 
interest  rates,  in  turn  leading  to  changes  in  trading  activities  and  a  disruption  in  market 
confidence 
Payment  systems  are  an  essential  component  in  preventing  such  occurrences  and  a 
technical mechanism for the central bank to step in order to challenge contagion or potential 
contagion.  The  interest  of  central  banks  in  financial  stability  was  largely  triggered  by  the 
Herstatt incident of June 26, 1974. German banks processed Deutsche Mark payments to 
Herstatt  bank  in  exchange  for  US  Dollars,  to  be  delivered  through  Herstatt  correspondent 
account  in  New  York.  Regulators,  deciding  to  close  the  bank  for  lack  of  solvency 
immediately, failed to appreciate the time-zone difference between Frankfurt and New York, 
leaving  transactions  half-completed.  German  banks  did  not  receive  their  US  Dollar 
payments.  Although  the  Herstatt  incident  did  not  lead  to  a  financial-stability  crisis,  it  made 
central banks aware of the risk and they started developing a continuous linked settlement 
platform,  whereby  commercial  banks  manage  settlement  of  foreign  exchange  amongst 
themselves on a payment versus payment basis.  
Cooperation  in  this  area  led  central  banks  to  share  experiences  covering  other  areas  of 
payment systems and financial stability. Well-functioning markets depend on the willingness 
to develop adequate solutions to ensure smooth functioning of payment systems. Ironically, 
part  of  the  problem  stems  from  the  very  fact  that  technological  advances  speed  up  the 
payment systems and make them more reliable. This in turn enables banks to economise on 
liquid balances. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
lead 
A financial-stability crisis can start when a financial institution is unable to repay funding to 
the lender at the repayment date, whilst the lender needs the liquidity at that repayment date. 
Fear  of  such  occurrences  happening  simultaneously  was  an  important  element  in  the 
proliferation of the US subprime lending crisis to a global one. Central banks, recognisant of 
the impediments to markets’ functioning and the threat to the existence of solvent economic 
actors, utilise payment systems to grant liquidity not only to the market as a whole, but to 
individual institutions as well. Because of the re-emerging crisis, central banks can still use 
unconventional  or  non-standard  monetary  policy  operations  or  target  individual  banks  for 
assistance.  The  latter  is  however  under-utilised  by  banks,  because  they  avoid  incurring  a 
penalty over the market rate, fearing it may stigmatise them in the interbank markets. Talk of 
“emergency liquidity assistance” or “acting as a lender of last resort” is at present fading into 
the  background  because  the  commercial  banks’  liquidity  scare  is  largely,  though  not 
exclusively, a symptom of the sovereign debt crisis 
Nevertheless,  risk  stems  from  commercial  banks  typically  holding  positions  across  many 
participants  (the  central  bank,  other  banks,  brokerages,  non-bank  businesses  and 
households)  and  across  different  payment  systems.  These  positions 
to 
interdependencies among the real-time gross settlement systems, mainly operated by central 
banks, and designated-time net settlement systems, mainly operated by commercial banks 
jointly.  The  successful  operations  of  both  Macedonian  Interbank  Payment  System  (MIPS), 
the  RTGS  system  of  which  the  central  bank  is  both  the  owner  and  operator  and  Klirinski 
Interbankarski Sistemi Skopje (KIBS), of which the central bank is the settlement agent, have 
contributed to a high level of confidence throughout the years and have a positive effect on 
the stability of the banking and financial system and the economy as a whole.  
To conclude, commercial banks transferring among them funds held in accounts with central 
banks  have  facilitated  the  proper  functioning  of  the  banking  and  financial  systems  and 
mitigated  disruptions  and 
instability  globally.  This  historical  development  has  been 
accompanied  with  a  slow,  but  steady  movement  towards  a  higher  velocity  of  money 
circulation.  
Settling  payments  in  accounts  at  the  central  bank  still  provides  the  link  with  the  two  main 
tasks  of  monetary  policy  and  financial  stability.  While  steering  monetary  conditions  the 
central bank cooperates with commercial banks and thereby reduces transaction costs. This 
reality is a layered architecture in which central bank money is the ultimate settlement asset 
in  the  economy.  The  positive  network  externality  is  best  described  by  referring  to  the  risk 
reduction,  service  assurance  and  competitive  neutrality  the  central  bank  provides.  Using 
money held in accounts at the central bank to effect payment is generally regarded as risk 
free,  service  is  assured  even  in  extraordinary  times  of  global  and  domestic  crises,  while 
using the central bank as a hub ensures that payment systems’ participants are not forced to 
rely on actual or potential competitors for payment. These arguments that were compelling at 
the dawn of central banking are most likely to ensure that modern payment systems continue 
to have a determined impact upon monetary policy and a positive influence upon the stability 
of the financial system as whole. 
Thank you for your attention.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
