Ric Battellino: European financial developments 
Address  by  Mr  Ric  Battellino,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  the 
24th Australasian Finance & Banking Conference, Sydney, 14 December 2011. 
 I  would  like  to  thank  Laura  Berger-Thomson,  Justin  Fabo,  Chris  Stewart  and  Grant  Turner  for  their  extensive 
assistance with this talk. 
Introduction 
Over  recent  months  we  have  all  watched  with  concern  the  growing  financial  problems  in 
Europe.  The  problems  are  multi-dimensional,  involving  excessive  government  debt,  weak 
banking sectors, slowing economic growth and marked differences in competitiveness across 
countries within the euro area. They have become the main threat facing the global economy 
and the international financial system.  
It is hard to tell how and when the problems will be resolved. In the meantime, turbulence 
continues  in  global  financial  markets  and  most  forecasters  are  now  predicting  a  very 
significant  weakening  in  the  European  economy  over  the  coming  year  as  government 
spending is cut back, credit tightens and confidence declines. Given the size of the European 
economy and financial system, it will be hard to avoid adverse consequences for other parts 
of the world, though the extent of these spillovers remains an open question. At this stage, 
most forecasters think that growth in the world economy will be only a little below trend in the 
coming year, though with the risk of a significantly worse outcome. 
Australia,  like  other  countries,  will  be  affected  by  the  events  in  Europe,  but  its  strong 
government finances, healthy banking sector and relatively limited direct trade and financial 
exposures  to  Europe  make  it  one  of  the  countries  best  placed  to  weather  the  situation. 
Australia is also fortunate to be subject, simultaneously, to a resources boom that is resulting 
in unprecedented investment and therefore helping to sustain economic activity. 
I will begin my talk today with a round-up of the European government debt situation. I will be 
brief as I think we all know the broad facts. I will then focus on the effect that the deterioration 
in  government  debt  has  had  on  European  banks  and  the  role  that  European  banks  are 
playing in spreading the problem to other countries. I will conclude by looking at the channels 
through which Australia could be affected, including through financial links, trade links and 
effects on confidence and wealth. 
The European debt situation 
As  you  know,  the  trigger  for  the  problems  currently  being  experienced  in  Europe  was  the 
rapid build up in government debt following the global financial crisis. Government budgets 
deteriorated sharply after 2008, due to the weakening in economic activity, the large fiscal 
stimulus applied by governments and, in some cases, the cost of bailing out banks. 
Government debt in the euro area had been rising as a ratio to GDP, however, for much of 
the period since the 1970s (Graph 1). This occurred because governments loosened fiscal 
policy  during  recessions  but  did  not  fully  reverse  those  policies  during  the  subsequent 
cyclical recoveries. In aggregate, budgets in the countries that now form the euro area have 
been continuously in deficit for the past 40 years (Graph 2). Clearly, there was no fiscal rule 
that aimed to balance the budget over the economic cycle, as there is in Australia.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Graph 1 
Graph 2 
  At the onset of the global financial crisis, the ratio of net government debt to GDP in the euro 
area was about 45 per cent and it has since risen to around 60 per cent. Within the euro 
area, Greece has the highest net debt ratio, at about 130 per cent, with Italy next, at about 
100 per cent. 
Concerns in financial markets about the sustainability of government debt levels in Europe 
first emerged in late 2009, when the Greek Government revealed that its fiscal position was 
significantly worse than it had previously led the markets to believe. Greek sovereign debt 
was downgraded and spreads on the debt widened, despite some fiscal tightening. By April 
2010,  the  situation  in  Greece  had  deteriorated  to  the  point  where  it  was  forced  to  seek 
external financial assistance from the IMF and other European countries. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
As typically happens, market participants quickly began to ask which country might be next, 
and spreads in some other euro-area countries also began to widen sharply. By November 
2010, Ireland had been forced to ask for external assistance, and Portugal followed in April 
2011. Recently, Italy and Spain have also come under severe financial pressure, though as 
yet have not needed external assistance. 
As the crisis has spread, a succession of measures has been announced to try to contain the 
problem,  the  latest  being  announced  last  weekend.  These  have  typically  provided  some 
short-term  respite,  but  in  the  past  none  has  managed  to  provide  lasting  reassurance  to 
financial markets. It remains to be seen whether the latest measures will be more successful. 
Most commentators see the long-term solution as involving greater fiscal co-ordination and 
discipline. In the short term, it is highly likely that part of the solution will involve substantial 
financial assistance from outside the region or the purchase of sovereign debt by the ECB, or 
some combination of both.  
A sticking point here is that the ECB’s charter precludes it from providing direct financing to 
governments. The ECB was initially also reluctant to buy government debt in the secondary 
market, though it has done so in substantial quantities recently. The restriction on the ECB’s 
funding  of  governments  was  put  in  place  both  to  guard  against  the  risk  of  inflation  and  to 
avoid the moral hazard that would arise if national governments had direct access to central 
bank financing in a situation where there is no central co-ordination of fiscal policy.  
While  an  arrangement  where  the  central  bank  is  precluded  from  direct  financing  of  the 
government guards against the risk of inflation – i.e. monetary instability – it increases the 
risk of financial instability. This is because if the central bank is not prepared to step in as a 
financial  back-stop,  a  government  that  is  unable  to  fund  itself  in  the  market  is  left  with  no 
option but to default or seek external assistance. It is highly unusual for a government in a 
developed economy to be forced to seek funding from an external party such as the IMF.  
The concerns about the sustainability of debt levels in various countries have resulted in interest 
rates  on  government  debt  rising  sharply  in  some  countries,  returning  to  the  relativities  that 
prevailed before the formation of the euro (Graph 3). Pre-euro, there was a wide variation in the 
interest  rates  paid  by  European  governments,  reflecting  each  country’s  history  of  inflation  and 
fiscal discipline. The formation of the euro area brought convergence of interest rates towards the 
low  levels  previously  enjoyed  only  by  Germany,  but  pre-euro  relativities  are  now  re-asserting 
themselves. This suggests that markets are pricing in the possibility of a break-up of the euro area 
or a significant risk of default by some governments, or both.  
Graph 3 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  3
The effect on European banks 
The problems in European sovereign debt markets have affected European banks through 
two main channels: 
 
first,  these  banks  have  experienced  valuation  losses  on  their  sovereign  debt 
holdings; and  
second, these losses have raised concerns about the financial soundness of banks, 
particularly  in  an  environment  where  some  governments  are  seen  as  having  less 
capacity to support banks financially. This has caused investors and other banks to 
become reluctant to lend to them, and has pushed up banks’ funding costs.  
 Let me say something about each of these points in turn. 
Euro-area banks, in total, hold about €2.5 trillion of euro-area sovereign debt. This is about 
one-third  of  all  the  euro-area  sovereign  debt  on  issue.  The  exposure  is  quite  substantial, 
being  equal  to  about  8  per  cent  of  these  banks’  assets  and  130  per  cent  of  their  Tier  1 
capital. The majority of the debt held by banks in each country is home-country debt but, not 
surprisingly for a common-currency area, there are also large cross-border holdings. This is 
particularly the case for Italian debt, which is widely held by non-Italian banks. 
Given the rise in yields that has occurred in some countries, the market value of the bonds 
has declined significantly. Greek debt, for example, has fallen in value by around 70 per cent. 
This means that even though the face value of Greek debt is about €260 billion, the market 
value of the debt is now only about €75 billion (Graph 4). Italian debt has fallen in value by 
10 per cent. Banks have brought some of these losses to account already, but they remain 
heavily exposed to further losses if the situation continues to deteriorate. 
Graph 4 
As I mentioned, concerns about these exposures have made investors and depositors more 
cautious.  The  cost  of  long-term  funds  has  risen  sharply  (though  it  remains  below  that 
reached during the global financial crisis) and, for some euro-area banks, bond markets have 
largely  closed.  As  such,  very  few  bonds  have  been  issued  by  euro-area  banks  recently 
(Graphs 5 and 6).  
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Graph 5 
Graph 6 
  Banks in some euro-area countries have also suffered large reductions in deposits. Greek 
bank deposits have fallen by about 25 per cent over the past couple of years and deposits in 
Irish  banks  by  10  per  cent.  Italian  and  Spanish  banks  have  experienced  a  small  fall  in 
deposits. Banks in Germany and France, in contrast, have experienced increases (Graph 7). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Graph 7 
 With  banks  under  funding  pressure,  the  ECB  has  had  to  increase  its  lending  to  banks. 
Essentially, it currently allows euro-area banks to borrow as much as they need (subject to 
the availability of eligible collateral) at its policy interest rate, for periods up to three years. 
Some banks have increased their use of ECB funding significantly: Greek banks and Irish 
banks are financing almost one-quarter of their balance sheets from either the ECB or their 
national central bank (Graph 8). For the banking system as a whole, however, central bank 
funding is equivalent to less than 3 per cent of liabilities.  
Graph 8 
6 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
European  banks  have  also  found  it  increasingly  difficult  to  access  US  dollar  funds,  which 
they use to fund US dollar assets, including trade finance. Lending to euro-area banks by US 
money market funds has fallen by 55 per cent this past year. In response, banks have turned 
to  foreign  exchange  swap  markets  to  source  US  dollars,  pushing  up  the  cost  significantly 
(Graph 9).  
Graph 9 
 To  alleviate  the  shortage  of  US  dollar  funds  among  European  banks,  the  US  Federal 
Reserve has re-activated its US dollar swap lines with a number of other central banks. This 
is to allow these central banks to lend US dollars to banks in their jurisdiction. Until recently, 
however, banks had not made much use of this facility, instead seeking to reduce their need 
for  US  dollars  by  selling  US  dollar  assets  and  cutting  back  on  cross-border  financing. 
Following  the  recent  reduction  in  the  interest  charged  on  the  facility,  however,  usage  has 
picked up somewhat.  
To try to enhance investor confidence, European banking authorities recently announced a 
requirement for a large number of  euro-area banks to lift their core Tier 1 capital ratios to 
9 per cent by mid 2012.1 It has been estimated that, other things equal, this would require 
about €115 billion of new capital. This is not a particularly large amount, being equivalent to 
about 12 per cent of these banks’ current capital. Nonetheless, there is evidence that at least 
some  banks  are  unwilling  or  unable  to  raise  equity  and  are  seeking  to  achieve  the  higher 
capital ratio by reducing assets, particularly in offshore markets. This will add to the general 
tightening of global credit conditions. 
Euro-area banks are large participants in cross-border lending, though this is mainly oriented 
towards  other  European  countries  and  North  America  (Graph  10).  Their  role  in  the  Asian 
region is smaller, though they are thought to play a significant role in trade financing. While 
no  data  are  available  for  the  recent  months  during  which  the  European  banking  problems 
have  escalated,  anecdotal  evidence  suggests  that  a  lack  of  trade  financing  is  not  as 
significant a problem in Asia as it was in 2008.  
                                                 
1   After including a buffer for valuation losses on their sovereign debt exposures. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Graph 10 
 Australia’s exposure to European developments 
There  are  various  channels  through  which  developments  in  Europe  could  affect  Australia. 
These include financial linkages, trade linkages and confidence and wealth effects. 
Financial linkages 
(a) 
The direct exposures of Australian banks to the euro area are small. Their claims on euro-
area countries amount to $87 billion, or 2.7 per cent of total assets. Moreover, 80 per cent of 
this exposure is to Germany, France and the Netherlands (Table 1).  
Table 1 
Australian-located Bank Claims on Euro Area Countries(a) 
Ultimate risk basis, as at 30 June 2011 
8 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
The main effect of the European crisis on Australian banks is through the increased cost of 
funds  in  global  markets  as  debt  has  become  more  expensive  in  Australian  banks  sharply 
have  reduced  their  issues  of  long-term  debt  (Graph  11).  Short-term  debt  remains  more 
readily available, particularly in the United States, where money market funds have shifted 
their investments from European banks to Australian, Canadian and Japanese banks.  
Graph 11 
Australian banks, overall, remain relatively liquid as they continue to receive strong inflows of 
deposits. Over the past year, total bank deposits in Australia have risen by 9 per cent, which 
has been more than sufficient to fund the increase in banks’ lending (Graph 12). 
Graph 12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  9
Trade links  
(b) 
The euro area accounts for only about 4 per cent of Australia’s merchandise exports, a low 
share compared with many other countries.  
Share of Merchandise Exports going to Euro Area (2010) 
Table 2 
  While the direct exposure of Australia to a slowing in European demand is low, the indirect 
exposure, through the effect on some of our important trading partners, could be significant. 
China and India, for example, both ship a substantial share of their exports to the euro area 
and  these  could  be  expected  to  decline.  Further,  history  shows  that,  when  exports  slow, 
domestic demand in Asia also slows, albeit to a lesser degree (Graph 13).  
Graph 13 
10 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
Overall, it would be prudent to assume that, if the European economy were to slow markedly 
over  the  next  year  or  so,  Australia  would  be  affected,  particularly  through  indirect  trade 
exposures. It is also likely, however, that if that were to eventuate, the exchange rate of the 
Australian  dollar  would  weaken,  as  it  has  when  the  global  economy  has  weakened  in  the 
past, providing some cushion for the Australian economy. 
Confidence and wealth effects 
(c) 
Confidence and wealth effects are difficult to quantify, but ultimately can be very important in 
transmitting economic shocks. 
Household  confidence  in  Australia  was  below  average  through  much  of  2011,  with 
households being particularly pessimistic about their financial situation over the coming year. 
No doubt, these perceptions were being affected by the unsettling financial news coming out 
of  Europe  and  the  associated  large  declines  in  share  prices.  In  recent  months,  however, 
measures of confidence have improved despite the escalating problems in Europe and the 
continuing volatility in share prices, suggesting that other factors are providing an offset. The 
changed picture for interest rates is one of these. However, the continuing solid expansion in 
household disposable income, which has risen by about 7 per cent over the past year, has 
no doubt also been important. 
Measures  of  business  confidence  are  a  little  below  average  at  present,  even  though 
business  conditions  are  around  average  levels.  Conditions  are  weakest  in  the  retail, 
manufacturing  and  construction  sectors  and  are  noticeably  weaker  among  smaller 
businesses  than  among  larger  businesses.  Overall,  however,  business  confidence,  like 
household confidence, has improved in recent months. The gradual spread of the benefits of 
the  resource  boom  is  helping  to  sustain  business  confidence  in  the  face  of  the  worsening 
European situation.  
The  key  drivers  of  wealth  are  changes  in  share  prices,  house  prices  and  deposits.  Share 
prices are down by 10 per cent over 2011, though a significant part of this has been offset by 
higher dividend payments. House prices on average are down by 4 per cent in 2011. On the 
other  hand,  deposits  have  risen  strongly  and  overall  household  wealth  has  fallen  by  a 
relatively  modest  2  per  cent  in  2011  (Graph  14).  This  is  a  much  smaller  decline  than 
occurred  following  the  global  financial  crisis  in  2008,  and  has  not  caused  households  to 
respond by sharply raising their rate of saving, as happened on that earlier occasion. This 
has allowed household spending to grow broadly in line with income. 
Graph 14 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  11
Conclusion 
The  sovereign  debt  problems  in  Europe  have  escalated  over  recent  months  and  an 
unfavourable  feedback  loop  has  developed  between  government  debt,  the  banking  sector 
and the economy. The large size of the euro-area economy and the significant role played by 
European banks in global cross-border banking mean that it is inevitable that there will be 
spillovers to other parts of the global economy, including Australia. 
Nonetheless, it is encouraging that, to date, any impact on the US economy has been more 
than offset by other factors, with recent US economic indicators being better than they were 
around mid year, despite the recent escalation of the European crisis. The same is also true 
in  Australia.  Asian  economies  have  slowed,  but  it  is  not  clear  how  much  of  this  is  due  to 
earlier policy tightening within Asia (which in some cases is now being reversed as inflation 
pressures subside) or the effect of the developments in Europe. 
The  situation  is  still  unfolding,  however.  The  impact  on  the  global  economy  will  ultimately 
depend  on  how  the  European  problems  are  resolved.  It  is  possible  that  a  combination  of 
credible fiscal commitments by governments and short-term support from the ECB and IMF 
will  provide  a  solution  that  is  relatively  benign  for  the  European  and  world  economies. 
However, other outcomes, including deflation caused by prolonged fiscal austerity, inflation 
caused by large-scale debt monetisation, or some disruptive event such as a change in the 
composition of the euro area, cannot be ruled out at this stage. 
We therefore need to monitor the situation carefully and remain alert to the risks. Having said 
that, I remain confident that Australia, with its strong government finances, resilient banking 
system,  relatively  low  exposures  to  the  troubled  countries  and  strong  links  to  the  dynamic 
Asian region, is well placed to deal with events that may unfold. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
