Ravi Menon: Asia – no room for complacency 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Ravi  Menon,  Managing  Director  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of 
Singapore, at the Paris Europlace Financial Forum, Singapore, 30 November 2011. 
 Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of Banque de France, 
Distinguished guests, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Good  morning.  For  those  of  you  who  are  coming  from  abroad,  a  warm  welcome  to 
Singapore. 
Deleveraging out of a debt overhang 
Molière, a French playwright considered to be one of the greatest masters of comedy, once 
offered this sobering thought: “Debts are like children; begot with pleasure and brought forth 
in pain”. Today, the pain he described is palpitating throughout the world and keeping many 
leaders in government, business, and finance awake at night. 
The  advanced  economies  are  awash  in  debt.  Governments,  households,  and  banks  must 
reduce  leverage  to  restore  economic  and  financial  sustainability.  But  history  tells  us  that 
deleveraging, while necessary, leads to a prolonged period of slower growth punctuated by 
increased financial market volatility.  
The gross government debt-to-GDP ratio is 80% in the UK and in the Eurozone, 100% in the 
United States, and 230% in Japan. Sovereign debt in aggregate is today at levels not seen 
since the Second World War. Financial markets, which had hitherto tolerated the build-up in 
debt, have turned merciless against the Eurozone economies, driving up sovereign spreads 
and dragging down the ratings of those who hold sovereign paper. European governments 
have begun to take steps towards fiscal consolidation, and must convince markets that these 
steps are credible.  
Unfortunately, the private sector is not ready to take over the slack in public demand. Private 
sector debt-to-GDP ratios exceed 250% in the G3 economies. In the United States, where 
the  household  debt-to-disposable  income  ratio  reached  an  unprecedented  135%  in  2008, 
deleveraging  is  already  underway  with  the  recovery  in  private  consumption  well  below 
historical  rebounds.  While  Eurozone  households  are  less  leveraged  than  US  households, 
disposable income is likely to grow more slowly in the Eurozone and hence be a bigger drag 
on consumption. 
A  third  source  of  deleveraging  is  the  banking  system.  Banks  in  the  Eurozone  have  to 
strengthen their capital adequacy position to meet new regulatory requirements as well as 
buffer against potential losses on their sovereign debt holdings. With uncertain prospects for 
raising  fresh  capital  in  equity  markets  and  facing  funding  shortages  in  wholesale  markets, 
some of them are looking to scale back their risk-weighted assets. The resultant crunch in 
credit could further exacerbate the slowdown in the economy. 
With governments, households, and banks all having to deleverage at the same time, we are 
looking  at  a  prolonged  period  of  sub-par  growth  in  the  advanced  economies.  In  many 
advanced countries, debt-to-GDP ratios are not expected to stabilise until 2015 to 2020. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Asia: neither decoupled nor derailed 
What does deleveraging in the G3 mean for Asia? Asia is not immune to developments in 
America or Europe. There are two channels through which the effects of deleveraging will be 
transmitted to Asia: financial and trade. 
The  financial  channel  could  see  several  global  banks  operating  in  Asia  downsize  their 
assets.  The  areas  more  likely  to  be  affected  are  trade  financing,  project  financing,  asset 
leasing, SME lending, and syndicated lending. No doubt, some Asian banks will step up and 
fill some of these gaps. But it is unlikely that there would be full substitution. The resultant 
tightness in credit could lead to a slowdown in economic activity. 
The  trade  channel  could  see  transmission  through  a  slowdown  in  exports  to  the  US  and 
Europe as consumption and investment in the latter become weaker.  
 
 
According to the ADB, 60% of sales from developing Asia are to the G3 economies. 
According to the IMF, if growth in the EU declines by 3.5% points below the baseline 
for two years, growth in Asia will decline 1.5–4.0% points below the baseline.  
Taking  the  perspective  from  Singapore,  Europe  is  also  one  of  our  largest  trading 
partners and source of investment. 
 A scaling back of global risk appetite precipitated by slower growth in the G3 will dampen 
consumer and business sentiment in Asia generally. 
In short, Asia is not decoupled from America and Europe. But while Asia is not decoupled, it 
will not derail either. Growth will slow but will not stall. Asia is entering the current downturn 
from a position of strength. 
 
 
Public finances are healthy. Fiscal deficits in emerging Asia are 2–3% of GDP. 
The debt burden is low. Public sector debt ranges from about 25% to 55% of GDP. 
External debt is about 30% of GDP. 
Official foreign reserves are healthy. 
The  banks  are  well-capitalised.  The  25  largest  Asian  banks  comfortably  meet 
Basel III Tier 1 capital adequacy ratios. 
Governance is stronger. Stronger regulatory frameworks and corporate governance 
reforms following the Asian financial crisis in 1998 have improved the resilience of 
the financial and corporate sectors. 
There is policy flexibility on the fiscal, and to some extent, monetary fronts, in the 
event global growth slips more than expected. 
   Notwithstanding  emerging  Asia’s  strong  fundamentals,  there  is  no  room  for  complacency. 
The  region  is  not  without  significant  challenges  which,  if  unaddressed,  will  prevent  it  from 
realising its potential and render it more vulnerable to shocks from the advanced economies. 
Let me highlight three medium-term imperatives for emerging Asia. 
Increasing domestic demand 
First, Asia must increase domestic demand. As growth slows in the advanced economies, it 
is  in  the  region’s  interest  to  reduce  reliance  on  external  demand  and  develop  indigenous 
sources of growth. This will help to strengthen and stabilise Asian economies over the longer 
term. If an increase in domestic demand in Asia is complemented by fiscal consolidation in 
the  key  industralised  economies,  a  longer  term  rebalancing  of  global  demand  could  be 
achieved. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Demographic factors will work to increase domestic demand in Asia. As the populations in 
the  surplus  economies  of  Asia  age  and  begin  to  consume  more,  a  structural  factor 
contributing  to  the  present  imbalances  will  diminish  in  importance.  But  demographic 
transitions take time and it is in Asia’s, and the rest of the world’s interest to step up reforms 
to boost domestic demand. Policy-led efforts in China to reduce precautionary savings and 
spur  consumption  through  pension  reforms  are  a  good  start.  Real  exchange  rates  in  Asia 
must appreciate, to spur resource allocation to the non-tradeable sector of the economy.  
Managing capital flows 
Second, Asia must learn to manage volatile capital flows. Low interest rates in the advanced 
economies  since  2008 have  prompted  global  investors  to  seek  higher  returns  in  emerging 
economies,  especially  Asia.  Gross  capital  inflows  into  developing  Asia  during  2009–2010 
amounted to some US$1.2 trillion, nearly 6% of GDP. Several Asian economies experienced 
record-high portfolio inflows. Capital inflows are unlikely to persist at the volumes seen in the 
last  two  years,  as  monetary  policy  settings  in  the  advanced  economies  are  eventually 
normalised. 
But  there  are  longer  term  structural  factors  that  will  drive  capital  flows  from  advanced 
economies  to  emerging  Asia,  namely  the  superior  growth  prospects  in  Asia  and  a 
diversification in global portfolios towards higher yielding Asian assets. Advanced economies 
represent  half  of  global  GDP  but  three-quarters  of  global  market  capitalisation  in  equity 
markets.  A  reallocation  of  just  5%  of  advanced  economy  equity  portfolios  to  emerging 
economies translates into a potential flow of US$2 trillion per year. So, the phenomenon of 
large capital inflows into Asia is here to stay and we should learn how to handle it. 
Large  capital  inflows  pose  two  risks.  First,  these  flows  can  potentially  overwhelm  Asia’s 
ability to channel them to productive use, and create asset market bubbles – especially in 
real estate. Residential property prices in some Asian markets have increased by more than 
50%  since  2009,  outpacing  income  growth.  To  be  sure,  there  are  underlying  structural 
factors supporting housing demand, such as urbanisation, growing populations, and the rise 
of  the  middle  class.  But  surplus  liquidity  and  rapid  credit  expansion  fuelled  by  low  global 
interest  rates  and  large  capital  inflows  have  exacerbated  asset  price  inflation  in  Asia.  The 
unwinding of asset bubbles can be rapid and extremely unpleasant. 
Second, large capital inflows can turn into sudden outflows. Sharp capital flow reversals can 
cause  exchange  rates  to  weaken,  trigger  panic  in  funding  markets,  and  even  result  in 
destructive  wealth  effects.  The  unwinding  of  long  positions  in  Asian  markets  as  global 
investors sought to de-risk their portfolios was partly responsible for the sharp selloff in many 
Asian currencies in recent months. 
The most effective way to manage capital inflows is to allow interest rates or exchange rates 
to go up so that capital is priced appropriately. Indeed, as emerging Asia continues to grow, 
allowing the exchange rate to steadily appreciate over the medium term is vital to ensuring 
that capital inflows are moderated and allocated to productive investments. 
But interest rates and exchange rates cannot shoulder entirely the burden of adjustment to 
large and volatile capital flows. Asian countries have been experimenting the use of so-called 
macroprudential  tools  to  complement  the  more  traditional  macroeconomic  tools  in  dealing 
with  capital  flows  and  asset  price  inflation.  These  include  the  use  of  loan-to-value  ratios, 
taxes  and  stamp  duties  on  asset  market  transactions,  and  minimum  holding  periods  for 
assets, all of which serve to dampen demand for domestic assets. Asia needs to continue 
refining these tools, learning from experience and adapting to different circumstances. 
Deepening and broadening financial markets 
Third,  Asia  must  deepen  and  broaden  its  financial  markets.  Asia  must  do  a  better  job  in 
effectively  intermediating  its  considerable  savings  pool  as  well  as  capital  inflows  towards 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
more  productive  investment  in  the  region.  Deeper  financial  markets  will  help  to  absorb  or 
redeploy more effectively capital from abroad. Broader financial markets will help minimise 
the  flow  of  capital  to  unproductive  investments  by  offering  a  wide  range  of  investment 
instruments. 
The  ADB  has  estimated  that  some  US$8  trillion  will  be  needed  in  Asia  to  finance 
infrastructure projects through 2020. Capital markets provide an efficient way to intermediate 
flows  and  can  reduce  the  cost  of  borrowing.  In  fact,  the  financing  needs  of  Asia  –  in 
infrastructure and other high fixed capital investments – are particularly amenable to capital 
market  solutions,  given  the  size  of  the  financing  tranche  and  the  need  for  credit  risk 
diversification. Moreover, as banks deleverage – pressed by the new Basel III capital rules – 
financing  through  the  capital  markets  will  allow  businesses  to  directly  access  the  large 
savings pool in Asia for funding. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
The Asian growth story remains intact. It is not a foregone conclusion, many things can go 
wrong,  but  the  odds  are  that  emerging  Asia  will  remain  the  fastest  growing  region  in  the 
world. But most of Asia is still relatively poor in per capita terms, its financial markets are still 
under-developed, and it lacks truly global businesses. 
Europe may be beset with economic uncertainties but European companies remain among 
the most dynamic, most technologically advanced, and most global businesses in the world.  
Together  –  Asian  economies  and  European  corporates  –  can  create  opportunity  and 
prosperity. 
European firms can promote long-term capital investment into Asia and provide expertise in 
niche sectors, such as in shipping, aviation, and sustainable finance. For European financial 
institutions,  emerging  Asia  represents  an  enormous  growth  opportunity.  Many  European 
corporates are expanding their footprint in Asia as Asia becomes an increasingly important 
source of revenue. For financial institutions, this is even more relevant because banking is 
about relationships – though thick and thin – and global financial institutions play a key role in 
financing  the  needs  of  businesses  in  Asia.  European  banks  currently  account  for  11%  of 
banking  system  assets  in  ASEAN,  according  to  estimates  by  Deutsche  Bank,  and  French 
banks, for instance, play an important role in commodities trading and infrastructure financing 
in Asia. 
At  this  critical  moment  in  the  global  economic  conjuncture,  we  in  Asia  wish  our  European 
friends well. The challenge before them is enormous. Europe needs to reduce its debt and 
grow at the same time. This will require restructuring its economy to become more productive 
and reforming its social structures to reduce the burden on the state. But Europe has much 
going  for  it  –  a  talented  people,  strong  institutions,  world-class  companies,  advanced 
technology, and large, integrated markets. With the right policies and strong leadership, you 
will succeed. 
As Jacques Cousteau, the famous French explorer, said: “If we were logical, the future would 
be bleak, indeed. But we are more than logical. We are human beings, and we have faith, 
and we have hope, and we can work.” 
I wish you fruitful discussions. Thank you.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
