Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj: Relevance of international standards to 
the Islamic financial industry 
Speech by HE Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj, Governor of the Central Bank of Bahrain, at 
the  13th  AAOIFI  –  World  Bank  Annual  Conference  on  Islamic  Banking  and  Finance, 
Manama, 23 October 2011. 
 Your Excellencies, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen: 
On behalf of the Central Bank of Bahrain, it gives me great pleasure to welcome you to the 
13th AAOIFI – Annual World Bank Conference on Islamic Banking and Finance. 
I should especially like to thank the many distinguished speakers who will participate in the 
Conference, as well as the event organisers and sponsors. Particular thanks are due to the 
World Bank for its continuing support. Mr. James Adams, Vice President, East Asia & Pacific 
Region of the World Bank has again travelled to Bahrain participate in this Conference. It is a 
pleasure to have you with us. 
As in previous years, the Conference agenda deals with a wide range of topics, all of which 
are important to the future development of the Islamic financial services industry. However, in 
my  remarks  this  morning  I  intend  to  focus  on  a  theme  that  two  of  the  sessions  have  in 
common:  the  relevance  of  international  standards  to  the  Islamic  financial  industry.  This 
theme  is  explored  both  in  session  one,  which  considers  the  risks  associated  with  using 
International  Financial  Reporting  Standards  by  Islamic  financial  institutions,  and  in  session 
five which is concerned with the potential risks and difficulties in the implementation of Basel 
III in Islamic banks. 
The question asked by both of these sessions is: How relevant are international standards to 
the  Islamic  financial  industry?  In  many  ways  the  Islamic  financial  industry  faces  different 
issues  to  those  that  the  international  standards  have  been  designed  to  address.  For 
example,  the  principle  of  risk  sharing  is  at  the  core  of  the  Islamic  financial  industry.  It 
changes  the  nature  of  the  risks  faced  by  Islamic  financial  institutions  and  their  customers. 
Unlike ordinary depositors, the holders of unrestricted investment accounts in theory share 
some  of  the  risks  that  in  a  conventional  institution  would  be  borne  exclusively  by  the 
shareholders of the bank. 
However, it is possible to concentrate too much on the differences and not enough on the 
similarities. While the principles of Islamic finance are very different to those of conventional 
finance, Islamic financial institutions are still subject to same kinds of risks and to the same 
laws  of  economics  as  are  conventional  ones.  The  differences  between  the  two  types  of 
financial structure should not blind us to the issues that are common to both. 
Let me give some examples. 
Basel III requires conventional banks to hold a stock of high quality liquid assets that can be 
used  to  meet  unexpected  deposit  outflows.  These  instruments  include  highly  rated  paper 
issued by sovereigns and by corporates. 
The regulators of the conventional industry have focused on the issue of liquidity because, 
pre-crisis,  conventional  banks  increasingly  relied  on  their  access  to  short-term  interbank 
markets  to  fund  relatively  long-term  assets.  Borrowing  short  to  lend  long  is,  of  course, 
fundamental to the business of banking. Even so, there comes a point of which the degree of 
maturity  mismatching  is  no  longer  prudent,  and  we  saw  with  conventional  financial 
institutions  that  the  boundary  between  prudent  and  imprudent  business  conduct  had  been 
crossed. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
If we look at the trends in Islamic banking in the years prior to the crisis, we can see that 
there  are  important  similarities  between  the  practices  of  Islamic  financial  institutions  and 
those  of  conventional  ones.  Just  like  conventional  institutions,  Islamic  financial  institutions 
increasingly  funded  long-term  assets  with  short-term  funding.  Although  the  assets  and 
liabilities were structured in a Sharia-compliant manner, the degree of maturity mismatching 
was  just  as  great  as  was  practiced  by  conventional  institutions.  In  some  cases  where  the 
asset  involved  a  long-term  development  project,  the  degree  of  maturity  mismatching  was 
significantly greater than that practiced by conventional financial institutions. 
The conventional financial industry received a wake-up call during the crisis concerning the 
importance of understanding, monitoring and controlling liquidity risks. The Islamic financial 
industry must recognise that it also needs good liquidity risk management. However, Islamic 
financial  institutions  find  it  difficult  to  manage  their  liquidity  risk  given  the  relative  lack  of 
short-term  money  market  instruments  in  which  they  can  invest.  The  CBB  has  been  at  the 
forefront of innovation in assisting Islamic financial institutions to manage their liquidity, but 
more still needs to be done both by regulators and the industry. 
So, does Basel III offer a solution? Obviously, Islamic financial institutions cannot invest in 
interest-based products. This makes the specific liquidity requirements of Basel III difficult to 
apply  to  them.  There  is  also  the  complication  that  the  outstanding  stock  of  Sukuk  is  not 
sufficiently large to enable all Islamic financial institutions to meet a liquidity ratio comparable 
to that mandated under Basel III. Finally, the markets for Sukuk are not always as liquid as 
those for conventional government bonds and therefore even if an Islamic financial institution 
invests in them it might not always be able to find a ready buyer when the need occurs. 
These are genuine practical difficulties in applying Basel III to Islamic financial institutions. 
Even so, they should not get in the way of recognizing the important principle that Islamic 
financial institutions need to take liquidity risk just as seriously as conventional firms need to 
do.  They  need  to  make  sure  that  they  keep  maturity  mismatching  to  prudent  limits.  There 
needs to be a debate about what sort of limits would be prudent. But there is no doubt that 
limits are needed. 
Another issue that Basel III seeks to address is to ensure that banks have sufficient capital to 
be able to absorb losses on an on-going basis. Standard setters have focused not only on 
the  amount  of  capital  but  also  on  its  quality.  In  the  simplest  terms,  the  financial  crisis 
revealed that too many conventional banks had capital that would only absorb losses if the 
bank  went  into  liquidation.  It  was  not  capable  of  absorbing  losses  on  an  on-going  basis. 
Basel III sets out to ensure that bank capital has a stronger ability to absorb losses before a 
bank goes into liquidation. 
It has often been argued that Islamic financial institutions need a different capital structure to 
conventional ones. Their account holders can expect to share in the risks to which the firm is 
exposed.  This  means  that,  in  principle,  they  should  expect  to  share  in  losses  as  well  as 
profits. But a similar assumption was made about investors who held the subordinated debt 
issued  by  conventional  banks.  When  those  banks  failed,  instead  of  taking  their  share  of 
losses, subordinated debt holders were often protected by the terms of the bail-out. 
So, what applies in theory does not always apply in practice. This means that the regulators 
of  Islamic  financial  institutions  also  need  to  pay  careful  attention  to  the  ability  of  capital 
structures  to  absorb  losses  on  an  on-going  basis.  It  has  become  clear  as  a  result  of  the 
financial crisis that the predominant form of bank capital needs to be equity. From an Islamic 
industry  perspective,  this  has  the  great  advantage  that  equity  is  without  a  doubt  Sharia-
compliant. 
Finally,  on  the  subject  of  international  financial  reporting  standards,  it  is  important  to 
remember  that  transparency  and  consistency  in  the  valuation  of  assets  is  every  bit  as 
important  to  Islamic  financial  institutions  as  to  conventional  ones.  In  fact,  it  is  even  more 
important. Because investment account holders are in principle exposed to similar kinds of 
risks as the holder of bank equity, it is important that Islamic financial institutions can present 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
their  financial  results  in  a  clear  and  understandable  form  which  is  comparable  between 
institutions. IFRS may not be the right solution in all circumstances. AAOIFI has done a lot of 
immensely important work over the years in adapting international standards to the needs of 
the  Islamic  financial  industry.  However,  the  need  to  adapt  international  standards  to  the 
needs  of  the  Sharia-compliant  industry  should  not  mean  that  the  important  underlying 
principles of transparency and comparability become neglected. 
Recognition that international standards are relevant to the Islamic financial industry, even if 
they should not be blindly copied, will go a long way towards ensuring that the industry has 
the strong foundations on which to build for the future. Securing strong foundations for the 
industry is in the interests of everyone involved it, especially those who are just beginning 
their careers. 
This  brings  me  to  the  second  purpose  of  our  meeting  today.  I  would  like  to  congratulate 
those students who have successfully completed the “Certified Sharia Adviser and Auditor”, 
and  “Certified  Islamic  Professional  Accountant”  programmes.  To  have  mastered  these 
challenging  courses  of  study  has  required  hard  work  and  commitment  from  you.  It  is  an 
achievement that you can be proud of, and one that I am sure will serve you well throughout 
your professional career. 
Let me end by wishing all the graduating students a long, successful, and rewarding career. I 
also  wish  all  the  participants  a  successful  Conference  and  hope  that  you  will  have  many 
stimulating and fruitful discussions over the course of the next two days. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
