Darmin Nasution: Building efficient equilibrium towards sustainable 
growth 
Speech by Dr Darmin Nasution, Governor of Bank Indonesia, at the Bankers’ Dinner, 
Jakarta, 9 December 2011. 
 Respectable Members of Parliament,  
Prominent Bankers, Businessmen and Dignitaries, 
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Assalamu’alaikum Wr. Wb,  
Good Evening and May God Bless Us All, 
To open my speech here today held in such salubrious settings, I would like to invite you all 
to join me in expressing thanks and praise to God Almighty who has blessed us again with 
the opportunity to congregate here for the Bankers’ Dinner at the end of 2011. 
In distinction from the previous Bankers’ Dinner’s tradition usually held in the opening of a 
new  year,  this  2011,  we  have  decided  to  organize  this  annual  event  at  the  closing  of  the 
year. By doing so, it is sincerely hoped that we have ample time to reflect on the success and 
failure over the past year as well as to discuss our expectations, risks and challenges to draw 
commitments ahead of time. 
Distinguished Guests, Ladies, and Gentlemen, 
It  has  come  to  our  common  understanding  that  changes  in  the  constellation  of  the  global 
economy since the global financial crisis of 2008 and its aftermath had left a profound and 
widespread fright. Against the backdrop of lingering effects from the global financial crisis, 
significant  challenges  in  managing  an  increasingly  complex  macroeconomic  stability  has 
risen  considerably.  External  shock  and  uncertainty  seem  becoming  a  constant  dimension 
that incessantly shadows us along with the prevailing shifts and changes.  
In  this  current  era  of  globalization,  every  formulation  and  implementation  would  be 
surrounded by some degree of uncertainty. However, it is believed that every open economy 
such as Indonesia will be constantly challenged by different external shocks over time. The 
problem is we do not know when, how big and through which channel the shock will happen. 
Nevertheless,  we  should  be  grateful.  Despite  the  uncertainties,  our  economy  has  shown 
stronger  performance  this  year  compared  to  last  year.  Solid  collaboration  and  close 
coordination,  based  on  common  understanding,  have  become  fundamental  elements  in 
achieving and maintaining the successful management of our economy.  
Therefore, prior to delivering the main substance of my annual address this evening, please 
allow  me  to  express  my  sincere  appreciation  and  thanks  to  the  banking  community,  all 
elements  of  the  Central  and  Local  Government,  the  Parliament,  business  community, 
academics,  observers,  the  media  and  all  other  parties  that  I  am,  unfortunately,  unable  to 
acknowledge  individually,  who  have  been  so  incredibly  supportive  of  Bank  Indonesia  in 
fulfilling its duties. 
For  me  personally,  my  journey  in  leading  Bank  Indonesia,  a  state  institution  with  legal 
mandate to maintain national macroeconomic stability, is extremely precious and cherished 
experience.  The  experience  in  this  arduous  journey  through  labyrinths  of  trials  and 
tribulations,  has  bestowed  upon  me  a  deeper  understanding  of  our  economic  dynamics. 
Hence, as citizen of this great nation myself, the mandate has also provided great honor and 
opportunity  for  me  to  pay  homage  to  our  nation  and  all  Indonesians  by  always  giving  my 
best.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
This  evening,  the  time  has  come  for  me  to  reflect  on  what  Bank  Indonesia  has  achieved 
during the years of my leadership and communicate the plans and strategies beforehand by 
presenting  my  views  regarding  the  economic  prospects  and  challenges  to  be  faced  in  the 
years  to  come  and  their  implications  on  Bank  Indonesia.  I  genuinely  hope  that  the  future 
perspective  I  plan  to  present  here  this  evening  can  serve  as  a  contribution  for  us  all  in 
determining some common measures to achieve a better national economic future. For that 
reason,  the  theme  of  my  speech  this  evening  is  “Building  Efficient  Equilibrium  towards 
Sustainable Growth.” 
Distinguished Guests, Ladies, and Gentlemen, 
By the theme, I would like to bring your thoughts and views to meditate over the question on 
how we suppose to place the function and role of banking industries in achieving economic 
development goals. In particular, I am asking all of us here to contemplate on how to heal 
from  inefficiency  disease  that  has  hindered  our  economy  from  growing  higher  and  more 
sustainable. Only by such sustaining growth, then the problem of poverty and unemployment 
can be solved altogether. 
It is technically believed that high and sustainable growth often refers to potential economic 
growth. Based on our estimate, the potential growth of Indonesian economy is around 7%, 
provided that investment could grow by 12% per year.  
However, to achieve sustainable economic growth, two conditions have to be satisfied. First, 
there  should  be  a  continuous  condusive  macroeconomic  environment.  Second,  capital 
accumulation  and  total  factor  productivity  should  grow  so  that  economic  capacity  and 
competitiveness  would  steadily  increase.  Capital  accumulation  can  be  achieved  through 
investment in the form of machinery, plants, research and development and human capital. 
The sustainability of investment is influenced by multiple factors, such as profit expectation, 
investment  climate,  and  not  less  important,  the  availability  of  financing.  For  Indonesian 
economy,  the  scarcity  of  financing  is  among  the  most  binding  constraints  of  investment 
activity. This has been reflected in the latest surveys on sectoral mapping and on business 
condition. More specifically, the surveys pointed to financing constraint suffered by business 
players, particularly difficulties in accessing bank loan, resulting from too high lending rate, 
too demanding collateral obligation, and too complicated administrative requirement. 
Reflecting on the survey results, I would like to invite all of us to retrospect on the place and 
role of banking industry. There is no doubt that banking industry has its strategic role in our 
national  economic  chain.  Looking  back  into  its  evolution  through  innumerable  crises  and 
elongated learning curve, it would not be excessive to say that our banking industry should 
have been transformed itself into better banking industry as expected by the public. 
The public craves for banking industry that is not only sound and robust, but also capable to 
effectively and efficiently participate in financing the economy. The establishment of sound 
and  robust  banking  industry  on  the  one  hand,  and  its  successful  in  performing  their 
intermediation  function  effectively  and  efficiently  on  the  other  hand,  are  two  things  that 
cannot stand apart. It’s like two sides of a coin. It is possibly there is a trade-off between the 
two, but we can certainly find the optimum point between the two. 
We  cannot  remain  silent,  static  and  satisfied  too  soon,  believing  that  our  banking  industry 
has  reached  a  good  equilibrium,  while  we  know  that  banking  industries  in  other  Asian 
countries  continue  to  pursue  improvement  and  transform  for  the  better  to  attain  the  real 
equilibrium of sound, robust, and efficient banking industries. If it is the bad equilibrium that 
prevails,  then  we  will  face  difficulties  and  hardships  in  coping  up  with  the  imminent 
challenges  laid  bare  before  us  in  welcoming  The  ASEAN  Economic  Community  (AEC)  by 
2015. 
When  we  do  not  have  the  capability  to  compete  in  the  globalization  era,  we  become  less 
compatible  with  other  nations.  Consequently,  we  become  less  able  to  benefit  from 
globalization and only accept-induced harm. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Distinguished Guests, Ladies, and Gentlemen, 
Amidst  the  increasingly  strong  currents  of  globalization,  I  see  2011  as  a  fascinating  and 
worthy of note year. Throughout 2011, we have booked numerous successful achievements 
which  bring  immense  satisfaction.  Yet,  the  year  is  also  full  of  dynamics  and  mounting 
challenges that have transformed us to become a relatively more matured entity in managing 
our national economic stability. 
In managing our national economy during the year 2011, global fluctuations and uncertainty 
seem  to  be  a  constant  threat  looming  incessantly  over  us.  The  uncertainty  of  European 
mechanism for sovereign debt crisis resolution and widespread fears of the lingering global 
recession  have  become  two  epicenters  triggering  turbulence  and  unrest  in  the  global 
financial  markets  during  2011.  In  closely  following  up  the  European  debt  crisis,  we 
experience  an  infinite  uncertainty  of  walking  into  dark  abyss.  We  do  not  know  yet  how 
profound  and  how  much  longer  the  European  debt  crisis  will  continue  to  last  because  the 
dimension of the crisis is significantly extensive and complex. At present, there are negative 
events producing more negative events in a reinforcing vicious cycle (adverse feedback loop) 
as reflected in the government debt crisis, worsening fragility of banking industries, and the 
simultaneous slowdown in economic activity which in turn escalates the crisis into precipitous 
and prolonged crisis.  
Meanwhile,  the  U.S.  economic  recovery  appears  to  remain  stagnant  due  to  the  restricted 
maneuverability in fiscal policy to stimulate economic activity. The combination of a relatively 
constrained fiscal policy and economic slowdown has naturally compelled them to pin their 
hopes on their central bank as the savior of the economy. 
However,  the  diminishing  room  to  cut  interest  rate  has  coerced  central  banks  like  The 
Federal  Reserve  to  invent  creative  policies  to  stimulate  economy  through  “quantitative 
easing”. As an emerging market country, we, too, suffer the blows of such measure in the 
form of two-way cross border capital flows. 
Retrospect  to  these  highlights,  it  is  not  my  intention  to  discourage  us  into  a  pessimist  in 
looking  up  to  the  future.  Quite  the  opposite,  these  highlights  are  presented  to  make  us 
continue  to  be  vigilant  and  devise  stretched  policy  frameworks  to  withstand  large  adverse 
shocks  in  anticipation  of  global  imbalances  and  uncertainty  in  the  coming  year  that  is 
predicted  to  be  no  much  better  than  the  current  condition.  We  are  also  required  to  make 
adjustments and re-alignment over the prevailing forecasts. 
Distinguished Guests, Ladies, and Gentlemen, 
We should be grateful, in the midst of unrelenting global turmoil; the resilience of financial 
sector  and  national  economy  has  been  increasingly  demonstrated  robustness.  At  least, 
during 2011 the Indonesian economy has managed to insulate itself from the spillover effects 
of  European  debt  crisis  through  trade  channel  due  to  its  robust  basis  of  largely  domestic 
demand-driven economy within our economic structure. 
Despite having successfully safe-guarded our financial system integrity, we believe that its 
spillover effects through financial markets channel had been felt ever since the start of the 
Greece’s fiscal crisis in mid 2010. In early 2011, a period in which optimism over the global 
economic  recovery  flourished,  massive  capital  inflow  flooded  our  market,  thus  rupiah  was 
greatly appreciated. However, this optimism faded instantly in April and May 2011 following 
the credit rating downgrades for Portugal and Greece by Fitch. 
In  early  September  2011,  the  scale  of  the  crisis  pressure  escalated  to  Italy  and  Spain, 
prompting  investors  to  reassess  (repricing)  the  investment  risk  profiling  and  reposition  the 
portfolio in emerging market assets, including in Indonesia. We have witnessed how rupiah 
has  been  considerably  under  pressure  in  the  last  three  months  amidst  foreign  currency 
excess demand situation.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Amidst imbalances of foreign exchange supply and demand within these last three months, 
Bank Indonesia has maintained a steady pace of rupiah depreciation in a relatively measured 
scale  against  regional  currencies.  The  obtained  range  of  fluctuations  in  exchange  rates 
aligns  consistently  with  the  internal  and  external  macroeconomic  balance  that  create 
conducive  atmosphere  in  providing  greater  certainty  for  business  players  in  the  real  and 
financial sectors regarding the average exchange rate in the long run. 
Distinguished Guests, Ladies, and Gentlemen, 
We have been closely monitoring that amidst massive pressures on global financial markets, 
our  economy  had  bred  strong  resilient  forces  that  make  it  more  apt  to  mitigate  external 
turbulences. This heartening situation has provided us some space to direct various macro-
economic  indicators  into  the  right  track  (on-track).  Domestic  household  consumption 
expenditure remains strong, while investment and exports continue to rise. In spite of this, 
the  inconsequential  realization  of  fiscal  capital  spending  has  led  to  situation  in  which 
multiplier effects of fiscal operations towards limited Gross Domestic Product (GDP) is still 
inadequate. 
With the ever-increasing investment, the investment ratio to GDP rose to 31.3% compared to 
23.6% in 2005. The increased investment was also reflected in increased imports of capital 
goods  mainly  in  the  form  of  machinery,  the  high  growth  in  investment  lending,  and  the 
expansion of Foreign Direct Investment. 
The increasing role of investment and export has paved the way to the well-maintained of a 
balanced economic growth in 2011. For 2011, the Indonesian economics is projected to grow 
6.5%,  surpassing  the  achievements  of  2010  at  6.1%.  Corresponding  to  the  increased 
investment, manufacturing industry is projected to grow by 6.1% (yoy), offsetting the growth 
in  the  extractive  sectors  such  as  mining.  It  is  heartening  to  note  that  the  expansion  of 
manufacturing industry has boosted absorption of workforce in formal sector. Consequently, 
unemployment rate fell to 6.6% in August 2011 from 7.1% in August 2010. 
Portrayal of our success in maintaining exceptionally high economic growth even during the 
recent global downturn is deemed satisfactory with the Consumer Price Index (IHK) inflation 
remained under control. The IHK inflation is forecasted reached only 3.9% (yoy). Meanwhile, 
core inflation remains steady in these past three-years at around 4.0% which indicates that 
the economy is yet operating below its potential growth. This occurs because an increased 
production capacity is simultaneously correspond with increased investment.  
I perceive this trend as a good start because it means capital accumulation process is on the 
lead to buttress the effectiveness of the productive capacity expansion of the economy. Our 
latest  assessment  on  the  phenomena  of  supply  side  constraint  points  to  the  fact  that  the 
sensitivity of price increase (core inflation) to growth increase has declined during the last 5 
year, particularly compared to early 2000s.  
Distinguished Guests, Ladies, and Gentlemen, 
In  the  midst  of  sluggish  economic  recovery  in  developed  countries  and  commodity  price 
correction within global market, Indonesia’s exports performance remains solid. Exports grew 
28.2% during 2011. We can take advantage of the increased intra-regional trade in Asia; so 
that adverse effects of the economic slowdown in developed countries can be compensated 
by  increased  exports  to  Asian  countries  having  high  economic  growth  such  as  China  and 
India. 
In the meantime, imports continued to grow rapidly (30.4%) as a consequence of accelerated 
economic  activity.  I  conclude  that  the  rising  imports  performance  is  still  within  a  relatively 
safe and healthy outlook because it is likely associated with the imported raw materials and 
capital goods to spur increased production capacity.  
Meanwhile, the quality of capital inflow structure is significantly improving with the increased 
foreign direct investment (FDI) exceeded portfolio investments. Overall, in 2011, the balance 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
of  payments  booked  surplus  of  USD  12.6  billion  and  foreign  reserves  rose  to  USD  111.0 
(December 7, 2011). 
Distinguished guests, ladies, and gentlemen, 
The financial system stability preserved in the midst of global turbulence is also attributable 
to the resilience of our banking industry, which is increasingly able to absorb instability risks 
while maintaining its intermediation function. 
Improvement in capital and consistent implementation of bank prudential principles appear to 
be effective in avoiding drastic deterioration in the industry. This is reflected in the low gross 
non-performing  loan  (NPL)  ratio,  reaching  only  2.7%,  far  below  the  indicative  threshold  of 
5%, while capital adequacy ratio (CAR) was recorded at 17.2% at end of October 2011. 
Despite pressures on domestic foreign exchange market, the rupiah liquidity condition in the 
interbank money market (PUAB) remains unaffected, while banking liquidity also continues to 
be adequate. Third party fund (DPK) in 2011 (up the October) grew 19,0% yoy, while ratio of 
liquid assets to non-core deposits was kept above 100% (182.0%) as of October 2011. 
The  banking  intermediation  function  is  managed  to  run  as  planned.  In  2011  credit  growth 
reached 25.7% (yoy), while loan to deposit ratio (LDR) rose to 81.4% as of October 2011 
from 75.5% at end 2010. The quality of the credit growth escalates as credit to productive 
sectors increases reflected by growth of investment credit that reached 31% as of October 
2011.  
In addition to the enhanced ability to absorb risks, our banking industry is also able to gain 
large amount of profit, in fact the largest among ASEAN countries. In October 2011, return 
on  assets  (ROA)  of  the  banking  industry  stood  at  3.11%,  far  above  ASEAN  average  of 
1.14%. 
Meanwhile,  for  Islamic  banking,  based  on  a  survey  conducted  by  BMB  Islamic  Finance, 
Islamic business and management consultancy based in London, Indonesia Islamic financial 
industry occupied the 4th position in the world after Iran, Malaysia and Saudi Arabia. Indeed, 
this is a very satisfactory achievement. 
In September 2011, total assets of Islamic banking has reached Rp 126, 6 trillion or 3.8% of 
total national banking assets, grew by 47.8% (yoy) and the highest in the last 3 years. The 
average CAR of Islamic Banks (BUS) and Sharia Unit (UUS) grew at 16%, while the average 
Capital  adequacy  Ratio  (CAR  )  of  Islamic  Rural  Bank  (BPRS)  24.7%  .  In  the  rural  banks 
group, in late October 2011 a year on year assets grew by 20.56%, credit 20.96%, third party 
fund  (DPK)  21.31%,  and  the  number  of  deposit  accounts  grew  9.72%,  while  Capital 
adequacy Ratio (CAR), in late October 2011 grew 28 , 58%. 
Distinguished guests, ladies, and gentlemen, 
I view the positive achievement of the national economy in 2011 as a result of hard work and 
strong  cooperation  among  stakeholders,  which  is  supported  actively  by  the  banking 
community, business agents and the general public. 
In this opportunity, I would like to highlight several policy actions taken by Bank Indonesia in 
confronting  the  national  economy  dynamics  during  2011.  On  the  monetary  side,  Bank 
Indonesia’s  policy  in  2011  is  basically  a  strengthening  of  previous  year’s  policy  mix,  but 
further calibrated to the dynamics and challenges of the economy during 2011. 
Interest  rate  policy  throughout  2011  is  directed  to  be  consistent  with  the  predetermined 
inflation target of 5%±1% and 4,5%±1% in 2011 and 2012, respectively. In February 2011 
Bank Indonesia increased BI Rate by 25 bps to 6.75% as a response to intensifying inflation 
expectation, which is attributable to high volatile food inflation. 
Since September 2011, the monetary stance is turned to an easing phase, by decreasing the 
lower  limit  of  interbank  money  market  interest  rate  corridor.  Further  in  October  and 
November 2011, Bank Indonesia lowered BI rate by 25 bps and 50 bps, respectively to arrive 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
at the 6.0% level. The decision to lower BI Rate is indeed quite delicate since it has to be 
taken in the middle of ongoing turmoil in the global financial market and against the market 
mainstream. However, we have strong belief supported by highly fundamental consideration. 
Since mid 2011, we have been convinced that CPI inflation would move down, possibly even 
reaching  below  the  5±1%  target.  On  the  other  hand,  we  need  to  lay  stronger  basis  for 
domestic demand in anticipation of global economic slowdown. It can be noted that this year 
Bank Indonesia is ahead of the curve by being the first central bank in Asia to lower policy 
interest rate. 
We view that the national economy should also be ring-fenced from instability sources such 
as short term capital flows. In addition, the structure of capital flows needs to be amended by 
shifting  it  to  longer  instruments.  Therefore,  on  13  May  2011,  the  SBI’s  holding  period  is 
extended to 6 months from previously 1 month. This policy proves to be effective in halting 
capital inflows into SBI and shift foreign capital investment to government securities market.  
Distinguished guests, ladies, and gentlemen, 
Experience demonstrates that crisis management often bears extremely high economic and 
social  cost  and  involves  long  recovery.  Against  this  background,  Bank  Indonesia  also 
implemented Crisis Management Protocol (CMP). However, the CMP needs to be equipped 
with proper guidance and legal basis which regulate crisis prevention and resolution process 
in a systematic and integrated way on a national scale, through Financial Safety Net Law. 
Financial crisis generally starts with liquidity squeeze in the interbank market, market interest 
rate hike, and exchange rate pressure. For that reason, we intensify monitoring on financial 
market transactions, especially to scrutinize vulnerabilities that would lead to financial crisis. 
Through the developed monitoring system, we wish to ensure the adequacy of rupiah and 
foreign  exchange  liquidity  in  the  financial  market,  as  well  as  to  maintain  exchange  rate 
stability. Therefore, we conduct a combination of intervention in the foreign exchange market 
and acquisition of government securities (SBN) in the secondary market. This policy is quite 
effective  in  stabilizing  the  exchange  rate  and  SBN  price,  while  also  increase  SBN 
accumulation in Bank Indonesia for monetary operation purpose (Reverse Repo).  
In order to maintain the stability of the exchange rate, we also need to seek long-term policy 
breakthrough by ensuring sustainable supply of foreign exchange.  
Against this background, at end September 2011, we took the initiative to issue a regulation 
to  obligate  export  proceed  and  proceed  from  external  debt  to  be  deposited  in  domestic 
banking system. 
This  policy  can  be  considered  soft  compared  to  those  in  Thailand  and  Malaysia,  who  has 
regulated tightly foreign exchange flows related to exports and imports since decades ago. 
We have been taken hostage for too long by market mechanism, which in fact lead to market 
imperfection, and we need to correct it.  
Considering the significant role of inflation from the supply side problem, Bank Indonesia has 
been  in  close  coordination  with  the  government  to  preserve  price  stability,  particularly 
resulting  from  volatile  nature  of  commodities  prices  and  government’s  decision  on 
administered prices.  
Bank  Indonesia  has  taken  steps  to  increase  the  role  of  Inflation  Control  Teams,  both  in 
national  and  regional  levels.  Additionally,  Bank  Indonesia  regional  representative  offices 
have also routinely published Regional Economic Study which serves as outlets of various 
aspects of the regional economy.  
Distinguished guests, ladies, and gentlemen, 
On  the  banking  area,  within  2011  bank  Indonesia  has  pursued  several  policies  framed  by 
four pillars, namely: 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
Policy to boost banking intermediation role, to enable more efficient and transparent 
intermediation,  as  well  as  to  open  access  of  low-income  community  to  financial 
services.  Included  in  this  policy  is  the  policy  on  Transparency  of  Information  on 
Primary  Lending  Rate  and  the  continuation  of  financial  inclusion  program.  I  put 
strong  attention  this  strengthening  of  banking  transparency,  which  is  expected  to 
lead up to efficiency. First, a transparent banking industry would encourage healthy 
competition through better market discipline. Second, it would increase banks’ ability 
in identifying aspects that influence cost structure such that higher efficiency level 
can be achieved. 
Policy  to  enhance  banking  resilience,  so  that  banks  remain  strong  and  sound  in 
confronting competition, through more transparent management that refers to good 
governance principles. This policy includes improvement in the calculation of capital 
to  suit  better  with  risks,  and  obligate  banks  to  implement  anti  fraud  strategy, 
prudential  principles  in  outsourcing  and  risk  management  in  delivering  services  to 
prime customers.  
Policy to strengthen supervisory function, aiming at increasing the effectiveness of 
bank  supervision,  especially  in  terms  of  the  quality  of  early  warning  system. 
Consequently, we apply improvements to the regulation for bank reporting to Bank 
Indonesia..  Meanwhile,  to  enhance  the  effectiveness  of  resolution  to  banking 
problems,  we  impose  deadline  for  every  bank  supervision  status  through  the 
regulation of “Determination of Status and Follow-Up Supervision.” 
Strengthening of macroprudential policy. This policy is aimed to strengthen financial 
system  stability  through  better  implementation  of  macroprudential  surveillance. 
Included in this policy is increase in foreign exchange reserve requirement and LDR-
reserve requirement.  
In  the  mean  time,  policy  on  syariah  banking  in  2011  continues  to  be  pursued  in  terms 
harmonization  of  regulation  with  conventional  banking,  relaxation  of  regulation,  and 
implementation of Law No.21 Year 2008 on Syariah Banking. Among the issued regulation is 
regulation on asset quality for syariah commercial bank, syariah business unit, and syariah 
rural banks, financing restructurization, and risk management for syariah commercial; bank 
and syariah business unit. 
We  also  support  research,  training  and  facilitation  of  SMEs  though  policy  and  strategy  to 
“Enhance SME’s Access to Banks” and “Encourage Banks to finance SMEs”. This policy is 
aimed to enable SMEs to enhance its eligibility and capability so that they can meet banks 
requirements (bankable), while also boosting regional economy capacity. 
With  intensifying  payment  transactions  through  means  of  payment  such  as  credit  card, 
ATM/debit card, and e-money, we pursue a number of policies to ensure the establishment 
of safe and efficient payment system.  
This  policy 
establishment of national payment gateway and standardization of electronic money. 
Distinguished guests, ladies, and gentlemen, 
It is important for me to say that we cannot and may not assume that our macro stability will 
definitely  continue  in  the  future.  This  assumption  can  lead  us  to  comfort  zone  that  would 
reduce our ability to anticipate future challenges early on.  
For that reason, allow me in this part to highlight views on the challenges confronted by our 
economy, which requires hard works from all of us to anticipate and address them in 2012. 
The  increasingly  difficult  external  challenge  is  related  to  vulnerability  and  recovery  of  the 
global  economic  recovery,  which  may  be  worse  than  predicted  (downside  risk).  This  is 
considering the complexity of European debt trap which definitely will affect global economy. 
IMF has just revised 2012 global growth from 4,0% to only 2,0%.  
includes  among  others  standardization  of  chip-based  ATM/Debit  Card, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
in  monetary 
On the one hand, with the dismal global picture, national economic machinery will depends 
on  effectivity  of  domestic  absorption  and  the  ability  to  benefit  from  local  markets.  In 
connection to that, the capacity to preserve growth momentum will be limited should banking 
intermediary and fiscal expenditure absorption are sub-optimal. 
On the other hand, combination among global economic deterioration, low interest rate, dan 
global excess liquidity, tends to shift global portfolio allocation. Such situation is a source of 
instability which challenges emerging markets’ authorities in sustaining its financial stability. 
As a domestic challenge, we have a lot of homework to finish. Some of them are old issues 
we  never  solve  and  thus  have  created  inefficiency  in  the  economy.  In  financial  sector, 
national  banking  industry  after  1998  has  been  more  vigilant.  However,  its  contribution  for 
economic development is still in the margin. If  we look at the statistic, Indonesian banking 
asset to GDP ratio has reached 47,2% in September 2011. However, credit to GDP ratio is 
only 29,0%. As comparisons, credit to GDP ratios in the region vary, with Malaysia, Thailand 
and China recorded 111,4%, 117,0%, and 131.0%. 
Opinions of business players provided a similar picture. From Bank Indonesia recent survey 
on “how to finance your company”, the proportion of bank loan in total financing is very low, 
that is only 25% for working capital, and only 21% for investment. On the contrary, intental 
financing  has  been  the  main  source  of  financing,  48%  for  working  capital  and  61%  for 
investment. 
In other words, it seems that the large asset size in banking industry is not followed by high 
contribution to the economy. This is also because there is a substantial portion of banking 
assets  that  are  not  productive  from  macroeconomic  point  of  view.  Those  are  ones  in  the 
forms of monetary instruments (Fasbi, TD, SBI) and government debts (SBN). The size of 
banks  placement 
instruments  and  government  debt  securities  are 
Rp 415.48 trillion and Rp 245.97 trillion, respectively, as of end of October 2011. In total, they 
constitute  31.4%  of  the  total  credit  of  Rp  2,106.2  trillion.  About  60%  of  Bank  Indonesia 
monetary instruments are currently held by the 10 biggest banks. Moreover, it seems that to 
preserve  high  probability,  banks  charge  high  lending  rates  to  customers,  partly  also  to 
compensate  for  the  generally  lower  rate  from  placement  in  monetary  instruments  and 
government securities.  
The  low  efficiency  of  banking  industry  has  also  contributed  to  high  lending  rate.  This  is 
reflected by operational cost to operational revenue ratio (BOPO) of 86.44% as of October 
2011. For comparison, the same ratios for ASEAN countries are 40%–60%. 
Although intermediation function somehow works, operational inefficiency generate high cost 
financing,  resulting  in  low  economic  competitiveness.  Such  high  financing  cost  can  be 
illustrated  by  lending  rate  of  working  capital  loan,  investment  loan  dan  consumption  loan, 
which are 12.09%, 11.66%, and 13.40%, respectively, as of October 2011. This is despite BI 
rate having reached the lowest ever level of 6.0%. For comparison, with 3.0% policy rate in 
Malaysia and 4.5% in the Philippines, bank lending rates in Malaysia and the Philippines are 
only 6.5% and5.7%, respectively (October 2011). 
The current structural problems which give rise to false equilibrium in the banking industry 
can not be solved by market mechanism alone. There is a need to put a corrective policy in 
place to bring the system back towards its real equilibrium.  
On the real sector side, inefficiency still dominates the conduct of the economy following the 
weakness  of  market  microstructure,  which  eventually  hindered  market  capacity  to  efficient 
allocation  of  resources.  This  feature  has  significant  impact  on  inflation  rate  particularly  on 
foodstuff  category  which  tends  to  be  volatile  and  uneasy  to  subdued.  The  fragile 
microstructure  of  staple  food  markets  has  significant  bearing  on  two  fronts,  namely 
production and distribution process.  
On the production front, the less effective development strategy in the agricultural sector, for 
instance,  gives  rise  to  imbalances  between  supply  and  consumption  of  rice  which 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
unfortunately has taken place for a long period of time. The recent increase of rice supply 
resulted from rice import, seen as a mere short cut solution to the problem.  
On the distribution front, the weakness of the market microstructure revolves around (i) the 
availability  of  logistics  services,  transportation,  and  transportation  infrastructure  related  to 
foodstuff, (ii) the availability of a symmetric market information for suppliers, wholesalers, and 
retailers, and (iii) the presence of policy that favors particular market players which eventually 
create oligopolistic behavior in the distribution market, as well as rent-seeking activities. The 
weakness  of  the  microstructure  in  the  distribution  market  has  caused  rising  prices  in  the 
consumer level, but not in the producer level.  
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The  magnitude  of  challenges  we  face  in  the  coming  years  should  not  discourage  our 
optimism towards the prospect of the economy. In the future, we must strive to maintain a 
high  sense of  hope  and  optimism,  macroeconomic  stability  and  a  strong  economic  growth 
momentum. 
Amidst the global economic slowdown, we expect the domestic economy to grow 6.3%–6.7% 
in 2012, or slightly lower than in 2011 due to sluggish growth of export. For that reason, we 
are able to maintain stronger economic momentum provided that the foundation of domestic 
economic growth is strengthened.  
We  are  confident  that  the  lowering  of  the  BI  rate  since  October  2011  will  revive  domestic 
financing, particularly from the banking sector. An economic growth rate of 6.3%–6.7% will 
require financing (including credit channelling) amounting to Rp 598 trillion, or equivalent to a 
credit growth rate of 26,9% (yoy). 
Investment growth rate which reached 7.7% in 2011 is expected to grow even higher in 2012 
at  9.7%–10.1%.  Vigorous  investment  will  eventually  buttressed  purchasing  power  hence 
supporting household consumption growth in 2012 which is projected to reach 4.7%–5.1%.  
Meanwhile, the role of fiscal stimulus is projected to be limited in line with the conservative 
fiscal  deficit  target  (1,5%  of  GDP)  along  with  the  still  significant  budget  allocation  for 
subsidies.  
CPI inflation in 2012 is projected to be consistent with the target of 4,5 percent ± 1 percent in 
2012–2013 and is expected to be stable at around the level of 4,5%.  
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Considering that the management of the macroeconomy is still prone to global risk as well as 
the complexity of the domestic predicament, Bank Indonesia policy direction in 2012 will stay 
focused towards the following: 
a. 
Optimizing the role of monetary policy in supporting economic capacity as well as in 
mitigating the risk of global crisis.  
Increasing  the  efficiency  of  banks  in  optimizing  their  contribution  to  the  economy, 
while strengthening banking resilience.  
Increasing the efficiency and competitiveness of the payment systems in servicing 
national payments as well as international payments.  
Strengthening the resilience of macroeconomic condition by enhancing coordination 
in the management of crisis prevention and resolution.  
Supporting real sector empowerment including initiatives to broaden banking access 
to a wide-array of community (financial inclusion).  
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
In 2012, policy mix of instruments will be strengthened and calibrated. Policy rate response 
will be anchored so as to be consistent with the CPI inflation target of 4,5 percent ± 1 percent 
in  2012  and  2013,  while  at  the  same  time  maintain  the  momentum  toward  economic 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
strengthening and mitigate the risk of global economic slowdown. This interest rate policy will 
also be complemented with  macro-prudential policy to mitigate the risk of vulnerabilities in 
the  consumptive  sectors  which  is  seen  unsustainable  or  potentially  prone  to  asset  bubble 
risk.  
The monetary operation policy strategy will be directed to maintaining interest rate stability in 
the rupiah money market and to supporting exchange rate stability in the forex market. I am 
of  the  view  that  this  kind  of  stability  is  needed  to  provide  a  broader  leeway  for  domestic 
financial market deepening.  
Therefore,  monetary  operation  will  be  based  on  instruments  which  can  directly  stimulate 
transactions  in  the  money  market  such  as  in  the  rupiah  interbank  money  market  (PUAB), 
Repurchase Agreement (Repo), and the swap market. This approach, I believe, will be able 
to  encourage  more  efficient  and  sound  liquidity  management  of  banks,  and  lessen 
dependence on placement in monetary instrument. I also observe the need to continue the 
re-alignment process of interest rate structure in the financial market by refining mechanism 
of the open market operation. 
Bank  Indonesia  policies  on  exchange  rate  will  be  centered  on  maintaining  exchange  rate 
stability  while  preserving  external  and  internal  balance  of  the  economy,  and  providing 
certainty for all economic agents. Since January 2012, policy on exchange rate stability will 
be supported by the implementation of the regulation on export proceeds and foreign debt 
withdrawal  through  domestic  banks.  Bank  Indonesia  is  also  reviewing  some  regulations  to 
enrich forex market instruments in order to revitalize hedging transactions. 
To curb regional inflation, we will optimize the functions of Bank Indonesia Regional Offices 
(KBI) as facilitator and catalyst for the acceleration of development in the region, particularly 
in eastern Indonesia where growth is still having immense disparity. KBI will be encouraged 
to carry out its functions effectively by strengthening coordination and cooperation as well as 
synergizing  with  local  government.  In  the  future,  Task  Force  for  Regional  Inflation  Control 
Team  (TPID)  should  be  sustained  by  strategic  consumer  goods  information  systems 
primarily encompassing information on national production and stock. To achieve this target, 
strong  commitment  and  support  from  a  wide  variety  of  parties,  including  from  relevant 
ministries  such  as  Ministry  of  Agriculture,  Ministry  of  Commerce,  as  well  as  Local 
Government is significantly needed. 
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
On  the  banking  sector  front,  policy  will  be  directed  to  maintain  a  proper  balance  between 
improving  competitiveness  and  strengthening  banks’  resilience,  as  well  as  encouraging 
banks’ intermediation function including broadening access to low cost banking services for 
the rural community.   
In order to improve banks’ competitiveness, kebijakan Suku Bunga Dasar Kredit (SBDK) will 
be carried on to ensure a well-functioning market mechanism so as policy targets could be 
achieved. From banking supervision perspective, we will continue to enhance enforcement of 
policy by requiring banks to include an appropriate level of targets on efficiency improvement 
and  credit  rates  lowering  in  their  business  plan.  Bank  Indonesia  is  also  looking  into  the 
practice of interest rate setting for third party above the level set by the Indonesia Deposit 
Insurance, as well as limiting the conduct of prize or gift offering to banks’ customers.  
Policy  to  strengthen  banks’  resilience  will  be  conducted  through  improving  banks’  capital 
structure.  It  is  hoped  that  such  policy  can  reinforce  bank  in  anticipating  potential  risk 
specifically amidst global economic uncertainty.  
I  see  that  policies  on  consumer  protection  and  governance  also  need  special  attention. 
Following  several  act  of  banking  frauds  during  the  course  of  2011,  policy  in  these  two 
aspects  needs  to  be  reviewed.  For  that  reason,  in  2012  we  will  continue  to  refine  several 
aspects related to customers and potential customers protection.  
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Furthermore,  to  improve  banks’  governance,  several  regulations  on  financial  report 
transparency  would  be  reviewed  particularly  in  relation  to  published  financial  report  and 
regulation  pertaining  to  appointment  of  public  accountant  by  banks.  We  also  will  examine 
policy on banks’ ownership and multi-licensing following the increased complexity of banks’ 
activities.  
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
We view that the strengthening of central bank’s role as a systemic regulator following the 
enactment  of  the  law  on  Otoritas  Jasa  Keuangan  (OJK)  is  timely  as  the  role  of  banking 
regulation  and  supervision  will  be  handed  over  from  Bank  Indonesia  to  OJK  at  the  end  of 
2013.   
Going  forward,  Bank  Indonesia  will  continue  to  escort  banking  industry  in  the  context  of 
financial stability system. For this purpose, Bank Indonesia will conduct surveillance both on 
banks and non banks, examine banks in the context of macro-prudential, and will coordinate 
closely in the context of crisis prevention and resolution. The function and the role of Bank 
Indonesia to achieve financial system stability is an important part of Bank Indonesia Law’s 
amendment which was scheduled under 2012 National Legislation Program. 
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen 
Aside from bank competitiveness and resilience, we will encourage the process of banking 
intermediation through several measures:  
a. 
By  continuing  the  initiatives  to  broaden  the  community  access  to  banks  (financial 
inclusion),  particularly  low  cost  banking  services  for  rural  community,  including 
improving  “My  Saving”  program  (Tabunganku),  developing  program  on  financial 
education,  implementation  of  Financial  Identity  Number  and  conducting  survey  on 
financial literacy.   
Working  together  with  government  agencies,  facilitating  intermediation  to  support 
financing  in  several  potential  economic  sectors.  We  will  also  assess  any  potential 
barriers  in  the  financing  of  those  sectors  with  relatively  low  credit  growth.  With 
regards to financing needs of particular sectors which are commercially unviable for 
banks but possessing strategic roles for the economy, Bank Indonesia together with 
the Government, will develop a special financing scheme.   
b. 
Initiative to increase competitiveness and governance is also center in the policy direction for 
sharia  banking  particularly  sharia  rural  banks.  In  addition,  we  will  also  encourage  the 
development of products and activities of sharia banking. Going forward, strategy to develop 
sharia rural banks will be directed in accordance with the characteristics of sharia rural banks 
as  a  community  bank  with  a  sound,  robust,  and  productive  feature  with  special  focus  on 
providing financial services for SMEs and rural community.  
Similar to the banking sector, financial services sector will also be encouraged to lowering 
economic  costs.  This  sector  includes  cash  and  non-cash  payment  systems  as  well  as 
transaction settlements. 
Bank Indonesia determines to take a lead in setting policy orientation for payment services 
development  in  the  future.  In  this  context,  policy  coordination  among  institutions  and 
authorities    is  imperative,  especially  since  the  development  of  payment  services  will  also 
involve many parties beyond the central bank. Going forward, the development of payment 
services industry will be performed by the following initiatives: 
a. 
First, 
improving  security  and  reliability  of  payment  services  providers  by 
implementing  risk  mitigation  including  leveraging  on  technology  advancement, 
strengthening legal framework, strengthening supervision, and improving the role of 
national payment services providers; 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
b. 
c. 
Second,  improving  efficiency  of  national  payment  services  providers,  including 
encouraging  the  setting-up  of  interoperability  and  interconnection  among  services 
providers. 
Third,  improving  consumers’  protection  by  enhancing  transparency  of  services 
providers and strengthening regulation on consumers’ protection. 
Those  abovementioned  programs  on  payment  services  development  are  stipulated  in  an 
integrated blueprint which serves as a guideline to establish an efficient, secure, and reliable 
payment system. 
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen,  
This brings me to the end of my speech this evening. A thoughtful ponders on the challenges 
ahead  lead  us  to  an  understanding  that  the  years  ahead  will  not  be  easier  than  previous 
years.  Our  commitment  to  carry  out  policies  and  measures  as  already  presented  will 
definitely call for support and cooperation from all of you.  
As closing remarks, I would like to invite all of you “to release our nation from any traps of 
inefficiency,  otherwise,  we  will  be  crushed  by  modernization  and  globalization”.  May  Allah 
Almighty always be with us, bless us and lighten our way towards a better future. Thank you. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
