Subir Gokarn: Monetary policy – key factors shaping trajectory 
Article  by  Dr  Subir  Gokarn,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  published  on 
www.livemint.com on 22 September 2011. 
 For  energy-importing  economies  such  as  China  and  India,  monetary  policy  is  going  to  be 
influenced by global oil price movements as long as oil remains the predominant incremental 
source of energy. 
The core objectives of monetary policy in the future will remain what they have been in the 
past. The primary objective of monetary policy is a low and stable inflation. In achieving this, 
the  economy  has  to  be  allowed  to  maintain  growth  at  the  highest  possible  rate  consistent 
with a low and stable inflation. 
However, the context in which these objectives are pursued obviously changes over time. In 
my view, there are three key factors that are playing an important role in the current Indian 
context. Each of them has a bearing on both the monetary stance and the strength of the 
monetary transmission process. 
Non-inflationary rate of growth (NIRG) 
The first critical factor is the maximum rate of growth that the Indian economy can generate 
without  provoking  inflationary  pressures.  This  notion  is  a  core  building  block  in  monetary 
economics, though it is typically labelled the potential growth rate of the economy. 
The concept is very simple. If the economy is growing faster than its potential, capacities and 
resources  are  stretched.  Producers  and  workers  find  it  relatively  easy  to  raise  prices  and 
wages in the face of buoyant demand for their goods and services. Rising prices across the 
board then translate into generalized or broad-based inflationary pressures. 
On the other hand, if the economy is growing below its potential, resources are idle, making it 
difficult for workers and producers to ask for higher wages or prices. Inflation is low and will 
remain so until the economy reaches its potential growth rate. 
The  challenge  for  monetary  policy,  then,  is  to  find  and  maintain  a  stance  that  keeps  the 
economy as close as possible to its potential growth rate. Grow any faster and there is a risk 
of inflation becoming entrenched; grow any slower and growth is being needlessly sacrificed. 
Do we know what India’s NIRG is? In the recent past, at what rates of growth have significant 
inflationary pressures been triggered? 
Looking back over the past two decades (see chart 1), we have three distinct episodes of 
accelerating  inflation  following  a  growth  spurt.  The  first  is  in  the  mid-1990s,  when  inflation 
surged during a three-year period of growth slightly above 7%. The second is in the pre-crisis 
high-growth phase, when inflation around the middle of a five-year period of growth averaged 
over  8.5%.  The  third  is  in  the  post-crisis  period,  when  rising  inflation  accompanied  the 
recovery from a growth of 6.8% in 2008–09, the trough of the crisis, to 8% in the following 
year. 
Two important implications for the future of monetary policy can be drawn from these three 
episodes. First, NIRG is not a long-term constant. It can change over relatively short periods 
of time, as it did from about 7% to about 8.5% in less than a decade, between the first and 
second episodes. 
Importantly, in the transition out of the crisis, when the growth rate accelerated from its low 
6.7% in 2008–09 to 8% in 2009–10 and, further, to a currently estimated 8.5% in 2010–11, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
inflationary  pressures  quickly  became  quite  strong.  This  might  suggest  that  NIRG  is  now 
closer to 8%. 
Second,  the  increase  in  NIRG  from  7%  to  8.5%  seems  to  have  been  accompanied  by  a 
sharp rise in the investment-GDP (gross domestic product) ratio and a steady decline in the 
fiscal deficit-GDP ratio. 
The former suggests that as new capacity is created in the economy, its ability to grow faster 
without spurring inflation increases. The latter suggests that for a given rate of growth, the 
composition of spending also matters. 
Chart 1: 
Growth and Inflation 
 Less government borrowing appears to be associated with a rising NIRG, perhaps because it 
creates  more  space  for  investment.  Of  course,  more  analysis  of  these  relationships  is 
warranted, but they do suggest that monetary policy will have to take the overall composition 
of  expenditure  into  account  while  assessing  NIRG,  which  in  turn  will  influence  the  policy 
stance. 
Impact of energy prices 
For  energy-importing  economies  such  as  China  and  India,  monetary  policy  is  going  to  be 
influenced by global oil price movements as long as oil remains the predominant incremental 
source  of  energy.  The  same  arguments  hold  for  other  important  commodities  as  well,  but 
energy is likely to be the most important factor, so I shall focus on it. 
Chart 2 demonstrates how important energy prices and their rate of inflation are to domestic 
inflation.  During  the  economy’s  pre-crisis  high-growth  phase,  the  crude  oil  price,  though 
rising, was doing so relatively slowly. 
As we saw in the earlier discussion, the domestic inflationary situation was relatively benign 
during  this  period.  Just  before  the  crisis,  it  rose  sharply,  driving  domestic  inflation  to  high 
levels, before crashing during the crisis, accompanied by a sharp fall in domestic inflation. 
Although it recovered from that low level quite strongly, it was still below $80 per barrel in 
October 2010. However, from November onwards, on that relatively high base, year-on-year 
increases of around 30% have clearly contributed significantly to the acceleration of inflation 
during the current year. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
In India’s current situation, as shown by the experience of the past few years, high and rising 
energy  prices  have  a  powerful  impact  on  domestic  macroeconomic  conditions.  If  they 
continue  to  rise,  they  will  have  a  negative  impact  on  NIRG;  in  other  words,  in  order  to 
maintain a given rate of inflation, growth may have to slow. 
Chart 2: 
Crude Oil 
 Even if they do not rise, high prices in absolute terms will have a bearing on the commercial 
viability of investments across the board. Investment activity may decline, contributing to a 
further erosion of NIRG. 
This perspective has a straightforward implication for monetary policy. 
When  the  economy  is  at  or  close  to  its  NIRG,  an  increase  in  energy  prices  can  trigger 
inflationary  pressures,  because  there  is  high  capacity  utilization  and  producers  can  easily 
pass on higher energy prices to their consumers. 
A common argument in the current Indian policy debate is that since rising energy prices are 
a  supply  shock,  monetary  policy,  which  acts  through  its  impact  on  demand,  should  not 
respond  to  this  shock.  It  must  be  emphasized  that  this  argument  has  merit  only  when  the 
supply  shock  is  transitory  or  temporary  in  nature.  If  its  impact  is  likely  to  fade  relatively 
quickly, a monetary policy response is not required. 
However, a persistent shock, which takes the prices of critical inputs to new highs and keeps 
them there, does warrant a monetary policy response. 
Essentially, to go back to the argument made a little earlier, high and rising energy prices 
may contribute to the lowering of NIRG and this needs to be recognized and acted upon, if 
inflation is not to get out of hand. 
Impact of food prices 
Years  of  experience  have  persuaded  us  that  food  price  inflation  is  typically  a  temporary 
phenomenon,  dependent  on  whether  the  monsoon  has  been  good  or  bad.  That  this  is  no 
longer the case has been vividly demonstrated by the record over the past few years, when 
food price inflation has persisted despite reasonable monsoon performance in some of those 
years. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
The simple reason for this is that Indian households have begun to diversify their diets away 
from,  predominantly,  cereals  to  protein  sources  –  pulses,  milk,  eggs,  meat  and  fish  –  and 
vegetables  and  fruits.  Chart  3  very  clearly  shows  the  sharp  increase  in  the  price  trend  of 
protein items. 
Chart 3:  
Trend in Primary Food Prices 
 The  great  consumer  boom  –  mobile  phones,  television  sets,  air  conditioners,  motorcycles 
and other products – emerged out of sustained increases in the income levels of millions of 
households.  There  is  no  reason  why,  at  relatively  lower  income  levels,  this  should  not  be 
happening to food as well. 
In  fact,  the  recently  published  Consumer  Expenditure  Survey  carried  out  by  the  National 
Sample Survey Organisation in 2009–10 demonstrates how significant the shift from cereals 
to proteins has been in terms of its significance in household food budgets. 
The  country  went  through  a  Green  Revolution  in  the  late  1960s  and  early  1970s,  during 
which time cereal production was increased dramatically to satisfy demand. At this stage of 
development,  the  gap  between  rapidly  rising  demand  and  not-so-rapidly  rising  supply  of 
proteins, vegetables and fruits have led to sustained increases in food inflation, which a good 
monsoon or two is simply not going to ease. 
Just as in the case of energy, an often-raised point is that monetary policy cannot directly 
address food inflation, so it has no role in responding to it. The response is the same. 
High and rising food prices in a situation where the economy is at or close to its NIRG do 
tend  to  work  their  way  through  wage  contracts  and,  eventually,  to  rising  prices  across  the 
board. Just as in the case of energy, persistently high and rising food prices adversely impact 
NIRG and, therefore, do warrant a monetary policy response. 
Concluding comments 
It is important to highlight the fact that the central bank is the only component of the policy 
establishment that has an explicit mandate for price stability or inflation management. 
Consequently,  whatever  other  goals  it  may  pursue,  these  must  be  aligned  to  this  primary 
mandate. This uniqueness will continue to determine the future trajectory of monetary policy. 
However, other components of the policy establishment have mandates that may indirectly 
impinge on inflation. In particular, as was illustrated above with reference to food, but is also 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
relevant to other potential bottlenecks, policy initiatives that induce additional supply help to 
raise NIRG. 
This  means  that  any  given  inflation  rate  will  now  be  consistent  with  faster  growth,  or 
alternatively,  any  given  growth  rate  will  be  consistent  with  a  lower  inflation  rate.  From  this 
perspective, the monetary policy stance will be influenced by an assessment of how NIRG 
itself is being shaped by public and private investment activity and other policy measures, as 
well as global developments, including, importantly, trends in commodity prices. 
Finally, there is a new set of considerations emerging after the crisis, which I did not have the 
space to go into here. 
Perhaps the most important of these is the issue of financial stability and how it should be 
integrated  into  the  broader  regulatory  mandate  and,  more  narrowly,  into  the  central  bank 
mandate. 
This is an evolving global debate and it is too early to say how it will impact monetary policy 
directly, but it is certainly something to watch out for. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
