Rundheersing Bheenick: Whither Africa? – Or how the African continent 
is facing up to the challenge of the global financial crisis 
Speech Mr Rundheersing Bheenick, Governor, Bank of Mauritius, at an international meeting 
of Rotarians, the “Rotary Institute Zone 20A”, Balaclava, 4 November 2011. 
 I  am  delighted  to  address  you  at  your  Institute  Zone  20A  Convention  today.  Let  me 
Rotarians from far and near, Good Morning! 
 
Thank you very much for your invitation, relayed to me through my old friend François 
de  Grivel.  Let  me  assure  you,  François,  that  the  slight  hesitation,  which  you  might  have 
detected, before I responded had nothing to do with any fear that this was perhaps going to 
be yet another skirmish in our long-running battle on the value of our domestic currency – 
which,  I  may  add  for  the  information  of  visiting  Rotarians,  regularly  pitches  us  in  opposite 
camps. It had everything to do with the other matter: today is the day when all Mauritians 
wait with bated breath for the Minister of Finance to deliver his annual budget speech this 
afternoon. But how can one not respond to a call from those who put “Service above Self”? 
 
begin by extending a very warm welcome to our island-state to all visiting Rotarians. 
 
Four  years  have  elapsed  since  the  largest  financial  and  economic  crisis  in  living 
memory, and perhaps the most complex ever, unfurled upon us. Policymakers around the 
globe  are  still  struggling  to  find  remedies  as  the  crisis  mutates  and  spreads  and  fails  to 
respond to any treatment, even unconventional ones. While we can now claim to understand 
better the origins of the crisis, we continue to be baffled by its many manifestations. And we 
are no nearer to a sustainable global recovery than we were at the beginning. And we are 
even further away from preventing financial crises from derailing global development in the 
future.  In  the  OECD  countries,  where  the  crisis  is  concentrated,  governments  may  have 
rounded  up  the  usual  suspects,  and  named  and  shamed  some  culprits  –  like  investment 
brokers,  fund  managers  and  bankers  –  but  they  have  yet  to  deal  with  them  effectively  or 
indeed to tackle the underlying causes of the disaster that unfolded.  
 
Some  commentators  have  disingenuously  claimed  that  the  crisis  was  completely 
unforeseen  and  they  were  quite  taken  aback  as  it  occurred  following  almost  a  decade  of 
substantial  global  growth  with  low  inflation.  Terms  like  “the  Great  Moderation”  and  the 
“Goldilocks economy” became popular and well describe the mood of the times. Developing 
countries, and emerging markets particularly, had been doing well. Many countries in Africa 
seemed to have finally turned the corner, with their growth rates boosted by high demand for 
commodities.  Global  poverty  was  in  retreat.  There  were  reductions  in  civil  conflicts.  The 
democratic  deficit  decreased.  There  were  improvements  in  governance.  Changes  in 
macroeconomic  management  and  the  policy  environment  held  out  hopes  of  fast  and 
sustained growth. Africa was on the move, at long last. 
 
And then the crisis hit! Severely denting growth prospects and dashing some of those 
hopes  and  aspirations.  The  growing  sub-prime  mortgage  loan  defaults  in  the  US  and  the 
failure of Northern Rock in the UK in 2007 were not just mere harbingers of a crisis. They 
undermined growth and development prospects for the developing world. They compromised 
recent  gains  in  poverty  eradication.  Three  points  made  the  financial  crisis  surprising,  I 
suggest.  
 
First, it originated in the US, the world’s largest and richest economy, which everybody 
thought was robust and secure. Perhaps with hindsight, we should say, not “secure” but too 
extensively securitised for its own security and for the security of global markets.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The second surprise was that it originated in the private sector, from an entrepreneurial 
 
flaw in the banking sector which had been producing wildly, enviously large profits for years. 
And the third surprise was that it led to a calamitous contraction in global trade. 
 
Although initially feared, another “Great Depression” was averted, partly thanks to John 
Maynard Keynes, who taught that the Great Depression was “great” because governments in 
the 1930’s failed to prop up aggregate demand. This time advanced countries responded by 
applying the lessons learned from that crisis by bailing out banks whereas many had been 
allowed to go bust during the Great Depression. They announced huge fiscal stimuli when, in 
the 1930’s, only monetary policy had been initially engaged by the central bankers of the “big 
four” who blithely believed they could save the world. Keynes who had seen his major policy 
recommendations subjected to so much criticism in the years leading to the “Great Inflation”, 
must be turning in his grave. Some of you may recall the famous words with which he ends 
his General Theory 
 The defunct economist who has enthralled the practical men trying so desperately to cope 
with the current crisis is Keynes himself. 
 
According  to  IMF  estimates,  the  costs  of  stabilizing  banks –  in  terms  of  injections  of 
capital for bailouts, provision of liquidity, standby arrangements, and guarantees of loans and 
deposits  –  amounted  to  around  US$11  trillion  in  developed  countries,  and  another 
US$1.7 trillion in developing countries. US$13 trillion is a huge sum. It is, for example, about 
ten  times  the  annual  flow  of  Official  Development  Assistance  from  OECD’s  Development 
Assistance Committee members in 2008. 
2 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
These problems of western finance, which induced a slowdown in the global economy 
 
over the past few years, are now referred to as the World Economic Crisis. One could ask 
why emerging and developing countries like us have not been as hard hit as Europe and the 
USA.  Was  it  because  of  the  immediate  effectiveness  of  the  stimulus  applied  in  advanced 
economies? Was it because the bailouts extended to stabilize the financial sector, protected 
the  innocent  bystanders?  Or  is  there  some  special  element  in  the  core  resilience of  these 
otherwise vulnerable states? The search for answers leads us to examine briefly the main 
channels  through  which  this  global  turbulence  is  actually  transmitted  to  Africa.  We  can 
identify five transmission channels.  
  
First, trade, in both goods and services, is obviously the main channel with the colonial 
legacy reflected in the continued dependence on EU member states as the largest trading 
partners  of  Sub-Saharan  Africa.  Second,  the  financial  channel  is  also  very  important  and 
works  through  four  different  but  interconnected  ways.  First  is  the  exchange  rate,  with 
increased currency volatility affecting countries with floating rate regimes while the currency 
peg  effectively  transmits  Eurozone  uncertainties  to  the  CFA  franc  zone.  Second,  African 
stock markets were severely hit as foreign investors withdrew in droves in an elusive flight to 
safety. Third, spreads on foreign-currency African bonds widened. And fourth, the domestic 
banking sector saw its access to foreign currency lines drying up as it shared in the growing 
risk aversion with rising spreads and declining credit.  
 
The  third  transmission  channel  is  Foreign  Direct  Investment  which  African  countries 
rely upon to make up for their domestic savings deficit. FDI flows can hardly be expected to 
grow  unabated  when  the  home  countries,  where  these  flows  originate,  are  caught  in  the 
throes of a deep crisis. The fourth channel is the flow of Official Development Assistance, 
which plays such a critical role in supporting development in some of the poorest countries. 
Despite  repeated  renewals  and  reconfirmation  of  commitments  to  raise  ODA  flows  to 
1 per cent of GDP since the so-called First Development Decade, this pledge is unlikely to be 
redeemed  when  the  source  countries  are  going  through  such  critical  times.  And  the  fifth 
channel whereby the crisis in the West is transmitted to Africa is via a reduction in the flow of 
remittances as rising unemployment and stagnating wages in home countries affect migrant 
labour and the African diaspora. 
 
After this short detour to survey the various transmission channels, all of which affect 
African countries to varying degrees depending on the structure of their economies and their 
openness, let us revisit the question posed earlier. What accounts for the resilience of Africa 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
to  the  global  turmoil?  The  answer, I  think, lies partly  in  a  delay  in  the  impact  of  this  crisis  
– which is like a far-off tsunami taking some time to hit our shores. Part of the answer for the 
renewed  resilience  also  lies  in  the  major  improvements  in  macroeconomic  management, 
achieved by many African (and other developing) states over the last decade. Another part of 
the answer is found in the success achieved by many of them in diversifying their trade and 
investment  partners.  This  was  at  the  core  of  the  policy  response  to  the  crisis  and  helped 
Africa weather the global turbulence. 
 
In the larger and stronger developing economies, such as the BRICs (Brazil, Russia, 
India,  China  and  one  might  add  South  Africa),  recovery  has  been  surprisingly  rapid.  More 
surprises!  Indeed,  one  constant  feature  of  the  saga  is  that  economists,  investors,  and  the 
commentariat are continually surprised, having been previously gently rocked into a belief in 
a stable economic state of the world, massaged for some by Keynesian principles and, for 
others, by a blind faith in the power of benign, self-regulating, markets. But I digress. This 
surprising  recovery  in  the  BRICs  has  been  supported  by  the  adoption  of  countercyclical 
policies,  with  a  cumulative  total  spending  of  around  2.7  per  cent  of  their  GDP  on  fiscal 
stimuli. 
 
In  many  African  countries,  including  the  most  fragile,  governments  have  made  bold 
attempts to shelter their economies. In those where there was adequate fiscal space, as here 
in  Mauritius,  agile  governments  launched  expansionary  fiscal  policies  to  counter  the 
downdraft  affecting  their  economies  through  the  various  transmission  channels.  While  in 
others who were running bigger budget deficits, assistance was sought from the IMF which 
made quick-disbursing facilities available.  
It  goes  without  saying  that  no  country  anywhere  can  be  immune  to  a  crisis  of  such 
 
global reach and unprecedented severity. It is a credit to African decision-makers that their 
countries found their way back to the path of recovery so rapidly. 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
In addition to prudent macro-economic policies, growth in Africa has also been propped 
 
up by timely financial support from other multilateral agencies apart from the IMF. To shield 
Africa from the second-round effects of the crisis, the African Development Bank spotted the 
most vulnerable countries and made emergency finance available. During 2009, it more than 
doubled  its  lending,  from  around  US$5  billion  to  US$11  billion.  The  International  Finance 
Corporation, the private-sector-lending arm of the World Bank Group, increased its loans to 
firms  for  private  sector  projects  in  Africa  which  reached  around  US$2.2  billion  in  2011,  or 
more than twice the 2007 pre-crisis level. 
 
The  improvement  in  macroeconomic  management  in  many  developing  countries, 
including  Africa,  followed  in  the  wake  of  major  improvements  in  governance.  These  were 
reflected  in  more  robust  democracies  and  more  frequent  elections,  and  accompanied  by 
steps to reduce corruption, end conflicts, and empower women. From the 2011 Mo Ibrahim 
Index  of  African  Governance,  we  learn  that  “27  out  of  53  listed  countries  in  Africa  have 
improved in overall governance quality, and just under half have declined”. The report notes 
that  the  majority  of  countries  had  improved  in  such  categories  as  “Sustainable  Economic 
Opportunity” and “Human Development”. In other words, growth has become more equitable, 
more  inclusive,  and  accompanied  by  more  buy-in  from  local  populations.  Thus,  better 
governance feeds into better economic outcomes, shores up resilience against shocks, and 
helps  Africa  confound  its  critics  that  it  is  a  perpetual  underperformer.  Development  is,  of 
course, an unending struggle and a lot remains to be done. The World Bank’s Ease of Doing 
Business report shows that Africa counts only 4 countries (Mauritius, South Africa, Rwanda 
and Tunisia) among the top 50 countries ranked by the ease of doing business.  
 
Remittances play an important role in numerous African economies. Africa’s diaspora 
is  variously  estimated  at  around  20  to  30  million,  mostly  in  the  crisis-hit  OECD  countries. 
They  send  about  US$40  billion  annually  to  their  families  at  home.  Remittances  constitute 
more  than  net  official  ODA  in  many  economies.  There  was,  thus,  a  tremendous  fissile 
potential in both these channels and we, in Africa, can count ourselves lucky that they have 
not been put to the test, at least so far. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  
However,  we  need  to  be  wary  that  a  continued  slowdown  in  the  West  could  cut 
demand for African exports of goods and services and curb private finance flows. Hence the 
need  for  Africa  to  look  within  the  continent  for  greater  resource  mobilization  while,  at  the 
same  time,  accelerating  regional  integration  to  safeguard  against  volatility  in  finance, 
employment, output and growth.  
 
Despite its numerous challenges, Africa seems to have emerged so far in a fair state of 
health.  Experience  varies  but,  generally,  African  economies  have  logged  an  impressive 
growth performance. This year, 2011, several African states rank among the fastest-growing 
economies in the world. Ghana outshines China and India. Nearly a dozen countries from 
Angola to Zimbabwe run neck-to-neck with them, outperforming Brazil and Russia. So far, so 
good, then. But what of the future? What are the prospects? Whither Africa? 
 
How far will the newly emerging element in northen Africa, the “Arab Spring” affect the 
picture? Will the ‘great leap forward’ acclaimed by Donald Kaberuka, Chairman of the African 
Development Bank, at the G20 meeting in Paris on 21 October 2011, mean, as he claims, 
that Africa has “left behind the stagnation of the past”? The optimism is grounded in a solid 
record  of  achievement.  And  yet,  there  is  so  much  in  Africa,  that  could  be  done  better, 
smarter, and more efficiently.  
 
Take the regional integration agenda, for example. The complex political and economic 
affiliations of the 54 African states, – organised in an alphabet soup of 6 economic blocs, with 
many overlapping intra-regional groupings – can lead to wasteful duplication of efforts. The 
differing  goals  of  these  political  and  economic  blocs,  their  differing  timelines,  and  differing 
methods  of  operation  can  dissipate  collective  efforts  towards  the  goal  of  many  for  African 
Union.  They  slow  down  negotiations  for  continental  level  integration.  Can  this  shifting 
geometry of linkages really ease the overall continental integration process? Or, does it not 
cry out for simplification?  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
Africa has undoubted untapped wealth and potential. It is no longer the dark continent! 
It has 70 per cent of world’s production of cocoa; 50 per cent of speciality coffee; 12 per cent 
of tea; 10 per cent of world reserves of oil; 40 per cent of gold, 64 per cent of manganese, 
33 per cent of uranium and, nearly 90 per cent of cobalt, chromium and platinum – and it has 
all this at a time when prices are rising steadily for such commodities, which are crucial to 
global  development.  And  yet  Africa  ranks  among  the  world’s  worst  performers  in  so  many 
categories,  including  poverty.  It  is  largely  unbanked,  with  poor  access  to  finance  for  its 
population. It has inefficient financial institutions and poor institutions generally. It is generally 
trailing behind at bottom of the pile in education and health but, sadly, it tops the charts in 
illiteracy and epidemic disease.  
 
Let me address another challenge that the Continent faces: offshore farming. This is 
the  growing  phenomenon  of  international  farm  investment,  in  which  countries  short  of 
productive  agricultural  land,  but  rich  in  capital  and  agricultural  technology,  are  acquiring 
farmland  overseas  for  large-scale  agriculture.  This  may  have  been  given  a  boost  by  the 
commodities boom and the weather-related surge in food prices which occurred during the 
crisis  when  some  food-exporters  applied  export  bans  to  keep  domestic  prices  low,  raising 
food security concerns in nervous importing countries, including ourselves here in Mauritius. 
 
The  phenomenon  rapidly  assumed  the  dimensions  of  a  global  land  rush,  driven  by 
sovereign wealth funds and multinational corporations on the back of bilateral state-to-state 
deals which raise the spectre of neo-colonial exploitation. China, South Korea and OPEC’s 
Middle East members, which face an explosive situation as they have more oil than irrigation 
water, are the most prolific deal makers. They have come to be seen by some as the neo-
colonisers, taking over from the former colonial powers who are now in retreat. As before, 
Africa with its untapped agro-ecological potential, is a choice target for such investment. 
 
The  Food  and  Agriculture  Organisation  reports  that  2.5  million  hectares  have  been 
acquired  since  2004  in  five  African  countries  alone  which  rank  among  the  world’s  poorest 
states,  and  have  some  of  the  highest  levels  of  poverty  and  malnutrition.  That’s  an  area 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
almost the size of Belgium. If the analogy with Belgium suggests itself here, it is no accident: 
as some of you will recall, King Leopold, the King of the Belgians, joined the scramble for 
Africa  by  laying  claim  to  the  Congo  basin  as  his  private  fiefdom.  Farmland  worth  US$20 
billion-US$30  billion  has  been  quietly  handed  over  on  lease  to  Saudi  Arabia,  Kuwait  and 
China  for  growing  staple  crops  or  biofuels,  and  shipping  them  home.  The  big  question  is 
what are the starving people in these African countries getting from such deals: if the deals 
are so good, why did the people in Madagascar throw out the government that signed one of 
these mega-deals?  
 
We should perhaps not be surprised by the findings of a recent (October 2011) IMF 
study on the matter. It comes to the startling conclusion that the investment climate of the 
host  country  actually  weighs  very  little.  What matter  much  more  are  poor  governance  and 
lack of transparency. This turns the conventional policy prescription on its head! Weak land 
governance and poor security of tenure for current users seem to enhance the attractiveness 
of countries for offshore farming. These perverse incentives need to be addressed if offshore 
farming  is  to  lead  to  win-win  outcomes  for  both  home  and  host countries.  Otherwise,  they 
can rapidly erode hard-won gains in democracy, governance and transparency. 
 
With the ongoing troubles in the US and Europe, current global growth depends much 
more  on  growth  in  demand  from  developing  countries  and  emerging  markets.  There  is 
growing  consensus  that  it  will  be  quite  some  time  before  the  tide  turns  for  the  better  in 
Europe and the US. The euro may not actually be in its death throes as some doomsters 
have  been  predicting.  But  it  is  clear  that  the  latest  definitive  solution  to  the  Eurozone 
sovereign  debt  crisis  is  no  more  definitive  than  the  half  dozen  or  so  that  preceded  it.  The 
euro saga keeps rolling on, along with the debt rollover that threatens to sink the currency 
and  the  Eurozone  economies.  Many  at  the  European  Commission  and  at  the  European 
Central Bank must be kicking themselves for not paying heed to the ancient Roman adage: 
“Timeo Danaos atque dona ferentes!” For “dona”, read “referenda”! Beware of the Greeks! 
Or have I got it the other way round? It’s the Europeans and their partners who have come 
bearing  gifts,  a  cool  Euros  130  billion  in  the  latest  sovereign  debt  bailout.  Beware  of  the 
Europeans, say the Greeks, looking this gift horse in the month.  
 
If the euro has its troubles, so does the dollar with “helicopter Ben” at the controls of 
the red-hot printing press. The US dollar remains the world’s reserve currency but confidence 
has been shaken by the fiscal brinkmanship in the US and the downgrade of its sovereign 
rating. The economy is doing poorly and there is little hope of any significant improvement in 
the near future. 
 
Against this gloomy backdrop, the only real glimmers of hope come from Africa’s non-
traditional partners, the rising stars in the East, China and India. African policymakers do not 
need  to  subscribe  wholeheartedly  to  the  short-lived  “decoupling”  theory  to  seek  to  reduce 
their former dependence on OECD markets. Traditional patterns of trade and investment are 
changing.  China  has  overtaken  the  US  as  Africa’s  largest  trading  partner.  Trade  between 
Africa and India increased tenfold from 1997 to 2007, when it stood at US$ 70 billion. And 
trade between Latin America and Africa has more than doubled since 1994 and now exceeds 
US$26  billion.  Our  own  trade  exchanges  with  Chindia  followed  a  similar  trend.  Mauritian 
imports  from  these  two  countries  saw  their  percentage  share  in  total  imports  more  than 
double, rising from 16 per cent in 2000 to 36 per cent in 2010. Exports to Chindia, although 
still a trickle, quadrupled their percentage share.  
As the Western economies lost momentum and FDI outflows fell off, China and India 
 
readily picked up the slack. Businesses in emerging markets are doing particularly well from 
this. We read in the Indian press headlines such as Billionaires Go on Buying Spree in Africa. 
We learn they are investing in some 80 ventures in Africa, the new girl in town, winning every 
beauty  contest.  China  is  the  largest  investor  in  Africa.  China  and  India  are  not  being 
charitable. It is an open secret that returns on FDI in Africa are among the most attractive 
around. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
This  expansion  and  diversification  in  investment  and  trade  has  brought  notable 
 
improvements in additional know-how, technology and development experience from these 
emerging economies into the African continent. The crisis spurred this shift away from the 
advanced  countries  toward  the  East  [China  and  India]  and  the  South  [Brazil  and  South 
Africa] for Africa and is transforming the gearing of the global financial and economic system.  
 
Africa is certainly not sinking into any depth of despondency, bewailing its lot that it has 
been  let  down  by  its  traditional  partners.  It  is  alive  and  kicking.  In  this  time  of  African 
renaissance and renewal, we should learn some lessons from the recent Greek sovereign 
debt crisis and default threat. There is a glaring difference in the way Greece is being treated 
and  the  treatment  meted  out  to  African  countries  when  they  faced  a  fairly  similar  debt 
predicament.  The  speed  with  which  decisions  are  taken,  funds  made  available,  haircuts 
agreed with bankers and creditors, and the personal engagement of the high and mighty, all 
stand in sharp contrast to the slow and lumbering processes of the Heavily Indebted Poor 
Countries  mechanism.  HIPC  came  with  its  own  jargon  of  “completion  point”  and  “decision 
point”.  It  proceeded  at  a  glacial  pace.  It  was  an  obstacle  course  where  strict  performance 
criteria had first to be met before qualifying for any debt relief.  
 
The  scheme  started  in  1996  and  by  July  2011,  that  is  a  full  15  years  later,  of  the 
40 countries  eligible  for  the  HIPC  Initiative,  only  32  had  reached  the  so-called  “completion 
point”. Twenty-six of these countries are African. If all 40 potentially eligible countries reach 
completion point, total debt relief provided by the World Bank and all participating creditors is 
estimated to reach around US$142 billion. As HIPC critics contend, it was a case of too little, 
too late, for too few countries. 
Contrast  this  with  the  case  of  Greece.  In  May  2010,  the  IMF  approved  a  €30  billion 
 
three-year  loan  for  Greece  as  part  of  a  joint  European  Union-IMF  €110  billion  financing 
package  to  help  the  country  ride  out  its  debt  crisis  with  about  €5.5  billion  immediately 
available.  A  haircut  of  20  per  cent  was  agreed  without  much  ado,  and  raised  with  little 
difficulty  to  50  per  cent  within  weeks.  And  there  will  probably  be  still  more  support 
forthcoming for Greece, if only out of enlightened self-interest to forestall any contagion to 
the  other  vulnerable  Eurozone  economies.  This  differential  treatment  becomes  still  more 
glaring when we take into account the population affected: just over 11 million for Greece, as 
against 462 million for the African HIPC’s. One cannot escape the conclusion that the donor 
community  had  been  pulling  its  punches  with HIPC  and  could  have  done  far  more  for  the 
countries concerned.  
 
Well done Greece: hard cheese Africa! So, there should be more reliance on self-help 
in the future. Over the past decades, the financial sector in Africa has slowly begun to realize 
its potential to mobilize domestic resources and finance African growth. Across the continent, 
there  are  numerous  examples  of  finance  firmly  serving  as  a  catalyst  to  transform  African 
economies.  It  is  increasingly  providing  capital  and  credit  to  new  businesses,  or  supporting 
the expansion of productive capacity in established firms. Cheap and rapid transfer channels 
for remittances dot the continent. SafariCom, in Kenya, has harnessed mobile telephony to 
deliver  a  range  of  services  to  meet  previously  unmet  needs  and  stimulate  growth.  These 
include  new  products  such  as  weather  insurance  to  help  farmers  manage  climate  risks, 
equipment  leasing  to  help  small  enterprises,  and  acceptance  of  warehouse  receipts  as 
security to push financing into agricultural value-chains. It enables low-income households to 
manage their lives more effectively through mobile payments, microcredit, no-frills accounts, 
and micro-health insurance. These developments are key transmission channels for growth 
and development. 
 
Long-term finance is crucial for Africa’s development for equipment leases especially 
for  farmers,  for  investment  in  essential  infrastructure  such  as  power  and  roads,  and  to 
upgrade  the  housing  stock.  But  getting  banks  to  go  in  this  direction  remains  a  challenge 
across  Africa.  By  international  standards,  African  banking  remains  expensive  and  poorly 
adapted to local needs.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
African  banks  are  starting  to  respond  to  the  demand.  During  the  crisis,  some 
 
international  banks  turned  out  to  be  fair-weather  friends,  downsizing,  retrenching,  or  even 
closing when African economies were at their most vulnerable. Others, based in international 
money  centres,  withdrew  or  reduced  trade  lines.  Local  banks,  including  central  banks 
assuming their developmental role, stepped smartly into the breach. Although African banks 
are small, 40 of them made it in the Top 1000 World Banks in 2011. They are also among 
the  world’s  most  profitable,  according  to  a  survey  by  The  Banker,  which  supports  the 
contention  that  Africa  is  a  land  of  high  returns.  Of  those  who  had  not  made  it  to  the  top 
1000 banks, we find many African banks lining up to join their ranks. Of the top 10 global 
lenders in this next group of 1000, measured by return on capital (ROC), five are African. Of 
the top 10 with the highest return on assets (ROA), seven are African. Overall, African banks 
–  there  are  17  in  this  survey  –  made  average  ROA’s  of  3.65  per  cent  [on  an  unweighted 
basis] and ROC’s of 35 per cent. These levels are far higher than the next profitable region, 
namely,  South  America,  where  banks  made  returns  of  1.95  per  cent  on  their  assets  and 
19.6 per cent on their capital. 
 
The investment needs of Africa are huge. Africa has to grow and explore other ways of 
attracting finance and capital. There is ample room for public-private partnership initiatives in 
the  continent  and  the  concept  has  to  be  vulgarised.  What  is  vital  for  the  future  is  that 
business  in  Africa  gives  greater  weight  to  quality,  inclusiveness  and  equity,  or  the 
aftershocks from the Arab Spring will spread across the whole continent, feeding on the pent-
up grievances and aspirations of local people. Moreover, we must broaden our assessment 
of  progress  to  include  the  protection  of  the  environmental  capital  of  the  continent  in  the 
equation for measuring development, and not zero-value it, as too often in the past. This is 
essential to ensure that any fresh spurt of economic growth follows a sustainable path and 
does not end in further land and human degradation.  
 
Let me conclude. When the global economic and financial crisis struck, Africa took a hit 
like everybody else, although with a lag. As its traditional trade partners teetered on the brink 
of recession and seemed to make living on the edge their new way of life, lurching from one 
crisis  to  another,  African  growth  faltered,  falling  off  from  its  trend  average  of  5  per  cent 
annually over a decade. The fall was steeper in the middle-income countries like Mauritius, 
but  growth  turned  only  marginally  negative.  Governance  and  policy  reforms  leveraged 
financial support from multilateral institutions to deliver a quick rebound in 2010. Africa also 
made some quick gains in re-orienting its trade and investment towards the rising stars in the 
East and South. The African investment climate attracts rising volumes of capital flows, both 
private and official. That’s the rosy view. 
 
But there is also a darker side to the picture. The global crisis is continuing, with no end 
in slight unless you are delusional. Africa is running out of fiscal space as inflation is hitting 
high double digits in, for example, East Africa. The Eurozone remains the continent’s main 
trading partner and prolonged slowdown in the EU and the US mean demand for exports of 
goods  and  services  will  remain  constrained.  International  commodity  prices,  which  have  a 
determining influence on the economies of so many African countries, are likely to stay weak 
for  quite  some  time,  clouding  African  prospects.  In  this  globalised,  interconnected  world, 
there  is  no  place  to  hide.  If  a  rising  tide  lifts  all  boats,  a  receding  tide  can  play  absolute 
havoc. 
 
On  balance,  weighing  these  two  contrasting  narratives,  what  can  we  say?  Whither 
Africa? I think the African growth story will continue. Africa has built up a certain resilience 
and there is little reason to believe this will diminish. The dynamism that characterises the 
African policy space, with many countries being very pro-active, gives ground for optimism. 
However  the  global  crisis  plays  out,  Africa  is  not  likely  to  shoot  itself  in  the  foot.  For  a 
concluding  remark,  let  me  draw  on  a  recent  World  Bank  publication  on  Africa’s  future 
(March 2011) which encapsulates it nicely: 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
“Putting these factors together, the Bank concludes that Africa could be on the 
brink  of  an  economic  take-off,  much  like  China  was  30  years  ago,  and  India 
20 years ago.” 
Whither Africa, you ask? Poised for an economic take-off, no less! 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
