Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview with Die Welt 
Interview with Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, conducted 
by Jan Dams and Martin Greive on 7 October 2011. 
 WELT: Mr Trichet, at the time you took up office, did you think it conceivable that you 
would be dealing with such a serious crisis in the currency union?  
Jean-Claude Trichet: Even before the outbreak of the financial crisis, the ECB warned that it 
was highly likely that there would be major corrections in the financial markets. However, the 
fact that the crisis would call into question the whole economic and financial strategy of all 
developed economies was not quite so foreseeable.  
You have had to take harsh criticism of your crisis management from Germany. How 
disappointing is that for you?  
That reminds me of a Goethe quote: “Against criticism a man can neither protest nor defend 
himself;  he  must  act  in  spite  of  it,  and  then  it  will  gradually  yield  to  him.”  The  ECB  must 
accept the criticism. The only thing that matters is that we are faithful to our primary mandate 
and take our decisions fully independently.  
It  is  about  precisely  that  that  increasing  doubts  are  being  expressed.  Under  your 
leadership, the ECB has lost its independence because it has financed hard-up euro 
area countries by printing money.  
This  criticism  is  completely  inaccurate.  We  are  fiercely  independent  of  governments  and 
pressure groups. All our decisions are made fully independently by the 23 members of the 
ECB’s Governing Council. And we are totally devoted to our primary Treaty mandate of price 
stability. We have delivered price stability over 13 years with an annual inflation rate of 2.0% 
for the euro area as a whole and 1.55% for Germany. This is better than any time over the 
previous 50 years. For the last four years we have been experiencing the worst global crisis 
since  World  War  II,  and  not  surprisingly  it  is  hampering  our  monetary  policy  transmission. 
That  is  why  we  have  had  to  take  some  non-standard  measures  but  with  caution  and 
prudence. With our decisions since the outbreak of the crisis, we have reacted appropriately 
to the market failures in the financial markets. We have lived up to our responsibilities.  
The two German members of the ECB’s Governing Council, Axel Weber and Jürgen 
Stark,  both  resigned  because  they  could  no  longer  support  the  buying  up  of 
government bonds.  
Jürgen is a very good European and a very close friend. Over the last 18 years he has been 
closely  involved  in  the  European  construction  and  European  unity.  He  has  been  an 
outstanding  ECB  Chief  Economist.  He  is  one  of  the  greatest  champions  of  the  European 
Union  that  I  know.  When,  after  serving  the  euro  for  many  years,  such  a  person,  who  has 
been totally loyal to the institution, announces his resignation for personal reasons, one has 
to fully respect his decision.  
According to opinion polls, a majority of Germans now want the Deutsche Mark back. 
Is the euro at risk of losing its backing in Europe’s largest economy?  
There  are  different  opinion  polls!  In  early  September  Die  Welt  published  the  results  of  a 
survey in which two thirds of respondents in Germany called for “more common policies in 
Europe”.  The  citizens  of  Germany  know  how  important  European  unification  is  for  their 
country; the fall of the iron curtain would not have been possible without a united western 
Europe.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
In that case, how do you explain the growing mistrust?  
I believe there is a problem of communication. Contrary to how things are often portrayed, 
we do not have a crisis of the euro as a currency. The euro is a credible, stable currency. In 
spite of the global crisis, its external value today is significantly higher than when it began. 
For  13  years  the  ECB  has  provided  for  stable  prices.  And  observers  and  markets  are 
anticipating the same stable prices for the next ten years. This achievement in particular is 
not valued highly enough by some commentators in Germany, and I do not understand why 
that  is.  Of  course,  there  are  shortcomings  in  the  financial  sector,  in  fiscal  policies,  and  as 
regards financial stability: the financial markets are too unstable, some euro area countries 
are uncompetitive, and reliable fiscal policy is lacking in several countries. However, none of 
these problems have to do with the currency. They are the responsibility of the governments 
of the euro area.  
Do you have the impression that the Heads of Government have understood what is at 
stake?  
I  believe  they  are  conscious  of  their  extraordinary  responsibility.  They  all  have  to  make 
decisions in the context of democracies which, in the advanced economies, are very inward-
looking, which is a real problem at the time of the worst global crisis for the last 66 years.  
What  will  happen  if  the  European  Heads  of  Government  do  not  get  the  crisis  under 
control?  
My working assumption is that the Heads of State and Government will overcome the crisis. 
Europe must realign its fiscal policy, as other large developed economies must also do. This 
year, at 10%, the deficits in the United States and Japan will be around twice as high as in 
the  euro  area  on  a  consolidated  basis.  In  spite  of  this,  Europe  is  the  epicentre  of  the 
government debt crisis. The reason for this is the mutual dependence of the 17 euro area 
countries. This is why it is so important that every euro area country plays by the rules. A few 
days ago in the European Parliament, I quoted what I told the Members of the Parliament in 
my  first  hearings,  eight  years  ago,  four  years  before  the  crisis,  concerning  the  absolute 
necessity to stick to the Stability and Growth Pact.  
At  your  Governing  Council  meeting  last  week  you  reactivated  all  the  crisis 
instruments. Is the euro in serious danger?  
The euro as a currency is evidently not in danger. It is the financial stability of the euro area 
as  a  whole  which  is  at  stake,  and  this  creates  difficulties  for  our  monetary  policy 
transmission. Taking into account the reality of the situation we have reactivated a number of 
non-standard measures.  
Many people nonetheless fear that the continuous flooding of the markets with new 
money will lead to inflation in the medium term. 
This  fear  is  totally  unfounded.  First  the  Securities  Market  Programme  (SMP),  namely  the 
purchase  of  Treasuries  on  the  secondary  market,  is  not  at  all  a  quantitative  easing 
programme. We are rigorously withdrawing all the liquidity which is provided. As regards all 
our non-standard measures, the balance sheet of the ECB has expanded by 77% since the 
beginning  of  the  crisis;  that  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve  System  by  226%.  This  gives  a 
measure of our relative prudence in this very grave crisis. And we are fully credible to deliver 
price stability over the next 10 years, according to observers and market participants.  
In the spring, the ECB spoke out against the restructuring of Greek debt which was 
being discussed at that time. Now there is again discussion of a debt restructuring. 
Does your opposition still stand?  
In the spring, the Governing Council of the ECB unanimously made the following points. We 
cannot accept the securities of a state in default, even for a short period of time, as collateral 
for  the  refinancing  of  banks  without  an  appropriate  credit enhancement.  Similarly,  we  said 
that a credit event should be avoided. Our position has not changed. In any case, we call for 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the  full  implementation  of  the  decisions  taken  by  the  Heads  of  State  and  Government  on 
21 July.  
Then  providing  funding  to  Greece  remains  the  only  option.  How  many  years  will 
Europe have to support Athens?  
Greece  must  pursue  an  adjustment  which  must  be  very  strong  and  credible  under  the 
permanent  surveillance  of  the  IMF  and  of  the  European  institutions.  A  key  element,  in  my 
opinion,  is  the  technical  assistance  of  Europe,  now  being  organised  in  Athens  by 
Mr Reichenbach.  
Can the European safety net protect the euro area from a conflagration?  
We welcome the decisions of the Heads of State and Government of 21 July through which 
the flexibility of the safety net was enhanced. It is now their responsibility to make the safety 
net operational as soon as possible.  
Do you believe that the ECB will then be able, as planned, to cease its controversial 
buying up of government bonds?  
In the future, the EFSF will be able to intervene in the secondary market. The stability of the 
European financial system will in the future be guaranteed by the governments via the EFSF.  
How large should the capacity of the EFSF be?  
The  governments  must  first  implement  all  the  decisions  of  the  EU  summit  of  21  July  and 
provide appropriate leveraging of the fund.  
Should  the  EFSF  be  granted  a  banking  licence  in  order  to  be  able  to  obtain  money 
directly from the ECB?  
The  ECB’s  Governing  Council  does  not  consider  that  appropriate.  The  governments 
themselves have several means to leverage the EFSF.  
Yet again the banks are deeply in crisis and clearly need to be recapitalised. Can the 
euro area afford another banking crisis?  
We  have  to  deal  with  the  sovereign  risk  tensions  and  we  have  to  deal  with  the  banking 
tensions. It is crucial that the banks put their balance sheets in order as quickly as possible. 
They need to build up a stronger equity position by retaining profits and being less generous 
with  bonus  payments.  In  so  far  as  is  possible,  they  must  recapitalise  in  the  market.  If  a 
financial institution has no access to the capital markets, the Government must stand ready 
to  recapitalise  solvent  banks.  In  addition,  where  it  would  be  necessary,  the  Heads  of 
Government have decided that the EFSF can be mobilised to recapitalise banks.  
How can it be prevented in future that taxpayers have to continuously save the banks? 
The global financial system must be much more resilient. That is the reason why we have to 
apply  rigorously  and  fully  the  new  Basel  III  rules,  to  be  sure  that  systemically  important 
financial institutions do not put the sector in danger. In this regard we have to be inflexible 
and oppose any pressure group.  
Under your leadership, the ECB has risen to become Europe’s secret government. Is it 
not deeply undemocratic when representatives of an unelected institution like the ECB 
can dictate austerity plans to an elected government like Italy’s?  
We do not dictate anything to anyone. We do not replace any government. We do not take 
any political decisions. We are only giving messages to Governments individually, and to the 
Eurogroup as a whole. This has always been our task since the setting-up of the ECB. Do 
you not think it was appropriate for us to tell the big countries in 2004 that they should not 
weaken the Stability and Growth Pact?  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Almost all experts agree that Europe must come closer together. How do you imagine 
the Europe of the future?  
I would make a distinction between the immediate future, and – after a change in the Treaty 
–  what  I  would  call  “tomorrow”  and  the  “day  after  tomorrow”.  Immediately  we  must  apply 
completely  and  rigorously  the  new  governance  which  has  just  been  approved  by  the 
Parliament and the Council. “Tomorrow” we must have the possibility to impose decisions on 
a country that is not applying the recommendations and, in so doing, is putting the system as 
a  whole  in  danger.  And  “the  day  after  tomorrow”  we  should  have  a  significantly  stronger 
political union with an executive branch and, in this executive branch, a European Finance 
Minister.  He  would  be  responsible  for  surveillance  of  fiscal  and  economic  policies,  for  the 
monitoring  of  the  financial  sector  and  for  the  representation  of  the  European  economy  in 
international institutions.  
At the end of the month, your term of office comes to an end and you will step down 
after years as President of the ECB. What headline would you like to read over your 
period in office?  
Despite  successive  oil  shocks  and  the  global  crisis,  the  ECB  Governing  Council  has 
delivered greater price stability than in the previous 50 years to 332 million fellow citizens.  
Do you already know what you are going to do with your spare time in future?  
I have not made any specific plans, because I am concentrating fully on my last weeks in 
office. My greatest privilege will surely be that I will have more time for reading, for meditating 
on  the  present  history  of  Europe  and  to  spend  with  my  four  granddaughters:  Eléonore, 
Diane, Anna and Marie. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
