Josef Bonnici: Lessons from the recent past and the road ahead 
Address  by  Professor  Josef  Bonnici,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malta,  at  KPMG’s 
biennial Financial Services Conference “Maintaining the vision – driving value from change”, 
St. Julian’s, 1 November 2011. 
 The euro area is currently addressing the challenge of a number of interacting problems: the 
economic slowdown, the sovereign debt crisis and financial sector instability. The sovereign 
debt crisis has been aggravated by the impact on fiscal balances of slower economic growth 
and,  in  many  countries,  government  support  for  distressed  banks.  In  turn,  sovereign  debt 
problems have damaged the balance sheets of euro area banks and impaired the supply of 
credit to the economy. 
The fact that this monetary union is made up of sovereign and autonomous Member States 
shows  up  at  various  levels.  Looking  at  national  fiscal  and  structural  policies  in  the  recent 
past, one notices sharp differences in the extent to which different countries have exercised 
budgetary  caution  and  preserved  their  international  competitiveness.  Other  national 
differences can also be observed. In the case of Greece, for example, the country’s problems 
were  compounded  by  the  statistical  understatement  of  the  budget  deficit  and  debt.  In  the 
case of Ireland, as another example, it was imprudent bank lending policies, particularly to 
the real estate sector, which led to a massive rise in the debt burden of the state.  
Of  course,  determined  efforts  are  required  on  the  part  of  EU  governments  to  reach  a 
consensus on improvements in governance – particularly on the rules governing budgetary 
policy in the monetary union – and on the provision of bail-out funds. While the discussion 
and  decision  process  surrounding  these  matters  are  often  regarded  as  a  weakness  in  the 
governance  structure,  it  must  also  be  recognised  that  the  changes  involved  represent 
significant  levels  of  assistance  to  programme  countries  and  also  touch  directly  on  issues 
related to sovereignty.  
It  is  perhaps  ironic  that  current  problems  are  in  part  a  side  effect  of  the  success  of  the 
monetary union, and the benefits it brought about. More precisely the crisis has also been 
triggered by the misuse of the benefits of monetary integration. 
The  new  currency  reduced  the  cost  of  borrowing  in  several  countries,  as  credit  spreads 
narrowed and exchange rate risk on intra-euro area borrowing was eliminated.1 The reduced 
cost of financing public as well as private debt was reflected in higher government debt and 
private sector leverage.  
In the wake of risk repricing by the financial markets, there is now the strong tendency for 
market operators to unwind their holdings of public and private sector debt. This can be seen 
in Chart 1, which shows as an example the ensuing reduction in the leverage of monetary 
and financial institutions. The deleveraging process could set the stage for a deterioration in 
economic conditions. However it also serves to correct past excesses.  
In looking for the origins of the crisis, one also observes instances of fiscal indiscipline, which 
caused problems at the Euro area level. 
In  some  member  states,  as  for  example  in  the  case  of  Greece,  EU  funds  were  not  put  to 
proper use and in some cases ended up imposing a burden on future government finances. 
In my previous appointment at the European Court of Auditors, where I was responsible for 
coordinating the overall audit report on the spending of the EU budget, in almost every report 
                                                 
1  See  L.  Bini  Smaghi,  “Eurozone,  European  crisis  and  policy  responses”,  Goldman  Sachs  Global  Macro 
Conference – Asia 2011, 22 February 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
during  my  six-year  term,  Greece  was  invariably  singled  out  because  of  its  problems  and 
serious deficiencies in the spending of EU funds. Greece often had to pay back to the EU 
budget funds that it badly needed. It is evident that such weaknesses in the administrative 
and political structure put an unnecessary burden on Greece’s fiscal position. 
 A recent study describes the first nine years of the euro, between 1999 and 2007 (that is, the 
pre-crisis  period),  as  “ ‘wasted  good  times’  during  which  the  foundations  were  laid  for  the 
present crisis … Almost as soon as the euro had been introduced, consolidation fatigue set 
in”.2 Moreover, governance at the EU level was weak. The application of the corrective arm 
of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  was  softened  through  intervention  at  the  political  level  in 
2003. The ensuing reform of the Pact in 2005 thus ushered in a greater degree of tolerance, 
and political influence was permitted in dealing with EU member states’ fiscal imbalances. 
It is true that the average deficit ratio in the euro area improved through 2007, aided by the 
upswing  in  economic  conditions.  However,  only  a  few  countries  earnestly  engaged  in 
substantial budgetary consolidation efforts. At the same time, financial market scrutiny was 
mild,  and  as  a  result  the  less  fiscally-responsible  governments  were  able  to  meet  their 
borrowing requirements at a relatively small spread on the benchmark interest rate. 
This changed after 2007, when the onset of the financial crisis found several Member States 
poorly prepared for what lay ahead. It became difficult to undo the accumulated imbalances 
and vulnerabilities. The debt burden worsens when the interest rate exceeds the growth rate 
of the economy. This is reinforced when the primary balance is in deficit, in which case the 
dynamics of servicing the debt could easily make the debt burden unsustainable.  
Fiscal consolidation, which is necessary even in less serious circumstances, carries the risk 
of downward macroeconomic adjustment. In today’s circumstances, there is the danger of a 
vicious  cycle  in  the  form  of  a  negative  macroeconomic  spiral.  This  is  because  weak 
economic growth leads to lower government revenue that raises the fiscal deficit ratio, and 
therefore requires further budgetary tightening.  
                                                 
2  L. Schuknecht, Ph. Moutot, P. Rother and J. Stark “The Stability and Growth Pact, Crisis and Reform” ECB 
Occasional Paper Series, No. 129, September 2011. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Similarly  meaningful  structural  reforms  are  not  easy  or  popular  to  implement  during  a 
recession. Since it takes time for these microeconomic measures to generate the so-called 
macroeconomic dividends, correction of the excessive debt ratio often requires a sharp fiscal 
correction, which brings in its wake a slowdown in economic activity.  
The lessons to learn from this experience are that fiscal prudence and the safeguarding of 
competitiveness have to be an ongoing and constant endeavour. It becomes difficult to apply 
fiscal discipline and structural reforms when the need becomes urgent or during an economic 
slowdown. 
As a number of countries have grossly breached the deficit and debt rules of the Stability and 
Growth  Pact,  they  have  not  only  threatened  their  own  economic  sustainability  but  also 
undermined the stability of the euro area as a whole. 
As  a  result,  there  is  a  broad  recognition  across  the  EU  that  fiscal  governance  has  to  be 
strengthened and that the Stability and Growth Pact should be reinforced once again. There 
is the search for mechanisms that would ensure the effective and concrete intervention of the 
European Commission when Member States breach the deficit and debt rules as set out in 
the  Pact.  Of  course,  the  eventual  changes  in  the  system  have  to  be  decided  through 
negotiations. 
Perhaps it is worthwhile to take heed of recent comments by the outgoing President of the 
ECB, Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, who recently expressed his personal view on this subject. He 
suggested  the  design  of  a  body  that  “would  exert  direct  responsibilities”  in  a  number  of 
domains,  including  “the  rigorous  surveillance  of  both  fiscal  policies  and  competitiveness 
policies with the capacity, in exceptional cases, to take decisions immediately applicable in a 
particular economy that puts the euro area financial stability in danger”.3 
Where does Malta’s fiscal situation and more generally the broader Maltese economy, fit into 
all this? 
Malta’s fiscal deficit ratio followed a generally downward path during the last decade, though 
the decline was interrupted during two particular years – 2003 and 2008 – each explained by 
particular events. 
More recently, the budget deficit ratio has fallen each year since the high of 4.6% that was 
recorded  in  2008.  A  large  outlay  was  incurred  during  that  year  for  the  restructuring  of  a 
government-owned  enterprise.  This  outlay  however  brought  to  an  end  the  provision  to  the 
same  enterprise  of  further  government  subsidies,  which  would  otherwise  have  added  to 
future deficits.  
The  ratio  eased  to  3.7%  and  3.6%  in  2009  and  2010,  while  the  latest  government 
projections, as indicated in the Pre-Budget Document, refer to a deficit of 2.8% in 2011 and 
2.2% in 2012. Since 2009 the deficit ratio for Malta has been below the euro area’s average, 
but it has to be pointed out that this average is heavily affected by the high deficit levels of 
the Member States facing difficulties (Chart 2). 
Thus although the fiscal imbalance is narrowing and returning back to the levels stipulated by 
the Maastricht Treaty a strong case can be made for continued caution in Malta’s fiscal policy 
and  for  further  measures  that  would  help  to  ensure  the  achievement  of  the  government’s 
targets.  
With a government debt ratio at around 69% in 2010 and 2011, it has become even more 
important to bring down this ratio at a faster pace (Chart 3). 
                                                 
3  J. C. Trichet, “Remarks at the farewell event”, Frankfurt am Main, 19 October 2011, p. 3. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  Moreover,  despite  the  weak  external  environment  the  economy  continues  to  grow  at  a 
sustained  rate  and,  as  I  referred  to  earlier,  it  is  considerably  easier  to  undertake  further 
consolidation at a time of ongoing economic growth.  
Reductions in the deficit ratio would also leave more room for manoeuvrability on the fiscal 
side in the event of an economic slowdown without breaching the European rules. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The  least  painful  way  to  reduce  the  ratio  of  the  deficit  to  the  GDP  is  through  economic 
growth. In turn faster growth can be achieved through improvements in productivity. In this 
respect,  consensus  needs  to  be  reached  on  steps  that  can  be  taken  with  minimal  social 
disruption  to  reduce  the  threat  to,  and  ultimately  enhance,  the  country’s  international 
competitiveness.  
Competitiveness depends partly on developments in productivity and wages. The importance 
of  the  wage  setting  process  and  efficient  labour  market  practices  was  evident  in  the 
statement, issued by the European heads of government in Brussels on October 26. In this 
regard, the statement specifically referred to commitments made by the Italian and Spanish 
governments  with  respect  to  structural  reforms  that  included  important  changes  in  their 
labour markets. Spain will enact “labour market changes to increase flexibility at firm level 
and employability of the labour force …” Italy will “reform labour legislation and in particular 
the dismissal rules and procedures and … review the currently fragmented unemployment 
benefit system …”4 
In the local perspective it is relevant to mention that collective agreements are negotiated at 
the level of the individual firm, and that helps to ensure that wage growth is compatible with 
the  realities  of  the  markets  where  the  firm  sells  its  products.  Nevertheless,  various  steps 
could  be  taken  to  increase  employment  or  enhance  productivity.  These  could  include 
measures  that  would  encourage  an  increased  participation  rate,  as  well  as  measures  to 
facilitate part-time employment and thereby increase employment rates. 
Increased  flexibility  and  productivity  are  also  important  in  the  public  sector.  Any  wage 
increases  negotiated  need  to  be  moderate,  taking  into  account  the  current  uncertain 
economic environment. They should also be backed by improvements in productivity, so that 
the burden on state finances is kept to a minimum and justified by enhancements in quality 
and quantity of services provided.  
A further ingredient for economic growth is the smooth functioning of the financial system. 
This  is  an  area  of  particular  interest  to  the  Central  Bank,  since  one  of  the  Bank’s  main 
responsibilities  is  macro-prudential  stability.  Particularly  during  these  turbulent  times, 
continued  economic  growth  depends  also  on  the  uninterrupted  supply  of  credit  by  the 
financial sector to firms and households, and to that end the stability of the financial system 
is essential.  
The  recently  published  Update  of  the  Central  Bank’s  Financial  Stability  Report  provides  a 
cautious but generally positive picture of developments in the banking sector since the last 
full report, which was published in June 2011.5 
The information relates to those banks that are closely integrated in the domestic economy, 
often  referred  to  as  systemically  important  banks  in  a  local  context.  Though  large,  the 
remainder of the banking sector is detached from the economy and interacts only marginally 
with these systemically important banks. 
The  Update  pointed  to  an  increase  in  bank  profits,  mainly  because  of  higher  net  interest 
income.  Meanwhile,  liquidity  and  solvency  ratios  remained  positive  and  significantly  above 
the regulatory requirements.  
Commenting  on  consumer  credit,  the  Update  observes  a  reduction  in  the  overall  non-
performing loans ratio for households. The ratio of non-performing loans for consumer credit 
transactions decreased while that for mortgages remained stable. As a result of favourable 
conditions  in  the  labour  market,  there  was  also  a  slight  reduction  in  household  loan 
repayments that were classified as being in arrears.  
                                                 
4 
5  Central Bank of Malta, Financial Stability Report Update – June 2011, 17 October 2011. 
“Euro summit statement”, Brussels 26 October 2011, points 5 and 6. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
It also noted a slight deterioration in the corporate non-performing loan ratio as an increase 
in the ratio for certain sectors, particularly construction and real estate activities, was offset 
by an improved ratio in other sectors. 
The  Update  noted  that  credit  risk  is  being  partly  mitigated  by  tight  credit  standards  and 
cautious lending behaviour on the part of the banks. However, it also expressed concern that 
credit and concentration risks remain elevated while provisioning levels remain inadequate.  
In  that  light,  the  Central  Bank  continues  to  urge  the  banks  to  make  higher  loan  loss 
provisioning – especially for loans related to construction activity – and to strengthen their 
capital base. These measures would not only enable the banks to meet potential shocks but 
would  also  allow  them  to  prepare  themselves  better  for  compliance  with  stricter  Basel  III 
regulatory requirements. 
On the funding side, the resilience displayed by the banking system in the face of adverse 
international conditions is attributable to the prudent traditional business model that has been 
a  historic  characteristic  of  domestic  banks,  one  that  places  a  strong  reliance  on  retail 
deposits.  
This business model has served Malta well as the traditional sources of funding have proven 
to  be  very  stable,  including  at  a  time  of  international  tension.  It  is  therefore  essential  that, 
while staying abreast of innovations in the financial world and taking on the changes that are 
required to stay competitive and improve efficiency, the domestic banking sector must also 
continue to build upon the strengths of the traditional model.  
By  contrast,  the  financial  turmoil  of  recent  years  has  had  a  negative  effect  across  many 
countries,  particularly  on  financial  institutions  that  rely  on  wholesale  funding  sources.  In 
response  to  the  rapid  drying  up  of  the  interbank  markets  and  with  liquidity  abruptly 
disappearing in many key financial markets in the euro area, the Eurosystem has for the past 
three years been implementing a broad programme of enhanced credit support.  
In particular, the Eurosystem has been providing liquidity on a fixed rate and full allotment 
basis and has also extended the maturity of its re-financing operations. These non-standard 
measures  have  been  instrumental  in  avoiding  a  credit  crunch  and  supporting  financial 
stability.  These  measures  are  designed  to  ensure  an  effective  transmission  of  monetary 
policy – to maintain the flow of credit to the real economy, avoiding liquidity problems and 
supporting growth in productive activity.  
However, there may be instances where the availability of these funding sources may induce 
some credit institutions to embark on alternative business models where access to central 
bank funding becomes the primary source of funding. I would like to make it very clear that 
the Central Bank of Malta is not prepared to support such ventures. When the conditions are 
favourable  a  higher  leverage  ratio  increases  the  return  on  capital.  However  when  the 
acquisition of high yielding assets is funded from short term sources, the financial institution 
is not only exposed to losses on the asset side but also to adverse changes in funding costs. 
In  such  a  situation,  the Central  Bank  finds  itself  in  a  position  where  it  is  more  exposed  to 
losses on collateral.  
Whereas the Central Bank will be constantly prepared to provide the necessary liquidity to 
the banking system to perform its intermediation role, the Central Bank expects that credit 
institutions will be looking primarily to the market for their funding requirements. 
Among  the  many  lessons  that  may  be  drawn  from  the  experience  of  the  international 
financial turmoil, one that stands out is the importance for each banking institution to keep a 
prudent mix of dependable sources of funding, to limit the level of financial leverage and to 
maintain a sound balance sheet. 
The merits of traditional banking practices are echoed in the recent remark by the German 
Finance  Minister.  He  said,  “I  believe  it  is  in  the  interest  of  the  financial  sector  itself  that  it 
should concentrate more on its proper role of financing the real economy, and ensuring that 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
capital is allocated in the most intelligent way, instead of banks conducting the bulk of their 
trading on their own account”. 
Such considerations provide the foundations for drawing the desired roadmap for the future 
evolution  and  growth  of  Malta’s  domestic  banking  sector  and  the  preservation  of  financial 
stability.  
In  summary  I  would  like  to  conclude  by  emphasising  the  need  for  fiscal  prudence,  further 
efforts  to  maintain  international  competitiveness  and  continued  vigilance  in  the  banking 
sector,  in  the  context  of  ongoing  uncertainty  in  international  financial  markets  and  in  the 
global economy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
