Peter Praet: Fixed income investment of insurance companies and 
pension funds in a low yield – but volatile – environment 
Speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at 
the 2011 European Pension Funds Congress during the 14th Euro Finance Week, Frankfurt 
am Main, 15 November 2011. 
 I  would  like  to  thank  Jürgen  Kirchoff,  Torsti  Silvonen  and  Stefan  Wredenborg  for  their  contributions  to  the 
preparation of this keynote speech as well as Michel Colinet and Kajal Vandenput for their helpful comments and 
all members of the CGFS working group on Fixed income strategies of insurance companies and pension funds 
for the preparation of its report. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure to speak here at the European Pension Funds Congress in Frankfurt, which 
forms an important part of the 14th Euro Finance Week.  
Earlier this year I was asked to chair a global Working Group with participating central banks 
from North America, Europe and Asia for the so-called Committee on the Global Financial 
System,  CGFS,  which  works  under  the  Bank  for  International  Settlement.  Our  aim  was  to 
assess how the regulatory initiatives together with the low-yield environment have affected 
the fixed income strategies of institutional investors, such as pension funds and insurance 
companies,  and  to  draw  implications  for  the  financial  system.  In  doing  so,  we  relied  on 
bilateral  interviews  and  regional  roundtables,  involving  70  private  sector  institutions.  Even 
after discounting industry complaints, there are grounds for expecting certain adjustments to 
the assets, liabilities and derivatives books run by insurance companies and pension funds.  
I would like to share the main findings of the CGFS work with you and express some of my 
views on the topic.  
Our exercise is published in the form of a CGFS Report, which can be found at the web-site 
of the Bank of International Settlements.1 
I will first provide some background on the role of insurance companies and pension funds, 
then elaborate on the main changes concerning international accounting standards and the 
regulatory front, before presenting some views on potential financial system implications. 
Background on the role of insurance companies and pension funds 
1. 
Insurance  companies  and  pension  funds  (ICPFs)  indeed  currently  find  themselves  at  the 
intersection  of  major  developments.  Having  weathered  the  financial  crisis  on  the  whole 
comparatively  well,  they  are  now  exposed  to  problems  confronting  some  euro  area 
sovereigns and banks, the low-interest rate environment, and they face upcoming changes in 
international regulation and accounting standards.  
With  combined  assets  of  some  $40  trillion,  insurance  companies  and  pension  funds 
constitute a large segment of the institutional investor space and they are therefore important 
for  financial  system  stability.  In  particular,  they  play  a  major  role  in  fixed  income  markets, 
also as providers of long-term funding to banks and the public sector.  
If we look at the situation within the euro area, the role of insurers and pension funds has 
been increasingly important as the size of the euro area sectors has grown rapidly over the 
                                                 
1  http://www.bis.org/publ/cgfs44.pdf 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
last decade. It should however be noted that the prominence and asset allocation strategies 
of these institutional investors is very different in different euro area countries. 
The  investments  of  insurers  and  pension  funds  have  created  strong  and  important 
interlinkages with sovereigns as well as banks and other financial institutions.  
Insurers and pension funds, with €1.1 trillion invested, hold almost 20% of the debt securities 
issued by euro area governments, which make them an important provider of governments’ 
funding. 
Euro  area  ICPFs  are  also  providing  funding  to  other  sectors.  After  governments,  the  euro 
area  ICPF  sector  has  the  second  biggest  debt  securities  exposure  to  euro  area  monetary 
financial  institutions  (MFIs),  a  sector  that  consists,  in  particular,  of  credit  institutions.  Euro 
area  insurance  corporations  and  pension  funds  hold  about  €600  billion  of  debt  securities 
issued by euro area MFIs, which represents around 12% of the total MFI debt securities. 
Most of the time, given the typically long-term investment horizons of insurers and pension 
funds, they are a source of stability in financial markets. In current discussions in different 
fora about systemically important financial institutions, I believe that it is therefore important 
to distinguish between “systemically important” and “systemically risky” financial institutions. 
A financial institution can in my view be important for the financial system even if it does not 
pose  direct  threats  to  it.  I  believe  most  insurers  and  pension  funds  fall  into  this  category. 
They  are  unlikely  to  trigger  financial  instability  but  it  is  crucial  that  they  maintain  their 
important role in financial markets, an in particular as a source of long term funding in fixed 
income markets.  
Changes in international accounting standards and in regulatory front 
2. 
It is important to know that current regulatory standards and requirements differ between EU 
countries. Also, the timetable for the implementation of future regulatory changes remains in 
a state of flux. 
It is therefore legitimate to ask whether we can draw any conclusions from such a mixed pie. 
Indeed, our first direct finding was that the uncertainty about the scope, timing and extent of 
accounting  and  regulatory  changes  increases  uncertainty  which  makes  it  more  difficult for 
insurance  companies  and  pension  funds  to  plan  their  investment  strategies  over  the  long-
term. So let me briefly recall the main upcoming accounting and regulatory changes relevant 
for these investors.  
I  start  with  the  changes  in  international  accounting  standards.  They  should  be 
implemented from 2013 or 2014 onward, though much remains to be decided. Alongside the 
gains in transparency and comparability, one can expect them to produce greater volatility in 
financial statements:  
– 
For  pension  commitments:  modifications  to  IAS 19  (concerning  the  measurement 
and recognition of “employee benefits”) by 2013 will create more valuation changes 
in defined benefit (DB) pension plans which will be reflected in their funding status 
and  the  profit  and  loss  statement  of  the  sponsoring  company.  This  is  mainly 
attributable to the fact that the revised IAS 19 – among other things – eliminates the 
existing option to defer the recognition of gains and losses, known as the “corridor 
method”.  
For  insurance  contracts:  IFRS 4  Phase  2  proposes  a  single  accounting  model  for 
insurance  contracts  by  2014  and  requires  that  liability  valuation  changes  are 
recognised in the P&L. This would also lead to greater accounting volatility, for the 
following reasons:  
• 
Going forward all life insurance liabilities and non-life (property and casualty) 
claims liabilities would have to be discounted either via a bottom up approach 
BIS central bankers’ speeches
 2 
  (risk free + liquidity premium...) or a top down approach (starting from assets 
return). The discount rate would have to be adjusted regularly, namely at the 
end  of  each  reporting  period.  In  the  IASB’s  tentative  approach,  the  effect  of 
changes in the discount rate must to be posted in P&L at each reporting date. 
As  a  result,  the  volatility  in  interest  rates  –  as  currently  experienced  with 
sovereign risk rates – will impact the annual results without consideration for 
the fact that the discounted insurance liability may span over very long term. 
On the other side, in response to mounting volatility of their liabilities, insurers 
may  be  tempted  to  –  contrary  to  their  current  treatment  –  measure  larger 
portions of their investments in fixed-income securities at fair value, reflecting 
all fair value changes in profit or loss (“net income”). With this new approach to 
classification and measurement of their investment portfolios, insurers would 
aim to reduce the “mismatch” between the valuation of assets and insurance 
liabilities (which is often referred to as “accounting mismatch”).2 Reducing any 
existing “accounting mismatch”, however beneficial this may be, would on the 
other  hand  not  alleviate  another  serious  concern  of  insurers,  namely  the 
“maturity  mismatch”.  As  a  general  rule,  insurance  contracts  tend  to  have  a 
longer maturity than insurers’ investments. 
Such accounting measurement volatility will have an impact on the position of own funds and 
likely also on the ease with which insurers can secure capital through financial markets. 
In both cases, there may be increased pressure from markets or sponsoring companies to 
de-risk asset holdings to limit volatility in financial statements. 
On the international regulatory front, the main development is the introduction of Solvency II 
in Europe for insurance companies, requiring that: 
• 
assets should be marked to market, and liabilities be discounted at risk-free rates, 
possibly augmented by a liquidity premium, or a countercyclical premium in case of 
stressed financial market situations 
insurers must hold loss-absorbing capital against the full range of risks on both their 
asset and liability side to withstand unexpected losses with a probability of 99.5% 
over a one-year horizon. 
 The  fifth  Quantitative  Impact  Study  QIS5  by  the  European  Insurance  and  Occupational 
Pensions Authority (EIOPA) on the impact of Solvency II shows that most insurers face no 
imminent need to raise new equity. But they may rebalance their asset portfolios in line with 
the  new  risk  charges,  as  they  tend  to  make  it  more  expensive  to  hold  equity,  structured 
products,  and  long-term  or  low-rated  corporate  bonds,  whereas  government  bonds  and 
covered  bonds  get  more  favourable  capital  treatment.  Sovereign  exposures  are  exempted 
from capital charges under the latest Solvency II proposals. 
It  is  important  to  prevent  risks  of  heightened  pro-cyclicality  arising  from  these  planned 
regulatory changes. 
As Solvency II requires both assets and liabilities to be marked-to-market, one key question 
concerns  the  discount  rate  curve  to  be  used  for  valuation.  As  already  mentioned,  IFRS  4 
Phase 2 requires that future cash commitments be discounted using risk-free rate adjusted 
for a liquidity premium or a yield curve that reflects current asset returns. This contrasts with 
the  experience  during  the  crisis,  when  the  liability  cash  flows  often  continued  to  be 
                                                 
2  There  is  another  potential  problem  for  insurers’  investment  strategies  related  to  the  new  IFRS  9  Financial 
Instruments. In contrast to the existing IAS 39, going forward insurers may no longer be allowed to recognise 
realised gains or losses (e.g. gains on sale) on their longer-term equity investments (e.g. in banks) in profit or 
loss (net income), but only in a separate reserve within equity (“other comprehensive income”). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
discounted  at  the  risk-free  rate.  The  application  of  a  liquidity  premium  on  the  liability  side 
could in principle reduce the valuation mismatch and thereby avoid situations where insurers 
are  unduly  forced  to  dispose  of  illiquid  assets.  Such  a  counter-cyclical  mechanism  might 
even mean that insurers would be willing to take on additional illiquid assets in a period of 
market distress. However, there are also some conceptual issues associated with this idea, 
mainly because insurance liabilities are different in nature from insurance assets and often 
do not have an accessible market. Nevertheless, it is important to find a method defining a 
discount rate that would be consistent from a financial stability perspective. 
Overall,  accounting  and  regulatory  changes  bring  important  benefits  in  terms  of  financial 
soundness  and  disclosure.  But  they  could  also  cause  portfolio  shifts  affecting  financial 
markets.  For  instance,  firms  may  want  to  divest  equity  and  shorten  the  duration  of  their 
corporate bond holdings. But to limit the resulting duration gap, they may have to use more 
long-term swaps or buy more long-term low-risk bonds, as defined by regulation. This would 
tend  to  flatten  the  risk-free  term  structure,  but  steepens  the  term  structure  for  lower-rated 
credit. 
However,  the  financial  market  implications  from  asset  allocation  perspective  may  be 
transitory  rather  than  permanent:  other  investors  come  in,  and  the  phase-in  period  of 
Solvency II is very long and gradual. It remains to be seen to what extend the risk weight of 
the internal models will significantly differ from the standard regulatory risk weight. 
Financial system implications: 
3. 
Let  me  now  move  to  my  final  part  and  elaborate  on  the  potential  main  financial  system 
implications:  
First, insurers and pension funds are likely to continue to move away from products offering a 
guaranteed return or defined benefits. This trend is being reinforced by the low-interest rate 
environment and the consequences of the financial crisis. As was the case in Japan in the 
1990s, low interest rates make it difficult for these institutions to meet future obligations out of 
meagre  fixed  income  yields.  Moreover,  a  negative  duration  gap  means  that  falling  interest 
rates raise the value of liabilities more than that of assets. This risk-shifting to households 
could eventually lead to greater sensitivity of household spending to changes in asset prices 
and interest rates, and more conservative asset allocation in aggregate (if households seek 
to reduce their direct risk exposure). This, in turn, may result in inefficient risk sharing.  
Experience in the US has shown that when fully exposed to market risk, individuals may on 
average opt for pension plans or insurance policies with lower risk allocations. Such products 
may  however  not  offer  sufficient  return  to  ensure  adequate  retirement  income  without 
additional saving. 
Second,  firms  may  engage  in  more  risk  transfer,  not  just  on  liabilities  (securitisation, 
reinsurance) but also on assets and duration gaps, leading to greater use of derivatives such 
as interest rate swaps. Our interviews confirmed that insurance companies and sponsors of 
pension  plans  have  already  been  placing  more  emphasis  on  ALM  practices  in  recent 
years. This will involve still greater use of fixed income assets and long-maturity interest rate 
swaps to match more closely their liabilities’ cash flows. Such a trend is relevant also for the 
current regulatory developments concerning the clearing of derivative contracts with a central 
counterparty. 
Third,  portfolio  shifts  may  alter  sectoral  funding  patterns.  Up  to  recently,  many  observers 
expected  a  shift  from  corporate  bonds  to  government  bonds  due  to  differential  capital 
charges, LDI strategies, and the need to limit duration gaps. However, current unease about 
sovereign  risk  could  mitigate  this  trend.  Within  corporates,  the  industry  has  been  clearly 
reducing exposure to financial institutions, except for covered bonds. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The fourth issue concerns the role of insurers and pension funds as global providers of long-
term risk capital. These institutions found it difficult to play this role during the crisis, due to 
extreme market pressure and volatility. But steeper risk charges will also make it costlier to 
hold long-term risky/illiquid assets in the future. Moreover, the investment horizon is being 
reduced by the one-year-horizon of Solvency II, shorter grace periods for pension funds to 
address  funding  shortfalls,  and  heightened  accounting  volatility.  This  limits  the  scope  for 
taking long-term or illiquid positions without too much concern for short-term fluctuations in 
their value. 
These  factors  tend  to  encourage  a  shift  away  from  long-term  investing  in  risky  assets.  A 
partial retreat of institutional investors from the long-term and/or illiquid segment of the credit 
market could reduce private and social benefits of long-term investing, and reduce the extent 
to  which  the  industry  mitigates  the  procyclicality  of  the  financial  system.  These  possible 
evolutions will have to be closely monitored. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
