Vítor Constâncio: Macro-prudential policy – strengthening the 
foundations, enhancing the toolkit and taking action 
Keynote address by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at 
the First conference of the Macro-prudential Research Network (MaRs), Frankfurt am Main, 
5 October 2011. 
 Ladies and gentlemen,  
It is a great pleasure to speak to you at the first conference of the Macro-prudential Research 
Network  (MaRs).  I  would  like  to  thank  the  organisers  for  this  very  important  and  timely 
gathering, which marks the first year of the network.  
The  sources  and  the  propagation  of  the  financial  crisis  have  proven  the  need  for  macro-
prudential policies to address systemic risk, as well as take account of the interplay between 
the financial system and the real economy. New institutions have been put in place, such as 
the European System of Financial Supervision and the Financial Stability Oversight Council 
in the United States, and regulatory reforms are taking shape, notably Basel III and a host of 
other initiatives under the leadership of the Financial Stability Board. However, it is also very 
clear that in the macro-prudential field we are in a much less comfortable position than in the 
monetary policy field, in particular concerning widely accepted scientific foundations and long 
experience with tested policy instruments. 
Against  this  background,  I  will  start  by  providing  a  brief  overview  of  the  research  that  has 
been carried out in the MaRs network. I will then focus on one important operational tool that 
we are pushing forward at the European Central Bank (ECB) to assess systemic risks: our 
top-down stress-testing framework. I will conclude by referring to a key aspect of our future 
regulatory  framework  in  Europe,  namely  the  set  of  macro-prudential  policy  instruments 
embedded  in  the  Capital  Requirements  Directive  (CRD)  IV,  and  how  these  instruments 
should  be  made  compatible  with  the  requirements  for  both  safeguarding  financial  stability 
and further developing the Single Market for financial services. 
A snapshot of progress in macro-prudential research  
1. 
The rudimentary state of the scientific foundations in the macro-prudential field led the 27 EU 
national central banks and the ECB, which constitute the majority of the member institutions 
of the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB), to establish a network of researchers working 
on macroprudential issues called MaRs – standing for Macro-prudential Research, but in a 
way also referring to a journey into unknown territory. The objective of MaRs is to develop 
core  conceptual  frameworks,  models  and  tools  to  improve  macro-prudential  supervision  in 
the EU. Through MaRs, we hope to fill some of the identified analytical gaps ourselves and 
also to act as a catalyst for more and better-targeted academic research in this field.  
This  conference  today  is  the  first  public  event  organised  by  MaRs.  The  papers  presented 
here are only a small sample of the research conducted. Many more projects are under way 
and we envisage publishing all papers produced in the ECB Working Paper Series. 
The  network  has  been  charged  with  conducting  research  in  three  areas  where  gaps  were 
identified and the need for analytical support for policy choices seemed greater.  
The  first  MaRs  work  area  deals  with  the  development  of  macro-financial  models  linking 
financial instability and the performance of the economy. A large part of this workstream is 
aimed at providing relatively fundamental research and therefore not immediately operational 
policy tools. The first three sessions of the conference feature papers from this workstream.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The modelling of bank defaults is crucial to characterising financial instability. In the paper by 
Eichberger et al. the authors analyse the endogenous and interconnected nature of default 
risk, therefore implying that models that treat default risk as exogenous may be subject to 
significant  biases  and  mistakes.  Another  fundamental  topic  is  the  shadow  banking  sector. 
The  model  by  Goodhart  et  al.  includes  the  presence  of  a  shadow  banking  system,  which 
holds securitised assets issued by the traditional banking system that are subject to default. 
The analysis explores how different types of financial regulation would perform in the event 
of many of the phenomena that were observed during the financial crisis. 
A  lot  of  attention  has  been  devoted  recently  to  the  debt  and  leverage  ratios  of  financial 
intermediaries and to their variation over the business cycle. The dynamic stochastic general 
equilibrium  (DSGE)  model  proposed  by  Rannenberg  shows  that  in  presence  of  a  costly 
bankruptcy  and  moral  hazard  between  banks  and  their  depositors,  the  yield  requested  on 
loans is affected by the leverage of both the borrower and the lender. This set-up is helpful in 
understanding the sources of the leverage cycle, since the response of the external finance 
premium  and  the  overall  economy  to  monetary  policy  and  productivity  shocks  is  greatly 
amplified.  
Another area of particular interest is the analysis of the interactions between monetary and 
macro-prudential policies. The estimated DSGE model with financial frictions by Beau et al. 
shows  that  the  combination  of  an  independent  macro-prudential  policy  leaning  against 
“excessive” credit growth and a monetary policy focusing on inflation is the best response to 
asset price or credit supply shocks to maintain price stability. In addition, a monetary policy 
taking into account any macroeconomic effects resulting from macro-prudential policies will 
optimise general welfare. 
The  paper  by  Lambertini  et  al.  examines  in  particular  the  effects  of  monetary  and  macro-
prudential policies that lean against boom-bust cycles in housing and credit. They show that 
counter-cyclical  -loan-to-value  rules  responding  to  credit  growth  do  not  increase  inflation 
volatility and are effective in maintaining financial stability. However,  a welfare comparison 
between  the  impact  of  an  extended  interest  rate  rule  –  including  financial  variables  –  and 
counter-cyclical  loan-to-value  ratios  leads  to  ambiguous  results,  as  lenders  and  borrowers 
are  affected  in  opposite  ways.  This  suggests  a  strong  need  for  cooperation  between 
monetary and macro-prudential authorities to avoid conflicting policies.  
Let me now turn briefly to the area of MaRs dealing with early warning models and systemic 
risk  indicators,  which  is  the  theme  of  sessions  V  and  VI.  The  results  of  this  workstream 
suggest  that  the  value  of  early  warning  indicators  has  increased  thanks  to  improved 
methodologies and the use of less exploited data sources. It should also be added that the 
focus  has  been  shifted somewhat  from  predicting  crises  to predicting  growing  imbalances, 
which has most likely contributed to the greater effectiveness of new early warning tools.  
A number of studies examine the variables to be included in estimated models in order to 
improve forecasting ability. Fornari and Lemke, and Abildgren examine the predictive value 
of financial variables. More generally, the work carried out by MaRs researchers shows how 
the predictive information can be improved by using individual balance sheet data of financial 
firms combined with traditional macro-financial variables. Concerning specific indicators, the 
merit  of  private  credit  gaps  and  the  role  of  global  variables  in  early  warnings  has  been 
confirmed, while the performance of bank solvency and liquidity ratios in this regard is still 
under debate. 
Very  valuable  information  for  policy-makers  comes  from  the  measurement  of  the  current 
level of systemic financial stress. Again, it seems that valuable indications arise from the use 
of  firm  balance  sheet  data  combined  with  financial  market  data,  as  is  the  case  for  the 
indicator  given  by  Louzis  and  Vouldis.  Other  studies  emphasise  that,  for  example,  the 
decoupling  of  credit  risk  conditions  of  financial  firms  from  the  macro-financial  environment 
can serve as an early warning indicator of systemic stress.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The third area in which the MaRs network seeks to achieve progress is the assessment of 
contagion risks, addressed in Session IV. In this context the analysis of the interbank market 
is crucial, and the paper by Memmel and his co-authors provides very useful insights. They 
confirm previous evidence of tiering in the case of Germany, where some banks distribute 
liquidity to others. Moreover, a relatively large share of default cases result either in a tiny 
loss or in a very large loss. This stands in contrast to the usual assumption that loss-given-
default averages about 40% and adds an element of fragility to the interbank system.  
Overall, more extensive research on risks from cross-border bank contagion in Europe is still 
held back by data limitations, which we hope will continue to relax over time. A large project 
assessing cross-border financial links using TARGET2 data and involving researchers from 
several central banks is just starting under MaRs. 
The ECB’s top-down stress-testing framework 
2. 
Beyond  MaRs’  research  in  a  cross-institutional  context,  a  lot  more  analytical  macro-
prudential work is undertaken here at the ECB, as at other central banks. Our main aim with 
this work is to be in a position to carry out systemic risk assessments in real time, directly 
and  regularly  supporting  policy  discussions.  For  this  we  have  at  our  disposal  a number  of 
tools and techniques which help to assess and quantify the impact of systemic risks on the 
banking  sector  and  ultimately  on  the  real  economy.  This  enables  us  to  rank,  according  to 
their severity, the systemic risks we have identified at any point in time. 
I will now specifically focus on the top-down stress-testing framework developed by the ECB, 
which is one of our major tools. This toolkit has proven particularly valuable during the recent 
financial  crisis  and  the  ongoing  sovereign  debt  crisis.  Systemic  risks  emerged,  intensified 
and  evolved  rapidly,  calling  for  a  flexible  and  operational  tool  that  could  deliver  quantified 
impact  assessments  in  a  timely  fashion.  The  tool  is  comprehensive  enough  to  cover 
individual banks and it incorporates real-financial interactions.  
The ECB top-down stress tests are a regular contribution to ESRB meetings. The analysis 
provided by the tests is also used to support the financial stability assessments in the ECB’s 
Financial  Stability  Review  and  also  for  background  policy  analyses.  Importantly,  our  top-
down stress test results were used as an input for the “peer review” process of the European 
Banking  Authority  (EBA)  2011  EU-wide  stress  testing  exercise.  The  top-down  analysis 
provided  a  basis  for  benchmarking  and,  where  necessary,  to  challenge  the  results  of  the 
bottom-up exercise. For instance, the top-down stress test uses common methodologies and 
assumptions  across  all  banks,  whereas 
for  some 
heterogeneity  across  banks  with  respect  to  certain  assumptions  and  applications,  such  as 
the use of banks’ own internal credit risk models. The top-down assessment can therefore be 
employed to capture outlier results of individual banks in the bottom-up stress test.  
The  current  ECB  top-down  macro  stress  testing  consists  of  a  number  of  distinct  but 
interrelated building  blocks.  They  can  be  grouped  into  four  broad  areas  reflecting  different 
stages of the process.  
First, a macro-financial scenario building block. The identified sources of systemic risks 
facing the EU banking sector need to be translated into specific shocks that drive macro and 
financial  variables.  Subsequently,  an  adverse  macroeconomic  scenario  is  derived,  by 
computing  the  effects  on  the  economy  of  these,  exogenous,  shocks.  A  topical  example  of 
such exogenous shocks could be contagion in the euro area sovereign debt market tensions.  
This  could  be  simulated  through  increases  in  government  bond  spreads  of  different  euro 
area  countries,  which  in  turn  would  have  adverse  effects  on  the  general  macroeconomic 
outlook, resulting in a decline in GDP compared with a baseline scenario. This translation of 
shocks to macro-financial scenarios is done using a variety of tools, ranging from in-house 
large-scale  macro  models  to  smaller  time-series  models.  An  especially  useful  and  flexible 
multi-country,  EU-wide,  macro  simulation  tool  is  our  set  of  “stress  test  elasticities”  (STEs). 
the  bottom-up  approach  allows 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
This  provides  impulse  response  functions  of  endogenous  variables  to  a  set  of  pre-defined 
exogenous shocks.  
For  example,  a  shock  to  EU  external  demand  –  perhaps  arising  from  confidence-driven 
developments in the United States – would lead to differentiated effects on GDP and other 
domestic  demand  variables  across  EU  countries,  with  the  impact  depending  on  country-
specific factors, such as the degree of trade openness. However, we do not have a single 
preferred choice for the macro-financial scenario simulation tool, but rather select from the 
wide menu of models available at the ECB, depending on the specific scenario we want to 
construct. Over time, models developed by researchers in Workstream 1 of MaRs could also 
be applied to inform our macro-financial scenario design. 
Second, a benchmark parameter block. The macro-financial scenario will in turn affect the 
banking sector through a number of channels including the impact on banks’ credit portfolios, 
their  trading  book  and  the  various  components  of  profits.  In  practice,  this  transmission  is 
performed  via  a  number  of  satellite  models.  The  impact  is  three-fold,  affecting  credit  risk, 
market risk and bank profitability.  
 
Our efforts so far have focused on deriving properly modelled credit risk parameters 
(that is, probabilities of default and loss-given-default rates from which loss rates are 
calculated). We have invested heavily in this area because credit risk still is the main 
risk component for most European banks.  
Regarding  market  risk,  the  benchmark  parameter  calibration  techniques  we  have 
developed have mostly concerned the computation of haircuts on banks’ sovereign 
debt holdings. (This uses a model that was specifically constructed for and used in 
the last two EBA EU-wide stress testing exercises.).  
Finally, regarding the modelling of bank profitability, we currently focus much of our 
efforts on simulating net interest income, because this remains the most important 
profit component for the majority of EU banks. Other items affecting bank earnings, 
such  as  trading  income,  fees  and  commissions,  taxes  and  dividend  policies,  are 
generally based on judgemental assumptions or extrapolations.  
  Third,  the  balance  sheet  part  of  the  framework.  This  third  module  includes  models  to 
estimate  loan  losses  and  tools  to  simulate  banks’  balance  sheet  items  (accounting  and 
regulatory)  as  well  as  their  profit  and  loss  statements  to  calculate  the  impact  on  banks’ 
capitalisation.  As  the  modelling  framework  is  based  on  a  bank-by-bank  assessment  of 
individual banks’ balance sheets, it is flexible with respect to the geographical coverage in 
the EU or euro area. 
Fourth,  contagion  and  feedback  effects.  Typically,  stress  tests  (including  the  EBA 
EU-wide  exercise)  do  not  look  beyond  the  first-order  impact  on  banks’  solvency  positions. 
However,  identified  capital  shortfalls  likely  have  repercussions  beyond  such  immediate 
effects at the individual bank level. Hence, our fourth building block, which is still the least 
developed,  concerns  the  modelling  of  contagion  from  banks  failing  the  stress  test to  other 
banks  (via  various  forms  of  counterparty  exposure)  and,  more  broadly,  also  to  other 
economic sectors (using a flow-of-funds-based propagation tool). In addition, real economic 
feedbacks  are  modelled  via  reductions  in  loan  supply  by  capital-constrained  banks. 
Operationally, this is typically done by feeding our stress test results into some of our large-
scale macro models that include an active banking sector and thus can adequately capture 
the  real-financial  linkages.  Nonetheless,  further  modelling  enhancements  are  warranted  in 
this  fourth  building  block,  and  for  this  purpose  we  will  continue  to  closely  monitor  the 
progress in the tools developed in Workstreams 1 and 3 of MaRs.  
Having  described  the  various  building  blocks,  let  me  furthermore  emphasise  that  our 
framework  is  based  entirely  on  publicly  available  consolidated  bank-level  data;  no 
supervisory information is employed in our set-up.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Our  analytical  framework  should  also  not  be  mistaken  for  the  constrained  “bottom-up” 
approach  adopted  by  the  EBA  for  its  annual  EU-wide  stress  test.  The  EBA  stress  testing 
exercise is carried out at the bank level and applying granular bank level data only available 
to the banks and their national supervisors. Compared with supervisory stress tests carried 
out  between  banks  and  their  home  supervisors,  the  EBA  bottom-up  stress  test  is 
“constrained” in the sense of using a common scenario across all banks and to a large extent 
also relies on common methodologies. 
Bottom-up  and  top-down  stress  tests  should  not  be  directly  juxtaposed,  as  a  one-to-one 
mapping of their results is not possible. Rather they should be seen as complementary tools 
to assess the resilience of the financial sector; they are characterised by different strengths 
and weaknesses. Importantly, although top-down stress tests are far from perfect and suffer 
from  many  deficiencies,  they  are  a  useful  tool  to  challenge  the  more  granular  bottom-up 
approaches and especially to detect outlier responses by individual banks in the latter case.  
The use of macro-prudential policy instruments in the Single Market 
3. 
I would like to conclude by turning to the design of policy instruments that authorities may 
use to address the risks identified by various analytical tools. 
As a consequence of the lessons learned from the crisis, the focus of financial regulation has 
gradually  shifted  towards  a  macro-prudential  approach,  a  key  element  of  which  is  the 
establishment  of  authorities  with  macro-prudential  mandates  at  both  the  national  and  the 
international level. In the EU context, the ESRB has been operational since the beginning of 
this year. The ESRB is currently working on developing a macro-prudential toolkit of policy 
instruments that authorities can use to address systemic risks. 
Moreover,  the  Basel  III  regulatory  framework  –  considered  the  cornerstone  of  the  global 
regulatory reform for banks and endorsed by the G20 leaders last year – already includes 
some elements of a macro-prudential toolkit. Indeed, the counter-cyclical capital buffer can 
be considered as a predominantly macro-prudential tool. The capital buffer will be built up in 
periods  of  excessive  credit  growth  and  released  in  stress  situations,  thus  introducing  a 
counter-cyclical element in financial regulation. 
Other elements of a macro-prudential toolkit fall primarily in the domain of what is traditionally 
micro-prudential supervision. We have capital and liquidity rules which aim to mitigate risks 
at the level of individual institutions, but which could, in principle, be recalibrated to address 
macro-prudential concerns as well. 
With  the  aim  of  implementing  Basel  III,  the  European  Commission  recently  published  a 
rulebook, known as “CRD IV”. This includes a proposal for two new legal acts: a directive, 
which needs to be implemented in each Member State, with provisions on the authorisation 
and supervision of credit institutions and investment firms; and a regulation laying down the 
prudential standards which will have direct application across the EU. 
Recently,  concerns  have  been  raised  with  regard  to  the  ability  of  authorities to  use  micro-
prudential tools for macro-prudential purposes if the capital and liquidity rules are introduced 
as a directly applicable regulation in the EU. This would imply not only a minimum but also a 
“maximum harmonisation” of prudential requirements, in that a country could adopt neither 
more nor less stringent implementations of the policy instruments. 
The  maximum  harmonisation  approach  aims  to  ensure  a  consistent  implementation  of 
prudential  measures  in  the  Single  Market.  It  ensures  that  a  level  playing  field  for  financial 
institutions will be established through a single rulebook, thus avoiding regulatory arbitrage 
and  distortions  to  competition.  Furthermore,  the  harmonised  rules  also  support  financial 
integration and improve transparency. Finally, this approach also reduces regulatory costs as 
well  as  banks’  compliance  costs.  Given  the  substantial  benefits  of  greater  financial 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
integration, the ECB has consistently supported the “single rulebook” approach for financial 
regulation, with the aim of promoting the smooth functioning of the Single Market. 
At the same time, however, let me underline that, for financial stability reasons, it is desirable 
that national authorities have the possibility to impose a more stringent calibration of capital 
requirements and a few other requirements than those proposed in the regulation.  
The need for such a macro-prudential framework overlay is justified by the fact that different 
countries are at different stages of the cycle within Europe, potentially facing different types 
of systemic risk. Authorities therefore need a certain degree of national discretion to calibrate 
the given set of macro-prudential policy instruments to their specific cyclical situation, i.e. to 
address  the  time  dimension  of  systemic  risk.  There  are  also  significant  differences  in  the 
structural importance of the financial sector or the size of the banking sector relative to GDP 
across EU countries, which may translate into different levels of systemic risk at a given point 
in  time.  Authorities  may  thus  need  appropriate  tools  with  which  to  address  the  cross-
sectional dimension of systemic risks as well. 
However,  given  that  regulations  are  directly  applicable  and  Member  States  cannot  modify 
them or add provisions unless this is explicitly provided for in the regulation itself, I am of the 
view that the establishment of a general macro-prudential regime in the Capital Requirement 
Regulation is warranted. This macro-prudential regime should have three main features: 
First, adjustments should only be possible in the direction of strengthening the harmonised 
minima. 
Second, and as mentioned earlier, only calibrations should be subject to upward adjustment. 
Definitions should be maintained, thus respecting the principle of an EU rulebook.  
Third, this macro-prudential regime should be subject to strict safeguards, under the ex ante 
coordination  of  the  ESRB.  The  purpose  of  this  coordination  before  new  calibrations  are 
introduced by individual countries is to guard against possible unintended consequences and 
spillover  effects.  These  safeguards  could  include  the  identification  of  the  macro-prudential 
concerns  in  the  respective  countries  and  confirmation  by  the  ESRB.  Deviations  should  be 
subject to close monitoring by the ESRB as well as to disclosure requirements. Finally, when 
the  macro-prudential  concerns  cease  to  exist,  the  calibrations  should  return  to  the 
harmonised minimum in the EU rulebook.  
This  should  provide  macro-prudential  authorities  with  the  flexibility  required  to  preserve 
financial stability while including safeguards against adverse side-effects on other countries 
and, ultimately, possible impairments of the Single Market for financial services in the EU. 
More generally, let me highlight that, while most of the arguments put forward against a more 
stringent  national  calibration  tend  to  stress  the  potential  trade-offs  between  financial 
integration  and  financial  stability,  this  may  not  always  be  the  case.  The  occasional 
introduction  of  more  stringently  implemented  macro-prudential  measures  by  specific 
countries  under  the  aegis  of  the  ESRB  may  actually  enhance  both  financial  stability  and 
financial  integration  by  protecting  the  Single  Market  from  excessive  boom-bust  cycles.  By 
avoiding,  or  at  least  mitigating,  such  cyclical  swings,  macro-prudential  authorities  may 
effectively  contribute  to  the  smooth  functioning  of  the  EU  financial  system  and  the  Single 
Market in the medium to long term. 
The work of the MaRs is an important contribution to a new pillar of policies that the crisis 
showed to be indispensable. As you can see, the ECB follows your work with great interest. I 
wish you a very fruitful conference.  
Many thanks for your attention.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
References  
Abildgren, K., “Business cycles, Monetary Transmission and Shocks to Financial Stability – 
Empirical  evidence  from  a  new  set  of  Danish  quarterly  national  accounts  1948-2010”. 
Danmarks Nationalbank Working Paper No 71, 2010. 
Beau, D., L. Clerc, and B. Mojon, “Macro-Prudential Policy and The Conduct Of Monetary 
Policy”. Banque de France, Occasional Papers No 8, 2011. 
Eichberger,  J.,  K.  Rheinberger,  and  M.  Summer,  “Credit  Risk  in  General  Equilibrium”. 
University  of  Heidelberg,  University  of  Applied  Sciences  Vorarlberg  and  Oesterreichische 
Nationalbank, mimeo, 2011. 
Fornari, F., and W. Lemke, “Predicting Recession Probabilities With Financial Variables Over 
Multiple Horizons”, ECB Working Paper Series No 1255, 2010. 
Goodhart,  C.  A.  E.,  A.  Kashyap,  D.  P.  Tsomocos,  and  A.  P.  Vardoulakis,  “Financial 
Regulation  in  General  Equilibrium”,  London  School  of  Economics,  University  of  Chicago, 
University of Oxford and Banque de France, mimeo, 2011. 
Lambertini, L., C. Mendicino, and M. T. Punzi, “Leaning Against Boom-Bust Cycles in Credit 
and Housing Prices”, Working Paper 8/11, Banco de Portugal, 2011. 
Louzis, D., and A. Vouldis, “Financial Stress Index for the Greek Banking System”, Bank of 
Greece, mimeo, 2011. 
Memmel,  C.,  A.  Sachs,  and  I.  Stein,  “Contagion  at  the  interbank  market  with  stochastic 
LGD”,  Deutsche  Bundesbank  Discussion  Paper  Series  2:  Banking  and  Financial  Studies, 
No 06, 2011. 
Rannenberg,  A.  “Asymmetric  Information  in  Credit  Markets,  Bank  Leverage  Cycles  and 
Macroeconomic  Dynamics”,  Nationale  Bank  van  België/Banque  Nationale  de  Belgique, 
mimeo 2011. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
