DeLisle Worrell: Challenges facing Caribbean economists 
Opening remarks by Dr DeLisle Worrell, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, at the 
Annual Monetary Conference, Bridgetown, 15 November 2011. 
 The Annual Monetary Studies Conference (AMSC) is now well established. It is the leading 
conference of Caribbean economists and economists working on the Caribbean. The quality 
of research and presentation at this conference is uniformly high, and the meeting offers the 
best opportunity Caribbean economists have for networking. The Journal of Banking Finance 
and Economics in Emerging Economies, the journal of the Caribbean Centre for money and 
Finance, offers swift publication of the best papers from this conference. So we can say that 
AMSC is no longer aspirational but a fixture of the Caribbean economic landscape. 
The  conference  is  now  challenged  to  push  to  the  next  level.  There  are  2  aspects  of  the 
challenge facing Caribbean economists that I would like to see this conference tackle: the 
need  for  new  ways  of  conceptualising  our  economies,  and  the  need  to  do  research  that 
points the way more clearly for policy makers and the public. 
Why do we need new concepts? The conventional analysis gives counter intuitive answers to 
many of the questions that are of ongoing interest: 
Conventional economics says that flexible exchange rates are better, but the countries with 
fixed exchange rates are more prosperous; 
Conventional  economics  teaches  that  it  is  good  policy  for  the  Central  Bank  to  speak  out 
publicly against bad fiscal policy, but in truth public disagreement destroys the credibility of 
both parties; 
Conventional economics recommends that to reduce inflation you should raise interest rates, 
even though higher interest drives up costs; 
Conventional economics suggests that stock exchanges are a good way to fund investment, 
even though new issues to fund capital formation have become a rarity. 
At  the  moment  our  research  looks  pretty  much  like  any  other.  We  used  to  argue  that 
Caribbean circumstances were different, that small open economies (SOEs) were different, 
and  that  resource  rich  and  resource  poor  countries  were  different.  Nowadays  we  use  the 
same  models,  the  same  specifications,  similar  data  and  the  same  tests.  If  you  use  these 
methods  and  you  get  the  same  result  for  Barbados,  with  an  economy  the  size  of  a  small 
county in an obscure US state, as you get for the entire US, shouldn’t you be sceptical? 
The  truth  is  that  economies  are  so  diverse  in  so  many  ways  that  the  notion  of  universal 
theory  is  problematic.  The  simplifications  which  are  the  essence  of  modelling  will  make 
sense only if they mirror the essential features of each economy. We need to build models 
that capture the essence of our economies, and that surely cannot be a mirror of the US. 
Technology is changing today’s world at an ever more furious pace. Does it still make sense 
– if it ever did – to think of economic transactions in equilibrium terms? Largely because of 
technological change, and the changes in societies that have resulted, the world of today is 
very different from societies of even 30 years ago. Are models grounded in principles dating 
back more than a century still relevant? 
The failure to be sufficiently specific may explain why we offer so little practical guidance to 
policy  makers.  Here  are  some  of  the  issues  about  which  central  bankers  have  to  make 
decisions. 
How  do  we  assess  regional  financial  stability  in  the  Caribbean?  What  financial  soundness 
indicators  (FSIs)are  appropriate  and  useful  for  this  integrated  financial  region?  What  early 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
warning  systems  do  we  need  for  a  region  where  cross  border  risks  have  been  the  most 
troublesome in recent times? 
The  market  behaviour  of  Caribbean  exchange  rates  in  an  era  of  consolidated  treasury 
management  is  proving  somewhat  of  a  conundrum.  The  changing  cash  management 
strategies  of  conglomerate  firms,  foreign  investors  and  multinational  banks  are  resulting  in 
fundamental changes to the way our foreign exchange markets work. We need research into 
these markets. 
We need alternative approaches to interest rate determination and more realistic models of 
interest rate effects. We have tested the interest sensitivity of loans every which way, and 
one thing is clear: small changes, of the orders of magnitude common in industrial countries, 
have little effect. 
We  need  better  indicators  of  fiscal  sustainability  on  the  open  economy.  We  keep  talking 
about debt sustainability when we should be discussing fiscal sustainability. And we need to 
distinguish the problematic from the unsustainable, if our advice is to be taken seriously. 
We need to test the limits to countercyclical policy in small open economies. The models we 
borrow  from  less  open  economies  fail  to  take  account  of  the  early  onset  of  the  foreign 
exchange constraint in our economies.  
The Annual Monetary Studies Conference is well established and productive, a gathering we 
all look forward to. The papers are interesting enough, in a conventional sort of way. But now 
we need to take the extra steps to make this a truly exciting meeting, a place to try out new 
concepts, new models, and different ways of thinking about our problems. And we need to be 
a bit more down to earth, to speak more directly to policy makers. That means we have to 
ask more relevant questions in our research. We may continue to use the most sophisticated 
tools  that  are  appropriate  to  the  circumstances, but  we  must  be  able  to  give  a  compelling 
intuitive explanation of results and recommendations. 
I wish us all an enjoyable and productive conference. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
