Rundheersing Bheenick: A testing time 
Address  by  Mr  Rundheersing  Bheenick,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  at  the  Annual 
Dinner  of 
in  honour  of  Economic  Operators,  Pailles, 
1 December 2011. 
the  Bank’s  Annual  Dinner 
 It  is  an  immense  pleasure  to  welcome  you  all  to  the  Bank’s  Annual  Dinner  in  honour  of 
Economic Operators. This full house speaks volumes for the excellent relations that we enjoy 
with our economic operators in Mauritius.  
And  now  let  me  add  my  special  welcome  to  our  distinguished  guest  His  Excellency 
Mallam Sanusi  Lamido Sanusi,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of Nigeria,  and  his charming 
spouse, Maryam. Sanusi Lamido Sanusi – or Sanusi2 – never does things by halves. He is 
the Central Bank Governor of the Year for Sub-Saharan Africa for the second consecutive 
year due, no doubt, to his reforms in Nigeria, where he cleaned up the banking scene, in the 
process firing several CEO’s and actually locking up a few of them.  
As many of you know, Abuja will host the African Central Bank when it is set up; but that is 
far in the distant future. Maybe, more immediately, I could draw on his expertise to advise me 
on how to deal with any recalcitrant bank CEO’s and errant directors. But, let me assure our 
bank CEO’s present here tonight that we don’t have any current plans to make jailbirds out of 
them. Mallam Sanusi is much admired in the central banking world, as is the leadership role 
of Nigeria in all things African. The strength of the Nigerian economy which has defied the 
crisis and posted GDP growth rates of 8% and 7% respectively in the last two years, is an 
inspiration to the rest of us. 
You are both most welcome.  
Now, I am glad to see that you look as if you are all eating well. For, as it is my custom on 
these occasions, I wish to make a few, just a few, short, very short, points. As Lord Reith, of 
BBC fame, remarked: 
“You can’t think rationally on an empty stomach… 
and a whole lot of people can’t do it on a full stomach either.” 
This event is important in the Bank’s calendar of activities. The first of its kind was held in 
1999  when  it  was  called  “the  Annual  Private  Sector  Dinner”.  The  makeover  as  “Annual 
Dinner  for  Economic  Operators”  came  under  my  governorship.  It  now  forms  part  of  the 
Bank’s ongoing dialogue with its stakeholders. We are happy to welcome here tonight the 
Entrepreneurs of the Year – this new breed of young entrepreneurs augurs well for the future 
of the SME sector in Mauritius. They are seated at Musgrave table. Let us give them a hand. 
You will notice that tonight we are also celebrating the economics profession. We decided to 
pay tribute to the leading economists who have made a signal contribution to the discipline. 
Each one of you, honoured Guests, is seated at a table named after a famous economist. 
As coincidence will have it, this Annual Dinner comes almost on the eve of the last Monetary 
Policy Committee Meeting for this year when you can expect some significant developments. 
No,  I  am  not  giving  you  a  preview  of  the  likely  interest  rate  decision.  Some  of  the 
recommendations of Sir Alan Budd to come into effect. This means that, henceforth, you will 
all be able to see the minutes of the meeting and the individual voting pattern published on 
our  website.  It  may  have  taken  us  nearly  two  years  to  get  to  this  stage.  But  there’s  no 
denying that this is a major step forward. The dawn of a more transparent MPC is upon us.  
May I underline three points for the benefit of our distinguished Guest of Honour: first, our 
MPC is just over 4 years old; second, Bank management is outnumbered by outsiders; and 
third, – fait rarissime – two foreigners sit on our MPC as full members. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
But  this  evening  I  want  to  touch  on  some  deeper  underlying  and  worrying  issues  for  the 
whole economy namely: the impact of the on-going global crisis and our economic prospects.  
First, the economic crisis 
We  all  observe  with  rising  dismay  how  the  crisis  in  the  US  and  Europe  has  metastasised 
from sub-prime to sovereign debt, moving from recession to slowdown, aided and abetted by 
political ineptitude and economic incoherence. It seems to many that the leaders in the West 
keep being caught wrong-footed by the unfolding chaotic scene. They lack the boldness and 
the drive required to put the global economy back on a safe course. The West looks to be 
heading  for  the  double  dip  recession  whose  spectre  has  been  haunting  us  ever  since  the 
crisis struck.  
There was a time when sovereign debt was deemed to be risk-free. An exception was made 
for  developing  countries,  whose  debt  had  always  been  a  bit  dicey,  with  many  of  them 
becoming  serial  defaulters.  The  West  could  lecture  the  South  on  getting  their  economic 
policies straightened out before they could grudgingly extend some much-needed debt-relief.  
“It’s the economy, stupid!” as US President Bill Clinton famously put it.  
That was then. Now that the US itself is drowning in debt, and runaway sovereign debt is 
raising the spectre of a Eurozone break-up, it suddenly looks as if Clinton should revise his 
stand:  
“It’s the politics, stupid!” would be closer to the truth.  
Silvio Berlusconi and George Papandreou have already paid the price to placate the bond 
vigilantes. Others may follow if they fail to navigate the treacherous waters between citizen 
and taxpayer revolt, on the one hand, and investor rebellion, on the other. France faces a 
threat of downgrade. Even fiscally-upright Germany failed to place nearly half the amount of 
ten-year  paper  on  offer  at  a  recent  auction.  Moody’s  is  now  threatening  a  generalized 
derating of Eurozone debt. The US has lost its triple-A rating, as Standard & Poors derated it. 
To  rub  in  the  point,  the  agency  berated  Washington  politics  and  the  fiscal  brinkmanship 
characterising the US response to the crisis. In the words of Standard & Poors, the politicians 
have become  
“less stable, less effective, and less predictable.” 
And where’s Mauritius in all that? We can count ourselves lucky that we are not hooked on 
foreign  commercial  debt.  We  do  not  face  any  rollover  risk.  We  are  not  at  the  mercy  of 
unforgiving markets. And all of us, and not just our politicians, can sleep easy on this score. 
How many of us know that, in their monumental work on economic and financial crises, This 
time it’s Different, Kenneth Rogoff and Carmen Reinhart, paid Mauritius – and a handful of 
other countries – an ultimate accolade when they called us “debt default virgins”? 
And, while we are on this subject, may I invite you, when you get the time, to cast a glance at 
the shape of the yield curve for Government rupee debt? You may be surprised to discover 
how  we  have  actually  smoothed  the  curve  and  reduced  volatility  –  and  that,  too,  during  a 
crisis. 
We do not know how the crisis will play out. The fog of uncertainty casts a pall over global 
growth  prospects.  Whatever  happens,  we  must  remain  agile  and  alert  to  ride  the  slightest 
favourable wave even as the European and US economies flounder in its wake. This scene 
is all the more curious for the West does not lack advice on such matters. As George Burns 
has remarked:  
“it’s  just  a  pity  that  those  who  really  know  how  to  run  the 
country are just too busy driving taxi-cabs or cutting hair.”  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
So let me add my two-pennyworth to the great debate on the financial and economic crisis 
and how well we have fared. 
I believe it was Talleyrand, Napoleon’s aristocratic Minister of Foreign Affairs, who on being 
asked what he did during the Revolution, gave a pithy reply: 
“I survived.” 
And we have survived, too, with scarcely an African country falling into recession, no banks 
going bust, and the African economy on the up and up. In Mauritius we have certainly done 
better  this  year  than  in  the  previous  two  years.  In  Africa,  the  impact  of  the  crisis  was  felt 
mainly through the trade channel and the falloff of FDI flows. This was exacerbated by loose 
monetary policy in some countries where, not surprisingly, double-digit inflation was back in 
2011.  
Your  Bank  was  under  constant  pressure  to  loosen  our  monetary  policy,  to  depreciate  the 
currency  just  a  little,  to  accept  a  little  more  inflation,  allegedly  to  save  jobs  and  stimulate 
growth. Let me ask you this. Do you really think we were wrong to resist those siren calls? 
Would you really really have preferred inflation in the high twenties to finish off the year? 
Mauritius fared well among middle-income countries, with GDP growth above 4% this year, 
or  slightly  below  the  trend  rate  of  the  pre-crisis  decades.  We  reinforced  our  regional  and 
international positions in a number of global rankings which I would have happily walked you 
through, but for the pressure of time.  
We  are,  of  course,  not  insulated  from  the  problems  affecting  the  rest  of  the  world  and 
inflationary  pressures  have  increased;  but,  with  well-timed  monetary  steps,  we  have 
succeeded in containing inflation to an expected 5.1% in 2011. Let’s keep on course, steady 
as she goes. 
Now let me turn to our economic prospects and our high aspirations 
We are living in troubled and testing times. Several questions arise. Will we be agile enough 
to meet the severe tests ahead? What kind of growth should we seek? Should it not be more 
inclusive?  And  more  equitable?  We  are  trying  hard  to  move  into  niche  markets  but  is  this 
enough? What else must we do to escape the middle-income trap, to be amongst the best 
small economies, not just in Africa, but in the wider world where our main competitors are to 
be found?  
We have seen the likes of Malta, Singapore, Hong Kong, Ireland and others raising the bar to 
achieve GDP per capita, adjusted for purchasing power, more than twice the levels we have 
achieved despite our continued economic growth. Can we make the breakthrough? Are we 
prepared to do what it takes to do so? 
I believe it is absolutely vital for the future of Mauritius that not only government but business 
as well give greater weight to innovation, quality, inclusiveness and equity. We could perhaps 
borrow a leaf from the book of Bhutan. How does Bhutan come in the picture, some of you 
may well ask? This small Himalayan Kingdom leads the world in the index of Gross National 
Happiness.  
And, while we are about it, we must also introduce a fresh dimension in our assessment of 
progress:  the  protection  of  our  environmental  capital  must  be  included  in  the  equation  for 
measuring development, and not zero-valued as in the past. This is essential to ensure that 
any fresh spurt of economic growth is channeled into a sustainable path and does not end in 
further land and human degradation.  
Otherwise,  we  shall  hand  over  to  our  children  a  country  whose  famed  natural  beauty  has 
been  sadly  overwhelmed  by  infrastructure  and  blighted  by  urbanisation.  Do  we  hear  the 
silent cries of those lovely “flamboyant trees” – planted by our forefathers, now coming into 
full flaming bloom, and adding to the season’s festive cheer – as they are brought down by 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
chain-saws to make way for road-widening schemes? Or do we really wish to become like 
Malta, developed most certainly, but to our mind, featureless, waterless, soulless and nothing 
but concrete from shore to shore?  
We  shall  never  tire  of  saying  that  our  people  is  our  greatest  asset.  We  must  nurture  an 
entrepreneurial  culture.  We  have  not  fully  capitalized  on  skills  enhancement  in  our  human 
resource. And we have failed to encourage R&D to turn it into a platform for creativity and 
innovation. We largely bring home what is fashion overseas. In sum, we are missing some of 
the critical ingredients of the recipe to add greater value and to move to the next stage of 
development.  We  certainly  have  the  doers.  But  do  we  have  the  forward  thinkers,  the 
visionaries, the dreamers? We are in danger of falling in a pedestrian rut. We have just not 
dreamt big enough. 
It is a scene reminiscent of Einstein’s definition of insanity, which he saw as 
“doing the same thing over and over again and expecting different results”. 
I am afraid that if we stick to the beaten path, we would soon be writing our global epitaph: 
Mauritius –The Home of the Dodo 
Three major ideas spring to mind here: the regional service hub, innovation and excellence. 
The  service  centre  or  hub  notion  has  been  bandied  around  for  years:  indeed  we  have  so 
many hubs thrown at us that I am beginning to lose count of the number of wheels on the 
wagon. The other two are vital ingredients which we largely lack: innovation and excellence. 
But what is really missing is an overarching vision of where we want to go and how we are to 
get  there.  Now  the  vision  does  not  have  to  come  from  Government:  there  is  a  great 
opportunity for the private sector and the NGOs to pick up where we left off with Vision 2020 
some fifteen years ago.  
I  am  sure  I  am  not  the  only  one  here  tonight  who  is  looking  askance  at  the  progressive 
financialisation  of  the  economy.  The  “Occupy  Wall  Street”  movement,  which  grabbed  the 
headlines  this  year,  and  its  equally  confused  copycats  elsewhere,  seem  to  speak  to  the 
same  concern.  Citizens  are  in  revolt  at  the  excesses  of  the  Lords  of  Finance  paying 
themselves fat bonuses on the back of recent public sector bailouts while the real economy 
has tanked, spawning retrenchment, bankruptcies and unemployment. The most egregious 
example is that of a famous bank CEO whose pre-crisis take-home pay was 75 times higher 
than the average wage: with the crisis, it is a staggering 169 times the average wage. He has 
had a good crisis. He must be a very rare diamond indeed. 
But the situation is not all that rare. The same scenario is being played out on the home front. 
With the crisis now in its fourth year and placing severe strain on our economic operators, 
you would have thought that it was in the self-interest of our banks to reduce finance costs 
for  their  clients  to  help  them  adjust  to  depressed  market  conditions  and  declining  profit 
margins.  But  you  would  have  been  wide  of  the  mark.  Oh,  our  real  our  sector  operators, 
especially  exporters,  are  hurting  just  as  much  as  their  competitors  elsewhere,  and  indeed 
their customers as well. Our banks have also had a good crisis. Some of them have raised 
their fees and charges. Bank sector profits are running at Rs65 million a day. Unlike bankers 
elsewhere, our bankers are sitting pretty ...laughing all the way to the bank, you might say! 
We  do  want  our  banks  to  be  profitable  but  we  do  draw  the  line  at  supernormal  profits. 
Especially at times like these. When the lion’s share still goes to the lions, we may be asking 
ourselves  a  question  or  two.  I  hope  we  never  see  in  our  island  the  bank  rage  which  has 
created  such  mayhem  in  the  streets  of  Manhattan  and  by  St  Paul’s  in  the  city  of  London. 
Bank bosses, recently bailed out at taxpayers’ expense, are increasingly seen as arrogant, 
greedy, and unrepentant. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
This is now emerging as the staple diet for stand-up comedians like Andy Borowitz, who has 
fantasized  on  a  letter  that  might  have  been  sent  from  the  boss  of  Goldman  Sachs  to  his 
investors: 
“We have taken note of the protests and have asked ourselves ‘how 
we can make money out of them?’ The answer is the newly launched 
Goldman Sachs Rage Fund. This will invest in firms likely to benefit 
from  social  unrest,  such  as  window  repairers  and  makers  of  police 
batons.  For  at  Goldman  we  recognize  that  the  capitalist  system,  as 
we know it, is circling down the drain, but there’s plenty of money to 
be made on the way down.” 
This may be a far cry from the situation here in Mauritius, yet. I am sure our bankers are not 
as insensitive as the profit figures would imply. The corporate board-rooms concerned should 
be reminded of their social role and urged to reconnect with reality unless they are keen to 
stoke discontent: How can we overcome this apparent disconnect? 
To begin with, we must all work to explode the notion that more money, by itself, is the true 
target of growth. It was a wise man who said:  
“Money is a good servant but a bad master.” 
And there is some serious re-thinking to be done 
 
to 
to  ethics,  with  greater  attention 
Let  us  see  remuneration  relate  more 
shareholders, entrepreneurs and high street customers 
Let us break the current nexus between managers and their boards 
Let us move towards a new vision and diversify the composition of boards, so that 
profits and high returns do not become an obsession 
Let us move towards a vision of banking where financial return is not the only goal 
and the business and social role of banks is revived 
Let us move towards a vision where the interests of banks are more  aligned with 
those of the wider population 
Let us together embrace a vision where the business of banking is the business of 
serving a thriving and just society. That is the real test of development 
    Government has a role in mediating, to try to ease the problems of various stakeholders of 
the  economy,  to  make  it  easier  for  them  to  co-ordinate  their  actions,  and  to  act  as  an 
important arbitrator and facilitator to support the optimal course of action for the economy as 
a whole. But Government only acts on the information available. Therefore we need a wide-
ranging process engaging the best people and best ideas in the land to develop the vision for 
all stakeholders. And banks are part of the system; they should not stand apart, turning a 
blind eye to financial stability and the impact they are having on the real economy. 
If  we  compare  ourselves  with  Singapore  and  Hong  Kong,  the  top  performers  in  the  small 
economies, we suffer from structural flaws that are inhibiting our progress. I have not seen 
any positive reaction to the wake-up call from the Global Economic Forum this year and last 
year. Wake-up Mauritius and grasp your future with vision and vigour.  
But now, if I may be permitted a little digression on the demographic time bomb. Its fuse is 
burning  steadily,  largely  un-noticed,  with  dire  consequences  if  we  neglect  its  import.  The 
population  in  Mauritius  over  pension  age  is  expected  to  more  than  double  over  the  next 
15 years, and more than triple over the next 35 years. The ratio of people of working age for 
each person over pension age is expected to fall continuously over the next 35 years from 
about  7  now,  to  2.5  by  2045.  This  demographic  time-bomb,  which  is  ticking  away 
relentlessly, has deep significance for our economy, our pension schemes, and our society. 
Dealing with it must be one of the key elements of our future visioning exercise.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
And now to close, I will share with you another of those whimsical laws of nature that define 
our frailty. In the past, for some light diversion, I have taken you in the world of the premier 
league  with  the  Maradonna  law  of  interest  rates.  Then  we  moved  into  the  domain  of 
advanced science with Einstein’s law of success. We came down to the nitty-gritty business 
of banking with Sutton’s Law on why he robbed banks. “Because that’s where the money is”, 
he explained with irrefutable logic. 
Tonight, we make a foray in the world of linguistics. There are very important developments 
there which can change forever our view of bankers. For a profession that has done so much 
for the world as we know it, both good and bad – and perhaps also very bad, the view is 
gaining  ground  that  the  orthography  of  the  word  “banker”  does  not  do  full  justice  to  the 
complexity  of  the  profession.  To  prevent  “banker”  from  being  confused  with  a  four-letter 
word, I understand that a proposal has been made simultaneously to the editors of Webster’s 
and the Oxford English Dictionary in the UK, the guardians of linguistic orthodoxy, to accept 
an  alternative  spelling.  Henceforth,  “banker”  will  be  spelt  “b-a-n-k-s-t-e-r”…  to  rime  with 
gangster. Maybe the CEO’s which our distinguished visitor, Governor Sanusi, had locked up 
were this new breed of bankers, spelt with eight letters. 
This inspires me to move an amendment to Sutton’s Law to update it to fit the times: if you 
want to rob banks, make sure you do it before they rob you. 
And  so  I  ask  you  all  to  be  upstanding,  as  I  propose  a  toast  to  Vision  2030,  to  our 
distinguished visitor, and to all of you, the economic operators of Mauritius. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
