Stefan Gerlach: Ireland’s road out of the crisis 
Address  by  Mr  Stefan  Gerlach,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland,  to  the 
ZinsFORUM, Frankfurt am Main, 8 December 2011. 
 Introductory remarks 
1. 
Ladies and gentlemen, first I would like to begin by thanking the organisers for the invitation 
to speak here at this conference today. 
From all the available evidence, it is clear that the global economy is experiencing a period of 
unprecedented  economic  and  financial  instability.  Risks  have  increased  substantially  in 
recent months. The crisis, and not just here in Europe, has entered a new and dangerous 
phase. Against this background, the a priori expectation would have been that a country with 
its own considerable banking and fiscal difficulties, and one that was already in an external 
assistance  programme,  would  see  its  situation  worsen.  However,  that  is  not  what  has 
happened to Ireland. While market sentiment still remains fragile, and even allowing for the 
recent reversal in Irish bond yields, there has been an improvement in market perceptions of 
the  risks  associated  with  the  Irish  sovereign  and  the  domestic  banking  sector  since  the 
summer.  Notably,  Ireland  has  also  received  favourable  comment  in  some  official  circles, 
being  referred  to  as  an  example,  and  even  a  role  model,  in  terms  of  implementing  a 
programme of adjustment. 
While these are welcome developments, they largely reflect the fact that, to date, Ireland is 
performing well under the terms of the adjustment programme. This is good, but there are no 
grounds for complacency. Ireland is a small and very open economy and, more than most, it 
is subject to the fluctuations of the international economy. More immediately, the recent rise 
in Irish bond yields is a reminder that market perceptions are volatile and can change quickly. 
So, while good progress is being made in returning the economy, the public finances and the 
banking system to a sustainable path, much still remains to be done. As it has been to date, 
the  adjustment  must  continue  to  be  comprehensive,  convincing  and  transparent  if  it  is  to 
deliver lasting success.  
Having said this, as it is around one year on from Ireland’s entry into an external assistance 
programme, it is probably timely to give an account of how Ireland is charting a path out of 
the  crisis  and  what  its  progress  has  been.  It  will  become  apparent  from  this  account  that 
Ireland’s adjustment began well before its entry into the EU-IMF programme and that many 
of the elements of that programme were already in place before Ireland had to turn to the 
Troika. What involvement with the external partners has provided are the invaluable funds 
needed  both  to  keep  the  government  and  the  banks  financed  and  to  implement  the 
programme  of  fiscal,  banking  and  structural  adjustment  over  a  reasonable  time  frame,  as 
well as welcome external discipline and oversight.  
Some background 
2. 
To begin, it is useful to go back in time and recall a little of Ireland’s recent economic history 
in  order  to  understand  how  the  country  found  itself  in  the  difficult  situation  it  has  faced  in 
recent  years  and  to  provide  a  context  for  explaining  the  approach  taken  to  managing  the 
crisis.  
For much of the 1970s and 1980s, the Irish economy was a problem economy, characterised 
by low growth, high inflation and high and rising public debt. In addition, relative to the EU 
average, living standards were low. This period came to an end in the late 1980s, when the 
economy, first, stabilised and then was transformed through the second-half of the 1990s on 
the back of very rapid output, employment and productivity growth. As can be seen from the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
chart  (Chart  1),  the  main  engine  of  growth  during  this  period  was  the  strength  of  export 
growth, which was underpinned by wage restraint. Consequently, after an extended period of 
underperformance,  the  1990s  witnessed  rapid  economic  convergence  with  Europe  while 
maintaining  macroeconomic  stability.  As  a  result,  the  unemployment  rate  fell  from  almost 
17 per cent in 1987 to just over 4 per cent by the turn of the millennium, the fiscal balance 
moved from a deficit of over 8 per cent of GDP to a surplus of 2.7 per cent and the debt-to 
GDP ratio from in excess of 110 per cent to under 40 per cent over the same period. 
This period, up to 2000, was the true “Celtic Tiger” era, characterised by buoyant export-led 
growth,  strong  employment  growth,  moderate  wage  and  price  inflation  and  healthy  public 
finances. There was no single factor which accounted for the buoyancy and stability of the 
economy  during  this  period.  Rather,  the  period  saw  the  coming  together  of  a  number  of 
factors, both long and short-term, which helped to generate strong and stable growth. These 
factors included: 
 
Broad  macro  policy  stability,  which  was  built  on  the  back  of  successful  fiscal 
consolidation in the late 1980s;  
A strong focus on improving the economy’s external competitiveness through wage 
restraint;  
Strong growth in labour supply and a dividend from earlier investment in education;  
A marked increase in inward foreign direct investment;  
Increased infrastructural investment (partly funded by the EU); and  
Micro reforms of labour and product markets.  
  The growth of imbalances 
3. 
By  2000,  economic  convergence  with  Europe  had  been  achieved,  full  employment  had 
effectively been reached and there was little spare capacity left in the economy. At that point, 
one would have expected growth to slow, moving to the more moderate rates normally seen 
in post-convergent economies. While, against the background of the global recession of the 
time, Irish economic growth did slow in 2001–02, growth picked up strongly again from 2003 
onwards.  Notably,  however,  the  sources  and  composition  of  growth  after  2003  differed 
significantly  from  those  of  the  1990s.  Growth  became  predominantly  driven  by  domestic 
factors and, in particular, by a surge in construction activity, reflecting a boom in housing and 
commercial property investment. On the external side, there was a sharp deceleration in the 
rate  of  export  growth  as  compared  to  the  1990s,  reflecting, in  turn,  a  considerable  loss  of 
competitiveness. In addition, there was also a significant slowdown in productivity growth.  
This  period,  from  2003  to  2007,  saw  the  emergence  of  significant  imbalances  in  the  Irish 
economy, which were at the root of the problems which emerged later. In summary, there 
were three sets of problems: 
 
An uncontrolled credit-fuelled construction boom which gave rise to an overheated 
property market and over-exposed banks;  
On the fiscal side, a tax structure and public expenditure levels which became too 
dependent on revenue from cyclically sensitive sources; and  
A  trend  loss  in  wage  competitiveness,  the  labour  market  impact  of  which  was 
masked by the transitory strength of parts of the domestic economy.  
  The property market and banking 
3.1 
Looking, first, at developments in housing and the construction sector. While both housing 
output  and  house  prices  grew  reasonably  strongly  over  the  course  of  the  1990s,  these 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
formation 
developments could largely be justified by both the initial low level of the housing stock and 
property  values  at  the  start  of  that  decade.  As  a  result,  over  the  course  of  the  1990s  the 
housing stock grew from 1.2 million to 1.4 million homes. However, over the following eight 
years, the number of homes increased by a further half a million (Whelan 2010), a staggering 
36 per cent increase in the stock. As a result, investment in dwellings in Ireland as a share of 
GDP rose from being close to the euro area average in the mid-1990s to being more than 
double that average a decade later (Chart 2). At this point, the share of construction output in 
GDP  had  also  doubled  in  a  decade,  rising  to  around  10  per  cent,  while  construction  jobs 
accounted for more than one-eighth of total employment.  
Despite  the  remarkable  increase  in  supply,  however,  Ireland  also  experienced  an 
exceptionally strong boom in house prices (Chart 2), reflecting the fact that demand, at that 
time, was significantly outstripping even the considerable growth in supply. In nominal terms, 
house prices increased by over 300 per cent in the decade between 1996 and 2006, with 
average annual growth in the region of 15 per cent over the period. Irish house price inflation 
over these years far outstripped that of any other advanced economy, with the rise in house 
prices  across  a  selection  of  other  OECD  countries  for  which  data  is  available,  averaging 
around 6 per cent over the same period.  
There  were  both  fundamental  and  other,  less  comforting,  reasons  why  Irish  house  prices 
grew so strongly during this period. Strong growth in per capita real disposable incomes and 
favourable  demographic  and  household 
trends,  boosted  by  sizeable  net 
immigration, underpinned some of the increase in demand. However, worryingly, the rise in 
even basic valuation measures, such as the ratio of house prices to disposable incomes, was 
considerable.  There  were  also  other  influences  at  work.  The  interest  rate  convergence 
process  as  a  result  of  the  move  to  EMU  brought  about  a  sharp  fall  in  nominal  short-term 
interest  rates,  with  ex-post  real  interest  rates  further  impacted  by  the  higher  rates  of  Irish 
inflation relative to the euro area. Also, there were significant incentives at the micro level, in 
terms of favourable tax treatment, which also served to stimulate the demand for property. 
For this greatly increased demand for housing and other forms of property to be satisfied, 
however, finance had to be provided – and it was, and in extremely large amounts. While 
banks had not been central to the financing of the export-led Celtic Tiger period, which was 
income-led  rather  than  credit-led,  they  were  central  to  developments  in  the  housing  and 
property  markets  from  2003  onwards.  Stimulated  by  financial  market  liberalisation  and 
increased competition in banking, as a result of the entry of some foreign banks into the Irish 
market,  competition  in  the  mortgage  market  intensified.  This  led  to  a  significant  easing  of 
loan  conditions,  such  as  maximum  loan-to-value  ratios  and  the  rigour  of  creditworthiness 
assessments, as well as a narrowing of margins on lending. Against this background, there 
was rapid credit expansion throughout the banking sector (Chart 3). While much of this was 
related to house purchase, lending for property development also soared. 
Given  the  scale  of  mortgage  lending,  it  is  no  surprise  to  find  that  this resulted  in an  over-
concentration  of  lending  to  the  property  sector  and  increasingly,  over  time,  to  property 
developers. It was the latter, which was to prove particularly problematic. At the peak of the 
boom, lending to the property sector accounted for two-thirds of the total outstanding amount 
of lending advanced by domestic Irish banks (Chart 3). This effectively tied the fate of the 
Irish  banks  to  the  evolution  of  the  market  for  property  and  for  development  land.  An 
additional  problem  was  that,  with  growth  in  credit  greatly  exceeding  growth  in  the  deposit 
base,  a  significant  proportion  of  the  funding  for  this  lending  came  through  short-term 
wholesale foreign borrowing by Irish banks. While this development occurred in other euro 
area  countries  as  well,  reflecting  the  fact  that  the  introduction  of  the  euro  facilitated  a 
significant increase in the availability of cross-border funding, in the case of the Irish banks 
the increased reliance on this source of funding was quite dramatic. Between late-2003 and 
early-2008, the net external indebtedness of domestic Irish banks had jumped from around 
10 per cent to over 60 per cent of GDP. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
As  noted  by  Honohan  (2010),  the  later  difficulties  of  the  Irish  banks,  whether  in  terms  of 
liquidity  or  solvency,  are  directly  attributable  to  their  over-lending  for  land  and  property 
investment during this period and to the fact that much of it was financed through external 
borrowing. In summary, both the scale and funding of property related lending between 2003 
and  2007  were  systemic  risks  which  were  very  poorly  managed  and  have  been  a  major 
subject  of  official  reports  into  the  Irish  crisis.  The  very  costly  lessons  learned  from  this 
episode have informed subsequent decisions with respect to the transformation of financial 
supervision and regulation in Ireland in recent years. 
Fiscal issues 
3.2 
In addition to the imbalances which were being created in property and banking, there were 
also less visible problems being built up in the fiscal area. There was both a particular and 
general aspect to these problems. The particular aspect stemmed from a growing reliance on 
revenues generated by the booming housing market. This was not just an Irish phenomenon, 
however. In many other countries, during this period, government revenues also benefitted 
from  surging  house  prices,  financial  asset  prices  or  strong  growth  in  the  financial  services 
industry. We are now more aware that these gains are, to a large degree, cyclical, and need 
to be viewed as such. However, adjusting for the impact of housing booms or asset bubbles 
on tax revenue is not straightforward and is not something that was explicitly corrected for 
either in Ireland or elsewhere at that time. By not taking account of this effect, however, the 
underlying  health  of  the  fiscal  position  is  overstated  and  its  vulnerability  to  the  cycle  is 
understated. 
In  Ireland’s  case,  given  the  scale  of  the  housing  boom,  this  was  a  significant  factor. 
Estimates suggest (Addison-Smyth  and McQuinn, 2010) that the contribution of residential 
property market taxes to total tax revenue doubled to almost 16 per cent between 2002 and 
2006 (Chart 4). If one adds revenues from Corporation Profits tax to this, the share of this 
group of taxes rises to around 30 per cent of total tax revenue. This would be around 4 times 
higher than the share of this same group of taxes two decades earlier. This raises the more 
general problem that had been gradually been increasing over time, which was a reduced 
reliance for revenue on more stable and reliable sources, such as income tax and VAT, and 
a greater reliance on more cyclically sensitive taxes. Growth in the latter had been used to 
facilitate a significant narrowing in the income tax base over the longer term and had also 
been used to fund relatively strong expenditure growth in the 2000s (Chart 4). The dangers 
inherent  in  this  approach  were  to  materialise  once  the  source  of  these  cyclical  revenues 
dried up. 
Competitiveness 
3.3 
The emergence of imbalances during the boom period was also reflected in a sharp loss of 
wage  competitiveness.  Following  EMU  entry,  some  deterioration  in  competitiveness  was 
probably inevitable, given that, by then, the economy had reached full employment and had 
probably achieved a level a level of competitiveness that was unsustainable. To some extent, 
this would have been a natural equilibrating mechanism in a strongly growing economy in a 
currency union. However, the scale of the loss of competitiveness which occurred went far 
beyond what might have been reasonable (Chart 5). The domestic demand driven nature of 
the  boom,  particularly  after  2002,  generated  a  strong  boom-fuelled  labour  market. 
Notwithstanding strong inward migration, wage growth moved well ahead of that in trading 
partner countries. In turn, export growth slowed and the balance of payments moved rapidly 
into  deficit  (Chart  5),  a  development  reinforced  by  the  sharp  increase  in  the  net  external 
liabilities of the domestic banking system, referred to earlier. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The crisis unfolds 
4. 
As time passed, it became increasingly apparent that the boom was based on unsustainable 
drivers.  The  over-extension  of  credit  had  given  risen  to  significant  over-investment  in 
housing,  an  excessive  increase  in  house  prices  and  a  sharp  rise  in  indebtedness.  Growth 
had  come  to  be  increasingly  driven  by  domestic  demand,  as  external  competitiveness 
deteriorated. There was an evident property price and construction bubble, the banks were 
over-exposed to this and there had been an effective loosening of fiscal policy, financed by 
an increasing dependence on cyclical tax revenues. This was unsustainable. 
A slowdown in activity loomed once the housing cycle began to turn in late 2006, in response 
to evident oversupply and the impact of rising interest rates on affordability. In early 2007, the 
broader level of economic activity peaked and the bubble started to burst. The adjustment in 
the  housing  market,  once  it  began,  was  relatively  swift  and  spread  quickly  to  the  wider 
economy. The effect on the wider economy was, in turn, then aggravated by the outbreak of 
global financial market turmoil from mid-2007 onwards. However, with or without this turmoil, 
the Irish economy would have undergone a significant downward adjustment. So while the 
global  recession  of  2008/09  undoubtedly  amplified  the  Irish  downturn,  Ireland’s  problems 
were home-made.  
The  collapse  of  the  housing  market  over  the  following  years  was  at  the  centre  of  the 
recession  and  the  unwinding  of  economic  imbalances.  The  level  of  annual  housing  output 
has fallen by around 90 per cent from peak (Chart 6), with output now little greater than the 
estimated depreciation rate of the housing stock. House prices have also collapsed, with the 
national average price currently around 45 per cent below peak and still declining (Chart 6). 
To give some context, the Japanese house price fall, which began in the early 1990s, is the 
only housing market decline across OECD countries which exceeds the Irish one in terms of 
depth and duration (Kennedy and McQuinn, 2011).  
The recession triggered by the housing crash and amplified by the fall-out from the correction 
of  the  significant  imbalances  which  had  been  created  between  2003  and  2007  has  been 
extremely  severe.  While  less  than  the  fall  in  output  experienced  by  the  Baltic  countries  in 
2008–09, it is the largest contraction within the OECD area. Chart 7 shows that the fall in 
average annual GDP between 2007 and 2010 was just over 10 per cent. With the price level 
falling, the fall in nominal GDP, at close to 18 per cent, has been much greater. 
Not surprisingly, given the nature of the preceding boom, the contraction in activity has been 
greatest on the domestic side of the economy, particularly on the investment side, reflecting 
the  collapse  of  construction  activity.  On  an  annual  average  basis,  total  building  and 
construction output fell by more than two-thirds between 2007 and 2010 and it is the fall in 
this  component  which  has  subtracted  the  most  from  growth  in  recent  years.  Consumption 
has  also  been  hard  hit.  However,  exports  have  performed  better  than  expected,  with  the 
composition  of  Irish  exports  proving  to  be  somewhat  acyclical  during  the  global  trade 
downturn of 2008–09. 
With the domestic side of the economy being relatively more labour intensive, the downturn 
has resulted in a sharp rise in the unemployment rate, which has risen from over 4 per cent 
to  stand  at  over  14  per  cent  at  present.  Ireland’s  unemployment  rate  is  now  one  of  the 
highest  in  the  OECD  and  over  half  of  the  jobless  have  been  unemployed  for  over  twelve 
months. Construction has accounted for close to half of the jobs lost. Large losses have also 
occurred  in  manufacturing  and  labour  intensive  services  such  as  retail,  hotels  and 
restaurants. Younger workers without tertiary qualifications have been hardest hit. Mitigating 
the rise in the unemployment rate somewhat has been a sharp fall in the rate of labour force 
participation and also a rise in net outward migration.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Fiscal and banking developments 
4.1 
Turning to fiscal developments, the crisis triggered a dramatic shift in the state of the public 
finances.  Having  appeared  a  model  of  fiscal probity,  running  a  budget  surplus  every  year, 
except  for  one,  between  1997  and  2007,  Ireland  rapidly  moved  into  sizeable  fiscal  deficit 
from 2008 onwards. While I will deal later with the fiscal implications of the banking crisis, I 
would  emphasise  that  a  large  part  of  the  movement  into  deficit  reflected  the  fact  that  the 
crisis revealed a weakness in the public finances which was not apparent during the boom 
years – the increased reliance on cyclical revenues derived from property related sources. 
While a movement into deficit could have been expected given the scale of the collapse in 
economic activity, the deterioration in the fiscal position in 2008–09 was driven, in large part, 
by a sharp collapse in Exchequer revenues (Chart 8), which fell at almost twice the rate at 
which nominal GDP declined. This reflected the fact that a large and growing share of boom-
time tax revenues, which had been boosted by the property bubble, all but vanished during 
the downturn. 
The most obvious impact of the crisis, however, was on the banks. The sharp correction in 
property prices exposed very severe vulnerabilities in the banking sector. Given the scale of 
lending during the boom and the heavy exposures to the property sector, and particularly to 
property developers, banks found themselves awash with bad or rapidly deteriorating assets, 
once the property market began to collapse. During the boom, the Irish banking system had 
lent excessively to fund a huge increase in credit, concentrated on the property sector. While 
most  lending  was  to  Irish  residents,  Irish  banks  also  lent  extensively  abroad,  though 
generally for property-related assets and in markets strongly correlated to Ireland. In effect, 
there was little risk diversification. The bulk of the lending advanced during the boom was 
secured  against  property  and  once  the  value  of  the  latter  began  to  fall,  which  it  did 
dramatically  in  the  case  of  development  land,  and  with  the  economy  also  moving  into  a 
severe  recession,  a  surge  in  non-performing  loans  and  impairments  became  inevitable 
(Chart 9).  
Although  Irish  banks  had  little  or  no  exposure  to  the  US  sub-prime  market,  their  heavy 
reliance  on  cross-border  wholesale  funding  and  concerns  about  the  scale  of  their  likely 
losses as a result of the rapidly unfolding collapse in property markets, meant that they were 
particularly  vulnerable  once  liquidity  began  to  dry  up  in  global  financial  markets.  However, 
concerns in relation to the Irish banks were not confined to liquidity, as evidence of the scale 
of  their  losses  emerged  (Chart  10)  solvency  concerns  intensified  and  the  Irish  banks 
experienced a sharp rise in their credit-default swap spreads and a steep fall in their share 
prices (OECD 2009). With the growing prospect of their capital being eroded, and in some 
cases entirely exhausted, the State was forced to step in to underpin the banking system. 
Policy responses 
5. 
The extent of the deterioration in both the fiscal and banking situations required immediate 
policy actions and I will now turn to discuss these and talk about the approach taken by the 
Irish authorities to, first, respond to, and, then, gradually start to begin to work their way out 
of the crisis. In doing this, it will become apparent that much was done before Ireland entered 
the EU-IMF programme and that the programme essentially represents a continuation and 
deepening of the adjustment strategy that had already been put in place. Crucially, however, 
this  is  now  happening  within  a  secure  funding  environment  for  the  next  two  years  and  is 
benefitting from the engagement and support of partners.  
While  the  aim  has  obviously  been  to  unwind  the  imbalances  in  the  economy  and,  in 
particular, to correct the problems in the fiscal and banking areas, the underlying approach 
has increasingly been to recognise the need to reduce both the level of debt in the economy 
and also the perceived tail risks associated with that debt, especially in relation to the banks. 
The lesson is that reducing uncertainty and risk in this way helps, not only to improve market 
perceptions,  but  also  to  demonstrate  clearly  that  progress  towards  a  resolution  of  the 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
problems  is  being  made.  Successfully  managing  risk  perceptions,  through  convincing  and 
transparent actions, is crucial in the current market environment. 
Banking 
5.1 
Turning to the policy response on the banking side, the first point to make is that, while policy 
actions  were  taken  relatively  quickly  in  response  to  the  emerging  crisis  in  banking,  for 
reasons outlined in a moment, it took some time to get a clear and credible estimate of the 
potential upper limit of the losses of the banking system in a stressed scenario. Up to that 
point, despite the scale of the policy actions taken, concerns about uncertainty and risk in 
relation to further bank losses dominated assessments of the outlook for both the banking 
system and fiscal policy.  
A timeline of banking sector developments from September 2008 is shown in Chart 11. As it 
shows,  the  initial  response  of  the  Irish  Government,  in  September  2008,  to  the  severe 
funding  difficulties  of  the  Irish  banks  and  the  intense  concerns  which  emerged  about  the 
viability  of  the  Irish  banking  system  was  to  introduce  an  extensive  guarantee  of  bank 
liabilities for a period of two years. While this guarantee was introduced in highly pressing 
and urgent circumstances, as Patrick Honohan (2010) noted in his report on the Irish banking 
crisis, “it complicated and narrowed the eventual resolution options for the failing institutions 
and increased the State’s potential share of the losses”. This guarantee was superseded by 
a narrower, more time-limited, scheme which has continued to be extended after the expiry 
of the original guarantee scheme and still remains in place. 
It  should  be  added,  at  this  point  in  the  narrative,  that,  governed  by  a  detailed  legal 
framework,  the  ECB  provided  ample  liquidity  to  the  Irish  banking  system  all  through  this 
period,  thereby  considerably  reducing  risks  for  the  domestic  banks.  During  this  time,  the 
Central Bank of Ireland has worked with the ECB to ensure that the necessary liquidity has 
been made available to allow the Irish banking sector to continue to function. 
Returning  to  the  banking  strategy,  in  practice,  it  has  come  to  be  organised  around  three 
objectives – recapitalise, resize and restructure. The first move to recapitalise banks was in 
late  2008,  though  these  injections  were  small  relative  to  what  would  come  later.  To  help 
stabilise  and  start  to  resize  the  system,  it  was  decided  to  establish  a  national  asset 
management  agency  (NAMA)  to  purchase  the  largest  property  development-related  loans, 
removing them from banks’ balance sheets. By removing the uncertainty about future losses 
on these loans, the intention was that it would leave banks in a stronger position to recover. 
The NAMA approach, with a view to breaking even over time, was to buy loans at market-
related  prices  from  banks.  Given  the  state  of  the  property  market,  this  implied  substantial 
haircuts and necessarily entailed crystallising sizeable losses on banks’ balance sheets. This 
generated a large and transparent recapitalisation need, which was met by the State. While it 
was recognised that this would be costly, it gave visibility to the process. 
However, there were difficulties. As a result of a requirement to apply competition law, it was 
necessary to value and transfer loans individually. This made the transfer process a relatively 
lengthy  one,  which  worked  against  the  objective  of  moving  quickly  to  cleanse  balance 
sheets. More significantly, an unforeseen consequence was the fact that the average size of 
the haircut increased over time, as  the typical size of haircut on the later tranches proved 
unexpectedly  large.  As  a  result,  the  final  recapitalisation  need  arising  from  the  NAMA 
process was greater than the initial indications from the earlier tranches of loan transfers had 
suggested.  This  added  to  the  uncertainty  as  to  the  ultimate  cost  of  State  support  for  the 
banks and, given that this news emerged as the European sovereign debt crisis itself was 
unfolding, it added to pressures on the Irish sovereign at a crucial time in 2010. 
Taking  everything  into  account,  the  total  recapitalisation  need  up  to  end-2010  was  slightly 
over  €46bn,  of  which  just  under  €36bn  (over  one-fifth  of  2010  GDP)  was  gross  debt 
enhancing. The bulk of this €36bn was accounted for by the cost of recapitalising Anglo Irish 
Bank, a bank with catastrophic development-related losses and which had been nationalised 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
in early 2009. The remaining public capital injections in 2009–10, of just under €11bn, into 
the two major domestic banks were recorded as financial investments and were funded from 
the National Pension Reserve Fund. 
The effect of the sizeable sovereign support for the banks, which impacted significantly on 
the 2010 fiscal deficit, allied to the rapid deterioration in the underlying fiscal deficit (Chart 
12),  led  to  an  extremely  sharp  rise  in  the  general  government  debt  ratio  (Chart  12).  This 
increased  from  a  relatively  low  level  of  25  per  cent  of  GDP  in  2007  to  rise  to  more  than 
90 per cent of GDP by 2010. The increase in the deficit and debt ratios occurred despite the 
fact that considerable fiscal consolidation had already been underway since 2008. In total, 
over  five  fiscal  adjustment  packages,  this  amounted  to  cumulative  ex-ante  consolidation 
measures  of  the  order  of  almost  10  per  cent  of  GDP.  Their  impact  in  improving  the  fiscal 
position, however, was being countered by the effect of the sizeable contraction in economic 
activity on the public finances. 
By the third quarter of 2010 then, despite significant measures in both the banking and fiscal 
areas, concerns remained elevated about Ireland’s financial balance sheet. The fiscal deficit 
was high, the debt ratio had risen sharply and had reached a level where there were growing 
concerns about sustainability, particularly given the perceived uncertainty about the ultimate 
costs of bank support and, in particular, about the uncertainty regarding the associated tail 
risks. In addition, the economy, particularly the domestic side, was still contracting.  
Against the background of the heightening of tensions in European sovereign debt markets, 
there were obvious risks in these circumstances. Added to this was the looming deadline of 
the  expiration  of  the  bank  guarantee  scheme  introduced  in  September  2008.  Irish 
government  bond  yields  began  to  rise  and  deposits  flowed  out  of  the  domestic  banking 
system  at  an  accelerated  rate.  Crucially,  despite  a  sharp  increase  in  the  need  for  central 
bank  funding,  the  Eurosystem  continued  to  fund  the  growing  liquidity  deficit,  with  lending 
carried out either through normal Eurosystem operations or directly from the Central Bank of 
Ireland.  
EU-IMF programme and banking measures 
5.2 
Pressures  continued  to  mount,  however,  and  an  adverse  shift  in  international  market 
sentiment  drove  yields  on  Irish  debt  in  November  2010  to  levels  that  signalled  the  market 
was no longer willing to provide funding to the sovereign at reasonable rates of interest. At 
this point, external assistance in the form of recourse to the financing facilities of the EU and 
IMF became essential.  
Through  providing  financial  support  out  to  end-2013,  subject  to  specific  conditionality,  the 
programme  provides  time  for  Ireland  to  tackle  its  problems.  In  terms  of  conditionality,  as  I 
mentioned  earlier,  the  programme  essentially  required  a  continuation  and  deepening  of 
existing policies. In particular, the EU-IMF programme endorsed the overall policy approach 
to banking, while facilitating a more rapid and far-reaching implementation of this strategy. 
The  central  aim  remained  to  recapitalise,  resize  and  restructure.  First,  capital  was  being 
injected  to  reach  the  newly  increased  capital  standards.  Second,  an  explicit  strategy  for 
downsizing  and  reorganising  the  banking  sector  was  to  be  implemented.  Third,  the 
institutional  weaknesses  that  had  become  apparent  during  the  banking  crisis  were  to  be 
addressed.  
To ensure that bank balance sheets were strengthened and that deleveraging plans could be 
implemented,  the  Central  Bank  carried  out  painstakingly  detailed  capital  and  liquidity 
assessment  reviews  of  the  domestic  banks,  the  results  of  which  were  published  in  end-
March  this  year  (Chart  13).  While  a  number  of  previous  capital  assessment  reviews  had 
been carried out earlier, this one differed in some important respects, with tougher loan loss 
assessments,  the  insertion  of  an  additional  capital  buffer,  strong  external  validation  and 
greater transparency, all features of the exercise. A highly conservative approach was taken 
to the estimation of loan losses, with an independent loan loss assessment exercise carried 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
out by internationally recognised experts in this area. These assessments were carried out 
on  the  basis  of  more  granular  and  demanding  information  gathering  and  analysis  of  the 
impaired  loan  portfolio  and  financial  condition  of  the  banks.  In  addition to  oversight  by  the 
external consultants, the detailed findings were subject to close scrutiny by the Troika teams. 
Stress  loan-loss  estimates  were  then  set  at  a  level  sufficient  to  cover  even  extreme  and 
improbable losses. Banks capitalisation requirements were, in turn, determined on that basis. 
The results were then published, with much fuller detail provided than before, to reinforce to 
market participants the quality of the exercise.  
The results, which suggested an additional recapitalisation requirement of €24bn (of which 
only  €6.5bn  would  be  gross  debt  enhancing,  with  the  remainder  coming  from  the  National 
Pension  Reserve  Fund  and  liability  management  exercises  by  the  banks)  were  seen  as 
convincing by the market. In effect, this dealt with the tail risk issue in relation to the banks 
and,  allied  to  the  plans  outlined  for  fiscal  consolidation  in  coming  years,  was  a  huge  step 
forward in convincing markets that there was now a more certain upper limit to Ireland’s debt 
problem. The beginning of the more positive assessments of Ireland’s prospects date from 
after the publication of the results of this exercise. 
In  addition  to  ensuring  capital  adequacy,  there  is  also  a  commitment  to  a  schedule  of 
deleveraging of the banking system. This reflects the fact that loan losses and credit quality 
are  only  part  of  the  problem  of  the  Irish  banking  system,  the  other  part  being  the  funding 
position  of  the  banks,  which  is  linked  to  their  structure.  To  address  this  problem,  the  Irish 
banks have been given a schedule of deleveraging and liquidity targets to be achieved by 
end-2013.  The  key  targets  here  are  the  planned  reduction  in  the  loan-to-deposit  ratio  to 
122.5 per cent (from an average starting level of close to 180 per cent) and the requirement 
for banks to meet specified targets to fund a greater proportion of their lending activities with 
stable, long-term funding. Deleveraging is to be achieved through the identification and sale 
of non-core assets, mainly foreign-held assets. In this way, the impact of deleveraging on the 
domestic economy should be minimised. To the extent that assets can be sold outright then 
bank recourse to official funding can be reduced.  
Restructuring of the system has also been taking place, with the establishment of two pillar 
banks  based  around  the  two  main  domestic  banks,  with  those  banks  which  are  no  longer 
sustainable  being  wound  down  and  their  deposits  transferring.  Further  progress  has  also 
been made in the resolution of terminally damaged institutions. 
Assessments  of  progress  on  the  banking  and  financial  sector  elements  of  the  programme 
have  been  very  positive,  with  implementation  seen  as  strong  during  the  first  year  of  the 
programme.  
Fiscal adjustment 
5.3 
On the fiscal side, the programme largely represents a continuation of the approach which 
has been taken to date, looking to build on the progress that has been made in arresting the 
deterioration  in  the  underlying  deficit  (that  is,  net  of  the  cost  of  the  banking  assistance 
measures).  Having  stabilised  this  measure  of  the  deficit,  the  aim  now  is  to  implement  a 
medium-term  programme  of  measures  which  will  reduce  the  deficit  to  below  3  per  cent  of 
GDP by 2015. Implementation on the fiscal side has also been judged to be strong. Including 
2011,  the  value  of  total  consolidation  measures  undertaken  to  date  amounts  to  around 
13 per  cent of  GDP  since  the  process  started in  late  2008  (Chart  14).  In  keeping with  the 
findings of both theory and best international practice, the bulk of the consolidation has taken 
place on the expenditure side, mostly through public sector payroll reductions and reductions 
in social welfare spending. Significant capital savings have also been made.  
While there can be arguments about the need to do even more in terms of future adjustment, 
the broad assessment of the Troika is that proposed medium-term path of deficit adjustment 
is credible and balanced, envisaging, as it does, a return to primary surplus to help stabilise 
the debt. The view is that the best contribution that fiscal policy can make, to ensure a return 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
to a sustainable medium-term position, is to adhere to the programme targets that have been 
set. In this regard, it is encouraging to see that the scale of planned fiscal adjustment in 2012 
and 2013 has been increased slightly to ensure that the agreed deficit targets in those years 
will be reached, despite the projected slowdown in growth.  
With  regard  to  the  debt  position,  the  greater  clarity  which  has  emerged  in  relation  to  the 
banking situation has helped to ease tail risk concerns in this area as well. The consensus 
view, including that of the Troika, is that, on current projections, the debt-to-GDP ratio will 
peak  in  2013  before  gradually  beginning  to  decline  thereafter.  However,  while  the  debt 
position  remains  manageable,  it  could  not  be  described  as  comfortable.  In  particular, 
continuing  strains  in  the  euro  area  and  global  economies  clearly  pose  some  risk  to  the 
outlook. 
The programme also requires improvements to the medium-term fiscal framework, many of 
which are currently being put in place. A new Fiscal Council has been established, with an 
independent mandate to assess budgetary projections and the appropriateness of the fiscal 
stance. A multi-annual planning and budgeting framework and formal fiscal rules are also in 
the process of being put in place. 
Some concluding thoughts 
6 
To conclude, with respect to progress made in implementing the adjustment programme and 
meeting  the  milestones  along  the  way,  Ireland  has  done  better  than  most  might  have 
expected one year ago. Despite the very challenging environment, both fiscal consolidation 
and financial sector reform are progressing on schedule. The external assessments by the 
Troika  note  that  programme  implementation  has  been  strong.  This  is  encouraging,  and 
reflects the fact that much heavy lifting has been done domestically to try and put the public 
finances and the banking system back on track. Much more remains to be done, however. 
Significant imbalances remain to be corrected, with debt, both public and private, still very 
high.  The  overwhelming  evidence  is  that  recoveries  from  banking  crises  are  slow  and 
gradual.  
One could be somewhat more confident about the outlook if the external backdrop was more 
favourable.  What  Ireland  is  trying  to  achieve  is  difficult.  Policy  implementation  has  been 
strong  and  important  progress  has  been  made,  but  much  will  depend  on  how  the 
international situation evolves, and the outlook there continues to be increasingly uncertain. 
Ireland is doing well in terms of its own adjustment programme, we will find out in time is that 
enough. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   11
   12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   13
   14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   15
   16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   17
References: 
Addison-Smyth,  D.  and  K.  McQuinn  (2010),  “Quantifying  Revenue  Windfalls  from  the  Irish 
Housing Market”. Economic and Social Review, Vol 41, No. 2: pp201–223 
Honohan  P.  (2010),  The  Irish  Banking  Crisis:  Regulatory  and  Financial  Stability  Policy  
2003–2008 
Kennedy  G.  and  K.  McQuinn  (2011),  “Scenarios  for  Irish  House  Prices”.  Economic  Letter, 
Vol. 2011, No. 2, Central Bank of Ireland 
Lane, P.R. (2011), “The Irish Crisis”. CEPR Discussion Papers 8287 
OECD (2009), Economic Survey of Ireland 2009 
O’Leary  J.  (2010),  “External  Surveillance  of  Irish  Fiscal  Policy  during  the  Boom”.  Irish 
Economy Note No. 11 
Regling, K. and M. Watson (2010), A Preliminary Report on the Sources of Ireland’s Banking 
Crisis 
Whelan K. (2010), “Policy Lessons from Ireland’s Latest Depression”. Economic and Social 
Review, Vol 41, No. 2: pp225–254 
18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
