Charles I Plosser: Some observations on fiscal imbalances and monetary 
policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Charles  I  Plosser,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, at The Philadelphia Fed Policy Forum: “Budgets on the brink: 
perspectives on debt and monetary policy”, Philadelphia, 2 December 2011. 
 The views expressed today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 
Introduction 
Good  morning  and  welcome  to  the  Philadelphia  Fed  Policy  Forum.  We  are  delighted  you 
could join us today. The topic for our conference is both important and timely: “Budgets on 
the Brink: Perspectives on Debt and Monetary Policy”. I look forward to today’s presentations 
and discussion, but as the host for today’s program, I am going to take the opportunity to 
share some of my thoughts on the fiscal situation facing many countries, including our own. 
Of  course,  these  are  my  views  and  do  not  necessarily  represent  those  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Board or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee.  
The challenge of fiscal imbalances for the economy 
During the past year, we have witnessed the ongoing saga of governments, both in Europe 
and in the U.S., as they struggle with large deficits and soaring public debt, which are the 
result of unsustainable fiscal policies. Financial markets have become increasingly skeptical 
about  whether  the  political  process  can  come  to  grips  with  the  problems.  And  so  far,  this 
skepticism  appears  to  be  wholly  justified.  Politicians  continue  to  engage  in  protracted 
debates  over  who  will bear  the  burden  of  the substantial adjustments  needed  to put  fiscal 
policies back on a sustainable path. In my view, these prolonged debates have detrimental 
effects on economic growth, in part, because of the uncertainty they impose on consumers 
and businesses. 
Given  the  magnitude  of  the  fiscal  shortfalls  in  many  countries,  the  way  in  which  fiscal 
discipline  is  restored  will  have  profound  implications  for  some  time  to  come.  Will  there  be 
higher  taxes  on  productive  investments  by  the  private  sector  and  higher  taxes  on  wage 
earners – which would discourage both investment and work effort? Or will there be cutbacks 
on government purchases of goods and services from certain industries, such as aerospace 
and defense, or cutbacks on entitlements that would affect health care and social insurance? 
Or will a viable fiscal plan combine various types of tax increases and spending cuts? Until 
the  path  is  chosen,  uncertainty  encourages  firms  to  defer  hiring  and  investment  decisions 
and complicates the financial planning of both individuals and firms. The longer it takes to 
reach a resolution on a credible plan to reduce future deficits, the more damage is done to 
the economy in the near term. 
The  cause  of  the  current  fiscal  crisis  is  sometimes  attributed  to  cyclical  factors  and  the 
magnitude of the recent global recession. It is certainly true that the financial crisis and the 
policy  choices  made  by  governments  to  deal  with  the  ensuing  recession  have  caused  a 
significant deterioration in fiscal balances and debt levels in many countries. For example, in 
the U.S., the federal budget deficit is now about 9 percent of gross domestic product, up from 
less  than  2  percent  in  2007.  However,  the  underlying  trends  that  are  at  the  root  of 
unsustainable fiscal deficits in many countries, including the U.S., have been in place and 
known  for  some  time.  Even  after  cyclical  effects  play  out,  many  countries  will  have  large 
structural  budget  deficits.  In  this  sense,  the  financial  crisis  and  recession  have  simply 
exacerbated the underlying problems and perhaps moved up the day of reckoning. In some 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
cases, such as Greece, that day has come. Market participants have begun to question the 
solvency  of  governments  and  their  ability  to  honor  their  sovereign  debt  obligations.  In 
Europe,  the  doubts  have  greatly  complicated  the  political  problems  as  various  countries 
debate the question of “who pays” for the anticipated bad debts of individual countries. Here 
too,  the  protracted  nature  of  the  political  debate  creates  uncertainty,  which  undermines 
economic  growth  and  exacerbates  the  crisis.  Indeed,  the  argument  offered  by  many  that 
preventing Greek default would prevent the crisis from spreading has proven false. 
The interaction of monetary policy and fiscal policy 
The fiscal challenges are daunting, yet they also have implications for monetary policy. The 
policy choices made during the recent global recession have made these implications even 
more complex and potentially dangerous. But the appropriate relationship between monetary 
and fiscal policy is not a new topic. Indeed, our very first Policy Forum in 2001 was organized 
around three questions for monetary policymakers, one of which was how should monetary 
and fiscal policy interact? 
It is widely understood that governments can finance expenditures through taxation, debt, or 
printing money. If public debt levels are high and rising, and fiscal policymakers are reluctant 
to make the hard choices of cutting expenditures or increasing taxes, history suggests that 
governments often resort to the printing press to try to escape their budget problems. Yet we 
all understand that this option is a recipe for creating substantial inflation. Indeed, it is often a 
path  toward  hyperinflation.  Failure  to  resolve  underlying  fiscal  imbalances  combined  with 
rising inflation means nominal funding requirements to close the budget gap keep growing, 
requiring ever more money to be created, and causing inflation to rise even further. It is a 
cycle any nation should seek to avoid. 
In addition, inflation is a hidden tax on holding nominal assets, and when it is unanticipated, it 
can  have  significant  consequences  that  redistribute  wealth  from  creditors  to  debtors.  The 
near-term  effects  of  money  creation  often  appear  to  be  positive,  while  the  undesirable 
consequences  only  become  apparent  over  time.  While  money  creation  results  in  lower 
nominal interest rates and perhaps a modest boost to real activity in the short run, over time, 
it results in higher inflation and higher nominal interest rates and ultimately requires painful 
efforts to restore price stability. Awareness of these long-term consequences of succumbing 
to the temptation of excessive money creation is the basic reason that over the last half of 
the 20th century, there has been a strong movement to establish and maintain independent 
central  banks  in  country  after  country.  It  is  simply  good  governance  and  wise  economic 
policy  to  maintain  a  healthy  separation  between  those  responsible  for  tax  and  spending 
policy and those responsible for money creation. 
Another  widely  acknowledged  basic  tenet  of  sound  central  banking  is  the  wisdom  of 
maintaining a low and stable inflation rate. Price stability contributes to the economy’s growth 
and employment prospects in the longer term and helps to moderate the variability of output 
and employment in the short to medium term. Price stability allows the economy to function 
in a more efficient and more productive manner by giving individuals and businesses more 
confidence that the purchasing power of their money will be maintained over time. Central 
banks are uniquely positioned to achieve price stability. The economic costs of failing to do 
so can be quite high. 
Despite  the  well-known  benefits  of  maintaining  price  stability,  there  are  increasing  calls  to 
abandon this commitment in both Europe and the U.S. Central banks are under increasing 
pressure  to  act,  both  because  fiscal  authorities  have  been  unable  to  make  credible 
commitments  to  maintain  fiscal  discipline  and  because  central  banks  have  been  willing  to 
engage in actions that stray into the realm of fiscal policy – for example, purchasing assets of 
the housing sector. This is a disturbing trend that risks undermining the independence of the 
central bank to control monetary policy and its ability to preserve a credible commitment to 
price stability.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Why monetary policy and fiscal policy should remain separate 
As  I  mentioned,  governments  can  finance  expenditures  through  only  three  options:  taxes, 
debt – which is really just a euphemism for future taxes – or money creation, which leads to 
the  hidden  tax  of  inflation.  Central  bank  independence  allows  monetary  policymakers  to 
pursue price stability without the political pressures to finance government expenditures or 
otherwise  engage  in  fiscal  actions  constitutionally  reserved  for  the  fiscal  authorities.  In  a 
classic paper1, recent Nobel Prize winner Thomas Sargent and his co-author Neil Wallace 
showed that when the fiscal authority chooses an unsustainable fiscal policy path, in which 
debt to GDP ratios are rising and proposed budgets don’t generate enough future surplus to 
offset  current  deficits,  seigniorage  is  the  only  way  for  the  government  to  achieve 
intertemporal budget balance. In other words, the central bank must eventually monetize the 
debt – whereby high rates of inflation devalue longer-term government debt. Today, one of 
our speakers, Eric Leeper, will discuss his work on how long-run fiscal stress can undermine 
monetary  control  of  inflation.  In  such  an  environment,  monetary  policy  is  no  longer 
independent but becomes subservient to unsustainable fiscal policy. 
There are those who argue that this is exactly what monetary policy should be doing today: 
creating higher inflation to solve the fiscal failures by devaluing the outstanding government 
debt.  The  inflation  tax  would  transfer  wealth  from  those  that  have  lent  money  to  the 
government in good faith – the investors in sovereign debt – to the government itself. I am 
deeply  skeptical  of  such  a  strategy.  In  my  view,  inflation  is  a  blunt  and  inappropriate 
instrument  for  assigning  winners  and  losers  from  profligate  fiscal  policy.  Moreover,  history 
has  shown  that  once  inflation  is  unleashed,  it  is  not  always  easy  to  bring  it  back  down, 
especially if the central bank loses the public’s confidence and damages the credibility of its 
commitment to return to price stability. The continuing fiscal disarray may also lead the public 
to believe that the government’s only near-term strategy is to monetize the debt. Even if the 
central bank resists, expectations of future inflation could become unanchored and inflation 
could rise through no fault or consequence of central bank action or intent. 
Unfortunately, from my perspective, the Fed and other central banks have already embarked 
on a path that has blurred the distinction between monetary policy and fiscal policy. These 
steps were undertaken with the sincere belief that they were absolutely necessary to address 
the challenges posed by the financial crisis. For example, the Fed established credit facilities 
to support particular asset classes, such as commercial paper and asset-backed securities, 
and  in  November  2008,  the  Fed  announced  it  would  begin  purchasing  housing  agency 
mortgage-backed securities and agency debt to increase the availability and reduce the cost 
of  credit  in  the  housing  sector.  These  types  of  credit  programs  target  particular  market 
sectors and thereby alter the allocation of credit across markets, reducing funding costs for 
some  sectors  and  likely  raising  costs  for  others.  These  programs  departed  from  the  usual 
way  the  Fed  implements  monetary  policy  through  buying  and  selling  U.S.  Treasury 
securities,  an  activity  that  is  generally  neutral  across  markets.  When  the  Fed  engages  in 
targeted  credit  programs  that  seek  to  change  the  allocation  of  credit  across  markets,  I 
believe  it  is  engaging  in  fiscal  policy.  Instead  of  the  central  bank  engaging  in  this  credit 
policy, the federal government could carry out these transactions by issuing Treasury debt to 
support  lending  to  the  targeted  markets  or  firms.  In  fact,  the  fiscal  authorities  frequently 
undertake such actions – think of “green energy” loans, small business loans, and subsidized 
home mortgages. Such credit allocation decisions belong with the fiscal authorities, not the 
central  bank.  Even  the  recent  maturity  extension  program,  or  “Operation  Twist”  as  it  is 
sometimes called, involves selling short-term Treasuries and buying longer-term Treasuries 
– an action that could just as well have been conducted by the U.S. Treasury. 
                                                 
1  Thomas  Sargent  and  Neil  Wallace,  “Some  Unpleasant  Monetarist  Arithmetic”,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 5 (Fall 1981), pp. 1–17. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Once a central bank ventures into conducting fiscal policy, it may find itself under increasing 
pressure  from  the  private  sector,  financial  markets,  or  the  government  to  use  its  balance 
sheet to substitute for other fiscal decisions. This pressure can threaten the central bank’s 
independence  in  conducting  monetary  policy  and  thereby  undermine  monetary  policy’s 
effectiveness in achieving price stability. 
I  have  long  argued  for  a  bright  line  between  monetary  policy  and  fiscal  policy,  for  the 
independence  of  the  central  bank,  and  for  the  central  bank  to  have  clear  and  transparent 
objectives. Decisions to grant subsidies to particular market segments should rest with the 
fiscal authorities – in the U.S., this means the Congress and the Treasury Department – and 
not  with  the  central  bank.  Should  the  fiscal  authority  ask  the  central  bank  to  engage  in 
lending  outside  of  its  normal  operations,  the  fiscal  authority  should  be  willing  to  exchange 
government securities for the nongovernment assets that would accumulate on the central 
bank’s balance sheet as a result. This type of swap would ensure that the full authority and 
responsibility for fiscal matters remained with the Treasury and Congress. 
Congress  has  mandated  the  goals  of  monetary  policy  to  promote  long-run  price  stability, 
maximum  employment,  and  moderate  long-term  interest  rates.  Asking  monetary  policy  to 
take on the role of fiscal policy undermines the ability to achieve this congressional mandate. 
Central banks and monetary policy are not and cannot be real solutions to the unsustainable 
fiscal paths many countries currently face. Proponents who believe otherwise are skating on 
thin  ice.  The  only  real  answer  rests  with  the  fiscal  authorities  and  their  ability  to  develop 
credible commitments to sustainable fiscal paths. It’s a difficult and painful task to be sure, 
but a monetary solution is a bridge to nowhere at best, and the road to perdition at worst – a 
world of rising and costly inflation. 
Once  again,  I  want  to  thank  everyone  for  coming  today.  I  am  confident  that  it  will  be  a 
fascinating program. So now that I’ve told you what I think, let’s get stared and hear from the 
real experts. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
