José Manuel González-Páramo: The ECB’s monetary policy during the 
crisis 
Closing  speech  by  Mr  José  Manuel  González-Páramo,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of 
the  European  Central  Bank,  at 
the  Tenth  Economic  Policy  Conference,  Málaga, 
21 October 2011. 
 Introduction 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
It is a great pleasure for me to be here and to discuss with you the ECB’s monetary policy 
during the crisis. I wish I could talk about the financial crisis in the past tense. The last time I 
had  the  opportunity  to  talk  about  these  issues  in  Malaga  was,  when  I  had  the  honour  of 
receiving  the  title  of  Doctor  Honoris  Causa  from  this  prestigious  university  in  June. 
Unfortunately, since then, the sovereign debt crisis has reached a new intensity. As you may 
know, this has led the Governing Council of the ECB, in its recent meeting on 6th October, to 
adopt  additional  monetary  policy  measures  in  the  form  of  a  commitment  to  continue  the 
fixed-rate full allotment policy at least until the middle of 2012, the allotment of two long-term 
refinancing  operations  of  approximately  12  and  13-months  maturity,  as  well  as  a  second 
Covered  Bond  Purchase  Programme.  These  measures  complement 
the  active 
implementation of the Securities Markets Programme which the Governing Council decided 
upon at the beginning of August in response to the intensification of the sovereign debt crisis. 
Apart from these non-standard measures, the Governing Council, however, also decided to 
leave the interest rate applied in our main refinancing operations unchanged.  
I would thus like to use the opportunity of delivering the closing speech to this conference, to 
reflect on our monetary policy objectives, the challenges posed by the on-going financial and 
economic  crisis  for  monetary  policy,  as  well  as  the  different  standard  and  non-standard 
measures we have adopted; and how they relate to each other.  
Monetary policy objectives 
Price stability 
As regards objectives for monetary policy, for the ECB there is one which trumps all others: 
price-stability. This is the primary objective which euro area governments have delegated to 
the  ECB  as  an  independent  central  bank,  and  which  is  enshrined  in  the  Treaty  on  the 
Functioning of the EU. The achievement of price stability is thus what we are accountable 
for, before anything else.  
While the ECB is bound to the primary objective of price-stability, it was left to the ECB to 
define price stability. Since the start of the euro in 1999, we have defined price stability as a 
level of inflation of below but close to 2% over the medium-term.  
What we have achieved, from the first of January 1999 until the end of this September, is an 
average  inflation  rate  of  around  2.0%.  Let  me  emphasise  that  this  period  includes  the 
financial crisis which started in the summer of 2007, which has already entered its fifth year. 
Despite  these  challenging  times,  the  record  in  delivering  price-stability  is  outstanding  and 
stronger than that of any of the national predecessors of the ECB. An average inflation rate 
of around 2.0% testifies as much to the success of the euro as a currency, as to the ECB as 
its central bank.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The monetary policy transmission mechanism 
The  pursuit  of  price-stability  requires  an  effective  monetary  policy  transmission 
mechanism. When the monetary policy transmission mechanism functions, then decisions 
on the official interest rate, in the case of the ECB the minimum bid rate in main refinancing 
operations, appropriately affect inflation and economic activity through various channels, in 
line with the established standard empirical relationships.  
The starting point of the monetary policy transmission mechanism is the overnight interbank 
market.  From  there,  interest  rates  are  transmitted  along  the  yield  curve,  also  through  the 
formation  of  expectations,  to  longer-term  interest  rates.  Furthermore,  banks  and  other 
financial  market  participants,  pass  on  money  market  interest  rates  to  households  and 
businesses, thereby affecting economic activity.  
In  what  follows,  let  me  focus  on  three  market  segments  which,  in  the  euro  area,  are 
particularly relevant for the monetary policy transmission mechanism. These segments have 
been  specially  important  during  the  financial  crisis  and  this  is  why  our  monetary  policy 
measures  have  focused  on  them:  first,  the  interbank  market;  second,  the  covered  bond 
market; third the sovereign debt market. 
The interbank market 
Let  me  start  with  the  interbank  market.  In  normal  times,  the  Eurosystem  calibrates  the 
amount of central bank liquidity it provides to banks in its refinancing operations in order to 
meet the liquidity needs of the system as a whole. The aim of this calibration is to equalise 
the probability of banks being either short or long in central bank liquidity on the last day of 
the reserve maintenance period. If that is achieved, the price for central bank liquidity in the 
interbank  market  should  lie  half-way  between  the  marginal  lending  and  the  deposit  facility 
rate: in other words it should be similar to the MRO rate. Intertemporal arbitrage assures that 
also in previous days of the maintenance period, the overnight rate equals the MRO rate.  
A key pre-condition for interbank markets to work smoothly is, however, that banks lend to 
each  other  and  that  liquidity  flows  smoothly  between  market  participants.  Central  bank 
liquidity provision is based on banks’ aggregate liquidity needs. If liquidity does not circulate, 
then  the  appropriate  liquidity  supply  is  very  difficult  to  calibrate.  More  than  that,  if  some 
banks’ access to the interbank market is impaired, these may have to pay very high rates. As 
a result money market rates may rise significantly above the MRO rate, thereby impairing the 
starting point of the monetary policy transmission mechanism.  
Covered bonds 
Well-functioning  securities  markets  more  generally  play  a  crucial  role  in  the  monetary 
transmission mechanism. The second market I would like to discuss is the most important 
privately  issued  bond  segment  in  euro  area  capital  markets,  namely  covered  bonds. 
Covered  bonds  represent  a  central  funding  source  for  euro  area  banks  and,  as  you  may 
know, in contrast to other currency areas, banks are the main source of credit in the euro 
area. As a result, conditions in the covered bond markets are an important determinant of 
banks’ ability to extend credit to their own customers.  
Sovereign bonds 
With regard to the third market segment which I would like to discuss, sovereign bonds, we 
can distinguish at least three ways in which they affect monetary policy transmission. First, 
the  price  channel:  As  a  “risk-free  rate”,  sovereign  bonds  have  traditionally  served  as  a 
benchmark, indeed a floor, for the interest rates banks charged for loans, and for the pricing 
of other financial contracts and securities. Indeed, due to their supposed “risk-free” property, 
the  holding  of  government  bonds  as  liquid  assets  is  generally  rather  encouraged  by 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
regulators. This is especially true also for the new liquidity risk regulation proposed as part of 
Basel III. Second, the balance sheet channel: changes in prices of government bonds affect 
the balance sheet value of securities held for trading, or for sale. Finally, there is the liquidity 
channel,  through  which  government  bonds  have  become  the  prime  source  of  collateral  in 
interbank lending.  
Other objectives? 
Beyond  price-stability  and  the  maintenance  of  the  transmission  mechanism,  can  the  ECB 
pursue monetary policy objectives other than price-stability? While the Treaty of the EU 
establishes price stability as the primary and overriding objective of monetary policy, it also 
states that without prejudice to price stability, the ECB shall “support the general economic 
policies  of  the  Community”  and  “act  in  accordance  with  the  principle  of  an  open  market 
economy  with  free  competition,  favouring  an  efficient  allocation  of  resources”.  The  Treaty 
also mentions that the ECB shall “contribute to the smooth conduct of policies pursued by the 
competent  authorities  relating  to  the  prudential  supervision  of  credit  institutions  and  the 
stability of the financial system.” 
At various points of the financial crisis, including the present juncture, financial stability has 
been at risk. What does this mean for the ECB in practice? As laid down by the Treaty, there 
is a lexicographic ordering of objectives: price stability comes first: if this is granted, then the 
ECB may contribute to financial stability. Therefore, there can be no question of trading off 
price  stability  against  financial  stability.  Indeed,  price  stability  is  a  necessary  condition  for 
financial  stability  and  thus  the  best  contribution  monetary  policy  can  make  to  financial 
stability.  
Note, however, that even with price-stability guaranteed, the ECB should only contribute to 
the  smooth  functioning  of  the  financial  system.  Financial  stability  is  a  responsibility  of 
governments,  while  our  responsibility  is  price-stability.  Indeed,  if  governments  respond 
appropriately to risks to financial stability and banks reinforce and efficiently restructure their 
balance  sheets,  the  ECB  may  have  to  be  less  concerned  with  non-standard  measures  to 
restore the monetary policy transmission mechanism. 
Against  the  background  of  our  objectives  of  price-stability  and  the  monetary  policy 
transmission mechanism, let me now turn to the origins of the financial crisis. 
The financial crisis and monetary policy measures 
We  can  distinguish  two  major  episodes  in  the  current  crisis,  first  the  sub-prime  crisis, 
magnified  by  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers,  and,  second,  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  in 
whose thrall we still find ourselves. 
the  so-called 
two  episodes  share  some  common  causes.  During 
Mispricing of risk 
The 
“great  
moderation” – growth was steady, inflation low, and the slicing, dicing and distributing of risk 
had  supposedly  made  financial  markets  more  efficient  and resilient  –  but  what  had  in  fact 
occurred  was  that  risk  had  been  mispriced.  The  risk  of  sub-prime  mortgages  and  the 
financial  products  built  around  them  was  grossly  underestimated.  The  same  occurred  with 
sovereign bond markets, as only small differences in risk premia could be observed in the 
euro area, despite significantly diverging debt and deficit dynamics in the different member 
states.  
Subsequently, both in sub-prime and sovereign debt markets risks became over-priced with 
markets  quickly  becoming  one-sided  as  a  result  of  contagion  and  extreme  risk  aversion. 
Underlying the crisis is thus a significant fragility of security markets, which calls into question 
the efficiency of financial markets more generally. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
From the sub-prime to the sovereign debt crisis 
At least three aspects of the sub-prime crisis contributed also to the current sovereign debt 
crisis.  First,  the  sub-prime  crisis  weakened  banks’  balance  sheets,  which  were  still  under 
repair  when  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  came  to  a  head  in  May  2010.  Second,  the  fiscal 
support given to banking systems and significant spending packages worsened public debts 
and deficits. Third, the Lehman bankruptcy left confidence in the robustness of the financial 
system severely dented. 
The  root  cause  of  the  current  crisis,  however,  lies  within  the  shores  of  the  euro  area. 
Nonetheless, with the internal and external value of the euro holding up well, this is certainly 
not a crisis of the euro but a sovereign debt crisis focused on some euro area sovereigns.  
Two things, however, have gone wrong: First, some countries have accumulated debts and 
deficits, which at a minimum make them vulnerable to self-fulfilling unsustainable dynamics.  
Second, the Stability and Growth Pact was effectively suspended when France and Germany 
escaped sanctions for breaching the debt and deficit criteria in 2003. More generally and at a 
deeper level, the governance of the economic union, which should complement the monetary 
union, has been insufficiently articulated since the outset of EMU.  
The standard tool: the official interest rate 
What has been the role of monetary policy in this context of economic and financial crisis? 
Let’s start by first looking at what is often referred to as conventional monetary policy. The 
standard and most important tool of monetary policy is the official interest rate, in the case 
of the Eurosystem the minimum bid rate in the weekly main refinancing operations. Although 
we  characterise  this  tool  as  “standard”,  the  financial  crisis  did  require  significant  and 
aggressive  cuts  in  interest  rates:  following  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers  the  ECB 
lowered,  within  a  period  of  seven  months,  the  refinancing  rate  by  325  basis  points  from 
4.25% to a historic low of 1%. The rate was kept at this historically low level until April 2011 
when  the  Governing  Council  decided  to  increase  the  rate  by  25  basis  points.  This  was 
complemented  by  another  rate  increase  to  the  current  level  of  1.5%, which  the  Governing 
Council decided to maintain at its last meeting of 6th October.  
The financial crisis has required the ECB to go beyond the standard interest rate policy. Let 
me now turn to the three market segments, I have mentioned earlier: the interbank market; 
the covered bond market and the sovereign debt market.  
Interbank market 
The sub-prime crisis made itself felt in interbank markets at the beginning of August 2007 
when  overnight  rates  started  trading  at  unusually  high  spreads  to  the  MRO  rate.  This 
reflected some banks’ perceived need to hedge against adverse liquidity risk. The collapse of 
Lehman then transformed the money market tensions into a full-blown crisis as a vicious 
circle of increased liquidity and credit risk brought interbank trading to a virtual halt. Money 
markets  meanwhile  became  extremely  segmented  according  to  specific  bank  names:  the 
uncertainty  surrounding  holdings  and  values  of  mortgage-related  financial  products  shut 
specific counterparties out of the interbank market.  
In  the  sovereign  crisis,  segmentation  is  arguably  an  even  more  significant  problem,  as  it 
occurs  normally  by  jurisdiction.  Banks  generally  exhibit  home  bias  in  their  public  debt 
holding:  as  a  result,  counterparties’  ability  to  trade  cross-border  in  the  interbank  market 
becomes increasingly correlated with the perceived riskiness of their sovereign.  
In response to the segmentation of interbank markets, the ECB adopted several measures 
which  essentially  replace  the  missing  intermediation  in  the  interbank  market  by  increasing 
intermediation through the central bank: first, the fixed-rate full allotment policy; second, 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
LTROs  with  6-month  and  12-month  maturity;  third:  foreign  currency  operations;  fourth:  a 
further broadening of the collateral framework. Let me take them in turn.  
While the money market tensions in August 2007 were addressed with a few fixed-rate full 
allotment tenders with overnight maturity, with effect from 15 October 2008, we introduced 
the  fixed-rate  full  allotment  policy  in  all  our  refinancing  operations  for  the  different 
maturities. Under fixed rate full allotment counterparties have their bids fully satisfied, against 
adequate collateral, and on the condition of financial soundness. The fixed rate full allotment 
policy  has  proven  a  very  efficient  way  of  offsetting  liquidity  risk  in  the  market  by  ensuring 
banks’  continued  access  to  liquidity.  It  is  also  a  very  flexible  tool,  as  counterparties  can 
themselves control the amount of liquidity they demand. Thus, a falling demand for liquidity 
can be seen as a sign of normalisation.  
The fixed-rate full allotment policy is probably the most significant non-standard measure the 
ECB  is  implementing.  At  its  latest  meeting  on  6th  October  the  Governing  Council,  in 
response to a worsening of liquidity tensions in the market, has committed to maintaining the 
fixed-rate full allotment policy until the middle of July 2012. 
The  fixed-rate  full  allotment  policy  has  been  complemented  by  6-month  and  12-month 
operations. These operations serve to further reduce the funding risk faced by the banking 
system  over  a  longer  time  horizon.  They  were  an  important  tool  following  the  Lehman 
collapse. Whilst in late 2009 it had been decided to phase them out, in August of this year 
the Governing Council decided to re-introduce such operations by conducting one 6-month 
operation and more recently to allot one operation of approximately 12-months and one of 
approximately 13-months which will reach the beginning of 2013. 
As  a  third  element  of  our  non-standard  measures,  the  international  cooperation  of  the 
major central banks has been crucial: especially the swap arrangements with the US Federal 
Reserve  which  have  allowed  us  to  conduct  fixed-rate  full  allotment  tenders  in  US  dollars 
which are aimed at repairing impaired money markets in foreign currency. These operations 
have been instrumental following the collapse of Lehman, while during the course of 2010 
demand  in  these  operations  petered  out.  As  a  precautionary  measure,  the  ECB  has 
nonetheless  recently  decided  to  re-establish  84-day  fixed-rate  full  allotment  tenders  in 
US dollar, in addition to the 7-days tenders.  
Finally, our response to the crisis has included an extension of our eligible collateral list. The 
main aspects of the Eurosystem’s collateral framework are the following: that we accept a 
very broad range of eligible assets; that a broad range of counterparties can participate in 
our  refinancing  operations;  that  the  same  type  of  collateral  is  accepted  in  all  refinancing 
operations;  and  that  we  have  common  eligibility  criteria  across  the  euro  area,  with  loss-
sharing in case of a counterparty default.  
Having a framework that already accepted a wide range of collateral before the crisis, which 
in  the  case  of  the  euro  area  is  due  to  the  original  need  to  accommodate  a  very  diverse 
financial  system,  has  served  as  a  key  crisis-mitigation  tool.  Especially  important  is  the 
possibility to increase the liquidity of assets and counterparties in times of stress. It is worth 
noting  that  the  financial  crisis  led  other  major  central  banks  to  significantly  broaden  the 
collateral framework for their open market operations.  
By contrast, the Eurosystem only had to make relatively minor adjustments to its collateral 
framework.  Let  me  give  you  two  examples:  in  October  2008,  we  started  to  accept  some 
foreign-currency  ABS  against  euro  area  collateral.  Furthermore,  credit  thresholds  on 
marketable assets (except ABS) were lowered from A– to BBB.  
A further response to the sovereign debt crisis relating to changes in our collateral framework 
has been to suspend the application of the minimum credit rating threshold for outstanding 
and  new  marketable  debt  instruments  issued  or  guaranteed  by  the  Greek,  Irish  and 
Portuguese governments, all of which are implementing EU and IMF programmes.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
It  should  be  emphasised,  however,  that  our  collateral  framework  is  flexible.  As  part  of  our 
traditionally  conservative  risk  management  approach,  we  have  also  tightened  some 
requirements in the course of the crisis. For instance, the eligibility of foreign-currency ABS 
was  revoked  on  the  first  of  January  of  this  year  and  ABS  rating  requirements  have  been 
tightened more generally. For example, we now require newly issued ABS to have at least 
two AAA ratings, when they are issued, in order to be eligible in our operations.  
Central bank intermediation as automatic stabiliser 
Both  our  fixed-rate  full  allotment  policy  and  our  broad  collateral  framework  have  the 
properties of automatic stabilisers with regards to financial market turbulences. The term 
“Automatic stabiliser” is usually applied to features of tax and transfer systems which tend to 
offset fluctuations in economic activity without the need for discretionary fiscal interventions 
by  policymakers.  However,  both  our  fixed-rate  full  allotment  policy  and  our  collateral 
framework smooth out the demand for liquidity in a similar automatic way.  
Consider  fixed-rate  full  allotment  against  broad  collateral:  If  demand  is  high,  liquidity 
provision is high and within the bound of the standing facilities corridor, money market rates 
fall, reducing tensions. By contrast, if demand for liquidity declines, money market rates rise 
again towards the MRO rate and become less accommodative. In addition, if financial market 
tensions have a negative effect on certain market segments, like the covered bond and ABS 
markets,  our  collateral  framework  can  help  improve  the  liquidity  conditions  for  these 
securities by accepting them as eligible collateral. 
Moving  on  from  interbank  markets  let  me  now  turn  to  the  covered  and  sovereign  bond 
markets. 
Covered Bond Purchase Programme 
One  of  the  innovative  responses  of  our  operational  framework  was  the  launch  of  our  first 
Covered  Bond  Purchase  Programme  (CBPP1)  in  July  2009.  This  initiative  had  four 
objectives:  first,  reducing  money  market  term  rates;  second,  easing  funding  conditions  for 
credit institutions and enterprises; third, encouraging credit institutions to maintain or expand 
their  lending  to  households  and  enterprises;  and,  fourth,  improving  market  liquidity  in 
important segments of private debt securities markets. 
The CBPP was announced in May 2009 and € 60 billion of covered bonds were purchased 
from July 2009 to July 2010. The programme was successful in restarting activity in primary 
covered bond markets. However, with the recent intensification of the sovereign debt crisis, 
covered  bond  markets  have  again  come  under  significant  pressure.  At  its  meeting  of  6th 
October,  the  Governing  Council  therefore  decided  to  announce  a  second  covered-bond 
purchase programme, CBPP2, within which €40 billion will be bought within the year starting 
November 2011. CBPP2 shares with CBPP1 the objective of easing funding conditions and 
encouraging institutions to maintain or expand lending, as well as supporting market liquidity 
in private debt security markets. 
Securities Markets Programme 
The  fact  that  sovereign  bond  markets  in  some  euro  area  jurisdictions  were  becoming 
increasingly  dysfunctional  by  May  2010,  and  considerations  over  the  crucial  role  that  this 
segment plays as a basic pillar of our financial system, motivated the launch of one of our 
most  important  non-conventional  monetary  policies  to  date:  the  Securities  Markets 
Programme  (SMP).  The  main  purpose  of  this  programme  is  maintaining  a  functioning 
monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism  by  promoting  the  functioning  of  certain  key 
government and private bond segments.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Impairment  of  the  monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism  caused  by  tensions  in 
government bond markets can be significant. This can happen, firstly, via the price channel, 
as  the  role  of  the  “risk-free  rate”  as  a  pricing  benchmark  is  distorted.  Falling  values  of 
sovereign bond portfolios also affect banks’ balance sheets, and reduce, through the liquidity 
channel the value of government bonds as collateral. In addition to this, excessive volatility of 
bond prices can also force investors to sell-off their bond holdings and make it more difficult 
for  market  makers  to  do  their  job.  All  these  channels  affect  banks’  and  other  participants’ 
ability to play their role in transmitting our interest rate policy because they negatively affect 
their intermediation role and can cause a contraction in the supply of credit. 
The SMP should, of course, be clearly distinguished from the policy of quantitative easing. 
While the objective of the SMP is to repair the transmission mechanism, quantitative easing 
aims  at  injecting  additional  central  bank  liquidity  in  order  to  stimulate  the  economy.  As  a 
result,  quantitative  easing,  as  for  instance  with  the  Bank  of  England,  comes  with  precise 
quantitative  targets.  By  contrast,  the  size  of  SMP  purchases  is  driven  by  an  intervention 
strategy which seeks to improve market functioning. Let me stress that the liquidity injected 
through SMP purchases is re-absorbed on a weekly basis so as to specifically neutralise the 
programme’s liquidity impact. 
It  is  important  to  note  that  with  its  contribution  to  the  monetary  policy  transmission 
mechanism, the SMP, in conjunction with the SMP-liquidity absorbing operations, is oriented 
towards  price-stability.  Thus,  the  SMP  is  very  much  an  innovative  tool  with  an  orthodox 
stability-oriented purpose.  
Standard and non-standard measures: complementary or independent of each other? 
How  can  we  best  characterise  the  relation  between  standard  and  non-standard 
measures? In terms of our decision-making we follow a separation principle. This means 
that  there  is  no  pre-determined  sequence  of  standard  and  non-standard  measures.  For 
instance, in April 2011 the Governing Council raised the MRO rate before having phased-out 
all the non-standard measures. Similarly, at its most recent meeting the Governing Council 
decided  to  keep  the  main  refinancing  rate  unchanged,  while,  firstly,  expanding  our  non-
standard  measures  by  re-introducing  LTROs  with  12-months  and  now  even  13-months 
maturity, and, secondly, announcing a second covered bond purchase programme.  
As the discussion of non-standard measures has shown, these measures are not, however, 
necessarily separate from the standard interest rate policy, but rather complement it. While 
the  monetary  stance  is  signalled  through  the  main  refinancing  rate,  and  non-standard 
measures  are  directed 
transmission 
mechanism,  standard  and  non-standard  measures  complement  each  other  in  the 
pursuit of price-stability , which is the mandate that our fellow European citizens entrusted us 
with in the EU Treaty.  
the  monetary  policy 
towards  maintaining 
Concluding remarks 
Let  me  briefly  conclude  by  highlighting  that  the  segmentation  of  interbank  markets  is  a 
reflection of the segmentation of sovereign bond markets and of the debt crisis which afflicts 
some euro area jurisdictions. Our most significant non-standard measure is without doubt the 
fixed-rate  full  allotment  policy,  which  provides  central  bank  intermediation  where  the 
interbank market fails and which operates in a very quiet manner. Although this policy can 
moderate the symptoms of the crisis, it cannot provide the lasting solution to this crisis. This 
solution  will  require  the  decoupling  of  banks’  fortunes  from  the  funding  situation  of  their 
sovereign. In light of recent developments, swift recapitalisations of banks in a coordinated 
fashion will prove crucial. A lasting solution to the sovereign debt crisis must tackle its root 
causes.  To  this  end,  the  affected  countries  must  improve  their  fiscal  adjustments  and 
implement structural measures aimed at promoting growth. In addition to this, the euro area 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
will  also  need  to  develop  economic  governance  which  is  effective.  More  generally, 
governments  also  have  to  step  up  more  decisively  to  preserve  financial  stability,  which  is 
their responsibility.  
If banks’, following appropriate policy actions on the above mentioned fronts, are no longer 
mistrusted because of their holdings of sovereign debt, the segmentation of money markets 
will  decrease  significantly.  Then  the  need  for  adopting  non-standard  measures  would 
disappear. And I would need to steal less of your time to discuss the monetary policy of the 
ECB.  Time  is  certainly  not  something  we  have  in  plentiful  supply,  given  the  immense 
economic policy challenges that countries like ours have ahead of them on their way out of 
the crisis. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
