Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview with the Financial Times 
Interview  with  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  and  the 
Financial Times, conducted by Lionel Barber and Ralph Atkins, London, 12 October 2011. 
 Financial Times: What needs to be done to contain and bring the eurozone crisis to a 
close? 
Jean-Claude Trichet: We have to be lucid, recognising the acuteness of the situation. Noting 
that there is an interplay between the sovereign risk crisis and the banking sector, and that 
we have to act both at a global level and at a European level. In such situations being ahead 
of the curve is of the essence. We have to take the right decisions in reinforcing the balance 
sheets  of  the  banking  sector  on  the  one  hand  and,  on  the  other  hand,  doing  what  is 
necessary  to  restore  as  completely  as  possible  the  credibility  of  the  sovereign  signature. 
Europeans  have  a  special  responsibility  because  they  are  the  epicentre  of  these  tensions 
which are of a global nature. 
What do European leaders need to do to restore the credibility of sovereign debt, or 
government bonds? 
European governments need to be crystal clear they are doing all they can, individually and 
collectively,  to  honour  their  signature.  It  is  what  the  Heads  said  on  21  July  2011  in  their 
communiqué: “All other euro area countries solemnly reaffirm their inflexible determination to 
honour fully their own individual sovereign signature and all their commitments to sustainable 
fiscal conditions and structural reforms. The euro area Heads of State or Government fully 
support  this  determination,  as  the  credibility  of  all  their  sovereign  signatures  is  a  decisive 
element for financial stability in the euro area as a whole.” This declaration is, in my view, 
extremely important. 
What are the risks in the discussions over Greece? 
The  ECB  has  a  clear  position.  Governments  should  avoid  a  credit  event  and  avoid  a 
compulsory solution [on involving the private sector]. We ourselves, in the July 21 [eurozone 
leaders’] agreement, called for the appropriate enhancement of our own collateral. 
So it is absolutely essential to prevent contagion from Greece? 
Yes. 
David  Cameron  in  his  Financial  Times  interview  talked  of  having  a  firewall.  How  do 
governments make sure that firewall is credible and that contagion can be prevented? 
They have an instrument, which is the EFSF. The appropriate way of having an appropriate 
firewall  would  be  to  leverage  the  EFSF  capital,  which  is  what  is  being  discussed  now  by 
Treasuries.  
Some believe that preventing contagion from Greece also requires a clear statement 
from governments that bond holders of other countries will not suffer haircuts or debt 
write-downs? 
The Heads of State or Government have said very clearly that Greece is a special case and 
that, as I just quoted, as regards all other countries they reaffirm their inflexible determination 
to honour fully their own individual sovereign signature. I would say it was important to avoid 
any ambiguity in this respect. 
Can you explain how you would leverage the EFSF? 
There are various means to do that and I don’t want to embark into technicalities because it’s 
really the responsibility of the treasuries. But there are several ways to leverage the EFSF. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
liquidity  prevented  an 
in  providing  unlimited 
Do  you  think  the  ECB’s  role 
intensification of the global financial crisis and a depression in Europe? 
I  think  the  governing  council  of  the  ECB  has  demonstrated  a  capacity  to  be  lucid  in 
diagnosing the gravity of the situation since the start of the crisis in August 2007. So I would 
certainly echo what you say. 
We have had two categories of monetary policy measures in this crisis. One has been the 
decisions on interest rates – what I would call the standard measures – which are designed 
to  deliver  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  and  be  sure  that  inflation  expectations  are 
solidly anchored. 
On  the  other  hand,  in  periods  of  abnormal  tensions  in  financial  markets,  we  have  helped 
restored a better transmission of our monetary policy – of our interest rates – by other, non-
standard measures. 
The most important of our non-standard measures is full allotment at fixed rates, which we 
used as early as August 2007 and which is now a generalised concept. Other non-standard 
measures have included intervention in the covered bond market and in treasuries.  
After  almost  13 years  of  the  euro  we  have  delivered  for  332 million  fellow  citizens 
2.0 per cent average annual inflation. This is better than over the past 50 years for the main 
euro area countries, and we can see from information we extract from financial markets that 
we are credible to deliver price stability for the next 10 years, in line with our definition. 
So this is a level of credibility, after four years of crisis, which demonstrates the effectiveness 
of our so-called separation principle between the standard measures and the non-standard 
measures. 
As it is obvious, the euro as a currency is credible and solid. The challenges in the euro area 
are related to fiscal credibility and financial stability.  
What  needs  to  be  done  today,  tomorrow  and  perhaps  in  the  more  distant  future  to 
make  sure  that  the  governance  systems  for  the  eurozone  are  actually  credible  and 
work properly? 
The crisis revealed – like an X-ray picture – the weaknesses of many advanced economies  
– weaknesses in the US and in Japan as well as in Europe. In Europe it has revealed a big 
weakness in terms of governance – abnormal behaviour of individual countries and absence 
of effective surveillance of the policies pursued by the various countries. The ECB called a 
long  time  ago  not  only  for  a  strict  respect  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  but  also  for  a 
surveillance of competitive indicators and imbalances inside the euro area. This new pillar of 
surveillance  is  now  part  of  the  enhanced  governance  just  decided  by  the  European 
Parliament and Council. 
Because of the hard lessons various countries have learnt during this crisis, I assume they 
will stick not only to the letter but also to the spirit of this new governance structure. It is of 
the essence.  
Beyond  this  I  think  we  have  to  reflect  on  a  treaty  change  that  would  permit  more  than 
surveillance, with recommendations and appropriate sanctions. When recommendations are 
not followed and sanctions prove ineffective, European institutions should have the capacity 
to impose the necessary decisions on a particular country. 
…and this is where your idea of a minister of finance comes in…. 
I said in my (Charlemagne award) speech in Aachen that, for the “day after tomorrow”, within 
the  framework  of  an  effective  European  executive  branch,  we  could  have  a  minister  of 
finance with, in particular, three major responsibilities. He or she would have responsibility for 
surveillance  of  fiscal  and  macro-economic  policies  –  including  the  capacity  to  impose 
decisions when necessary. And as far as the executive branch responsibility is concerned, 
the  minister  would  be  responsible  for  the  financial  sector  of  Europe,  so  that  the  financial 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
sector  could  be  decoupled  from  the  various  sovereign  signatures  in  order  to  have  an 
achieved  single  market  of  financial  services,  including  in  crisis  periods.  And  the  minister 
would have also the responsibility of representing Europe in international institutions, vis-à-
vis the rest of the world. 
Would this just be for the eurozone or for the 27 European Union countries? 
The working assumption of European treaty is that at a certain moment in time, all 27 would 
be in the euro. But of course the possibility of imposing decisions would not apply outside the 
euro area – that goes without saying.  
Do  you  think  the  appetite  for  that  amount  of  economic  integration  is  there  now  in 
Europe, among the new generation of leaders? 
There  are  more  reasons  today  for  the  Europeans  to  unite  in  economic,  financial  and 
monetary fields than there were at the beginning of the 1950s, at the time of the first speech 
of  Robert  Schuman.  I  really  think  that  the  structural  transformation  of  the  world,  the 
formidable economic success of the emerging countries, of China, of India, of all emerging 
Asia, of Latin America, calls for the Europeans to unite very significantly. One of the main 
lessons  of  the  crisis  is  precisely  that  Europe  needs  more  unity.  In  my  opinion,  this  is  not 
necessarily perceived spontaneously or communicated appropriately to the public, but I think 
these are truths that are there. This necessity for Europe to unite is recognised more and 
more in the business sector, by all those who have a direct connection with the rest of the 
world.  
I think we had, recently, several examples of European democracies where it was said it was 
impossible  to  take  some  difficult  decisions.  But  after  discussions  and  due  reflection,  the 
decision  was  finally  taken  in  the  direction  of  reinforcing  European  unity.  We  are  presently 
experiencing history in the making in Europe. All what I know makes me think that no leader, 
no individual and no country will take the responsibility of going backwards. That’s the reason 
why I’m confident in the future of Europe. But it calls for a strong sense of direction and for 
hard work.  
Even  those  countries  where  there  are  deep  political  reservations,  deep  political 
doubts? 
I’m confident for all countries without any exception.  
How do you respond to those leaders who say “we’re elected, we’re not going to be 
pushed around by markets”? 
I think we are proud to live in market economies because they have proved the right way of 
producing  wealth,  and  all  other  experiments  have  proved  catastrophic.  That  said,  market 
economies have to be disciplined. You must have rules. You cannot rely too naively on the 
spontaneous functioning of markets. Central banks were created when it became apparent 
that it was necessary from time to time to exert some discipline in the market. 
Was not part of the problem leading up to the current crisis that there was almost an 
irrational belief in the perfect nature of markets and in, for example, efficient market 
theory? 
Yes. In this respect I have to say that the immediate lessons drawn from the crash of the 
dotcom  bubble  were  unfortunate.  The  idea  was  that  financial  markets  were  extraordinarily 
resilient – which was plain wrong. I must say, I never shared the view that we were in a world 
where there was no risk.  
That being said, when the first diagnosis was made at a global level with China, India, Brazil, 
Russia around the table, as well as of course Japan, the US and the Europeans, we didn’t 
challenge the fact that a market economy was the best recipe for producing growth.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
In  Germany  there’s  a  very  strong  belief  in  the  market,  which  is  why  German 
conservatives opposed crisis measures taken by the ECB. We’ve had two resignations 
by  Germans  –  Axel  Weber  and  Jürgen  Stark  –  from  the  governing  council.  If  you’re 
talking about further steps towards European integration, are you in danger of losing 
the Germans? 
First of all, I don’t know what “The Germans” means, I don’t know what “The English” means, 
I  don’t  know  what  “The  French”  means.  We  are  living  in  cultures  that  are  very  deep,  very 
profound  and  very  complex,  obviously,  and  where  fortunately  you  have  a  lot  of  different 
opinions. 
We have a legitimate debate – in Europe as well as in the US and in Japan – about whether 
the central bank is doing well on this, well on that. The Governing Council of the ECB did all 
what  was  necessary  to  be  faithful  to  its  primary  mandate  and  to  take  into  account,  in 
transmitting our decisions on interest rates, that we were in the worst crisis since 66 years, a 
crisis which was disrupting some markets. 
Jürgen Stark has been a very close friend for 18 years. He has worked for Europe for the 
past 18 years. I have great esteem for Jürgen and all that he has done and is doing.  
If you look back on all the years that you’ve been involved in European construction, 
is this the most serious crisis that you’ve had to deal with? 
I was involved in many crises: the real economy crisis after the first oil shock, the sovereign 
risk crises of the 1980s, the crisis of the exchange rate mechanism in 1992 and 1993, the 
Asian crisis in particular. But what we are experiencing presently is bigger and has hit directly 
in at the heart of the advanced economies. So it is undoubtedly an historical event of the first 
magnitude, the worst financial crisis since the Second World War. It could have produced a 
great depression had appropriate decisions not been taken at the appropriate.  
This is also the moment of maximum peril for Europe’s most important political and 
economic project and if this were to fail, it would have the gravest consequences for 
Europe, never mind the rest of the world? 
All  advanced  economies  are  being  X-rayed  by  the  present  crisis  and  revealing  their 
skeletons and the weaknesses in their skeletons. It’s true for all of us – for Japan, for the US, 
for Europeans. Europe’s skeleton of Europe is weak because the institutional framework is 
weak. 
I  would  confirm  that  is  a  major  challenge  and  that  it  puts  into  question  the  strategy  of  all 
major  advanced  economies,  including  Europe  and  its  institutional  framework.  At  the  same 
time, I could say, that it has positive aspects, now what are our major weaknesses. We had a 
period of benign neglect, at the global and European levels which was shared by financial 
markets,  by  the  mainstream  of  economic  analysis  and  by  executive  branches.  As  regards 
financial markets, before the crisis, for instance, Greece’s government was borrowing at the 
same interest rate as the German treasury!  
Can we carry on with a situation where every country has to sign up to the slightest 
change and we can be held hostage, if you like, by a country like Slovakia? 
I think that the complexity of the European decision-making process in a crisis situation that 
requires for major decisions 17 democratic decisions is obviously one of the weaknesses of 
the present institutional framework. 
Are  you  confident  that  in  the  end  will  get  a  suitable  rescue  package  agreed  by 
European leaders at their meetings over the next two to three weeks? 
All that I know makes me think that it is the clear will of the European governments. I would 
add that I see nobody taking the responsibility of a failure.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
A lot of people think the ECB should be acting as lender of last resort to governments 
and that ultimately this crisis could only be resolved when the ECB says “we are the 
ultimate backstop” Why is the ECB not prepared to be that ultimate backstop? 
I  think  that  the  ECB  has  done  all  it  could  to  be  up  to  its  responsibilities  in  exceptional 
circumstances. I explain tirelessly what we have been doing to those who are uneasy with 
some  of  the  decisions  we  have  taken.  Keeping  inflexibly  our  sense  of  direction  –  price 
stability – and being up to the challenges of the worst crisis since 66 years. 
The  ultimate  backstop  is,  of  course,  the  governments.  To  do  anything  that  would  let 
government off their own responsibilities would be a recipe for failure. 
Are banks still being irresponsible when it comes to pay and bonuses?  
I  think  we  have  a  real  problem  here.  It  is  a  question  of  values.  Our  democracies  do  not 
understand some behaviour. It’s a very grave issue for all the democracies in the advanced 
economies.  
You  will  be  succeeded  by  a  very  experienced  technocrat  and  somebody  who’s  also 
spent  years  on  Europe’s  construction.  But  he’s  Italian  and  in  some  quarters,  in  the 
press  and  the  media,  this  is  seen  as  a  potential  problem.  What  is  your  response  to 
that? 
First,  nationalities  do  not  count.  He  is  a  very  knowledgeable  true  European.  And  do  not 
forget,  he  took  all  the  decisions  of  the  Governing  Council  as  member  of  the  college.  Our 
decisions  are  collegiate  decisions.  So  I  have  absolutely  full  confidence  in  what  he  will  do, 
together with all our colleagues. 
What do you plan to do after you leave the ECB on October 31? 
I have not reflected yet on what I will do afterwards because I have to say that, even in the 
three weeks which I still have, there are a lot of things to do – 24 hours a day. I’m sure that I 
will  read  much  more  than  I  do  today.  I  will  certainly  continue  to  meditate  on  the  historical 
future of Europe and I will give more time to my four granddaughters. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
