Peter Praet: Housing cycles and financial stability – the role of the 
policymaker 
Speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at 
the  European  Mortgage  Federation’s 
(EMF)  Annual  Conference  2011,  Brussels, 
24 November 2011. 
I  would  like  to  thank  Nicola  Doyle,  Petra  Lennartsdotter  and  Balázs  Zsámboki  for  their  contribution  to  the 
preparation of this keynote speech. 
 Introduction 
Housing markets have certain characteristics that intrinsically link them to financial stability. 
House  price  collapses  can  have  systemic  consequences.  We  know  this  from  the  current 
crisis and we know this from past crises. This fact raises a number of important questions for 
policymakers.  
 
 
 
Do asset price bubbles exist? 
If they do, how do we identify them? 
Should  we  react  in  the  same  manner  to  all  asset  price  bubbles?  Should  we  treat 
housing price bubbles differently? 
We know the cost of not reacting to house price bubbles, but what is the cost of over 
reaction? 
If we react, how do we react and who reacts? 
 
These are all important questions and one could easily devote an entire speech to each of 
them. Instead, I’ll try to touch lightly on all of them.  
 Do asset price bubbles exist? 
This may seem like a strange question to ask in light of the recent experiences in the US, 
Ireland and Spain. But, there is no consensus among economists that asset price bubbles 
actually exist. If one takes the narrow definition of a bubble used by researchers then – in 
order to identify a bubble – policymakers need to prove that, given the information available 
at the time, investors behaved irrationally. This is an impossible task, even ex-post. Some 
well reputed economists have argued that all famous historical asset price bubbles – from 
the Dutch Tulip Mania of 1634 to 1637 to the new economy boom of the 1990s – can be 
explained  by  fundamentally  justified  expectations  about  future  returns  on  the  underlying 
assets.  Therefore,  even  though  the  booms  were  large  and  ultimately  costly  they  were  not 
considered excessive or irrational and, therefore, were not bubbles. So there was no need to 
react? I’m not trying to argue here that asset price bubbles don’t exist, I believe they do. But 
while the costs of dangerous house price bubbles are clear, their identification is not. Even if 
one feels certain that a bubble exists, it’s impossible to prove and there will many who will 
say you are wrong (this time it is different). 
The systemic importance of house price cycles compared with other asset price cycles 
The potential risks of asset price bubbles tend to vary across asset classes. Research by the 
IMF has shown that housing busts are, on average, twice as costly in terms of output losses 
as equity price busts. This reflects the higher exposure of banks to mortgages than shares. A 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
key  conclusion  of  literature  on  historical  financial  crises  is  that  they  tend  to  have  worse 
outcomes when banks are distressed. For example, in October 1987 stock markets around 
the world fell sharply, but this did not represent a threat to the banking system and so, its 
impact was contained. In contrast, many researchers trace the origins of the current financial 
crisis  back  to  the  bursting  of  the  US  house  price  bubble.  The  link  between  house  prices, 
banking  crises  and  recessions  is  not  unique  to  the  current  situation:  a  number  of  studies 
examining crises in both advanced and emerging economies over time and across countries 
have  shown  that  they  tend  to  coincide  with  the  bursting  of  house  price  bubbles.  The 
securitisation of mortgage loans has not only tended to weaken the origination process but 
has tended to expose countries’ financial systems to real estate excesses in other countries. 
By  transferring  the  credit  risk  the  originator  can  exacerbate  the  boom  without  fear  of  the 
consequences of a collapse.  
Identifying house price bubbles: problems and potential indicators 
So, how do policymakers identify these costly house price collapses? Most house price busts 
are  preceded  by  lengthy  booms,  so  perhaps  policymakers  should  try  to  identify  potentially 
costly booms. But, even identifying a house price boom (costly or not) in real time can be 
challenging due  to  data  issues  regarding  house  price  indices.  The  quality  of  these  indices 
can  be  quite  poor,  one  country  can  have  a  variety  of  indices  from  which  to  choose  (each 
providing a different measure of growth), the publication lag can be quite significant in some 
countries and, within the euro area, there is a lack of harmonisation across countries.  
Even if one identifies a boom, how do you know that it’s a costly one? Not all house price 
booms end in bust and not all busts are very costly in terms of output nor have implications 
for  financial  stability.  A  2003  IMF  study  of  real  house  price  cycles  for  14  countries  over 
30 years found that only 40 per cent of house price booms ended in bust. An examination by 
the OECD of 17 countries over a similar period showed that two-thirds of real house price 
booms ended in bust. Closer to home, a 2003 ECB study of real house price cycles in EU 
countries over twenty years found that busts followed 55 per cent of booms. If we examine 
nominal house price cycles the percentage of booms ending in bust is even lower. 
But,  to  avoid  overreaction,  policymakers  need  to  be  able  to  disentangle  the  pernicious 
housing price booms from those that are costless or low-cost. This is a difficult task, even ex-
post,  and  one  that  some  researchers  have  described  as  “impossible”  ex-ante.  However, 
research on house price booms and busts has identified some useful and timely indicators. 
Analysis has shown that house price booms fuelled by excess credit growth tend to be most 
costly.  Following  from  this  conclusion,  research  –  within  ECB,  the  BIS  and  the  IMF  –  has 
shown  that  simple  deviations  of  money  and  credit  aggregates  from  a  trend  that  exceed  a 
given threshold are useful predicators of potentially costly boom/bust cycles in asset prices. 
A key feature of these indictors from a policy perspective is that they signal a warning well 
before the standard conjunctural analysis does.  
Proactive and reactive policy approaches 
Once there is a clear indication or signal that a house price is likely to be a reflection of a 
potentially costly boom episode, how should policy makers react? Policy measures aimed at 
containing asset price bubbles can be proactive and reactive. In the presence of financially 
sound borrowers and/or a resilient banking sector, the impact of house price declines on the 
real economy should be limited. This enhances the case for a proactive approach focusing 
on both the quality of the borrowers and the resilience of the banks.  
Regarding  borrower  quality,  it  is  imperative  that  banks  ensure  that  mortgage  holders  are 
credit worthy and capable of withstanding income shocks. The propensity for banks to take 
risks can increase in a competitive market where they are trying to maintain/increase market 
share. It is worth noting at this point that the significant and widespread mistakes made by 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
income  prospects  and/or  where 
(sub-prime) mortgage lenders in the US when assessing the credit worthiness of borrowers 
were not paralleled in the euro area and that write-offs on housing loans extended by euro 
area  banks  have  remained  low  and  broadly  stable  this  year.  However,  certain  euro  area 
mortgage  lenders  did  make  some  serious  errors  in  judgement  and  credit  risk  exposures 
arising  from  mortgage  lending  do  vary  significantly  across  euro  area  countries.  Exposures 
are highest among banks operating in countries with high household indebtedness, subdued 
household 
in 
residential/commercial  property  prices  and  also  among  banks  that  issued  loans  in  foreign 
currencies that have now appreciated. The tools available to limit the exposure of banks to 
borrower credit risk are well known by this audience but I’ll list a few anyway: loan-to-value 
thresholds, debt-to-income thresholds, caps on the monthly repayment-to-income ratio. 
As regards the banks resilience, the current financial crisis revealed that fragmented micro-
prudential supervision was insufficient to ensure a stable banking sector. Since then some 
substantial  changes  have  been  made  and  are  currently  under  way  in  financial  regulation. 
These include a strengthening of micro-prudential oversight and, perhaps most importantly, 
the introduction of a complementary macro-prudential perspective.  
for  a  decline 
is  potential 
there 
The role of the ESRB 
The  practice  of  macro-prudential  oversight  –  the  bird’s  eye  perspective  on  the  financial 
system  –  was  not  yet  sufficiently  established  in  the  period  before  the  crisis  erupted.  In 
Europe a key response to the crisis was the creation last year of the European Systemic Risk 
Board (ESRB) – an independent EU body responsible for the macro-prudential oversight of 
the Union’s financial system.  
An  important  challenge  for  the  ESRB  in  its  task  of  monitoring  systemic  risks  and 
vulnerabilities  is  bringing  this  new  macro-prudential  perspective  to  the  traditional  micro-
prudential one. This interaction is key, as the recent financial crisis painfully illustrated that 
financial  institutions  may  be  sound on  a  stand-alone  basis  while  the  financial system  as  a 
whole can still be exposed to serious risks and vulnerabilities. In the ESRB this interaction is 
facilitated by the body’s composition which brings together representatives from both central 
banks  and  financial  supervisory  authorities  from  all  27  EU  Member  States,  from  the 
European Commission and the three European Supervisory Authorities. 
To prevent and mitigate systemic risks to the EU financial system, the ESRB identifies and 
assesses  risks  and  vulnerabilities  and  may  as  a  next  step  issue  risk  warnings  and/or 
recommendations  if  deemed  appropriate.  Warnings  and  recommendations  can  be  either 
public or private. They can be addressed to supervisory bodies, both national and European 
ones,  as  well  as  individual  member  states  and  the  EU  as  a  whole.  The  ESRB  gives  the 
addressee of a recommendation a timeline for its implementation, and this process is then 
followed-up  according  to  a  “comply  or  explain”  mechanism.  Although  the  ESRB  has  no 
binding power, addressees that do not follow recommendations have to provide reasons for 
their 
“moral  suasion”  of  a  public 
recommendation, provides a strong incentive for the addressees to comply.  
Last  month,  the  ESRB  published  its  first  public  recommendations  on  lending  in  foreign 
currencies. Lending in foreign currencies has become common in some EU countries. Often 
it takes place through mortgage loans at significantly lower interest rates than similar loans in 
national currency and to households that are not protected against the exchange rate risk. It 
entails  significant  risks  for  the  financial  sector,  including  the  potential  for  cross-border 
contagion. It is a practise that may also amplify booms and busts in housing markets. The 
ESRB’s recommendations aim to tackle the roots of the problems and thereby, improve the 
overall resilience of the financial sector.  
A lot of the ESRB’s work to date has, by necessity, focused on the challenges of the current 
crisis situation, but much effort has also gone into more medium term or structural issues and 
inaction.  This  mechanism, 
together  with 
the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
the  development  and  future  implementation  of  macro-prudential  tools.  Having  the  proper 
regulatory framework, the right tools and the mandate to use them is essential for achieving 
more  balanced  future  developments,  for  example  in  credit  and  asset  markets.  The  ESRB, 
therefore,  reviews  draft  EU  financial  legislation,  and  provides  suggestions  to  legislators  on 
how  to  strengthen  its  macro-prudential  dimension  whilst  ensuring  that  policy-makers  have 
the flexibility to take necessary action.  
The macro-prudential toolkit 
The  macro-prudential  policy  toolkit  is  currently  in  the  process  of  being  built.  The  potential 
instruments  are  various  and  many  are  already  assigned  to  other  policy  objectives,  most 
notably  short-term  interest  rates,  capital  ratios  and  tools  for  ensuring  the  soundness  of 
individual banks. Few of these instruments have been used for macro-prudential purposes; 
therefore, practical experience is limited. The choice of instrument will largely depend on the 
policy goal. If the aim is to constrain excessive credit growth, then tools that impact the cost 
and  quantity  of  credit  are  the  most  likely  choice.  Given  the  key  role  of  interest  rates  in 
achieving the ECB’s price stability objective, capital or leverage requirements, and/or liquidity 
requirements  may  be  the  most  appropriate  tools.  If  the  objective  is  to  curb  borrower 
indebtedness,  then  the  aforementioned  tools  are  also  useful,  as  are  other  measures 
including increasing collateral requirements (e.g. LTV ratios), changing the tax treatment of 
mortgage  interest  and  capital  controls  (but  risk  of  long-term  distortions).  If  the  goal  is  to 
reduce banks’ exposure to asset price cycles then counter cyclical capital buffers are useful 
as well as tools of a more micro-prudential nature.  
Basel capital and liquidity standards 
In  addition  to  the  establishment  the  ESRB,  several  steps  have  been  taken  both  at  the 
international and at the European level to improve the regulatory framework, by introducing 
financial regulations that directly or indirectly address systemic risks. These include the new 
Basel capital and liquidity requirements published in December 2010. 
While the higher minimum capital requirements are aimed at strengthening micro-prudential 
supervision, they will be complemented by the introduction of counter cyclical capital buffers 
from  2016  onwards.  The  objective  of  countercyclical  buffers  is  to  ensure  banks  build  up 
capital  buffers  in  good  times,  so  that  capital  is  available  to  absorb  increased  losses  in 
downturns.  This  tool  is  largely  macro-prudential  and  should  help  mitigate  excessive  credit 
growth and avoid the build up of excessive risks – not just in mortgage markets – but in the 
financial  system  as  a  whole.  Although  the  trigger  for  activating  the  counter-cyclical  capital 
buffer is defined as the excessive deviation of private sector credit growth from its long term 
trend, authorities may use complementary sources of information in buffer settings, including 
more granular data on house prices and mortgage loans.  
The new liquidity rules of Basel III should also mitigate excessive credit growth. In particular, 
the  so  called  net  stable  funding  ratio,  which  aims  to  reduce  the  maturity  mismatch  by 
requiring  banks  to  finance  their  long  term  loans  with  long  term  funds.  The  Basel  III 
framework,  represents  a  minimum  standard,  and  therefore,  authorities  can  introduce  more 
stringent  prudential  rules  to  address  specific  risks  in  their  domestic  banking  systems,  for 
example higher risk weights for certain exposure classes. For example, the proposed Capital 
Requirements  Regulation  (Art.  119),  which  will  be  directly  applicable  across  all  European 
countries,  offers  a  leeway  for  national  authorities  to  increase  risk  weights  or  set  stricter 
criteria (e.g. for loan-to-value ratios) for exposures secured on residential or commercial real 
estate on the grounds of financial stability. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The role of central banks: leaning against the wind? 
The  financial  crisis  has  intensified  the  debate  as  to  whether  monetary  policy  should  be 
actively used to contain asset price booms and bubbles. This is the idea that central banks 
should “lean against the wind” of a sustained and swift upward movement in asset prices. In 
general, the view on “leaning against the wind” in the central bank community seems to have 
shifted more in its favour since the outbreak of the crisis. In the past, there were some very 
vocal critics of “leaning against the wind” whose arguments included the following:  
 
Monetary  policy  is  too  blunt  a  tool  to  contain  bubbles.  Increasing  the  main 
refinancing rate has implications not just for mortgage rates but also rates on loans 
given  to  other  sectors  of  the  economy  and  other  potentially  non-booming  asset 
prices. 
“Leaning against the wind” is a very complex tool to use in a currency union such as 
the euro area where one can experience diverging trends in house and other asset 
prices across countries 
Finally,  as  I  have  mentioned,  asset  price  booms  are  not  always  costly  and  it’s 
difficult to identify those that are in real time. 
    Since the outbreak of the financial crises, more and more empirical evidence and theoretical 
arguments have been put forward either directly or indirectly supporting the “leaning against 
the wind” proposition. The arguments supporting this proposition include the following: 
 
The current and past crises highlight the potentially significantly high costs of asset 
price booms and busts 
Simple deviation indicators help with the early detection of potentially costly house 
price  booms/busts.  (Deviation  from  long  term  trends  in  credit-to-GDP  ratio  is  a 
trigger for the activation of the counter-cyclical capital buffer. Data on house prices 
and mortgage loans may also be used by authorities as complementary source of 
information in buffer settings.) 
There  is  increasing  evidence  that  banks’  attitude  to  risk  are  correlated  with  the 
monetary policy stance (risk taking channel) 
Small increase in rates might break herding behaviour of private investors. 
 
The debate is ongoing. Regarding the ECB’s stance, some elements of “leaning against the 
wind” are implicitly incorporated in the monetary policy strategy through the second pillar of 
monetary analysis. Having said this, it should be clear that “leaning against the wind” is only 
a second best instrument, to be considered once macro-prudential tools should have proven 
to  be  ineffective  and  only  to  be  used  in  very  special  circumstances,  e.g.  in  case  a  rise  in 
asset prices is geographically widespread and thus threatening price stability in the monetary 
union in the long-run.  
Conclusion 
Asset  price  bubbles  do  exist  and  have  potentially  large  costs  for  the  real  economy, 
particularly  in  the  case  of  house  price  bubbles.  Although  their  costs  are  clear  their 
identification is not. The ex-ante detection of costly house price booms is extremely difficult 
and cannot be done with complete certainty. In addition, identification problems are amplified 
by  data  issues  regarding  house  price  indices.  However,  a  number  of  useful  predicators  of 
potentially costly boom/bust cycles have been identified by researchers, these include simple 
deviations of money and credit aggregates from a trend that exceed a given threshold. Policy 
makers can use both proactive and reactive measures to combat costly house price booms. 
Limiting credit risk exposures from borrowers and/or ensuring the resilience of banks would 
help limit the potential costs of house price collapses. The establishment of the ESRB – an 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
independent body responsible for the macro-prudential oversight of the EU financial system 
– along with the new capital and liquidity measures for banks marks a big step in the right 
direction. However, the macroprudential policy toolkit is currently in the build-up phase. The 
current set of instruments is varied and many are already assigned to other policy objectives. 
The instruments policy makers use will largely depend on the objective they want to achieve. 
The  use  of  macro-prudential  instruments  requires  a  balancing  act:  on  the  one  hand 
containing  developments  judged  to  contain  financial  stability  risks  and  on  the  other  hand 
ensuring that economic growth and financial development is not unnecessarily constrained 
by an overreaction. As regards the monitoring of asset price cycles and mitigating the risk of 
credit-fuelled  booms,  the  newly  formed  ESRB,  which  brings  together  central  bankers, 
financial  supervisors  (both  national  and  European)  and  the  European  Commission,  is  best 
placed to provide warnings and recommendations to policymakers. We will never be able to 
create  a  “bubble  free”  world  but,  with  better  support  from  macro-prudential  policy,  we  can 
significantly reduce the probability of costly booms.  
References 
Alessi,  L.  and  C.  Detken,  “Quasi  real  time  early  warning  indicators  for  costly  asset  price 
boom/bust cycles: A role for global liquidity”, European Journal of Political Economy, 27(3), 
520–533, Sept. 2011. 
Allen, F. and K. Rogoff (2011), Asset Prices, Financial Stability and Monetary Policy, paper 
presented  at  Swedish  Riksbank  Workshop  on  Housing  Markets  Monetary  Policy  and 
Financial Stability (subsequently updated), February. 
Clark,  A.  and  A.  Large  (2011),  Macroprudential  Policy:  Addressing  the  Things  We  Don’t 
Know, Occasional Paper Series, No. 83, Group of Thirty, Washington. 
Drudi, F. et al. (2009), Housing Finance in the euro area, Occasional Paper Series , No. 101, 
European Central Bank, March 
ECB (2003), Structural Factors in the EU Housing Markets, European Central Bank. 
Garber, P. (2000), Famous first bubbles: the fundamentals of early manias, Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology. 
Girouard,  N.,  M.  Kennedy,  P.  van  den  Noord  and  C.  Andre´,  (2006),  Recent  house  price 
developments: The role of fundamentals, OECD Working Paper, No. 475, Organisation for 
Economic Co-operation and Development. 
IMF (2004), “When Bubbles Burst”, World Economic Outlook, 61–84, International Monetary 
Fund, April. 
Pastor, L. and P. Veronesi (2004), Was there a NASDAQ bubble in the late 1990s?, Working 
Paper, University of Chicago. 
Reinhart, C. and K. Rogoff, Banking Crises: An Equal Opportunity Menace, Working Paper 
Series , No. 14587, National Bureau of Economic Research, December. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
