Bwalya K E Ng’andu: Workshop on Zambian banknotes 
Opening remarks by Dr Bwalya K E Ng’andu, Deputy Governor (Operations) of the Bank of 
Zambia, at the G&D Workshop on Zambian banknotes, Lusaka, 22 November 2011. 
 Mr. Werner Reisch and all resource persons from Giesecke and Devrient GmbH 
Acting Director – Banking, Currency and Payment Systems 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
 
 
 
I wish to welcome you all to this workshop on Zambian banknotes and in particular allow me 
to  welcome  Mr.  Werner  Reisch  and  his  team  from  Germany.  As  Bank  of  Zambia,  we 
appreciate your efforts to organise this workshop and would like to assure you that by the 
end of the workshop all participants will have been enriched with new information on cash 
management. I am reliably informed that this workshop will be divided into two sessions, with 
this  session  targeting  employees  from  Bank  of  Zambia  and  the  next  session  that  will  take 
place tomorrow targeting commercial bank employees.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, As you may be aware G&D is a reputable printing company based 
in Germany which has been in existence since 1852. The Bank has a long standing business 
relationship with G&D going as far back as 1996 when the company first installed the ISS 
300  money  counting  machines  in  our  Currency  office  and  subsequently  the  BDS 
400 banknote destruction system in 2000.  
The Bank’s relationship with G&D developed further as the company was awarded a contract 
to  print  the  K10,000  denomination  in  the  2007–2009  currency  supply  contract.  Currently, 
G&D  are  the  printers  of  all  banknotes  under  the  2010–2012  currency  supply  contracts. 
Further,  G&D  are  the  suppliers  of  the  Bank’s  current  banknote  processing  equipment,  the 
BPS  1000  machines  integrated  destruction  system  and  the  off-line  BDS  400  destruction 
system.  
Distinguished participants, The Bank of Zambia, under the Bank of Zambia Act (1996), is 
empowered to “issue notes and coins to be legal tender in the Republic and regulate all 
matters  relating  to  the  currency  of  the  Republic”.  In  line  with  this  function,  the  Bank 
pursues a clean note policy which entails effective and efficient management of banknotes. 
We therefore, welcome this initiative by G&D to conduct this Workshop, which is aimed at 
empowering  the  cash  handlers  from  both  the  Bank  of  Zambia  and  the  Commercial  Banks 
with knowledge needed for effective and efficient cash management.  
I  have  noted  that  the  programme  covers  topical  issues  such  as  Banknote  processing, 
Banknote  security  features,  counterfeit  notes,  just  to  mention  but  a  few,  which  are  all 
relevant to both the Central Bank and Commercial Banks being the main cash handlers.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, Let me briefly touch on one of the issues that will be addressed at 
this workshop, that of counterfeit notes. The Bank of Zambia faces challenges in this area, 
especially  with  regard  to  the  highest  value  denomination,  the  K50,000.  However,  the 
volumes are not alarming as evidenced by the prevailing statistics. For instance, the ratio of 
counterfeit  notes  in  circulation  to  currency  in  circulation  in  the  K50,000  is  negligible  at 
0.000036% as at end June 2011. This has been the case for the past five years. Despite the 
aforementioned statistic, it still remains our responsibility to ensure that this illegal activity is 
curbed by sensitizing the general public about the genuine security features of the Zambian 
banknotes.  
Distinguished participants, the topics that will be addressed at this workshop will provide 
you with an opportunity to learn modern methods of cash processing. As you may be aware, 
the Bank has made attempts to automate cash operations. As a result, the Bank acquired the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
BPS  1000  banknote  sorting  machines  with  an  integrated  banknote  destruction  system  in 
2008.  The  process  of  automating  currency  operations  is  one  of  the  Bank’s  key  strategic 
objectives.  
This  workshop  provides  us  with  a  unique  opportunity  to  share  our  experiences  with  the 
printers of our banknotes and suppliers of the cash processing equipment. Please use this 
opportunity  to  tap  knowledge  from  the  vast  experience  and  expertise  of  our  resource 
persons.  
Finally, I wish to urge workshop participants to actively participate during deliberations of this 
Workshop.  
With these few words, it is now my honour and privilege to declare this workshop officially 
open.  
I THANK YOU! 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
