José De Gregorio: Capital flows and the interaction between 
macroprudential policy and monetary policy 
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  José  De  Gregorio,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Chile,  at  the 
Central  Bank  of  Chile  Annual  Conference  on  “Capital  Mobility  and  Monetary  Policy”, 
Santiago, 17 November 2011. 
 I  am  very  grateful  for  comments  and  suggestions  from  Rodrigo  Cifuentes,  Kevin  Cowan,  Luis  Oscar  Herrera, 
Alejandro Jara, Ernesto Pastén and Claudio Raddatz. 
Welcome to the 15th annual Conference of the Central Bank of Chile, this time focusing on 
“Capital  Mobility  and  Monetary  Policy”.  In  this  address,  I  will  discuss  the  challenges  of 
dealing  with  macroeconomic  and  financial  instability  in  the  context  of  inflation  targeting  in 
emerging  economies  and  analyze  the  special  case  of  capital  inflows  as  a  source  of  such 
macroeconomic and financial instability. 
The monetary policy framework based on inflation targeting and exchange rate flexibility has 
been  successful in  providing  price  stability  and  the  conduction  of countercyclical monetary 
policy  over  the  last  decades.  Perhaps  precisely  because  of  this  success,  the  “separability 
view”, that takes price stability and financial stability as independent goals, was the preferred 
policy  framework  before  the  global  crisis  in  those  countries  that  explicitly  pursue  financial 
stability  as  a  policy  goal.1  Nevertheless,  the  recent  crisis  and  financial  turmoil  resulted  in 
increasing awareness of the linkages (spillovers) between macro and financial stability, both 
at the national and the international level. This calls for a revision of this view.2 
In my remarks today, I would like to start by discussing some general issues regarding the 
linkages  between  price  and  financial  stability  and  the  linkages  between  monetary  and 
macroprudential  policy.  In  the  second  part  of  this  talk,  I  will  refer  to  the  context  of 
international  capital  flows  and  policy  responses  in  a  small  open  economy  with  inflation 
targeting, and the relation that monetary policy has to have with macroprudential policies in 
that context.  
Interactions between Monetary and Financial Policies 
Most central banks care not only about price stability, but also about financial stability. The 
goal for price stability is usually the main mandate of central banks, and is widely understood 
as maintaining low and stable inflation, which also reduces the deviations of output from its 
potential.  However,  the  central  bank’s  mandate  for  preserving  financial  stability  is  less 
explicitly  defined;  probably  in  part  because  there  is  less  agreement  on  what  is  financial 
stability  and  what  should  be  considered  an  indicator  of  it.  Broadly  understood,  it 
encompasses a stable and fundamental-driven credit and asset price growth, as well as the 
absence of large mismatches in the financial sector. It is not the purpose of my talk to narrow 
the definition of financial stability, so I will use the term in a broad sense. There is also the 
key distinction between micro and macro financial stability, and in most of what follows I will 
be focusing on the systemic aspects of financial stability, unless noticed otherwise. 
                                                 
1  This idea is consistent with the principle known as the Tinbergen rule (Tinbergen (1952)). 
2  The framework discussed in this presentation takes the perspective of a small open economy like Chile. In 
many  emerging  markets  the  concern  for  financial  stability  was  explicit,  especially  regarding  international 
financial transactions. This was not the case in many advanced economies that, as price stability became the 
main objective, financial stability played a secondary role, or often no role at all. For further discussion, see 
De Gregorio (2011), and Bernanke (2011). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The recent crisis calls into question the view that macro and financial stability can be really 
seen as separate objectives. In fact, it seems to have brought a reminder that in the end, 
macroeconomic and financial stability are related, both directly and through the instruments 
used to achieve each of them. The direct linkages are natural: it is difficult to imagine a stable 
financial  system  operating  in  a  volatile  macro  environment.  Financial  systems  are  good  at 
dealing  with  idiosyncratic  risks,  but their  ability  to  deal  with  aggregate risk is  more  limited, 
especially  in  emerging  markets.  Vice-versa,  financial  instability  typically  ends  up  creating 
macroeconomic fluctuations. The uncertainty that accompanies periods of financial instability 
leads investors and consumers to postpone investment plans and the purchase of durable 
goods, with foreseeable consequences for output and inflation. Moreover, extreme episodes 
of financial instability that lead to financial crises almost always end up in a sharp and costly 
recession.  
There  are  also  indirect  linkages  between  macro  and  financial  stability  through  the  main 
instruments  used  to  achieve  them.  The  main  tool  used  by  most  central  banks  to  achieve 
macro stability is the management of a short term reference interest rate. Movements of this 
benchmark  rate  not  only  directly  affect  the  consumption/saving  decisions  of  firms  and 
households, but also have consequences for all asset prices (e.g. equities, bonds, exchange 
rates,  housing),  the  cost  and  availability  of  credit,  and  the  willingness  of  investors  to  take 
risks.  For  instance,  in  a  stable  context,  persistently  low  interest  rates  may  generate 
incentives  for  investors  whose  income  depends  on  absolute  returns  (such  as  hedge  fund 
managers and insurance companies) to invest in more risky assets. It may also make it more 
profitable  to  engage  in  carry  trades  and  create  currency  or  maturity  mismatches.  On  the 
unintended  side,  the  success  in  achieving  macro  stability  may  change  the  perception  of 
agents about the riskiness of the environment and lead them to take more risky bets in the 
expectation that good times will continue indefinitely (or at least until the bet pays off). Also, 
the way to deal with bubbles in monetary policy in the US, applying the so-called Greenspan-
put  (Blinder  and  Reis,  2005),  may  have  increased  the  chance  of  bubble  formation 
(De Gregorio, 2011). On the other hand, micro and macro prudential regulatory tools, such 
as caps on credit growth or capital requirements have direct consequences on the cost and 
availability  of  credit,  with 
investment,  consumption, 
employment, and output, and the transmission channels of monetary policy.  
However,  the  links  between  macro  and  financial  stability  as  goals,  as  well  as  in  the  cross 
impact  of  their  main  tools,  do  not  mean  that  they  can  be  dealt  with  using  a  single  type  of 
instruments.  While,  as  highlighted  above,  interest  rate  movements  affect  credit  and  asset 
prices,  they  are  not  the  most  appropriate  for  addressing  financial  stability  concerns.  For 
instance, raising the interest rate could in principle tame stock- or house-price growth in a 
closed  economy,  helping  to  prevent  the  formation  of  bubbles  or  bursting  them  at  an  early 
stage, before they threaten financial stability. But even if it were possible to identify a bubble 
from a fundamental-driven asset price increase, controlling asset price growth may require 
substantial  increases  in  the  interest  rate,  which  will  reduce  credit  supply  and  the  prices  of 
other assets that may or may not be part of the bubble, having negative consequences on 
output and inflation. In other words, the impact of such policy would be felt across the board 
in financial markets, on top of the detrimental impact it would have in the real economy by 
unnecessarily depressing output, employment and real investment.  
In  an  open  economy,  such  policy  may  be  ineffective  in  controlling  asset  price  growth  and 
may even worsen the prospects for financial stability. I will tackle this further in my coming 
discussion of capital flows.  
The  same  criticism  applies  to  the  use  of  regulation  to  achieve  macro  stability.  It  could  be 
possible to use bank capital requirements to control inflation through the supply of credit and 
real  activity,  but  it  would  raise  the  cost  of  capital  and  would  hit  especially  hard  bank-
dependent  firms  and  consumers  while  other  borrowers  would  turn  to  other  sources  of 
financing.  Furthermore,  the  relatively  high-frequency  changes  that  managing  macro 
the  corresponding 
impact  on 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
conditions may require may create unnecessary policy-driven volatility in financial markets. 
All this indicates that it is more appropriate to tackle each goal with its own type of tool. 
The  separation  of  the  instruments  does  not  necessarily  mean  that  the  achievement  of  the 
goals  can  be  separated  operationally.  Because  of  the  dual  causality  of  price  and  financial 
stability,  monetary  and  financial  policies  should  be  explicitly  coordinated.  How  this 
coordination  is  achieved  varies  across  countries.  At  the  very  least,  instances  to  monitor 
global  risks  to  financial  stability  should  exist.  Central  Banks  should  be  involved  in  these 
monitoring instances (or should centralize the monitoring and supervision functions) because 
of  their  relative  advantages  in  providing  a  macro  view  of  the  economy  and  their  market 
contacts, due to the implementation of monetary operations. In addition regulation that could 
have systemic implications should be discussed in these instances. 
In  the  case  of  Chile,  the  supervisory  landmark  is  made  up  of  three  superintendencies 
(including banks). In this setting, coordination for systemic stability is achieved at two levels. 
One  the  one  hand,  the  Central  Bank  is  involved  in  several  aspects  of  financial  regulation 
directly  by  dictating  regulation,  or  by  participating  in  consultations  with  other  agencies.  On 
the  other  hand,  the  Central  Bank  participates  in  two  coordination  instances  with  the 
superintendents and finance ministry. The experience during the last years has shown that 
during periods of financial turmoil, mainly as result of external shocks, the Central Bank, the 
Finance  Ministry,  and  the  financial  regulation  agencies  have  indeed  worked  in  close 
coordination,  and,  as  the  global  financial  crisis  testifies,  results  have  been  positive. 
Moreover, in Chile, as banking supervision takes place outside the Central Bank it is key that 
it is not out of touch with the broader macro environment, so that financial system stance vis-
à-vis  the  risks  perceived  in  the  macro-outlook  is  the  natural  first  step  in  the  supervisory 
process. 
Recently,  these  instances  have  been  formalized  with  the  creation  of  a  Financial  Stability 
Council,  headed  by  the  Finance  Minister.  This  council  will,  amongst  other  things,  identify 
systemic risks and mitigation policies, and discuss the systemic impact of regulation. 
Summing  up,  monetary  and  prudential  policies  are  closely  connected,  first  because 
interlinked,  and  second  because 
macroeconomic  and 
instruments  designed 
front  have  cross  effects.  This 
interconnection  suggests  the  need  for  coordination  of  both  types  of  policy.  There  are 
arguments, however, that call for specialization of some functions. So far, we have seen in 
Chile a banking supervisory agency that takes into consideration the macro-systemic aspects 
and a central bank concerned about both price and financial stability, arrangement that has 
permitted the necessary coordination in dealing with situations of financial distress. 
financial  stability  are  closely 
to  achieve  stability 
in  each 
The role of capital flows 
In what follows, I will deal with the issue of capital flows as a source of financial instability 
within  the  framework  of  inflation  targeting  and  flexible  exchange  rate.  In  particular,  I  am 
concerned  with  the  interaction  between  price  and  financial  stability  when  a  small  open 
economy, like Chile, is exposed to volatile capital flows. I have to start by emphasizing that in 
the current surge of capital inflows, Chile was not subject to massive inflows as was the case 
in  the  past.  However,  we  cannot  rule  out  this  possibility,  as  prospects  for  advanced 
economies are very gloomy, while emerging markets offer very healthy returns to investment. 
First, the long history of emerging markets booms and busts has shown us that frequently in 
this type of economies the building up of risks is associated with periods of capital bonanzas 
that fuel credit booms, asset bubbles, and exchange rate misalignments, and that frequently 
end in sudden stops and reversals of capital inflows that wreak havoc in the financial system 
and  the  real  economy.  The  form  that  these  flows  take  in  many  countries,  short-term  and 
foreign-currency  based,  further  contributes  to  the  building  up  of  financial  mismatches  with 
potentially  severe  financial  and  macroeconomic  consequences.  Moreover,  even  before  a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
crisis occurs, capital surges have macroeconomic impacts through the expansions in activity 
resulting from credit growth, the factor reallocations that may be associated with persistent 
exchange rate movements, and the inflationary or deflationary pressures that may arise from 
the combination of exchange rate pass-through and aggregate demand expansions.  
In cases where capital flows are not excessive and driven by fundamentals, the pursuit of 
macro  and  financial  stability  can  be  consistent  with  the  inflation  targeting  framework  and 
exchange  rate  flexibility,  even  though  it  may  be  accompanied  by  moderate  exchange  rate 
volatility  and  real  exchange  rate  appreciation.  Under  these  conditions,  exchange  rate 
flexibility  helps  the  efficient  reallocation  of  resources  and  thus  becomes  the  first  line  of 
defense  in  avoiding  the  building  up  of  risks.  For  example,  the  delayed  appreciation  of 
exchange  rates  to  improved  domestic  conditions  could  be  a  factor  that  accelerates  capital 
inflows to take advantage of artificially low asset prices. Therefore, a flexible macroeconomic 
framework geared to avoiding the buildup of overheating and that allows prompt asset price 
adjustment  should  be  the  main  way  to  avoid  excessive,  especially  speculative,  capital 
inflows. 
But  even  if  flows  are  not  “excessive”,  agents  may  undertake  exposures  that  could  be 
privately  efficient,  such  as  currency  and  maturity  mismatches,  but  result  in  aggregate 
vulnerabilities.  In  these  situations  of  moderate  and  fundamental-driven  capital  flows,  the 
prevention  of  financial  vulnerabilities  resulting  from  exchange  rate  volatility  should  be 
addressed through financial regulation and financial development. In fact, this has been the 
case  of  Chile,  where  the  regulation  of  currency  mismatches  has  prevented  banks  from 
excessive risk taking, and the deepening of the financial system has provided an increasing 
hedging capacity of the private sector. Nonetheless, this approach is not free of situations 
like  those  experienced  in  some  emerging  market  economies  like  Mexico,  Brazil  and 
South Korea  after  the  Lehmann  bankruptcy,  where  the  un-regulated  corporate  sector 
became systemically important after the misuse of hedge instruments increased dramatically 
their exposure to exchange-rate risk. In this regard, strict rules for addressing excessive risk-
taking from financial intermediaries that fund these positions should be implemented. 
On the other hand, when a country is subject to a sudden surge of capital inflows due to the 
incentives  associated  with  temporary  macroeconomic  and  financial  conditions,  or  due  to 
sudden  changes  in  the  international  investors’  portfolio  decisions,  the  inflation-targeting 
framework  may  be  subject  to  important  challenges.  These  challenges  are  particularly 
important when episodes of capital flows also result in inflationary pressures. Under these 
circumstances, dealing with inflationary risk through interest-rate policy may generate further 
incentives  for  capitals  inflows,  exacerbating  exchange  rate  volatility  and  even  creating  an 
over-appreciated currency. From the point of view of macroeconomic policies, this requires to 
ensure that fiscal policy is not what is inducing capital inflows. All considered, the pursuit of 
macro  and  financial  stability  in  the  context  of  an  inflation  target  regime  may  call  for  some 
exceptional departure from a fully floating exchange rate and a highly integrated international 
financial market. This can take different forms, as they may require the use of non-interest-
rate  policy,  such  as  reserve  requirements  on  bank  deposits  instead  of  the  conventional 
interest rate policy; a temporary reduction of the degree of financial integration, through the 
use of some sort of capital controls; or it can allow some exchange rate intervention, through 
the  accumulation  of  international  reserves  in  order  to  avoid  excessive  exchange-rate 
appreciation. I will comment on each of these options next. 
Using  alternative  monetary  policy  instruments  to  deal  with  inflationary  pressures,  such  as 
reserve requirements on bank deposits, may prevent the undesired credit growth associated 
with capital inflows without affecting interest rate differentials. This seems to be the case of 
Turkey, Peru, Brazil, China and India, which have used extensive reserve requirements to 
deal with inflationary pressures in the current scenario. Other alternative is imposing a levy 
on foreign exchange borrowing by banks, as the one implemented in South Korea. However, 
this road is more appropriate when inflationary pressures come from excessive bank credit 
related to capital inflows than in other cases. When the surge in inflows comes not only from 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the banking system, these measures may only create disintermediation and the allocation of 
excessive risk in other parts of the financial system. 
A temporary reduction in the degree of financial integration may result in some “sand in the 
wheels” of capital movements and reduce the speed of capital inflows and outflows, allowing 
some  further  degree  of  monetary  policy  independency.  This  is  behind  the  idea  of  using 
capital controls in some emerging market economies. Although even the IMF has supported 
the  idea  of  using  capital  controls  under  extreme  circumstances  (Ostry  et  al.,  2010),  the 
empirical literature has found only partial evidence of its effectiveness.3 
Finally, the validity of alternative tools to deal with episodes of unsustainable capital inflows 
may  be  particularly  important  when  the  concerns  about  real  exchange  rate  volatility  are 
relatively high. For instance, in export-based economies with imperfectly developed financial 
markets, exchange rate fluctuations and persistent episodes of appreciations may result in 
sustained  damages  to  the  productive  structure.  In  such  situations,  targeted  and  limited 
exchange  rate  interventions  may  help  reduce  temporary  pressures  and  at  the  same  time 
build  up  international  reserves,  which  act  as  precautionary  savings  and  self-insurance 
against  the  potential  consequences  of  a  sudden  capital  outflow.  This  has  been  the  route 
followed  in  Chile,  since  the  concern  about  the  external  scenario  has  not  been  the  rise  in 
capital  inflows,  but  rather  the  pressures  on  the  exchange  rate  and  the  need  to  have  an 
adequate level of international liquidity. Of course, this policy is not free of cost, since holding 
reserves is costly, and therefore its use is limited.4 
It is difficult to recommend a particular strategy, since realities are different across countries, 
not only on the nature and impact of capital flows, but also on the overall macroeconomic 
policy  framework  and  deepness  and  strengths  of  financial  systems.  However,  the  general 
principles discussed above should be taken into consideration. 
Final remarks 
The connections between price and financial stability suggest that the central banks should 
consider the cross effects of financial policies and monetary policy. In countries like Chile, 
the central bank has an explicit mandate on financial stability, and many other countries are 
moving in this direction as the interactions among policies have been recognized. But also, it 
is  important  to  have  a  close  and  continuous  coordination  among  all  authorities  with 
responsibilities  on  the  financial  system.  This  coordination  becomes  also  more  needed  in 
times of crisis or extreme distress, since the central bank has to implement its LLR functions. 
In normal times, the pursuit of price stability in a small open economy is not in contradiction 
with  financial  stability  in  the  presence  of  capital  flows.  In  this  context,  the  potential 
vulnerabilities  to  high  exchange  rate  volatility  can  be  handled  with  prudential  regulation. 
However, in episodes of capital surges that may affect macroeconomic and financial stability 
a close coordination of monetary policy and prudential policies is required.  
References 
Bernanke, B.S. (2011), “The Effects of the Great Recession on Central Bank Doctrine and 
Practice”,  speech  delivered  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Boston  56th  Economic 
Conference, Boston, Massachusetts, October 18th. 
                                                 
3  For the case of Chile, see Cowan and De Gregorio (2007), and for a review for a broad set of countries, see 
Magud et al. (2011). 
4  For further discussion on exchange rate intervention in emerging market economies see De Gregorio (2010). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Blinder, A., and R. Reis (2005), “Understanding the Greenspan Standard”, in The Greenspan 
Era: Lessons for the Future, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming. 
Cowan,  K.  and  J.  De  Gregorio  (2007),  “International  Borrowing,  Capital  Controls  and  the 
Exchange  Rate:  Lessons  from  Chile”,  in  S.  Edwards  (ed.),  Capital  Controls  and  Capital 
Flows  in  Emerging  Economies:  Policies,  Practices  and  Consequences,  NBER  and  The 
University of Chicago Press. 
De  Gregorio,  J.  (2010),  “Monetary  Policy  and  Financial  Stability:  An  Emerging  Markets 
Perspective”, International Finance, 13:1, pp. 141–156. 
De  Gregorio,  J.  (2011),  “Price  and  Financial  Stability  in  Modern  Central  Banking”,  speech 
delivered at LACEA-LAMES Conference, November, Santiago, Chile.  
Magud,  N.,  C.  Reinhart  and  K.  Rogoff  (2011),  “Capital  Controls:  Myth  and  Reality  –  A 
Portfolio Balance Approach”, NBER Working Paper N°16805. 
Ostry,  J.,  A.  Ghosh,  K.  Habermeier,  M.  Chamon,  M.  Qureshi  and  D.  Reinhardt  (2010), 
“Capital Inflows: The Role of Controls”, IMF Staff Position Note, SPN/10/04. 
Tinbergen, J. (1952), On the Theory of Economic Policy, Amsterdam: North-Holland. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
