Bwalya K E Ng’andu: Enhancing corporate governance among various 
stakeholders within the financial sector 
Opening remarks by Dr Bwalya K E Ng’andu, Deputy Governor (Operations) of the Bank of 
Zambia, to the Financial Sector Development Programme (FSDP) presentation of corporate 
governance model board charter to financial sector stakeholders, Lusaka, 25 October 2011. 
 Chief executive officers and senior management of financial institutions 
Members of the FSDP Secretariat and Working groups 
Distinguished participants 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Let  me  start  by  thanking  the  organisers  of  this  meeting  for  inviting  me  to  make  opening 
remarks at the presentation of the corporate governance model board charter. As you are 
aware, corporate governance has been identified as one of the most important components 
of the Financial Sector Development Programme (FSDP). The reason for this is not difficult 
to discern. The relationship between financial institutions and the public is premised on trust. 
Loss of confidence and trust in even one financial institution can threaten the stability of the 
entire financial sector because feelings about one erring institution can be extended to other 
institutions.  This  fiduciary  responsibility  that  financial  institutions  carry  requires  that  all 
players in the financial sector are subjected to elaborate oversight. In this regard, the Boards 
of Directors are one organ that is vested with this responsibility of oversight.  
Before  I  comment  on  the  significance  of  board  charters  in  augmenting  good  corporate 
governance  in  the  financial  sector,  I  think  it  is  appropriate  that  I  acknowledge  the 
commendable work that has gone into implementing the FSDP through collaborative effort 
involving  government  and  other  institutions.  The  Government,  working  with  the  three 
financial  sector  regulatory  bodies,  namely,  the  Bank  of  Zambia,  the  Pensions  &  Insurance 
Authority  and  the  Securities  &  Exchange  Commission  has  continued  to  take  the  lead  in 
implementing various reforms. This effort has been supported by private sector experts and 
representatives 
the  FSDP 
recommendations.  
This collaborative effort among a range of market players has resulted in positive milestones 
being achieved including:  
(i) 
technical  aspects  of 
implementing 
responsible 
the 
for 
Ongoing  review  and  updating  of  the  financial  sector  legislation,  including  the 
Banking  and  Financial  Services  Act;  the  Pensions  Scheme  Regulation  Act;  the 
Insurance Act; and the Securities Act targeted for legislation in 2012;  
Participation  in  the  on-going  review  of  the  Companies  Act  whose  comprehensive 
revisions  under  the  Ministry  of  Commerce,  Trade  and  Industry  are  scheduled  for 
2012;  
Resolution  of  weaknesses  in  the  state  owned  financial  institutions  which  have 
become profitable and innovative in terms of delivery of financial services;  
Introduction  of  a  regulatory  framework  for  the  introduction  of  a  credit  reference 
bureau;  
Development  and 
establishment of a Financial Intelligence Unit;  
laundering  guidelines  and 
issuance  of  anti  money 
the 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
(vi) 
(vii) 
Development  and  issuance  of  the  corporate  governance  guidelines  by  the 
regulators; and,  
Strengthening  the  autonomy  and  enhancing  the  supervisory  capacities  of  the 
three financial sector regulatory authorities.  
Powers, functions and delegations of the board;  
Board composition and mix – and the challenge in state-owned institutions;  
The Chairperson and CEO – and whether they should be different persons and why;  
Rights and duties of Directors – and that ultimately the buck stops here;  
The role of the Board Secretary – and how they can help drive the right agenda;  
Disclosure of conflict of interest and the challenge of ethical standards;  
Members’ remuneration and expenses – and what is morally right?  
Corporate social responsibility; and,  
Evaluation of the Board’s performance, etc.  
Through the FSDP, the BoZ is also working with stakeholders like the Institute of Directors 
(IoD)  in  enhancing  corporate  governance  among  various  stakeholders  within  the  financial 
sector.  Under  the  first  phase  of  the  FSDP,  IoD  conducted  seminars  on  core  principles  of 
corporate governance targeted at executives and senior officials in the financial and business 
sector.  
In  addition,  the  IoD  provided  input  into  the  Corporate  Governance  Model  Board  Charter 
which has been developed with technical expertise from MTN Special Engagements led by 
Ms  Mary  Ncube.  The  outcome  of  this  work  is  what  will  be  presented  to  you  today.  The 
presentation will focus on the significant position that Boards of Directors occupy in the whole 
Corporate Governance process and how their role, functions and operations may be reduced 
into a charter that might guide their work., including;  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
But why do we need a Board Charter one may be tempted to ask? I think it is correct to say 
that  second  only  to  the  articles  of  association,  a  Board  Charter  is  probably  the  most 
important  corporate  governance  policy  document  which  defines  the  respective  roles, 
responsibilities  and  authorities  of  the  board  and  management  in  setting  the  direction,  the 
management and control of an organisation.  
It is a document that is useful to both old and new directors, particularly those who may not 
be  familiar  with  how  a  company  conducts  its  business  and  what  is  expected  of  them  as 
directors. In this respect, the charter serves the following functions among many;  
One-source reference – a board charter is a one-source document which clearly sets out 
how the board and directors are to perform their roles.  
As an induction tool – a board charter acts as an induction tool for new directors and senior 
managers.  
Standard key board documentation – it contains documentation templates for such things 
as the board meeting agenda and board paper format.  
Having  said  this,  I  need  to  place  a  rider  by  stating  that  these  charters  that  you  will  be 
examining this morning only set out minimum standards of what the boards are required to 
do. Some institutions present here may already have charters which are more elaborate than 
the  model  charters.  That  is  fine  as  you  will  not  be  required  to  downgrade  your  existing 
charters. But for those institutions which might not have any charters, it may well be useful to 
consider  customising  the  model  charters.  If  in  adopting  model  charters,  some  of  you  find 
certain provisions too onerous, it may be necessary to consider a phased approach to their 
adoption.  In  this  way,  the  process  of  adopting  model  charters  will  not  place  on  an 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
organisation  undue  difficulties.  The  model  charters,  it  is  hoped  will  act  as  guide  for 
institutions to adopt elements that are applicable to their sub sector and industry and act as a 
benchmark,  for  you,  and  for  assessing  board  and  management  and  for  assisting  the 
oversight  function  by  regulatory  supervisors.,  such  as  ourselves.  I  expect  that  individual 
institutions requiring further advice will continue to engage us, as well as the consultants, to 
ensure  that  they  extract  maximum  benefit  from  the  work  that  has  gone  into  this  phase  of 
the FSDP.  
I thank you all and wish you fruitful deliberations. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
