Jean-Claude Trichet: Towards a more integrated Europe – challenges 
ahead for the euro area and Central and Eastern Europe 
Address by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the National 
Bank of Poland’s conference “Towards a more integrated Europe – challenges ahead for the 
euro area and Central and Eastern Europe”, Warsaw, 21 October 2011. 
 President of the Republic of Poland,  
President of the European Parliament,  
President of the National Bank of Poland, 
Ministers, 
Governors,  
Commissioner Rehn 
Distinguished guests, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Let me start by thanking my dear friend and colleague, President Belka, for inviting me to 
address such a distinguished audience today.  
Twenty  years  ago,  the  dissolution  of  the  Soviet  Union  marked  one  of  the  most  important 
events in European history – the final stage of the revolutions that began two years earlier in 
1989;  the  end  of  communism  in  the  countries  of  Central  and  Eastern  Europe;  and  the 
beginning of their transition to democracy and market economies. 
It  is  also  almost  20  years  since  the  European  Council  met  in  the  city  of  Maastricht in  the 
Netherlands to agree on strengthening the pillars of the European Union (EU) and laying the 
foundations for the transition to Europe’s Economic and Monetary Union (EMU). 
The changes that Europe has seen over the last two decades have been enormous 
Right  from  the  start,  the  countries  of  Central  and  Eastern  Europe  embarked  on  a  hugely 
ambitious  path  of  reform.  Leaving  aside  differences  across  countries,  a  long  and 
challenging  process  of  economic  transformation  brought  countries  in  the  region 
significant  improvements  in  incomes  and  living  standards.  Full  membership  of  the  EU  
–  or  the  prospects  of  accession  –  provided  an  important  stimulus  for  the  process  of 
transformation as well as an anchor of stability. 
In Western Europe, completion of the three stages of EMU led to the establishment of the 
European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  and  the  introduction  of  the  euro  in  January  1999.  Having 
started originally with 11 participating countries, the euro area has since expanded to include 
17  EU  Member  States  including  some  previous  transition  economies,  namely  Estonia, 
Slovenia and Slovakia. 
The changes Europe has seen over these past 20 years are enormous. Equally enormous 
have been the challenges along the way, not least of course due to the global financial crisis. 
But there have also been enormous achievements. In my remarks today, I would like to take 
stock  of  some  of  those  achievements  and  focus  on  three  main  aspects  of  the  process  of 
economic convergence in Central and Eastern Europe. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Three main aspects of the process of economic convergence 
Nominal and real convergence: what has been achieved? 
1. 
The  first  aspect  of  convergence  relates  to  developments  in  terms  of  nominal  and  real 
convergence  between  the  countries  of  Central  and  Eastern  Europe  and  the  euro  area. 
Looking at the region as a whole, after some  very difficult years, inflation has come down 
dramatically from very high levels at the beginning of transition to single-digit levels today. 
Long-term  interest  rates  have  also  fallen  substantially,  reflecting  the  gradual  anchoring  of 
inflation expectations.  
The countries of the region have also made remarkable progress in terms of institutional and 
structural  convergence.  In  particular,  we  have  witnessed  the  building  of  appropriate 
institutions, increased trade integration with the euro area and improvements in the business 
environment.  
Naturally, this progress has been reflected in per capita income convergence. Over the last 
20 years, per capita income has risen to an average of 63% of the EU average if adjusted in 
terms of Purchasing Power Parity (PPP).  
But  combining  low  inflation  with  real  convergence  has  posed  a  serious  challenge  in  many 
countries. Let me elaborate on this.  
The very process of real convergence entails upward pressures on prices, which can be hard 
to avoid in terms of both relative prices and the overall price level. Among other things, these 
pressures stem from high productivity growth as well as the processes of price liberalization 
and tax harmonization.  
Price  increases  related  to  productivity  growth  are  usually  referred  to  as  the  Balassa-
Samuelson  effect.  But  most  studies  have  found  this  effect  to  be  relatively  limited.1 
Convergence  in  price  levels,  which  stood  on  average  at  two  thirds  of  the  EU  average  in 
2010, seems to have surpassed convergence in income levels in all countries of the region. 
This means that growth in prices has generally been higher than growth in productivity.  
Potential rigidities in labour and product markets and, in some cases, an excessively loose 
macroeconomic  stance  may  have  complicated  the  delivery  of  low  inflation  rates.  Indeed, 
while  all  countries  have  reduced  inflation  to  moderate  levels,  the  entrenchment  of  a  low 
inflation environment still constitutes a challenge in many economies. 
2. 
Importance of ensuring polices that support fast and sustainable output 
growth  
The second aspect of convergence that I would like to highlight relates to the growth model 
followed  by  some  new  EU  Member  States.  Given  its  lower  starting  point  in  terms  of  real 
income,  it  could  be  expected  that,  in  a  world  with  full  financial  integration,  large  capital 
inflows would flow into the region.  
Moreover, as people expect to be richer tomorrow than today, they may choose to smooth 
consumption  over  time  by  borrowing  today,  the  more  so  the  higher  the  expected  gains  in 
disposable  income.  A  process  of  gradual  real  exchange  rate  appreciation,  supported  by 
strong,  domestically  driven  output  growth  and  temporarily  accompanied  by  relatively  large 
current  account  deficits,  would  seem  fully  in  line  with  what  the  theory  of  convergence 
suggests.  
                                                 
1   According to Mihaljek, D. and M. Klau (2008), over the period from the mid-1990s to the first quarter of 2008, 
the Balassa-Samuelson effect would explain around 24% of the CEE inflation differentials vis-à-vis the euro 
area. For more details, see, “Catching-up an inflation in transition economies: the Balassa-Samuelson effect 
revisited”, BIS Working Paper. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
financial  sector 
for  example,  construction  and 
But in several countries, the process of real convergence proved itself difficultly sustainable. 
During the period before the global crisis, expectations were overly optimistic, and investors 
and  consumers  engaged  in  economic  behaviour  that  generated  excess  domestic  demand, 
strong credit growth and inflationary pressures.  
As in many other markets, risk premia were squeezed, leading to asset price misalignments 
(particularly in the housing market) and over-indebtedness in a context of abundant global 
liquidity and a strong appetite for risk. Foreign direct investment flows often focused on the 
non-tradable  sector, 
intermediation. 
Furthermore,  foreign  currency  lending  grew  rapidly,  leading  to  increasing  balance-sheet 
mismatches.  
As  a  result  a  number  of  countries  experienced  notable  departures  from  price  stability  and 
wide external imbalances that eroded competitiveness – developments that went over and 
above what could be justified by “equilibrium” catching-up.  
Macroeconomic  policies  added  to  the  risks.  In  countries  with  a  fixed  exchange  rate, 
independent monetary policy was not available, resulting in monetary policy conditions that 
became too expansionary. In principle, this could have been compensated by very tight fiscal 
policy. But with the benefit of hindsight, fiscal policies were often insufficiently restrictive or 
even loose. 
The  global  crisis  revealed  these  weaknesses  with  particular  virulence.  When  capital  flows 
dried  up  in  late  2008  and  trade  collapsed,  real  output  declined  sharply,  in  some  cases 
leading to severe recessions. With the main and remarkable exception of Poland, the region 
was severely hit by the crisis. Many observers feared then that, if the crisis were allowed to 
run its course, it could be near catastrophic for the region and extremely dangerous for the 
European banking system.  
But  I  am  pleased  to  say  that  this  potential  “catastrophe”  was  avoided  and  I  would  like  to 
devote  my  remaining  time  to  the  question  of  how  this  was  done  –  the  third  aspect  of  the 
convergence process I previously mentioned. I believe answering this question may provide 
lessons for countries that are currently facing similar challenges in the euro area. 
3. 
The reaction of CEE countries to the global financial crisis: what can be 
learnt? 
In my view, the return to the convergence path is being achieved thanks to a combination of 
four main elements.  
First and foremost, there are domestic policy actions to address macroeconomic imbalances 
at the national level. The precise policy actions differ across countries, reflecting the different 
country-specific challenges and policy frameworks in place. But the actions generally require 
a strong fiscal adjustment and/or measures to maintain confidence in the soundness of the 
financial sector. 
Second,  the  reaction  of  the  international  community  has  been  essential.  Where  funding 
challenges became more acute, international financial assistance led by the IMF – jointly with 
the  EU  in  EU  Member  States,–  has  been  crucial  in  supporting  market  confidence  and 
avoiding financial crises. The balance of payments support facility available for EU Member 
States has been reactivated, while the World Bank, the European Bank for Reconstruction 
and  Development  and  the  European  Investment  Bank  have  supported  several  countries. 
Some European countries have also provided bilateral financial support. 
Third, the private sector, represented by the foreign banks active in the region, has by and 
large  maintained  its  exposure  to  the  region,  helped  by  the  informal  forum  known  as  the 
“Vienna  Initiative”.  By  avoiding  a  large-scale  uncoordinated  withdrawal  of  cross-border 
banking groups from Central and Eastern Europe, a systemic crisis in the region could be 
avoided.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Finally,  the  ECB  is  also  making  a  key  contribution.  For  example,  by  providing  extensive 
liquidity  provision  to  parent  banks  established  in  the  euro  area,  the  subsidiaries  of  those 
banks in Central and Eastern Europe are indirectly benefiting from this ample liquidity.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  let  me  draw  to  a  close.  I  am  sure  that  the  three  aspects  of 
convergence  that  I  have  mentioned  will  be  better  understood  thanks  to  the  discussions, 
which will take place during this impressive conference.  
Achieving  sustainable  convergence  requires  the  conduct  of  sound  economic  policies,  both 
before and after adoption of the euro. The present global crisis is demonstrating, once again, 
to  which  extent  continuous  resolute  sound  macro  policies  are  the  best  way  to  improve 
economic and financial resilience in times of unexpected challenges and shocks. 
Thank you very much for your attention.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
