Mark Carney: Opening statement for appearance before the House of 
Commons Standing Committee on Finance 
Opening statement by Mr Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of Canada, presented to the 
House of Commons Standing Committee on Finance, Ottawa, Ontario, 1 November 2011. 
 Good  morning.  Tiff  and  I  are  pleased  to  be  here  with  you  today  to  discuss  the  October 
Monetary Policy Report, which the Bank published last week. 
 
to 
the  various  measures  and 
The  global  economy  has  slowed  markedly  as  several  downside  risks  to  the 
projection  outlined  in  the  Bank’s  July  MPR  have  been  realized.  Volatility  has 
increased  and  there  has  been  a  generalized  retrenchment  from  risk-taking  across 
markets.  The  combination  of  ongoing  deleveraging  by  banks  and  households, 
increased  fiscal  austerity  and  declining  confidence  is  expected  to  restrain  growth 
across the advanced economies.  
The Bank now expects that the euro area – where these dynamics are most acute – 
will  experience  a  brief  recession.  The  Bank’s  base-case  scenario  nonetheless 
assumes  that  the  euro-area  crisis  will  be  contained,  although  this  assumption  is 
clearly subject to downside risks.  
We  welcome  the  agreement  announced  last  week  by  euro  area  leaders  on  a 
comprehensive plan to address the ongoing challenges in Europe. We look forward 
to  additional  details  on  modalities  of 
their 
implementation in the coming weeks.  
In the United States, real GDP growth is expected to be weak through the first half 
of 2012, reflecting diminished household confidence, tighter financial conditions and 
increased fiscal drag.  
Growth in China and other emerging-market economies is projected to moderate to 
a  more  sustainable  pace.  These  developments,  combined  with  recent  declines  in 
commodity prices, are expected to dampen global inflationary pressures. 
The  outlook  for  the  Canadian  economy  has  weakened  since  July,  with  the 
significantly 
through 
financial, confidence and trade channels. Although Canadian growth rebounded in 
the  third  quarter  with  the  unwinding  of  temporary  factors,  underlying  economic 
momentum  has  slowed  and  is  expected  to  remain  modest  through  the  middle  of 
next year. 
Household  expenditures  are  projected  to  grow  relatively  modestly  as  lower 
commodity  prices  and  heightened  volatility  in  financial  markets  weigh  on  the 
incomes, wealth and confidence of Canadian households.  
Business  fixed  investment  is  still  expected  to  grow  solidly  in  response  to  very 
stimulative  financial  conditions  and  heightened  competitive  pressures,  although  it 
will be dampened by the weaker and more uncertain global economic environment. 
Net exports are expected to remain a source of weakness, owing to sluggish foreign 
demand and ongoing competitiveness challenges, including the persistent strength 
of the Canadian dollar. 
Overall,  the  Bank  expects  that  growth  in  Canada  will  be  slow  through  mid-2012 
before  picking  up  as  the  global  economic  environment  improves,  uncertainty 
dissipates and confidence increases.  
less-favourable  external  environment  affecting  Canada 
         BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
         2 
 The weaker economic outlook implies greater and more persistent economic slack 
than previously anticipated, with the Canadian economy now expected to return to 
full capacity by the end of 2013. As a result, core inflation is expected to be slightly 
softer  than  previously  expected,  declining  through  2012  before  returning  to 
2 per cent by the end of 2013.  
The  projection  for  total  CPI  inflation  has  also  been  revised  down,  reflecting  the 
recent reversal of earlier sharp increases in world energy prices, as well as modestly 
weaker core inflation. Total CPI inflation is expected to trough around 1 per cent by 
the middle of 2012 before rising with core inflation to the 2 per cent target by the end 
of 2013, as excess supply in the economy is slowly absorbed. 
There are several significant risks to the inflation outlook in Canada.  
The  three  main  upside  risks  relate  to  the  possibility  of  stronger-than-expected 
inflationary  pressures  in  the  global  economy,  stronger  momentum  in  Canadian 
household  spending,  and  the  possibility  of  a  faster-than-expected  rebound  in 
business and consumer confidence, due to more decisive policy action in the major 
advanced economies. 
The  three  main  downside  risks  relate  to  sovereign  debt  and  banking  concerns  in 
Europe,  the  increased  probability  of  a  recession  in  the  U.S.  economy,  and  the 
possibility  that  growth  in  household  spending  in  Canada  could  be  weaker  than 
projected. 
Reflecting  all  of  these  factors,  the  Bank  last  week  maintained  the  target  for  the 
overnight rate at 1 per cent. With the target interest rate near historic lows and the 
financial system functioning well, there is considerable monetary policy stimulus in 
Canada.  The  Bank  will  continue  to  monitor  carefully  economic  and  financial 
developments in the Canadian and global economies, together with the evolution of 
risks,  and  set  monetary  policy  consistent  with  achieving  the  2 per cent  inflation 
target over the medium term. 
I  would  now  like  to  say  a  word  about  an  issue  that  this  Committee  has  raised 
recently  – 
the 
Government of Canada. This is central to the Bank’s mission and we appreciate the 
Committee’s interest in it. 
Since  1991,  inflation  targeting  has  proven  its  worth  in  both  tranquil  and  turbulent 
times. Even so, we are always looking to improve the framework.  
At  the  time  of  the  last  renewal,  the  Bank  committed  to  continue  its  research  into 
potential improvements that might build on the success of the current framework. A 
concerted  and  ambitious  research  agenda  focused  on  evaluating  whether  two 
specific changes – targeting a lower rate of inflation or a path for the level of prices – 
could  provide  significant  net  benefits  to  the  Canadian  economy  and  Canadian 
households.  Subsequently,  the  experience  of  the  global  financial  and  economic 
crisis prompted the Bank to add a third item to its research agenda – asking to what 
extent monetary policy should take account of financial stability considerations. 
Allow me to highlight just some of the initiatives and work undertaken by the Bank 
over the past five years. Since 2008, we have had three major conferences for our 
staff and other researchers to present work on inflation targeting and the monetary 
policy  framework.  The  most  important  of  these  research  papers  have  been 
published in three special issues of the Bank of Canada Review – Winter 2007–08, 
Spring 2009 and Summer 2010. As well, Governing Council members have spoken 
regularly and publicly about the issues. 
inflation-control  agreement  with 
the  renewal  of 
the  Bank’s 
BIS central bankers’ speeches
 We  have  been  pleased  to  answer  questions  before  this  Committee  regarding 
progress  to  date  toward  renewing  the  inflation-control  target.  And  Tiff  and  I  are 
happy to answer more of these questions today, as well of course, questions about 
the outlook for the Canadian economy. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
