Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Fostering price stability and a sound 
financial system in Uganda 
Speech by Mr Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile, Governor of the Bank of Uganda, at the end 
of year thanksgiving party, held at the Bank of Uganda, Kampala, 9 December 2011. 
 Our Guest Speaker, Dr. Steve Ogan, 
Members of the Board, 
Senior Management of the Bank, 
Invited guests, 
Members of staff of the Bank, 
Ladies and Gentlemen. 
On  behalf  of  the  Board,  Management  and  Staff  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  I  am  pleased  to 
welcome  you  all  to  this  end  of  year  thanksgiving  celebration.  As  children  of  God, 
thanksgiving ought to be integral part of our lives. Let us choose to Praise God with songs 
and magnify Him with thanksgiving as the Psalmist did in Psalm 69:30. 
We, at Bank of Uganda, have every reason to give thanks to the Almighty God. He has given 
us  amazing  victories  throughout  the  year  2011,  amidst  challenges  of  vast  magnitude  at 
Global, regional, national, institutional and individual level. 
We can only be said to be alive in those moments when our hearts are conscious 
of our treasures. ~ (Thornton Wilder) 
Out of God’s unmerited grace and favor, He has kept us alive and well throughout the year to 
work  tirelessly  towards  our  mission  of  fostering  price  stability  and  a  sound  financial 
system. We thank God for everyone within and outside the Bank that has contributed to the 
pursuit of our vision and mission. 
We  have  witnessed  outstanding  victories  which  could  never  have  been  achieved  without 
grace and favor from God. 
Through  the  year,  there  has  been  a  smooth  and  gradual  transition  from  the  old  currency 
notes to the new notes which registered significant reductions in counterfeit crimes. 
We wish to thank the Almighty God for enabling us win a Global Award, the first of its kind in 
Africa, for the 50,000/= Uganda Currency note as the best Bank Note of the year for 2010 
by International Bank Note Society (IBNS). Bank of Uganda also received an award for 
the  Best  Bank  Notes  Series  in  2010  from International Association of Currency Affairs 
(IACA).  The  twin  awards  were  received  by  the  Bank  of  Uganda  Deputy  Governor  in 
Singapore in September 2011. This came shortly after the Bank of Uganda Governor was 
recognized as the best African Central Bank Governor by the African Banker Awards 
2011. 
We continue to thank God for His wisdom and guidance in streamlining monetary policy to 
positively  impact  on  price  stability. For  the  first  time  ever  in  about  20  years,  the  Country’s 
inflation rate had grown above 30%, a situation which appeared to be growing out of control. 
We are grateful to God that as this year draws to a close, the inflation rate is dropping from 
30.4% in the month of October to 29% in November and will certainly continue to drop. The 
Uganda  Shilling  has  also  appreciated  to  the  dollar  from  a  low  adverse  rate  of  almost  
2,900/= in the month of October to a higher value of 2,500/= to date. 
We  have  registered  several  milestones  towards  achievement  of  set  goals  of  customer 
satisfaction  by  aiming  at  zero  tolerance  for  inefficiencies  in  the  financial,  monetary  and 
payment  systems  which 
regional 
harmonization. 
turn  have  contributed 
tremendously 
towards 
in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Some of these milestones include, 
 
 financial 
financial 
institutions 
to  ensure 
Close  and  effective  supervision  of 
soundness of the economy, 
Launching of inflation targeting, 
upgrade of  the RTGS from a Uganda Shilling based System to one that supports 
East African Currencies, 
creation of a platform for cross-border payments, 
launching of Internet Banking, 
and facelift of the BOU website. 
Considerable improvement in service delivery to our customers 
Real time account balances and statements 
Provision of daily government position 
Holding 2 daily clearing sessions 
And Improved financial reporting 
 
 
 
Since the Implementation of Bank of Uganda Banking System (BBS) in July 2010, the Bank 
has registered the following successes: 
 
 
 
 
 
Amidst  all  the  above  milestones,  there  have  been  significant  challenges.  “To  be  tested  is 
good.  The  challenged  life  may  be  the  best  therapist.”  (Gail  Sheehy).  During  this  year,  we 
(BOU)  have  featured  in  the  media  but  we  have  seen  the  Almighty  God  vindicate  us  from 
various accusations. We continue to thank God for the registered victory, the trust that He 
will take us through any other challenges and that through all this we are coming out more 
resilient and a better BOU! 
This year, as part of our corporate social responsibility, we have committed to facilitate the 
running  of  a  Mobile  Dental  Clinic  for  HIV  positive  children  that  will  be  held  at  Reach  Out 
Mbuya Clinic in Kasaala on 17th December 2011. This clinic will be conducted by Dr. Brian 
Rushaju who is here today with his wife and I thank Dr. Rushaju for partnering with us in this 
cause. 
I want to thank each one of you very candidly for your individual and collective contributions 
towards making this year a great success. 
I would like to express my sincere gratitude to God for the opportunity to serve our nation 
with members of staff through the year. At the same time, my condolences go out to staff 
members who lost their loved ones in 2011. May the Almighty God comfort them with grace 
and mercy as they continue serve the Bank. 
I would like to encourage each one of us to celebrate life and strive to excel in our different 
roles here at the Bank knowing that God is indeed with us. As Dorothy Sayers put it, “Work is 
not primarily a thing one does to live, but the thing one lives to do. It is or it should be, the full 
expression of the worker’s faculties, the thing in which he finds spiritual, mental, and bodily 
satisfaction, and the medium in which he offers himself to God.” 
Finally, with a heart full of gratitude to the Almighty God, I wish to congratulate members of 
the Board, Senior Management and all members of staff for coming to the end of the year. I 
am eternally grateful for the contributions you have made to enable the Bank to carry out its 
responsibilities very effectively during the year. 
I also wish to thank the Bank of Uganda Christian Fellowship, for their continued prayers and 
intercession  for  the  Bank.  May  the  grace  of  God  that  enables  you  to  take  charge  of  this 
responsibility continue to abound in your lives. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
I thank God for all our customers including Government, Projects, Financial institutions, the 
public and all other stakeholders who enrich BOU’s purpose of existence. 
I wish you all a Merry Christmas and a prosperous New Year 2012. 
Last but not least, I take this opportunity to thank Dr. Steve Ogan for accepting our invitation 
to come and minister to us today. 
I now invite him (Dr Steve) to share with us the word of God. 
I thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
