Stefan Ingves: Basel III – regulations for safer banking 
Speech by Mr Stefan Ingves, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank and Chairman of the Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  to  the  the  Swedish  Bankers’  Association,  Stockholm, 
10 November 2011. 
 I  would  like  to  begin  by  expressing  my  gratitude  for  the  invitation  to  speak  at  this  bank 
meeting on the theme of “Basel III – regulations for safer banking”.  
In this presentation, I will briefly describe the Basel III regulations and the underlying reasons 
for them. Following that, I shall discuss the characteristics of the Swedish bank market that 
are significant for how we in Sweden shall implement Basel III. Before I finish, I would also 
like to illustrate how the authorities of a few other countries with large banking industries see 
the need for regulation. 
Briefly,  however,  I  intend  to  start  by  describing  the  background  of  bank  regulation  –  why 
advanced economies need a financial system, and the risks this entails. 
Banks are important to the economy 
The banks are of fundamental importance to the national economy. The banks are the single 
most  important  participants  in  the  financial  system,  and  their  basic  functions  are  often 
considered  to  be  three.  The  system  converts  savers’  money  into  productive  investments, 
ensures that we can pay each other when we exchange goods and services, and allocates 
risk among those who are willing to take risks and those who are not.  
Through these functions, a meeting place is formed by the financial system (and particularly 
the  banks)  for  the  economic  activities  of  households  and  companies.  Perhaps  it  could  be 
likened  to  a  motorway  junction  for  the  economy.  In  the  financial  sector,  the  income  and 
expenditure  of  households  and  companies  meet  like  traffic  flowing  from  all  directions.  A 
robust construction is needed to make this interaction proceed smoothly. When a lot of traffic 
is moving at high speed, the construction must also have a clear focus on safety. The higher 
the speed limit, the greater the safety margins must be. 
Financial crises have major macroeconomic costs 
Just like driving on a motorway, the financial system entails risks. On the roads, these risks 
do not just affect the driver’s own vehicle, but the entire flow of traffic. In the same way, the 
economic costs of a financial crisis are significant. Nobody could have missed this in recent 
years. 
We know that financial crises have permanent effects on growth. It is often not possible to 
recover from the major fall in GDP that is the consequence of a deep financial crisis in the 
period following such a crisis. Normally, we see a downwards shift in GDP level trend even if 
good times may then mean a return to the same rate of growth.  
The economic costs are significant. Of course, any estimate would vary depending on the 
crisis and assumptions, but a mainstream assessment would be just over 60 per cent of pre-
crisis GDP. So transposed to Swedish conditions, around SEK 2 000 billion is at stake. This 
happens to be in the same order of magnitude as the balance sheet total of three of the four 
major Swedish banking groups. 
And,  of  course,  this  kind  of  shock  to  the  national  economy  would  not  spare  the  country’s 
citizens in their role as taxpayers. Financial crises impact severely on the public treasury. A 
recently-presented  British  investigation  –  the  so-called  Vickers  report  –  shows  how  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
financial  crisis,  since  2007,  has  increased  the  United  Kingdom’s  public  net  debt  by  about 
100 per cent of GDP. 
Basel III is strengthening the system’s airbags… 
The crisis of recent years has made us painfully aware of the financial system’s vulnerability 
and its importance for the real economy. The need for bigger and better airbags is obvious. 
These lessons lie behind the global Basel III agreement. 
The most important areas of Basel III deal with the quantitative requirements for capital and 
liquidity being placed on the banks.  
…with a substantial amount of equity… 
The Basel Committee’s analysis has concluded that the banks need substantial resilience. 
The crisis has shown the risk of considerable losses.  
So  capital  requirements  are  being  increased  in  Basel  III,  above  all  for  Common  Equity 
Tier 1.1 The minimum requirement for the banks’ equity is being set at 4.5 per cent of risk-
weighted assets – more than double the requirement under Basel II. A capital conservation 
buffer of 2.5 per cent, added to a contra cyclical buffer, will create a stronger shock absorber 
than previously was the case. This contracyclical buffer is built up when times are good to 
then  provide  a  safety  margin  during  downturns.  The  capital  adequacy  requirement  is  also 
complemented with a pure leverage ratio measure, meaning that equity may not fall below 
3 per cent of total assets. 
Under earlier frameworks, other capital, of lower quality, could have accounted for a large part 
of  capital  adequacy.  This  applies  to  both  Additional  Tier  1,  i.e.  other  instruments  that  cover 
losses  while  the  bank  is  active  (going  concern),  and  Tier  2,  which  is  to  say  financing 
instruments  that  can  cover  losses  if  the  bank  should  fail  (gone  concern)  –  for  example, 
unsecured  debts  with  long  maturities  that  cannot  be  redeemed.  The  crisis  has  shown  that, 
above all, it is Common Equity Tier 1 that can be counted on when the tide turns for the worse. 
All  in  all,  the  banks’  capital  position  will  be  strengthened  considerably  compared  with 
previous regulations, contributing to the boosting of confidence in the individual banks and in 
the system as a whole. 
…clear measures for liquidity… 
In the autumn of 2008, we saw how a lack of confidence in the financial markets rapidly led 
to liquidity problems. So one priority for increasing financial stability has been to ensure the 
banks  are  able  to  manage  liquidity  problems  in  the  short  and  long  terms.  The  Basel 
Committee is thus introducing quantitative liquidity requirements for banks for the first time. 
Basel III works with two liquidity measures – one short-term and one long-term. The short-
term measure is based on, in principle, every bank having sufficient liquid assets to survive 
for at least 30 days. It is difficult to see such a requirement as unreasonable. The long-term 
measure, in principle, limits the gap between the maturity of a bank’s assets and the maturity 
of its debts. This limits the duration risk of the bank. 
…and particularly the regulation of systemically-important banks 
A  particular  focus  has  been  placed  on  systemic  risks  and  the  most  systemically-important 
institutions. To a great extent, this is a work in progress. So far, the Basel Committee has 
                                                 
1 
In principle, Basel III defines Common Equity Tier 1 as share capital and previous profits. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
identified almost 30 global systemically-important banks (G-SIBs). The list was published last 
week and includes one of the major Swedish banks, as you may have noticed.  
The  Committee  feels  that  it  is  particularly  important  that  these  banks  have  extra  strong 
resilience. Those identified as G-SIBs should thus have an additional capital buffer, the size 
of  which  depends  on  how  systemically  important  each  bank  is  deemed  to  be  on  a  global 
level. A framework should be put in place for how the authorities in different countries should 
handle  them  if  they  find  themselves  teetering  on  the  brink.  In  addition,  the  supervision  of 
these banks should be particularly intensive. 
Work to identify which banks are systemically important on the regional and national levels 
will also start soon. This work is, of course, particularly interesting for us in Sweden. 
Conditions in Sweden should be considered in the implementation of Basel III 
The regulations I have just sketched will eventually enter the national legislation. They are to 
be fully implemented by 2019, with several milestones on the way. 
The Basel Committee has been clear that the regulations and the implementation of them 
form a minimum standard. Financial systems differ from country to country and so there may 
be reason for certain countries to place higher demands than have been placed globally.  
The  Swedish  banking  system  is  distinguished  by  a  number  of  characteristics  that  make  it 
somewhat special from an international perspective – characteristics that either increase the 
risk of problems or the socioeconomic costs if problems should arise in the banking sector. 
Some  of  these  characteristics  are  that  the  banking  system  is  concentrated,  large  and 
international,  with  significant  implicit  state  guarantees,  a  heavy  dependence  on  market 
funding, particularly in foreign currency, and low risk weightings.  
The Swedish banking system is concentrated 
The Swedish banking system is highly concentrated. The four major banks stand for about 
three-quarters of both lending and deposits. The major Swedish banks have large exposures 
to one another, primarily through interbank loans and holdings of covered bonds.  
Risks arising in a single bank’s operations can thereby easily be spread to the other major 
banks. During the crisis, we also saw how uncertainty over future loan losses in individual 
banks spilled over to the others. In the eyes of a foreign investor, the Swedish banks were all 
travelling on the motorway in the same vehicle.  
Swedish banks are large and internationally dependent 
The Swedish banks are also large in relation to the Swedish economy. The assets in the total 
banking sector are equivalent to about 425 per cent of Sweden’s GDP. One reason for this is 
that  they  have  comprehensive  international  operations.  At  the  same  time,  there  are  few 
effective international agreements on how to manage cross-border banking groups in a crisis 
situation.  Consequently,  the  failure  of  a  major  Swedish  bank  would  risk  being  difficult  to 
manage. This also means that the cost for Sweden’s taxpayers would risk being significant.  
The market assumes that major Swedish banks have implicit state guarantees 
The market also assumes that the major banks have an implicit guarantee from the state, as 
they are considered to be too big for the state to allow them to fail. This means that these 
banks  can  obtain  cheaper  funding  than  would  otherwise  have  been  the  case.  The  implied 
state guarantees were clearly illustrated by our neighbour, Denmark, when Amagerbanken 
collapsed  and  the  Danish  authorities  forced  senior  lenders  to  contribute.  The  result  of  this 
was that the credit rating agency Moody’s lowered the credit ratings of several Danish banks 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
and loan loss insurance became more expensive. Moody’s justified this change by claiming 
that the implicit state guarantee had decreased.  
Major Swedish banks have a large share of market funding in foreign currency 
In addition, the major Swedish banks receive a large share of their funding – about half – 
from  the  financial  markets.  In  addition,  almost  half  of  this  market  funding  is  in  foreign 
currency.  The  integration  of  financial  markets  is  basically  a  good  thing.  Much  of  foreign 
currency borrowing is necessary to meet lending needs. And market funding can be good for 
spreading  financing  risks.  But  at  the  same  time,  the  risk  of  imported  shocks  increases. 
Borrowing in foreign currency for lending in Swedish kronor also increases dependence on 
the efficiency of the swap market. The liquidity risks taken by the major Swedish banks are 
also still larger than the European average.  Unexpected negative events or disruptions on 
the international financial markets can thus cause considerable problems for the major banks 
and ultimately for the Swedish economy. 
Swedish banks have low risk weightings 
The  low  risk  weightings  in  Sweden  are  particularly  important  for  the  Basel  regulations  on 
capital adequacy. At present, of course, the banks can calculate risk weights using internal 
risk-classification  models  based  on  historical  data  on  loan  losses.  From  an  international 
perspective,  these  internal  models  generate  very  low  risk  weights  for  Swedish  mortgages. 
The question is how well the last 20–30 years of history reflect the risks we may face in the 
future. 
History warns us of low resilience in the financial sector 
Even before the last crisis, we in Sweden had already seen warnings of insufficient capital 
levels. The credit deregulation of the mid-1980s coincided with the highest leverage ratios in 
Swedish  banking  history.  As  some  of  us  remember,  lending  increased  almost  explosively 
during the second half of the 1980s. The low solvency of the 1980s created strong financial 
leverage that facilitated the excessively rapid growth of credit. 
As most of us remember, this ended in disaster. The low level of solvency also made the 
banks far too vulnerable when growth slowed down. The crash at the start of the 1990s led to 
a banking crisis with three years of negative growth and steeply rising unemployment and 
public debt. As we all know, leverage can work both ways. 
Resilience is needed in uncertain times 
Only a few years ago, we came close to seeing history repeat itself. In late 2008 and early 
2009, Sweden stood on the brink of a new banking crisis. The low level of confidence on the 
financial  market  and  great  uncertainty  over  developments  in  the  Baltic  countries  made  it 
difficult  or  impossible  for  Swedish  banks  to  obtain  funding  on  the  market.  The  measures 
adopted  by  the  Riksbank,  the  Ministry  of  Finance,  Finansinspektionen  and  the  Swedish 
National Debt Office were decisive for saving the situation. 
The Swedish banks have had comparatively minor loan losses and provisions since 2008. 
But there is nothing to say that the banking sector will not be affected more severely next 
time. Allow me to use a rough estimate to give you an idea of how a crisis can impact the 
banks’  equity.  In  2007–2010,  35  of  the  largest  banks  in  the  EU  had  loan  losses  and 
provisions of about SEK 350 billion. Today, these same banks have Common Equity Tier 1 
of  about  SEK  780  billion.  So  if  we  incur  similarly  large  loan  losses  in  the  next  few  years, 
about 45 per cent of the banks’ Common Equity Tier 1 would disappear.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The important point here may not be the exact amount of the total loan losses – the estimate 
has been, and still is, uncertain. The important point is that, in such a situation, confidence 
will  be  a  hard  currency.  Uncertainty  over  the  banks’  resilience  affects  confidence.  When 
confidence is undermined, the banks’ funding disappears. For the Swedish banks, this could 
be particularly devastating.  
Other countries with large banks have more stringent regulations than Basel III 
Earlier experiences, not least from the latest financial crisis, have also been studied by other 
major banking countries. Authorities in these countries wish to proceed faster and set higher 
requirements  than  the  minimum  standards  of  Basel  III.  These  include  the  two  European 
countries whose banking sectors have greater assets in relation to GDP than the Swedish 
banking sector – Switzerland and the United Kingdom.  
In  Switzerland,  an  expert  committee  has  proposed  progressive  capital  adequacy 
requirements.  The  larger  and  more  important  to  the  economy  a  bank  is,  the  higher  these 
requirements  will  be.  The  two  major  banks  –  UBS  and  Credit  Suisse  –  have  a  capital 
adequacy requirement of 19 per cent, at least 10 per cent of which is to be Common Equity 
Tier  1.  The  remaining  9  per  cent  can  be  supplied  by  what  are  known  as  contingent 
convertibles  (CoCos)  –  which  is  to  say  debt  instruments  that  can  be  converted  to  equity 
under certain circumstances. 
In the United Kingdom, the Vickers commission proposes a structural separation of retail and 
investment  banking.  Major  retail  banks  will  have  an  extra  capital  buffer  of  3  per  cent.  The 
proposal also includes forcing certain debt instruments with long maturities to cover losses 
when a bank encounters problems – by introducing what are known as bail-in bonds. In total, 
equity and bail-in bonds in major banks are to amount to 17–20 per cent. 
It is time to take the discussion one step further 
Considering  the  characteristics  of  the  Swedish  bank  market,  historical  experiences  and 
international  developments,  we  at  the  Riksbank  feel  that  there  are  several  areas  that  still 
require attention. The Swedish system needs extra-large airbags.  
We  consider  that  capital  requirements  for  major  Swedish  banks  need  to  go  beyond  the 
requirements of Basel III. The costs of higher capital adequacy requirements are limited and 
largely private, as opposed to the true economic costs. The advantages in the form of a safer 
banking  system  are  considerable.  A  reduced  risk  of  financial  crises  is  good  for  the  real 
economy, good for taxpayers and also good for the banks’ shareholders. The Riksbank will 
soon  present  a  report  that  clearly  shows  that  the  benefits  of  higher  capital  adequacy 
requirements exceed the costs. An increased capital adequacy requirement may also need 
to be matched by a tighter leverage ratio requirement. 
The  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB)  has  recently  submitted  recommendations 
covering  lending  in  foreign  currency.  We  could  see  the  risks  of  this  type  of  lending  to 
households at close quarters in the Baltic countries a few years ago. A few of the ESRB’s 
recommendations  are  (i) better  consumer  information  and  credit  reviews  of  borrowers, 
(ii) taking  exchange  rate  risk 
the  national  capital  adequacy 
requirements, and (iii) supervision of the risks in liquidity management. Swedish banks need 
to limit these risks better in the future.  
The  Swedish  banks’  liquidity  measures  need  to  take  into account  that  it  can  be difficult to 
obtain certain currencies in stressed situations. Basel III’s short-term liquidity requirements 
also need to be met on a per-currency basis. Furthermore, we are examining whether the 
Riksbank’s reserve requirement can play a part in this regard.  
The  low  Swedish  risk  weights  are  a  cause  for  concern.  Historical  data  does  not  always 
predict the future and so we should not place too much confidence in models. A floor may be 
into  consideration 
in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
necessary to prevent the combination of low risk weights and high leverage from becoming 
unreasonable. 
Most of what I have been saying here has been said by us at the Riksbank for some time. 
We  have  encountered  both  counterarguments  and  cries  of  encouragement.  We  have  also 
been  asked  if  we  couldn’t  be  more  precise.  Consequently,  I  thought  I  would  wrap  up  by 
telling you a little about what will be happening in the immediate future.  
The Riksbank will clarify its recommendations soon 
When motorway junctions are planned, the traffic planners take many factors into account to 
ensure  that  the  traffic  flows  smoothly  and  safely.  Benefit  is  balanced  against  cost  –  and 
safety is given a high priority. 
We at the Riksbank take the same approach when we and other authorities are considering 
how to implement Basel III in Sweden.  
The  Riksbank  will  soon  announce  its  view  of  the  measures  that  should  be  adopted.  One 
example is how much higher we think that the capital adequacy requirements for the major 
banks should be – in addition to the minimum levels in Basel III. 
One  important  step  is  this  year’s  second  Financial  Stability  Report,  to  be  published  on 
29 November.  In  connection  with  this,  we  will  also  publish  a  report  analysing  the 
economically appropriate capital adequacy requirements for the major Swedish banks. 
I hope that these reports will be interesting reading and thank you for having me here today. 
 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  7
    8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
   12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
   14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
