Mario Draghi: Hearing at the Committee on Economic and Monetary 
Affairs of the European Parliament 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  a 
hearing  before  the  Committee  on  Economic  and  Monetary  Affairs  of  the  European 
Parliament, Brussels, 19 December 2011. 
 Dear Madam Chair, 
Dear Honourable Members, 
È per me un estremo piacere partecipare per la prima volta come Presidente della Banca 
Centrale Europea a questa riunione. Il dialogo monetario trimestrale con l’ECON rappresenta 
un’opportunità fondamentale e la pietra angolare per un rapporto costruttivo tra le nostre due 
istituzioni.  
Cet échange a lieu quelques semaines seulement après que d’importantes décisions ont été 
prises  à  la  fois  par  le  Conseil  des  Gouverneurs  de  la  BCE  et  par  les  Chefs  d’Etats  et  de 
Gouvernements. Dans ce contexte, notre discussion promet d’être particulièrement riche et 
fructueuse.  
Zur  Einführung  werde  ich  zunächst  auf  die  aktuellen  wirtschaftlichen  Entwicklungen  im 
Eurogebiet  eingehen.  Anschließend  werde  ich  mich  den  von  Ihnen  gewünschten  Themen 
zuwenden,  nämlich  dem  Instrumentarium  zur  Krisenbewältigung  einerseits,  sowie  den 
Rating-Agenturen andererseits.  
Economic and monetary developments 
I. 
Since the last regular hearing in October with former President Trichet, the ECB has taken a 
number of steps to ensure that it will continue to deliver price stability in the medium term in 
an environment that remains challenging. These steps relate both to changes in our interest 
rates and to non-standard measures.  
As  you  know,  regarding  interest  rates,  the  Governing  Council  early  December  decided  to 
lower the key ECB interest rates by 25 basis points, following a 25 basis point decrease on 
3  November 2011.  
As regards the short-term growth outlook for the euro area, the intensified financial market 
tensions  are  continuing  to  dampen  economic  activity  in  the  euro  area  and  the  outlook 
remains subject to high uncertainty. Euro area economic activity should recover, albeit very 
gradually, in the course of 2012, as also projected by Eurosystem staff in early December. 
Substantial downside risks to this economic outlook nevertheless remain. 
With regard to price developments, inflation was 3.0% in November. Inflation is likely to stay 
above  2%  for  several  months  to  come,  before  declining  to  below  2%,  which  view  is  also 
broadly  confirmed  in  the  December  staff  projections.  Given  the  environment  of  weaker 
growth in the euro area and globally, underlying cost, wage and price pressures in the euro 
area should also remain modest. Risks to the medium-term outlook for price developments 
remain broadly balanced.  
The  latest  monetary  data  reflect  the  heightened  uncertainty  in  financial  markets.  Looking 
beyond  short-term  volatility,  the  monetary  analysis  indicates  that  the  underlying  pace  of 
monetary expansion remains moderate. 
The  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  is  determined  to  ensure  that  inflation  expectations 
continue to be firmly anchored in line with our aim of keeping inflation rates below, but close 
to, 2% over the medium term.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  latest  non-standard  measures.  Such  measures  should  prevent 
adverse effects on the monetary policy transmission mechanism stemming from the ongoing 
tensions  in parts  of  the  euro  area  financial  markets.  They  should  in  particular  mitigate  the 
effects of strains in financial markets on the supply of credit to firms and households. 
First, several measures have been enacted to ensure that banks maintain access to funding 
markets.  
 
We  have  decided  on  three-year  refinancing  operations  to  support  the  supply  of 
credit to the euro area economy. These measures address the risk that persistent 
financial  markets  tensions  could  affect  the  capacity  of  euro  area  banks  to  obtain 
refinancing over longer horizons.  
Earlier,  in  October,  the Governing  Council  had  already  decided  to  have  two  more 
refinancing operations with a maturity of around one year.  
Also, it was announced then that in all refinancing operations until at least the first 
half of 2012 all liquidity demand by banks would be fully allotted at fixed rate.  
Funding via the covered bonds market was also facilitated by the ECB deciding in 
October to introduce a new Covered Bond Purchase Programme of €40 billion.  
Funding in US dollar is facilitated by lowering the pricing on the temporary US dollar 
liquidity swap arrangements. 
    These measures should ensure that banks continue to have access to stable funding, also at 
longer  maturities,  which  gives  them  the  opportunity  to  continue  lending  to  firms  and 
households.  
Second, some banks’ access to refinancing operations may be restricted by lack of eligible 
collateral. To overcome this, a temporary expansion of the list of collateral has been decided. 
Furthermore, the ECB intends to enhance the use of bank loans as collateral in Eurosystem 
operations.  These  measures  should  support  bank  lending,  by  increasing  the  amount  of 
assets  on  euro  area  banks’  balance  sheets  that  can  be  used  to  obtain  central  bank 
refinancing.  
Third, the Governing Council decided on measures aimed at fostering money market activity. 
Amongst  others,  the  reserve  ratio  will  be  temporarily  reduced,  from  2%  now  to  1%.  This 
increases  the  incentives  for  market  participants  to  engage  in  money  market  transactions. 
Also, it increases the collateral available to banks, as it reduces their liquidity needs vis-à-vis 
the Eurosystem and thereby the amount of collateral that needs to be posted.  
Overall,  all  measures  mentioned  aim  to  ensure  enhanced  access  of  the  banking  sector  to 
liquidity and facilitate the functioning of the euro area money market, thereby avoiding severe 
limitations to the real economy from a lack of financing possibilities. This also helps ensure 
that  the  official  interest  rates  set  by  the  ECB  are  transmitted  in  an  appropriate  way  to  the 
economy, and in that way help maintaining price stability in the medium term.  
Foundations for a stable economic and monetary union 
II. 
Let me now turn to the outcome of the last European Council. 
This Council has really brought about a breakthrough in terms of commitment to sound and 
transparent fiscal rules. The foundations for a fiscal compact have been laid – a suggestion 
presented before the plenary of the European Parliament at the ECB hearing on our annual 
report at the beginning of this month.  
It has been agreed that the annual structural deficit should not exceed 0.5% of nominal GDP. 
Euro area Member States will implement such a rule in their national legal frameworks at a 
constitutional level. The objective is to avoid excessive deficits before they arise, rather than 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
trying to control them after they have emerged. An automatic correction mechanism is also 
foreseen in case of deviation. Moreover, the leaders agreed on a numerical benchmark for 
annual debt reduction to bring down debt levels. Sanctions will also apply automatically to 
euro  area  Member  States  in  breach  of  the  3%  reference  value  for  deficits.  The  European 
Court of Justice may be asked to verify the implementation of these rules at national level.  
The  new  fiscal  compact  is  an  essential  signal,  showing  a  clear  trajectory  for  the  future 
evolution  of  the  euro  area.  It  frames  expectations  of  both  citizens  and  financial  markets. 
Enshrining strict rules in primary legislation, making them enforceable by the European Court 
of  Justice:  all  of  this  should  contribute  to  making  public  finances  in  the  euro  area  credibly 
robust. The ECB welcomes this outcome.  
As regards the euro area crisis management instruments, we welcome the decisions of the 
Heads of State or Government of the euro area to strengthen the EFSF and the ESM in a 
number of areas.  
First, there is now greater flexibility in the euro area crisis mechanisms to act as backstops, 
thanks to the decision to accelerate the entry into force of the European Stability Mechanism, 
ESM, to July 2012 and for the European Financial Stability Facility, EFSF, to remain active in 
financing programmes that have started until mid-2013. 
Second, the clarification that as regards private sector involvement, the euro area will adhere 
to established IMF practice is also helpful in reassuring investors.  
Third, the decision to include an emergency procedure into the voting rules of the ESM1 is 
essential for effective decision making procedure, especially in crisis situations. 
As regards the EFSF, the Governing Council of the ECB has decided that the ECB will be 
able to act as agent for the EFSF in its market operations. The ECB – probably supported by 
a  number  of  National  Central  Banks  –  will  make  its  technical  infrastructure  and  know-how 
available  to  the  EFSF.  The  technical  and  legal  preparations  have  started  and  we  hope  to 
complete them in January.  
Credit rating agencies 
III. 
The activities of credit rating agencies, notably in relation to sovereigns as well as the EFSF, 
have lately occupied centre stage in the debate in Europe. Calls for better regulation have 
become louder. Against this background, the Commission’s recent legislative proposals on 
Credit  Rating  Agencies,  which  the  ECB  broadly  supports,  is  also  discussed  by  this 
Committee.  
Credit  ratings  have  a  direct  impact  on  the  market  functioning  and  the  wider  economy.  A 
sound  and  robust  framework  must  thus  be  created.  This  framework  should  be  geared 
towards the following objectives: to reduce market volatility; to enhance the quality of rating 
process; and to restore market confidence.  
The  two  issues  that  are  of  particular  importance  are,  first,  the  assurance  of  appropriate 
underlying  methodologies  and  the  transparency  of  ratings;  and  second,  the  reduction  of 
hardwiring  of  ratings  in  legislation  and  market  practices.  Ratings  simplify  complex  risk 
assessments. But they should only be one of several inputs for investors. In particular, they 
should  be  no  substitute  for  financial  institutions  and  other  investors  to  carry  out  their  own 
assessment. This is the main step towards avoiding mechanistic reliance on external credit 
ratings. 
Let me say a few words on how the ECB itself uses ratings. In practice, for the large majority 
of  marketable  securities  (such  as  sovereign  bonds)  the  Eurosystem  Credit  Assessment 
                                                 
1  Subject to approval by Finnish Parliament. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Framework  mainly  uses  the  ratings  issued  by  eligible  credit  rating  agencies.  At  the  same 
time, the Eurosystem does not mechanically rely on these assessments, as it is aware of the 
limitations of methodologies. It reserves the right to reject or limit the use of an asset on the 
basis of any information on its credit quality that it may consider relevant. The Eurosystem 
has  applied  such  discretion  to  temporarily  suspend  the  application  of  the  minimum  rating 
requirement  to  debt  instruments  issued  or  guaranteed  by  some  euro  area  governments 
following EU/IMF adjustment programmes. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
