Masaaki Shirakawa: Insurance companies and the financial system – a 
central bank perspective 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Masaaki  Shirakawa,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the 
18th Annual  Conference  of  the  International  Association  of  Insurance  Supervisors  (IAIS), 
Seoul, 30 September 2011. 
 Introduction 
I. 
It is a great privilege to have the opportunity to speak here today. Before starting, I would like 
to  express  my  deep  respect  for  the  countless  contributions  made  by  the  International 
Association of Insurance Supervisors (IAIS) since its establishment in 1994. 
The Bank of Japan has consistently had a keen interest in developments in the insurance 
business, although it does not have the authority to supervise insurance companies in Japan. 
As  you  know,  Japan  experienced  a  financial  crisis  from  the  late  1990s  through  to  the 
beginning of the 2000s, during which a few small and medium-sized insurance companies 
failed. In a country with a significant insurance sector, these failures were one of the factors 
that  had  a  considerable  impact  on  the  macroeconomy.  The  causal  relationship  between 
insurance  companies  and  the  macroeconomy  also  holds  true  the  other  way  around. 
Macroeconomic developments can have a significant effect on the financial system, including 
insurance  companies.  In  fact,  Japanese  insurance  business  from  the  late  1990s  onward 
cannot  be  discussed  without  reference  to  Japan’s  declining  population  and  the  “negative 
spread  problem”  caused  by  continued  low  interest  rates.  I  hope  this  gives  you  some 
background on why the Bank of Japan has such a strong interest in insurance business. 
The title of my speech today is “Insurance Companies and the Financial System: A Central 
Bank Perspective.” First, I will talk about the significance of a shared aspect of the remit of 
insurance companies and central banks: providing stability and security. Next, I will discuss 
the  current  state  of  the  global  economy,  with  particular  reference  to  its  effects  on  the 
business  of  insurance  companies.  Finally,  I  will  offer  my  thoughts  on  regulation  and 
supervision of insurance companies. 
Provision of stability and security 
II.  
Looking at the relationship between central banks and insurance companies, the two have in 
common  their  role  as  providers  of  stability  and  security.  From  the  moment  human  beings 
began to engage in organized economic activity of some sort, there was a prevailing sense 
of awareness of the need to transfer risks that could not be borne by an individual economic 
entity  to  other  economic  entities  and  to  diversify  them.  The  Code  of  Hammurabi,  a 
Babylonian  law  code  dating  back  to  around  the  18th  century  B.C.,  apparently  refers  to  a 
contract  under  which  the  owner  of  a  trading  vessel  who,  when  applying  for  loans  for 
procuring cargo, paid a special fee in advance and was thus exempted from repayment of 
the relevant loans in the case of loss or damage of the cargo procured. This early example of 
an insurance contract shows how important it is for an economy’s development to transfer 
and  allocate  risks  that  exceed  the  risk-taking  capacity  and  appetite  of  individual  economic 
entities. 
Compared  to  the  history  of  the  insurance  business,  central  banking  is  a  relatively  new 
invention.  Although  the  oldest  central  bank  has  a  history  of  nearly  400  years,  the  central 
bank in a modern sense only appeared in the mid-19th century. As economies became more 
complex and networks of banks started to provide credit for economic activity in an organized 
manner, there was an increasing need for someone to play the role of ensuring the stability 
of the network, or in other words the financial system. The financial system is built on mutual 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
trust  among  participating  financial  institutions.  Once  such  confidence  is  undermined  and 
participants  become  beset  with  doubts  and  fears,  the  financial  system  destroys  itself  in  a 
self-fulfilling manner. In order to stop such a vicious cycle before it ended in catastrophe and 
to ensure the stability and security of the financial system, central banks started to function 
as the “lender of last resort.” 
Central banks also provide stability and security in another form. Under the gold standard, 
which was adopted until the 1930s, at least theoretically the outstanding amount of gold held 
by individual countries formed the basis of the value of their currency and economic activity. 
After  the  gold  standard  was  abandoned,  it  became  necessary  to  conduct  active  policy 
intervention,  with  central  banks  playing  part  of  this  role.  Through  the  conduct  of  monetary 
policy,  central  banks  began  to  work  toward  fostering  an  environment  in  which  individual 
economic  entities  were  not  disturbed  by  macroeconomic  uncertainties  such  as  large 
fluctuations in prices. 
To  sum  up,  both  insurance  companies  and  central  banks  provide  economic  entities  with 
stability  and  security  through  their  respective  business.  Such  contribution  facilitates  risk-
taking by economic entities and, consequently, promotes economic growth. 
By  the  way,  in  addition  to  having  the  similarity  of  both  working  to  achieve  stability  and 
security,  insurance  companies  and  central  banks  share  some  of  the  same  difficulties. 
Insulation  from  significant  risks  that  cannot  be  borne  by  individual  economic  entities  will 
stimulate  economic  activity  but  it  could  also  encourage  excessive  risk-taking.  Taking  the 
example  of  car  insurance,  drivers  insulated  from  liability  for  compensation  could  drive  at 
excessive  speed  and  cause  accidents.  This,  as  you  know,  is  a  textbook  example  of  the 
“moral hazard” problem. 
Central  banks  also  face  the  problem  of  moral  hazard.  Instead  of  contributing  to  financial 
system stability, the “lender of last resort” function of central banks could end up threatening 
that  very  stability  by  encouraging  excessive  risk-taking  by  banks.  Also,  in  terms  of 
macroeconomic stability, it is sometimes pointed out that the recent financial crisis was partly 
attributable to what is sometimes referred to as the “Great Moderation” from the 1990s to the 
mid-2000s,  a  period  characterized  by  a  favorable  combination  of  low  inflation  and  high 
growth,  and  a  time  of  too  much  confidence  in  central  bank  policy,  which  contributed 
significantly  to  the  moderation.  As  moral  hazard  is  one  of  the  most  important  topics  of 
discussion  for  monetary  policy,  financial  system  stability,  and  regulation  and  supervision,  I 
will return to it toward the end of my speech. 
Current state of the global economy and financial markets 
III.  
Next, I would like to turn to the current state of the global economy, with particular reference 
to its effects on the business of insurance companies. 
Developments in the global economy following the failure of Lehman Brothers 
It  is  now  three  years  since  Lehman  Brothers  collapsed  in  September  2008,  triggering  the 
financial crisis. Developments in the global economy thereafter can be summarized into the 
following three points. 
First is the fact that the global economy has managed to prevent a depression that might well 
have been as severe as the one witnessed in the 1930s. This significant achievement can be 
attributed to the effective measures to stabilize the financial system and to the bold monetary 
and fiscal policy after the failure of Lehman Brothers. 
Second,  the  global  economic  recovery  has  been  bifurcated  so  far.  Emerging  economies 
started recovering relatively soon after the crisis and have continued to post high growth. In 
contrast, given the significant downturns of advanced economies after the failure of Lehman 
Brothers, their pace of recovery thereafter has been slow. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Third,  the  downward  pressure  exerted  on  advanced  economies  by  the  repair  of  balance 
sheets is a root cause of their sluggish recovery. The global credit bubble in the mid-2000s 
was incredibly large. When such a huge bubble bursts, balance sheets have to be repaired, 
or  in  other  words,  excesses  in  stock  and  corresponding  debt  have  to  be  adjusted. 
Furthermore,  economic  activity  is  restrained  for  the  duration  of  that  process.  The  sectors 
requiring  balance-sheet  adjustment  differ  according  to  the  country:  in  the  United  States,  it 
has  been  needed  in  the  household  and  government  sectors;  in  Europe,  the  financial  and 
government sectors. The recent fiscal deterioration is attributable to several developments. 
One is the aggressive measures implemented by governments and a decline in tax revenue 
associated with economic deterioration after the onset of the financial crisis. The other, which 
applies  to  some  countries  in  the  euro  area,  is  the  weakening  of  fiscal  discipline  amid 
favorable  issuing  conditions  of  government  bonds  brought  about  by  the  introduction  of  a 
common currency. In any case, the time required to complete the repair of balance sheets 
largely  depends  on  the  magnitude  of  the  bubble  and  financial  imbalances  preceding  the 
adjustments. 
To sum up, although we have managed to prevent another great depression, conditions are 
not exactly favorable for the global economy as a whole. This reflects the prolonged balance-
sheet  repair  taking  place  particularly  in  advanced  economies,  which  is  counteracting  the 
growth momentum being maintained in emerging economies. A particular point to note in this 
regard  is  that,  in  advanced  economies,  deteriorations  in  fiscal  balances,  combined  with 
historically low interest rates, are recognized as restraints on the implementation of additional 
policy stimuli, and this is further undermining the already fragile recovery process. 
Current state of global financial markets 
Amid  the  developments  in  the  global  economy  that  I  have  mentioned,  we  have  observed 
various changes in global financial markets. 
First,  long-term  interest  rates  of  advanced  economies  have  reached  historically  low  levels 
and the yield curve is generally flattening. Underlying this are increased market expectations 
that major central banks of advanced countries will continue with accommodative monetary 
policy given the increasingly cautious views about the economic outlook. 
Second, investors are becoming increasingly risk-averse. Especially after this summer, stock 
prices  fell  and  credit  spreads  widened  on  corporate  bonds as  investors  became  more  risk 
averse and entered what is often called “risk off” mode. In government bond markets, U.S. 
and German interest rates declined partly due to market participants’ preference for risk-free 
assets, while interest rates in peripheral euro-zone economies rose substantially. In foreign 
exchange markets, the Swiss franc and the Japanese yen appreciated as they were viewed 
as relatively safe-haven currencies. 
And third, there is rising concern about sovereign debt. As I have described, fiscal balances 
in many advanced economies deteriorated after the failure of Lehman Brothers. In Europe, 
Greece, Ireland, and Portugal successively had to receive financial support packages. The 
sovereign  spreads  of  peripheral  euro-zone  countries  have  remained  wide,  reflecting 
heightening market concerns about sovereign debt. 
Implications for insurance companies 
The  current  state  of  the  global  economy  and  financial  markets  definitely  has  significant 
implications for the insurance business. 
First of all, with little room left for fiscal stimulus, central banks in advanced economies have 
strengthened so-called unconventional monetary policy. While those central banks, including 
the Bank of Japan, have tried a variety of unconventional monetary policies, one common 
feature is that a flattening of the yield curve has been observed in the process. If the repair of 
balance sheets takes a certain length of time, the flattening could also last for that period. For 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
some insurance products that cover a long time period, a slight difference in a discount rate 
could result in a significant variation in asset value. Therefore, the management of insurance 
companies as well as the regulatory and supervisory authorities need to consider carefully 
whether the current low interest rate environment is an exceptional case or not. 
Next,  increasing  risk  arising  from  sovereign  debt  could  call  for  a  review  of  the  risk 
management  practices  that  have  been  adopted  by  insurance  companies.  Insurance 
companies  have  made  efforts  to  match  the  durations  of  their  insurance  payment  liabilities 
and the products in which they invest their insurance premiums. They have invested in super 
long-term government bonds to address mismatch risk arising from long-term contracts such 
as life insurance. If the credit risk associated with sovereign debt is not negligible, these risk 
management practices will become less effective. 
Finally,  with  their  long  investment  horizons,  insurance  companies  are  expected  to  take 
advantage  of  market  distortions  caused  by  risk  aversion  among  investors  with  shorter 
horizons.  If  insurance  companies  are  currently  having  difficulties  doing  this,  we  need  to 
consider  the  background  to  the  situation  and  what  the  authorities  can  do  to  address  the 
issue. 
At  this  juncture,  central  banks  in  advanced  economies,  including  the  Bank  of  Japan,  are 
deploying strong monetary easing measures to ensure the global economic recovery. Given 
that  we  are  already  in  the  uncharted  territory  of  unconventional  monetary  policy,  it  is 
important  to  weigh  the  benefit  of  such  policy  against  its  cost  by  carefully  considering  the 
following matters: whether a given policy is having its intended effect; whether it is causing 
an unexpected distortion in financial markets; and whether there are any other policy options 
for achieving the same results. 
Regulation and supervision of insurance companies 
IV.  
Financial system stability 
Until now I have been describing the current state of the global economy. Now I would like to 
turn to my last topic for today: regulation and supervision of insurance companies. We can 
point  out  two  reasons  to  regulate  and  supervise  financial  institutions  including  insurance 
companies: consumer protection and prevention of systemic risk. With regard to the latter, 
whether insurance companies could cause systemic risk has been frequently discussed. One 
camp  argues  that,  compared  to  banks,  insurance  companies  themselves  are  less  likely  to 
become the epicenter of a liquidity crisis or to cause systemic risk because their liabilities are 
mainly long-term ones based on insurance contracts. Although such an argument is valid in a 
comparative sense, the global financial crisis shows that we cannot safely say that the failure 
of  insurance  companies  would  not  cause  systemic  risk.  As  financial  markets  become 
increasingly  interconnected,  we  cannot  deny  the  possibility  that  a  deterioration  in  the 
business  conditions  of  insurance  companies,  or  their  failure,  could  trigger  cancellations  of 
savings insurance products or a deterioration of market sentiment that would undermine the 
stability of the financial system as a whole. When insurance companies are also involved in a 
wide range of business operations through their subsidiaries, such operations could trigger 
systemic risk. During the financial crisis, the U.S. Federal Reserve provided a large amount 
of funds to AIG, based on the judgment that such risk was highly significant. When small and 
medium-sized insurance companies failed in Japan, the Insurance Policy-Holders Protection 
Corporation was established and the Bank of Japan established a temporary credit line to the 
corporation, although it was never activated. 
Designing regulatory and supervisory frameworks: finding the right balance 
Various international efforts have been made in the areas of regulation and supervision of 
financial  institutions,  including  insurance  companies,  with  the  aim  of  preventing  future 
financial crises. With regard to bank regulation, the introduction of the Basel III framework 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
was  internationally  agreed  in  2010.  This  summer,  planned  measures  were  announced  for 
global systemically important financial institutions, or G-SIFIs, including an additional capital 
charge  and  the  establishment  of  a  smooth  resolution  framework  for  winding  down  such 
institutions. In parallel with such developments, active discussions have been taking place to 
change  the  regulations  for  insurance  companies,  including  the  Solvency  II  Directive  in 
Europe. 
As  financial  transactions  become  more  complex  and  globalized,  reforming  our  frameworks 
for financial regulation and supervision is becoming an extremely challenging task. Although 
it  is  easy  to  point  out  problems  with  any  reform  proposals,  it  does  not  mean  that  current 
frameworks should remain unchanged. In order to prevent financial crises, the regulatory and 
supervisory  authorities,  central  banks,  and  financial  institutions  need  to  do  their  utmost  to 
successfully make the necessary reforms. Today I am not going to discuss specific reform 
measures  given  the  time  constraints.  Instead,  as  a  guiding  principle  for  reforming  the 
frameworks for international financial regulation and supervision, I would like to emphasize 
the importance of finding the right balance in various respects without relying too much on 
any specific methodology. This is based on the recognition that our knowledge is still quite 
limited  with respect  to  the  intrinsically  complex  mechanisms  of  the  financial system,  which 
continue to evolve in a dynamic manner. The need for humility is obvious when we look back 
on how bubbles have developed and burst in the past and how financial crises have followed 
thereafter. 
In  terms  of  finding  the  right  balance,  it  is  first  of  all  important  to  strike  a  balance  between 
regulation  and  supervision  on  the  one  hand  and  the  macroeconomy  on  the  other.  While 
regulation and supervision is, of course, important, the macroeconomic environment is also 
critical. Our experience of financial crises clearly shows that various risks can accumulate in 
a seemingly benign macroeconomic environment and the materialization of those risks in the 
form of a financial crisis could end up causing significant economic damage. This is the sort 
of moral hazard that I spoke of earlier in which perceptions that risks have declined invite 
excessive risk-taking. In this sense, when conducting monetary policy we need to pay due 
attention not only to price developments but also to the accumulation of financial imbalances 
such as asset price inflation, leveraging and increasing maturity mismatch. 
Second, the balance between regulation and supervision is important. Business models of 
financial  institutions  differ  by  country  and  institution.  Against  the  backdrop  of  financial 
globalization and advances in information and communication technology, individual financial 
institutions need to flexibly adjust to changing business environments. Given this, enforcing 
“one-size-fits-all”  regulations  for  various  types  of  financial  institutions  could  increase  the 
likelihood of adverse side-effects. In order to avoid this, we should rely more on supervision 
than  we  do  today.  We  must  design  a  comprehensive  framework  that  better  combines 
regulation and supervision. 
Third,  it  is  crucial  to  find  the  right  balance  by  paying  due  attention  to  similarities  and 
differences  in  the  functions  of  various  financial  institutions.  Insurance  companies  are 
important providers of long-term funds to banks and other sectors. They can play this role 
because their liabilities are mainly long-term. This makes them less vulnerable to interest risk 
arising from maturity transformation and liquidity risk in comparison to banks. On the other 
hand,  insurance  companies  have  inherent  insurance  risk  on  their  liabilities.  As  such, 
insurance companies and other financial institutions including banks have different functions 
and  risk  profiles.  Collectively  and  in  complement  to  one  another,  these  various  types  of 
financial  institutions  perform  important  financial  intermediation  functions  in  the  economy. 
There is also a similarity. In the current global financial markets, various types of financial 
institutions perform socially beneficial financial functions using their various distinct products. 
For  example,  options,  one  type  of  derivative  instrument,  are  very  similar  to  insurance.  Of 
course, we should not denounce overlaps between different financial products that provide 
the same economic function. If more competition lowers the cost of financial services, it could 
benefit  society  as  a  whole.  However,  significant  risk  could  be  created  depending  on  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
incentive structures in the overlapping areas. In that sense, due attention should be paid to 
both similarities and differences in the functions of insurance companies and other financial 
institutions. 
I know that the points I have made  so far are typical examples of something being easier 
said than done. Still, I believe these points are absolutely critical and should be considered 
when designing regulatory and supervisory frameworks. 
Concluding remarks 
V. 
As I have already used up most of my time, I would now like to conclude my remarks. With 
some exceptions such as France, the Netherlands and Belgium, in many advanced countries 
a  central  bank  is  not  directly  in  charge  of  the  regulation  and  supervision  of  insurance 
companies.  Nevertheless,  central  banks  have  a  keen  interest  in  the  activities  of  insurance 
companies,  as  insurance  companies  are  an  important  player  in  the  financial  system.  It  is 
important that central banks take part in the discussion about the design of regulatory and 
supervisory frameworks for insurance companies. Another potentially significant contribution 
by central banks is to analyze potential risks within the financial system as a whole, including 
insurance  companies,  and  present  the  results  to  the  public.  This  is  what  we  call  macro-
prudential analysis, an area that is increasingly seen as important in recent years. In Japan’s 
earlier financial crisis, its insurance sector was hampered by the “negative spread problem” 
and capital losses on equity holdings. Insurance companies’ business conditions are affected 
less by short-term economic and financial fluctuations and more by long-term developments. 
Put another way, as insurance companies have the unique characteristic of handling long-
term funds, it is particularly important for them to manage risk from a long-term perspective 
with emphasis on the interaction between the real economy and the financial system. When 
we think about coming developments in the global economy and their impact on insurance 
business,  there  are  many  factors  that  underscore  the  importance  of  macro-prudence, 
including  the  likelihood  of  continued  low  interest  rates,  sovereign  debt  problems,  and 
demographic changes. In that sense, let me close my remarks by stressing the importance of 
cooperation  and  exchanges  of  views  among 
insurance  companies,  regulatory  and 
supervisory authorities, and central banks. Thank you very much. 
 
 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
