Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview with Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung 
Interview  with  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  in 
Frankfurter  Allgemeine  Zeitung,  conducted  by  Mr  Gerald  Braunberger  and  Mr  Stefan 
Ruhkamp, on 13 October 2011, and published on 19 October 2011. 
 Mr Trichet, do you believe in destiny? 
I  have  used  that  term  on  a  few  occasions  –  including  the  tenth  anniversary  of  the 
establishment of the ECB, when I quoted Konrad Adenauer. He once said that Europe is a 
community with a common destiny. He also said that “it’s up to us to shape that destiny”, and 
I believe he was right. 
You  have  also  talked  about  a  common  destiny  in  connection  with  the  euro  and  the 
sovereign  debt  crisis.  Is  destiny  not  the  opposite  of  a  free  political  decision  on 
whether or not to pursue a particular form of European integration? 
That is certainly not the way that I interpret the word “destiny”, and it’s definitely not Konrad 
Adenauer’s understanding, either. It’s certainly not a question of predetermination. It relates, 
instead, to the fundamental importance of the close unity, interdependence and friendship by 
which the people of Europe choose to bind themselves in today’s world. 
And in that respect, we share a “common destiny”. Many politicians have described 
our currency union as a matter of war and peace. Is that an exaggeration? 
The process of integration has enabled Europe to enjoy more than half a century of peace, 
prosperity  and  stability.  Were  we  to  begin  regressing,  we  would  place  this  stability  in 
jeopardy. From an economic perspective, the rationale for pursuing integration is far stronger 
today than it was in the immediate aftermath of the war. Back then, China, India and Latin 
America  did  not  have  the  considerable  economic  importance  that  they  have  today. 
Demographic  developments  have  also  tended  to  increase  the  importance  of  European 
integration. We Europeans, if we act alone in our individual countries, will gradually look like 
dwarves relative to developments in the rest of the world.  
What is wrong with remaining dwarves? 
There are different ways of looking at this. But what was the original concept of Europe after 
the war? Our role model was the single US market. The view taken at the time was that, if we 
want to achieve prosperity and peace, we have to enjoy the same economies of scale and 
the same free market as the United States. That was the view of Europe’s founding fathers. If 
it was true then, it is even truer today. 
Is the success of our currency union a precondition for the success of the European 
project? 
Our currency union is the most advanced element in the process of European integration. It 
is the most appropriate means of realising our founding fathers’ vision of a single market in 
Europe. After all, you could hardly imagine a single market in the United States with different 
currencies in Massachusetts, Florida and California.  
You like to point out that average inflation in the euro area has been lower than… 
Average annual inflation has, at 2.0% over the first 13 years, been much lower than it was 
before  the  euro  in  a  number  of  member  countries,  and  also  lower  than  it  was  under  the 
Deutsche  Mark  over  the  previous  50  years.  Our  primary  objective  of  price  stability  is  the 
needle in our compass. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
But inflation is not the only thing that the Germans fear. They are also scared that they 
will end up being responsible for the debts of other countries. Can you understand that? 
First  of  all,  I  don’t  like  this  talk  of  “the  Germans”,  “the  Italians”  or  “the  French”.  We  live  in 
democracies. Our mandate is to ensure price stability. We have delivered price stability, and 
the markets clearly trust us to continue doing so for the next ten years. The question of debts 
and who should be responsible for them needs to be put to national governments. First, to 
the governments who behaved improperly in the past and accumulated excessive levels of 
debt.  And  second,  to  the  governments  who  simply  accepted  that  behaviour  on  the  part  of 
their neighbours. We, the Executive Board and Governing Council of the ECB, have spent 
years arguing publicly against infringements of the Stability and Growth Pact and warning of 
the dangers that this poses.  
Do you think Germany has changed over the years? 
I  have,  of  course,  had  the  opportunity  to  discover  much  of  Germany  for  myself  and  have 
gained a lasting impression of this country. This is due, among other things, to the fact that I 
have many, many friends here – friends such as Jürgen Stark, Horst Köhler, Theo Waigel 
and Hans Tietmeyer and many more. So, I have close ties with Germany. I have observed 
changes  in  Germany  which  are  highly  significant  from  an  economic  perspective.  A  simple 
example is the fact that, when I moved to Frankfurt eight years ago, the shops were shut by 
late afternoon – and shut all afternoon on Saturdays! Now, some are still open at 10 p.m., 
which my wife particularly appreciates. This is a small thing, but it shows that the country is 
changing extremely quickly. 
Do you have the impression that the Germans are too scared? 
As regards inflation, I understand the deep-seated fears of many German citizens, given their 
experience of hyperinflation in the 1920s. In fact, a lot of people feel much the same way in 
France. The French experienced hyperinflation at the time of the revolution. This experience 
of the “assignats” – paper money introduced during the French revolution that lost all but a 
fraction of its value in just a few years – continued to have an impact right up to the Second 
World War. But what matters is the fact that today we have price stability in the medium term 
and  inflation  expectations  are  firmly  anchored.  The  thing  about  Germany  is  that,  given  its 
export-oriented  economy,  it  is  widely  acknowledged  by  employees  and  workers  that 
international competition means that there is limited room for manoeuvre. In other countries, 
the weight of the public sector is much greater and the percentage of the private sector which 
is engaged in the production of tradable goods is smaller. As a result, there tends to be less 
recognition of the importance of competitiveness than there is here. In this respect, Germany 
is particularly well equipped to meet the demands of international competition. 
Over  the  last  few  months  you  have  –  as  result,  among  other  things,  of  the  ECB’s 
buying  of  government  bonds  –  been  heavily  criticised  by  people  in  Germany, 
including your friends. Do you feel misunderstood? 
This means that we have to tirelessly explain what we are doing. We have strictly separated 
(in  accordance  with  the  “separation  principle”)  our  interest  rates,  which  are  designed  to 
deliver  price  stability,  and  our  “non-standard  measures”,  which  are  helping  to  improve  the 
transmission of our interest rates in this period of market disruption. We cannot ignore the 
fact that we are experiencing the worst global financial crisis for 66 years! 
What do you say to your critics? 
What exactly is the criticism? Have we delivered price stability since the inception of the euro 
– both before and during the crisis? Are we credible in delivering price stability over the next 
ten years? The answer to these two questions is “yes”. We are conducting monetary policy 
for our 332 million fellow citizens in 17 countries. We design all our non standard measures – 
the full allotment of liquidity at fixed rates, the covered bond purchase programme and the 
Securities Markets Programme – to be commensurate to the market disruption, in order to 
improve the transmission of our monetary policy. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Some German central bankers say that the ECB’s actions have taken it to the limit of 
what is defensible, while others say that it has overstepped this limit. 
We are entitled to use all of the instruments mentioned, since the transmission of monetary 
policy is at risk if interest rates for “risk-free” monetary and financial investment instruments 
in the individual euro area countries are hampering our monetary policy. At the same time, 
we have always made it clear that financial stability is the responsibility of governments. We 
had to intervene – for monetary reasons – only because for a long time governments did not 
take their responsibility for ensuring financial stability seriously. Have we perhaps gone too 
far  as  regards  our  monetary  policy?  To  answer  that,  we  should  look  at  the  policy  rates  of 
other currency areas, such as Japan or the United States, which are much lower than ours. 
Any comparison with other important advanced economies’ central banks shows that we are 
actually very prudent in our application of non-standard measures. 
But is that also true of the non-standard measures? 
Again, the comparison is simple. Look at the evolution of central banks’ balance sheets since 
the start of the crisis. Our balance sheet has increased by around 80%. On the other side of 
the Atlantic, the equivalent balance sheet has grown by 226%. None of us can ignore the 
crisis. Drawing on the ideas of the great German thinker Max Weber, I would say that we 
have to rely on both the ethic of conviction, which I associate with the interest rate measures, 
and the ethic of responsibility, which I associate with all the non-standard measures. And we 
have to do that in a highly responsible way. That being said, did you know that in my own 
country I was called the “ayatollah of the strong franc” and “Tietmeyer’s clone”? 
You must admit that you find that flattering. 
It was meant as very harsh and serious criticism by some in my home country. On the other 
hand, there are also those in Germany who are not critical. I was awarded the Karlspreis in 
Aachen and the Global Economy Prize in Kiel. This was a very great honour for me and both 
were very moving occasions.  
In Germany there is a debate about whether the voting rights in the ECB’s Governing 
Council should be redistributed. Instead of the rule that each member has one vote, 
there would be a weighting according to capital share. Is that conceivable? 
When  Monetary  Union  was  set  up,  the  “one  member,  one  vote”  rule  was  an  important 
requirement for Germany. A different approach would have been possible, but Germany was 
afraid  that  there  would  be  a  nationalisation  of  the  behaviour  of  the  Governing  Council 
members.  When  the  EU  was  enlarged,  the  voting  rules  of  the  Governing  Council  were 
reformed  in  the  Treaty  of  Nice  in  order  to  safeguard  the  decision-making  capacity  of  the 
Governing  Council  in  the  enlarged  EU.  The  idea  of  taking  into  account  the  size  of  the 
respective countries has thus already been implemented. 
Will  European  integration,  as  currently  foreseen,  be  possible  without  excessive 
transfer payments? 
We should make a distinction between assistance, transfers and loans. The Treaties do not 
prohibit loans between member countries. It would not be conceivable on any continent for 
countries not to help each other out with loans bearing interest, for instance to complement 
IMF loans. The Treaties do prohibit subsidies and transfers. In addition, it should be possible 
in future to impose decisions on countries that persist in not complying with the Stability and 
Growth Pact, thereby putting at risk the stability of Monetary Union. In my view, the Treaties 
would need to be amended to this end.  
Why do you believe that the new Stability and Growth Pact will not fail just as the old 
one did? 
It is much stricter, although not as strict as we would have liked it to be. In addition, the euro 
area countries have been made painfully aware of the dangers of constant violation. They 
have learned the hard way that benign neglect is not acceptable. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
This crisis has also changed the role of the ECB. Is there not a risk of the central bank 
taking on too much responsibility and overdoing things? You sent the Italians a letter 
in which you set out what the country needs to do in order to get the debt crisis under 
control. That is not the type of letter that central banks usually send to governments, 
is it? 
You know, much of what we have developed and put into practice in Europe has gradually 
gained acceptance throughout the world. That is true of the deficit limit of 3% of GDP, of the 
inflation target of just below 2%, and of the central bank’s press conference. And the same is 
also  true  of  the  tradition  of  the  Bundesbank,  the  Banque  de  France  and  other  European 
central banks to voice their opinion on fiscal policy. This has proved to be worthwhile. The 
reason  that  we  are  experiencing  such  great  difficulties  and  that  we  have  this  government 
debt crisis is that for too long the governments of the advanced economies and of Europe in 
particular did not live up to their fiscal responsibilities.  
What exactly caused the ECB to step in? 
There was a decision to expand the rescue fund, the European Financial Stability Facility, 
and to broaden its mandate so that it can purchase government bonds. All 17 Heads of State 
or  Government  signed up  to  this  decision.  There  were  then  delays,  and  so  the  ECB  once 
again  found  itself  in  a  situation  where  it  had  to  intervene  in  the  bond  market  in  order  to 
safeguard the transmission of monetary policy. We had to act decisively vis-à-vis savers and 
investors throughout the world. We had to send a message to governments about what, in 
our opinion, could be done in order to retain the confidence of the markets. But we never act 
as a substitute for the governments’ responsibility and decisions. 
Will the ECB not stretch itself too far through the politicisation of its role? 
We  are  not  politicising  our  role.  We  are  executing  our  monetary  policy  responsibly  in 
accordance with the Treaty, fully in line with the European tradition as regards our call for 
sound  fiscal  policies,  at  a  time  of  the  worst  crisis  since  the  Second  World  War.  The 
Europeans  are  making  history.  There  has  never  before  been  an  attempt  to  bring  together 
17 countries,  including  the  world’s  third,  fourth,  sixth  and  eighth  largest  industrialised 
economies. This is, of course, ambitious. And the crisis is acting in advanced economies as 
an X-ray picture: it is revealing the weaknesses of all. In our case, it is the weaknesses of the 
governance of Economic Union.  
But  why  is  the  ECB  constantly  seen  at  the  centre  of  the  action  and  on  the  political 
stage? 
The  ECB  is  the  most  developed  institution  of  integrated  Europe,  and  the  institution  that  is 
fully able to take action. Something that also plays a role is the fact that Europe’s capitals  
–  unlike  us  –  may  not  have  at  all  times  a  complete  and  immediate  picture  of  the  crisis 
situation. From this institution, we have the complete picture, worldwide and in Europe. It is 
simply our duty to pass on this picture to the leaders of our democracies. Sometimes they 
follow  us,  sometimes  they  don’t.  The  responsibility  lies  with  the  governments.  The  most 
important thing for the ECB is to ensure medium and long-term stability, and that is why it 
cannot use monetary policy to put right the failings of government policies. 
Will the euro still be around in ten years? 
Not only will it be there in ten years’ time, the information that we obtain from investors and 
savers indicates that it will ensure price stability in line with our definition: less than 2%, but 
close to 2%. The average annual inflation rate six to ten years from now is expected to be 
1.8%. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
