Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview with Le Monde 
Interview with Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, conducted 
by  Messrs  Erik  Izraelewicz  and  Clément  Lacombe  and  Ms  Cécile  Prudhomme  on 
27 October 2011, and published in Le Monde dated 30–31 October 2011. 
 New  agreements  were  reached  on  the  night  of  Wednesday  26  October  to  Thursday 
27 October by the heads of state and government of the euro area, three months after 
the summit of 21 July. Is this, at long last, the end point of the crisis? 
This  agreement  must  be  applied  rigorously  and  quickly  in  all  its  dimensions,  including  the 
improvement of governance. Decision-makers must strive to be ahead of events, even if the 
speed of decisions in our democracies is not necessarily that of the markets. 
A key challenge for the euro area is to communicate with investors and savers in the rest of 
the world, who have difficulty in deciphering European decision-making. Provided that their 
decisions are implemented quickly, the euro area countries have the means to improve the 
perception that the rest of the world has of Europe. 
Nevertheless,  there  are  still  uncertainties…  Which  element  needs  the  greatest 
vigilance? 
Progress has to be made on all points in a resolute way. 
In respect of governance, in the past, at the ECB, we have found ourselves preaching in the 
wilderness,  when  negligence  by  governments,  markets  and  by  many  economists  was  the 
rule. We knew a time when markets did not distinguish between the signature of Greece and 
that of Germany, when a majority of observers felt that the Stability and Growth Pact was a 
too tight corset which prevented Europe from breathing, and when the whole world believed 
that IMF loans had become useless. That was still the case in early 2007! 
Your  successor,  Mario  Draghi,  has  indicated  the  ECB  is  going  to  continue  its 
purchases  of  government  bonds.  Does  this  mean  he  has  given  in  to  political 
pressure? 
Mario has repeated what the Council had communicated previously.  
Hasn’t the independence of the ECB been affected nonetheless? 
The question doesn’t arise. The treaty requires us neither to receive nor to seek instructions 
from anyone. We did not ask for permission to take exceptional measures on 9 August 2007 
to confront the first waves of financial turbulence! We were criticised by Germany and France 
when we refused to lower rates in 2004, and by ten out of 12 countries when we increased 
them  in  December  2005.  All  our  non-standard  decisions  have  been  taken  in  complete 
independence. That independence is essential.  
You are the captain of a ship passing through a terrible storm. Isn’t it dangerous for 
the euro to have to change its captain right now, because of mandate issues? 
In the storm the direction is clear: the mandate given by Europe’s democracies. One has to 
be permanently alert. The weather has been particularly rough for four years. The crew of the 
ECB is on deck. The crew does not change. The future president has been on the ship for 
years. He has shared in all the decisions in a collegial way. He has considerable experience.  
Emerging countries like China could come to the aid of Europe via the EFSF… 
In  the  summit  statement  there  is  an  increase  in  the  intervention  capability  of  the  EFSF, 
thanks  to  a  leveraging  effect.  In  practice,  this  means  that,  in  addition  to  European  capital, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
private capital – and possibly public capital – from around the world could invest jointly with 
the Stability Fund. They will do it because it will be in their interest of course.  
Do you understand the criticism coming from Germany, namely that the ECB had gone 
too far in its support for states? 
In our democracies, criticism is natural and necessary. Some people in Germany and other 
countries  regard  our  policy  as  too  bold.  While  other  people  think  of  us  as  being  too 
cautious... 
We  keep  the  currency  for  17  countries,  for  332  million  fellow  citizens,  for  citizens  of  all 
persuasions.  We  have  a  course  to  follow,  price  stability,  and  our  non-standard  decisions 
since  9  August  2007  –  the  first  global  decision  in  the  crisis  –  have  been  taken  to  help  us 
restore a proper implementation of our policy in a crisis without precedent for 65 years. 
Price stability has been ensured since the creation of the euro, but Europe’s economy 
has weakened, unemployment has grown... 
Since 1999, prices have increased by 2,0% per year. We have done what was demanded of 
us by Europe’s democracies. I will add that our fellow citizens, the 332 million people in the 
euro area, are extremely attached to price stability, particularly the most vulnerable among 
them. Opinion polls show this. 
With regard to employment, we have created around 14 million jobs in the euro area since 
the launch of the single currency, compared with around 7 million in the United States. These 
job  creation  efforts  must  be  resolutely  pursued.  The  European  countries  which  have  paid 
most attention to their competitiveness and those most committed to structural reforms are in 
a better situation than the others.  
Some of your decisions continue to cause discussion, such as the increase in your 
rates in 2008, a few weeks before the collapse of Lehman Brothers... 
At  the  time,  there  was  a  real  threat  of  inflation  expectations  becoming  destabilised  by  the 
increase  in  oil  prices.  Of  course  nobody  could  foresee  that  Lehman  Brothers  would  file  for 
bankruptcy in mid-September. The fact that we showed ourselves to be very firm about price 
stability, fully in line with our definition – less than 2% but close to 2% over the medium term – 
helped us in the crisis. Because we avoided not only a materialisation of the inflation risk but 
also of the deflation risk which, after Lehman bankruptcy, was becoming the main danger. A 
comparison of inflation expectations shows that we have had one of the best “anti-deflation” 
protections of comparable advanced countries.  
The  movement  of  the  “indignant  ones”  is  on  the  rise  around  the  world.  Do  you 
understand these feelings of helplessness in the face of globalisation? 
We are seeing at the moment multiple and complex messages that highlight that the fragility 
of  the  global  economic  and  financial  system  is  not  acceptable.  These  messages  are 
important. Indeed, all the efforts of the international community, particularly those of the G20, 
aim to improve the soundness of the global economy. 
These messages are fed by many factors beyond the financial fragility observed since 2007. 
There is an outcry against the level of some bonuses in the financial sector, which are not 
accepted by our democracies. The financial sector must change its values. It is also an area 
of work opened by the G20. There is also another message which is more complex, namely 
that  the  changes  are  too  fast.  First  of  all,  science  and  technology  are  advancing  at  an 
unprecedented  rate:  it’s  a  great  success  but  it  requires  constant  adaptation.  Second,  the 
emerging markets, all of the former “Third World” countries, are growing at a pace which has 
no  historical  precedent:  it’s  a  great  success  but  leading  to  swift  significant  economic 
transformations.  Third,  longer  life  expectancy  is  also  a  remarkable  success  but  is  raising 
major funding problems. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Three distinct successes but very difficult to control. To put them fully at the service of our 
citizens, our societies and economies must make an ongoing effort to adapt much faster than 
in the past.  
You would welcome the creation of a European Ministry of Finance. Do you think that 
attitudes are ready for that? 
Not as President of the ECB, but as a citizen, I can imagine a development for “tomorrow” 
and “the day after tomorrow”. Tomorrow, it would be necessary that we could impose on a 
country  the  essential  decisions  after  several  refusals  to  apply  the  recommendations 
formulated  by  European  governance.  Thus,  one  could  prevent  a  particular  economy  from 
adversely affecting the financial stability of the rest of the area. This requires a change in the 
Treaty, now being specifically envisaged by governments in the euro area, which I welcome. 
As  for  “the  day  after  tomorrow”,  one  can  consider  a  deeper  institutional  change,  with  a 
genuine European executive. In any case, Europe’s historical development depends entirely 
on the lessons our democracies will draw from the crisis, on the conclusions the people of 
Europe will draw from the events experienced since 2007. 
What are you going to do now ? 
First of all, I’m going to read a lot and think a lot. Then, knowing me as I do, I know that I’m 
going to stay active.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
