Christian Noyer: Europe – a financial crisis, not a monetary one 
Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France and Chairman of the Board 
of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  the  Paris  Europlace  Financial 
Forum, Singapore, 30 November 2011. 
 The situation in Europe and the world has significantly worsened over the past few weeks. 
Market stress has intensified. Bond markets in the euro area are not functioning normally. 
Economies  outside  the  euro  area  are  feeling  the  effects  of  increased  uncertainty,  lower 
growth  prospects  and  capital  repatriation.  In  these  conditions,  it  is  important  to  clarify  the 
mechanisms at work and identify the underlying causes. I will also discuss possible policy 
responses, from a Eurosystem perspective. 
The true nature of the crisis 
I will start with a paradox. Looking at fundamentals, the euro area today seems in a position 
of strength when compared to other developed economies. Growth has been stronger than in 
the UK and Japan since 2007. External accounts are in balance. Even the fiscal position is 
favorable. On aggregate, the euro area deficit (at 4% of GDP) is the smallest of all, less than 
half of that in the US, Japan or the UK. This remains true even for some peripheral countries. 
For instance, the Spanish fiscal deficit, at 6.1% of GDP, is much smaller than that in the US, 
the  UK  and  Japan.  Total  gross  public  debt,  at  67%  of  GDP,  is  amongst  the  lowest  in  the 
OECD.  
Considering these figures, it is clear that Europe has the resources to face a manageable 
financing gap in some parts of the region. And yet, it is in turmoil. The answer to this paradox 
can be found by considering the true nature of the crisis. Most observers would simply see 
the fiscal imbalances in peripheral economies. These may have been the trigger. But we are 
now looking at a true financial crisis – that is a broad-based disruption in financial markets. 
To understand what is going on, it is necessary to take a step back.  
Europe is the most financially integrated area in the world. There is full capital mobility inside 
the  EU.  Financial  regulation  is  almost  totally  harmonized,  financial  infrastructures  and 
payment systems are closely interconnected. Europe is truly a single financial market and, 
more importantly, a truly single financial system. 
The  single  capital  market  has  brought  significant  benefits  to  Europe.  Capital  has  been 
flowing  to  peripheral  countries,  triggering  investment  and  growth.  Financial  integration  has 
supported and underpinned the broader process of trade and economic convergence.  
At  the  same  time,  capital  mobility  has  been  used  to  postpone  fiscal  adjustment.  Capital 
inflows  have  fueled  credit  and  asset  booms.  Current  account  deficits  have  been  financed 
through fragile sources of funding. The easy access to financing has created insensitivity to 
current account imbalances which, in turn, have weakened the incentives for preserving or 
improving competitiveness.  
An  integrated  financial  system  may  be  efficient,  but  not  necessarily  robust.  The  more 
complex  and  interconnected  it  gets,  the  more  vulnerable  it  is  when  exposed  to  small,  and 
localized, shocks. These may worsen and compromise the stability and integrity of the whole. 
This is what is now happening in Europe, as it happened before with subprime mortgages in 
the  US.  In  both  cases,  problems  of  limited  size  –  the  Greek  public  debt  in  the  case  of  
Europe  –  have  had  a  disproportionate  impact  because  amplification  mechanisms  have 
occurred inside the financial system. 
In Europe, three separate dynamics have been at work. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
First,  between  solvency  and  liquidity  of  sovereign  debtors.  In  times  of  turmoil,  sovereigns, 
like  financial  institutions,  can  be  either  illiquid  or  insolvent,  or  both.  In  many  cases,  the 
distinction is blurred. When uncertainty is high, sovereigns face liquidity shortages, and they 
can only issue new debt at ever higher interest rates. This, in turn, creates doubts about their 
ultimate solvency, triggering a negative spiral. Good fundamentals are an absolute necessity, 
but not always a sufficient condition. Liquidity spirals, when allowed to develop, can lock a 
country, just like a financial institution, into a bad equilibrium. This process has clearly been 
at work in peripheral Europe, especially Spain and Italy, since the beginning of August. 
A second interaction occurs between sovereigns and banks. Both are perceived as closely 
linked by the market. Indeed, sovereign CDSs act as floors to bank CDSs. And, conversely, 
banks’ creditworthiness depends on their exposure to sovereign risk. This circularity creates 
powerful feedback loops which may lead to absolute market freeze. 
Finally, banks form a closely interconnected network. Interbank relationships are key to the 
smooth functioning of financial intermediation. They have been severely disrupted during the 
current turmoil. It is important to note – and accept – that counterparty risk between financial 
intermediaries  depends  as  much  on  perception  as  on  reality.  It  was  enough  for  European 
banks to be perceived as vulnerable, even if that was unjustified, to experience tensions on 
funding. A case in point is the significant retrenchment by US money market mutual funds 
from European banks on the basis of their exposure to peripheral sovereign risk.  
What we have seen in the last three weeks is the simultaneous interaction between these 
three dynamics: solvency and liquidity; banks and sovereigns; and inside the banking sector 
itself. All sovereigns have been impacted. This includes, most recently, all triple A countries, 
even Germany. 
I draw three conclusions from this analysis 
First,  the  essential  weakness  of  Europe  does  not  primarily  lie  in  the  fragility  of  any  of  its 
components. Europe’s fragility comes from its difficulty to organize and manage, in times of 
crisis, the complex interactions occurring at the heart of its financial system.  
Second,  we  are  facing  a  financial  crisis,  not  a  monetary  one.  There  are  huge  differences. 
Confidence in the currency remains as strong as ever. Gross capital inflows in the euro area 
remain unaffected. The euro exchange rate remains high by historical standards (6% in real 
terms above its average over the past decade).  
Finally, interconnectedness, which creates contagion inside Europe, also works well beyond 
the euro area. Banking and market pressures have been transmitted globally. Asia may be 
6,000  miles  away  from  Europe,  but,  for  the  financial  markets  the  distance  is  less  than 
30 seconds. 
Origins and causes 
How could the crisis have been allowed to develop? There have been lags in the decision-
making process. Fiscal discipline has not been respected in the past. European rules have 
not  been 
implemented.  Also,  some  policy  decisions  have  produced  unintended 
consequences. 
One example is private sector involvement (the so-called PSI) in sovereign debt resolution. 
On the face of it, it sounds totally appropriate. Economists like saying that, once debt has 
become unsustainable, it is better to reduce it immediately. Beyond simple economics, PSI is 
seen  as  necessary  for  eliminating  moral  hazard  and  ensuring  market  discipline.  When 
investors have taken excessive risks, they should normally pay a price. Finally, PSI has a 
strong,  and 
the 
consequences of the reckless behavior of borrowers and lenders.  
tax  payers  cannot  be  called 
legitimate,  political  appeal: 
to  bear 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
However compelling, this line of reasoning misses an important point. The sovereign bond 
market is more than a means of financing governments. It is the pillar on which all financial 
systems  ultimately  rest.  Over  the  past  70  years,  financial  markets  have  worked  on  the 
assumption that public debt in advanced economies was, indeed, risk-free. That basis has 
now been shaken, both by PSI in Europe and the debate on the debt ceiling in the US. We 
used to think of public debt in major countries as a riskless asset. Not anymore, or at least 
not to the same extent.  
The immediate effects seem benign so far in the US, which remains the deepest and most 
liquid  bond  market  in  the  world.  In  Europe,  by  contrast,  there  have  been  more  dramatic 
consequences. Once credit risk has entered into sovereign bonds, a fundamental element of 
instability has been introduced. This is why, unfortunately, the strong statement made in the 
Communiqué of the Euro Area Heads of 21st July that Greece was a unique and exceptional 
case did not impact the market and was followed by an increase in sovereign spreads for all 
peripheral countries. 
A second, more recent, decision may have contributed to intensifying the current turmoil. It 
was  rightly  decided  by  European  regulators,  under  the  auspices  of  the  European  Banking 
Authority,  that  banks  should  hold  more  capital  to  face  increased  uncertainty  in  the  current 
environment.  A  deadline  was  set  for  them  to  achieve  a  9%  core  tier  1  ratio,  based  on  a 
commonly  agreed  definition  of  capital.  Unfortunately,  however,  calibration  for  this  exercise 
explicitly incorporated a mark to market assessment of each bank’s exposure to sovereign 
debt. Although this element of the calibration was deemed to have been done once and for 
all, just for the purpose of calculating an additional capital cushion above the objective of 9%, 
the market considered the risk that it might be repeated in other circumstances. This created 
a powerful disincentive to hold, let alone acquire, such debt, since banks felt they could be 
penalized  in  the  future.  Banks  are  major  actors  on  the  sovereign  bond  markets  and  it  is 
certainly no coincidence that liquidity dried up and spreads went up in most markets in the 
days following that decision. 
Policy responses 
Cumulative  and  destabilizing  dynamics  need  to  be  addressed  by  a  conjunction  of 
complementary actions. 
First,  it  is  essential  to  stabilize  European  bond  markets.  We  have  to  recognize  that  the 
necessary  degree  of  fiscal  adjustment  is  heavily  dependent  on  the  level  of  market 
confidence.  This  has  been  well  recognized  by  France  with  the  recent  EUR  18  billion 
consolidation  package  for  this  year  and  2012,  consisting  notably  of  tax  benefit  reductions, 
VAT  increases  and  an acceleration  of  the pension  reform.  But  we  also  know  that  markets 
react  positively,  if  only  progressively,  to  credible  fiscal  consolidation  and  financial  reform. 
Witness the success in Ireland where 10-year spreads have gone down from 14% in July to 
around 8% recently.  
Second,  we  should  try  and  delink  bank  and  sovereign  risk.  In  the  future,  this  may  call  for 
more  structural  solutions,  with  deposit  insurance  and  crisis  resolution  mechanisms  firmly 
established at the euro area level.  
In current, unstable circumstances, what role should the central bank play?  
Monetary policy should certainly stick to its mandate and ensure price stability in the medium 
run.  In  Europe,  with  financial  conditions  tighter  as  a  result  of  the  explosion  in  sovereign 
spreads,  increased  uncertainty  and  loss  of  confidence,  –  as  shown  by  the  fall  in  most 
indicators – there are now more downside risks to price stability. It was therefore appropriate 
to lower our policy rates by 25bp, a decision reached unanimously by the Governing Council. 
Second,  we  need  to  ensure  that  the  banking  system  has  access  to  liquidity  –what  is 
sometimes  called  the  role  of  lender  of  last  resort  of  the  central  bank.  In  this  respect,  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Eurosystem has confirmed its policy of providing unlimited liquidity – at fixed rates – to the 
banking system until at least until the end of Q2 2012. Collateral policy has been adjusted to 
avoid the shocks and liquidity squeezes borne out of rating changes. Dollar funding, based 
on the existing swap with the Federal Reserve, has also been made easier. 
Finally, in a period of intense market disruption, it is essential to ensure that the monetary 
policy transmission mechanism actually works. This may involve temporary and exceptional 
interventions on those market segments where dysfunctions are most apparent. This is the 
purpose of the Securities Markets Program (SMP), initiated in May 2010 by the Eurosystem. 
It is important to note that in our case, the objective was not to expand the monetary base. 
Central bank money created through these purchases has been sterilized.  
There  have  been  some  criticisms  against  this  bond  buying  program.  But  it  is;  in  my  view, 
totally  justified  by  our  primary  mandate.  Faced  with  a  clear  risk  of  completely  disrupted 
financial markets, and with huge divergences in credit market interest rates, the ECB was in 
danger of not being able to implement a truly single monetary policy, nor to meet its primary 
mandate, i.e. maintaining price stability over the medium term in the whole of the euro area.  
There have been calls for more. Both markets and some governments seem to consider that 
the ECB should take a more aggressive stance in buying public debt. Let me give you some 
perspective on the issue.  
In some jurisdictions, unconventional monetary policies have led central banks to purchase 
significant  amounts  of  government  debt  –  these  purchases  amount  to  58%  of  total  debt 
issued since 2009 in the UK, 21% in the US and between 9 and 10% in the euro area (there 
was a monetary policy objective in all cases). Although this was not the primary purpose, this 
policy stance has contributed to providing markets with an insurance, or even an assurance, 
against  a  potential  dry-up  in  liquidity.  In  countries  where  significant  amounts  of  debt  have 
been purchased by monetary authorities, long-term interest rates have been kept at very low 
levels, irrespective of their fiscal situation. But this equilibrium could be unstable in a different 
inflation environment. Indeed, markets seem to be aware of some inflation “tail risks” and are 
hedging against these risks through gold and the CHF, whose prices have reached historical 
highs.  
In the Euro Area, we consider that any lasting backstop has to come from governments. This 
is why we have been asking for a speedy implementation and greater flexibility in the EFSF 
and very much welcome decisions taken in this regard in July and in October. 
At this stage, therefore, the euro area is paying a double price. One for its mistakes and one 
for  its  virtues.  The  mistakes,  for  governments,  was  to  allow  the  piling  up  of  debt  through 
unsustainable fiscal policies over a decade, and then to create ex nihilo a doubt as to their 
willingness to pay those debts. And we are also paying the price for our virtue and our refusal 
to liquefy public debt through massive monetization of our fiscal deficits.  
I believe that virtue will eventually be rewarded. In the next decade, markets and lenders will 
trust  those  currencies  that,  whatever  the  circumstances,  are  managed  with  one  overriding 
priority:  preserving  price  stability  and  the  intrinsic  value  of  the  currency  unit.  On  this 
fundamental basis, we can look at the future of the euro with strong and realistic optimism. I 
see  the  recent  decision  by  the  Swiss  central  bank  to  peg  the  CHF  to  the  euro  as  a 
confirmation of this statement.  
Conclusion 
History  has  taught  us  that  financial  crises  can  be  extremely  violent.  The  current  turmoil  in 
Europe is no exception. In the most intense phases, it is difficult to imagine that there is light 
at the end of the tunnel.  
But history has also taught us that crises provide opportunities for reform and progress. We 
live in democracies and have to accept that political decisions follow their own process and 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
obey their own constraints. But I am confident that the euro area will emerge from this period 
stronger and more cohesive.  
There are, indeed, some reasons for optimism. On the supply side, our economies are robust 
and dynamic. Corporate balance sheets are very strong. Our banking system is robust and 
well supervised. Emerging economies are well placed to enjoy strong and sustainable growth 
in  the  years  to  come  therefore  contributing  to  sustained  global  demand.  Above  all,  the 
community of nations seems ready to face the extraordinary challenges we are confronted 
with.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
