Mario Draghi: Continuity, consistency and credibility 
Introductory  remarks  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
21st Frankfurt European Banking Congress “The Big Shift”, Frankfurt am Main, 18 November 
2011. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a privilege and a pleasure for me to be here today.  
As you know, this is the first time I’m speaking publicly as President of the European Central 
Bank outside the ECB. I could not think of a more appropriate occasion than the European 
Banking Congress in the ECB’s home town.  
I  understand  that  this  congress  was  established  about  20  years  ago  to  strengthen  the 
position of Frankfurt as a European financial centre, and thereby make the city attractive as a 
location – first for the European Monetary Institute and now for the ECB. Well, I am pleased 
to see how successful it has been! 
Before discussing the shift towards a much greater role of emerging economies, which is the 
theme of today’s congress, let me elaborate on the current situation in the euro area.  
The euro area situation and ECB monetary policy  
I. 
Activity is expected to weaken in most of the advanced economies. This is the result of a 
weakening of various components of aggregate demand, both domestic and foreign. And it is 
evident in “hard” data as well as survey data.  
In the euro area, downside risks to the economic outlook have increased, and the weaker 
degree of activity will moderate price, cost and wage pressures.  
This  is  why  the  ECB  decided  to  reduce  its  key  interest  rates  by  25  basis  points  on 
3 November,  acting  in  full  compliance  with  its  mandate  to  maintain  price  stability  in  the 
medium term.  
We are aware of the current difficulties for banks due to the stress on sovereign bonds, the 
tightness of funding markets and the scarcity of eligible collateral. We are also aware of the 
problems of maturity mismatches on balance sheets, the challenges to raise levels of capital 
and the cyclical risks related to the downturn. 
In the money market, we see rising spreads between secured and unsecured segments, and 
a  widening  of  repo  prices  between  different  types  of  collateral.  Interbank  activity  remains 
subdued and concentrated in the very short-term maturities. This limited activity is reflected 
in increased recourse to our liquidity-providing operations, as well as to our deposit facility. 
So far, the ECB has taken several non-standard measures to ensure that short-term funding 
does  not  represent  a  problem  for  euro  area  banks.  The  most  important  non-standard 
measures  are  the  fixed  rate  full  allotment  procedures  and  the  longer-term  refinancing 
operations.  We  have  also  implemented  three  additional  US  dollar  operations,  which  cover 
the end of the year, and we have launched a second covered bond purchasing programme.  
Let me use this occasion to dwell a bit further on monetary policy in the current environment. 
Three principles are of the essence: continuity, consistency and credibility.  
Continuity first and foremost refers to our primary objective of maintaining price stability over 
the medium term.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Consistency means to act in line with our primary objective and with our strategy both in time 
and over time.  
Credibility implies that our monetary policy is successful in anchoring inflation expectations 
over the medium and longer term. This is the major contribution we can make in support of 
sustainable  growth,  employment  creation  and  financial  stability.  And  we  are  making  this 
contribution in full independence. 
Gaining credibility is a long and laborious process. Maintaining it is a permanent challenge. 
But  losing  credibility  can  happen  quickly  –  and  history  shows  that  regaining  it  has  huge 
economic and social costs.  
These  three  principles  –  continuity,  consistency  and  credibility  –  are  at  the  root  of  the 
Governing  Council’s outstanding record during the past 13 years in terms of price stability 
and anchoring inflation expectations.  
National  economic  policies  are  equally  responsible  for  restoring  and  maintaining  financial 
stability.  Solid  public 
the  basis 
for 
competitiveness, sustainable growth and job creation – are two of the essential elements. 
But in the euro area there is a third essential element for financial stability and that must be 
rooted in a much more robust economic governance of the union going forward. In the first 
place  now,  it  implies  the  urgent  implementation  of  the  European  Council  and  Summit 
decisions. We are more than one and a half years after the summit that launched the EFSF 
as part of a financial support package amounting to 750 billion euros or one trillion dollars; 
we are four months after the summit that decided to make the full EFSF guarantee volume 
available; and we are four weeks after the summit that agreed on leveraging of the resources 
by a factor of up to four or five and that declared the EFSF would be fully operational and 
that all its tools will be used in an effective way to ensure financial stability in the euro area. 
Where is the implementation of these long-standing decisions?  
finances  and  structural  reforms  –  which 
lay 
The shift towards a much greater role of emerging economies  
II. 
Let me now turn to the “big shift” in the global economy that is the theme of today’s congress: 
the much greater role of emerging economies.  
Their  performance  in  the  aftermath  of  the  crisis  has  been  impressive.  Diverging  economic 
performance  between  the  emerging  economies  and  the  advanced  economies  had  been 
evident  for  at  least  a  decade.  But  after  the  crisis,  there  was  a  dramatic  widening  in  the 
divergence.  
Initially after the “Lehman shock” of September 2008, economic activity contracted sharply in 
both advanced and emerging economies. But a two-speed recovery quickly became evident. 
The emerging economies have returned to their pre-crisis economic dynamism very rapidly, 
while the advanced economies have experienced the slow pace of growth that is typical for 
recoveries following profound financial crises. 
To this day, most of the advanced economies are only close to, or have just recovered, their 
production  levels  pre-Lehman.  In  contrast,  output  in  the  main  emerging  economies  is  now 
already 20% higher than it was before.  
In  the  past,  shocks  in  advanced  economies  often  caused  enduring  drags  on  emerging 
economies. The Latin American debt crisis of the 1980s was a prominent example. But now, 
economic  reform  and  strengthened  institutions  in  the  emerging  world  have  changed  this 
pattern. Generally, these economies have built enough financial, fiscal and external buffers 
to dampen international spillovers. 
The second feature I would like to highlight is the asymmetry between the rising role of the 
emerging economies in trade and their still lagging role in finance. They are giants in trade, 
but their financial linkages to the rest of the world are still developing. Indeed, they are much 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
more  open  in  terms  of  trade:  trade  openness  is  close  to  60%  of  GDP,  whereas  the  same 
measure based on financial flows is less than 15% of GDP.  
The third feature is the relevance of emerging economies for the euro area. They account for 
roughly one third of our external trade, up from a quarter ten years ago. Interestingly, this 
increase in the weight of emerging economies has improved the price competitiveness of the 
euro  area,  because  on  average  they  have  had  higher  inflation  than  us.  At  the  same  time, 
their higher inflation has not fed into higher euro area prices, because their goods were much 
cheaper to begin with and because of an increasing share of imports from these countries.  
The  euro  area  also  benefits  from  trade  with  emerging  economies  in  terms  of  product 
specialisation. We have a comparative advantage in mid-technology exports, while the most 
dynamic  emerging  economies  focus  on  either  high-tech  or  low-tech  good.  Thus,  those 
economies compete  more  directly  with  exports  from  the  United  States  and  Japan  or  other 
emerging economies.  
The euro area is also helped by the composition of demand in emerging economies. This is 
tilted  more  towards  goods  than  services,  matching  the  composition  of  euro  area  exports 
better than that of other large advanced economies. 
Therefore,  in  macroeconomic  terms,  the  euro  area’s  trade  relationship  with  emerging 
economies has been generally positive.  
Conclusion  
In  spite  of  the  decoupling  experienced  in  recent  years,  the  fortunes  of  advanced  and 
emerging economies are intimately linked. The growth of emerging economies has brought a 
much higher level of economic prosperity to hundreds of millions of their people. And their 
rising role means that today they share responsibility for global economic performance in half 
with  the  rest  of  the  world.  They  account  for  almost  50%  of  global  GDP  measured  in 
purchasing  power  parity  terms  (or  just  over  one  third  of  global  GDP  measured  in  market 
exchange rates). 
In today’s global economy, advanced economies can face some of the same distress that 
was earlier associated with emerging economies: profound fiscal challenges, sudden stops in 
capital flows, macroeconomic retrenchment and forced reform. At the same time, and going 
forward,  the  emerging  economies  will  be  confronted  with  the  challenges  that  have  long 
concerned advanced economies: population ageing and, perhaps, reform fatigue.  
In spite of the current challenges faced by the global economy, we must resist temptation to 
resort to unilateral policies, and we must work together to ensure that the gains achieved are 
firmly secured for future generations.  
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
