Erkki Liikanen: European integration in a global economic setting – 
CESEE, China and Russia 
Opening remarks by Mr Erkki Liikanen, Governor of the Bank of Finland, at the Conference 
on European Economic Integration (CEEI) 2011: “European Integration in a Global Economic 
Setting – CESEE, China and Russia”, Vienna, 21 November 2011. 
 Thank you very much, Ewald! Let me start by expressing how much I and the whole Suomen 
Pankki appreciate the invitation to join the National Bank of Austria in organizing this exciting 
conference. This conference is a great example of cooperation between two members of the 
Eurosystem. I am very glad so many of you have been able to join us.  
The  topic  of  this  conference  is  timely:  The  emergence  of  China  has  been  one  of  the  key 
defining  trends  of  the  past  two  decades  in  the  global  economy.  Chinese  manufacturing 
goods are competing at higher and higher levels of sophistication, and the effects are being 
felt all over Europe and the rest of the world. 
At the same time, Russia’s economic growth has also been impressive, and the country has 
become even more important for us in Europe. Russia is particularly important as a source of 
energy  and  Russia’s  growing  standards  of  living  have  enabled  many  countries  – including 
Finland – to export more there.  
Furthermore, we should not forget the other emerging market and developing countries that 
have succeeded in growing at a rapid pace during the past years and even decades. During 
the  “Great  Recession”  most  large  emerging  market  economies  continued  to  grow,  while 
advanced OECD countries contracted.  
This  means  that  –  adjusted  for  purchasing  power  parities  –  the  emerging  and  developing 
economies will overtake advanced economies, perhaps already in 2013. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
While this is a significant shift in the balance of economic activity in the world, we need to 
also remember that we are witnessing a return to the situation that persisted for most of the 
past  two  millennia.  China  accounted  for  more  than  one  quarter  of  global  output  until  the 
beginning of the 19th century, and the country is now on its way to a similar share of total 
output.  
  2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
While this growing share necessarily comes at the expense of Europe and the US, we need 
to remind ourselves that the global economy is not a zero-sum game. A more affluent China 
also means larger export markets for European goods and services. Moreover, China is not 
alone.  
What’s more, large emerging economies like Russia and Brazil have generally enjoyed rapid 
growth during the past years, partly because of their prudent economic policies, which have 
allowed them to utilize their catch-up potential to the fullest. 
The catch-up has not been limited to the so-called BRIC countries, of course. Many smaller 
countries  in  Eastern  Europe,  Asia  and  Sub-Saharan  Africa  have  become  more  integrated 
into the world economy, and – as a result – have been able to increase the welfare of their 
citizens. In many ways this conference is dedicated to discussing the results of this global 
shift of the balance of economic activity. 
 Given  the  importance  of  these  rapidly  growing  economies,  it  is  no  surprise  that  that  their 
share in the foreign trade of the EU countries has also grown. Last year, China accounted for 
8.4% of all exports for the EU as a whole, while Russia’s share was 6.4%. On the import side 
both countries were even more important, and China accounted for almost 19% of all imports 
to the EU. Russia’s share was 10.5%. On the export side only the US was a more important 
trading  partner  than  China,  and  on  the  import  side  China  was  clearly  the  most  important 
trading partner, while the US and Russian shares were practically equal. It is obvious that we 
have  become  more  dependent  on  the  large  emerging  economies,  especially  China  and 
Russia.  
Given the growing importance of both Russia and China, it is interesting that within both the 
EU, and also the euro area, different countries still have different economic ties with these 
two emerging giants. Partially these differences are driven by geography, partly by economic 
structure.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
 For  example,  on  the  import  side  Russia  is  Finland’s  most  important  trading  partner, 
accounting for some 18% of all imports. This is mainly due to the high level of natural gas 
and  crude  oil  imports  from  Russia,  together  with  the  relatively  high  price  for  these 
commodities.  The  situation  is  similar  in  many  EU  countries  in  the  Central  and  Eastern 
Europe, but even in Austria Russia accounts for less than 2% of total imports.  
The emergence of China, Russia and other large middle-income countries as major global 
economic powers is one of the defining trends of the current century. I am very glad to be 
able to participate in this conference and to discuss various aspects of these changes with 
such esteemed researchers, policy-makers and representatives of the business community.  
Before  introducing  Professor  Andrew  Rose,  I  would  like  to  announce  that  the  next 
Conference on European Economic Integration will be held in Finland, on November 26 and 
27, 2012.  
Now, let me introduce our first keynote speaker, Professor Andrew K. Rose from University 
of  California,  Berkeley.  Andrew  K.  Rose  is  the  B.T.  Rocca  Jr.  Professor  of  International 
Business  in  the  Economic  Analysis  and  Policy  Group,  Haas  School  of  Business  at  the 
University  of  California,  Berkeley.  He  serves  as  Associate  Dean  for  Academic  Affairs,  and 
Chair  of  the  Faculty.  He  is  also  a  Research  Associate  of  the  NBER  (National  Bureau  of 
Economic Research, based in Cambridge, MA), and a Research Fellow of the CEPR (Centre 
for Economic Policy Research, London).  
Professor Rose has published numerous articles in refereed economics journals, including 
the  American  Economic  Review,  the  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics,  the  Review  of 
Economic Studies, and the Journal of Finance. Rose is interested in the theory and practice 
of  economic  policy,  and  his  research  addresses  issues  in  international  trade,  finance,  and 
macroeconomics.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
