Mario Draghi: Opening of the cultural days of the European Central Bank 
– Italy 2011 
Address by Mr Mario Draghi, Governor of the Bank of Italy and Chairman of the Financial 
Stability Board, at the opening of the cultural days of the European Central Bank – Italy 2011, 
European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 19 October 2011. 
 Madam Mayor, Mr. President, Ministers, my esteemed central bank colleagues, Ladies and 
Gentlemen, 
 
For  me  it  is  a  privilege  and  an  honour  to  inaugurate  this  event,  together  with  Lord 
Mayor Petra Roth and President Jean-Claude Trichet, in the magnificent setting of the Alte 
Oper, which traditionally hosts the culmination of the European Central Bank’s Cultural Days. 
 
The Cultural Days, dedicated this year to Italy, are opening just days before the end of 
my term as Governor of the Bank of Italy and the beginning of my new position at the head of 
the ECB. This means that I will have the pleasure of being here in Frankfurt more often. 
 
This year’s edition of the Cultural Days is also distinguished by the fact that it coincides 
with  the  150th  anniversary  of  Italian  national  unity.  At  home,  countless  initiatives  have 
retraced and commemorated the events that marked our history as a nation. Exalting Italy’s 
social  and  cultural  roots  is  essential,  because  a  country  ignorant  of  its  past  is  a  country 
without  a  future.  I  am  thoroughly  convinced  that  our  common  European  identity  must  be 
founded first of all upon common knowledge of the history and the traditions of the countries 
that make up the Union. The Cultural Days serve this purpose, stimulating reflections on our 
shared roots. They offer an opportunity to become familiar with the cultural heritage of the 
nations of Europe, to appreciate their fruitful differences, to comprehend their similarities, to 
grasp the full sense of our common Europe. Culture is fundamental to making the European 
Union  a  living  reality.  The  diverse  forms  in  which  it is  expressed, crossing  borders,  create 
channels for mutual understanding and forge a common feeling of belonging, over and above 
origin or language.  
 
We are now at the ninth edition of the Days, and certainly one of the reasons for the 
growing success of the initiative is the enthusiastic participation of the Frankfurt public, the 
primary audience. Let me thank you straight off for your attention to this dialogue. This year, 
there  is  perhaps  an  additional  reason  to  spark  the  city’s  interest:  Frankfurt  is  the  city  of 
Goethe, the “universal” man of the Enlightenment whose Italienische Reise was an essential 
bridge between the culture of Germany and that of the Land wo die Zitronen blühen. 
 
The programme for these Days revisits our cultural heritage, our artistic and historical 
legacy,  but  it  also  reflects  the  culture  and  cultural  activities  of  present-day  Italy.  Classical 
music is the centrepiece of the opening and closing concerts as well as the charity event, but 
there  will  also  be  presentations  of  contemporary  Italian  music.  The  Italian  film  days  are 
entirely given over to contemporary directors and will offer the opportunity to reflect on the 
ways in which the traditional Italian family model has changed. In literature, the themes range 
from the deeper meaning of cultural identity to the role of women in the Risorgimento. 
 
This evening the Orchestra Mozart will perform the opening concert under the baton of 
Claudio Abbado. The Maestro’s career, his essential embodiment of the universal language 
of music, certainly needs no presentation. I cannot even begin to sum up the course of his 
art. Let me merely recall that he has conducted some of the world’s greatest orchestras: the 
Berliner Philarmoniker, the Wiener Philarmoniker, La Scala. Constantly engaged with social 
problems and active in promoting the artistic growth and careers of young musicians, Claudio 
Abbado has founded a series of orchestras for young instrumentalists of artistic excellence, 
including notably the Chamber Orchestra of Europe and the Orchestra Mozart, which came 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
into  being  in  Bologna.  Both  draw  their  players  from  a  vast  range  of  different  countries, 
talented young musicians playing alongside established soloists. 
 
The  Orchestra  Mozart  owes  its  name  to  the  role  that  the  city  of  Bologna  played  in 
Mozart’s  development.  It  was  with  the  Philharmonic  Academy  of  Bologna  –  one  of  the 
centres of European cultural life – that Mozart, at the age of fourteen, took his diploma as 
“maestro compositore” on the 9th of October 1770. 
Music  as  solidarity,  music  as  social  life,  music  as  at  once  expression  of  and  factor  in 
personal and cultural growth. These are the values that Claudio Abbado and all these young 
musicians have brought with them to the Orchestra Mozart, from the very start. Now, it is my 
pleasure to leave you to the sublime art of Gioacchino Rossini. Claudio Abbado conducts the 
Orchestra Mozart in the Overture to the Barber of Seville. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
