Mark Carney: Retail price differentials between Canada and the United 
States 
Opening statement by Mr Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of Canada, presented to the 
Senate Standing Committee on National Finance, Ottawa, Ontario, 2 November 2011. 
 Good  evening.  Tiff  and  I  are  pleased  to  be  here  with  you  today  to  discuss  retail  price 
differentials between Canada and the United States. 
The  mandate  of  the  Bank  of  Canada  is  to  enhance  the  well-being  of  Canadians  by 
contributing to sustained economic growth. The single, most direct contribution that monetary 
policy can make to sound economic performance is to provide Canadians with confidence 
that  their  money  will  retain  its  purchasing  power.  In  Canada,  this  is  achieved  through  an 
inflation-control targeting framework. 
Inflation-control  targeting  has  been  a  cornerstone  of  monetary  policy  in  Canada  since  its 
introduction in 1991. Since 1995, the target range has been 1 to 3 per cent, with the Bank’s 
monetary policy aimed at keeping inflation at the 2 per cent target midpoint. 
It is important to stress that the target is for total CPI inflation, which is the best measure of 
the overall cost of living for Canadians. We do not target or try to control prices of individual 
goods and services. With 2 per cent inflation, there will always be some prices rising more 
quickly  and  others  more  slowly.  Central  to  a  market-based  economy  is  the  role  of  relative 
price signals in allocating resources. 
To  understand  the  evolution  of  CPI  inflation,  the  Bank  looks  at  the  forces shaping  various 
prices, one of which is consumer price differentials between Canada and the United States. 
We also examine the role played by the exchange rate in price gaps, about which I will speak 
in a moment. We look at both of these, and the factors that drive them, to understand how 
prices  are  set  in  Canada  which,  in  turn,  contributes  to  our  analysis  of  the  inflation 
expectations of Canadian households and businesses and, ultimately, to our ability to fulfill 
the Bank’s mandate. 
At the Bank, we use two sources of information to estimate the size and evolution of retail 
price  differentials  between  Canada  and  the  United  States.  The  first  is  the  consumer  price 
index  information  from  Statistics  Canada  and  the  U.S.  Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics.  In 
particular,  we  examine  the  ratio  of  the  Canadian  CPI  to  the  U.S.  CPI  for  three  price 
categories:  autos,  other  durables  and  clothing.  These  ratios  provide  information  about  the 
evolution of prices in Canada relative to prices in the United States. On their own, however, 
they do not tell us the absolute dollar amount of price gaps between the two countries. 
To assess the price-gap level, we use information about the prices of specific goods in both 
countries gathered from an informal Internet survey conducted by Bank of Canada staff. We 
record the prices of a list of identical goods in Canada and the United States at the same 
retail  outlet.  U.S.  dollar  prices  are  converted  into  Canadian  dollars  using  the  bilateral 
exchange rate for that day. 
Using  these  two  sources  of  information,  the  Bank  of  Canada’s  best  estimate  is  that  the 
Canada-U.S. retail consumer-goods price differential was 11 per cent in September, down 
from 18 per cent in April. In other words, prices of a set of comparable goods in Canada are 
an average of 11 per cent higher than the prices of these same goods in the United States. I 
caution that these are estimates and there is some uncertainty around them. 
An  important  question  is  why  has  the  gap  not  narrowed  more  for  similar  goods,  given  the 
increase  in  the  value  of  the  Canadian  dollar.  For  your  consideration,  allow  me  to  discuss 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
some of the possible factors, both macroeconomic and structural, that influence the prices of 
goods and services in both countries. 
First, cyclical issues may be responsible for some differences between Canadian and U.S. 
prices. Unexpected economic weakness in one country could lead to an undesirable buildup 
of inventories and result in local discounting of prices. In addition, as long as markets are 
partially segmented across international borders, market power may enable firms to respond 
to local demand conditions—possibly resulting in lower prices in areas with weaker demand. 
Secondly, from a macro perspective, prices take time to adjust. Importantly, this is not only 
true  in  response  to  the  exchange  rate,  but  also  to  anything  that  changes  the  economic 
environment (and this is why there are lags in the effect of monetary policy). 
In addition to the macro elements, there are structural factors, including profit margins and 
underlying costs, that influence the prices of goods and services and that can also contribute 
to the gap in prices in Canada and the United States. 
Operating profit margins for both the wholesale and retail sectors will have an impact on the 
prices of consumer goods in retail outlets. One possible reason that margins have remained 
elevated in Canada may be that the retail environment is more concentrated in Canada than 
in  the  United  States.  In  Canada,  the  top  four  retailers  have  a  28  per  cent  market  share, 
compared with only 12 per cent in the United States. 
On  the  cost  side,  there  are  a  number  of  factors  that  are  important  for  understanding  the 
differences in prices in Canada and the United States. 
Labour costs tend to be higher in Canada than in the United States. For instance, in the retail 
sector, total compensation per hour is higher in Canada. Despite this, retail- and wholesale-
sector employment is higher as a share of total employment in Canada, even though retail 
and  wholesale  trade  in  Canada  each  represent  a  smaller  share  of  real  GDP.  The  latter 
reflects Canada’s productivity performance in the retail sector, which has lagged that of the 
United States. This is partly a result of a much lower level of capital intensity and lower total 
factor productivity growth. 
Total factor productivity refers to how labour and capital are combined to create efficiency 
gains.  Here,  industry  structure  appears  to  matter,  with  larger  productivity  gains  from 
investment at chain stores than individual stores. Following 1995, productivity surged in the 
United  States,  with  investment  in  new  equipment  and  organizational  change.  In  Canada, 
these effects do not seem to have been experienced to the same degree, perhaps due to the 
more localized nature of Canadian markets. 
Transportation is another factor on the cost side. While fuel costs are only a portion of total 
transportation costs, the difference in gasoline taxes between the two countries makes gas 
more  expensive  in  Canada.  Lower  population  density  in  Canada  may  also  contribute  to 
higher transportation costs on a per-item basis. 
All of these factors and other domestic value-added services, such as marketing, are priced 
in local currency. Thus, when the value of the exchange rate moves, these costs to Canadian 
retailers, which must be paid in Canadian dollars, do not change. 
For imported goods, reflecting the smaller size of the Canadian market, the price paid by a 
Canadian  importer  of  a  good  may  be  higher  than  that  paid  by  an  American  importer.  The 
Canadian market is roughly one tenth the size of the U.S. market, suggesting a much smaller 
potential for economies of scale. While this may not be as much of an issue for large retail 
chains with presence in both markets, smaller mostly domestic retail firms could be affected. 
Finally, given all of these factors just discussed, allow me to turn to the role played by the 
exchange rate in price differentials between Canada and the United States. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
As  mentioned  earlier,  consumer  prices  tend  to  be  sticky—this  is  true  on  both  sides  of  the 
border.  More  broadly,  the  segmentation  of  international  markets,  in  part  due  to  the  higher 
costs of shopping abroad, creates limits to competitive pressures. 
In addition, paying attention and adjusting to fluctuations in the exchange rate requires time 
and energy. It is costly. When fluctuations in the exchange rate are relatively small, not all 
firms and consumers tend to pay close attention. It makes sense to focus attention where it 
matters  most.  That  is  one  reason  why  prices  are  only  adjusted  over  time  and  price  gaps 
persist. 
However, when the movements in the exchange rate are particularly large, they attract more 
attention and the adjustments are much faster, which we saw in the fall of 2007. 
The  most  useful  illustration  of  these  phenomena  is  the  behaviour  of  online  book  prices. 
These  are  often  completely  homogeneous  goods  on  both  side  of  the  border.  The  cost  of 
changing prices for an online retailer should be minimal. In addition, it is difficult to think of an 
easier case for consumers to take advantage of price differentials: comparing prices is just a 
matter  of  visiting  different  websites,  there  is  no  constraint  or  tariff  involved  when  ordering 
from abroad, and transportation costs are known. Despite all this, while online book prices do 
change frequently, they typically do not respond quickly to fluctuations in the exchange rate. 
However, in the fall of 2007, they did adjust to the strong Canadian-dollar appreciation. 
Typically, exchange rate movements tend to be reflected quickly in prices for only a narrow 
range of goods that are homogeneous in nature, e.g. fruits, vegetables, gasoline and meat 
prices.  For  other  goods  and  services,  there  is  no  apparent  short-run  pass-through.  The 
greater the value added in Canada to a good or service, the smaller the role played by the 
exchange rate in its price. However, estimates of pass-through at a more aggregated level, 
such as core CPI or total CPI, are quite low. Estimated pass-through is about 3 per cent for 
core inflation and 4 per cent for total inflation. To elaborate further, this means that a 10 per 
cent rise in the dollar would be expected to lower the level of total CPI by 0.4 per cent. 
Similar  to  the  experience  of  many  countries,  exchange  rate  pass-through  has  declined  in 
Canada in the last 20 years. Some possible explanations include: 
 
better-anchored  inflation  expectations  associated  with  the  conduct  of  monetary 
policy and increased credibility, and 
the  changing  composition  of  trade  (e.g.  switching  to  different  goods  as  relative 
prices change). 
 I trust these comments provide some insights to the underlying dynamics of Canadian-U.S. 
price differentials. 
With that, Tiff and I would be pleased to take your questions. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
 4 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  5
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
