Yaseen Anwar: Microfinance developments in Pakistan 
Inaugural  address  by  Mr  Yaseen  Anwar,  Governor  of  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan,  at  the 
5th Pakistan Microfinance Country Forum, Karachi, 2 December 2011. 
 totally  excluded,  and  another  32% 
Distinguished Speakers, Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen! 
I am delighted to be invited to the 5th Pakistan Microfinance Country Forum. 
Microfinance  in  Pakistan  has  made  good  progress  but  must  make  major  breakthroughs  to 
reach millions of underserved people who require a wide variety of financial services. 
Pakistan has one of the lowest financial penetration levels in the World with 56% of the adult 
population 
informally  served.  However,  despite 
considerable  support  from  the  Government,  donors  and  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan,  the 
microfinance sector has only been able to tap a small fraction of the potential market, with 
current active borrowers standing at roughly 2 million. 
Now,  I  would  like  to  share  SBP’s  vision  on  the  development  of  microfinance  and  financial 
inclusion in Pakistan and some of the initiatives taken by SBP. The history of microfinance is 
not very old in Pakistan. In fact, efforts to mainstream Microfinance into the formal financial 
system  started  in  2000  &  2001  when  the  Government  promulgated  the  Microfinance 
Ordinance.  The  passage  of  the  law  the  allowed  private  sector  to  establish  Microfinance 
Banks  that  are  licensed  and  regulated  by  State  Bank  of  Pakistan.  Since  then,  we  have 
witnessed the establishment of new MFBs, transformations of large MFIs, diversification of 
funding  sources,  development  of  inclusive  financial  services,  emergence  of  alternative 
delivery channels, and piloting of “Microfinance – Credit Information Bureau” (MCIB). These 
developments are indeed a sign of growth and maturity and a direct outcome of the enabling 
regulatory  framework  and  market  development  initiatives  for  microfinance.  The  success  of 
microfinance  in  Pakistan  is  widely  acknowledged  by  the  international  community.  Our 
microfinance regulatory framework has been ranked globally at the top in 2010 and 2011 by 
the independent “the Economic Intelligence Unit” of UK’s “The Economist” Magazine. 
In  developing  regulations  for  microfinance,  the  State  Bank  has  pursued  a  bottom-up 
approach  along  with  use  of  strong  analytical  and  problem  solving  skills  and  industry 
consultation. Since the inception of microfinance banking in Pakistan, our goal has been to 
determine the proportionality of a regulation before it is put in place. Hence, the regulatory 
approach has remained gradual and in line with the evolution of the sector. The evolution or 
trajectory of microfinance has so far remained positive despite the fact that many challenges 
arose along the way which I will cover later. Presently, nine MFBs are operating in Pakistan. 
All  these  MFBs  are  privately  owned  and  reflect  diversity  of  ownership  and  approaches  to 
microfinance  banking.  Considering  that  the  market  has  potential  and  the  regulatory 
framework is supportive, the ownership in MFBs has flowed both from local and international 
investors  including  banks,  development  agencies,  investment  funds,  mobile  network 
operators, and large domestic MFIs. 
One  of  the  success  stories  in  microfinance  sector  is  the  unique  opportunity  in  Pakistan  to 
utilize  alternative  delivery  channels  due  to  the  presence  of  a  sound  and  pro-growth 
regulatory  framework,  dense  population,  and  high  demand  for  financial  services.  The 
motivation for developing alternative channels for service delivery is twofold: firstly, there is 
enormous  scope  for  expanding  outreach,  especially  to  hard-to-reach  rural  areas.  The 
emerging models relying on “banking agents” will greatly extend the distribution of financial 
services  to  the  poor  and  marginalized  segments.  Secondly,  alternative  delivery  channels 
promise  significant  cost  reduction  to  institutions.  The  traditional  microfinance  business  is 
based on personal, one-on-one relationships. Thus, personnel expenses often account for a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
significant portion of microfinance operating expenses. The use of banking agents will help to 
reduce the operating costs of the sector. 
The recent development in mobile phone banking is highly encouraging. The expansion in 
the retail network of microfinance has arisen overwhelmingly from agents and mobile phone 
channels. Within a span of just two years, there are now almost 18,000 branchless banking 
outlets surpassing the 10,000 conventional bank branches. The combined daily transaction 
volume  of  the  two  prominent  branchless  banking  models  “Easypaisa”  and  “Omni”  now 
averages  over  175,000,  with  an  average  size  of  Rs. 3,700.  As  per  an  independent  World 
Bank – CGAP study, the small size of the transaction indicates enhanced access to finance 
by  the  poor  and  the  marginalized  unbanked  people,  an  important  milestone  for  financial 
inclusion.  The  early  successes  of  mobile  banking  in  Pakistan  are  attributable  to  the 
collaborative efforts of a wide range of stakeholders, including the Government, regulatory 
authorities,  development  agencies,  NADRA,  telecom  operators,  financial  institutions,  and 
technology  firms.  SBP  continues  to  work  with  all  stakeholders,  in  order  to  support  this 
nascent industry that is expected to be a key driver in expanding financial services to all of 
Pakistan.  The  sheer  diversity  of  the  stakeholders,  many  of  which  had  not  worked  in 
businesses together, underlines the need for continued close coordination to foster a market-
driven mobile banking eco-system.  
I must acknowledge the important role our partner donors continue to play in facilitating this 
sector  to  develop  a  sound  footing.  I  would  like  to  especially  thank  the  UKAid  and  Asian 
Development Bank for funding support for microfinance development. Under the  programs 
sponsored by these donors, a number of market interventions are managed by SBP. Some 
of these initiatives are as follows: 
The  Institutional  Strengthening  Fund  (ISF)  a  UK  £10million  grant  facility  launched  in 
December 2008, is intended to strengthen institutional & human resource capacity of MFB/Is 
to enhance scale and sustainability of microfinance services. The ISF has thus far approved 
Rs. 522 million for 11 microfinance providers including top and middle tier MFBs and MFIs. 
Under the arrangements, the ISF will support 15 projects for investment in HR, IT, product 
development,  Risk  management  systems,  business  plans  and  branchless  banking 
development.  Also,  under  ISF,  the  Pakistan  Microfinance  Network  (PMN)  was  provided 
funding  support  to  conduct  research  and  develop  the  industry’s  infrastructure  such  as  the 
testing of pilot microfinance Credit Information Bureau (CIB) in Lahore. Going forward, ISF 
will consider how to further support important systemic areas such as upgrading CIB to the 
national level. 
The  Microfinance  Credit  Guarantee  Facility  (MCGF)  a  £10  million  guarantee  facility,  was 
launched  by  SBP  in  December  2008,  to  mobilize  wholesale  commercial  funding  for 
microfinance providers through partial guarantees to commercial banks. The facility hasthus 
far  mobilized  commercial  funding  of  Rs. 3,225/-  million  for  four  microfinance  providers  for 
onward lending to around 200,000 new micro borrowers. Going forward, the facility will aim 
to raise commercial debt from non bank sources, diversifying sources of commercial capital 
for  microfinance  providers.  The  facility  will  be  instrumental  in  mainstreaming  microfinance 
providers and resolve some of its funding constraints on a permanent basis. 
Similarly,  the  Financial  Innovation  Challenge  Fund  (FICF),  a  £10million  innovation  grant 
facility, was launched by SBP in May 2011, to provide grants to foster innovation and test 
new markets, lower cost of delivery, enable systems and procedures to be more efficient and 
provide  new  ways  of  meeting  the  larger  demand  for  financial  services.  The  first  FICF 
challenge round was held on Financially Inclusive Government to Persons (G2P) Payments. 
Banks,  public  sector  institutions,  Microfinance  institutions,  government  agencies,  pension 
funds, and academic institutions were invited to apply for the promotion of financial inclusive 
G2P payments through bank accounts at branchless banking outlets and also provide other 
financial services to the G2P payments beneficiaries. A number of applications have been 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
received  from  these  institutions  which  are  now  being  evaluated  for  the  first  round  of  G2P 
payments Challenge. 
Financial literacy has assumed greater importance in recent years and is now considered an 
important  systemic  area  for  promoting  financial  inclusion  and  ultimately  financial  stability. 
Both developed and developing countries, therefore, are focusing on programs for financial 
literacy/education. 
SBP  has  started  a  pilot  Financial  Literacy  Program  (FLP)  with  the  private  sector  as  an 
implementing  partner.  The  Program  is  the  first  ever  initiative  to  promote  financial  literacy 
among the general public at the national level. The dissemination will be made through TV 
channels, regional Radio, print media and mobile network operators. In addition, field training 
and  street  theatres  will  also  be  used  to  target  beneficiaries.  The  program  will  impart 
knowledge  about  basic  financial  concepts  such  as  budgeting,  savings,  investments,  debt 
management,  financial  products  and  branchless  banking.  The  pilot  phase  will  target  about 
50,000  beneficiaries  with  emphasis  on  low  income  strata.  After  completion  of  the  pilot,  an 
impact  assessment  of  the  pilot  will  be  conducted  and  based  on  the  results  and 
recommendation the program will be scaled to the national level. 
Although  these  early  successes  in  microfinance  industry  are  laudable,  they  have  yet  to 
create a major dent in the widespread financial exclusion. Currently, microcredit is reaching 
only  2  million  borrowers  whereas  the  size  of  the  target  market  is  estimated  to  be  25  to 
30 million.  While  this  high  level  of  financial  exclusion  is  somewhat  disappointing,  it  does 
highlight  the  frontier  of  opportunities  and  bodes  well  for  development  of  the  microfinance 
industry  to  become  a  major  participant  within  the  overall  financial  sector  while  serving  the 
millions of underserved and unbanked people. I, therefore, urge all stakeholders to step up 
their efforts in their area. 
As we know, Pakistan has unfortunately faced an increased occurrence of natural calamities. 
In 2010 and 2011, floods and rains destroyed lives, properties, and businesses, particularly 
of those living in rural and peri-urban areas. The poor have also been adversely affected by 
volatility  in  food  prices  and  fuel  costs.  Increased  power  outage  has  been  another  major 
concern. Furthermore, the current global financial turmoil may in the long run adversely affect 
the flow in funding from the global financial markets. This state of affairs poses a number of 
challenges for the microfinance sector. I will highlight some of these and try to offer general 
solutions. 
The  first  and  foremost  challenge  is  organizational  development.  Every  institution  must 
determine  and  pursue  this  goal  by  having  in  place  appropriate  governance  structures, 
management  teams,  business  policies  &  plans,  risk  management  practices,  product 
development & innovation and use of appropriate technologies. Quality Human Resource is 
a prerequisite for achieving this goal. 
The second challenge is funding avenues for microfinance service providers. It is a proven 
fact  that  in  order  to  have  a  financially  sustainable  model,  MFBs  should  assign  more 
emphasis on savings mobilization and develop strategies and the infrastructure to mobilize 
deposits. 
Thirdly,  MFBs  need  to  improve  the  quality  of  growth  through  promoting  inclusive  financial 
services  with  up-scaling  credit  operations.  Lending  operations  must  extend  to  different 
economic  and  geographic  segments.  SBP  will  issue  regulatory  guidelines  to  MFBs  for  up-
scaling of loans, and develop a reporting structure to assess the geographic distribution of 
microfinance growth. Donor funding can support product development, capacity building, and 
market surveys. 
Fourthly, institutions must assign equal importance to consumer protection and awareness. 
SBP  will  also  review  and  strengthen  its  regulatory  and  supervisory  processes  to  ensure 
protection of microfinance clients’ rights. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
In the new Microfinance Strategic framework 2011–15, SBP has laid out a detailed strategy 
to promote sustainable growth of the sector. The strategy’s effectiveness and success hinges 
on  growth  dynamism  fundamentally  coming  from  microfinance  operators  themselves.  The 
role of SBP is to develop the banking infrastructure, encourage the use of successful global 
practices, and provide the regulatory and supervisory mechanism to enable MFBs to develop 
viable business models. 
To sum up, I would like to reaffirm the need for microfinance development for fostering a pro-
poor  and  sustainable  development  in  Pakistan.  Microfinance  has  come  of  age,  and  the 
sector  needs  to  discontinue  dependence  on  external  catalysts  and  focus  on  improving  its 
financial and operating performance by setting targets for borrowers, savers, portfolio quality, 
and  self-sufficiency.  Considerable  work  still  needs  to  be  undertaken  to  ensure  that  all 
microfinance banks and institutions are acting responsibly. It is also important for the industry 
to  continue  to  innovate,  create  new  partnerships  with  the  growing  branchless  banking 
networks, and to evolve and provide financial access to the unbanked. 
Let  me  once  again  thank  the  organizers  for  holding  important  event  and  I  wish  the 
Conference all success. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
