K C Chakrabarty: Empowering MSMEs for financial inclusion and growth 
– issues and strategies 
Keynote address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at 
the Central Bank of India SME Conclave, Mumbai, 20 December 2011. 
 Assistance provided by Smt L Vadera in preparation of this address is gratefully acknowledged. 
Shri  M.  V.  Tanksale,  Chairman  and  Managing  Director,  Central  Bank  of  India  (CBI),  
Smt  V.  R.  Iyer,  Executive  Director,  Central  Bank  of  India,  Shri  Chadrakant  Salunkhe, 
President SME Chamber of India, Shri A. Ramesh Kumar, MD & CEO – Asia Pragati Capfin 
Pvt  Ltd,  SME  entrepreneurs,  staff  members  of  CBI,  distinguished  guests,  members  of  the 
print and electronic media, ladies and gentlemen. 
It is my pleasure to be here at this Conclave on the eve of the conclusion of Centenary Year 
Celebrations of Central Bank of India. As you all may be aware, Central Bank of India, which 
was  established  way  back  in  1911,  has  a  glorious  past  and  would  be  celebrating  its 
Foundation Day on December 21, 2011. I take this opportunity to congratulate Shri Tanksale, 
CMD, Smt Iyer, ED, all employees and customers of the bank and all the other stakeholders 
on completing a remarkable hundred years of exemplary service to the nation. The bank was 
the realization of the dream of Shri Sorabji Pochkhanawala, a visionary, a philanthropist and 
a rare breed of people who richly deserve our tributes. It was the first commercial bank which 
was wholly owned and managed by Indians. Central Bank of India, over the years, has won 
the trust and confidence of its clients and it comes as no surprise then that it has become 
one of the most prominent banks in India. But more importantly, the bank had a rich tradition 
of promoting small and medium entrepreneurship and played a sterling role in the industrial 
development of the Bombay Presidency region. However, over a period of time, this zeal of 
promoting  entrepreneurship  development  appeared  to  have  dimmed  a  bit  and,  therefore,  I 
am extremely happy that as their Centenary Year draws to a close, Central Bank of India is 
bringing the limelight back to SMEs and rededicating themselves to the cause. I congratulate 
Shri  Tanksale  for  organizing  this  Conclave  on  “Empowering  SMEs  for  Inclusive  Growth- 
Strategies  and  Initiatives”  in  collaboration  with  a  predominant  industry  association  –  the 
Small and Medium Business Development Chamber of India. 
Importance of the MSME sector 
A. 
Now, there is no need for me to overemphasize the role and importance of the micro, small 
and medium enterprises You are all aware that in a developing economy, the MSMEs play a 
vital  role  and  if  India  were  to  have  a  growth  rate  of  8–10  percent  for  the  next  couple  of 
decades, it needs a strong micro, small and medium sector and for that micro entrepreneurs 
need  to  be  nurtured.  As  per  available  statistics  (4th  Census  of  MSME  Sector),  this  sector 
employs  an  estimated  59.7  million  persons  spread  over  26.1  million  enterprises.  It  is 
estimated that in terms of value, MSME sector accounts for about 45% of the manufacturing 
output and around 40% of the total export of the country. The MSMEs are the best vehicle for 
inclusive growth, to create local demand and consumption and also to fight with the global 
meltdown. Public policy has rightly accorded high priority to this sector in order to achieve 
balanced, sustainable, more equitable and inclusive growth in the country. A micro enterprise 
of  today  will  be  a  big  enterprise  of  tomorrow,  and  might  well  become  a  multinational 
enterprise  eventually,  if  given  the  support  in  finance  and  capacity  building.  It  is  also  an 
opportune time for putting more emphasis on MSMEs due to recession in many countries of 
the globe and rupee depreciation. The recession, while slowing down the global demand for 
goods and services, should not impact the sector, so adversely, as there is a huge demand 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
in the local markets which could be tapped and the depreciation of the rupee has improved 
their price competitiveness of exporting firms in the sector. 
Sizeable growth in credit – yet MSMEs feel not enough is being done 
The MSMEs primarily rely on bank finance for their operations and as such ensuring timely 
and  adequate  flow  of  credit  to  the  sector  has  been  an  overriding  public  policy  objective. 
Advances extended to the micro and small enterprises sector are treated as priority sector 
advances.  Over  the  years  there  has  been  a  significant  increase  in  credit  extended  to  this 
sector by the banks. As at the end of March 2011, the total outstanding credit provided by all 
Scheduled Commercial Banks (SCBs) to the MSE sector stood at Rs.4,575 billion as against 
Rs.3,622  billion  in  March  2010  registering  an  increase  of  26.3%.  Despite  the  increase  in 
credit  outstanding  to  the  sector,  the  MSME  borrowers  feel  that  the  lenders  are  not  doing 
enough for the MSMEs and are catering more to the needs of the large corporate. Let me 
now  focus  on  the  major  problems  /  challenges  /  issues  faced  by  the  MSMEs  and,  more 
specifically, the Micro and Small sector. 
B. 
Major problems / challenges / issues faced by the sector 
Access to credit 
Notwithstanding  the  increase  in  credit  outstanding  to  the  sector,  access  to  adequate  and 
timely  credit  at  a  reasonable  cost  is  a  critical  problem  faced  by  this  sector.  The  statistics 
compiled in the Fourth Census of MSME sector September 2009, revealed that only 5.18% 
of  the  units  (both  registered  and  unregistered)  had  availed  of  finance  through  institutional 
sources, 2.05% had finance from non-institutional sources; the majority of units i.e. 92.77% 
had  no  finance  or  depended  on  self-finance.  Thus,  the  extent  of  financial  exclusion  in  the 
sector is very high. But, this is not entirely unexpected because if one looks at the financial 
exclusion in our country in general, then MSMEs cannot remain unaffected by it. But there is 
a need to bridge this gap through enabling policies and the Government of India (GoI) needs 
to play a catalytic role to cater to the needs of this sector.  
First time entrepreneurs 
The  MSE  borrowers,  especially  new  generation  entrepreneurs,  do  not  have  collaterals  to 
offer to avail of bank finance. It is generally observed that collateral security provides comfort 
to the lenders as it ensures commitment of the borrower to the project and is also available to 
them for recovery in the event of failure of the enterprise. 
Infrastructure 
In  the  present  global  environment,  the  MSMEs  and  more  specifically  the  micro  and  small 
enterprises (MSEs) have to be competitive to survive and thrive. To ensure competitiveness 
of  the  MSEs,  it  is  essential  that  the  availability  of  infrastructure,  technology  and  skilled 
manpower are in tune with the global trends. MSEs are either located in industrial estates set 
up many decades ago, or have come up in an unorganized manner in rural areas. The state 
of  infrastructure  including  power,  water,  roads,  etc.  in  such  areas  is  inadequate  and 
unreliable. Further, the MSE sector in India, with some exceptions, is characterized by low 
technology levels, which acts as a handicap in the emerging global market. Although India 
has the advantage of a large pool of human resources, the industry continues to face deficit 
in manpower with the right skill sets for specific areas like, manufacturing, service, marketing, 
etc. The HR problem is further exacerbated by the low retention rate. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Access to alternate sources of capital 
The  ability  of  MSMEs  (especially  those  involving  innovations  and  new  technologies)  to 
access  alternative  sources  of  capital  like  angel  funds/risk  capital  needs  to  be  enhanced 
considerably. For this purpose, removing fiscal/regulatory impediments to use such funds by 
the MSMEs should be considered on priority. Access to equity capital is a genuine problem. 
At present, there is almost negligible flow of equity capital into this sector. Absence of equity 
capital  may  pose  a  serious  challenge  to  development  of  knowledge-based  industries, 
particularly those that are sought to be promoted by the first-generation entrepreneurs with 
the  requisite  expertise  and  knowledge.  There  is  a  demand  for  a  dedicated  Exchange  for 
MSMEs. 
Delayed realization of receivables 
Considerable delay in settlement of dues/payment of bills by the large-scale buyers to the 
MSMEs  units  adversely  affected  the  recycling  of  funds  and  business  operation  of  MSME 
units. Though the Government has enacted the Delayed Payments Act, 1998 many of the 
MSME units are reluctant to pursue cases against major buyers. After the enactment of the 
Micro,  Small  and  Medium  Enterprises  Development  (MSMED)  Act  2006,  the  existing 
provisions  of  the  Interest  on  Delayed  Payment  Act,  1998  to  Small  Scale  and  Ancillary 
Industrial Undertakings, have been strengthened. The banks have been advised to sanction 
separate sub-limits within the overall limits sanctioned to the corporate borrowers for meeting 
payment obligations in respect of purchases from MSME sector. Necessary instructions have 
been issued by banks to their branches to monitor the position of payment by corporates to 
MSME  and  wherever  found  necessary,  persuade  the  corporate  to  release  the  same  on 
priority basis. 
Sickness of units 
Growing  incidence  of  sickness  of  the  sector  is  yet  another  area  of  concern.  When  the 
sickness  prolongs  it  leads  to  the  closure  of  units  and  unemployment.  The  mortality  of  the 
MSE  units  is  high.  This  has  wider  implications  including  locking  of  funds  of  the  lending 
institutions, loss of scarce material resources and loss of employment. As on March 2011, 
the number of units identified as potentially viable as a percentage to total sick MSE units is 
around 8. The units placed under nursing as a proportion to the total number of sick units 
stood at 5.22%.The causes of sickness are both internal and external. The major causes are 
limited  financial  resources,  lack  of  organisational,  financial  and  management  skills  and 
expertise, non-availability of power  supply shortage of raw  materials, marketing difficulties, 
delayed and inadequate credit, obsolete technology, inadequate infrastructure, etc. 
Exit policy for MSMEs 
An exit route for non-viable units is necessary to manage sickness. Worldwide, MSMEs are 
credited  with  high  level  of  innovation  and  creativity,  which  also  leads  to  higher  level  of 
failures. Keeping this in view, most of the countries have put in place mechanisms to handle 
insolvencies  and  bankruptcies.  The  present  mechanism  available  in  India  for  MSMEs  is 
archaic. Business failure in India is viewed as a stigma, which adversely impacts individual 
creativity and development in the country. The existing legislations may have to be toned up 
so as to provide for efficient liquidation of non-viable businesses.  
Initiatives by government of India / Reserve Bank of India 
C. 
Recognizing the important role played by MSMEs in economic development and its sizeable 
contribution  to  employment  and  GDP,  and  realizing  that  financial  access  is  critical  for 
MSMEs  growth  and  development,  Government  and  Reserve  Bank  of  India  are  taking  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
lead  in  supporting  initiatives  that  improve  access  to  finance.  While  at  the  broader  level, 
financial 
inclusion  makes  growth  broad  based  and  sustainable  by  progressively 
encompassing the hitherto excluded population, and has become a national priority, at the 
more narrower level, since the level of financial exclusion is very high in this sector, drive to 
universal  financial  access,  including  SME  finance,  is  no  longer  a  policy  choice  but  a 
compulsion. The Reserve Bank of India has intensified a number of measures and endorsed 
quantitative access targets over the last year to further financial inclusion. Let me very briefly 
touch upon a few of them. 
With an objective of ensuring uniform progress in provision of banking services in all parts of 
the country, banks were advised to draw up a roadmap to provide banking services through 
a banking outlet in every unbanked village having a population of over 2,000 by March 2012. 
The  Reserve  Bank  advised  banks  that  such  banking  services  need  not  necessarily  be 
extended through a brick and mortar branch but could be provided also through any of the 
various  forms  of  Information  and  Communication  Technology  (ICT)  –  based  models, 
including Business Correspondents (BCs). A total of about 74,000 such unbanked villages 
have been identified and allotted to various banks through State Level Bankers Committees 
(SLBCs).  As  at  the  end  of  September  2011,  as  reported  by  the  State  Level  Bankers’ 
Committees  of  various  states/Union  Territories,  banking  outlets  have  been  opened  in 
42,079 villages across the various States in the country. This comprises of 1127 branches, 
39998 business correspondents and 954 other modes like rural ATMs, mobile vans etc. 
To ensure enhanced credit flow to the sector, in terms of the recommendations of the Prime 
Minister’s  Task  Force  on  Micro,  Small  and  Medium  Enterprises  (MSMEs)  (Chairman: 
Shri T.K.A.Nair, Principal Secretary, Government of India) constituted by the Government of 
India, banks were advised to achieve a 20 per cent year-on-year growth in credit to micro 
and small enterprises; the allocation of 60% of the MSE advances to the micro enterprises is 
to be achieved in stages viz. 50% in the year 2010–11, 55% in the year 2011–12 and 60% in 
the year 2012–13 and achieve a 10% annual growth in number of micro enterprise accounts. 
The Reserve Bank is closely monitoring the achievement of targets by banks on a quarterly 
basis. The matter is followed up with the laggard banks to know their constraints and impress 
upon them the need to devise strategies to gear up the credit mechanism for the sector.  
Further, based on the recommendations of the Working Group (Chairman: Shri V.K. Sharma, 
Executive  Director,  RBI)  constituted  by  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  to  review  the  Credit 
Guarantee  Scheme  (CGS)  of  the  Credit  Guarantee  Fund  Trust  for  Micro  and  Small 
Enterprises (CGTMSE), the limit for collateral free loans to the MSE has been increased from 
the present level of Rs. 5 lakh to Rs.10 lakh and it has been made mandatory for banks. The 
Working  Group  has  also  made  recommendations  regarding  increase  in  the  extent  of 
guarantee  cover,  absorption  of  guarantee  fees  for  the  collateral  free  loans  by  CGTMSE 
subject to certain conditions, simplification of procedure for filing claims with CGTMSE and 
increasing awareness about the scheme. CGTMSE, which is implementing agency for Credit 
Guarantee Scheme, has been advised to expedite implementation of the recommendations. 
The  implementation  of  the  Recommendations  of  the  Working  Group  should  result  in 
enhanced usage of the Guarantee Scheme and facilitate increase in quality and quantity of 
credit to the presently included, as well as excluded, MSEs, leading eventually to sustainable 
inclusive growth. 
All Scheduled Commercial Banks have also been advised on May 4, 2009, to review and put 
in  place  MSE  Loan  policy,  Restructuring  /  rehabilitation  policy  and  Non-discretionary  One 
Time Settlement Scheme for recovery of non-performing loans duly approved by their Board 
of  Directors.  Banks  were  advised  in  December  2009  to  give  wide  publicity  to  the  Non-
discretionary  One  Time  Settlement  Scheme  for  recovery  of  non-performing  loans  for  the 
MSE  sector  by  placing  it  on  their  bank’s  web-site  and  through  other  possible  modes  of 
dissemination.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
On  the  issue  of  alternate  sources  of  credit,  dedicated  Exchange  for  MSMEs,  marketing, 
technology up-gradation and infrastructure, the  PM’s Task Force has examined the issues 
and has made several recommendations to address the bottlenecks. The implementation of 
the recommendations in a time bound manner are being monitored by the GOI.  
D. 
Role of banks and industry associations in empowering MSMEs 
Role of banks 
There has been a burst of entrepreneurship across the country, spanning rural, semi-urban 
and  urban  areas.  This  has  to  be  nurtured  and  financed.  It  is  only  through  growth  of 
enterprises across all sizes that competition will be fostered. As I mentioned in the beginning, 
a micro entrepreneur of today will become a small entrepreneur and then a big entrepreneur 
of tomorrow, and might eventually well become a multinational enterprise if given the comfort 
of financial support and capacity building. There will be failures and successes. Despite the 
risk, financing of first time entrepreneurs is a must for financial inclusion and growth. Banks 
will  therefore,  have  to  tone  up  their  risk  assessment  and  risk  management  capacities  and 
provide for these failures as part of their risk management.  
Banks  have  to  recognise  the  vast  potential  that  exists  in  responsible  lending  to  the  MSE 
segment. The banks must deliver on their voluntary commitments enshrined in their Code of 
Commitment  to  their  MSE  borrowers.  Banks  have,  no  doubt,  through  the  Code  of  Bank’s 
Commitment to MSEs, voluntarily committed to their MSE customers to provide easy, speedy 
and transparent access to banking services in their day-to-day operation. In the last Standing 
Advisory  Committee  meeting  held  on  July  5,  2011,  it  was  decided  that  the  SCBs  should 
understand the problem of the sector and devise strategies to gear up their credit mechanism 
structure so as to achieve the prescribed target of lending to the sector by the PM’s Task 
Force.  Sensitivity  on  the  issue  to  be  developed  at  various  hierarchical  levels,  such  as, 
discussion  of  the  issue  in  the  Board  meetings,  management  level  meetings  once  in  three 
months. Branch manager’s conference on financing to the micro sector to be held and the 
local  NGOs,  KVIC  could  be  involved  so  as  to  appreciate  the  problems  of  the  sector  and 
flagging  major  issues  to  remove  constraints/  bottlenecks  in  financing.  The  performance  of 
branch managers in dealing with the sector should be made a criterion in their performance 
appraisal. 
With 
introduction  of  new  products  and  stringent  regulatory 
environment, the role of banks needs to change from mere lenders to partners in business. 
There  is  a  need  for  greater  participation  of  banks  in  the  affairs  of  their  constituents  by 
convergence of credit services and non credit services. The bank’s staff should be trained 
and sensitised through customised training programmes to meet the diverse needs of MSEs 
such  as  knowledge  of  markets,  both  domestic  and  global,  use  of  technology,  etc.  Banks 
should  be  actively  providing  advisory  and  planning  services  and  in  fact  hand-holding  their 
clients through the setting-up stage and such services should be extended to all regardless 
of  the  size  of  their  turnover.  The  banks  should  not  only  provide  differentiated  products  for 
MSMEs,  but  also  provide  counseling  &  guidance  to  new  and  established  businesses, 
marketing  support  etc.  In  short,  all  banks,  in  fact,  may  develop  innovative  mechanism  to 
provide not only finance and banking services to their MSME customers but also non credit 
related services to them under one roof at reasonable charges.  
For  creating  transparency  and  wider  dissemination  of  services  provided  by  banks  for  their 
MSME clients, it was decided in the 12th Standing Advisory Committee on MSMEs that all 
SCBs  should  set  up  a  SME  Portal  on  their  website,  where  they  could  put  in  all 
information/products of their bank for their MSE clients, as well as information on awareness 
programs  etc  organized  by  them.  I  am  sure  Central  Bank  of  India  and  other  banks  would 
have taken a step in that direction.  
increasing  competition, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
In order to expedite sanction and disbursement of loan to MSMEs a single window concept 
could be provided by Central Bank of India, if not already done. Loan facility to small units, 
say Micro enterprises, should be sanctioned at the level of the branch. A Centralised Credit 
Processing  Cell  (CPC)  for  MSMEs  could  be  introduced.  These  Cells  may  be  utilized  for 
single  point  appraisal,  sanction,  documentation, 
renewal  and  enhancement.  The 
arrangement is expected to help in reduction in delay and multiple queries, utilization of the 
available talent in an optimal fashion besides building reliable MIS, developing fair practices 
and easier tracking. Initially, the CPCs may be set up at each Regional Office of the banks 
and  subsequently  in  the  recognized  clusters.  In  case  of  micro  and  small  enterprises 
simplified procedure of loan application/ sanction should be followed, score based lending be 
done up to Rs 2 crores, working capital limits be given by projected turnover method, and 
term loans be sanctioned as recommended above to prevent the burden of data collection, 
project  report/  projections  preparation  for  MSMEs.  The  disposal  of  applications  should  be 
done in a time bound manner, which should be within the overall time limit prescribed by RBI. 
All  banks  should  tap  the  available  technology  and  set  up  Central  Registration  of  Loan 
Applications.  The  same  set  up  can  be  used  by  the  borrower  for  tracking  of  the  status  of 
application on the internet on the basis of the receipt issued to him. The borrower may also 
be  provided  option  of  tracking  his  application  over  telephone  on  the  toll-free  helpline.  The 
same  technological  setup  may  also  be  used  for  making  online  applications.  Online 
applications may be popularized and publicized by all branches.  
Lack  of  adequate  capacity  is  the  key  feature,  as  regards  micro,  small  and  medium 
enterprises are concerned. In order to equip the MSMEs with the capacity to manage their 
businesses effectively and efficiently comprehensive guidance and training on setting up new 
units  as  well  as  providing  continuous  education  on  different  aspects  of  successful 
management  of  existing  business  enterprises  must  be  provided.  While  the  Rural  Self 
Employment  Training  Institutes  (RSETIs)  are  working  in  this  direction  there  is  a  need  to 
examine the impact of RSETIs. A scheme for utilizing NGOs to provide training services to 
tiny  micro  enterprises  could  be  encouraged.  Entrepreneurship  development  is  important  in 
view  of  its  visible  impact  on  wealth  creation  and  employment  generation.  To  facilitate  and 
encourage this, skill building has been impressed upon by the Prime Minister’s Task Force 
for MSMEs. Enterprise Development Centres (EDC) should be set up by the Central/State 
Governments with incubators to provide training not just for setting up of new units but also 
to  provide  continuing  education  on  different  aspects  like  product  design,  packaging, 
technology upgradation, financial management and marketing.  
Role of associations 
All SLBC Convenor banks have been to review their institutional arrangements for delivering 
credit to the MSME sector, especially in 388 clusters identified by United Nations Industrial 
Development  Organisation  (UNIDO)  spread  over  21  states  in  various  parts  of  the  country. 
The  Central  Bank  of  India  has  presence  in  47  clusters  identified  by  UNIDO  and  these 
branches  have  been  designated  as  Specialised  MSME  Branch.  The  MSME 
Associations/Chambers  may  bring  to  the  notice  of  SLBC  Convenor  banks  clusters  were 
banking  facilities  are  not  available  so  that  the  same  could  be  addressed.  Specific  issues 
concerning the sector were banks could play a role should also be brought to the notice of 
the  SLBC  Convenor  bank  and  the  Empowered  Committee  on  MSMEs  by  the  Industry 
Associations for appropriate measures to be taken to solve the issues.  
As any other sickness, the need for timely treatment after identification of sickness cannot be 
overemphasized  in  MSMEs.  For  viable  units,  timely  and  effective  rehabilitation  by  way  of 
renegotiations  of  terms  of  loans,  induction  of  fresh  dose  of  funds,  business  restructuring, 
change of management etc. may become necessary. The process should not only be quick, 
efficient, cheap and fair to all stakeholders but also acceptable to and implementable by all, 
with necessary monitoring arrangements for implementation of the same. In case the unit is 
not  found  viable,  recovery  of  the  dues  of  lenders  through  a  fair,  efficient  and  swift  legal 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
mechanism should be the focus. The senior-level representatives of MSME Associations in 
each State are members of the Empowered Committee set up by RBI at each of its Regional 
Offices, of which the SLBC convenor, representatives of banks having predominant share in 
SME financing in the State, SIDBI, Director of Industries of the State Government etc. are 
also members. MSME Associations need to use this Forum not only for removing bottlenecks 
in  the  smooth  flow  of  credit  to  the  sector  but  also  for  reviewing  the  accessibility  of  bank 
finance to more and more MSMEs but also highlight gaps if any in the attitude and skills at 
the bank branch level. As it is observed that rehabilitation of sick micro, small and medium 
enterprises could not be taken up due to non-availability of promoters’ contribution in a large 
number  of  cases,  we  have  recommended  to  the  GOI  to  set  up  a  Rehabilitation  Fund  for 
rehabilitation of sick MSME enterprises. 
The Industry Associations have often been often representing on the delayed payments from 
large corporates. While banks have been advised to allocate a sub-limit in respect of large 
borrower accounts, for making payments to the MSE units against purchases from them but 
it is not possible for banks to force the large buyers to utilize the limit for making payments. 
This  problem  could  be  institutionally  tackled  by  factoring.  In  the  recent  meeting  of  the 
Standing  Advisory  Committee  to  review  credit  flow  to  this  sector,  it  was  urged  upon  the 
Industry Associations to bring forward exemplary cases where big corporates have defaulted 
in  making  payments  to  MSE  suppliers  so  that  appropriate  action,  under  the  Act,  could  be 
taken by the Government of India. 
The  MSME  Associations  and  Chambers  of  Commerce  have  an  important  role  to  play  in 
stepping up credit to this segment. Asymmetry of information and lack of transparency and 
reliability  of  data  has  been  a  major  concern  for  organizations  dealing  with  MSMEs  world 
over.  The  Association  need  to  therefore,  proactively  engage  themselves  in  organising 
workshops  and  training  programmes  for  their  members  to  enlighten  them  about  cash  flow 
cycles, various financial products, accounting practices, etc. In this regard, I would urge upon 
the  other  MSME  Associations,  Chambers  of  Commerce  etc.  to  collaborate,  in  the  same 
manner with banks, NIBM or any other training institute in the area of banking and finance, 
basic accountancy and information technology for MSMEs.  
Role of MSMEs 
MSEs too, on their part, should understand that banks are responsible to their depositors and 
shareholders and, therefore, they, i.e. the MSEs, as customers of bank credit, have certain 
obligations  to  fulfill  by  way  of  repaying  bank  loans,  maintaining  proper  books  of  accounts, 
submitting  information  correctly  and  more  importantly  sharing  information  about  financial 
problems when these arise so that they can work together with the bank in resolving these. 
On the cost of credit, while interest rates have been deregulated by Reserve Bank of India, 
my message to the MSME sector is that as interest costs are a very small fraction of their 
operating costs, only approximately 4%, do not ask for low interest rates from the banking 
sector, and instead ask for credit at competitive rates. Credit has to be self-liquidating on a 
viable project and has a cost. 
In  fact,  what  the  small  entrepreneurs  need  to  focus  on  are  four  typical  mistakes 
entrepreneurs make as rightly pointed out by Peter F. Drucker in his book “Managing in the 
Next Society”. Many new businesses start out with high promise but suddenly run into trouble 
after a year or two. There are typical mistakes entrepreneurs make and all are foreseeable 
and avoidable. Firstly, majority of successful new inventions or products do not succeed in 
the market for which they were originally designed. So one has to keep options open and not 
be  dogmatic  about  pushing  a  product  in  a  market  for  which  initially  designed  or  targeted. 
Success may lie elsewhere. Secondly, entrepreneurs believe that profit is what matters most 
in a new enterprise. But profit is secondary. It is the cash flow that matters. A business that 
grows fast devours cash. Constant investments have to be made to just keep even. Thirdly, 
when a business grows, it is necessary to create a management team. Young entrepreneurs 
often cannot afford to bring in an external management team. So, it is necessary to identify 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
the core competencies of the people working with you. This planning should take place well 
in advance. Lastly, when the business is a success the entrepreneur needs to ask what the 
business  needs  at  this  stage  and  whether  he  is  concentrating  on  the  right  things.  As 
successful entrepreneurs, they have gained experience and wisdom from their mistakes and 
going forward, it is necessary to ensure that the same mistakes are not repeated. 
Need for financial infrastructure 
E. 
Establishing  a  solid  financial  infrastructure  (credit  registries/  bureaus,  collateral,  and 
insolvency regimes) should be a priority in the financial development agenda, as it can lower 
the costs and risks to financial institutions of serving MSMEs. Bankruptcy regimes regulate 
the efficient exiting of the market, and make the resolution of multiple creditors’ conflicting 
claims  more  orderly,  resulting  in  more  extensive  opportunities  for  recovery  by  both  the 
bankrupt entity and its creditors. Stronger creditor rights improve access to finance. Stronger 
creditor rights tend to have a higher number of loan accounts per adult population and also 
higher rates of private credit to GDP. 
There is a need for adequate and reliable credit information mechanism, such as an MSME 
credit  bureau,  that  serves  the  needs  of  both  the  MSMEs’  and  the  potential  lenders’. 
Transparency  shall  facilitate  them  in  obtaining  finances,  getting  favourable  contracts  and 
improving their business prospects. A World Bank report stated that a good credit information 
infrastructure  can  contribute  significantly  towards  assisting  MSMEs’  access  to  capital.  The 
report further highlighted that small firms with access to credit bureaus have a 40% chance 
of obtaining a loan, whereas firms without access to credit bureaus have only a 28% chance 
of receiving a loan. Therefore, significant opportunities exist to increase lending activities to 
MSMEs  with  the  establishment  of  MSME  credit  bureaus.  A  sound  financial  information 
infrastructure  should  improve  transparency  and  disclosure  for  MSMEs  in  a  cost-effective 
way,  and  help  MSMEs  build  a  credit  history,  which  is  critical  in  helping  to  address  both 
challenges  of  information  asymmetry  and  cost  to  serve.  Setting  of  Credit  Information 
Companies has already been approved by Reserve Bank of India. 
Conclusion 
F. 
The recent past has been a challenging time for the banking sector in India. You, along with 
the entrepreneurs, have coped well with these challenges and have emerged stronger from a 
difficult  phase.  While  the  banking  sector  has  responded  well  so  far,  there  are  several 
challenges that lie ahead. Our banking system needs to equip itself to deal with emerging 
challenges and be prepared to cash in on the opportunities unleashed by higher growth. In 
dealing with the needs of small and medium enterprises, banks have to look for new delivery 
mechanisms. They  must economise on transaction costs and provide better access to the 
currently  under-served.  To  serve  new  rural  credit  needs,  innovative  channels  for  credit 
delivery  will  have  to  be  found.  The  proud  history  of  your  bank  should  inspire  you  to  seek 
greater heights of professional glory. In the end, I once again congratulate Central Bank of 
India and the SME Chamber in jointly organizing this Conclave. I also convey my best wishes 
to every employee and entrepreneur customer of your bank on the eve of the conclusion of 
your  Centenary  Year,  to  your  customers  and  well-wishers,  and  wish  you  a  great  future  of 
growth  and  development.  You  have  had  a  glorious  hundred  years.  You  now  have  a  great 
opportunity. May the next hundred be even better!  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
