Mario Draghi: 2011 World Savings Day 
Address by Mr Mario Draghi, Governor of the Bank of Italy and Chairman of the Financial 
Stability  Board,  at  the  87th  World  Savings  Day,  organized  by  the  Association  of  Italian 
Savings Banks, Rome, 26 October 2011. 
 The crisis 
Economic  activity  in  the  euro  area  is  expanding  at  a  very  modest  pace,  curbed  by  the 
slowdown  in  world  demand,  the  fall  in  the  confidence  of  firms  and  households,  and  the 
adverse effects on financial conditions of the strains in some sovereign debt markets. The 
risk  of  a  further  deterioration  of  the  growth  outlook  is  significant,  in  a  context  marked  by 
pronounced uncertainty. 
The  worsening  of  the  crisis  is  a  world  and  a  European  phenomenon,  but  Italy’s  particular 
vulnerability has domestic roots: the large public debt, the doubts about the prospects for the 
growth of our economy, the hesitancy and delay with which steps to correct imbalances have 
been taken and measures to foster growth adopted. After declining in August, the gross yield 
on ten-year BTPs has returned to a very high level (more than 5.9 per cent yesterday). 
After six months of virtual stagnation, in the second quarter of this year Italy’s GDP began to 
grow again, but at a very modest pace. Although they continue to sustain economic activity, 
exports have been affected by the less vigorous growth in world demand. In their responses 
to surveys, firms report a worsening of their short-term outlook and a deterioration in their 
assessment of investment conditions. Domestic demand is weighed down by the weak trend 
in  households’  disposable  income,  the  slow  recovery  in  employment,  and  the  uncertainty 
about the economy’s prospects. The leading forecasters have reduced their expectations for 
growth next year; according to the International Monetary Fund, it will barely be positive. 
The Eurosystem is preventing, with its use of non-standard measures, the malfunctioning of 
the  money  and  financial  markets  from  obstructing  the  monetary  transmission  mechanism. 
With the provision of liquidity and the allotment modes used for refinancing operations, we 
are  continuing  to  ensure  that  banks  are  not  constrained  on  the  liquidity  side.  We  have 
announced a programme for the purchase of covered bonds. All the non-standard measures 
adopted  in  response  to  the  financial  strains  are,  by  their  nature,  temporary.  It  remains 
essential  to  ensure  price  stability,  anchoring  inflation  expectations  in  the  euro  area  in  line 
with the objective keeping inflation below, but close to, 2 per cent over the medium term. 
The  interventions  prevent  the  imbalances  from  worsening;  on  their  own  they  cannot 
overcome the underlying causes. At European level there is an urgent need for a governance 
in  which  budgetary  discipline  and  solidarity  are  mutually  supportive;  there  is  also  an 
immediate  need  to  implement  the  instruments  of  financial  support  for  managing  the  crisis. 
But  without  a  decisive  and  lasting  response  from  appropriate  domestic  policies  that,  by 
promoting  growth,  remove  the  imbalances  in  the  public  finances,  the  first  objective  is 
unattainable, the second a palliative. 
The  work  begun  with  the  first  report  of  the  Financial  Stability  Board  in  April  2008  has 
proceeded to good effect. Much has been done, both in implementing it and in drawing up 
new regulations. It is now necessary to continue with the transposition of the new rules into 
national legal systems. International coordination has been a key factor in imparting impetus 
to  the  reform  of  international  finance;  it  remains  crucial  to  its  implementation.  The 
contribution of the G20 leaders has been fundamental. 
To  crown  the  process,  the  Financial  Stability  Board  will  submit  a  report  to  the  next  G20 
summit  in  Cannes  in  November  with  specific  recommendations  regarding  systemically 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
important financial institutions, the limits to be imposed on the shadow banking system, and 
the reduction of the systemic risk associated with OTC derivatives business. 
The Italian banks 
Italy’s banks have to face the impact of sovereign risk on their funding, on the value of the 
collateral they provide for refinancing, and on their capital market. 
But  our  banks’  exposure  to  Greece,  Ireland,  Portugal  and  Spain  is  modest,  amounting  to 
about 1 per cent of total system assets. Their investment in Italian government securities is 
substantial. 
Although the banks’ short-term liquidity position continues to be in balance as a whole, it is 
affected  by  the  persistence  of  strains,  particularly  on  the  wholesale  markets,  where  fund-
raising has slowed markedly since the summer. The Bank of Italy continues to ask banks to 
maintain  balanced  liquidity  positions;  these  positions  undergo  careful  monitoring  at  weekly 
intervals by the Bank’s supervisory area. 
Though  diminishing,  the  rate  of  growth  in  lending  to  both  households  and  firms  remained 
higher in August than the rates for the euro area. In September the three-month growth came 
to 3.9 per cent on an annualized basis. However, surveys of firms find a tightening of lending 
standards and growing difficulty in obtaining credit. The bank lending survey conducted by 
the Eurosystem also finds signs of a tightening of supply conditions by Italian banks, limited 
for now to requests for higher interest rates. 
Strong capital bases enable banks to cope with the cyclical worsening, and to contain the 
cost of fund-raising on the markets. On more than one occasion we have insisted that the 
banks should carry out capital increases. The response has been prompt so far and we trust 
it will continue to be so in the future. 
At European level, the largest banks are expected to equip themselves with adequate buffers 
of high-quality capital by the middle of next year. The amount is determined for each bank 
taking its exposure to sovereign risk into account. 
The request for temporarily higher capital ratios is necessary in order to address investors’ 
current worries, with benefits for banks’ funding on the wholesale markets.  
Our  banks  are  up  to  this  new  challenge.  We  are  fully  confident  that,  as  in  the  past,  the 
banking  foundations  will  shoulder  their  share  of  responsibility.  If  necessary,  adequate 
backstops will be identified and put into operation in a timely manner.   
The difficulties that the Italian banking system finds itself facing today have origins that lie 
beyond it. In the longer term, the problems can be solved at the root only by increasing the 
growth  potential  of  the  Italian  economy  as  a  whole  and  acting  on  the  sustainability  of  the 
public  finances.  The  September  budgetary  package  needs  to  be  implemented  completely 
and  swiftly,  in  particular  by  rapidly  setting  up  and  carrying  out  the  envisaged  public 
expenditure revision. 
Savings and young people 
Historically, the capacity to save has always been a resource for the Italian economy. Last 
year Italian households’ net wealth was equal to eight times their disposable income, a value 
that is higher, sometimes considerably higher, than the ratios in the other leading advanced 
countries. For Italy, excluding government securities held directly or indirectly by households 
changes this ratio only marginally. 
Today’s accumulated wealth, however, is the product of the saving of the past. Unless it is 
fed by new inflows, it will soon be dented. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The risks are not lacking. Since the turn of the century the propensity to save has fallen by 
about 4 percentage points, down to 12 per cent of income in 2010, almost 2 points below the 
euro-area  average.  The  decline  has  been  sharpest  among  the  less  affluent  families,  who 
have  found  it  harder,  in  the  face  of  stagnating  disposable  income,  to  reduce  spending  on 
essential  goods  and  services.  ACRI’s  latest  survey  of  Italians  and  savings  found  that  only 
13 per cent of those interviewed – the lowest value ever recorded – hope to save more next 
year.  
In part, the decline in the saving rate is due to the ageing of the population. It is accentuated 
not  only  by  the  diminished  relative  size  of  the  younger  generations  but  also  by  their 
diminished capacity to save. The deterioration of labour market entry-level wages, not offset 
by  more  rapid  career  advances,  has  helped  to  compress  the  propensity  to  save  among 
households headed by young people. 
The share of young families with nil or negative saving has risen. Among those headed by 
persons under 35, it increased from 26 per cent in 2000 to 32 per cent in 2008. Heightened 
income instability also affects young people’s savings opportunities and decisions. 
In the absence of more equitable intergenerational redistribution of resources, young people 
today  will  have  to  contribute  more  heavily  than  in  the  past  to  the  public  finances.  For  a  
35-year-old  in  1990,  the  incidence  of  taxes  and  social  security  contributions  on  income, 
calculated on the basis of remaining life expectancy and net of the value of social benefits, 
was equal to approximately 20 per cent; for someone 35 years old today, it exceeds 25 per 
cent. A factor in this increase has been the excessively slow transition to the contributions-
based pension system. The older generations have been less severely affected. 
The  recession  has  exacerbated  economic  difficulties  above  all  for  the  young.  The 
unemployment  rate  of  Italians  aged  15–24  rose  by  nearly  7.6  percentage  points  between 
2007 and 2010 (nearly 3 points more than the average for the EU-15) and that of those aged 
25–34  by  3.6  points;  in  the  35–64  age-group,  the  increase  was  1.8  points.  One  source  of 
difficulty  has  been  the marked  dualism  of  the  labour  market.  Young  people  who  lose  their 
jobs are relatively unprotected by the existing income support programmes. 
Attenuating  the  segmentation  that  now  exists  in  the  labour  market  and  making  income 
protection programmes more universal, as well as more effective and rigorous, would help 
equalize  employment  opportunities  and  income  prospects,  which  are  now  heavily  tilted  in 
favour of the older generations. Contracts providing for protection that builds over time and 
the  introduction  of  a  modern  system  of  unemployment  benefits  would  make  the  labour 
market  more  fluid  and  efficient,  as  well  as  more  equitable.  Well-designed  measures  along 
these  lines  could  also  help  stimulate  labour  market  participation.  In  addition,  this  would 
benefit  the  propensity  for  forms  of  saving  more  oriented  to  the  long  term,  which  in  turn, 
suitably  channeled,  could  facilitate  the  birth  and  growth  of  new  enterprises  with  greater 
potential for innovation. 
Reforms for growth 
Policies that stimulate growth and economic dynamism expand the opportunities for young 
people. At the same time, the measures required to impart renewed impulse to growth will 
hinge on young people, easing the constraints on their contribution. 
Removing the barriers to economic activity by lowering the cost of forming and running new 
enterprises will increase economic participation by the younger generation. New enterprises 
– in which economists place their hopes both for their high potential for innovation and for 
their  capacity  to  stimulate  efficiency  in  others  –  are  mostly  in  the  hands  of  entrepreneurs 
under  the  age  of  40.  And  they  tend  to  employ  younger  workers.  But  they  will  be  more 
dynamic  and  competitive  only  if  the  work  force  has  a  suitably  high  level  of  educational 
attainment, which is an essential factor for growth in the “knowledge-based economy.” 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
In  the  short  term,  macroeconomic  policy  measures  can  help  to  support  growth.  The 
composition of fiscal revenue can be modified, shifting the burden from levies on labour and 
productive activity to taxes on property and consumption. 
But  above  all  the  durable  achievement  of  faster  sustainable  growth  requires  the  structural 
reforms  invoked  for  so  long,  broadly  endorsed  but  as  yet  unimplemented:  heightening 
competition  in  the  product  markets,  especially  in  the  service  sector;  creating  a  more 
enterprise-friendly administrative and regulatory environment; stimulating the accumulation of 
physical and human capital; and raising the levels of labour market participation. 
Such  measures  imply  the  substantially  recasting  the  priorities  and  overhauling  the  modus 
operandi of public policy and administration. They must not be allowed, under the pressure of 
vested interests, to leave particular areas untouched. Properly designed and communicated, 
these measures can have an immediate propulsive impact, enhancing business confidence 
and  expectations,  increasing  the  propensity  to  invest,  and  narrowing  the  spread  on  Italy’s 
public debt.  
This is my last official speech as Governor of the Bank of Italy. 
I  end  my  term  amidst  a  confused  and  dramatic  situation  at  home  and abroad  on both  the 
political and the economic fronts. 
When I took the floor in this venue six years ago, incidentally with a speech on growth, the 
situation was very different. Its apparent tranquility, the generally indulgent, indeed admiring, 
attitude towards finance as the engine of growth concealed the seeds of the future disaster. 
Italy  bore  none  of  the  blame  for  the  crisis.  But  because  of  never  redressed  structural 
weaknesses Italy was overwhelmed by it, penalized more than others, to the point that today, 
owing to its slowness in overcoming its own crisis, Italy itself has become a cause of general 
crisis.  
Nevertheless,  the  gravity  and  complexity  of  the  situation  must  not  make  us  forget  our 
strengths. 
The first of these is our Head of State, whom I wish to thank both personally as a citizen and 
institutionally on behalf of the Bank of Italy. He is a beacon, an inspiration, an example. 
The second strength comes from looking back on what has been accomplished. In these six 
years we have done a great deal. The Bank of Italy has made outstanding contributions at 
domestic  and  international  level  to  the  efforts  to  cope  with  the  crisis,  to  revamping 
supervisory  action,  to  the  design  and  management  of  European  monetary  policy,  to  the 
formulation  and  implementation  of  the  reform  of  European  and  global  regulation.  The 
autonomy of the Bank of Italy has been essential for all this. 
The Bank’s autonomy is not an end in itself. It is an essential element of the way in which the 
Bank  exercises  the  powers  and  performs  the  duties  defined  in  its  Statute,  the  Italian 
Constitution and the European Treaty. In exercising these powers, the Bank is called upon to 
safeguard  the  common  good,  for  it  is  always  perceived  as  impartial  and  not  subject  to 
external controls or interventions. The General Council does not represent private interests; it 
does not intervene in matters for which the Bank or its top management is alone responsible; 
it oversees the Bank’s administration, its management and its choices. 
I now take leave of the Bank with a peaceful mind, with, I believe, your warm feelings that will 
accompany  me  to  Frankfurt.  The  new  governor  epitomizes  all  the  best  that  the  Bank  has 
produced  in  its  tradition  of  training  authentic  central  bankers.  The  Bank’s  organization  is 
sound and strong. 
But you too – Italy’s banking foundations and banking system – have done much in these 
years to cope with the crisis by increasing resources, making sacrifices, changing operating 
rules, and aligning incentives with results, and you deserve ample credit for this. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
It is, then, from the strength of some of our institutions, from the awareness that we have 
succeeded in accomplishing things that seemed impossible, that we draw courage, security, 
the belief we will succeed. 
But we are experiencing a historical discontinuity. We are moving towards a new European 
pact, towards a shared management of the underlying problems of our economies in which 
each is called on to shoulder more responsibility in serving the common good. 
Although the forms may be mortifying, the substance of the problems to be solved does not 
depend  on  the  person  who  enunciates  them.  It  is  in  the  interest  of  the  individual  member 
states to recognize this substance, to recognize the ways to go forward – and without hoping 
in others – to trust in themselves, their own strength, their own history – to save themselves 
in Europe. 
This is the fundamental lesson of the crisis: to build the future in Europe together. Only by 
doing so will we be able to remake Italy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
