José Manuel González-Páramo: Sovereign contagion in Europe 
Speech  by  Mr  José  Manuel  González-Páramo,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European Central Bank, at the Distinguished Speaker Seminar of the European Economics 
and Financial Centre, London, 25 November 2011. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure to speak to you here in London and discuss some key issues relating to 
the  ongoing  crisis  in  Europe.  For  centuries  the  City  of  London  has  held  its  position  as  a 
leading  international  financial  centre.  Few  other  places  in  the  world  exhibit  such  a  high 
density of expertise in financial matters. At the same time, where financial activity tends to be 
concentrated experiences with financial contagion during crises are often also pronounced.  
Let me cite a few excerpts from Walter Bagehot’s “Lombard Street”:1 “Mercantile bills are an 
exceedingly  difficult  kind  of  security  to  understand  …in  years  like  1871  many  active  men 
make so much money at the end of the year they are worthy of altogether greater credit than 
anyone would have dreamed of….On the other hand, in years like 1866 a contagious ruin 
destroys the trustworthiness of very many firms…Persons who buy and sell again soon are 
often  liable  for  amounts  altogether  much  greater  than  their  own  capital;  and  the  power  of 
obtaining  those  sums  depends  upon  their  “respectability,”  their  “standing,”  and  their 
“credit,”…and more simply upon the opinion which those who deal with them have formed of 
them.” 
Whilst not directly applicable to the present times and taken out of the historical context of 
the financial panic around the failure of Overend, Gurney and Co. in 1866, there are still a 
number of thought-provoking passages that sound so familiar in comparison with what we 
have been experiencing over the past four years of financial crisis. This is not only the case 
because the offices of Overend in Lombard Street were only a few miles away from where 
we are meeting today. 
So,  let  me  dedicate  my  speech  to  the  issue  of  contagion,  and  more  specifically  to  the 
experiences with sovereign contagion during the European debt crisis and the related policy 
responses. I would like to start out by discussing why contagion needs to be addressed by 
policy  and  how.  Next,  I  shall  review  recent  evidence  of  contagion  phenomena  across 
European sovereigns. The third part of my speech will deal with how the European Central 
Bank  has  responded  to  these  developments;  and  the  fourth  part  with  the  ultimate  key 
responsibilities  pertaining  to  domestic  fiscal  authorities  in  this  area  and  the  need  for 
strengthened governance structures.  
Financial contagion and public policy 
Since  the  writings  of  Walter  Bagehot  financial  contagion  has  become  an  issue  that  is 
discussed  widely  in  policy,  market  and  academic  research  circles.2  Taking  a  broad 
                                                 
1   W.  Bagehot  (1873),  Lombard  Street  –  A  Description  of  the  Money  Market,  pp.  129ff.  Emphases  by  the 
speaker. 
2   See, for example, the following surveys on the issue: G. Kaufman (1994), “Bank contagion: A review of the 
theory and evidence”, Journal of Financial Services Research, 7; E.P. Davis (1995), Debt, Financial Fragility 
and  Systemic  Risk,  Clarendon  Press,  2nd  ed.;  O.  de  Bandt  and  P.  Hartmann  (2000),  “Systemic  risk:  A 
survey”,  ECB  Working  Paper,  no.  35,  November;  S.  Claessens  and  K.  Forbes  (eds.,  2001),  International 
Financial  Contagion,  Kluwer  Academic  Publishers;  ECB  (2005),  “Financial  market  contagion”,  Financial 
Stability  Review,  December;  ECB  (2009),  “The  concept  of  systemic  risk”,  Financial  Stability  Review, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
perspective embracing different views and studies, contagion could be defined as a situation 
in which instability in a specific financial market, institution or country is transmitted to one or 
several other markets, institutions or countries. A first characteristic of contagion is that the 
spread of instability would usually not happen without an initial trigger event – which often 
appears to be a relatively contained event. A second characteristic is that the transmission of 
instability is in some way abnormal, for example, in terms  of its speed, strength or scope. 
Though  spillovers  are  to  be  expected  in  an  interconnected  financial  system,  contagion  is 
distinct in that it often reflects a market failure and a dangerously amplified transmission of 
instability. 
The underlying market failure consists of the fact that contagion often involves externalities.3 
As a result, the private costs of the initial financial market failure, that is the costs to the actor 
triggering  contagion,  are  lower  than  the  social  costs.  In  the  specific  case  of  the  sovereign 
debt crisis in Europe, the trigger could, for example, be that a country in a precarious fiscal 
situation  does  not  seriously  implement  the  necessary  fiscal  consolidation  measures.  This 
could lead interest rates on this particular country’s government debt to rise and could in turn 
also constrain economic growth in that country. This is what I call the “private costs” of such 
behaviour.  Although  in  this  case  the  lack  of  fiscal  discipline  is  something  which  is  strictly 
related to one country, this circumstance may still lead volatile financial markets to also lower 
their expectations about fiscal consolidation efforts in other countries. As a result, those other 
countries also begin to face costs in terms of significantly increased interest rates on their 
government debt. 
The social costs are in the end equal to the aggregate cost represented by the higher interest 
rates that the governments of all the other countries have to pay for their debt because of the 
fiscal irresponsibility of the original country.  
The difference between private and social costs implies a market inefficiency calling for some 
form  of  intervention  whose  objective  is  to  internalise  these  kinds  of  externalities.  In  other 
words,  the  countries  that  pursue  activities  which  risk  causing  contagion  need  to  be 
constrained in pursuing such activities or “pay a price” which is proportional to the expected 
costs  to  the  other  countries  which  are  affected  by  the  contagion.  This  provides  them  with 
incentives to reduce the activities that could trigger contagion.  
Given that the possibility of contagion is well known from the literature and economic history, 
we should mind about both the preventive and corrective policies. In the case of sovereign 
contagion preventive policy options would include, fiscal rules and governance mechanisms 
that avoid excessive deficits or high stocks of public debt. Ex post policy options aimed at 
addressing the fall-out from sovereign contagion would include liquidity provision by central 
banks to financial markets, the recapitalisation of fragile banks and the swift implementation 
of  growth  enhancing  structural  policies  and  fiscal  adjustment  measures  to  regain  market 
confidence  in  national  economies  and  governments  and  offset  the  adverse  effects  of 
contagion.  It  goes  without  saying  that  –  as  a  rule  –  prevention  is  by  far  preferable  to 
addressing the problems that arise from contagion ex post. But I am afraid that the evidence 
of  contagion  that  I  will  present  to  you  in  a  moment  illustrates  that  we  no  longer  have  the 
privilege of focusing on prevention alone.  
                                                                                                                                                      
December; O.  de Bandt, P.  Hartmann and J.L. Peydro (2010), “Systemic risk: An  update”,  A. Berger  et al. 
(eds.), The Oxford Handbook of Banking, Oxford University Press. 
3   See de O. Bandt and P. Hartmann (2000), op.cit., sub-section 2.4 for a more extensive discussion of policies 
addressing financial contagion. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Recent evidence on sovereign contagion in the euro area  
There is a growing body of evidence which shows that contagion plays an important role in 
the current crisis gripping the euro area – across sovereigns, across banks, and between the 
two.4 While contagion has characterised the various stages during which the financial crisis 
has  become  more  acute  through  the  end  of  this  last  summer,  recent  developments  have 
been indicative of a continuation – or even by some metrics an intensification – of contagion 
forces. Perhaps the most potent illustration of this comes from studying the dynamics of a 
specific  recent  episode  where  various  aspects  of  contagion  –  notably  the  intense  and 
persistent  transmission  of  idiosyncratic  risks  in  a  sequential  manner  –  offer  a  compelling 
narrative characterising developments.  
The  episode  in  question  is  the  announcement  by  the  Greek  authorities  on  the  first  of 
November that a referendum on the rescue programme agreed at the EU summit the week 
before was being considered. The referendum was an event very specific to Greece. Indeed, 
the fact that this day was a public holiday in parts of Europe implies that the news flow on 
that day was more limited than usual. 
In response to the announcement yields on Greek government bonds and Greek sovereign 
CDS  premia  soared  even  further.  The  transmission  of  this shock to  some  other  euro  area 
sovereigns  and  euro  area  banks,  in  particular,  appears  to  have  been  rapid,  large  and 
persistent. The CDS premia of France, Germany, Italy and Spain exhibited the largest one-
day  increase  of  the  year.  But  whereas  the  CDS  premia  of  France  and  Germany  quickly 
receded to their previous levels, those of Italy and Spain further rose in subsequent days. 
Movements  in  bond  yields  were  comparatively  muted,  although  Germany  benefited  from 
strong safe haven flows.5 
The above observations offer quite a compelling case for contagion, but such narratives are 
still subject to the question of whether alternative interpretations of these events are possible. 
It therefore makes sense to have a more systematic look at the data using empirical models 
of contagion. For this purpose, ECB staff has developed and is extending an analytical toolkit 
of models, which is “state of the art” in this area. Generally speaking, the results from these 
multiple analyses tend to support the notion that contagion is indeed a driving force behind 
the trends in the data. I would like to focus in particular on the results from two different but 
complementary empirical approaches that sharpen the view on the existence and nature of 
contagion occurring in the euro area over the course of this year.6 
The  first  approach  exploits  the  possibility  of  a  persistent  ability  of  idiosyncratic  events  in 
Greek credit default swap premiums to predict developments in other  euro area countries’ 
                                                 
4   A  previous  account  of  this  has  been  provided  in  a  recent  speech  by  my  colleague  Vítor  Constâncio,  who 
described  inter  alia  how  contagion  spread  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  beyond  the  countries  under  EU/IMF 
programmes  over  the  summer  (http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2011/html/sp111010.en.html).  For 
further discussions of the links between banking instabilities and sovereign debt problems, see V. Acharya, 
I. Drechsler  and  P.  Schnabl  (2011),  “A  pyrrhic  victory?  –  Bank  bailouts  and  sovereign  credit  risk”,  NBER 
Working  Paper,  no.  17,136,  June,  or  A.  Alter  and  Y.  Schüler  (2011),  “Credit  spread  interdependencies  of 
European states and banks during the financial crisis”, mimeo., University of Konstanz, June. 
5   Like in previous episodes, such effects were not limited to sovereigns. The average CDS premium of a group 
of 17 large European banking groups – none of which is Greek – showed the largest one day increase of this 
year. Finally, also non-financial corporations were affected. The Eurostoxx 50 declined by 5.2% on the same 
day, the third largest one day drop of this year. 
6   Staff  of  the  International  Monetary  Fund  has  found  related  evidence  with  different  methodologies;  see 
C. Caceres,  V.  Guzzo  and  M.  Segoviano  (2010),  “Sovereign  spreads:  Global  risk  aversion,  contagion  or 
fundamentals”,  IMF  Working  Paper,  no.  WP/10/120,  May,  or  R.  Arezeki,  B.  Candelona  and  N.  Sy  (2011), 
“Sovereign  rating  news  and  financial  markets  spillovers:  Evidence  from  the  European  debt  crisis”,  IMF 
Working Paper, no. WP/11/68, March. See also G. Amisano and O. Tristani (2011), “The euro area sovereign 
crisis:  Monitoring  spillovers  and  contagion”,  ECB  Research  Bulletin 14  (http://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/ 
other/researchbulletin14en.pdf). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
in 
two  stages,  using  multivariate 
CDS  premiums.7  Estimation  proceeds 
frequency 
decomposition.  First,  each  CDS  series  is  decomposed  into  long-,  medium-,  and  short-run 
shocks. Second, the long- and medium-run shocks of Greece, which are those that produce 
lasting  effects,  are  used  to  explain  the  CDS  spreads  of  another  euro  area  country,  while 
conditioning  on  the  country’s  own  shocks.  If  the  additional  explanatory  variables  improve 
forecast accuracy over a 100-day horizon, the results from the model may be interpreted as 
an indication that developments in Greece are causing contagion.  
The results suggest that with the escalation of the sovereign crisis in July 2011, contagion 
from  Greece  has  become  a  source  of  systemic  risk  for  several  euro  area  countries. 
Spillovers  from  the  Greek  sovereign  crisis  can  explain  the  sharp  deterioration  in  the 
perceived  creditworthiness  of  the  other  countries  under  EU/IMF  programmes,  Ireland  and 
Portugal that occurred in July 2011. Since July, this applies also to some of the larger euro 
area  countries  such  as  Italy  and  even  Germany.  Moreover,  the  model  indicates  that  the 
spillovers  from  Greece  are  persistent  and  are  thus  likely  to  dissipate  only  slowly  in  the 
presence of favourable developments. 
Another model co-authored by ECB staff assesses the effect of an increased probability of 
default  of  one  country  on  the  likelihood  of  default  of  other  countries  in  the  euro  area, 
controlling inter alia for the fact that the degree of interconnectedness in the system changes 
over  time.8  Let  me  emphasize  that  these  default  probabilities  are  estimated  strictly  on  the 
basis  of  the  CDS  premiums  quoted  in  the  market,  irrespective  of  whether  the  probabilities 
priced-in by the market are in line with the assessment made by official institutions. On the 
basis  of  historical  CDS  data,  these  models,  for  example,  find  that  a  default  in  Greece 
increases the probability of Portugal defaulting on its public debt by 30 percentage points. 
The  results  of  this  model  may  be  interpreted  as  providing  some  indication  of  sovereign 
contagion effects from Greece to other euro area countries.  
In  sum,  both  descriptive  and  model-based  evidence  point  to  the  presence  of  significant 
sovereign  contagion  in  the  euro  area.  Moreover,  these  contagion  pressures  have  recently 
intensified, as they have spread beyond the euro area’s periphery and have started to affect 
larger  economies.  Following  up  on  my  earlier  discussion  on  the  policy-relevance  of 
contagion, policy makers need to address this. I shall address policy responses in two steps; 
first, responses by the ECB and, second, responses by fiscal authorities. 
Sovereign contagion, the monetary transmission mechanism and the ECB’s Securities 
Markets Program 
The intensification over time of the sovereign debt crisis – as also illustrated by the contagion 
evidence I have just referred to – has presented the ECB with the challenge of preserving the 
proper functioning of the monetary policy transmission mechanism. In normal times the key 
interest rates decided by the central bank have an initial impact on short-term interest rates 
in the money market, and arbitrage relationships further propagate the policy impulse along 
the  maturity  spectrum  and  across  different  asset  classes.  Coupled  with  adjustments  of 
money,  credit  and  financing  conditions,  monetary  policy  can  ultimately  affect  prices.  The 
smooth working of this transmission mechanism allows the central bank to fulfil its mandate 
of maintaining price stability.  
Security  markets,  especially  sovereign  bond  markets,  have  traditionally  come  to  play  a 
distinct role in the transmission of monetary policy in all advanced economies. This occurs 
                                                 
7   P.  Donati,  (2011),  “Modelling  spillovers  and  measuring  their  impact  and  persistence:  Application  to 
CDS spreads during the euro area sovereign crisis”, unpublished ECB internal manuscript, August. 
8   X. Zhang, B. Schwaab and A. Lucas (2011), “Disaster calculus: Joint and conditional measures of euro area 
sovereign default risk”, unpublished ECB internal manuscript, November. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
via three channels. First, government bonds are often used as a reference rate for pricing 
loans  or  other  asset  classes.  This  is  the  so-called  price  channel.  In  particular,  markets 
generally  consider  that  the  credit  standing  of  a  sovereign  has  direct  implications  for  the 
creditworthiness  of  most  private  institutions  within  the  jurisdiction  of  the  sovereign  itself. 
Thus,  sovereign  yields  provide  generally  a  floor  to  the  funding  conditions  of  the  private 
sector. To the extent to which abrupt movements in yields carry the risk of spiralling off and 
leading  to  contagion,  credit  intermediation  suffers  and  there  is  an  impairment  in  the 
transmission  of  monetary  policy.  Second,  government  bonds  usually  provide  a  primary 
source  of  collateral,  given  that  they  are  generally  the  most  liquid  asset  class.  This  makes 
government bonds a prominent type of collateral in repurchase agreements. The disruption 
of sovereign debt markets hampers the functioning of the interbank repo market and reduces 
its liquidity. This leads to increased money market rates due to premia for liquidity risk, with 
an  impact  on  the  capacity  of  banks  to  provide  credit  to  the  real  economy.  This  is  the  so-
called liquidity channel. Third, changes in the valuation of bonds affect the behaviour of the 
financial  and  non-financial  sectors  via  their  impact  on  the  strength  of  their  balance  
sheet – this is the so-called balance sheet channel. For lenders, the lower capital base may 
mean  that  they  can  supply  fewer  loans  to  the  economy.  By  contrast,  borrowers  see  their 
creditworthiness reduced. This in turn limits their capacity to borrow. Concerning contagion, it 
is  clear  that  both  contagion  across  sovereign  bond  markets  and  contagion  between 
sovereigns  bonds  and  banks  distort  the  working  of  all  three  channels  on  top  of  any 
idiosyncratic market malfunctioning.  
Faced  with  the  risk  of  profound  impairments  of  the  transmission  mechanism  of  monetary 
policy, the ECB has adopted several non-standard measures in order to maintain a stable 
relationship  between  its  monetary  policy  stance  and  the  conditions  actually  faced  by 
households and firms. I will focus here on the Securities Markets Programme (SMP) adopted 
by  the  ECB  in  May  2010,  given  its  direct  relevance  for  addressing  the  malfunctioning  of 
security markets.  
The  programme  was  designed  in  the  form  of  interventions  in  the  euro  area’s  securities 
markets. The liquidity provided by the central bank via SMP interventions is fully re-absorbed 
by other liquidity operations. The liquidity neutrality of the SMP interventions is one feature 
making them distinct from “quantitative easing”, which has the very purpose of increasing the 
liquidity provided by the central bank.9 In addition, quantitative easing programmes have a 
numerical target for the amount to be purchased. This is not the case for the SMP. Finally, 
quantitative  easing  programmes  have  a  much  larger  size,  given  their  intended  aim  of 
“flooding” the market with liquidity. A better-fitting analogy may therefore be drawn between 
the SMP and sterilised exchange-rate interventions, which likewise do not necessarily have 
an announced target and aim to correct a misaligned asset price.  
To fully assess the impact of the SMP it would be necessary to know the counterfactual, that 
is  the  situation  that  would  have  prevailed  in  the  absence  of  the  SMP.  By  definition  this 
counterfactual cannot be observed. There is, however, no doubt that through the purchases 
of government bonds the SMP has contributed to restoring the monetary policy transmission 
mechanism in the euro area. Other things equal, the programme also helped contain volatility 
in the markets concerned.  
                                                 
9   For an overview of quantitative easing (QE) and its impact, see A. Krishnamurthy and A. Vissing-Jorgensen 
(2011),  “The  effects  of  quantitative  easing  on  interest  rates:  Channels  and  implications  for  policy”,  mimeo., 
Northwestern  University,  October  (http://www.kellogg.northwestern.edu/faculty/krisharvind/papers/QE.pdf). 
For more specific policy views regarding the nature of QE policies by the US Federal Reserve and the Bank of 
England,  see  Chairman  B.  Bernanke  (2009),  “The  crisis  and  the  policy  response”,  Stamp  Lecture,  London 
School  of  Economics,  January,  and  M.  Joyce,  M.  Tong  and  R.  Woods  (2011),  “The  United  Kingdom’s 
quantitative easing policy: Design, operation and impact”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, 51(3). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
It is essential that the nature of the SMP as a measure that supports the central bank in the 
pursuit of its goal of maintaining price stability does not distort the incentive structure among 
different policy actors that lie at the heart of EMU. For this reason, both when the SMP was 
first announced in May 2010 and when its active implementation was confirmed in August 
2011, the ECB took special note of the commitments of euro area governments to ensure the 
sustainability of their public finances and address the shortcomings of economic governance 
in the euro area. 
Fiscal imbalances, governance in a Monetary Union and sovereign contagion 
It  is  clear  that  a  lasting  solution  to  the  current  sovereign  debt  crisis  requires  making  swift 
progress in the consolidation of public finances, the boosting of sustainable economic growth 
and the strengthening of the governance framework at the euro area level – to which I will 
now turn. 
The  fiscal  situation  in  euro  area  countries  deteriorated  significantly  following  the  financial 
crisis.10  In  2010,  the  aggregate  fiscal  balance  of  the  euro  area  stood  at  more  than  6%  of 
GDP, up from an almost balanced budget in 2000. The latest projections by the European 
Commission suggest that the euro area deficit ratio would gradually decline to around 3½% 
of  GDP  in  2012.  Euro  area  debt  amounted  to  more  than  85%  of  GDP  in  2010  and  would 
increase  to  around  90%  of  GDP  in  2012.  Moreover,  14  out  of  17  euro  area  countries  are 
currently facing an excessive deficit procedure related to a budgetary deficit above the 3% of 
GDP reference value. 
To  be  sure,  the  fiscal  situation  in  the  aftermath  of  the  crisis  is  even  worse  in  other  major 
economies. In the United States, for example, the 2010 deficit ratio stood at more than 10% 
of GDP and the latest IMF projections suggest only a relatively limited decline to around 8% 
of GDP in 2012. US debt reached around 95% of GDP in 2010 and would further increase to 
around 105% of GDP in 2012. Japan and the UK ran similarly high deficits. In the case of 
Japan,  the  deficit  ratio  amounted  to  around  9%  of  GDP  in  2010  and,  after  an  increase  in 
2011, would return to around this level in 2012. In the UK, according to the latest European 
Commission  forecast  the  deficit  ratio  would  decline  from  10.3%  in  2010  to  around  8  %  in 
2012. 
Against this background, what are the reasons for the particularly severe disruptions in some 
euro area sovereign debt markets and the related contagion effects, which are undermining 
financial stability in the euro area as a whole? To approach this question it is helpful to take a 
closer look at the specificities of the euro area institutional setup.  
The  combination  of  a  single  monetary  policy  and  strongly  decentralised  fiscal  policies 
constitutes a specific feature of the euro area. The weak European governance has not been 
able to remove incentives for national fiscal policymakers to allow the emergence of fiscal 
imbalances in the form of running excessive deficits at the cost of other participating Member 
States. The Stability and Growth Pact (SGP) was established to address such coordination 
problems. However, it suffered from weak national implementation and a lack of enforcement 
at the European level.  
Enforcement of the SGP was built on a peer pressure mechanism among Member States. In 
the  past,  however,  Member  States  proved  to  be  reluctant  to  enforce  adequate  fiscal 
discipline on their peers. Moreover, decision-making bodies at the EU level were left with a 
                                                 
10   See A. van Riet (ed., 2010), “Euro area fiscal policies and the crisis”, ECB Occasional Paper, no. 109, April 
(http://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/scpops/ecbocp109.pdf). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
to  one  of  extreme  market  sensitivity 
significant  degree  of  discretion  regarding  the  implementation  of  the  fiscal  rules,  notably 
following the 2005 reform.11 
Incentives  for  ensuring  sound  national  fiscal  positions  have  as  a  consequence  been 
insufficient. Member States failed to adhere to their medium-term budgetary objectives and 
only  slowly  corrected  excessive  deficits.  As  a  result,  a  number  of  euro  area  countries 
accumulated large fiscal imbalances already in “good times”, instead of using opportunities 
for reducing public deficits and debt levels. Therefore, they were left with hardly any room for 
manoeuvre when the financial and economic crisis hit.  
In  the  wake  of  the  crisis,  the  substantial  underlying  fiscal  and  structural  weaknesses  in  a 
number of euro area countries, as well as the inability of the current governance framework 
to  prevent  the  emergence  of  such  imbalances,  became  very  apparent.  Starting  from  the 
collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers  in  mid-September  2008,  a  regime  switch  in  the  pricing  of 
sovereign  credit  risk  could  be  observed,  from  a  pre-crisis  situation  of  almost  complete 
compression  of  spreads 
to  adverse  country 
developments.  At  the  same  time,  the  high  degree  of  economic  and  financial  integration  in 
EMU  resulted  in  the  fact  that  risks  quickly  spread  to  other  Member  States  perceived  as 
vulnerable by the market. This happened, particularly, via national banking systems and their 
exposure  to  sovereign  credit  risk.  These  developments  illustrate  how  the  emergence  of 
economic  and  financial  imbalances  laid  the  groundwork  for  the  subsequent  instability.  The 
experience of the crisis has also shown that in times of financial market stress the unravelling 
of imbalances and contagion effects, which are both sources of systemic risk, often reinforce 
each other.  
As result, I think it is fair to say that we now stand at a crossroads and that decisive and far-
reaching reforms will be necessary to address the sovereign debt crisis and ensure a smooth 
functioning of EMU in the future. It seems that European policymakers have understood the 
urgency of the situation and, fortunately, substantial reform steps have been initiated.  
A  governance  reform  package  –  the  so-called  “Six  pack”  –  has  been  approved  by  the 
European  Council,  the  European  Parliament  and  the  European  Commission  in  September 
2011. It strengthens both the preventive and the corrective arm of the SGP and establishes 
minimum  requirements  for  national  budgetary  frameworks.  At  the  European  summit  of 
26/27 October  2011  governments  announced  further  steps  to  enhance  fiscal  governance, 
notably a strengthened surveillance of countries under the excessive deficit procedure and 
the implementation of balanced budget rules in all euro area Member States. 
Important steps have also been taken to strengthen the European Financial Stability Facility 
(EFSF).  The  EFSF  has  been  ratified  by  all  17  Member  States  of  the  euro  area  and 
agreement  has  also  been  reached  on  leveraging  existing  EFSF  resources  in  order  to 
increase the overall “firepower” of the fund without extending the guarantees underpinning it.  
Conclusion 
Looking ahead, the identification of the necessary reforms has to start from being clear about 
what the ultimate objective is: the need to establish institutional arrangements which provide 
credible incentives for sound fiscal and macroeconomic policies in a monetary union. In my 
view, a more fundamental deepening of fiscal and economic policy surveillance is necessary 
in the long run. This would involve a transfer of sovereignty to the European level of decision 
                                                 
11   See, for example, R. Morris, H. Ongena and L. Schuknecht (2006), “The reform and implementation of the 
Stability  and  Growth  Pact”,  ECB  Occasional  Paper,  no.  47,  June  (http://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/ 
scpops/ecbocp47.pdf), or M. Catenaro and R. Morris (2008), “Fiscal policy and implementation in EMU: From 
Maastricht  to  the  SGP  reform  and  beyond”,  F.  Farina  and  R.  Tamborini  (eds.),  Economic  Policy  in  the 
European Monetary Union: From the Old to the New Stability and Growth Pact and Beyond, Routledge. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
making, which should have much stronger powers, and would also mean stricter constraints 
on national budget policies.  
This kind of reforms would require a comprehensive change to the EU Treaty but, above all, 
an  adequate  mechanism  to  ensure  their  democratic  legitimacy.  Let  me  outline  the  ideal 
cornerstones  of  such  a  governance  reform.  First,  to  ensure  fiscal  discipline,  all  planned 
deficits of more than 3% of GDP and those in excess of a country’s medium term objective 
would  need  to  be  approved  by  all  euro  area  governments.  Second,  past  fiscal  slippages 
would be automatically corrected in upcoming budgets without any room for discretion via the 
introduction  of  constitutional  rules  similar  to  the  German  “debt  brake”.  Third,  all  Member 
States  would  also  agree  to  implement  fines  and  sanctions  in  a  quasi-automatic  mode. 
Finally,  with  the  introduction  in  2013  of  a  permanent  crisis  resolution  mechanisms,  the 
European  Stability  Mechanism  (ESM),  those  countries  slipping  in  the  progress  with  their 
macroeconomic adjustment programmes would temporarily loose financial autonomy.  
The institutional arrangements at both national and supranational level would also have to be 
strengthened.  At  the  national  level,  independent  budget  offices  would  ensure  reliable 
forecasts  –  a  prerequisite  for  sound  planning  and  implementation  of  budgets.  At  the  euro 
area level this needs to be complemented by an independent entity with a clear mandate and 
a  strong  institutional  framework  to  assess  the  implementation  of  fiscal  rules.  For  instance, 
this  could  be  called  a  European  Budget  Office  or  “EBO”,  which  could  potentially  form  the 
nucleus of what might become over time, and in a gradual manner, a European Ministry of 
Finance. Strong and independent institutions at the euro area and national levels serve  to 
enhance transparency. They bring the necessary pressure to bear to ensure the conduct of 
sound  policies  and  effectively  counteract  possible 
tendencies 
lenient 
implementation of fiscal rules at the level of individual member states. 
In addition to the “Six-pack” adopted in March 2011 the Heads of State or Government of the 
euro area also agreed on a “Euro Plus Pact” to strengthen policy coordination with the aim of 
improving competitiveness and convergence. Under this agreement euro area governments 
commit to use a set of common indicators to regularly monitor each others progress in areas 
such as labour-market reforms, reforms to wage-setting arrangements and reforms aimed at 
improving the sustainability of pension, health care and social benefit systems. Governments 
who signed the Euro Plus Pact also committed to translate the rules set out in the Stability 
and  Growth  Pact  into  their  national  legislations.  The  reform  of  article  135  of  the  Spanish 
constitution  in  August  2011,  which  for  the  first  time  introduced  the  principle  of  budgetary 
stability  into  the  fundamental  law  of  the  country,  is  a  positive  example  of  recent  progress 
made in this area. 
As  a  final  remark,  let  me  emphasise  once  again  that  mastering  the  current  crisis  situation 
requires  that  all  parties  involved  honour  their  previous  commitments.  Most  notably, 
governments need to ensure, under any circumstances, the achievement of announced fiscal 
targets and deliver the envisaged institutional and structural reform programmes. This is of 
utmost  importance  for  improving  market  confidence  and  regaining  macroeconomic  and 
financial stability in the euro area.  
Thank you for your attention. 
towards  a 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
