Jan F Qvigstad: Contribution at the conference on “Welfare effects of 
financial innovation” 
Comments  by  Mr  Jan  F  Qvigstad,  Deputy  Governor  of  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of 
Norway),  on  Mr  Frank  Smets  (ECB)  paper  “Financial  markets  –  productivity,  procyclicality, 
and policy”, at the Netherlands Bank conference in honour of Mr Nout Wellink on “Welfare 
effects of financial innovation”, Amsterdam, 11 November 2011. 
 I would like to thank Birger Vikøren, Sigbjørn Atle Berg and Helle Snellingen for useful comments. 
Thank you for inviting me and giving me the opportunity to comment on Frank’s paper. The 
common  starting  point  of  the  literature  is  that  the  value  of  financial  markets  lies  in  their 
contribution to real economic growth. This is the perspective we always need to have for any 
meaningful  discussion  of  the  social  value  of  financial  markets.  A  well  developed  financial 
market is not a goal in its own right. 
During my 30 years of service in the Treasury and the central bank, I have had my fair share 
of dealings with banking and financial crises. I will draw on some of that experience in my 
comments today as part of my modest contribution to this distinguished group. 
In  the  aftermath  of  the  Lehman  Brothers  collapse  the  funding  situation  for  banks  became 
difficult, also for Norway with its oil-driven economy. Early in 2009 a swap arrangement was 
introduced to improve the medium-term funding situation for our banks. Government bonds 
were swapped for covered bonds issued by banks and normal lending activity was restored. 
However, this was not the first time the Government had used swaps to stimulate the real 
economy. We did so around 200 years ago... 
 A swap of government bonds for privately issued securities was used already in 1819 when 
Norway emerged on the scene as a sovereign country after the Napoleonic wars. The 1819-
bonds were swapped for bills of exchange issued by farmers and merchants in the domestic 
market. With these bonds as collateral they managed to raise sufficient credit to import seed 
to secure important supplies to farmers and merchants in this difficult period in Norwegian 
economic history. This is a historical example of how financial markets underpin economic 
growth. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
They create credit to make it available for real investment. 
They allocate credit to the most profitable investment projects. 
And they improve risk sharing in the economy. 
More generally, financial markets contribute to economic growth in three ways: 
 
 
 
The caveat is that they create the credit volumes that they find privately optimal, and allocate 
it  to  the  projects  that  are  most  profitable  to  them.  Neither  the  credit  volume  nor  the  credit 
allocation is necessarily socially optimal: this is one basic reason why financial markets are 
and should be regulated. 
The next question is: How strictly should they be regulated? When does regulation severely 
impair the positive effect from financial markets to economic growth? 
Let me again make some observations from my home country: 
 figure 
into  perspective, 
the  106  billion  euros 
the  European  banks  need 
Norway had a severe banking crisis around 1990. Three of the four largest banks failed and 
the direct capital injections required were alone more than 3½ per cent of GDP. Just to put 
this 
for 
recapitalisation now is less than 1 per cent of GDP in the euro area. 
Ever since the Norwegian banking crisis in the early 1990s, our banking industry has been 
regulated more strictly than banks in comparable countries. 
 
For instance, bank capital definitions have been tighter and the financial supervisor 
has been more actively restricting banking activities. 
Another example is that packaging loans into complex financial instruments was in 
practice not permitted until 2007 when new regulations provided for the issuance of 
covered  bonds.  The  complex  instruments  central  in  the  creation  of  the  subprime 
crisis were never introduced, and Norwegian banks did not invest in them. 
 Our  GDP  growth  rates  have  still  been  high  during  the  years  up  to  2008,  also  outside  the 
petroleum  sector.  And  the  downturn  we  experienced  in  2009  was  modest  in  relation  to 
comparable countries. 
At the early stage of the banking crisis in the1990s, the Norwegian central bank provided a 
large liquidity loan to a savings bank. It soon became clear that the loan would not be paid 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
back. A liquidity problem turned into a problem of solvency. This was not the first time! We 
were  again  reminded  how  responsibilities  should  be  shared  between  the  fiscal  authorities 
and the central bank. It is the responsibility of the parliament and the government to spend 
taxpayers’ money. It is not up to an independent central bank to spend their money! We still 
remembered this principle in late 2008 and early 2009 when the funding of Norwegian banks 
also  dried  up.  Then  we  made  sure  that  the  Ministry  of  Finance  became  the  banks’ 
counterparty in the bond swap I mentioned earlier. We thus avoided the discussion we have 
seen elsewhere about the central bank intruding into the arena of the fiscal authorities. 
 The financial crisis also hit some very small Norwegian municipalities – far up North close to 
the coldness of the Barents Sea and others deep into the fjords warmed by the Gulf Stream 
– that had in fact invested in instruments exposed to the US subprime market. They were 
told that they could earn a risk-free excess return of 50 basis points. The instruments were in 
most cases sold to them by their very small local savings banks, which had taken them on 
from  large  US  investment  banks.  The  savings  banks  did  not  understand  the  risks  either! 
Ignorance  combined  with  greed  –  a  dangerous  combination.  In  2008  and  2009  the 
municipalities  suffered  very  large  losses;  from  risks  they  had  not  understood.  Welfare 
schemes had to be cut, schools closed and the pupils had to learn to swim in the cold fjords 
because the swimming pools were closed. 
The main argument used in favour of new and complex instruments is that they facilitate risk 
sharing across economic agents. But risks that are not understood can hardly be shared in 
any optimal way. It is also important to keep in mind that risk sharing can also be promoted 
through simpler and more conventional instruments. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
 Our  oil  fund  –  managed  by  Norges  Bank  and  with  more  than  500  billion  dollars  under 
management – set up a special instrument committee after the recent financial crisis. The 
committee must sanction every financial instrument before it can be used for investments. As 
a result, the number of instruments available to the Fund’s managers has been significantly 
reduced,  in  particular  fixed-income  and  derivatives  instruments,  since  the  committee  was 
established. 
One  factor  behind  the  financial  crisis  was  a  very  important  market  distortion  described  by 
Hyman Minsky: The interaction between asset prices and credit volumes may create a spiral 
where  both  asset  prices  and  credit  rise  to  unsustainable  levels.  The  use  of  financial 
innovations  to  create  more  credit  with  the  result  that  it  fuels  such  a  spiral  is  clearly  not  a 
socially desirable use. 
Adair Turner of the British FSA1 has pointed out that credit and asset bubbles also represent 
a massive misallocation of capital in the real economy. 
                                                 
1  Speech by Adair Tuner on 29 September 2011, Credit Creation and Social Optimality. 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
One  key  answer  to  the  spiral  described  by  Minsky  has  been  to  introduce  macroprudential 
regulation.  Instruments  such  as  the  countercyclical  capital  buffer  are  meant  to  provide  a 
cushion when the credit cycle turns down. There is also a commonly held view that we need 
instruments to dampen credit growth during an expansion. 
We  should  probably  look  broadly  at  how  the  Minsky  style  spirals  could  be  contained. 
Discretionary  policy  can  be  a  useful  tool,  but  due  weight  must  be  given  to  building  strong 
automatic stabilisers into the financial system to reduce the risk of future bubbles. 
The topic of this conference is financial innovation. Both Adair Turner2 and Paul Tucker3 have 
raised  doubts  about  the  social  value  of  some  of  these  new  instruments.  I  quite  agree: 
Restrictive  regulation  of  some  of  these  instruments  could  contribute  to  stabilising  financial 
markets. 
One could imagine that the regulator should evaluate the pros and cons of allowing any new 
instrument. At the very least, the regulator should make sure that any instrument traded in 
significant quantities is sufficiently transparent to be a useful risk shifter. 
In  short,  I  agree  with  Frank  that  the  positive  relationship  between  financial  markets  and 
economic growth has its limits. 
The difficult question is naturally where these limits are. It will be hard for a regulator to draw 
the line. But there are few other candidates for doing it. 
                                                 
2  Speech by Adair Turner on 18 February 2011, Reforming finance: are we being radical enough? 
3  Speech by Paul Tucker on 23 May 2011,  Building resilient financial systems:  macroprudential regimes and 
securities market regulation 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
