Abdulrahman A Al-Hamidy: Risk strategies for Basel III compliance and 
beyond – extracting business value from regulatory change  
Speech by His Excellency Dr Abdulrahman A Al-Hamidy, Vice Governor of the Saudi Arabian 
Monetary  Agency  (SAMA),  at  The  Institute  of  Banking/Moody’s  Analytics  Symposium, 
Riyadh, 30 November 2011. 
 Distinguished Participants, 
I  am  pleased  to  be  here  today  to  share  my  thoughts  on  “Risk  Strategies  for  Basel  III 
Compliance and Beyond”. Given the lingering global financial crisis with ongoing impact on a 
number of economies and financial markets, this is a relevant and timely subject to deliberate 
upon. 
I appreciate the efforts of the Institute of Banking and the Moody’s Analytics to organize this 
Symposium for the benefit of the bankers and supervisors in the Kingdom. I have seen the 
list of topics to be covered today and the impressive list of speakers and I am confident that 
all of you would greatly benefit from the discussions. 
The world today has not yet recovered from the global financial crisis that started in 2007. 
While the governments, central banks, supervisory authorities and international organizations 
have been working hard to revive and revitalize financial markets and financial institutions in 
many  advanced  markets,  the  recovery  has  been  slow.  Following  the  financial  crisis  the 
lessons  learned  exercise  had  attributed  the  main  causes  to  include  a  long  period  of  easy 
monetary  policy  that  fueled  accelerated  economic  growth  accompanied  by  lax  and  light 
supervision in a number of advanced markets. Consequently, one of the key response from 
the authorities was to develop the BASEL III Reforms Package that aims to strengthen global 
supervision of international banks and banking systems. 
While  the  global  banking  supervisors  have  been  working  hard  to  improve  banking 
supervision, the financial crisis has mutated into a fiscal crisis in some markets in Europe, 
once again threatening the viability of some global banks and causing the risk of contagion to 
other  financial  institutions  and  markets.  Consequently  this  drives  home  the  lessons  that 
strengthening  banking  supervision  alone  is  not  sufficient  and  that  prudent  fiscal  and 
monetary policies are essential for a sound and resilient banking system. 
Before  I  talk  about  Basel  III,  I  would  like  to  revisit  the  evolution  of  the  Basel  II  framework 
which  was  published  by  the  Basel  Committee  in  June  2004  with  a  tentative  full 
implementation date of 1st January 2007. Consequently in 2007 a pertinent question was that 
why did Basel II fail to prevent the financial crisis. The response was that apart from its slow 
and uneven implementation in the advanced markets, Basel II was a flawed standard that 
had failed to address some of the major supervisory weaknesses. These included the lack of 
a common definition of quality of capital, no limits on leveraging, no common standards for 
liquidity  and  a  failure  to  recognize  the  excessive  market  risks  embedded  in  trading  and 
derivative transactions that had risen very sharply among the major banks. Therefore, Basel 
II would have not done the job it was required to do. 
This  brings me  to  the  Basel  III  which  not  only  addresses  the  shortcomings  of  Basel  II  but 
goes far beyond by introducing a variety of new concepts which have raised the bar in terms 
of global supervisory standards. Some of these concepts emerged from the various lessons 
learned exercises that were carried out following 2007, while others are a product of serious 
research  and  reflection  by  the  global  banking  supervisors.  Basel  III  has  introduced  some 
fundamental  reforms  such  as  elevating  the  status  of  Common  Equity  capital  as  the  key 
component of Core capital. It also has introduced the concept of a conservation capital buffer 
and even more importantly an additional countercyclical buffer on top of the minimum capital 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
requirements.  Also  Basel  III  has  recognized  that  liquidity  is  as  important  if  not  even  more 
important  than  capital  for  safety  and  viability  of  banking  institutions.  It  has  recognized  that 
there must be limits on leveraging by financial institutions so that bankers are restrained from 
excessive risk taking. 
Basel III also has taken a serious and perhaps a much needed closer look at risks in trading 
and investment activities and particularly for derivatives and off balance sheet transactions. 
In July 2009, as an interim measure, Basel Committee had issued a document addressing 
the  market  and  trading  book  weaknesses  in  Basel  II  for  immediate  implementation.  This 
document is known as Basel II.5. Basel III goes much further with refinements in areas such 
as counterparty credit risk, Credit Value adjustments, etc. These measures should enhance 
the  risk  management,  governance  and  supervision  of such  activities as  securitizations,  re-
securitizations and credit derivatives. 
Also  at  the  conceptual  level  there  is  far  greater  emphasis  on  stress  testing  by  banking 
institutions for various risks. Banks are required to develop stress scenarios and demonstrate 
their ability to cope and survive under stressful situations. Basel III also requires supervisors 
to use stress testing at the systemic level. 
One related area of major concern that has kept Basel Committee very busy is the enhanced 
supervisory regime for  Global Systemically Important Financial Institutions(G-SIFIs). These 
institutions will be subject to a more stringent, sensitive and effective supervisory regime and 
will  also  face  a  higher  capital  charge  in  form  of  common  equity  capital.  They  are  already 
subject  to  supervisory  colleges  and  to  the  emerging  requirements  of  stronger  resolution 
regimes. There is already an informal consensus that these rules will be equally applied to 
Domestic SIFIs. 
I do not want to delve into many details on these measures which I am sure will be covered 
by  various  speakers  today.  I  just  want  to  make  a  fundamental  point  that  the  Global 
supervision  is  reverting  back  to  fundamental  values  of  prudence,  conservatism  and 
simplicity. These are the same values that SAMA has always espoused and maintained and 
therefore  for  us  the  transition  to  Basel  III  raises  no  major  concerns  nor  poses  major 
challenges. 
Let  me  now  highlight  some  challenges  to  be  globally  faced  by  banks  and  supervisors  in 
implementation of Basel III: 
 
Firstly,  Base  III  has  substantially  raised  the  quality,  quantity  and  international 
consistency  of  capital  and  liquidity.  The  new  rules  are  aimed  at  strengthening  of 
capital and risk management in banks. This may require banks to inject high quality 
fresh  capital,  preserve  existing  capital  by  limiting  the  payout  of  dividends  and 
bonuses, realize efficiency gains, and mobilize liquidity from new sources in certain 
jurisdictions  to  meet  additional  capital  and  liquidity  requirements.  This  would  be  a 
major  challenge  for  some  internationally  active  banks,  particularly  under  present 
market conditions; 
Secondly,  internationally  active  banks  facing  major  capital  shortfalls  will  have  to 
revisit their business strategies on global presence and expansion plans. They might 
be  required  to  take  some  tough  decisions  on  exiting  from  certain  locations  or 
considering merger and consolidation of their affiliates and subsidiaries; 
Thirdly,  implementation  of  Basel  III  will  require  banks  to  assess  their  existing 
capacity on estimation of additional capital and liquidity requirements. This may also 
require  some  banks  to  make  additional  investment  in  systems  and  procedures  to 
build-up their capacity; 
Fourthly,  new  capital  and  liquidity  rules  are  conceptually  and  technically  very 
demanding. This will require banks and supervisors to undergo extensive trainings 
to learn these new concepts and techniques; 
   2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   the  additional  regulatory  requirements  relating 
Fifthly,  given  the  scarce  availability  of  qualified  human  resources,  banks  and 
supervisors will face the challenge of attracting and retaining staff with appropriate 
skill sets; 
Sixthly,  meeting 
to  Basel III 
implementation will require banks to reassess their existing regulatory reporting and 
compliance structure to ensure its adequacy. This is important given the extended 
transitional  timeline  for  implementation,  during  which  some  banks  are  required  to 
participate  in  quantitative  impact  studies  while  others  will  have  to  prepare  for  full 
implementation  within  specified  timeline.  We  also  have  to  keep  in  mind  that  new 
rules are still evolving in certain areas based on the results of quantitative impact 
studies  and  thus  may  require  further  adjustments  in  the  current  regulatory 
requirements; 
Lastly,  and  the  most  important  step  to  be  taken  by  banks,  is  adopting  the  robust 
governance structure that best suits their business model and risk profile. The Board 
of Directors should have a clear understanding of their role in corporate governance 
and be able to exercise sound and objective judgment about the affairs of the bank. 
The senior management should ensure that the bank’s activities are consistent with 
the  business  strategy,  risk  tolerance/appetite  and  policies  approved  by  the  board. 
This is the cornerstone on which any effective risk management framework, sound 
incentive structure and robust governance arrangements must be built. 
In  order  to  give  you  our  perspective  of  implementing  Basel III,  I  would  point  out  that  our 
Banking Control Law (BCL) already provides for a clear definition of capital and also provides 
for  legal  capital,  liquidity  and  leverage  ratios  and  limits  on  large  exposures.  The  BCL  also 
allows  SAMA  to  introduce  appropriate  and  relevant  international  standards  such  as  those 
emanating from the Basel Committee or the Financial Stability Board. Over the years, SAMA 
has  proactively  introduced  international  standards  and  best  practices  in  Saudi  Arabia  to 
ensure  that  the  Saudi  Banks  are  well  managed,  adequately  capitalized  and  effectively 
governed.  This  is  also  reflected  in  the  safety  and  soundness  of  individual  banks  and  the 
resilience of the overall banking system. 
In line with its stance, SAMA was among the first group of non Basel Countries at that time to 
introduce  Basel  I  framework  in  1992  and  the  Basel  II  in  January  2008.  While  Basel  I  was 
crucial for the introduction of the concepts of risk sensitivity of banks’ assets and tier-1 and 
tier 2 capital, Basel II introduced us to the concepts of internal risk rating systems and risk 
modeling.  From  SAMA  perspective  the  greatest  value  in  introducing  Basel  II  was  the 
significant progress that banks have made in four areas. Firstly, with the introduction of the 
Internal  Capital  Adequacy  Assessment  Plan(ICAAP),  they  have  improved  their  capital 
planning process. ICAAP requires banks to align their business plans with their risk appetite 
and  risk  profiles  in  projecting  their  capital  over  the  medium  term.  The  second  area  of 
improvement  is  on  other  Pillar  2  risks  including  interest  rate,  liquidity,  FX,  strategic, 
technology  and  reputation.  All  banks  have  developed  methodologies  to  identify,  quantify, 
manage  and  allocate  capital  to  such  risks.  These  were  risks  for  which  no  capital  was 
required earlier. A third area is stress testing where Saudi banks have made good progress. 
This allows them to know their risk tolerance and resilience in times of stress. Finally, the 
introduction of Pillar 3 has strengthened the disclosure of Saudi banks to high international 
standards. 
This brings me to an important natural question. What does Basel III mean for Saudi banking 
system? Well let me assure you that our preliminary analysis is that the transition to Basel III 
in  the  Basel  agreed  time  frames  should  be  smooth.  Saudi  banks  already  maintain  a  high 
level of core common equity capital. The average following the introduction of Basel III has 
been  about  17%,  of  which  around  85%  is  core  common  equity.  Similarly  Saudi  Banks 
maintain a high level of liquidity which has averaged over 30% over the past two decades. 
SAMA  already  requires  banks  to  keep  conservation  buffers  above  the  minimum  and  has 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
introduced  stringent  stress  testing  requirements.  Banks  are  making  good  progress  in  all 
areas.  
SAMA  has  already  started  the  Basel  III  implementation  process  by  publishing  its  plans, 
introducing  relevant  prudential  returns  and  providing  guidance  to  banks.  As  a  part  of 
implementation plans, SAMA has conducted quantitative impact studies on selected banks, 
started capacity building within SAMA as well as the banking industry, and formed technical 
groups  comprising  of  supervisors  and  bankers  to  deliberate  on  technical  issues  and  seek 
industry  feedback  to  facilitate  smooth  implementation.  Our  multi-pronged  strategy  to 
implement Basel III is focused on the following areas:  
i. 
Setting  the  regulatory  requirements  for  banks  essentially  based  on  the  Basel 
Committee’s rules and international best practices on implementation of Basel III; 
Conducting impact studies and collecting data from banks to assess the impact of 
new capital and liquidity rules on Saudi banks; 
Providing  guidance  to  banks  on  regulatory  and  technical  issues  to  facilitate  the 
implementation; 
Reviewing the plans of banks for implementation and holding bilateral and industry-
wide meetings at various levels to track progress on implementation; 
Arranging  and/or  coordinating  training  programs  and  other  capacity  building 
initiatives  for  supervisors  as  well  as  bankers  to  enhance  their  understanding  of 
technical issues. We are also actively participating in various international meetings, 
conferences and forums to keep ourselves updated on international developments; 
Implementation  of  various  other  standards  of  BCBS  and  FSB,  besides  Basel III. 
These  includes,  inter  alia,  the  FSB  Principles  and  Standards  on  Compensation, 
BCBS Principles on Stress testing, plans to introduce rules for D-SIFIs, etc. In many 
areas,  the  new  rules  are  equally  applicable  to  the  branches  of  foreign  banks 
operating in Saudi Arabia; 
Review  and  updating  of  SAMA  regulatory  requirements  in  other  related  areas. 
SAMA’s regulatory initiatives are aimed at protecting the interest of depositors and 
consumers of banks, besides ensuring the safety and soundness of banks. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
In  conclusion,  I  would  say  that  in  the  aftermath  of  the  global  financial  crisis,  the  financial 
landscape has changed substantially and still continues to change at a rapid pace. In order 
to cope with the challenges ahead, the supervisors and central banks are required to have 
better  management  of  systemic  risks  through  coordination  and  cooperation  in  global 
standards  and  policies.  We  believe  that  Basel  III  when  fully  implemented  will  contribute 
significantly  in  managing  the  systemic  risks  and  strengthening  of  global  financial  system. 
However, this will require substantial investment in systems and human resources as well as 
strengthening of governance and risk management frameworks. But this does not mean that 
we should excessively rely on advanced risk methodologies and models, and undermine the 
role of sound professional judgment and common sense. In practice, the use of quantitative 
risk  models  have  proved  much  more  effective  when  coupled  with  judgment  and  institutive 
thinking.  We  have  been  emphasizing  upon  our  banks  the  value  of  strengthening  risk 
management frameworks and methodologies along with requiring their boards to institute a 
strong corporate governance culture to manage the banks effectively. We at SAMA are also 
actively  monitoring  the  new  developments  both  globally  and  in  domestic  markets,  and  are 
fully geared to ensure stability of our financial system. 
I wish you a fruitful symposium! 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
