Jürgen Stark: Economic situation and fiscal challenges 
Speech by Mr Jürgen Stark, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the Forecaster Club of New York, New York, 2 December 2011. 
 As  the  ECB’s  Governing  Council  meets  on  Thursday  next  week,  we  are  now  in  the  pre-
decision  period  and  nothing  that  I  say  should  in  any  way  be  interpreted  in  terms  of  future 
monetary policy decisions. 
Introduction 
Thank you very much for the invitation to speak today to this distinguished audience at the 
Forecasters Club here in New York.  
Large  parts  of  Europe  are  suffering  from  the  ongoing  sovereign  debt  crisis.  An  increasing 
number of sovereigns are facing financing problems. A solution needs to be found urgently. 
But fingers are pointing in different directions.  
In my view solving the current sovereign debt crisis is primarily in the hands of governments. 
Its root cause lies in lax fiscal policies and associated deteriorating public finances in some 
euro  area  countries.  Stability  criteria  were  violated,  fiscal  rules  ignored  and  statistics 
tweaked. Growth dividends were not used for necessary consolidation in good times. In the 
same vein, competitiveness positions worsened in many euro area countries, due to a lack of 
structural  reforms.  These  developments  have  raised  doubts  in  financial  markets  on  the 
political will and capacity to live up to their commitments and to do whatever is needed to 
comply  with  the  rules  of  the  game  within  a  monetary  union.  To  solve  the  crisis  requires 
determined fiscal consolidation and ambitious structural reforms. These must be the prime 
answers  for  tackling  current  challenges.  At  the  same  time,  it  has  to  be  recognised  that 
sovereign debt issues are not confined to the euro area but have become an important issue 
for all advanced economies.  
Thus,  I  will  focus  my  presentation  today  on  the  policy  responses  to  the  crisis  and  the 
requirements I see as essential in the areas of monetary policy, fiscal policy and structural 
reforms to cope with current challenges.  
Macroeconomic and monetary environment  
Let me start with briefly sketching the economic and financial developments in the euro area 
during the years of crisis up to now.  
Following  the  collapse  of  Lehman,  financial  market  tensions  escalated  in  2008.  As  a 
consequence, we witnessed a severe global recession. After the deep recession that started 
in 2008, euro area real GDP started to contract and stood in the first half of 2009 about 5% 
below its level one year earlier, compared to a contraction of the US economy of close to 5% 
taking  into  account  the  recent  revisions  to  US  national  account  data.  Continued  strong 
external  demand  as  well  as  a  strengthening  of  domestic  demand  where  the  main  drivers 
behind the subsequent economic recovery (slide 3). At present, it seems that some of the 
downside risks we had identified earlier have been materialising. Looking ahead, short-term 
indicators and survey data suggest that real GDP growth may be very moderate towards the 
end of this year and at the beginning of next year. Indeed, economic activity in the euro area 
is adversely affected by a moderation in the pace of global demand. In addition, the crisis 
continues  to  weigh  on  confidence  and  financing  conditions  in  the  euro  area.  These 
developments are expected to dampen activity. At the same time, activity should benefit from 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
continued  positive  economic  growth  in  the  emerging  market  economies,  the  continued 
extremely low levels of short-term interest rates and the various measures that have been 
implemented to support the functioning of the financial sector. 
Having  said  this,  uncertainty  remains  very  high  and  risks  to  the  economic  outlook  on  the 
downside.  
Turning  to  prices,  average  inflation  in  the  euro  area  rose  to  1.6%  in  2010,  and  continued 
increasing  in  2011.  It  stood  at  3%  in  November,  according  the  Eurostat’s  flash  estimate, 
unchanged from previous months, still significantly lower than in the US. The main drivers 
behind  the  elevated  inflation  rates  since  the  end  of  last  year  have  been  oil  and  other 
commodity  price  surges.  As  of  late,  increases  in  indirect  taxes  due  to  fiscal  consolidation 
needs  have  been  an  additional  driver.  At  the  same  time,  domestic  price  pressures  have 
remained moderate. Survey data up to October point to some easing in pipeline pressures, 
especially  at  the  earlier  stages  of  the  pricing  chain,  i.e.  producer  prices  for  intermediate 
goods. In view of the rather weak growth prospects and continued slack in labour markets, 
labour cost pressures are likely to remain contained in the medium term. 
Looking ahead, euro area inflation rates are likely to decline in the coming months. They are 
expected to fall below 2% in the course of 2012. In the medium term, inflation rates should 
remain moderate. This is in line with latest available inflation forecasts from public sources. 
Medium  to  longer-term  inflation  expectations  according  to  both  survey  and  market  based 
measures remain well anchored in line with the ECB’s aim of keeping inflation rates below, 
but close to, 2% over the medium term. 
As to monetary and credit developments, following double digit growth rates in the build-up of 
the financial crisis, signalling risks for macroeconomic instabilities and price stability, annual 
growth in the broad monetary aggregate M3 and in loans to the private sector fell sharply 
between  2008  and  mid-2010  (slide  5).  Since  then,  money  and  credit  growth  started  to 
recover. However, underlying growth trends remained moderate, correcting a sizeable part of 
the excess liquidity that had been accumulated before the start of the crisis. 
Monetary policy 
The ECB from the very beginning of the crisis has taken decisive and swift action through 
both  its  standard  and  non-standard  monetary  policy  measures.  In  a  first  response  to 
intensified financial market tensions, and based on our assessment of medium-term risks to 
price  stability  in  the  euro  area,  we  reduced  our  key  interest  rates  by  325  basis  points 
between October 2008 and May 2009 and kept them unchanged until April 2011. During this 
time,  the  main  refinancing  rate  of  the  Eurosystem  stood  at  1%.  (slide  6).  Over  the  same 
period, the overnight money market interest rate (EONIA) also decreased rapidly, reaching 
levels as low as 0.3%. 
Earlier  this  year,  in  April  and  July,  we  raised  interest  rates  in  two  steps,  each  time  by 
25 basis  points.  At  that  time,  we  were  concerned  that  prevailing  upward  price  pressures, 
mainly from energy and commodity prices, could translate into second-round effects in wage 
and  price-setting  and  to  broad-based  inflationary  pressure.  However,  the  picture  has 
changed since then. The economic outlook has worsened amidst continued high uncertainty 
and intensified downside risks. In such an environment, it is reasonable to expect moderate 
price,  cost  and  wage  pressure.  This  assessment  has  led  us  to  the  decision  last  month  to 
reduce rates by 25 basis points. Our main refinancing rate therefore now stands at 1.25%, 
and  the  rates  on  the  deposit  facility  and  marginal  lending  facility  at  0.75%  and  1.75% 
respectively (slide 7). 
At the same time, we have introduced a number of non-standard monetary policy measures, 
with the aim to support credit flows from banks and thereby ensure that our interest rate is 
transmitted  properly  to  households  and  firms.  Notably,  the  design  of  these  measures  has 
taken into account the pivotal role of banks in financing the real economy of the euro area 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
(slide  8).  They  focused  on  a  proper  functioning  of  the  banking  sector,  by  ensuring  that 
funding markets, notably the money market, continued functioning. The main non-standard 
monetary policy measure in that context is the full allotment of liquidity demand by banks, at 
fixed, low rates, against eligible collateral.  
In addition, the ECB also engaged in buying government securities via its Securities Markets 
Programme (SMP). The Governing Council’s aim of this programme is to restore a proper 
transmission  process  that  threatened  to  become  impaired  given  dysfunctional  market 
segments, as witnessed by very high interest rate spreads on sovereign bonds (slide 9). This 
is  a  major  difference  with  quantitative  easing  in  other  major  countries  where  such  bond 
purchases  are  conducted  in  financing  governments  and  against  the  background  of  official 
interest rates being close to the lower zero bound. The aim of quantitative easing is to have a 
more  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance  via  lowering  long-term  interest  rates.  By 
contrast,  the  ECB’s  purchases  of  bonds  aim  to  ensure  that  our  official  short-term  interest 
rates are transmitted in a proper way to the economy. Another difference is that the ECB fully 
sterilises the liquidity injected in the market through its SMP while this is not the case in the 
US and the UK. The ECB has much less government securities on its balance sheet than the 
central banks of the US and the UK (slide 10). To be fair, this difference not only reflects the 
quantitative  easing  policy  conducted  in  the  UK  and  the  US.  In  the  US,  for  instance, 
government  bonds  already  were  an  important  item  on  the  balance  sheet  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  before  the  crisis.  The  Federal  Reserve  typically  implements  its  monetary  policy 
through purchases and sales of government bonds. 
Let  me  also  emphasise  that  all  the  non-standard  monetary  policy  measures  taken  by  the 
ECB are temporary in nature and complementary, rather than supplementary, to our interest 
rate instrument. 
At the same time, we should not forget the adverse side-effects of interest rates being kept at 
very low levels for a long time. In fact, the period preceding the start of the financial market 
tensions in August 2007 is reminiscent of the associated risks. Notably, the very low level of 
global interest rates after 2001 and the resulting ample liquidity conditions at the global level 
has laid the basis for the current crisis. In addition, maintaining very low interests rates for a 
protracted period may weaken the financial incentive for deleveraging for both the banking 
and  non-financial  sectors,  and  can  result  in  “evergreening”  of  outstanding  loans.  Very  low 
interest rates may also discourage banks from trading in interbank money markets. This is an 
important market for the transmission of monetary policy. Related, it has adverse effects on 
some financial institutions such as money market funds.  
Overall, the combination of standard and non-standard monetary policy measures has been 
successful in maintaining inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium term, while 
ensuring  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  in  difficult  times.  This  is  witnessed  by  fairly 
stable  inflation  expectations  around  ECB’s  objective  (slide  11).  The  ECB  therefore  has 
delivered fully on its mandate. 
Unfortunately, that cannot be said of all policymakers involved, resulting in the lingering of 
the sovereign debt crisis. To tackle the crisis decisively first and foremost requires tackling its 
root cause will require ambitious fiscal policies and structural reforms.  
Fiscal policy 
Let me now turn to the fiscal situation in the euro area in more detail. The severe imbalances 
that came to the forefront in the wake of the financial and economic crisis – to a significant 
extent – are related to past policy mistakes. In this context, one needs to bear in mind that 
the  euro  area  neither  constitutes  a  fully-fledged  federation  nor  a  political  or  fiscal  union. 
While monetary policy is centralised, budgetary sovereignty remains to a large extent at the 
Member  State  level.  The  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  has  been  put  in  place  to  ensure  a 
sufficient degree of fiscal coordination. However, this rules-based framework, which is built 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
on peer-pressure, was not sufficient to ensure a smooth functioning of the monetary union. 
This calls for a more pronounced transfer of sovereignty to the European level and the move 
towards a fiscal union.  
Countries have joined the euro area and benefited from its advantages but some have failed 
to  live  up  to  the  responsibilities  that  are  inherent  in  being  part  of  a  monetary  union.  In 
particular, many euro area countries failed to achieve sufficiently sound fiscal positions in line 
with the rules of the European Fiscal Framework in previous economic good times. This was 
the  consequence  of  a  lax  enforcement  of  the  provisions  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact, 
notably due to a deficient governance framework at the European level. As a result, many 
countries  already  entered  the  crisis  with  weak  fiscal  positions  which  amplified  the  fiscal 
deterioration.  
In 2010, the aggregate fiscal balance of the euro area stood at more than 6% of GDP up 
from  an  almost  balanced  budget  in  2000;  euro  area  debt  amounted  to  more  than  85%  of 
GDP in 2010. Moreover, 14 out of 17 euro area countries are currently facing an excessive 
deficit procedure related to a budgetary deficit above the 3% of GDP reference value of the 
Treaty. Particularly high deficits exist in the countries subject to EU/IMF programmes, i.e. in 
Ireland, Greece and Portugal, but also in some large euro area countries, notably Spain and 
France. As consequence, sizeable and persistent structural adjustment will be necessary in 
most euro area countries to put debt back on a declining path and reduce it to a sustainable 
level, in line with the 60% of GDP debt criterion of the Stability and Growth Pact.  
However,  most  advanced  economies  face  substantial  fiscal  consolidation  requirements. 
Notably, for the US, the IMF estimates that general government gross debt will reach 100% 
of GDP in 2011 and that it will continue to rise through the year 2016. At the same time, the 
general government deficit is expected to remain close to 10% of GDP in 2011 (slide 12). 
As you can see from the slide, significant aggregate structural adjustment of 1 percentage-
point of GDP per year will be necessary in the euro area to reduce the debt ratio to below 
60% of GDP by 2030. For the US, even such a relatively ambitious adjustment path would 
keep  the  debt-to-GDP  at  around  75%  of  GDP  by  2030.  These  scenarios  highlight  the 
significant fiscal challenges we are facing on both sides of the Atlantic in the aftermath of the 
financial and economic crisis. 
In European countries, the correction of excessive deficits is on its way. The pace of fiscal 
adjustment  has  been  set  by  the  European  Council  in  a  way  that  reflects  country-specific 
imbalances. Most countries will have to reduce their deficit ratio to below 3% of GDP by 2013 
at  the  latest.  Accordingly,  euro  area  Member  States  have  presented  medium-term 
consolidation strategies in their Stability Programmes which point to a strongly expenditure-
based adjustment. Such an approach is warranted in view of strong increases in government 
spending  during  the  crisis  in  most  countries.  Moreover,  past  experience  suggests  that 
successful consolidations typically have a strong expenditure component.  
In  addition,  case  study  evidence  from  previous  consolidation  episodes  indicates  that 
ambitious expenditure reform was typically carried out in the context of a broader economic 
reform  programmes,  comprising  structural  reforms  to  promote  potential  growth  and 
institutional  reform,  e.g.  to  strengthen  the  budgetary  framework.  In  fact,  many  euro  area 
countries,  notably  the  ones  subject  to  EU/IMF  programmes,  are  following  such  a  strategy 
which I would like to call the European approach to fiscal adjustment.  
If effectively implemented, such reform programmes would enable countries to address their 
sustainability risks and, at the same time, limit potential short-term costs of fiscal tightening 
through  growth-enhancing  structural  reform.  Especially  in  the  current  environment  of 
heightened  market  sensitivity,  ambitious  reform  efforts  should  quickly  trigger  positive 
confidence effects and be conducive to macroeconomic stabilisation. 
It  is,  therefore,  of  the  utmost  importance  that  European  governments  implement  the 
announced  fiscal  consolidation  and  reform  measures  and  ensure  –  by  all  means  –  the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
delivery of agreed fiscal targets. This will be crucial to regain market confidence, notably in 
countries with very high and strongly rising debt ratios and pronounced risks related to the 
expected  ageing-related  fiscal  burden.  For  these  countries,  with  a  view  to  ensuring  a 
sufficiently swift return to sound and sustainable fiscal positions, it appears to be advisable to 
implement  fiscal  adjustment  beyond  what  is  required  to  correct  excessive  deficits  and 
converge towards the medium-term budgetary objective, typically a balanced budget.  
Only if national governments strictly adhere to ambitious fiscal consolidation and reform does 
it  make  sense  to  seek  ways  to  buy  some  time  to  implement  the  planned  measures.  The 
European  Financial  Stability  Facility  is  the  appropriate  vehicle  for  that  but  before  coming 
operational European  governments  need  to  deliver  on  their  commitment  to  leverage  funds 
available  to  this  facility.  Public  programmes  should  be  based  on  strong  conditionality,  as 
otherwise  incentives  to  take  the  necessary  national  measures  would  be  weakened.  In 
addition, surveillance mechanisms at the European level need to be strengthened to monitor 
progress and avoid major derailments in the future. 
Decision-making in crisis times is different in our democratic systems. In the US, a medium-
term  fiscal  exit  strategy  has  yet  to  be  clearly  specified.  The  bipartisan  congressional 
committee on deficit reduction did not reach an agreement on measures to reduce the public 
deficit. At the same time, the recent downgrade of US long-term government debt and rising 
sovereign  CDS  spreads  signal  that  no  advanced  economy  is  immune  to  a  loss  of  market 
confidence in its public finances. It is therefore essential for the US to formulate a credible 
fiscal consolidation programme that returns its government debt to a declining path towards 
sustainable levels. 
Structural reforms 
As I mentioned before, deteriorating competitiveness positions in some euro area countries 
contributed  to  the  current  crisis.  These  countries  therefore  need  to  restore  price  and  cost 
competitiveness. Apart from labour cost moderation, this calls for structural reforms targeted 
at  removing  remaining  rigidities  in  labour  and  product  markets,  thereby  raising  potential 
economic growth. The measures should focus on enhancing wage flexibility and increasing 
competition in product markets, particularly in services.  
However, the need for structural reform does not stop with the euro area countries hit most 
by  the  sovereign  debt  crisis.  For  instance,  the  US  economy  would  benefit  from  a  more 
sustainable  growth  model,  where  solid  and  medium-term  oriented  economic  policies 
strengthen  potential  growth  and  job  creation.  This  would  include  structural  reforms  that 
address weaknesses in the labour market and in particular reduce long-term unemployment. 
Policies that stabilise the housing market, such as facilitating refinancing of mortgage debt, 
would also help households to deleverage and support private consumption in the medium 
term. Sustainable growth is also enhanced by policies that avoid the build-up of excessive 
misalignments  in  asset  prices.  At  a  global  level,  continuing  imbalances  require  ongoing 
efforts  to  address  factors  or  policies  that  foster  disequilibrium  flows  around  the  globe. 
Enhancing  exchange  rate  flexibility  in  emerging  economies  with  large  external  surpluses 
would mitigate the risk of a disorderly unwinding of global imbalances. 
Conclusion 
The lingering and expanding sovereign debt crisis must be halted to avoid macroeconomic 
and financial disaster, in the euro area and beyond. No country is immune anymore to a loss 
of  market  confidence  in  its  public  finances.  With  fiscal  imbalances  and  deteriorating 
competitiveness in euro area countries at the root of the current crisis, there can in my view 
be  no  discussion  which  policymakers  should  make  a  move.  Ambitious  fiscal  consolidation 
and  structural  reforms  by  national  governments  in  the  euro  area  are  required  now  –  or 
actually,  yesterday.  Only  if  the  course  of  national  policies  is  the  right  one  can  an 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
accompanying financing scheme as the EFSF play a useful role to bridge the period when 
market access remains restricted. Monetary policy in the euro area was and will remain an 
anchor of confidence and stability. It will remain dedicated to its mandate of maintaining price 
stability.  This  is  the  necessary  and  central  contribution  that  monetary  policy  can  make  to 
fostering sustainable growth, job creation and financial stability. Monetary policy should not 
be overburdened. 
Thank you for your attention.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   7
   8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   9
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   11
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
