Guy Debelle: The committed liquidity facility 
Speech by Mr Guy Debelle, Assistant Governor (Financial Markets) of the Reserve Bank of 
Australia,  APRA  (Australian  Prudential  Regulation  Authority)  Basel  III  Implementation 
Workshop 2011, Sydney, 23 November 2011. 
 As you know, last week the Reserve Bank released details of the Committed Liquidity Facility 
(CLF) that forms part of Australia’s implementation of the Basel III liquidity reforms. At the 
same  time,  the  Reserve  Bank  also  released  details  of  a  revised  set  of  margins  for  the 
collateral that is eligible in both its regular open market operations and for the CLF. Today, I 
will talk to those two press releases and provide more detail and some of the thinking behind 
them.  
Why do we need a CLF? 
Charles Littrell has already explained the motivation behind the need for the CLF, but it is 
worth reiterating some of those arguments. The Basel liquidity standard requires that banks 
have access to enough high-quality liquid assets to withstand a 30-day stress scenario, and 
specifies the characteristics required to be considered an eligible liquid asset.  
The issue in Australia is that there is a marked shortage of high quality liquid assets that are 
outside the banking sector (that is, not liabilities of the banks). As a result of prudent fiscal 
policy  over  a  large  run  of  years  at  both  the  Commonwealth  and  state  level,  the  stock  of 
Commonwealth  and  state  government  debt  is  low.  At  the  moment,  the  gross  stock  of 
Commonwealth debt on issue amounts to around 15 per cent of GDP, state government debt 
(semis) is around 12 per cent of GDP.1 These amounts fall well short of the liquidity needs of 
the  banking  system.  To  give  you  some  sense  of  the  magnitudes,  the  banking  system  in 
Australia is around 185 per cent of nominal GDP. If we assume that banks’ liquidity needs 
under the liquidity coverage ratio (LCR) may be in the order of 20 per cent of their balance 
sheet, then they need to hold liquid assets of nearly 40 per cent of GDP.  
In  addition  to  government  debt,  the  Basel  standard  also  includes  balances  at  the  central 
bank  in  its definition  of  high-quality  liquid  assets  (level  1  assets  in  the  Basel  terminology). 
That is, the banks’ exchange settlement (ES) balances at the RBA are also a liquid asset. 
Hence,  one  possible  solution  to  the  shortage  of  level  1  assets  would  be  for  banks  to 
significantly increase the size of their ES balances to meet their liquidity needs. While this is 
possible, it would mean that the RBA’s balance sheet would increase considerably. The RBA 
would have to determine what assets it would be willing to hold against the increase in its 
liabilities,  and  would  be  confronted  by  the  same  problem  of  the  shortage  of  assets  in 
Australia  outside  the  banking  system.  Similarly,  the  government  could  increase  its  debt 
issuance  substantially  with  the  sole  purpose  of  providing  a  liquid  asset  for  the  banking 
system to hold. Again, it would be confronted with the problem of which assets to buy with 
the proceeds of its increased debt issuance. Moreover, it would be a perverse outcome for 
the liquidity standard to be dictating a government’s debt strategy.  
However, the Basel Committee acknowledges that there are jurisdictions such as Australia 
where  there  is  a  clear  shortage  of  high  quality  liquid  assets.  In  such  circumstances,  the 
liquidity standard allows for a committed liquidity facility to be provided by the central bank 
against eligible collateral to enable banks to meet the LCR.  
                                                 
1  The  net  stock  of  Commonwealth  government  debt  on  issue  is  considerably  lower  at  6  per  cent  of  GDP, 
reflecting the assets held by the Commonwealth government, including through the Future Fund. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Access to the CLF 
As Charles has explained, APRA will work with the banks to determine their overall liquidity 
needs. They will discuss how much of these liquidity needs can be met through holdings of 
government paper. An important consideration in that discussion is ensuring that the banking 
system’s holdings of government paper are not so large that they compromise the liquidity of 
the  market.  Otherwise  this  would  be  completely  self-defeating,  as  the  whole  aim  of  the 
liquidity regime is to ensure the banks hold liquid assets. One influence in this determination 
is the large amount of government debt that is held offshore by investors that are not overly 
price sensitive (and also do not necessarily lend their securities). This further limits the size 
of the government debt stock that the banking system can realistically hold.  
As a result of that discussion, APRA will allow banks to reach an agreement with the RBA for 
a CLF for a specified amount, subject to RBA approval, to enable them to meet the balance 
of their liquidity requirement under the LCR. APRA may ask banks to specify the size of their 
access to the CLF as much as 12 months in advance. The facility will only be available for 
banks to meet that part of the liquidity requirement agreed with APRA.  
Access fee 
The Reserve Bank has set a fee of 15 basis points in return for its commitment to provide 
liquidity  to  a  bank  under  the  CLF.  The  fee  will  be  paid  on  both  the  drawn  and  undrawn 
amount.  
The general motivation in determining the price of the Reserve Bank’s commitment was to 
replicate  the  effect  in  other  jurisdictions  where  a  bank  could  meet  its  liquidity  needs  of 
holding eligible assets in a liquid market, solely through holding government paper. Hence 
the yield differentials between government bonds and the assets that will be eligible for the 
facility is a logical starting point.2 However, the spreads on the eligible securities incorporate 
compensation for a variety of risks, including credit and liquidity. It is only the latter risk that 
the facility is addressing and hence the banks should be charged only for the liquidity access. 
Importantly, the Reserve Bank will not be offering any credit protection on these assets and 
so the banks should be able to retain the compensation for holding these riskier assets. The 
Reserve  Bank  is  protected  as  it  provides  the  liquidity  to  an  institution  under  a  repo  with 
appropriate margining (see below).  
While at times like the present, liquidity can have considerable value, the Reserve Bank will 
not be varying the size of the fee through the cycle. Consequently, the facility is to be priced 
at a level that takes into account the value of liquidity in more normal conditions, as well as in 
stressed circumstances.  
From the history of the Reserve Bank’s own market operations, we can look at repo rates on 
some  of  the  eligible  securities  to  try  and  gauge  how  much  a  one  month  liquidity  premium 
might be worth. The answer is not very much in normal circumstances, generally less than 
10 basis points. Moreover, when you take into account the fact that to access the facility, an 
institution has to pay a penalty rate and, in most cases, with greater haircuts than previously 
applied, a “market-based” valuation from historical rates would imply a low fee.  
However, part of the point of the new liquidity regulations is to recognise that the market has 
underpriced liquidity in the past. Consequently, it is appropriate to levy a fee which is greater 
than implied by a long run of historical data. The net outcome is thus a weighted average of a 
                                                 
2  One complication in doing this calculation in Australia is that because government paper has been in short 
supply  for  many  years,  it  has  tended  to  trade  with  a  scarcity  premium.  This  widens  the  observable  spread 
between the  yield on government paper and the  yield on other assets in a  way that is not present in most 
other jurisdictions. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
relatively  low  liquidity  premium  in  normal  times  and  a  much  higher  liquidity  premium  in 
stressed times.  
In  determining  the  fee,  it  must  be  remembered  that  ADIs  will  not  only  have  the  option  of 
meeting their LCR requirements through the Reserve Bank’s liquidity facility, they will always 
have the option of meeting their LCR requirements through holding RBA obligations. This is 
because, as mentioned earlier, ES balances are also recognised as liquid assets.  
Within  the  Reserve  Bank’s  monetary  policy  framework,  the  supply  of  ES  balances  is 
effectively market-determined. That is, the Reserve Bank stands ready to supply whatever 
quantity of ES balances is necessary (against eligible collateral) to keep the cash rate trading 
at the Board’s target. In normal times, and even at times like the present, the demand for ES 
balances is very low. This is because the remuneration on ES balances is purposefully set at 
a “below-market” rate – 25 basis points below the cash rate target – in order to encourage 
banks to recycle their surplus balances.  
However,  in  an  environment  where  banks  need  to  obtain  more  liquid  assets,  there  is  the 
possibility that a liquid asset (one that is in every way risk-free) priced 25 basis points below 
the OIS curve may become more attractive. This would particularly be the case were the fee 
on  meeting  a  bank’s  LCR  requirement  through  non-liquid  assets  to  be  set  at  a  sufficiently 
high level so as to make ES balances appear reasonable value.  
While ES balances pay 25 basis points less than the cash rate, the cash market is not risk-
free; it is an unsecured interbank market. Consequently, a fee a little less than the 25 basis 
points has been deemed necessary to ensure banks did not have the incentive to meet the 
LCR  by  holding  unduly  large  amounts  of  ES  balances.  Beyond  the  problem  (discussed 
above) that such an outcome would present to the RBA in terms of what assets it would need 
to hold, this outcome would also significantly affect the ability to meet the cash rate target set 
by the Reserve Bank Board. That is, we do not want to impair the operational framework for 
monetary policy which has served us well for many years.  
If  the  banks  were  to  hold  large  ES  balances  with  the  RBA,  this  would  also  be  likely  to 
significantly impair the short-term interbank market in Australia, which is an important pricing 
reference for many other markets.  
As a result of these considerations, the RBA concluded that the fee needed to be set high 
enough to ensure banks had the appropriate incentives under the liquidity standard, but low 
enough to not generate unwarranted distortions in the domestic market.  
Interest rate on the facility 
Should a bank need to obtain liquidity under the facility, it will undertake a repo with the Bank 
using its eligible collateral and pay an interest rate on the repo of 25 basis points above the 
Reserve Bank Board’s target for the cash rate. This is the same as the current arrangements 
for  the  RBA’s  overnight  repo  facility.  This  25  basis  points  charge  will  be  in  addition  to  the 
ongoing access fee of 15 basis points.  
Eligible securities 
The  securities  that  a  bank  can  hold  to  access  the  CLF  are  the  same  as  those  which  are 
eligible  for  the  RBA’s  normal  market  operations.  In  addition  to  government  paper,  these 
securities  include  domestic  issues  by  supranationals  and  other  foreign  governments,  ADI-
issued  debt  securities  and  asset-backed  securities,  including  residential  mortgage-backed 
securities (RMBS).  
However  for  the  purposes  of  the  CLF,  the  RBA  will  also  allow  banks  to  present  certain 
related-party assets such as self-securitised RMBS. There are a number of reasons for this 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
decision,  but  the  primary  motivation  is  to  reduce  the  systemic  risk  of  excessive  cross-
holdings of bank-issued instruments.  
As  mentioned  earlier,  a  large  share  of  the  securities  on  issue  in  Australia  are  “inside”  the 
banking system. That is, they are securities issued by the banks themselves. The available 
pool  of  outside  assets  in  Australia  which  includes  securities  issued  by  supranationals  and 
corporates is small. Hence, the primary type of asset available in the market to the banking 
system to meet its liquidity needs is a security issued by another bank. In our judgement, and 
that of APRA’s, it would be undesirable for a bank to meet its liquidity needs by significantly 
increasing its exposure to the rest of the banking system. If a stressed situation was to arise 
at  one  bank,  the  increased  cross-holdings  could  rapidly  translate  this  to  other  banks. 
Moreover,  if  the  stressed  bank  was  to  meet  its  liquidity  needs  by  selling  its  holdings  of 
securities issued by other banks into the market, this would also serve as a possible source 
of contagion to the rest of the banking system.  
Thus to reduce the likelihood of systemic risk, a bank will be able to hold some share of its 
liquid  assets  in  the  form  of  self-securitised  mortgages.  There  is  a  trade-off  here  between 
systemic risk and reduced “market” liquidity of the bank’s asset holdings, but the bank will 
have access to liquidity from the RBA with these assets.  
In terms of the range of assets eligible for the CLF, the RBA reserves the right to broaden 
that range at any time, but will give 12 months’ notice of any decision to narrow the range. 
The latter condition will give banks adequate time to adjust their liquids holdings in response 
to any change.  
Margins 
At  the  same  time  as  the  RBA  released  the  details  of  its  CLF,  we  also  issued  a  revised 
schedule  of  margins  for  the  securities  that  are  eligible  in  our  domestic  market  operations. 
This revised schedule of margins will take effect on 1 February next year.  
The Reserve Bank applies margins to the collateral held under repo in its domestic market 
operations  in  order  to  protect  the  Bank  against  all  but  the  most  extreme  movements  in 
market prices, should its counterparty in the repo be unable to repay the repo.  
The margins are set to ensure that the Reserve Bank’s contingent risk is the same across all 
eligible securities. This implies that margins need to be higher on those securities with longer 
duration, greater illiquidity and greater credit risk.  
It  was  appropriate  to  revisit  the  Reserve  Bank’s  schedule  of  margins  in  light  of  the 
experience  of  recent  years  which  has  provided  some  indication  of  how  the  various  asset 
classes perform in stressed situations. Moreover, the margins are important in determining 
the amount of liquid assets a bank will need to obtain a given level of access to the CLF.  
In conducting the review, we examined the average daily yield movements across the range 
of  eligible  securities,  as  well  as  the  largest  daily  yield  movements.  We  also  compared  the 
margins set by the RBA with those in other jurisdictions. As a result of this review, we have 
made  a  number  of  changes.  The  principal  change  is  that  the  margins  on  unsecured  bank 
paper have been increased, with the margin increasing with time to maturity and the lower 
the credit rating. The RBA has also adjusted the eligibility criteria for unsecured bank paper. 
All senior debt securities with less than 12 months to maturity issued by ADIs with a public 
credit rating will be eligible. There will no longer be a requirement that an ADI hold an ES 
account with the Bank. For securities with longer than 12 months to maturity, the minimum 
credit rating required is BBB+.  
Margins  on  asset-backed  securities  were  maintained  at  10  per  cent.  For  self-securitised 
mortgages, and other private securities for which it is difficult to identify a timely market price, 
the securities will be valued at a price equal to 90 per cent of par, prior to the application of a 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
margin. Hence, for example, to obtain liquidity of $100 under the CLF, a bank will need to 
present a self-securitised RMBS with a value of $122.  
Conclusion 
I have provided some background to the decisions taken by the Reserve Bank around the 
application  of  the  new  Basel  liquidity  regime  in  Australia.  The  new  Basel  standards  are 
designed  to  ensure  that  the  banking  system  in  Australia  is  even  more  resilient  and  stable 
than it has been to date. While these reforms are not costless to comply with, the benefits of 
a stable banking system are considerably larger. Both ourselves and APRA will continue to 
work together to promote a strong and resilient financial system. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
