G Padmanabhan: Payment system issues and challenges 
Speech  by  Mr  G  Padmanabhan,  Executive  Director  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
Foundation Day – Catholic Syrian Bank, Thrissur, 26 November 2011. 
 Assistance rendered by S/Shri G Srinivas, K Sivaraman and Saswat Mahapatra gratefully acknowledged.  
Mr V.P. Iswardas, Managing Director & CEO, Catholic Syrian Bank (CSB), Mr Nandakumar, 
President, Thrissur Management Association, Mr Anantharaman and Mr Bobby Jose, Board 
members present here, other office bearers of the Thrissur Management Association, ladies 
and gentlemen. I deem it a privilege to be invited to speak on this important day in the bank’s 
history. It is a matter of pride to each one of you that the bank which had a modest beginning 
in November, 1920, is completing commendable 91 years of service and achievement.  
I have very fond memories of CSB, as this was the one of the private banks which had a 
presence in Thiruvananthapuram, which is my home town, as I was growing up. I must say 
the bank has grown from strength to strength, imbibing the enterprising spirit inherited from 
its  founding  fathers,  adapting  admirably  to  the  far-reaching  social,  political  and  economic 
changes  that  have  been  happening  around  us.  Today  it  has  a  client  base  of  more  than 
15 lakh customers. It established its first contact point with RBI in the year 1969, when it got 
the  status  of  a  Scheduled  Bank,  under  the  RBI  Act.  In  1972  it  came  out  of  its  traditional 
bastion  and  opened  its  first  branch  in  Chembur,  Mumbai.  The  bank  entered  the  field  of 
International Banking in 1975. Currently, I am told the bank has 364 branches spread across 
16 states. Of the 364 branches 242 are in Kerala and of this nearly 80% are in rural and semi 
urban areas. I am also informed that with the intention of making the right proposition to the 
right customer at the right time, tailor made banking products have been designed to cater to 
the specific banking needs of various sections of the society like Students, Women, Senior 
Citizens, Farmers etc. A bank which has customer focus, has to continuously endeavour to 
retain customer confidence in its capabilities and deliveries.  
When  I  was  extended  the  invitation,  I  was  told  that  it  is  customary  for  the  speaker  to  talk 
about any financial sector issue of topical interest. I thought it fit to flag certain current and 
emerging  issues  in  Payment  Systems.  It  is  important  to  appreciate  that  it  is  the  effective 
functioning  of  robust  payment  systems  that  reduced  the  severity  of  the  impact  of  the 
economic crisis and the shocks. I therefore wish to raise a few questions that straddle across 
the  various  dimensions  of  the  payment  systems  and  offer  comments  which  more  than 
providing answers would hopefully lead to a greater debate among stakeholders.  
1.  
Why so much ado about an “efficient payment system”? Are Indian payment 
systems efficient?  
The  importance  of  payment  and  settlement  systems  could  be  gauged  from  the  IMF 
publication “Central Banking Lessons from the Crisis” (May 27, 2010) which states that: 
“The  crisis  would  have  been  much  more  severe  had  central  banks  not  taken 
efforts to introduce robust payment and settlement systems, including for foreign 
exchange,  over  the  two  decades  ahead  of  the  crisis.  The  systemic  impact  of 
failure  of  a  financial  institution  depends  critically  on  the  robustness  of  the 
infrastructure  underpinning  those  markets  in  which  it  is  active.  Central  banks, 
which in many cases are engaged in oversight of these systems, should play an 
important  role  in  this  regard,  in  cooperation  with  securities  regulators  and 
supervisors of individual institutions”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The central bank interest in payment systems arises on account of critical roles played by an 
efficient  payment  system  with  respect  to  (i)  financial  stability;  (ii)  economic  efficiency; 
(iii) monetary policy transmission; and (iv) fiscal policy implementation.  
Financial  stability:  Generally,  any  strains  in  the  financial  system  are  likely  to  be  first 
reflected  in  the  payments  system,  with  settlements  being  affected  due  to  liquidity  issues 
faced  by  one  or  more  of  the  participants.  Due  to  the  interconnected  nature  of  payment 
systems,  such  disturbances  have  the  potential  to  transmit  themselves  to  other  financial 
institutions as well, leading to issues of financial stability.  
Let me illustrate this by drawing your attention to the fact that in some countries, the payment 
system  turnover  to  GDP  ratio  is  more  than  100.  The  significance  of  this  number  is  that  it 
means that the turnover in the payment system over a period of three days is equal to the 
GDP (of that particular nation). Therefore, any disturbance in the orderly functioning of the 
payments and settlement system could disrupt the smooth functioning of the economy, the 
markets, the financial market infrastructure and the participants themselves. 
As flagged earlier, the recent financial crisis demonstrated the importance of payment and 
settlement  systems.  The  smooth  and  efficient  functioning  of  the  payment  and  settlement 
infrastructure  enabled  the  market  participants  to  fulfil  their  settlement  obligations  on  time, 
even in the face of the Bear Sterns and Lehman Brothers Holding Inc. (Lehman) episodes, 
widespread counter party credit concerns in the latter part of 2008, and the generally strained 
financial markets over the past two years. 
Economic efficiency: The speed at which transfer of value is effected between economic 
entities has assumed greater significance over the years as economies grow and the level of 
economic activity increases leading to the payments system processing and settling a large 
volume and value of payments. An efficient payment system results in an increased velocity 
of circulation of money as a result of faster transfer of funds between economic entities. This 
in turn has a positive impact on economic growth as shown by economic theories. Studies by 
economists indicate that an economy can save 1–3% of its GDP in terms of both private and 
social  costs  if  it  is  able  to  increase  the  velocity  of  circulation  of  money  by  completely 
switching  to  electronic  payments.  An  efficient  payment  system  also  reduces  the  cost  of 
transactions  and  is  crucial  for  the  orderly  functioning  of  inter-bank,  money,  capital  and 
security markets. 
Monetary policy transmission: Another significant reason for the importance of Payment 
Systems is the role they play in efficiently transmitting monetary policy signals to the markets 
and economy as a whole. The monetary policy actions of the central bank influence either 
the  quantity  of  money  (i.e.  money  supply)  or  the  price  of  money  (i.e.  interest  rates  at  the 
short-end of the curve). Both these measures require a reliable large-value payment system 
with  same-day  (preferably  real-time  as  is  the  norm)  settlement.  The  effectiveness  of  any 
monetary  policy  measure  depends  to  a  large  extent  on  the  efficacy  and  soundness  of  the 
large-value payment system. Besides, a well functioning Payment System facilitates effective 
implementation  of  monetary  policy  by  supporting  accurate  and  precise  measurement  of 
liquidity positions of banks and monetary aggregates. 
Fiscal  policy  implementation:  Developments  in  Payment  Systems  have  a  bearing  on 
implementation  of  Fiscal  Policy.  The  speed  and  turnover  of  government  cash  inflows  and 
outflows are directly impacted by the efficiency of Payment Systems. Payment System also 
plays a critical role in lending and borrowing activities of Government.  
Now  let  me  turn  to  the  obvious  question,  how  does  our  Payment  system  fare  in  terms  of 
efficiency?  Let  me  start  with  the  Reserve  Bank’s  stated  goals  towards  payment  systems 
which  are  laid  down  in  the  Vision  document  for  Payment  System  2009–12.  These  are  to 
ensure  that  all  the  payment  and  settlement  systems  operating  in  the  country  are  “safe, 
secure, sound, efficient, accessible and authorised”. Efficiency of payment systems is also 
determined by other factors such as technology adoption, innovation, market structure, and 
competitive conditions. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
RBI  has  taken  a  number  of  initiatives  to  put  in  place  an  efficient  payment  and  settlement 
infrastructure in the country covering both the retail and large-value payments. In the retail 
arena,  RBI’s  pioneering  efforts  were  the  implementation  of  MICR  technology  (leading  to 
reduction  in  the  cheque  clearing  cycles  to  a  T+1),  implementation  of  electronic  payment 
systems  such  as  ECS (which  has morphed  into  local  ECS,  RECS  and  NECS)  and  NEFT. 
Speed clearing and Express Cheque Clearing system (ECCS), initiatives at clearing houses 
have further enhanced the efficiency of the cheque clearing operations in the country. The 
implementation of Cheque Truncation system is a continuation of this effort. CTS has now 
been implemented in New Delhi and Chennai. Grid based CTS when rolled out completely 
will centralise the entire cheque clearing in the country in 4–6 grids. 
Focus on retail electronic payments has been an ongoing endeavour of the Reserve Bank 
since  the  mid  90’s.  In  order  to  provide  near-to-real-time  funds  transfer  facility  to  retail 
customers,  as  also  to  cater  to  the  stock  market  timings,  11  batch  settlements  have  been 
provided  under  NEFT.  The  NEFT  system  operates  from  9.00  a.m.  to  7.00  p.m.  providing 
hourly  settlements  on  week  days  and  5  settlements  on  Saturday.  These  measures  have 
further improved the efficiency of the system. It is one of its kind in the world which provides 
a  positive  acknowledgement  to  the  originator  regarding  credit  to  the  beneficiary  customer 
account. The RTGS introduced in 2004 now handles around 2 lakh transactions per day. All 
critical and wholesale financial market settlements now take place in RTGS.  
Realising the growing importance of card payments in the country, Reserve Bank has been 
engaged in enhancing the safety and security of card transactions. After securing all card not 
present  transactions  through  implementation  of  an  additional  factor  of  authentication,  the 
focus is now towards securing card present transactions. A definite timeframe and roadmap 
for securing all card present transaction through technology upgrade, infrastructure upgrade, 
implementation of EVM (chip and pin cards) etc, has been mandated.  
Other important measures relating to efficiency include: (i) the creation of National Financial 
Switch which have made the ATM network into a national infrastructure, enhancing customer 
convenience  and  reach;  (ii)  Enabling  straight  through  processing  in  electronic  payments, 
credit  is  now  afforded  based  only  on  the  account  number  of  the  beneficiary  which  has 
significantly improved the efficiency in operations.  
Efficiency  when  measured  as  a  technical  measure  of  production,  viz.,  the  number  of 
payments  that  can  be  processed  in  an  hour  holds  up  very  well  in  the  Indian  context  as 
evidenced by the increase in volumes of transactions being processed in various payment 
systems. The efficiency has also increased on account of the banks implementing the core 
banking solution. This is evident in the case  of all payment systems viz., the paper based 
(MICR  and  CTS)  system;  the  retails  electronic  payment  products  (NEFT,  variants  of  ECS) 
and the large value payment system-RTGS.  
Should we be mandating upper limits for paper based transactions? 
2.  
We have already mandated such threshold limits by stipulating that with effect from August 1, 
2008 payments above Rs.10 lakhs by all RBI regulated entities in the RBI regulated markets 
have to be routed through electronic payment systems only (vide our circular DPSS No. 2096 
/ 04.04.007 / 2007-2008 dated June 20, 2008). 
Another area where we have already implemented such a threshold, albeit indirectly, was the 
closure  of  inter-bank  clearing  as  well  as  high  value  clearing  which  essentially  catered  to 
cheque payments above Rs.1 lakh. This incentivised the use of electronic modes (RTGS / 
NEFT)  which  were  faster  and  safer,  as  opposed  to  the  normal  cheque  clearing  process, 
which takes a relatively longer time.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Present position of paper based instruments 
Based on the data of cheques processed in the four metro cities, out of an average of around 
235 lakh cheques processed each month, 8.6% are of the value of Rs.1.00 lakh and above. 
Cheques of over Rs 10 lakh in value accounted for 5.9%. 
International scenario 
South Africa: The maximum value payable per cheque is currently set at R5 000 000– (Five 
Million Rand/Rs.3.05Crore). In instances where cheques for higher values are issued that will 
be cleared manually between the banks and the beneficiary’s accounts will only be credited 
on completion of this process. 
Canada:  Canada  has  introduced  a  $25  million  ceiling  for  cheques,  bank  drafts  and  other 
paper-based items to be processed through Canada’s clearing system, effective February 3, 
2003. The objective of their initiative is to ensure certainty of settlement which enhances the 
safety and stability of the Canadian payments system, and reduces risks for businesses and 
other organizations involved in large value transactions. 
Nigeria: Central Bank of Nigeria has set a maximum limit on cheque payment at N10 million 
with effect from January 1, 2010. Any payment value exceeding N10 million should be made 
through the e-payment mode such as the Central Bank Inter-Bank Funds Transfer System 
(CIFTS  i.e.  RTGS)  and  Nigeria  Inter-Bank  Settlement  System  Electronic  Fund  Transfer 
(NEFT) from that date. The maximum limit serves as a risk reduction measure in the clearing 
and settlement arrangement in line with international best practice. To support this initiative, 
deposit  money  banks  are 
the 
implementation procedure. 
Kenya:  The  limit  set  for  value  capping  is  Kshs  1million,  USD  35,000  EUR  30,000  and 
GBP 15,000 and above that will NOT be processed through the Nairobi Automated Clearing 
House  from  1st  October  2009.  Customers  can  still  write  cheques  of  above  the  limit  BUT 
his/her bank will take them through a process called collection meaning that payment rests 
with the paying bank, subject to a maximum period of 21 working days.  
Tanzania: With effect from March 1 2009, cheques with value of above TZS 10 Million are 
not to be accepted for processing in the clearing houses. Payments exceeding the limit shall 
be  processed  through  the  Tanzania  Interbank  Settlement  System  (TISS).  However, 
exception was made in the case of Government cheques.  
Namibia:  Any  cheque  payment  made  in  excess  of  N$500,000  are  not  to  be  accepted  by 
banking institutions after 10 June 2010. 
to  properly  educate 
their  customers  on 
implored 
Will we ever be able to completely switch over to an electronic payment regime? 
Doing away with cash: It would be utopian to assume that we can achieve a cashless India 
unless  we  have  a  well-established  infrastructure  for  acceptance  of  alternative  means  of 
making  payments  which  is  accessible,  safe  and  easily  operable  by  each  citizen.  It  is  also 
necessary to remember that in India only 55% of the population has bank accounts and it is 
hard to imagine a cashless society with the exclusion of a vast population from the formal 
financial system. Even if we achieve total financial inclusion, we also have to recognize that 
habits die hard. 
At the same time, we are aware of the costs involved in the management of currency and the 
menace  of  fake  notes,  which  makes  it  imperative  to  take  measures  to  move  towards 
electronic  modes  of  payment  at  a  decent  pace.  In  the  last  decade  and  more,  RBI  has 
introduced various products like the NEFT, ECS, etc. which enable secure and cost effective 
means of making payments. CBS in banks has enhanced the use of these products which 
are being increasingly used today. But financial inclusion is key to have a major reduction in 
the use of cash in our society.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Can usage of cheques be contained? 
The  electronic  products  referred  to  above  do  offer  a  very  good  and  efficient  alternative  to 
cheques.  But  use  of  cheques  continues  to  be  predominant  in  the  payment  systems  even 
today. Some probable reasons are –  
Comfort factor: Cheques as a mode of payment has been in vogue for a very long time and 
customers,  even  the  illiterate  population,  derive  a  reasonable  level  of  comfort  in  this 
arrangement.  The  same  level  of  comfort  is  not  experienced  by  a  vast  majority  of  bank 
customers  in  the  electronic  mode.  As  an  illustration,  it  is  easy  to  draw  and  hand  over  a 
cheque to a person as compared to visiting the bank branch to initiate a NEFT transaction. 
Not everyone has the facility or ability to initiate a money transfer transactions through net 
banking. 
Cheques offer a means to make post-dated payments which is of significance to the parties 
in  certain  transactions.  Though  ECS/NECS  are  effectively  payment  instructions  to  be 
executed at a future date, these products are intended for repetitive payments. Presently, the 
electronic payments in the country, do not provide the facility of post-dated payment there 
could be exceptions though in the form of standing instructions. Perhaps it is time to consider 
the feasibility of developing an e-cheque system. 
Cost factor: A major factor which may go against the principle of empowering the customer 
(to  move  away  from  cash)  would  be  the  charges  (ad-valorem)  which  are  applicable  for 
electronic payments, whereas cheque payments normally do not entail any charges for the 
customers. Introduction of charges for cheque-based transactions on the lines for electronic 
payments may be an alternative but difficult to justify.  
Efficiency of the payment system may not always be a factor: While electronic mode of 
payment  is  efficient,  how  many  of  us  really  care  whether  a  credit,  at  least  the  relatively 
smaller  amounts,  reaches  us  in  one  hour  or  one  day?  Even  when  we  receive  a  cheque 
payment, not all of us are particular in depositing the same with the bank. 
Is it the right time to reduce the threshold for cheques? How should this be 
implemented?  
Today, payments in excess of Rs. 10.00 lakh by RBI regulated entities are expected to be 
made  only  through  electronic  mode.  As  banking  is  well  developed  in  the  metro  cities,  we 
need to consider restricting use of cheques of the value of Rs. 1.00 lakh in the local clearing 
at  these  centres.  However,  this  measure  has  to  be  applied  uniformly  to  all  participants, 
including Government departments. 
3.  
Are payment systems operated by non-bank entities a necessary reality for 
achieving FI in India? 
What is financial inclusion?  
In  our  view  financial  inclusion  is  the  process  of  ensuring  access  to  appropriate  financial 
products and services needed by all sections of the society in general and vulnerable groups 
such as weaker sections and low income groups in particular, at an affordable cost in a fair 
and transparent manner by regulated mainstream institutional players.  
Seen in the above context, non-bank entities may not be able to offer a range of financial 
products. In particular, they cannot offer basic banking services, which are important from the 
point  of  view  of  financial  inclusion.  However,  non-banks  have  the  potential  to  play  an 
important role in the FI process in India though not necessarily as payment system operators 
but as participants in the systems.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Why has India opted for a bank-led model for mobile payments?  
It is incorrect to say that non-banks have not been allowed entry into the mobile payments 
space in India. The 17 non-banks authorised to issue prepaid payment instruments include a 
mobile  phone  company,  an  MSP  and  a  few  others  who  issue  semi-closed  prepaid  mobile 
wallets.  RBI  has  opted  for  a  bank-led  model  of  mobile  banking.  This  was  a  conscious 
decision taken by the RBI and endorsed by a high level Inter Ministerial Group constituted by 
the Government of India last year. The MSP-led model is perhaps working fine in Kenya and 
Philippines. We also understand that this model is being adopted in certain other countries 
like  Maldives.  However,  each  country  has  its  own  needs,  concerns  and  constraints  and 
India’s  decision  to  opt  for  an  exclusive  bank-led  model  of  mobile  banking  is  based  on  the 
following –  
1. 
The mobile banking services provided by Telcos in Kenya, South Africa, Philippines 
are  e-money  products.  The  e-money  rules  of  these  countries  permit,  cash 
withdrawal/deposit  and  funds  transfer  from  e-money  products  and  these  are  not 
treated  as  deposit  products.  No  interest  is  payable  on  the  amounts  held  in  these 
accounts.  The  equivalent  in  India  would  be  the  “open  system  prepaid  payment 
instruments”, which is akin to acceptance of demand deposit, and non-banks are not 
permitted to accept deposits for maturity less than one year. 
M-PESA in Kenya provides remittance services. The success of the system can be 
attributed  to  the  absence  of  competition.  The  presence  of  a  single  dominant 
operator and the absence of a cost effective remittance channel have facilitated the 
fast adoption of this product in Kenya. However, the situation in India is different with 
the presence of nearly 8–10 key players in this space with the competition playing a 
key role. Facilitating a model like M-PESA in India would require the setting up of a 
clearing  and  settlement  arrangement  for  such  non-bank  operators.  Such  clearing 
and settlement arrangements could have systemic implications.  
Certain customer service issues (viz. Non-availability of funds at the paying outlet, 
non-delivery/delayed  delivery  of  messages)  are  associated  with  the  MSP  models. 
Any model of mobile banking in India should ab initio address customer service and 
customer  protection  issues  to  enhance  the  confidence  level  of  customers  and 
ensure sustained credibility of the model. 
Last but not the least, money laundering is a matter of concern in India. Person-to-
person remittance is a high risk activity from the point of view of money laundering, 
and  the  safety  and  security  of  the  transactions.  The  customer  identification 
processes followed in case of prepaid customers are lax as the MSPs consider this 
as low risk from their financial stand point. Given the large number of  such cards 
being issued and the number of outlets through which they are issued, it is difficult to 
contain the risk of anonymity in a MSP led model unless the system is strengthened 
effectively. Although this process has commenced, it has some distance to go to be 
deemed as robust. 
As  regards  the  problems  of  the  migrant  population,  we  have  recently  permitted 
domestic money transfer with the requirement of a bank account at only one end. 
This is expected to meet the remittance requirements of the migrant population in a 
significant way. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
Does it mean that banks can do without the support of the mobile companies in their 
efforts towards financial inclusion? 
As mentioned in the beginning, non-bank entities, particularly the MSPs have an important 
role  in  the  FI  process.  With  an  extensive  network  of  retail  outlets  even  in  remote  places 
where  there  is  no  bank  branch,  Mobile  Operators  can  partner  with  banks  to  facilitate  the 
reach  of  mobile  banking  across  the  country.  However,  their  role  is  primarily  of  a  service 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
provider facilitating quick transmission of messages across their net work while that of the 
banks  is  to  provide  banking  services  to  the  people.  The  roles  of  banks  and  the  mobile 
operators are to that extent well delineated and the participants should recognize the same. 
RBI  has  issued  revised  guidelines enabling  banks  to  engage  the  services  of  profit  making 
companies  as  business  correspondents  for  promoting  financial  inclusion  in  a  big  way.  We 
believe  that  the  telcos  would  take  this  opportunity  to  work  with  the  banks  as  business 
correspondents for ensuring that mobile banking reaches the last mile in view of its spread 
and usage. In fact, a few major MSPs have already initiated tie-ups with banks which should 
give a fillip both to mobile banking and the measures towards financial inclusion. A healthy 
partnership between banks and MSPs will certainly augur well for the FI process. Let me also 
state that we have no issues with non-banks joining the IMPS as a member and it is a call 
which the NPCI has to take. However, we would like to examine the model once finalised to 
satisfy ourselves that there are no regulatory concerns. 
Are technology driven payment systems more risky? 
4.  
Any payment system is bound to have risks associated with the process and it is necessary 
that such risks are anticipated, identified and suitably addressed to ensure that the system is 
secure. Electronic payment systems are no exception though the risk perception, the sources 
of risks and the impact of exposure could be relatively high. 
Won’t the average customer who is not tech savvy be deterred from doing electronic 
banking in the light of the above threats, which only grow in variety in times to come?  
A person need not be  tech savvy,  in its true sense, to do his payment transactions in the 
electronic mode. In fact, in the Sheikhpura district of Bihar, a good number of self employed 
women are using mobile banking, thanks to the initiatives of an NGO. The electronic mode of 
payment offers a very secure, convenient and speedy means of doing payment transactions. 
He needs to take minimum precautions like not sharing his personal information, particularly 
his account details and password, with anyone, changing his password periodically, checking 
the status of his accounts regularly, heeding to any online alerts from his bank etc. 
Who is accountable in case of a security breach in an electronic payment 
environment?  
This would depend on the place and mode of the breach. For example, when a customer 
uses an ATM or a PoS terminal, he assumes that he undertakes his transaction in a secure 
manner. If a skimming device has been planted at the ATM which results in the card data 
being stolen and misused later, the bank or service provider which manages the ATM or the 
PoS  terminal  should  accept  the  responsibility  and  make  good  the  losses.  The  onus  of 
proving  the  customer’s  liability  in  such  cases  should  squarely  rest  on  the  bank/service 
provider. 
In the case of online/phone banking transactions, the possibilities of fraud arise generally on 
account of lapses on the part of the customer in exposing his system to the risks mentioned 
earlier which may result in theft of his identity, account details etc.  
How has the Reserve Bank of India sought to address the risks faced by customers 
using electronic payments?  
For online credit/debit card transactions, which are essentially card-not-present transactions, 
RBI had mandated a second factor authentication based on information not present on the 
cards with effect from August, 2009. This measure enhanced the confidence of customers as 
evidenced  by  the  spurt  in  online  transactions  in  the  recent  past.  The  second  factor  of 
authentication  has  been  mandated  for  Interactive  Voice  Response  (IVR)  transactions  from 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
February 2011 and for the residual transactions ( Mail Order Telephone Order transactions, 
hotel bookings etc.) with effect from May 2012. 
RBI  has  also  mandated  issue  of  online  alerts  to  customers  for  all  card  transactions 
irrespective of the value of the transaction or the channel used. This measure will at least 
help a customer to remedial action to prevent further misuse of his card. 
Let me now turn to my last question.  
Where do I wish to see the Indian payment system five years hence? 
5.  
Let  me  start  with  the  milestones  we  have  set  in  the  payment  systems  vision  document 
(2009–2012). The list includes: 
(i)  
(ii) 
(iii) 
Implementing a new and feature rich RTGS system 
A domestic card scheme for the country 
Redesigning ECS to function as a true Automated Clearing House (ACH) for 
bulk transactions 
We are on track to achieving the milestones. What next? 
First we need to ensure the transition from cash dominant economy to predominantly non-
cash  dominant  economy.  Further,  non  cash  transactions  should  be  predominantly  in 
electronic mode. 
Second  payment  systems  need  to  reach  out  to  unbanked  population.  Payment  system 
should achieve a certain degree of ubiquity in the sense access to payment systems should 
be simple, easy, convenient, cost effective for the “aam admi”. 
Third  Indian  payment  systems  need  to  continuously  innovate  products,  channels  and 
business models. Technology should facilitate the convergence of payment products.  
Fourth  recent  surveys  worldwide  indicate  mobile  and  NFC  are  the  future  payment  trends. 
Given the huge potential for both mobile and NFC as the future payment products, we should 
see the adoption and integration of these into our payment systems.  
Fifth, our payment systems should be able to provide a low cost solution to bring government 
payments , e-commerce, etc, into its fold. 
Sixth, safety and security of payment systems instil public confidence. Our payment systems 
should meet the emerging challenge of frauds and be the trend setter for security 
I once again felicitate the CSB Ltd on this momentous day. 
Thank you. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
