Mario Draghi: Interview with the Financial Times 
Interview  with  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  in  the  Financial 
Times,  conducted  by  Messrs  Lionel  Barber  and  Ralph  Atkins  on  14  December  2011  in 
Frankfurt, and published on 19 December 2011. 
 Financial Times: We are now more than four years into the financial crisis. What 
lessons would you draw so far? What has gone right and what has gone wrong? 
Mario  Draghi:  We  have  to  distinguish  two  stages.  First  was  the  financial  crisis,  with  its 
repercussions  for  the  real  economy.  I  think  we  learnt  the  lessons  that  we  need  a  more 
resilient financial system, a system where we would have less debt and more capital. There 
has  been  substantial  progress  in  designing  new  regulatory  policies  and  some  progress  in 
implementing this new design.  
The second stage of the crisis is really a combination of, I would say, a challenging political 
phase,  where  euro  area  leaders  are  reshaping  what  I  called  the  fiscal  “compact,”  and  a 
situation  where  banks  and  countries,  face  serious  funding  constraints.  These  challenging 
funding  conditions  are  now  producing  a  credit  tightening  and  have  certainly  increased  the 
downside risks for the euro area economy. 
Action is proceeding on two fronts. At last week’s European Union summit you saw a first 
step towards fiscal rules that are not only more binding, but actually are of a different nature. 
They would be binding ex ante, which is an entirely new quality, and written into the primary 
legislations of the member states.  
The second line of action is a set of meaningful, significant decisions taken by the ECB last 
week.  We  cut  the  main  interest  rate  by  25  basis  points.  We  announced  two  long-term 
refinancing operations, which for the first time will last three years. We halved the minimum 
reserve ratio from 2 per cent to 1 per cent. We broadened collateral eligibility rules. Finally, 
the  ECB  governing  council  agreed  that  the  ECB  would  act  as  an  agent  for  the  European 
Financial Stability Facility (EFSF).  
Will the three-year refinancing operations give banks an incentive to buy “periphery” 
eurozone bonds? 
Not  necessarily.  Of  course  banks  also  have  capital  difficulties,  and  these  measures  don’t 
necessarily help them on that side. The objective is to ease the funding pressures that banks 
are experiencing. They will then decide what the best use of these funds is. One aspiration is 
to  have  them  financing  the  real  economy,  especially  small  and  medium  sized  enterprises 
(SMEs). What we are observing is that small and medium sized banks are the ones having 
the  biggest  funding  difficulties,  and  they  are  generally  the  ones  who  provide  most  of  the 
financing for the SMEs. And SMEs account for about 70 per cent of employment in the euro 
area’s corporate sector.  
Is this Europe’s version of “quantitative easing”? 
Each jurisdiction has not only its own rules, but also its own vocabulary. We call them non-
standard  measures.  They  are  certainly  unprecedented.  But  the  reliance  on  the  banking 
channel falls squarely in our mandate, which is geared towards price stability in the medium 
term  and  bound  by  the  prohibition  of  monetary  financing  [central  bank  funding  of 
governments]. 
Coming  back  to  what  banks  are  going  to  do  with  this  money:  we  don’t  know  exactly.  The 
important thing was to relax the funding pressures. Banks will decide in total independence 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
what  they  want  to  do,  depending  on  what  is  the  best  risk  /  return  combination  for  their 
businesses. One of the things that they may do is to buy sovereign bonds. But it is just one. 
And it is obviously not at all an equivalent to the ECB stepping-up bond buying. 
Do you expect, in the next six months, another round of bank recapitalisations and, in 
some cases, nationalisation? 
Last  week,  we  had  the  results  of  the  European  Banking  Authority  (EBA)  “stress  tests” 
exercise. But ideally, the sequence ought to have been different: We should have had the 
EFSF in place first. This would have had certainly a positive impact on sovereign bonds, and 
therefore a positive impact on the capital positions of the banks with sovereign bonds in their 
balance sheet. So the ideal sequencing would have been to have the recapitalisation of the 
banks after EFSF had been in place and had been tested. 
In fact, it was done the other way round, so the capital needs identified by the EBA exercise 
reflect stressed bond market conditions. That may exert pressure on banks to achieve better 
capital ratios by simply de-leveraging. 
De-leveraging  means  two  things;  selling  assets  and/or  reducing  lending.  In  the  present 
business  cycle  conditions,  I  think  the  second  option  is  by  far  the  worst.  I  understand 
regulators have recommended to their banks that they shouldn’t go this way, so let’s hope 
they follow this advice. 
Couldn’t somebody just say to the EBA, look, just hold off now, this is completely 
unhelpful?  
I  think  the  press  statement  by  EBA  somehow  hints  at  that,  because  they  say  that  there 
wouldn’t be another exercise next year. 
To  be  fair  to  EBA,  the  shape  of  the  exercise  was  decided  at  a  time  when  the  biggest 
economic threat seemed to be the banking system’s lack of credibility. People feared banks’ 
balance  sheets  concealed  fragilities  that  in  the  end  would  strain  the  economies.  So  they 
started  this  exercise  thinking  that,  being  transparent,  and  marking-to-market  sovereign 
bonds, would strengthen the credibility of the banking system and reduce risk premia. At the 
end, it did not work that way because of the sequencing. But I wouldn’t say it’s EBA’s fault. 
The big point here though is, at least the world in 2011, has fundamentally changed, if 
not for the last two years, where a position where equities would be seen as more 
risky than government bonds is now in reverse…. 
The  big  change  is  that  assets  which  were  considered  absolutely  safe  are  now  viewed  as 
potentially unsafe. We have to ask what can be done to restore confidence. I would say there 
are at least four answers. 
The first lies with national economic policies, because this crisis and this loss of confidence 
started from budgets that had got completely out of control. 
The second answer is that we have to restore fiscal discipline in the euro area, and this is in 
a sense what last week’s EU summit started, with the redesign of the fiscal compact. 
However, we are in a situation where premia for these risks are overshot. When you have 
this high volatility – like we had after Lehman – you have an increase in the counterparty risk. 
In the worst case, you can have accidents and even if you don’t have accidents, you have a 
much reduced economic activity because people become exceedingly risk averse. 
So  the  third  answer  to  this  is  to  have  a  firewall  in  place  which  is  fully  equipped  and 
operational. And that was meant to be provided by the EFSF.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The fourth answer is to again ask: why are we in this situation. Part of this had to do with 
fiscal  discipline,  but  the  other  part  was  the  lack  of  growth.  Countries  have  to  undergo 
significant structural reforms that would revamp growth.  
And the fifth answer is that the idea of introducing private sector involvement (PSI) in 
eurozone bail-outs was, in retrospect, a mistake?  
The  ideal  sequencing  would  have  been  to  first  have  a  firewall  in  place,  then  do  the 
recapitalisation of the banks, and only afterwards decide whether you need to have PSI. This 
would have allowed managing stressed sovereign conditions in an orderly way. This was not 
done. Neither the EFSF was in place, nor were banks recapitalised, before people started 
suggesting  PSI.  It  was  like  letting  a  bank  fail  without  having  a  proper  mechanism  for 
managing this failure, as it had happened with Lehman.  
Now, to be fair again, one has to address another side of this. The lack of fiscal discipline by 
certain  countries  was  perceived  by  other  countries  as  a  breach  of  the  trust  that  should 
underlie the euro. And so PSI was a political answer given with a view to regaining the trust 
of these countries’ citizens.  
Coming to the fiscal pact, what is your answer to those who say there is excessive 
concentration on budgetary rigour at the expense of competitiveness and growth and 
that actually what is being created is a “stagnation and austerity union”?  
The answer is that they are right and wrong at the same time. They are right because there 
can’t  be  any  sustainable  economy  without  growth  and  competitiveness  and  job  creation. 
They are wrong if they think that there is a trade-off between the two. There’s no trade-off 
between  fiscal  austerity,  and  growth  and  competitiveness.  I  would  not  dispute  that  fiscal 
consolidation leads to a contraction in the short run, but then you have to ask yourself: what 
can you do to mitigate this.  
Improvement  in  budgetary  positions  should  elicit  some  positive  market  response,  lower 
spreads  and  lower  cost  of  credit.  But  two  further  conditions  have  to  be  satisfied: 
Implementation at national level of the structural reforms needed to enhance growth and jobs 
creation.  And  finally,  it  is  necessary  to  have  the  right  euro  area  design,  implementing  the 
fiscal compact, so that the confidence is fully restored. Austerity by one single country and 
nothing else is not enough to regain confidence of the markets – as we are seeing today.  
Consolidation must also go hand in hand with structural reforms. Each country has its own 
path  that  they  should  undertake.  For  some,  the  situation  would  not  be  sustainable  even  if 
they  were  outside  the  euro  and  were  to  devalue  their  currency.  That  would  give  only  a 
temporary respite – and higher inflation, of course.  
But that was part of the answer in the early 1990s in Italy – it did have an exchange 
rate adjustment.  
If you take that as an example, remember there was no IMF around, there was no EFSF and 
gross [government bond] issuance in 1992 was a multiple of the figures that we see today. 
It’s true that Italy moved the exchange rate, but this cuts both ways. It brought a temporary 
respite  to  the  economy,  so  that  exports  could  grow,  but  it  also  widened  sovereign  bond 
spreads because exchange rate risk came on top of sovereign risk. Three or four years down 
the  road  Italy  still  had  something  like  600  basis  point  spread  with  respect  to  the  German 
bund. Furthermore, the effect of the devaluation would have been only temporary without the 
structural reforms (abolition of indexation among others) that followed. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
But these austerity programmes are very harsh. Don’t think that some countries are 
really in effect in a debtor’s prison? 
Do you see any alternative? 
They could leave the eurozone?  
But as I said before, this wouldn’t help. Leaving the euro area, devaluing your currency, you 
create a big inflation, and at the end of that road, the country would have to undertake the 
same reforms that were due to begin with, but in a much weaker position.  
But maybe it would be the best thing for the rest of the eurozone? 
Well, then you would have a substantial breach of the existing treaty. And when one starts 
with this you never know how it ends really.  
You said earlier that it would have been far better if the EFSF had have been in place. 
So where are we on creating this firewall – what size of bazooka are we talking about? 
One  first  observation  is  that  the  delay  in  making  the  EFSF  operational  has  increased  the 
resources  necessary  to  stabilising  markets.  Why?  Because  anything  that  affects  credibility 
has an immediate effect on the markets. A process that is fast, credible and robust needs 
less resources.  
It sounds like you’re a bit disappointed then with the outcome of last week’s summit 
then? 
Actually no, because there was confirmation of previous figures on the EFSF’s resources – 
and of an additional €200bn that could be provided by the International Monetary Fund. What 
was  also  overlooked  by  many  is  that  the  date  for  a  first  assessment  of  the  adequacy  of 
resources has been brought forward to March 2012 – in just three months’ time, when the 
leaders  ask  themselves  whether  the  resources  for  the  firewall  will  be  adequate.  In  the 
meantime, the ECB acting as an agent will make the EFSF operational. Important was also 
the  commitment  to  clearly  restrict  the  PSI  to  IMF  practices,  which  should  reassure  the 
investors. 
When do you think the EFSF will be operational? 
Our aim is to be ready to provide agency functions in January next year.  
But can we assume that the idea floated in October of leveraging the EFSF is not 
actually going to happen? And that bringing in other sovereign wealth funds, Chinese, 
all this was overpriced. 
No,  I  think  it  is  premature  and  probably  wrong  to  proclaim  the  EFSF  dead.  Furthermore  I 
think that if one can show its usefulness in its present size, the argument for its enlargement 
would be much stronger. 
What do you say to those who say the solution is to have a very big fire wall and 
ultimately put the ECB behind it, because that is the only thing which will tame the 
markets? 
People have to accept that we have to and always will act in accordance with our mandate 
and within our legal foundations.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
But if you look at the wording of the treaty, there is nothing that sets a limit on how 
many government bonds you buy…. 
We have to act within the Treaty. In general, there must be a system where the citizens will 
go back to trusting each other and where governments are trusted on fiscal discipline and 
structural reforms.  
Once the firewall is in place with the EFSF, perhaps as soon as the beginning of next 
year, might you actually stop the SMP (securities market programme)?  
We have not discussed a precise scenario for the SMP. As I often said, the SMP is neither 
eternal nor infinite. 
Let’s not also forget that the SMP was initiated with the view to reactivating monetary policy 
transmission  channels.  So  as  long  as  we  see  that  these  channels  are  seriously  impaired, 
then the SMP is justified.  
Arguably, the monetary transmission channels are more impaired than ever before, if 
you look at interest rates in Greece or Italy compared with Germany? 
The cost of credit is bound to differ because it’s geared to some extent not on our short-term 
policy rate but on sovereign spreads.  
Would the ECB consider putting a limit on yields or spreads, or would that violate the 
treaty in your view? 
Sovereign spreads have mostly to do with the sovereigns and with the nature of the compact 
between  them.  It  is  in  this  area  that  progress  is  ongoing.  Monetary  policy  cannot  do 
everything.  
But if the economic situation deteriorated, would you be prepared to embark on 
“quantitative easing” in the style of the US Federal Reserve or Bank of England, in 
terms of large-scale government bond purchases to support economic growth? 
The important thing is to restore the trust of the people – citizens as well as investors – in our 
continent. We won’t achieve that by destroying the credibility of the ECB. This is really, in a 
sense, the undertone of all our conversation today.  
What will be the effect of the British staying out of Europe’s fiscal compact, and is 
there in your view a risk to the City of London? 
The UK certainly has shown a capacity to undertake a fiscal correction of an extraordinary 
size. My more general reaction to all this is that it’s sad. I think the UK needs Europe and 
Europe needs the UK. There’s a lot that can be learnt from both sides.  
The UK has taken legal action against the ECB [over the location of financial market 
clearing houses]… 
I can’t comment on that.  
What are you expectations for global growth next year? 
You  could  have  a  significant  slowdown  in  several  parts  of  the  world.  Global  growth  is 
decelerating, and uncertainty has risen. At the same time, we have laid a lot of groundwork 
for a better functioning of economic union in the future and we should draw confidence from 
that.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
