Mr.  Stals  elucidates  monetary  policy  objectives  in  South  Africa  in  the
environment of financial globalisation   Address by the Governor of the Reserve Bank of South
Africa, Mr. C. Stals, at the Monthly Meeting of the Bank for International Settlements in Basle on
11/5/98.
1.  Background
Major  political  and  social  reforms  in  South  Africa  in  recent  years  created  new
expectations, and many demands are being made on the Government for the social upliftment of
the people. In defining its macroeconomic strategy, the South African Government first produced
a  Reconstruction  and  Development  Programme  (RDP)  in  1994  in  which  legitimate  needs
were  identified.  The  total  cost  of  implementation  of  the  RDP,  however,  as  could  have  been
expected,  by  far  exceeded  what  was  affordable.  This  was  confirmed  by  the  publication  in
mid-1996  of  a  Macroeconomic  Strategy  for  Growth,  Employment  and  Redistribution
(GEAR),  which  concentrated  more  on  the  supply-side  of  the  economy.  GEAR  provided  a
programme for macro-economic restructuring that is intended to raise the growth potential of the
country over a five-year period from 3 to 4 per cent to 6 per cent per annum.
In  the  Government’s  macroeconomic  strategy,  monetary  policy  was  tasked  with
the  responsibility  of  maintaining  overall  financial  stability,  or  of  protecting  the  value  of  the
currency. It was assumed that the objectives of neither the RDP nor GEAR would be attainable
unless overall financial stability is maintained.
The  instruction  to  the  Reserve  Bank  to  secure  financial  stability  also  appears  in
the South African Reserve Bank Act, and was recently written into the new Constitution of the
Republic of South Africa. In terms of Section 224(1) of the Constitution:
“The primary object of the South African Reserve Bank is to protect
the value of the currency in the interest of balanced and sustainable
economic growth in the Republic”.
The  Constitution  also  provides  for  the  protection  of  the  independence  of  the
Reserve Bank:
“224(2)  The South African Reserve Bank, in pursuit of its primary
object,  must  perform  its  functions  independently  and  without  fear,
favour or prejudice, but there must be regular consultation between
the Bank and the Cabinet member responsible for national financial
matters”.
The macroeconomic strategy of the Government, and particularly the GEAR part
of  it,  is  often  criticised  and  there  are  strong  pressures,  emanating  mainly  from  labour
organisations,  for  the  total  rejection  of  this  programme.  The  disciplined  monetary  policies
applied in terms of the above mandates from the Government are also often denounced by these
pressure groups. The Reserve Bank is from time to time castigated for not following a policy that
will provide more money at lower interest rates for the purpose of financing the social upliftment
programmes of the country.
BIS Review   43/1998
2.  The main objective of monetary policy
- 2 -
The  mandate  from  Parliament  to  the  Reserve  Bank  is  not  explicit  on  what
“protection  of  the  value  of  the  currency”  really  means.  This  obviously  opens  up  the  way  for
malignant attacks on the Bank, whatever objectives might be pursued.
The  main  objective  of  the  Bank,  however,  is  to  bring  inflation  down.  Over  the
twenty years from 1972 until 1992, inflation in South Africa fluctuated between 10 and 20 per
cent per annum, with an average of about 15 per cent. This was obviously too high, and there
was general public support for determined efforts by the Bank since 1990 to reduce inflation to a
single  digit  level.  Since  1992,  the  rate  of  inflation  has  been  contained  within  the  single  digit
level,  fluctuating  between  5  and  10  per  cent.  Over  the  twelve  months  up  to  March  1998,  the
consumer price inflation equalled 5.4 per cent, and at the production level, prices rose on average
by 2.3 per cent.
In the absence of a formal quantified guideline from the Government, the Reserve
Bank defined its goal for inflation as a rate that will be more or less in line with the average rate
of  inflation  in  the  economies  of  South  Africa’s  major  trading  partners  and  competitors.  In  the
present world environment, this will require a rate of inflation of even lower than 5 per cent.
The  Reserve  Bank  is  often  criticised  for  being  obsessed  with  inflation,  and  for
unnecessarily  depressing  the  domestic  economy,  in  its  efforts  to  reduce  inflation.  Studies  like
those recently produced by Michael Sarel, an economist at the International Monetary Fund, are
thrown against the Bank.
3.  The monetary policy model of the Reserve Bank
In 1986, South Africa introduced the M3 money supply as an anchor for monetary
policy. Annual targets, or guidelines, for an acceptable rate of growth in M3 were announced by
the Bank, and decisions to influence overall liquidity in the banking sector, or to change the Bank
rate,  were  triggered  by  substantial  deviations  in  actual  money  supply  growth  from  the
predetermined guidelines.
To  control  the  money  supply,  the  Reserve  Bank  obviously  had  to  manage  the
amount of liquidity available within the banking sector, and had to accept realistic interest rates.
With  fairly  stable  relationships  between  the  money  supply  and  aggregate  demand,  the  model
served South Africa well for a relatively long period of time. In 1987/88, for example, the rate of
growth in M3 was close to 30 per cent, and the rate of inflation 20 per cent. In 1992, growth in
M3 was reduced to 8 per cent, and inflation declined to a single digit figure for the first time in
1993.
In  recent  years,  however,  with  the  major  changes  particularly  in  South  Africa’s
international financial relationships, the money supply model lost some of its usefulness. Over
the past four years, the rate of increase in the money supply has persistently stayed around the
level of about 15 per cent, being about 5 full percentage points above the annual guidelines of the
Reserve Bank. Over the same period, total bank credit extension increased by about 16 per cent
per annum, a rate of growth that is also regarded as excessive by the Reserve Bank.
And yet, gross domestic expenditure declined from 5 per cent growth in 1995 to
1½ per cent last year, and inflation remained well under control. After a depreciation of the rand
BIS Review   43/1998
- 3 -
of 22 per cent in 1996, inflation rose correspondingly from 5 per cent to almost 10 per cent a year
later. Over the past twelve months, however, inflation has come down again to the level of about
5 per cent per annum.
These  developments  forced  the  Reserve  Bank  to  reconsider  its  monetary  policy
model and to follow a more eclectic approach in which a strict financial (monetary) package is
used as a basis for monetary policy decisions. This financial package includes:
n
n
n
n
n
movements in the money supply and its components M1, M2 and M3;
changes  in  total  bank  credit  extension,  both  to  the  Government  and  the
private sector;
the level of interest rates and the structure of the yield curve;
changes in the gold and foreign exchange reserves;  and
movements in the exchange rate of the rand.
In  terms  of  Reserve  Bank  analyses,  the  main  reasons  for  the  breakdown  in  the
money supply model in recent years have been:
n 
n 
n 
n 
the  almost  explosive  increases  in  volumes  on  the  various  financial
markets;
the reintermediation in the banking sector of certain financial transactions,
such as direct lending by foreign banks to South African non-bank private
sector institutions;
the  absorption  of  many  new  workers  from  the  subsistence  sector  in  the
market economy;  and
the  effects  of  large  and  volatile  international  capital  flows  on  bank
liquidity, interest rates and the money supply.
The  debate  in  South  Africa  at  this  stage  about  the  monetary  policy  model  is
whether South Africa should not, at this juncture, follow the example of many other countries
and introduce a formal inflation target as an anchor for its monetary policy.
4.  Other objectives of monetary policy
Effective  monetary  policy  is,  for  obvious  reasons,  not  only  dependent  on  sound
principles  applied  by  the  central  bank,  but  also  on  the  infrastructure  or  the  architecture  within
which we operate. In summary, over the past few years, we had to restructure our banking sector,
our financial markets, and the national payment, clearing and settlement system to support the
process of gradually introducing the South African financial system in the global markets.
Bank regulation and supervision are, at this stage, a responsibility of the Reserve
Bank, but there are serious proposals for following the recent examples of the United Kingdom
and Australia to remove these functions from the central bank. The present regulatory system is
very much based on the risk management approach as prescribed by the Basle Committee, and
on the Core Principles. The major change in the South African banking sector in recent years was
the introduction of more than 20 new foreign banks  and  additional  foreign  competition  by  the
opening of more than 60 representative offices of foreign banks in South Africa.
The  financial  markets  were  also  encouraged  to  modernise.  The  Johannesburg
Stock  Exchange  (JSE)  introduced  major  reforms  to  provide  for  corporate  ownership,  foreign
BIS Review   43/1998
- 4 -
ownership  (of  stockbrokers),  dual  capacity  trading,  negotiated  commissions,  and  electronic
screen trading. It is continuing to improve its facilities by providing for the immobilisation and
dematerialisation  of  stock,  and  for  improved  clearing  and  settlement  arrangements.  The  total
turnover on the JSE last year amounted to about US $45 billion.
Major changes were also introduced in bond trading, and the total turnover in the
Bond  Exchange  of  South  Africa  last  year  amounted  to  the  equivalent  of  US  $927  billion.
Non-residents accounted for $257 billion.
The  daily  turnover  in  the  market  for  foreign  exchange  in  South  Africa  now
exceeds $10 billion.
A Euro-rand market developed in Europe where the total amount of outstanding
Euro-rand bonds now exceeds R37 billion.
To stay in step with the financial globalisation process, the Reserve Bank recently
also  upgraded  the  national  payment,  clearing  and  settlement  system.  The  new  system  now
provides for:
n
n
n
n
n
an electronic on-line real-time link between participating banks;
secure  fund  transfers  between  banks  through  Reserve  Bank  settlement
accounts;
a  better  management  on  a  continuous  basis  of  the  liquidity  positions  of
banks;
electronically  managed  end-of-day  settlement  of  interbank  transactions;
and
from the beginning of October, settlement of large transactions on a gross
basis as and when instructions are received by the system.
5.  The financial globalisation process
The implementation of sound monetary policies and the establishment of a sound
and well-managed banking sector, effective financial markets, and an efficient national payment,
clearing  and  settlement  system,  were  regarded  as  important  preconditions  for  the  extension  of
South Africa’s participation in the process of financial globalisation.
As  a  further  important  element  of  the  process,  South  Africa  is  also  removing
exchange controls on a gradual and structured basis. There are, at this stage, no more exchange
controls on any current account transactions; all controls were removed on non-residents who are
now free to bring funds into South Africa and to repatriate funds for any purpose; restrictions on
residents to make investments outside of the country have been eased for corporates, institutional
investors  and  private  individuals,  who  may  make  foreign  investments  within  fairly  generous
prescribed limits. These limits are being raised gradually until they will become ineffective.
The South African approach on financial globalisation is that it is in the interest of
the country to have access to foreign funds, and that we must therefore apply domestic financial
and other macroeconomic policies that will make the country attractive to the foreign investor.
BIS Review   43/1998
- 5 -
Furthermore, policies in South Africa must  be  flexible  enough  to  adjust  quickly
and decisively to changes in foreign investor sentiment. When capital inflows subside, or switch
into outflows, as a minimum:
n
n
n
n
the exchange rate must be allowed to absorb part of the shock;
an outflow of capital must reduce liquidity in the banking sector;
interest rates must be allowed to rise;  and
some  inflationary  pressures  will  develop  that  will  require,  almost
immediately, more restrictive monetary and fiscal policies.
These  adjustments  will  obviously  not  be  painless,  but  will  provide  a  basis  for
re-establishing confidence in the shortest possible time.
BIS Review   43/1998
