Mr. Tietmeyer discusses EMU – after the Brussels Summit   Address by the
President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  Prof.  Hans  Tietmeyer,  at  the  spring  meeting  of  the
Institute of International Finance in Rome on 7/5/98.
In Brussels last weekend some momentous decisions were taken.
I
Now we can be sure about
  the participation of eleven countries,
the  bilateral  rates  at  which  the  participating  countries  will  irrevocably  fix
the exchange rates of their currencies upon the start of monetary union, and
the candidates for the offices of the President, Vice-President and the other
four members of the Executive Board. This means that the composition of
the ECB Governing Council, in future comprising 17 members, is likewise
clarified.
It is, I think, advisable to distinguish between the substance of the decisions and
some  of  the  events  in  Brussels.  Not  everything  that  happened  last  weekend  in  Brussels
contributed  to  the  necessary  expectation  that  the  euro  will  be  a  really  supranational  and
depoliticised currency. I hope, however, the learning process will go on and some of the things
accompanying the weekend decision will be forgotten shortly. For the future what counts most
is the substance of the decisions.
The  suggestions  with  regard  to  the  nominations  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the
ECB are to be viewed favourably overall. The persons involved are acknowledged experts on
monetary and banking issues, and for the most part have many years of experience in the field of
monetary policy. And the reactions by the markets were clearly positive. Some analysts are even
talking of a “dream-team”. But, of course, even the most promising dream-team has to make the
big points in reality.
The EMI  has  already  endorsed  the  nomination.  And  we  are  sure:  the  European
Parliament  will  do  the  same  in  the  next  few  days,  so  that  the  ECB  can  be  established  as
scheduled on the first of June.
II
In  several  respects,  the  Brussels  decisions  already  alter  European  monetary
policy-making  today  (and  not  merely  in  January 1999).  The  policies  of  the  national  central
banks -  although  national  responsibility  still  reigns,  formally  speaking,  until  the  end  of  this
year - are from now on influenced even more by European considerations.
The phrase of “de facto monetary union” was used sometimes in the past. After
all, many observers spoke of a “de facto monetary union” in connection with the EMS back in
1991-92 - a notion that soon turned out to be an illusion. But during the seven-month interim
period until the start of formal monetary union, there is certainly far more justification for the
phrase than there was then.
BIS Review   42/1998
- 2 -
Firstly,  subject  to  the  well-known  time-lags,  the  monetary  policies  of  all  the
participating national central banks exert an impact on the entire euro area. Hence it is essential
not to introduce any national inflationary pressures into the monetary union.
Secondly, upon the entry into monetary union at the end of the year, if not before,
uniform money market rates will pertain. On account of the increase in mutual interdependence
in  Europe,  monetary  policy  cooperation  between  the  national  central  banks  will  have  to  be
reinforced, even though final responsibility will rest with the individual national central banks.
There  will  presumably  also  be  a  further  convergence  of  central  bank  rates.
However,  such  convergence  need  not  take  place  at  the  very  beginning  of  the  interim  period.
Limited interest rate differences and exchange rate movements may well continue to exist for
some time.
It  cannot  yet  be  predicted  where  the  common  level  of  central  bank  rates  will
actually  be  by  the  end  of  the  year.  That  depends  primarily  on  monetary  and  anti-inflationary
policy  developments  throughout  “euroland”,  with  the  larger  countries  naturally  bearing
particular responsibility on account of their greater economic weight.
In this connection, the future course of the “mix” of fiscal and monetary policy in
the individual countries will certainly play a part. After all, in future undesirable developments
will not only exercise an impact on the domestic economy. From now on all “euroland”-central
banks have to take that into account.
III
As  soon  as  the  European  Central  Bank  has  been  set  up,  the  ECB  Governing
Council will have a number of important decisions to take before the start of monetary union.
For, needless to say, European monetary policy must be fully operational from the very first day
of monetary union. In particular, that calls for
 a forward-looking, empirically-backed strategy, and
an effective arsenal of instruments.
The  European  Monetary  Institute  has  already  done  a  good  deal  of  preliminary
work on both those subjects. Although a consensus has been reached on most issues, a number
of options and details are still unresolved. It is on these that decisions are still required - if need
be, majority decisions. In any case, the new ECB Governing Council will in part be composed
differently from the existing EMI Council.
As  regards  the  monetary  policy  strategy,  two  models  have  emerged  from  the
EMI’s preliminary work: the strategy of direct inflation targeting and that of targeting the money
stock. We at the Bundesbank believe that our proven monetary targeting strategy is appropriate
in principle for the euro area, too. At all events, studies suggest that the demand for money in
the euro area is actually likely to be even more stable than that in national markets.
Above  all,  a  monetary  targeting  strategy  has  the  advantage  that  it  involves  an
inherent commitment on the part of the central bank, and sets a standard by which the central
bank must let itself be judged. Hence a monetary targeting strategy may be a major element in
building  up  the  European  Central  Bank’s  reputation.  Moreover,  a  monetary  targeting  strategy
BIS Review   42/1998
- 3 -
provides  a  dependable  framework  to  which  the  markets’  expectations  can  be  geared.  It  is
forward-looking and indicates unwelcome developments at an early stage. However, initially it
may  not  be  possible  to  rule  out  major  volatilities  in  the  movement  of  the  money  stock.  That
owes something to the existing differences in countries’ financial market patterns.
Hence it no doubt makes sense to supplement the monetary targeting strategy by
some  features  of  direct  inflation  targeting.  Then  the  European  Central  Bank  would  have  to
elucidate its policies against the background of its money stock target and its price expectations.
Such  a  twofold  transparency,  in  which  it  seems  to  me  the  money  stock  target  should  have  a
certain  primacy,  could  help  the  single  monetary  policy  to  build  up  a  reputation  swiftly  in  the
initial phase.
The European Monetary Institute has also elaborated some proposals relating to
the  range  of  policy  instruments  and  its  structure.  The  central  banks  are  broadly  agreed  on  a
number of instruments. That applies in particular to
 the marginal refinancing facility,
the deposit facility, and
the open market instruments in the form of repo transactions (with fixed
maturities).
Repo transactions have meanwhile been accepted by all the national central banks
as an effective policy instrument consistent with market conditions.
The  marginal  refinancing  facility  is  intended  as  a  safety  valve  in  the  event  of
short-term  liquidity  bottlenecks  in  the  money  market.  It  restricts  upward  swings  in  money
market rates and thus steadies the money market. The deposit facility likewise has a steadying
effect, by offsetting short-term liquidity surpluses. It constitutes a floor for money market rates.
Hence the two facilities virtually lay down the limits of the interest rate corridor.
I know that the topic of minimum reserves is no favourite of the banks. Even so, I
advise  the  ECB  to  make  limited  use  of  minimum  reserves,  not  so  much  as  a  management
instrument but rather as a basis instrument. Minimum reserves, as a durable basis instrument,
enhance the responsiveness of money demand to changes in interest rates, and thus can make
monetary policy more effective.
So  as  to  guarantee  the  uniformity  of  the  money  market  in  the  euro  area,  the
monetary policy operations of the central banks in “euroland” should be settled on a same-day
basis.  For  that  purpose,  a  cross-border  large-value  payment  system -  known  as  TARGET -  is
being set up. Since TARGET is attractive to the private sector as well, a disagreement has arisen
about the conditions of access. In the main, it revolves around the conditions on which banks
and central banks outside the euro area are to be granted intra-day credit.
There  are  good  reasons  for  arguing  that  participants  in  another  monetary  area
cannot be granted the same terms of access in every respect as participants within the monetary
union. It seems to be only logical that those who wish to benefit fully from the advantages of
TARGET will also submit to the monetary policy constraints imposed by the euro area. At all
events,  the  monetary  policy  of  the  euro  area  must  not  be  undermined  by  recourse  to  the
TARGET system.
BIS Review   42/1998
- 4 -
Viewed as a whole, there are signs that the instrumental prerequisites for a euro
monetary policy consistent with stability will soon all be met. Although that is not a sufficient
condition, it is certainly a necessary condition, for a stable euro. And the euro must be stable if it
is to unfold in full its undoubtedly great potential for economic benefits. It is only as a stable
currency that in future it will be able to play a major  role  as  a  global  reserve  and  investment
currency, alongside the dollar. And it is only as a stable currency that the euro will make its due
contribution to the stability of the international financial system.
IV
the  moment,  after  all, 
But  the  stability  of  the  international  financial  system  also  depends  on
developments  outside  Europe.  At 
international  organisations,
governments,  central  banks  and  private  financial  institutions  (such  as  the  IIF)  as  well  are
engaged in drawing conclusions from the dramatic course of events in South-East Asia. Some
observers are debating these conclusions in the rather imprecise terms of a radical reform of the
structure of the international financial system, with ideas ranging from the abolition of the IMF
and World Bank - without replacement - to illusionary notions of a new Bretton Woods system
or even a World Central Bank.
I am sure that all these extreme positions do not stand a chance in the real world.
In point of fact - as the discussions three weeks ago at the spring meeting of the IMF and World
Bank in Washington showed - the key issue is how and in which direction the existing system
can be strengthened.
Unfortunately,  the  crucial  importance  of  well-functioning  markets  for  sound
international finance is often underrated. In South-East Asia, at any rate, the functioning of the
markets was obstructed in two respects:
  externally,  by  clinging  too  long  to  exchange  rate  parities  which  had
become unrealistic, and
internally, by investment decisions which were not geared adequately to
sustained profitability.
Any contribution to the prevention and solution of such crises cannot but enhance
the  markets’  ability  to  function.  And  in  this  context  it  is  not  very  helpful  if  the  IMF  unduly
emphasises its financing role and steps in at an early stage with overly large financial packages.
That  only  creates  moral  hazard  problems.  This  is  because  such  financing  may  easily  be
misconstrued  as  an  invitation  to  the  countries  concerned,  as  well  as  to  other  endangered
countries, to refrain from undertaking essential structural reforms.
Private investors, too, are tempted to pay less heed to the risks. Charles Dallara
was  quite  right  to  draw  attention  to  these  moral  hazard  problems  in  his  recent  letter  to  the
chairman of the Interim Committee.
In  my  opinion,  improving  surveillance  is  a  much  more  promising  approach.
Besides macroeconomic data, financial market data should be monitored more closely than has
been the case hitherto. What we chiefly need, in my view, is more, and more up-to-date, data on
countries’ foreign currency debt. This is a challenge addressed to borrowers and lenders alike.
BIS Review   42/1998
- 5 -
The IMF should endeavour to obtain more, and above all better, data especially
from the debtor countries. For the markets’ ability to function, it is essential that the business
data collected should be more transparent, more complete and more up-to-date. It is only on this
basis that the IMF can perform its primarily catalytic task. That strengthens the structure of the
international financial system. And it should also be considered whether governments that fail to
comply with such transparency requirements should be publicly admonished.
The  challenge  extends  to  creditors,  too.  At  the  BIS  we  are  discussing  at  the
moment how the time-lags in the provision of data can be substantially reduced. In particular,
the  crises  in  South-East  Asia  have  demonstrated  how  important  timely  information  on  the
maturity and the currency of loans may be.
I  greatly  appreciate  the  fact  that  the  Institute  of  International  Finance  actively
buttresses efforts to bring about greater transparency among creditors. After all, this also implies
a certain extra workload on creditor banks. But the responsibility for crisis prevention naturally
rests on both sides - on the multilateral organisations and the private financial institutions alike.
And if a crisis does erupt despite all the efforts at prevention, it can mostly only be overcome if
private  investors,  too,  pull  their  weight -  pull  their  weight,  that  is,  in  a  spirit  of  enlightened
self-interest.
Charles Dallara was therefore undoubtedly right when he wrote:
“In  this  era  of  globalization,  both  market  participants  and  multilateral
institutions have crucial roles to play; the more they understand each other,
the  greater  the  prospects  for  better-functioning  markets  and  financial
stability.”
Of  course,  both  sides  have  their  own  rules  and  responsibilities.  But  they  have
their common interests and responsibilities too.
In  the  market-based  financial  world  of  today  and  tomorrow  multilateral
institutions  can  only  play  a  limited  role.  Bailing  out  the  private  investors  would  not  only  be
beyond  the  limits  of  the  available  reserves;  it  would  -  and  this  is  even  more  important  -
undermine  the  proper  functioning  of  the  private  markets.  I  am  happy  to  mention  that  the
IIF-members seem to share this view.
BIS Review   42/1998
