Mr.  George  comments  briefly  on  the  global  economy  and  on  recent  economic
performance in the United Kingdom   Speech by the Governor of the Bank of England, Mr. E.A.J.
George,  at  the  Dinner  with  the  Lord  Mayor  for  Bankers  and  Merchants  of  the  City  of  London  on
11/6/98.
The past year, since we last enjoyed the generous hospitality of the Mansion House,
on this great City of London occasion, has been a testing time. It has been characterised by major
imbalances in both the global economy and here in the United Kingdom - which have complicated
the task of policy-makers everywhere, including the task of the Bank of England’s now legitimised
Monetary Policy Committee.
Internationally there has been good news in the enviable performance of the United
States - Goldilocks - economy, with continuing robust domestic demand growth and further falls in
unemployment,  with  so  far  remarkably  little  inflationary  pressure.  To  the  extent  that  this
performance  can  be  sustained,  it  provides  substantial  underpinning  for  the  global  economy  as  a
whole.
And there has been encouraging news, too, in the re-emergence of domestic demand
growth  in  the  Continental  European  countries  as  they  prepare  to  take  the  final  step  to  monetary
union.  That  is  a  promising  context  for  the  launch  of  a  strong,  credible,  currency  and  I  wish  the
European  Central  Bank  every  success  in  its  historic  task.  Domestic  expansion  with  monetary
stability within Europe is in the interest of us all.
Elsewhere  though  the  international  situation  has  been  decidedly  less  benign.  A
combination of financial fragility and weak business and consumer confidence has weighed heavily
on the Japanese economy, and on the Yen; and the financial thunderstorms, which broke initially last
year over a number of other countries in Asia, are still intermittently rumbling around the region and
elsewhere.  The  economic  fallout  from  these  developments  poses  a  serious  downside  risk  to  the
growth  of  world  activity  and  threatens  the  emergence  of  potentially  large  international  payments
imbalances. It is a dangerous environment.
All of this has prompted a far-reaching re-examination of the international monetary
structure, and in the meantime it presents the international monetary authorities with some difficult
immediate  management  challenges.  It  also,  of  course,  represents  an  uncertain  international
background for the conduct of monetary policy in this country.
Our  own  overall  economic  performance  over  the  past  year  was  again  very
encouraging.  Output  growth  (on  the  latest  data,  to  the  first  quarter  of  this  year)  was  2.9%  -
significantly above the rate  of  inflation  (measured  by  the  GDP  deflator)  for  the  fourth  time  in  the
past five years - which I think is unprecedented in post-war British experience. On this basis over the
past five years annual output growth has averaged some 3.1% while annual inflation has averaged
2.2%. And unemployment - on the conventional claimant count basis - fell further last year, to 4.8%
on the latest figures, the lowest since the summer of 1980.
The  task,  of  course,  is  to  sustain  this  pattern  of  relatively  steady  growth  with  low
inflation into the medium and longer term. And that task has certainly become much tougher.
At  the  aggregate  level  -  looking  at  the  economy  as  a  whole,  while  no-one  -  and  I
mean no-one, whatever they may claim - knows with any great precision just where current demand
and output is in relation to the underlying supply capacity of the economy, there is no doubt that we
are now at least much closer to full capacity output than we have been - and the actual rate of growth
BIS Review   55/1998
- 2 -
over the past year was, on almost anyone’s calculation, above the rate of underlying capacity growth.
So we have been at greater risk of overheating than for some time.
The consequence - if we were to overheat - is quite clear. Inflation would accelerate
and  we  would  then  need  to  impose  an  abrupt  slowdown  on  the  economy  to  bring  it  back  under
control - to meet the Government’s inflation target. It was, of course, to avoid accelerating inflation
and the associated need for an abrupt slowdown that the members of the Monetary Policy Committee
last year had no difficulty in agreeing upon a significant policy tightening.
But there was - and is - a significant complication. The aggregate position takes no
account  of  the  serious  imbalance  within  the  overall  economy  between  external  and  domestic
demand. The internationally exposed sectors of the economy were already confronted last year with
an  exaggeratedly  strong  exchange  rate,  particularly  against  the  core  European  currencies  -  which
could  only  be  partly  explained  by  cyclical  and  monetary  policy  differences.  It  appeared  to  have  a
good deal to do with market scepticism - I would argue misplaced scepticism - about the prospective
strength of the euro. The internationally exposed sectors faced a further battering as a result of the
economic impact of the developments in Asia and elsewhere - which I mentioned earlier.
These pressures have had - and are having - a seriously depressing effect on demand
and output in the exposed sectors of the economy - particularly large parts of manufacturing industry
and agriculture - which is contributing to a sharp deterioration in our balance of payment and a fall
in the net external component of aggregate demand.
At the same time, the strong exchange rate, and the weakness of world commodity
prices, is having a direct dampening impact on costs and prices in this country - particularly at the
wholesale, producer, level but also affecting retail prices.
Meanwhile 
the  domestic  economy  has  been  unsustainably  strong.  Private
consumption,  in  particular,  was  growing  at  an  annualised  rate  of  over  5%  last  summer,  and  still
growing  at  an  annualised  rate  of  4%  by  the  first  quarter  of  this  year.  This  compares  with  a
longer-term  trend  rate  of  some  2½%.  But  for  the  dampening  impact  of  the  external  influences  on
aggregate demand and on costs and prices, this could already have resulted in accelerating inflation.
The  complication  for  monetary  policy,  in  this  situation  of  external/domestic
imbalance, has, of course, been that a tightening of monetary policy to slow the pace of the domestic
economy would have been likely to aggravate the appreciation of the exchange rate, intensifying also
the  restraining  external  demand  and  price  effects,  and  putting  even  more  intense  pressure  on  the
internationally exposed sectors.
Now,  there  is  no  question  but  that  the  strength  of  the  domestic  economy  must
moderate  further  -  as  indeed  we  expect  that  it  will.  But  the  external  influences  -  which  we  can
anyway  not  do  much  about,  but  which  will  in  time  wear  off  -  made  this  moderation  of  domestic
demand growth less immediately urgent than it would otherwise have been. In these circumstances,
with some evidence that growth in the domestic economy was in fact slowing, and given the evident
pressures  on  the  internationally  exposed  sectors,  we  needed,  in  my  view,  to  be  more  than  usually
confident in our judgement as to the need to tighten policy further.
The questions with which the MPC has been struggling this year then are: just how
much shelter the external situation would in fact give us, and for how long; and just how much time,
therefore,  we  had  to  bring  about  a  sufficient  slow  down  in  domestic  demand  to  prevent  inflation
accelerating  and  the  economy  from  overheating.  Now  these  are  immensely  difficult  judgements.
They depend in part upon one’s perception about the starting position - that is how close we are to
BIS Review   55/1998
- 3 -
full capacity utilisation to begin with. And they depend upon not just the direction, but the rate of
change  and  the  timing,  of  changes  in  the  different  components  of  aggregate  demand.  It  is  hardly
surprising  that  the  various  members  of  the  MPC  should  -  within  this  common  framework  of
analysis - reach, essentially marginally, different conclusions, reflecting their individual judgements
as to the balance of risks. Indeed it would have been incredible if they had not reached marginally
different conclusions. What is unusual - and what outside observers are I think still getting used to -
is  that  different  possible  interpretations  of  the  data  and  different  possible  judgements  are  openly
displayed in the minutes of our meetings, which also record the way in which each member votes.
Some people now seem to find this open discussion of alternative views confusing.
My own view is that it can only contribute to the effectiveness of monetary policy if the public at
large  better  understand  the  nature  of  the  issues  and  the  uncertainties  surrounding  them.  But  our
procedures have had one, by me at least, unforeseen, and I think regrettable, consequence, in that it
has focused excessive attention upon the way in which individual members of the Committee vote -
leading to their over-simple categorisation as either hawks or doves. It is as if their judgements were
expected  to  be  consistently  instinctive  rather  than  objectively  based  upon  their  individual,
open-minded, assessment - reached after careful analysis - of the most recent information available
at  the  particular  time.  As  a  result  serious  economic  commentary  seems  -  perhaps  temporarily  -  to
have ceded some ground to ornithomancy - which, as of course you know, is the ancient practice of
divining the future by observing the behaviour of birds - especially their flight patterns!
This  I  suspect  contributed  to  the  surprise  reaction  to  last  week’s  further  rise  in
interest  rates  -  which  proved  once  again  that  “Hell  hath  no  fury  like  a  wrong-footed  financial
commentator”!  It  should  not  have  been  such  a  great  shock.  In  the  Inflation  Report  which  we
published a month ago we set out the analysis as I have described it to you this evening, and we drew
attention to the fact that the outlook for monetary policy remained finely balanced - as it has clearly
been  for  some  months.  We  drew  attention  also  to  the  major  uncertainties  surrounding  the  central
inflation  projection.  These  uncertainties  included  both  the  level  of  the  exchange  rate  and
developments in the labour market. It was - as we explained in our press notice last Thursday - the
subsequent  “news”  essentially  on  these  fronts,  and  particularly  the  sharp  acceleration  in  private
sector  earnings  growth,  that  caused  the  Committee  to  conclude  that  the  necessary  slowdown  in
domestic demand growth had become more pressing. The interest rate decision showed simply that
what were always fine judgements changed with the facts - as I can assure you they will in future, in
either direction.
BIS Review   55/1998
