Mr. Hartmann reports on the driving forces behind current changes in payment
and  settlement  systems      Speech  by  Mr.  Wendelin  Hartmann,  a  member  of  the  Board  of  the
Deutsche Bundesbank, delivered at the 6th Annual Conference on International Payment Systems in
London on 20/4/98.
There  are  several  driving  forces  behind  current  changes  in  payment  and  settlement
systems.
As a political factor, we are all aware of the start of stage three of European Monetary
Union  (EMU)  on  January  1,  1999  with  the  introduction  of  a  single  currency  and  a  European
monetary policy.
Change  is  also  being  caused  by  developments  in  the  highly  liquid  and  mobile
markets.  Volume  and  value  of  transactions  in  these  markets  are  still  increasing  and  markets’
liberalisation  and  interdependence  is  continuously  growing.  Last  but  not  least,  technological
advances are leading to an improvement in communications technology and a lowering of costs. The
Internet is likely to become universally comparable to the telephone nowadays.
Let us now take a look at the current situation in international payment and settlement
systems.  The  use  of  correspondent  relationships  is  customary  for  the  execution  of  cross-border
payment  orders.  This  results,  for  example,  in  larger  banks  having  hundreds  of  correspondents  in
Europe. One cause of this can be seen, for example, in the fact that banks mutually attend to credit
customers and to large-value payments between third countries (such as Japan and Hong Kong). But
this variety of relationships may lead to a complicated liquidity management and high costs.
European cross-border retail payments could almost be said to be still in the “Middle
Ages”: they are characterised by high  fees, long execution times and very  little  transparency.  This
situation  led  to the EU  Directive  on  cross-border credit transfers  (Transparency  Directive)  coming
into  force  early  1997,  the  outcome  of  which  has,  up  to  now,  regrettably  been  mediocre.  As  an
example, if we compare the cost and time taken for a credit transfer of FRF 5.000 from Frankfurt to
Paris,  the  fee charged  by  the  different  German  banks  varies  -  according  to  a  German  newspaper  -
from  DEM  20.00  to  DEM  60.00  and  the  processing  time  takes  between  two  and  14  days.  The
statistical  reporting  requirement  of  cross-border  orders  cannot  be  construed  as  an  adequate
explanation for this. On the contrary, the European market will require considerable improvements in
this field.
Another obstacle is, for example, the lack of a common European bank-code number,
branch identification and account number. The European Committee for Banking Standards (ECBS)
is  pursuing  several  activities  such  as  the  introduction  of  an  International  Bank  Account  Number
(IBAN). But, due to problems in the implementation of developed standards, its work has so far been
none-too effective. Another approach to cross-border payments is the linkage of automated clearing
houses.  This  solution  has  been  hindered  in  Germany  by  the  banking  associations  protecting
profitable fees and hampering a strategic cooperation. As far as the European banking associations
are concerned, they are not yet ready to design a common standard for retail payments. At all events,
some progress can be identified in in-house, club and special associations’ solutions.
Owing  to  their  global  availability,  the  card  market  is  dominated  by  the  American
credit card systems. The eurocheque card as a strategic European response is widely used only in a
few countries. The Maestro functionality will allow a  gradual  expansion  worldwide.  At  all  events,
the  eurocheque  cards  are  still  successful  as  an  access  medium  for  ATMs  and  in  their  direct  debit
function. Especially in Germany, they are quite important: approximately 60 million cards using ec
BIS Review   38/1998
- 2 -
technology are in circulation. Prepaid cards are a logical development of the eurocheque card with a
common  security  access  and clearing  standard.  But  their  system  faces  drawbacks  due  to  relatively
high  transaction  and  turnover  fees  charged  to  retailers.  Since  there  are  only  national  solutions,
American  cards  have  expanded  their  global  dominance,  despite  well  designed  European  systems.
Attempts to cooperate internationally, for example, by the French and German banking industry on
the major German prepaid card system seem to have stagnated.
Not only chips on cards but also networks have gained in importance for payment and
settlement systems. The Internet is inevitably moving from a pure access medium (for home banking,
for instance) into an independent carrier of payment systems on a local, regional, and global basis.
As part of electronic commerce, the Internet is even governmentally subsidised, as it is in the United
States, for example. International financial authorities are gradually taking an interest in a controlled
use of the Internet.
Chip cards used on the “Net” will go beyond their function as a pure access or storage
medium.  But  this  inevitably  requires  a  common  security  strategy.  Current  barter  clubs  might  also
spread globally by using the Internet.
Central  banks  regard  the  dissemination  of  this  electronic  money  to  be  in  its  early
stages at present. But they suspect a possible loss of control over the money stock and interest rate
movements if the amounts transferred through these systems become significant. They are therefore
calling for non-banks to be excluded from the issuance or administration of electronic money units.
The  European  central  banks  made  this  approach  concerning  prepaid  cards  public  in  the  1994
European Monetary Institute (EMI) report.
At  all  events,  the  creation  of  fully  private  systems  such  as  “Microsoft  money”  can
only be successfully regulated by a worldwide cooperation on the part of governments and central
banks.
The introduction of different electronic cashless payment instruments has not reduced
the  high  demand  for  cash.  This  is  partially  due  to  inadequate  financial  systems  and  the  fear  of
inflation in foreign countries, such as in East Europe or South America. Thus, the USD currency in
circulation abroad is assumed to be about 70% and, for the DEM currency, to be approximately 30%
of the total amount in circulation.
An  increasing  consolidation  in  the  respective  countries  might  reduce  international
demand.  But  retailers,  for  instance,  still  consider  cash  payments  to  have  comparative  commercial
advantages over cashless payment and combined high bank fees.
The criticism that central banks subsidise the use of cash is not valid. The DEM 260
million or so in bank notes have to be “bought” from the Bundesbank. Assuming an interest rate for
refinancing of 3%, this would result in a benefit DEM 7.8 billion per year.
The  high  demand  for  cash  also  supports  the  transformation  process  of  the  central
banks’  interest  policy.  Therefore,  central  banks  do  not  consider  it  necessary  to  push  back  cash
demand beyond the already existing impact of technological developments. Progress in this field is
fully accepted by them.
With  regard  to  the  replacement  of  cash,  retail  transactions  in  coins  of  all
denominations  and  in  lower  value  banknotes  at  vending  machines  or  service  terminals  are  most
BIS Review   38/1998
- 3 -
likely  to  be  replaced  by  electronic  payment  means.  This  evolution  might  even  be  fostered  by  the
delayed changeover to the euro cash.
Let us now take a look at an important driving force in more detail: Stage Three of
EMU.
Implementation  of  the  single  monetary  policy  will  then  require  a  single  money
market  in  the  participating  countries  and  secure  and  efficient  payment  and  settlement  systems.
Therefore,  the  central  banks,  in  particular,  are  paying  interest  to  interbank  and  commercial
large-value payments. For that reason, they are setting up TARGET, the Trans-European Automated
Real-time Gross settlement Express Transfer system, which will link the national RTGS systems in
Europe. Non-participating countries can also be connected to TARGET.
Monetary policy transactions have to be fully collateralized. Securitisation will also
be needed for payment systems. Since the European systems for the cross-border use of securities are
not yet fully designed, the central banks are preparing the what is known as Correspondent Central
Banking  Model  (CCBM),  with  the  foreign  central  bank  acting  as  correspondent.  The  CCBM  will
serve as an interim solution for the cross-border use  of  securities  until a  private  sector  system  has
been put in place. A private system of this  kind  is the  solution  of  the  European  Central  Securities
Depository  Association  (ECSDA),  using  bilateral  links  between  the  domestic  and  foreign  central
securities depositories with an efficiency comparable to that of TARGET.
Taking an overall view of payment systems at the beginning of next year, TARGET
will not be the only European scheme; there will also be several net settlement systems.
Owing to their net characteristics, those systems cannot provide an immediate finality
of payments. Participants not fulfilling their due payments may - under certain circumstances - even
cause an unwinding of all transactions. Allowing, on the one hand, for liquidity-saving through the
netting of payment orders, there is, on the other hand, the risk of a liquidity trap since the settlement
is final only at the end of the business day.
The operators of net settlement systems, which are for example the EBA Clearing, the
EAF  2  and  SNP  (système  net  protégé)  have  their  own  individual  strategy  for  preparing  for  Stage
Three of EMU. At all events, some changes will be brought about by the Lamfalussy standards and
the requirement for cross-border net systems to settle in central bank money.
The choice and, ultimately, the success of the different schemes will depend on issues
such as liquidity demand, early finality, security and, last but not least, availability characterised by
execution times, operating  hours  and  days.  Cost  and  fees  for  participation  in  payment  systems  are
another factor which cannot be considered unimportant.
Looking at the European payment systems of the future, allow me to make a forecast
from my personal point of view.
At the moment, the future development of coexisting payment and settlement systems
is still undecided. But some trends towards the respective systems can be identified.
TARGET  as  the  central  banks’  gross  system  will  be  the  basis  for  all  large-value
monetary policy transactions.
 BIS Review   38/1998
- 4 -
Bearing in mind that all cross-border payments of large amounts will be best served
by  processing  through  TARGET  due  to the immediate  finality  of  payments  in  this  system,  central
banks will also act as a settlement provider for other large-value payments of the banking industry
and their customers.
 
The  European  landscape  for  the  banking  industry’s  system  might  be  highly
diversified. The EBA Clearing, EAF 2 and SNP, as examples of these, might dominate the market
for commercial large-value payments with Europe likely to remain a polycentric area needing several
financial centres.
 
Cross-border retail payments are likely to be gradually integrated into net settlement
systems  owing  to  the  lack  of  European  standardisation.  But  there  will  still  be  a  need  for
transformation into national standards.
 
Considering  the  fact  that  smaller  banks  will  not  have  direct  access  to  major
cross-border  oriented  netting  systems  the  sole  use  of  big  business  partners  might  ultimately
jeopardise their independence.
BIS Review   38/1998
