Bank  of  Japan  presents  summaries  of  articles  in  the  February  edition  of  its
Quarterly Bulletin   BANK OF JAPAN, COMMUNICATION, 27/2/98.
Response to the Disclosure Framework for Securities Settlement Systems: The-BOJ-NET JGB
Services
Introduction
This  document  provides  answers  to  the  “Disclosure  Framework  for  Securities
Settlement Systems”, a survey questionnaire drawn up by a joint working group of the Committee on
Payment  and  Settlement  Systems  (CPSS)  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  and  the
International Organisation of Securities Commissions (IOSCO).
The  Securities  Settlement  System  (SSS)  here  is  the  “Bank  of  Japan  Financial
Network  System  (BOJ-NET)  JGB  Services”,  which  is  the  Japanese  government  bonds  (JGB)
settlement  system  in  Japan.  The  answers  as  prepared  by  the  operator  of  the  system,  the  Bank  of
Japan, are intended to help current and future participants in the settlement system to appropriately
understand and assess the risks associated with it.
The  answers  provide  basic  information  about  the  BOJ-NET  JGB  Services  as  they
were in October 1997 (when the answers were prepared). The BOJ-NET funds transfer system is also
referred to where necessary.
Please note  that  the  answers  are  intended  to  provide  a  general  explanation,  and  the
information may not apply to every individual case.
Utilization of Financial Institutions’ Self-Assessment in Enhancing Credit Risk Management
Summary
The  government’s  Prompt  Corrective  Action  (PCA)  measures  to  be  implemented
from April 1998 require financial institutions to conduct adequate assessment of their assets and to
calculate  appropriate  ”loan-loss  write-offs  and  provisions”  based  on  their  own  internal  rules  and
referring to guidelines of the authorities. The Japanese “Big Bang” reform package is expected to be
conducted by the year 2001. Given these situations, large financial institutions in Japan are making
great efforts to enhance credit risk management. Medium and small-sized financial institutions are on
their  way  to  establish  basic  credit  risk  management  systems  under  the  PCA  measures.  Since
information  derived  from  self-assessment  can  be  useful  in  a  wide  range  of  activities  from
strengthening  risk  management  systems  to  formulating  business  strategy  large  differentials  in
business management are likely to arise among financial institutions depending on the utilization of
this valuable information.
The  Bank  of  Japan  introduced  the  Tracing  Method  of  asset  assessment  and  loan
losses in  order  to  support  financial  institutions  to  maximize  the  use  of  their  own  assessments  as  a
management  tool.  The  Tracing  Method  is  used  to  observe  changes  in  the  condition  of  individual
assets in a time series and is one way to utilize financial institutions’ self-assessment of assets. The
Bank conducted a follow-up analysis in the recent on-site examination to analyze how many of the
loans classified in the previous examination (1993-94) were later “written off and others” in relation
to  financial  losses  (“others”  are  defined  as  specific  loan-loss  provisions,  losses  from  support  by
BIS Review   20/1998
- 2 -
renunciation  of  claims,  and  losses  from  sales  of  nonperforming  loans  to  the  Cooperative  Credit
Purchasing Company [CCPC]).
These empirical studies using the Tracing Method suggest the following four points
of importance for enhancing credit risk management.
(1) Importance of strengthening the early warning functions
It is vital to control loans classified as “substandard” (S) because the likelihood of loan losses in
terms  of  “write-offs  and  others”  reaching  a  substantial  size  in  the  long  term  may  vary
substantially  depending  on  the  adequacy  of  the  long-term  management  of  this  classification  of
loans.
(2) Importance of utilizing statistical methods which cover the life-span of loans
For example, for loans classified as (S), there is a tendency for the loan-loss ratio to rise after the
third year following the assessment.
(3) Importance of avoiding loan concentration
Financial  institutions  with  highly  concentrated  loans  in  terms  of  industry  had  higher  loan-loss
ratios, while institutions with diversified loan portfolios had relatively low ratios.
(4) Importance of gathering financial institutions’ own default data for risk quantification
The estimated losses may be understated when only publicly disclosed bankruptcy data are used
since  losses  incurred  through  loans  against  “de  facto  bankrupt  borrowers”  and  recipients  of
financial support are not covered in such data. The latter type of losses accounts for a significant
share of outstanding losses. The Tracing Method covers all these data and enhances establishment
of financial institutions’ own default data for credit risk quantification.
On  our  part,  the  Bank  of  Japan  will  continue  to  check  and  monitor  the  credit  risk
management  systems  at  financial  institutions  on  the  off-site  basis  and  also  during  the  on-site
examination  in  a  more  risk-focused,  seamless  and  flexible  manner,  taking  individual  institutions’
circumstances  into  consideration.  In  addition,  the  Bank  will  continue  to  research  methods  of
quantifying credit risks as well as conducting follow-up analysis of the Tracing Method, in line with
the worldwide trend to further enhance credit risk management.
Revision of the Wholesale Price Indexes to 1995 Base
Introduction
The  Wholesale  Price  Indexes  (WPI)  system  is  one  of  the  three  sets  of  price  index
statistics  presently  compiled  by  the  Bank  of  Japan,  along  with  the  Corporate  Service  Price  Index
(CSPI)  and  the  Input-Output  Price  Indexes  of  Manufacturing  Industry  by  Sector  (IOPI).  Each  has
different coverage and purposes. The WPI provides a measure  of  average  changes  in  the  prices  of
goods in inter-enterprise transactions. It functions as (1) an economic indicator; (2) a barometer of the
purchasing power of the currency; and (3) a deflator.
A base-year revision of the WPI from the 1990 base to 1995 has been conducted to
incorporate  changes  in  Japan’s  economic  and  trade  structures.1  While  the  basic  framework  of  the
BIS Review   20/1998
- 3 -
index system remains unchanged by the revision, the selected commodities (i.e., the smallest unit of
commodities for which indexes, calculated based on sample prices, are published) have been revised
and expanded in order to further increase the precision of the index. This paper outlines the details
involved in the revision of the WPI to the 1995 base, figures on the new base having been released in
December 1997.
 1 A base-year revision of the WPI, involving the updating of the base year for both indexes and weight calculation, is
conducted every five years based on a recommendation made by the Statistics Council in March 1981. In the revision
to the 1995 base, indexes were recalculated from the 1990 average = 100 base to the 1995 average = 100 base, and the
weights  used  in  the  calculation  of  indexes  were  updated  based  on  1995  data  from  such  sources  as  the  Census  of
Manufactures” of the Ministry of International Trade and Industry and the Trade Statistics of the Ministry of Finance.
The framework of the index system is also reviewed as necessary at the time of the base-year revision.
BIS Review   20/1998
