Mr. Heikensten discusses economic policy in EMU and Sweden   Speech by the
Deputy Governor of the Bank of Sweden, Mr. Lars Heikensten, at an IIR Seminar on “EMU soon a
reality - how is monetary policy affected?” in Stockholm on 12/2/98.
1.  Introduction
The  European  Monetary  Union  is  now  less  than  a  year  away.  For  Europe  this  is  a
momentous step, perhaps the most important change, after the fall of the Iron Curtain, since World
War Two. EMU will gradually entail major consequences for European economic development, for
the way in which monetary policy in Europe is conducted, for financial markets and for all European
citizens.
Today I shall mainly be considering three issues:
   First  there  is  the  countdown  in  Europe.  Which  decisions  about  EMU  and
monetary policy will have to be made in Europe in the coming year?
Then  I  shall  say  something  about  the  problems  that  European  economic
policies  will  encounter.  How,  for  example,  should  fiscal  and  monetary
policies be constructed? What will be the need for cooperation and dialogue?
Finally some words about the economic policy issues that will be raised for
Europe and for Sweden.
2.  The countdown in Europe
Timetable for spring 1998
Perhaps the principle issue this spring is, of course, which countries will be adopting
the euro from the start. The selection process starts at the end of February when the member states
submit  national  convergence  data.  What  has  happened  in  the  past  year  with  budget  deficits,
government debt, inflation and interest rates, for example? The European Monetary Institute and the
Commission  will  then  independently  assess  the  national  statistics  in  the  light  of  the  Maastricht
Treaty’s criteria. The findings are to be presented in two convergence reports on March 25th. On the
same day, moreover, the Commission is to present a recommendation to the Ecofin Council as to the
countries  that  meet  the  necessary  conditions  for  adopting  the  single  currency,  as  well  as  a
recommendation concerning countries that are considered to have an excessive government deficit.
The reports are to provide a basis for decisions by the Heads of State or Government
and  show  whether  members  states  are  ready  to  adopt  the  single  currency  –  whether  they  have
achieved what is commonly referred to as sustainable economic convergence, though what is meant
by sustainable is not clearly defined in the Treaty. The convergence reports are also to assess whether
member states have adapted their national laws in accordance with the Treaty and given their central
bank an independent status with price stability as the statutory objective.
During  March  and  April  these  reports  and  recommendations  will  be  studied  by  the
member states and the EU institutions. During the first weekend in May, which is liable to be hectic,
the final decision will then be taken.
The Ecofin Council will convene in the evening of 1st May to discuss the reports and
the  Commission’s  recommendation  before  drawing  up  a  recommendation  to  the  Heads  of  State  or
Government as to which member states fulfil the necessary conditions for the adoption of the single
currency.  The  recommendation  from  the  Ecofin  Council  is  also  to  be  presented  to  the  European
Parliament, which will then forward its opinion in the morning of 2nd May so that this, too, can be
taken into account in the decision by the Heads of State or Government. That afternoon, finally, the
BIS Review   9/1998
- 2 -
Heads of State or Government of the member states will assemble to make the final decision, which
requires a qualified majority, about which countries will adopt the single currency from the start in
1999.
As soon as it has been decided which countries will be participating in the euro area,
the  Ministers  of  Finance  or  Economic  Affairs  in  the  selected  countries  will  meet  to  decide  the
bilateral exchange rates between their national currencies that will apply from 1st January 1999.
At  the  same  meeting,  the  ministers  of  the  selected  countries  will  prepare  a
recommendation concerning the future members of the Executive Board of the new European Central
Bank (ECB). Work on this is already in progress and, as you will have gathered from discussions in
the press, arriving at an agreement is not a simple matter. There are some general criteria to do with
professional experience and so on but in practice it is almost inevitable that nationality will also be a
criterion. During May and June, both the European Parliament and the EMI will express an opinion
on  this  recommendation.  The  composition  of  the  Executive  Board  is  to  be  finally  decided  by  the
Heads of State or Government by 1st July at the latest. This decision must be unanimous.
New central bank established
Once the ECB’s Executive Board has been appointed, work can start on building up
the  new  organisation.  The  Executive  Board  is  to  comprise  a  president  (the  head  of  the  ECB),  a
vice-president and up to four other members. If some member states do not adopt the euro from the
start, it is possible to appoint a smaller Board and enlarge it later as more states join; but the Board
must consist initially of at least four members. The term of office is eight years. When the members
are first appointed in 1998, however, their terms will differ so as to avoid having to renew the whole
Board simultaneously.
The Executive Board and the central bank governors of countries that adopt the euro
constitute the ECB’s highest decision-making body, the ECB Governing Council, which is to meet at
least ten  times  a  year.  Monetary  policy  decisions  require  a  simple  majority;  each  member  has  one
vote and the president has the casting vote.
The Executive Board is to conduct monetary policy in accordance with decisions and
guidelines from the ECB Governing Council. But rather than concentrate everything in Frankfurt, the
intention  is  to  arrange  for  the  national  central  banks  (NCBs)  to  undertake  as  much  as  possible,
including  monetary  policy’s  implementation.  The  Executive  Board  will  accordingly  issue  the
instructions that the participating NCBs need in order to carry out the decisions. The Executive Board
will also be accountable for the day-to-day activities of the ECB.
The central bank governors of member states that do not adopt the euro, e.g. Sweden,
will  be  represented  on  the  ECB  General  Council  together  with  their  colleagues  from  participating
countries  and  the  ECB  president  and  vice-president.  The  General  Council  is  the  ECB’s  third
decision-making body but will not exert any influence on the single monetary policy; it is intended to
take over the functions that are currently performed by the EMI. The General Council will exist as
long as there are member states outside the euro area. Information about decisions taken by the ECB
Governing Council will be conveyed to central bank governors of outsider countries via the General
Council.
These  three  decision-making  bodies  will  presumably  be  supplemented  with
committees with representatives of the NCBs, along the lines of the EMI’s existing committees. The
structure of this has still to be decided. There are likely to be committees for discussions on monetary
policy, payment systems, inflation forecasts and so on. Neither is it yet clear in which fields and to
what extent outsider countries will be able to participate in this committee work.
BIS Review   9/1998
- 3 -
The ECB will not be a large organisation. To begin with, around 500 people will work
centrally in Frankfurt, about 400 of them as administrative staff. There will clearly be a great deal of
discussion  about  how  the  work  should  be  divided  between  the  ECB  and  the  NCBs.  The  ECB  is
naturally interested in creating a strong and highly competent central organisation that can uphold an
overall  European  perspective  in  monetary  policy.  At  the  same  time,  many  of  the  participating
countries are interested in maintaining competence, operations and influence. One aspect of this that
is already colouring some discussions is the effects that different ways of organising the central bank
activities  would  have  on  the  geographical  distribution  of  private  financial  activities  in  the  Union.
What consequences would, for instance, a decentralised implementation of monetary policy have for
the status of Frankfurt relative to Paris or London?
Most issues resolved
The work of constructing the new European Central Bank (ECB)  and  the  European
System of Central Banks (ESCB) has been in progress for a long time. It is now more than four years
since the NCBs joined forces to lay the foundation for a new central bank. To appreciate what this
entails it is necessary to look at what the new central bank will be doing.
The Treaty states that the ESCB is to define and implement the monetary policy of the
Community,  conduct  foreign  exchange  operations,  hold  and  manage  the  official  foreign  exchange
reserves of the member states and promote the smooth operation of payment systems. In addition, the
ESCB is to ensure that supervisory authorities can pursue their policies and thereby contribute to the
stability of the financial system.
While the NCBs will play an active part in the implementation of monetary policy, it
is  the  ECB  that  will  prepare  and  make  the  policy  decisions.  The  ECB  accordingly  needs  its  own
analytical capability for the work of constructing monetary policy and deciding the appropriate level
of the interest rate. This in turn calls for a monetary policy model and a strategy for constructing the
policy so that the ultimate objective is met. When the interest rate has been set, a  system is needed
whereby the central banks can exercise  interest  rate  control  and  signal  their  intentions  clearly.  An
effective  monetary  policy  also  requires  a  system  for  payments  and  the  exchange  of  information
between the central banks as well as with the financial sector. Certain  financial market procedures
have  to  be  harmonised  and  uniform  principles  have  to  be  agreed;  for  example,  securities  issued
anywhere in the euro area must be eligible as collateral. Then the ECB has to have foreign reserves as
well as routines for their management. The matter of accounting also has to be settled. In the context
of information and analysis, moreover, there will have to be harmonised statistics for the euro area.
The  organisation  and  administration  of  the  new  central  bank  then  have  to  be  arranged.  Premises,
personnel and equipment must be ready for the ECB to function as of January 1999.
Most  of  these  issues  have  been  resolved  through  the  EMI  cooperation,  though  of
course  this  has  not  always  been  simple.  The  Community  consists  of  fifteen  sovereign  states  with
traditions that differ in many respects and affect how a central bank works. This is not just a matter of
attitudes  to  monetary  policy  and  inflation;  it  also  concerns  approaches  to  regulations,  free  trade,
administrative traditions, transparency and so on. Each NCB has a veto, so the discussions have been
lengthy. But the main features of the system are now clear, as are the principles that will apply.
There are some issues, however, that could not be solved in the EMI, so the matter
has  been  referred  to  the  ECB.  In  such  cases,  alternative  solutions  have  been  prepared  and  their
number has been reduced as far as possible to make it easier to reach the final decision.
1.  The choice of monetary policy strategy is one matter that has been referred to the
ECB. The primary objective – price stability – is stipulated in the Treaty but it will be up to the ECB
BIS Review   9/1998
- 4 -
to quantify this objective, make it operational and choose the strategy for achieving it. To prepare for
the  ECB’s  decision,  the  EMI  has  studied  alternative  strategies  and  whittled  these  down  to  two:  a
direct inflation target and an intermediate target in the form of a monetary variable.
2.    The  EMI  is  setting  up  TARGET,  a  European  payment  system  or  a  freeway  for
intra-EU  payments.  All  the  NCBs  are  developing  their  national  payment  systems  for  real-time
settlement and linkage to a common network. A matter of importance for Sweden that has not been
settled  is  whether  non-euro  countries  will  have  access  to  credits  in  the  payment  system.  Some
countries  fear  that  if  they  do,  it  may  be  detrimental  to  the  single  monetary  policy.  The  Swedish
position, however, is that member states outside the euro area ought to have access to intraday credit
on the same terms as euro participants. TARGET will not be the only payment system in Europe and
will  have  to  compete  by  being  the  most  efficient  and  reliable.  A  smooth  flow  of  payments  in  the
system would accordingly benefit all the participants.
3.  The principles for the new system for interest rate control are known; the system
will resemble the Swedish arrangement with an interest rate corridor and a repo rate. But the ECB
will also have to decide whether the monetary policy instruments are to include minimum reserves.
Those  in  favour  argue  that  minimum  reserves  facilitate  the  construction  of  monetary  policy,  for
instance by reducing the need to fine-tune liquidity. In Sweden, however, we consider that minimum
reserves create unnecessary complications and are not required for controlling liquidity.
3.  Economic policy in EMU
With  all  the  preparations  completed,  the  monetary  union  can  be  established  on  1st
January  1999.  There  will  be  a  single  monetary  and  exchange  rate  policy  –  that  is  inherent  in  the
notion  of  a  monetary  union  –  but  fiscal  policy  will  continue  to  be  conducted  nationally.  But  the
situation will be new for both fiscal and monetary policy; credibility must be established under the
new conditions and ways must be found for cooperating  on  the  different  components  of  economic
policy.
Monetary policy
The ESCB will have a very independent status so that monetary policy can focus on
sustainable  price  stability  and  be  immune  to  short-run  political  considerations.  The  national
governments have enshrined these principles in the Maastricht Treaty, which every member state has
ratified.
Independence,  however,  does  not  absolve  the  ECB  from  the  duty  of  explaining  its
policy in public. It is rather the case that just the high degree of independence, plus the fact that the
ECB is a new institution with no store of credibility on which to draw, obliges the new central bank
to be particularly transparent. If the single monetary policy is not made comprehensible to the public
and politicians, the ECB will not acquire the desired credibility.
A  clear  strategy  for  the  single  monetary  policy  is  therefore  needed.  The  Riksbank
considers that the strategy should include a distinct and explicit inflation target. One advantage is that
such a target is comparatively easy to explain and monitor. We have also argued that inflation reports
should be published on a regular basis in order to provide as transparent a picture as possible of the
current policy and how this will be constructed in the future against the background of the existing
forecasts.
Opinions on this matter differ, however. Monetary targets are likewise distinct in the
sense that they can be monitored for fulfilment. But they do not  always  show  a  direct  relationship
BIS Review   9/1998
- 5 -
with  inflation  and  in  practice  they  may  have  to  be  abandoned  from  time  to  time.  That  is  liable  to
render the policy less transparent.
Without being unduly partial, it seems to me  that  the  Swedish  arrangement  with  an
inflation target is attracting growing attention. It is strongly supported by academic economists and
my European colleagues are also increasingly interested in our experience. But against this there is,
of course, the Bundesbank’s long and favourable experience of monetary targeting  and  Germany’s
self-evident weight in this discussion.
Certain routines for the central bank’s policy presentation are prescribed in the Treaty.
The  annual  report  from  the  ECB  is  to  be  presented  to  the  Ecofin  Council  and  the  European
Parliament, which may hold a general debate on that basis. The ECB president and other members of
the  Executive  Board  may,  at  the  request  of  the  European  Parliament  or  on  their  own  initiative,  be
heard by the Parliament’s committees. EU discussions are in progress on the arrangements for this
and whether further clarification is feasible.
Under the Treaty, meetings of the ECB’s Governing Council may be attended by the
president  of  the  Ecofin  Council  and  a  member  of  the  Commission  but  without  the  right  to  vote.
Similarly, the ECB president may attend Ecofin Council meetings on matters relating to the ECB’s
objectives and tasks. The Ecofin Council president is also entitled to submit motions for deliberation
to the ECB Governing Council.
Exchange  rate  policy  in  the  monetary  union  is  another  topic  for  discussion.  This  is
hardly surprising – interest rate policy and exchange rate policy are two sides of the same coin. An
interest  rate  adjustment,  upwards  or  downwards,  normally  affects  the  exchange  rate,  just  as  the
exchange rate has consequences for inflation and thus for the appropriate  level  of  the  interest  rate.
The Treaty entitles the European Council to issue guidelines for exchange rate policy under a flexible
exchange rate between the euro and other currencies. Discussions have been held to clarify what this
entails.  The  member  states  have  agreed  that  such  guidelines  are  to  be  drawn  up  only  under
exceptional circumstances and then only  in  general  terms.  The  guidelines  are  not  to  jeopardise  the
price stability target. Still, it is not entirely clear how exchange rate policy will be implemented.
Fiscal policy
Fiscal policy will continue to be a national concern in EMU. The Maastricht Treaty is
intended  to  institute  a  common  objective  to  preclude  imbalances  in  government  finances.  This
objective  is  specified  in  greater  detail  in  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  that  the  member  states
concluded last year, the aim being to avoid fiscal irresponsibility in member states after the move to
Stage Three.
In this Pact, all the EU countries have undertaken to avoid an excessive government
deficit and to aim for a budget that is close to balance or surplus in the medium term. In principle, a
budget deficit is not to exceed 3 per cent of GDP. A country in the euro area that exceeds this limit
will  normally  be  liable  to  a  fine.  Sanctions  can  be  waived,  however,  under  certain  exceptional
circumstances defined by the member states.
The  reasonableness  of  the  Pact’s  strict  limit  for  government  finances  has  been
discussed  and  doubts  have  been  expressed  as  to  whether  fines  can  be  imposed  in  practice.  The
monetary  union  accentuates  the  need  to  adjust  Europe’s  economies  in  other  ways  than  via  the
exchange rate, above all as regards the functioning of the labour market. But national  fiscal  policy
can provide a buffer in the event of shocks. Provided the medium-term objective is met, moreover,
there is still some scope for fiscal policy under the Pact.
BIS Review   9/1998
- 6 -
Estimates from the OECD and others indicate that, as an average for the EU countries,
a retardation of growth by one percentage point enlarges the budget deficit relative to GDP by half a
percentage point. This implies that a normal conjunctural slowdown can cause the cyclical deficit to
increase by about 1–1.5 percentage points. Staying below the ceiling imposed by the Stability Pact
then  presupposes  a  limited  structural  deficit.  Today  the  statistical  picture  is  troublesome  in  that  a
number of member states, including some of the core countries, have structural deficits of more than
2 per cent. This leaves a very small margin for coping with an economic slowdown.
Trade-off between fiscal and monetary policy
The credibility and success of the Stability and Growth Pact are highly dependent on
the ability of member states to meet the medium-term target. Like the single monetary policy, under
the  Pact  fiscal  policies  will  be  closely  scrutinised  and  assessed  in  the  initial  years.  For  monetary
policy,  high  credibility  confers  greater  freedom  to  make  temporary  allowance  for  other  factors
without  this  impairing  expectations  about  the  central  bank’s  target.  Similarly,  by  building  up
credibility, more room is created for the Ministers of Economic Affairs or Finance to accept minor
deviations from the Pact.
Monetary  policy  and  the  other  components  of  economic  policy  are  interdependent.
Safeguarding  price  stability,  for  example,  is  easier  if  fiscal  policy  is  tight  and  Europe’s  economic
structures function smoothly. From time to time there may be more direct calls for a dialogue about
policy but such a dialogue must not be allowed to endanger the price stability objective; neither need
it, since the ECB ultimately controls the instruments whereby low inflation can be maintained.
Let  me  illustrate  this  with  a  simple  example.  About  a  year  ago  most  economists
considered that British policy needed to be tightened to prevent inflation from exceeding the targeted
rate.  However,  the  pound  was  already  so  strong  that  most  people  believed  British  manufacturing
would ultimately suffer. If possible, therefore, it was fiscal policy that should be tightened. As things
turned out, however, the adjustment was made via monetary policy. The Bank of England lived up to
its responsibility for price stability and raised the interest rate to prevent an increase in inflation.
Precisely the same discussion may be called for in the future at the European level.
The  ECB  may  perceive  a  threat  to  price  stability  even  though  the  euro  is  “too  strong”  and  may
therefore  advocate  fiscal  restrictions.  The  finance  ministers  in  turn  may  want  to  discuss  how  this
should be done and how the burden of adjustment should be allocated between them. Such matters
are  far  from  simple;  I  mention  them  here  mainly  to  illustrate  what  I  see  as  a  growing  need  for
communication and cooperation, at  least  if  the  aim  is  to  construct  policy  with  the  best  interests  of
Europe in mind.
As most of you know, a dialogue and cooperation have been called for in the debate
on the monetary union’s policy arrangements. In December  1997  the  member  states  agreed  on  the
setting  up  of  what  has  been  called  the  Euro  X  Council.  This  body  is  not  to  have  any  formal
decision-making  powers  and  its  composition  is  to  be  determined  by  the  agenda.  Matters  that  only
concern  countries  in  the  euro  area  are  to  be  discussed  by  the  ministers  of  those  countries;
representatives of the outsider countries may join in on matters that are also of interest to them. How
participation in Euro X is to be decided and the arrangements for this are not yet clear. What is clear
is that the Ecofin Council is the only decision-making body and that all formal decisions have to be
made there.
In my opinion the debate about Euro X tended to extremes. It can hardly be denied
that in certain economic matters the euro participants will need to arrive at a common standpoint. The
above example of the United Kingdom is a case in point. At the same time, the mutual dependence of
countries  inside  and  outside  the  euro  area  is  very  pronounced  and  good  arguments  for  excluding
BIS Review   9/1998
- 7 -
outsider  countries  from  the  discussion  are  to  be  found  in  extremely  few  issues  (one  example  is
perhaps  matters  to  do  with  the  position  of  the  euro  relative  to  the  currencies  of  non-euro  member
states). A number of colleagues have in fact indicated some concern about the EU split that Euro X
might bring about under unfortunate circumstances.
4.  Economic policy in Sweden
It  is  frequently  claimed  that  the  establishment  of  a  European  monetary  union  that
Sweden has chosen not to join imposes new requirements on Swedish economic policy. This may be
true but only up to a point. EMU will bring the countries of Europe closer to each other economically
and  this  will  accelerate  and  accentuate  the  internationalisation  of  Sweden’s  economy.  The
consequences  are  essentially  favourable:  stronger  competition  and  lower  prices,  access  to  a  larger
labour  market,  etc.  At  the  same  time,  in  some  respects  internationalisation  restricts  the  scope  for
national economic policy. But in this context EMU does not represent something radically different;
it simply reinforces earlier tendencies.
As regards economic policy, the major step was really taken at the beginning of
this decade with the realignment of our policy for stability. Today, the main features of Swedish
economic policy are the same as EU policy and there are good grounds for believing that this will
continue to be the case. Here I shall briefly consider three types of argument:
   Firstly,  the  results  of  policy  in  recent  years;  low  inflation  and  a  rapid
improvement in government finances.
Secondly, institutional changes; the rules for both monetary and fiscal policy
have  been  changed  so  that  conditions  today  for  conducting  a  policy  for
stability are considerably better than before.
Thirdly, Sweden, whether or not we adopt the single currency, belongs in a
European  context  that  will  continue  to  exert  a  distinct  pressure  on  our
economic policy and markedly affect our freedom of action.
Good results for growth and inflation
The 1990 Budget Statement contained the first clear statement that low inflation was
one  of  economic  policy’s  primary  objectives:  low  inflation  paves  the  way  for  future  growth  and
employment.  The  distinct  message  signalled  an  awareness  that  there  was  no  turning  back  –  the
devaluation policy was no longer tenable and what mattered now was a  policy  focus  on  long-term
stability.  This  awareness  naturally  had  its  roots  in  the  Swedish  experience  of  recent  decades  –  a
combination of high inflation and weak economic growth. But another important contribution was the
EU experience – in many countries a policy focused on low inflation since the early 1980s had borne
fruit, for instance in terms of growth. A major drawback, however, was that the good growth had not
generated good results in terms of employment. After the fall of the Iron Curtain, Sweden was now
beginning to draw closer to the EU politically.
Since  the  reduction  of  inflation  to  a  more  normal  European  level,  which  happened
soon after the policy realignment, the rate of price increases in Sweden has matched or been below
the EU average. Since the announcement of the inflation target in January 1993, the CPI has risen at
an average annual rate of 2.3 per cent. Since the target came into force at the beginning of 1995, CPI
inflation  has  averaged  1.5  per  cent.  The  picture  is  even  clearer  in  terms  of  underlying  inflation,
calculated to exclude transitory effects like tax increases, interest rate adjustments, etc. This indicator
of inflation has been relatively stable inside the tolerance interval of 1–3 per cent that surrounds the
Riksbank’s target.
BIS Review   9/1998
- 8 -
It  is  worth  underscoring  that  the  economic  growth  which  has  accompanied  this
performance has been relatively good. Since the low in economic activity in Sweden in the summer
of 1993, at 2.5–3 per cent the average annual GDP growth rate has been higher than in the 1980s.
However,  employment  has  not  picked  up  with  growth  to  the  desired  extent.  This  has  to  do  with
numerous factors, of which one is, of course, the cuts in public sector activities in connection with
budget consolidation, for example. Another factor is the problems in the labour market, which partly
concern rules and the process of wage formation.
The  profound  crisis  in  the  early  1990s  meant  that  output  in  Sweden  dropped  by
around 5 per cent, which is almost unparalleled in post-war Europe. The drop in production was the
primary cause of the dramatic weakening of government finances in the period 1991–94. Since then
this situation has also radically improved. Having peaked at over 12 per cent of GDP, the government
deficit has swung sharply.  Stronger  economic  activity  has  made  a  major  contribution  to  this  but  it
would  not  have  been  possible  without  the  extensive  consolidation  of  government  finances.  Tax
increases and spending cuts between 1995 and 1997 have totalled the equivalent of almost 7 per cent
of GDP. Besides their direct budgetary impact, these measures laid a foundation for a downward shift
in interest rates, a considerably better exchange rate trend and an overall economic stabilisation that
aided the improvement appreciably.
The massive budget deficits meant that in the period 1990–96 public sector debt grew
from  44  to  78  per  cent  of  GDP.  This  restricts  the  future  freedom  of  action  in  fiscal  policy.  For
Sweden  this  constraint  is  accentuated  in  that  the  high  revenue  and  expenditure  ratios  render  the
budget very susceptible to conjunctural factors. Seen in this light, the Government’s objective of  a
2 per cent budget surplus over the medium term seems reasonable. It also provides a margin of safety
for  the  deficit  criterion  in  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  A  budget  surplus  lessens  the  risk  of  a
sizeable deficit when economic activity is weak. Moreover, the objective means that Sweden fulfils
the undertaking in the Pact that the budget is to be close to balance or in surplus in the medium term.
Institutional changes
To some  extent,  Sweden’s  problems  with  government  finances  have  stemmed  from
institutional factors. In recent years, however, there have been changes which improve the conditions
for a sound budget policy. One change, instituted for other purposes as well, is that the Riksdag is
now  elected  for  four  years  instead  of  three;  the  longer  mandate  renders  policy  more  stable.  As  of
1997, moreover, the Budget Act has altered the budget process. A nominal spending ceiling has been
introduced and applies to a moving three-year period; this means that additional spending in one field
has  to  be  financed  via  reassessments  elsewhere  so  that  the  overall  ceiling  is  not  exceeded.
Expenditures during the current fiscal year are also monitored more closely; if items are expected to
exceed the budgeted figure, the competent ministry has to propose ways of preventing this.
Institutional changes are also on the way in the domain of monetary policy. The status
of the Riksbank is to be strengthened as of 1999. As a result of the five-party agreement, the inflation
target is to have the force of law. The ban on giving instructions is to be statutory. The only grounds
for dismissing the Riksbank governor are to be serious misconduct or an inability to continue to fulfil
the conditions required for the performance of his/her duties. Concerning monetary and exchange rate
policy  decisions  of  major  importance,  instead  of  the  present  obligation  to  consult  the  Minister  of
Finance,  in  future  the  Riksbank  will  simply  inform  him/her.  The  agreement  also  provides  for  a
different managerial structure, an adaptation in accordance with the Maastricht Treaty, and changes in
the right to decide exchange rate policy. In exchange rate policy matters the Riksbank has a stronger
legal  status  than  the  ECB.  All  this  makes  the  Riksbank  one  of  Europe’s  most  legally  independent
central banks.
A European context
BIS Review   9/1998
- 9 -
The fact that Sweden will not be adopting the single currency from the start does not
mean  that  Swedish  economic  policy  can  be  constructed  independently  of  opinions  in  other  EU
countries. Cooperation and dialogue with other member states are requirements that have grown up
with  the  increasingly  pronounced  economic  integration  and  definitely  applied  when  we  joined  the
Community. The Maastricht Treaty stipulates that we are to regard our economic policy as a matter of
common concern. We shall therefore continue to participate in the discussions in Brussels at which
the economic policies of member states are deliberated and assessed.
We will take part once a year in the construction of the broad guidelines for economic
policy. The Stability and Growth Pact applies to Sweden even as a non-euro member state. We are
admittedly not liable to sanctions but we are under an obligation to fulfil the Pact’s objectives. We
have also undertaken to explain our policy continuously in convergence programmes that require the
approval of the other member states. Moreover, the Treaty requires us to regard our  exchange  rate
policy as a matter of common concern.
These arrangements mean that we continuously participate in the joint supervision of
economic  policies  in  the  Community  and  have  to  explain  and  defend  the  policy  we  pursue.
Conducting a policy that differs in essentials from the Community’s declared objectives is scarcely
feasible and, at least as far as Sweden is concerned, undesirable. The pressures from joint processes
of this kind should not be underestimated.
5.  Conclusion
The  countdown  to  the  economic  and  monetary  union  is  proceeding  rapidly.  All  the
preparations throughout Europe will have to be completed in the course of this year so that the single
currency can be adopted from the beginning of 1999. Most of the major and difficult decisions have
already been made. In about three months time the EU countries will have selected the member states
that are to constitute the euro area. The new European Central Bank will then be launched and dress
rehearsals can begin. EMU is indeed on the way.
Much will be required of both the ECB and the governments of participating countries
in the form of a credible policy. The legal framework provides good conditions for this. But of course
there  are  elements  of  uncertainty.  One  important  issue  is  the  formulation  of  economic  policy
cooperation in the union. Only time will tell just how this matter will be settled.
EMU  will  entail  changes  for  the  players  in  financial  markets  as  well  as  for  other
economic agents, like households and firms. Sweden is no exception, though the drama should not be
exaggerated. The tendencies are gradual and much has already happened.
The conditions for economic policy in Sweden will also be affected. In the wake of
excesses in the 1980s, the realignment of Sweden’s economic policy in the early 1990s led initially to
considerable  convulsions.  Today,  however,  our  stabilisation  policy  stands  up  well  in  a  European
perspective. Government finances have been improved in record time and inflation is low. New rules
have been established for both fiscal and monetary policy. The task now is a consistent continuation
of this policy.
BIS Review   9/1998
