Mr.  George  discusses  international  economic  and  monetary  management  and
the implications of the present disturbances in Asia   Text of the Henry Ford II Lecture delivered
by  the  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  Mr.  E.A.J  George,  at  Cranfield  University  School  of
Management on 21/4/98.
It is a real pleasure to be back here at Cranfield to deliver this Henry Ford II Lecture.
The Lecture - as you have just heard - commemorates an award made by the Ford Motor Company,
in celebration of Henry Ford II’s 60th birthday, to Cranfield School of Management.  It was one of
just  two  such  awards  to  European  business  schools.    And  we  have  just  seen  evidence  -  in  the
presentation of the Henry Ford Award - of the continuing close relationship between the Ford Motor
Company and the School of Management.  The University has every reason to take pride in the fact
that the achievements of the School are recognised by a great multinational company in these ways -
as I take pride in my own links with Cranfield.
Given the nature of the occasion, Mr. Chairman, I thought it might be appropriate if I
were to look beyond the narrow perspective of the monetary and economic situation in this country -
though I will say something about that towards the end of my remarks - and focus on some wider
aspects of the international economy.  I will begin with a broad overview of the current international
approach  to  overall  economic  management,  then  say  something  about  the  present  disturbances  in
Asia, and finally about their implications for the prospects for the rest of the world.
Let me begin with just a few words about the process of international economic and
monetary  management.    I  have  just  returned  as  it  happens  from  the  annual  Spring  Meeting  of  the
IMF in Washington, where the Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors from all around the
world gather to discuss current international developments.  We all meet again every autumn.  Last
week, we debated much the same agenda in a variety of meetings - in the Group of 7 major industrial
countries; in the Group of 10 - actually eleven - a somewhat wider range of industrial countries; in
the  Interim  Committee  in  which  all  IMF  member  countries  are  represented,  in  constituencies;  and
this time in a new ad hoc Group of 22 or 23 countries including a broad cross-section of industrial,
emerging and transition countries.  Invariably the journalists, who also gather in Washington, quite
reasonably  ask,  “What  exactly  did  you  decide  in  all  those  meetings?”  And  almost  invariably,  we
have to respond that “We did not actually decide on anything - we agreed we should do some further
work  and  meet  again  for  further  discussions!”  You  could  be  forgiven  for  thinking  that  the  whole
process of reaching international agreement on anything moves at a snail’s pace!
But even a snail can make remarkable progress if it keeps going.  I am told that the
quick species - I suppose they are the Model T snails - travel at a speed of three inches a minute - say
5 yards an hour.  In that case a quick snail could have travelled quite easily  from Cranfield to the
borders of Scotland since the collapse of the Berlin Wall! And if you look back over a decade rather
than  at  the  outcome  of  just  the  latest  meetings,  then  there  really  has  been  remarkable  progress  -
within the developing, emerging and transitional economies as well as the industrial world - towards
a  broad  international  consensus  on  approaches  to  economic  management.    That  consensus  can
perhaps be summed up essentially as macro-economic stability and supply-side flexibility - but that
needs some elaboration.
On the macro-economic side we have learned - and it has taken some countries longer
than others - that you cannot achieve what we are all trying to achieve - sustained growth, high levels
of  employment  and  rising  living  standards  -  simply  by  pumping  up  demand  in  our  economies
through  expansionary  monetary  and  fiscal  policies  without  regard  to  the  underlying  supply-side
capacity of our economies to meet that demand.  Short-term demand management through monetary
policy  too  often  led  just  to  accelerating  inflation,  which  had  then  eventually  to  be  brought  under
control  through  recession  -  an  absolute  recipe  for  short-termism  in  both  financial  and  business
BIS Review   36/1998
- 2 -
behaviour.    Equally,  excessive  public  expenditure  -  which  had  ultimately  to  be  financed  through
higher  taxation  -  imposed  burdens  on  the  private  sector  which  weakened  its  capacity  to  generate
employment and income and wealth.
So the emphasis now, more or less everywhere, is on effective price stability as the
immediate  objective  of  monetary  policy  -  not  simply  as  an  end  in  itself  but  as  a  measure  of  the
balance between aggregate  demand and  underlying  supply  in  the  economy  as  a  whole,  in  order to
moderate  rather  than  aggravate  the  economic  cycle,  and  so  to  provide  the  basis  for  sustainable
growth  at  around  the  underlying  rate  of  growth  of  productive,  supply-side,  potential.    And  the
emphasis now - again more or less everywhere - in relation to fiscal policy is to limit public sector
borrowing, and the outstanding  level  of  public  sector  debt,  to levels  that can  be  sustained into the
future, without the need for increasing tax burdens or raising real interest rates on the private sector.
These  objectives  of  macro-economic  policy  -  monetary  and  fiscal  policy  -  will  be
familiar to you in recent years in this country; they are at the heart of the policies being pursued in
Continental Europe by those countries that, in just under a fortnight from now, will agree to move
ahead to Monetary Union; and they are the policies endorsed, too, by all the members of the IMF in
the  Madrid  Declaration  adopted  at  the  IMF  Annual  Meeting  in  1994  and  expanded  and  updated
eighteen  months  ago.    Of  course  on  occasion  the  flesh  proves  to  be  weaker  than  the  spirit  -  and
achieving these macro-economic objectives is not easy in practise even as a technical matter.  But the
intention - the international commitment to macro-economic stability - is clear and this in itself ought
over time to mean a radical change - for the better - in the environment for private sector business
activity across the world.
Acceptance of the aim of macro-economic stability has brought into sharper focus the
structural,  supply  side,  of  the  economy  -  that  is  the  whole  raft  of  influences  that  can  affect  the
underlying  growth  rate  of  capacity  and  thus  the  growth  rate  of  aggregate  demand  that  can  be
sustained.
In  this  context  there  is  a  strengthening  international  presumption  in  favour  of  open
markets  and  free  competition  -  both  domestically  and  internationally  -  with  a  continuing  strong
presumption against predatory trade or exchange rate manipulation.  The argument is that undistorted
competition  contributes  to  potential  macro-economic  growth  through  increased  efficiency  and  the
more effective allocation of productive resources.
This  in  itself  is  somewhat  remarkable,  given  that,  at  the  micro-economic  level,
competition invariably constitutes a threat to established producers - and their employees - who may
be tempted to make, often highly vocal, pleas for protection in one form or another to their national
governments.    Consumers,  who  benefit  from  competition,  tend  to  make  less  noise.    The  threat  of
protectionism is never, therefore, far away.  But in fact the presumption in favour of competition has
proved  encouragingly  robust.    And  that  is  not  just  in  relation  to  international  trade.    Domestic
deregulation is increasingly in vogue in many countries; and there is much greater openness around
the  world  to  inward  investment  and  foreign  ownership.    I  see  the  same  presumption  in  favour  of
competition,  for  example,  in  the  global  trend  to  privatisation,  through  which  governments  have
increasingly returned commercial activities, in which they have no necessary comparative advantage,
to the market sector.  At the same time, against the background of financial globalisation, attention
has in the past few years increasingly focused on removing restrictions on the free flow of capital -
again domestically and internationally - essentially on the grounds that this can further improve the
effective allocation of productive resources, increasing the benefits to be derived from competition in
markets  for  goods  and  services.    The  IMF  is  in  fact  currently  working  on  an  amendment  to  its
Articles  of  Agreement  to  give  it  a  greater  role  in  promoting  the  liberalisation  of  external  capital
movements.
BIS Review   36/1998
- 3 -
Of  course,  it  remains  true  that  market  competition,  and  the  supply  capacity  of  the
economy more generally, are inevitably influenced by virtually every other aspect of public policy,
and will be affected to varying degrees by the particular social and economic judgements made by
national  politicians.    This  is  true  whether  one  is  talking  about  direct  public  sector  provision  -  of
education and training, for example, or incentives to saving and investment, or current or prospective
welfare provision, or the structure of taxation.  And it is true equally of government intervention in
the  form  of  regulation and  social  protection.    But  my  strong  impression  is  that  there  is  a  growing
awareness  in  many  countries  that  policies  in  all  these  areas  need  to  take  account  of  potential
supply-side effects, with an increasing bias towards structural reforms, in labour, product and capital
markets,  with  a  view  to  increasing  employment  and  reducing  distortions  that  impede  efficient
resource allocation.
Now I do not pretend to you, Mr. Chairman, that the international policy consensus
that  I  describe  -  particularly  on  the  supply-side  -  is  fully  articulated;  nor  do  I  claim  that  it  is
subscribed to in its detail equally in every IMF member country.  But it does represent a substantial
evolution  in  our  collective  thinking  over  the  past  decade  or  so  towards  a  much  more  common
approach to economic management, which serves as a valuable framework within which countries’
performance  can  be  assessed.    The  snail  may  have  moved  slowly  but  it  has  in  fact  travelled  a
considerable distance!
It has nonetheless still a long way to go.  Its progress has been impeded in the past
few years by the eruption of a number of financial disturbances - most recently in Asia - which have
drawn attention to continuing deficiencies in our approach to economic management; and we spent
much of the time last week in Washington discussing what lessons we might learn from those events.
The  storm  last  year  in  Asia  struck  essentially  the  ASEAN  four  -  Thailand,
the Philippines, Malaysia and Indonesia - spreading subsequently to South Korea and intermittently
battering Hong Kong and elsewhere.
It is still not wholly clear - to me at least - quite why the storm struck suddenly when
it did.  Most crises of this sort have their origins in some evident macro-economic policy failure.  At
least in hindsight there are usually fairly clear tell-tale signs of expanding fiscal deficits and/or lax
monetary  policies,  classically  accompanied  by  evidence  of  imbalance  in  the  form  of  accelerating
inflation  or  a  rapidly  deteriorating  balance  of  payments.    There  were  such  signs,  perhaps  most
notably  in  Thailand;  but  they  were  not  for  the  most  part  particularly  pronounced  in  Asia.    In  fact
through the first half of the 1990s, and in some cases for much longer, the countries in question had
been remarkably successful.  They attracted, by their very success, huge inflows of capital from the
rest of the world, where yields had fallen, in the hope of sustaining higher returns.
There  is  no  question  that  this  capital  inflow  made  a  very  big  contribution  to  the
economic expansion in Asia; but with the benefit of hindsight, the accelerating scale of the inflow,
and particularly the forms that it took, became an important part of the problem.  It was not all in the
end productively employed.  There was over-investment in some sectors; much went into ambitious
property development; and much went into financial rather than real assets.  The hoped-for higher
returns could not be maintained.
Again with the benefit of hindsight, it is possible to identify a number of structural
weaknesses  in  the  mechanisms  for  financial  resource  allocation  in  the  recipient  countries.    There
was,  for  example,  a  general  lack  of  reliable  financial  information,  and  a  lack  of  transparency  in
relation  to  the  financial  position,  of  both  public  and  private  sectors.    Complex  and  opaque  links
between  government,  financial  institutions  and  non-financial  companies  made  it  difficult  for
outsiders  to  understand  the  real  nature  of  their  exposures.    Financial  markets  were  not  well
developed, leaving the system heavily dependent upon the banks.  There was inadequate regulatory
or  supervisory  oversight.    There  was  widespread,  often  informal,  government  influence  over
BIS Review   36/1998
- 4 -
financial flows, which importantly also contributed to a perception that much of the borrowing was
implicitly under-written by the government.  The list could go on.
The problem was compounded by the absence of any real perception of exchange rate
risk.  Borrowers were evidently confident that governments would maintain their exchange rate pegs
against the dollar, even when it began to strengthen, so that unhedged foreign currency debt, much of
it at short-term, appeared to be a cheap alternative to domestic currency borrowing.  The result was a
build-up  of  short-term  foreign  currency  liabilities,  by  banks  and  non-banks,  which  was  not  fully
appreciated, and  which  left  the  Asian  economies  especially  vulnerable  to  a  flight  of  capital  in  the
event of a change in sentiment.  The problem is that  national authorities  can  create their  domestic
currency, if they choose to do so, even if it leads to inflation, but they cannot simply create foreign
currencies in the same way.
So, once the run started, it was violent and contagious.  For a time around the end of
last year there was a significant possibility of a chain of default emanating from Asia that could have
reverberated right through the global financial system.  The immediate task was how to contain that
risk.
Essentially there are two broad options for dealing with an external financial crisis.
One  is  simply  to  allow  financial  markets  -  exchange  markets,  interest  rates,  and  stock  and  bond
prices  -  to  take  the  strain,  and  to  seek  to  restore  confidence,  and  moderate  the  impact  of  market
movements, by restrictive macro-economic policy adjustment.  The second is to limit the financial
market  impact  and  the  extent  of  the  associated  macro-economic  adjustment  by  providing  or
arranging  alternative  external  financing.    In  practice  these  options  are  not,  of  course,  mutually
exclusive and the real question is the appropriate balance between them.
Where a country has  transparently  been  pursuing  an  unsustainable macro-economic
policy, most people find it easy to accept that that country should bear the burden and adjust, painful
though  that  may  be.    Many  people  find  this  harder  to  accept  where,  as  in  the  present  case,
conventional  macro-economic  policies  had,  for  the  most  part,  been  relatively  responsible.    There
were  certainly  adjustments  to  macro-economic  policy  that  needed  to  be  made  -  a  more  flexible
exchange  rate  regime  in  some  cases,  for  example,  or  a  somewhat  tighter  overall  macro-economic
stance,  with  perhaps  some  adjustment  between  fiscal  and  monetary  policy.    And,  once  the  capital
outflow had started, macro-economic adjustment had to be harsher than might otherwise have been
necessary,  in  order  to  re-establish  confidence.    But  there  are  real  dangers  in  extreme  market
movements or in excessively severe macro-economic adjustment to contain them.  That could cause
a vicious circle of domestic default and systemic financial weakness in the affected  country.    And
that  could  have  seriously  adverse  implications  -  in  terms  of  both  financial  and  economic
knock-on-effects - for the global economy.
That, essentially, is why it may be in the self-interest of the international community
to attempt to mitigate the market and macro-economic adjustment pressures by providing  financial
support.
It  is  why  the  international  community  responded  to  the  crisis  in  Asia  by  promptly
offering very large amounts of official assistance - $17 billion in the case of Thailand, $43 billion for
Indonesia and $57 billion for South Korea.
But such official financial help cannot be unlimited and it cannot be provided without
strings.    It,  too,  has  real  dangers.    If  it  were  too  readily  forthcoming  it  could  encourage  “moral
hazard”, especially by encouraging commercial lenders - particularly foreign currency creditors - in
the belief that they will be bailed out if things go wrong.  That would be likely to add to the problem
of potentially volatile capital inflows next time around.  Not surprisingly, too, there is strong political
BIS Review   36/1998
- 5 -
resistance  in  many  countries,  including  notably  the  United  States,  to  the  idea  that  public,
i.e., taxpayers’, money should be used to bail out private creditors, especially foreign creditors.
External  financing  need  not  come  solely  from  the  public  sector.    Private  finance
would, in principle, serve the same purpose, and in many situations market price adjustments may be
sufficient to stem the capital outflow.  But, given the extent of the loss of confidence in the Asian
case,  organising  private  financial  support  meant  in  practice  persuading  existing  creditors  that  their
assets  would  be  better  protected  if  they  were  prepared  to  leave  them  in  place,  especially  if  other
major creditors agreed to do the same and if official support was made available in parallel.  But in
this case, too, difficult judgements had to be made.  There was a danger that, if private creditors had
to be in effect coerced into staying put, they would immediately cut their positions elsewhere, while
they still could, adding to the international contagion.
In  fact,  in  the  critically  important  case  of  Korea,  the  promise  of  massive  official
support failed to restore market confidence.  And when it became apparent that the official bilateral
financing was in practise available only as the very last resort we had to turn to the commercial bank
lenders in the major creditor countries and persuade them to extend the maturity of their loans.  It
was  a  dangerous  moment.    But  their  constructive  response  went  a  long  way  to  resolving  the
immediate  crisis  and  helped  to  restore  greater  financial  stability  to  the  region  as  a  whole.    The
creditor banks are also now in negotiation with Indonesia’s commercial debtors.
The discussion in Washington turned to preventative measures for the future.
It would have been understandable in the light of the Asian experience if there had
been some turning back from the path towards greater freedom of international capital movements,
and there was some suggestion of this.  But on the whole the long term benefits of free capital flows
were upheld, and the mood was to continue cautiously down that path, but to emphasise the need, not
only for sound macro-economic policies which everyone accepts as a sine qua non, but also for steps
to accompany capital account liberalisation designed to reduce the risks of volatility.
These related in part to the process of capital account liberalisation, where there was a
good  deal  of  stress  on  ‘sequencing’  -  that  is  on  liberalising  potentially  more  stable,  longer-term,
capital inflows initially, rather than short-term borrowing.
But they related particularly to three key conditions for living with freedom of capital
movements.
The first was “transparency”.  In a broad sense a need for greater transparency was
recognised in relation to public policy, to the relationship between the public and private sectors, to
corporate governance and accounting and so on.  In a narrower sense there was seen to be a need for
greater and  more  timely  disclosure  of  financial  information  generally,  but  especially  in  relation  to
countries’ true foreign exchange reserve positions and in relation to their  short term  external  debt.
The general point is that we cannot reasonably expect markets to make a proper assessment of the
risks of their lending if they do not have adequate information in accessible form.  The corollary is
that  where  they  do  have  adequate  information  they  can  be  expected  to  accept  the  penalty  if  their
judgements prove ill-founded.
The  second  condition  for  more  stable  capital  flows  is  stronger  financial  systems.
That includes for example the broadening of capital markets so that the allocation of capital is less
concentrated  on  local  banking  systems.    It  includes  robust  financial  infrastructure  -  for  example
payments  and  settlements  systems.    And  it  includes  more  effective  financial  regulation  and
supervision.  A key feature of future arrangements for me in this area is the encouragement of more
active  management  of  short-term  foreign  currency  assets  relative  to  liabilities,  by  both  the  public
BIS Review   36/1998
- 6 -
sector  and  the  local  banks,  taking  account  of  the  nature  of  the  exchange  rate  regime.    It  was
weaknesses in this area, above all, in my view that turned the Asian problem into a panic.
These  various  steps  -  which  need  a  great  deal  of  elaboration  and  refinement  -  in
themselves represent a huge agenda for the future.  But however much we try to prevent accidents
we need nevertheless to be prepared for them to happen.  The third condition for living with greater
freedom of capital movements, therefore, is a more consistent view of how, when a crisis does break,
the burden might be expected to be shared in the future between official and private sector financing.
In  this  context,  one  thing  seems  clear:  given  the  evidence  of  public  resistance,  we
cannot assume that massive official financing packages will in fact be deliverable in the future to bail
out  private  creditors.    Various  ideas  have  been  put  forward  for  involving  the  private  lenders  in
maturity extension - within a formal legal framework or through official persuasion - and they, too,
need to be elaborated and refined.  But it might help to avoid inflows becoming excessive if private
lenders clearly understood from the outset that they would be expected to carry a substantial part of
the load.
Mr. Chairman, the debate on all of these issues is still at a relatively early stage.  But
it is an important part of the present international monetary agenda and you can expect that, as the
debate crystallises, aspects of it will be gradually added to the policy consensus.  Our snail must keep
moving forwards.
In the meantime, Mr. Chairman, the world too goes on.  So let me conclude with a
few  remarks  on  the  prospects  for  the  global  economy,  bearing  in  mind  the  potential  economic
aftershock from Asia’s financial disturbances.
In fact those prospects are less bleak overall than you might suppose.
The  last  few  years  have  seen  world  growth  at  around  4%,  against  a  longer-term
average rate of just under 3½ % - with the improvement extending across both the industrial and the
developing countries as a whole and with stabilisation now in the transition economies.  Meanwhile,
inflation has declined almost everywhere.
The latest IMF projections suggest world growth of just over 3% this year - more than
1% less than was projected as recently as last October.  The slowdown - and downward revisions -
are  heavily  concentrated  on  the  Asian  countries  themselves,  notably  Japan,  which,  because  of  the
massive  size  of  its  economy  has  a  large  impact  on  world  growth.    Elsewhere  among  the  major
industrial countries weaker demand from Asia is expected to be offset by relatively strong domestic
demand, so that overall output growth is not much affected - indeed it is expected to pick up on the
continent.  A troublesome feature of these projected developments - coupled with recent exchange
rate  movements  -  is  that  they  imply  large  external  payments  imbalances  which  will  need  to  be
carefully managed if they are not to lead to protectionist pressures and exchange market volatility.
Against  that  background  the  G7  surveillance  discussion  focused  particularly  on
Japan, where financial fragility - in the wake of the bubble and subsequent collapse of asset prices -
continues, which is itself acting as a drag on the domestic economy and which is compounded by a
loss  of  both  consumer  and  industrial  confidence.    Both  the  financial  fragility  and  the  domestic
economic weakness are now aggravated by the problems elsewhere in Asia.  Everyone at the meeting
welcomed the Japanese commitment of public funds to strengthen the financial system and the recent
announcement of large fiscal stimulus to strengthen domestic demand led growth, which will help to
reduce Japan’s external surplus and also to strengthen the Yen.
BIS Review   36/1998
- 7 -
In relation to the other major industrial countries there was general puzzlement at the
persistent strength of equity markets and about the implications if it were to continue - or even if it
does not.
Particular  points  made  in  relation  to  continental  Europe  were  that  it  is  important
there,  too,  that  the  gathering  recovery  -  hitherto  driven  largely  by  external  demand  -  should
increasingly  be  based  on  sustained  growth  of  domestic  demand;  and  that  continuing  structural
reforms will be necessary to combat persistent high unemployment - especially now in the context of
monetary union.  In the United States and this country, on the other hand, which both grew strongly
last year on the back of domestic demand, the emphasis was on a need for vigilance - as always - to
stay on a non-inflationary path so that sustainable growth can be maintained.
The IMF’s analysis of this country’s position, Mr. Chairman, is in fact very similar to
our  own.    We  both  recognise  that  aggregate  demand  growth  needs  to  moderate  quite  sharply  if
inflation  is  to  be  held  to  the  Government’s  target  over  the  next  two  years  or  so.    We  are  already
clearly  seeing  a  weakening  of  net  external  demand  in  response  to  the  sterling’s  exaggerated
appreciation - particularly against other European currencies - since the autumn of 1996 and now in
response  to  the  Asian  crisis.    However  undesirable  that  may  be  in  terms  of  the  balance  of  the
economy  -  and  I  am  very  sensitive  to  the  hammering  being  taken  by  the  internationally  exposed
sectors - it does provide a little more time to bring about the necessary moderation of the strength of
domestic  demand  growth,  which  we  expect  to  occur  as  a  result  of  both  the  fiscal  and  monetary
tightening already in place, and in the absence this year of “windfalls” from demutualisations.  The
critical  judgement  relates  to  the  precise  timing  and  pace  of  this  moderation  of  domestic  demand
growth, and whether it will be sufficient to prevent a pick up in inflation as the dampening effects of
the strong exchange rate and weaker external demand wear off.
Now  -  although  there  are  some  encouaging  signs  -  frankly  no-one  can  know  the
answer to that question with any great confidence - we are not blessed with perfect foresight!  As the
IMF says in one of its documents prepared for the recent meetings: “Striking the right balance for
monetary  policy  in  this  environment  is  a  difficult  challenge.”  Well  you  can  say  that  again!  It  is
hardly  surprising  against  this  background  that  there  should  be  disagreement  within  the  Monetary
Policy  Committee  as  to  whether  or  not  a  marginal  further  tightening  of  monetary  policy  is
necessary-in fact I would normally expect there to be disagreement when we are close to where we
need to be.  But we are all unambiguously clear about where we need to get to in terms of inflation,
and it is unrealistic in the circumstances - indeed in any circumstances - to expect us to say what will
happen to interest rates in the future.
Mr.  Chairman,  the  overall  prospect  for  the  world  economy  -  and  indeed  our  own
domestic  economy  -  is  for  continuing  growth  with  low  inflation,  and  we  do  I  think  have  a  clear
vision of where we want to go and the policies to take us there.  But there are certainly a number of
immediately painful blackspots - internationally and here at home - and there are some formidable
rocks and potential whitewater further ahead.  Navigating through them will not be easy.  I only hope
that our snail is able to swim.
BIS Review   36/1998
