Mr. Stals asks whether the East Asian financial crisis can be repeated in South
Africa  Address by the Governor of the Reserve Bank of South Africa, Mr. C. Stals, at a breakfast
meeting organised by Life Line West Rand in Krugersdorp on 29/4/98.
1. Background to the East Asian crisis
It is now history that the economies of a number of East Asian countries collapsed in
the second half of 1997 and created disruptive turmoil  in  financial markets around  the  world. The
countries  most  affected  were  Indonesia,  the  Republic  of  Korea,  Malaysia,  the  Philippines  and
Thailand.
A  number  of  reasons  were  provided  for  this  collapse  which  shocked  the  world
economy,  particularly  because  it  occurred  in  those  countries  that  were  the  most  successful  in
achieving  their  economic  development  objectives  during  the  past  thirty  years.  The  main  reasons
included:
•  a substantial build-up of foreign liabilities -- particularly of a short-term nature --
took place over the protracted period of rapid economic growth;
  the financial sectors were not properly supervised and regulated, with the result
that banking institutions accumulated large amounts of non-performing loans, not
provided for in capital and reserves;
there  were  unjustified  governmental  interventions  in  the  normal  working  of  the
financial  markets.  Financial  institutions  were,  for  example,  instructed  to  make
loans to preferred clients at low interest rates;
•  governance within private sector institutions, public corporations and government
departments was of low quality and, in the case of some countries, undermined by
corruption;
•  macroeconomic  policies  did  not  adjust  to  the  changing  environment;  markets
were  liberalised  without  concurrent  adjustment  in  internal  economic  structures;
money  supply  and  bank  credit  extension  increased  almost  unchecked;  interest
rates were kept artificially low, and exchange rates were not allowed to adjust in
accordance with changes in the overall balance of payments situation.
The  final  collapse  was  triggered  first  in  Thailand,  when  foreign  investors  lost
confidence in the economy and started to withdraw part of their more liquid  investments  from  the
country. The authorities were very slow to react to the threatening crisis. As became evident at a later
stage, important information on the deteriorating economic situation was withheld from the markets
and vital statistics were, in some cases, deliberately not released.
In  the  end,  the  International  Monetary  Fund,  the  World  Bank,  a  number  of  the
governments of industrial countries, and the international investment  community,  had  to  provide  a
massive amount of financial support -- more than US $120 billion -- to assist these countries. The
countries themselves also had to implement painful corrective measures that will, over time, restore
equilibrium in their economies. These programmes inter alia provide for:•
 
relatively  restrictive  monetary  policies  that must  prevent  further  depreciation  of
the currencies to protect domestic institutions with outstanding foreign liabilities
from further losses, and must eventually reduce inflation;
BIS Review   38/1998
- 2 -
  the restructuring of the financial sectors through predetermined reform agendas in
each country. Public sector rescue operations must be supported by cost sharing
sacrifices  from  the  private  sector,  and  prudential  regulations  for  financial
institutions must be tightened;
improvements  in  public  and  corporate  governance  and  a  strengthening  of
transparency and accountability;
•  a  reduction  in  the  dependence  of  public  sector  budgets  on  external  funds,  and
fiscal provision for the costs of restructuring and recapitalising banking systems.
The devastating effects of the crises can be illustrated by a few statistics from some of
the affected countries. According to a recent World Bank report, prices of key commodities, such as
rice, increased by 25 per cent or more in Indonesia, leading to food riots and major demonstrations
against  the  Government.  Unemployment  is  rising  sharply  and  will  increase  the  number  of  people
living below the poverty line from 23 million to 40 million during the course of 1998.
In Korea, bankruptcies and unemployment are on the rise. Eight of the thirty biggest
conglomerates  (chaebol)  have  filed  for  liquidation.  Unemployment  is  expected  to  increase  from
500,000 last year to 1.2 million workers soon.
In Thailand, the slump in industry is severe. Monthly sales of motor vehicles, steel,
consumer electronic goods and durable consumer goods are now running at levels of 35  to  75  per
cent down on last year. Industrial output growth is expected to decline by about 50 per cent.
In terms of the latest World Economic Outlook of the International Monetary Fund,
the global economic growth rate for 1998 will be reduced by the East Asian crisis from a previous
forecast of 3½ per cent to not more than 3 per cent in 1998. This will have an adverse effect on world
trade, and also on the export prospects for countries such as South Africa. It further deteriorates the
outlook for an early economic recovery in Japan, and also holds adverse effects for many emerging
market economies.
2. The South African situation
The  South  African  economy  was  so  far  relatively  little  affected  by  the  East  Asian
crisis.  The  foreign  exchange  market,  and  particularly  the  exchange  rate  of  the  rand,  came  under
pressure for only a few weeks in October last year. Prices on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange were
more directly affected, although the declines registered at that time were wiped out by a strong bull
run over the past three months.
Some other emerging markets, for example Brazil, were affected much more severely
than South Africa. The question is often asked why was South Africa left almost unimpaired by the
East Asian crisis? There are a number of reasons for this:
Firstly,  it  must  be  remembered  that  South  Africa  had  its  own  mini-crisis  in  1996
when sudden capital outflows from the country forced a depreciation of the rand of
more than 20 per cent, and the introduction of restrictive fiscal and monetary policies
that reduced the growth rate in total domestic expenditure from 5.0 per cent in 1995
to 2.7 per cent in 1996, and 1.4 per cent in 1997. At the time of the East Asian crisis,
South Africa had just  gone  through  a  very  painful  downward  economic adjustment
BIS Review   38/1998
- 3 -
period  that  satisfied  foreign 
macroeconomic disciplines.
investors  of  our  resolve 
to  apply  acceptable
Secondly,  the  South  African  problems  of  1996  were  created  by  a  cyclical
disequilibrium,  following  from  excessive  rates  of  growth  in  total  domestic
expenditure, and this situation could be corrected fairly easily with the right kind of
monetary  and  fiscal  policies.  In  most  of  the  East  Asian  countries,  the  fundamental
problems  are  more  of  a  structural  nature  and  will  require  longer  and  more  painful
adjustments to restore growth to previous levels.
There are, nevertheless, a number of lessons to be learned by South Africa from the
East Asian crisis. Our country is also being integrated more and more into the global markets of the
world and, as in the case of those countries, developments in South Africa are also subject to the very
critical surveillance of the international investors’ community. At this stage, their critical monitors
are being focused on:
      the health and soundness of the domestic financial sector;
the openness and efficiency of the money and capital markets, and the market in
foreign exchange;
the transparency, both of policies and of macroeconomic data made available by
the authorities;
the  quality  of  governance  in  both  the  public  and  the  private  sectors  of  the
economy;
the macroeconomic policies followed in  the  country  by  the  monetary  and  fiscal
authorities, and in respect of labour and commodity markets;
the overall balance of payments situation, including developments in the current
and in the capital accounts; and
the total outstanding foreign liabilities, with special reference to the vulnerability
of the country for sudden outflows of capital.
In recent months, foreign investors showed their satisfaction with the South African
situation by continuing to increase their investments in South Africa. Over the first four months of
this year, non-residents increased their holdings of South African equities and bonds by no less than
R34  billion.  This  enabled  South  Africa  to  continue  with  the  programme  of  gradually  relaxing
exchange  controls,  and  also  helped  the  Reserve  Bank  to  increase  its  net  foreign  reserves  by  R4.9
billion during the first quarter of this year.
South Africa can continue to hold the confidence of foreign  investors,  provided  we
are also prepared to continue to apply the sound monetary and fiscal policies of the past year. If not,
foreign market sentiment towards the country can change very quickly, and we can easily be forced
into a new financial market crisis of our own.
With  his  latest  Budget,  the  Minister  of  Finance  reconfirmed  the  Government’s
determination to maintain the necessary disciplines in fiscal policy. The Reserve Bank is known for
its  conservative  approach  towards  monetary  policy,  and  is  equally  determined  to  maintain  strict
disciplines in the management of the money and banking systems of the country. In this way, South
Africa will continue to benefit from being part of the global financial system, and to make use of the
savings of other countries to help finance growth and development.
In summary, it depends on us and on the economic policies we apply, whether an East
Asian crisis will also develop in South Africa. Foreign investors nodded their approval of the policies
BIS Review   38/1998
- 4 -
of  the  past  year.  We  should  therefore  not  deviate  unnecessarily  from  the  course  of  the  existing
policies.
BIS Review   38/1998
