Bank of Japan’s August report of recent economic and financial developments
Bank of Japan communication, XX/8/98.
The Bank’s View1
Japan’s economic conditions continue to deteriorate.
With  respect  to  final  demand,  public  investment  seems  to  have  bottomed  out.  Net
exports  have  resumed  to  increase  mainly  due  to  a  decline  in  imports.  However,  business  fixed
investment has been decreasing significantly, and housing investment has weakened further. Private
consumption  has  not  yet  shown  a  resumption.  Against  this  background  of  weak  final  demand,
substantial production cutbacks continue. As a result, inventories have decreased somewhat, but the
level  is  still  high.  With  the  decline  in  expenditure  and  production,  corporate  profits  continue  to
decrease, and employee income remains below the previous year’s level. In addition, the ratio of job
offers  to  applications  has  dropped  to  a  historically  low  level,  and  the  unemployment  rate  has
increased further. As a whole, employment and income conditions have worsened.
Although  the  above  indicates  a  continued  negative  interactions  of  production,
income, and expenditure, a further deterioration in the economy is expected to cease gradually from
the effects of the comprehensive economic stimulus package including additional public works and
the special income tax reduction. Given the current considerably  low  level  of  economic  activities,
however,  the  positive  influence  of  the  package  on  private  demand  will  likely  be  limited,  and  the
economy’s  immediate  transition  to  a  self-sustained  recovery  is  hardly  expected.  In  these
circumstances,  the  relevant  bills  have  been  submitted  to  the  Diet  to  rebuild  the  stability  of  the
financial  system.  Moreover,  the  new  administration  is  planning  to  launch  new  economic  stimulus
measures, including additional public investment in the supplementary budget for fiscal 1998 and the
reduction in personal income taxes and corporate taxes. The materialization of these policies along
with their effects on corporate and household sentiment should be carefully monitored.
With  regard  to  prices,  wholesale  prices  are  on  a  downtrend,  and  consumer  prices
(excluding the effects of institutional changes2) remain below the previous year’s level. With respect
to  the  factors  affecting  the  outlook,  the  downward  pressure  on  domestic  prices  induced  by  the
decline in import prices is weakening. In addition, the expansion in the output gap in the economy is
expected to slow in line with the implementation of the comprehensive economic stimulus package.
Nevertheless, reflecting the present large output gap, the downward pressure from domestic factors
is unlikely to weaken considerably, and hence, prices are likely to be weak for some time.
As for financial markets, yields on long-term government bonds and stock prices rose
toward  mid-July  1998  reflecting  growing  anticipation  for  permanent  tax  cut.  However,  they  have
declined  since  then  as  a  wait-and-see  posture  has  prevailed  among  market  participants  with  the
growing  attention  to  the  concrete  measures  of  the  new  administration’s  economic  policies.
Meanwhile,  Euro-yen  interest  rates  and  the  Japan  premium  indicate  strong  market  concerns
regarding credit risks of financial institutions and liquidity risks at end-September 1998, the end of
the first half of fiscal 1998.
With respect to monetary aggregates, growth in M2+CDs has been slowing, reflecting
the  sluggish  private  bank  lending.  These  developments  basically  reflect  the  further  decline  in  the
credit  demand  of  private  firms  with  the  worsening  of  overall  economic  activities,  along  with  the
continued cautious lending stance of private banks.
                                                     
1 The Bank’s view on recent economic and financial developments, determined by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy Meeting
held on August 11, as the basis of monetary policy decisions.
2 The rise in medical service charges due to the medical insurance system reform of September 1997.
BIS Review   65/1998
- 2 -
Meanwhile, some firms, especially small and medium-sized firms, have been facing
difficult  financing  conditions  in  terms  of  both  funds  availability  and  fund-raising  costs.  This
influence on the overall economy continues to warrant careful monitoring.
BIS Review   65/1998
