Mr. Fazio discusses Italy and Europe in a world of global finance      Address
by the Governor of the Bank of Italy, Dott. Antonio Fazio, at a conference jointly organised by
AIOTE - ASSOBAT - ATIC - FOREX - AIAF and held in Naples on 24/1/98.
The expansion of trade and the globalization of markets have maintained the rate
of  growth  of  the  world  economy  at  a  high  level  in  the  last  ten  years.  The  pace  has  been
particularly  rapid  in  the  countries  where  labour  is  most  abundant  and  least  costly  and  in  the
industrial  countries  whose  economies  are  marked  by  a  high  degree  of  flexibility  and  rising
productivity.
The  liberalization  of  trade  in  goods  and  services,  the  improvement  in
communications and the reduction in transport costs increase the efficiency of the allocation of
resources  in  the  world.  The  gains  from  trade,  the  new  wealth  created  are  unequally  divided
among the countries involved; they also result in a redistribution of productive capacity and an
increase in specialization and concentration.
The  globalization  of  finance  allows  saving  to  be  allocated  and  managed  more
efficiently  at  world  level;  it  has  made  a  significant  contribution  to  sustaining  productive
investment in the fastest growing economies.
In the six leading industrial countries the volume of financial assets rose between
1982 and 1995 from $30 trillion to $124 trillion and from four to six times their annual GDP at
current prices. In the industrial countries the huge rise in public debt contributed to the increase
in the supply of financial  instruments.  Stock  markets  have  grown  very  rapidly  in  recent  years,
especially  in  the  emerging  countries.  The  activity  of  non-bank  intermediaries  operating  on  a
global  scale  and  investing  primarily  in  shares  and  bonds  and  other  widely  traded  assets  has
developed, rapidly reaching a very substantial volume.
Financial intermediaries, including banks,  tend  to  behave  according  to  operating
models  that  are  based  on  the  same  theoretical  paradigms;  sometimes,  however,  by  reacting
uniformly  to  important  new  information  or  to  changes  in  expectations  concerning  individual
economies, they shift funds very rapidly from one economy to another; they can take positions
with very-short time horizons in foreign exchange or securities of a size that heavily influences
countries with less solid financial structures.
1. The Asian crisis
Foreign investment in the emerging markets by banks and institutional and private
investors rose from $50 billion in 1990 to $240 billion in 1996.
In  mid-1997  the  foreign  debts  of  eight  emerging  Asian  economies,  including
Hong Kong, Singapore and China, amounted to $900 billion or about 40 per cent of the area’s
GDP; some two thirds of the total was due to mature within one year.
The crisis, which has affected five countries in particular -- Thailand, Indonesia,
Malaysia,  the  Philippines  and  South  Korea  --  is  basically  the  result  of  the  persistence  of  large
external current account deficits ranging from 3 to 6 per cent of GDP and the consequent rapid
accumulation of foreign debt.
These  countries’  budgets  are  generally  close  to  balance  and  their  public  debt  is
limited. The disequilibria are attributable to an excess of private and public sector investment in
BIS Review   4/1998
- 2 -
relation  to  the  albeit  high  rate  of  saving.  The  returns  on  investment  projects  have  not  always
been  adequate  in  terms  of  profitability  and  exports,  partly  owing  to  inefficiencies  in  the
allocation of credit. Competitiveness was eroded by the 40 per cent devaluation of the Chinese
currency in 1994.
Firms’ growing dependence on foreign loans, denominated mostly in dollars, the
preponderantly  short-term  nature  of  the  debt  and  shortcomings  in  the  supervision  of  financial
intermediaries made financial systems more fragile. The uncertain performance of the Japanese
economy and financial system exerted a negative influence.
The  crisis  started  and  spread  when  market  participants  came  to  recognize  the
difficulty of sustaining exchange rates in the face of the sharp and continuing appreciation of the
dollar  and  expectations  of  increases  in  interest  rates  in  the  United  States.  The  possibility
emerged  of  heavy  losses  by  firms;  growth  prospects  were  scaled  back,  with  further  adverse
effects on stock markets.
It  is  surprising,  in  this  crisis  as  well,  how  fast  the  climate  of  opinion  changed
among  investors;  it  suggests  a  formation  of  expectations  based  on  the  performance  of  the
macro-economic variables only in the short run and on the attitudes of other market participants.
The extrapolative nature of expectations compounds fluctuations in exchange rates and securities
prices.
Once  again  there  was  a  failure  to  make  a  thorough  analysis  of  the  underlying
conditions  of  each  economy.  To  be  sure,  the  shortness  of  the  average  maturity  of  the  debt
indicated uncertainty among investors regarding long-term growth prospects; nonetheless, until
mid-1997 the flow of capital to the area remained substantial.
Notwithstanding  the  interventions  organized  by  the  IMF,  the  crisis  deepened  in
December and the early days of this year. The falls in share prices and exchange rates against the
dollar in the five countries mentioned since early 1997 have reached respectively 40 and 50 per
cent on average; expressed in dollars, share prices have fallen to less than one third of the initial
level. The markets, and especially the stock markets, of Singapore, Taiwan and Hong Kong have
been caught up in the crisis.
Events in the markets and the poorer prospects for the economies of the countries
hit  by  the  crisis  have  adversely  affected  the  already  delicate  balance  of  Japan’s  capital  market
and the quality of its banking system’s assets.
The  Chinese  economy  has  not  been  drawn  into  the  crisis,  owing  to  its  initially
strong competitive position, relatively underdeveloped financial system and the preference given
to direct inward investment over portfolio investment.
The volume of financing mobilized by the IMF, other international organizations
and the nations working to cope with the crisis is  without  precedent.  The  World  Bank  and  the
Asian Development Bank have been called upon to contribute to objectives beyond the scope of
their  respective  institutional  mandates.  Total  disbursements  of  around  $110  billion  have  either
been made or are envisaged.
Banks  will  have  to  help  in  containing  the  effects  of  the  crisis  by  rolling  over
existing loans.
BIS Review   4/1998
- 3 -
The intensity of the crisis and the fear of systemic repercussions have produced a
disarray  in  the  measures  and  decisions  adopted  that  suggests  the  present  arrangements  for
international cooperation are inadequate in the face of the challenges posed by the globalization
of markets.
2. International monetary developments
The  backdrop  to  the  Asian  crisis  is  the  persistent  problem  of  the  uncertain
performance of the Japanese economy and the excessive burden placed on monetary policy.
This  situation  is  an  inheritance  from  the  Mexican  crisis  in  the  early  months  of
1995,  which  led  initially  to  an  abnormal  appreciation  of  the  yen  and  to  fears  of  a  prolonged
decline of the dollar.
The lowering of interest rates in Japan to near zero led in the second half of 1995
to a fall on the order of 20 per cent in the effective exchange rate of the yen. The economy did
not  benefit  sufficiently  in  terms  of  growth,  while  the  imbalance  associated  with  Japan’s  large
external  credit  position  was  aggravated.  The  weakness  of  the  exchange  rate  tended  to  depress
share prices, thereby contributing to the contraction in domestic bank credit.
Fiscal policy, even after the recent announcement of a small reduction in taxation,
continues to be directed towards the undeniably desirable objective of containing the public debt
in  the  long  term.  A  further  reduction  in  the  budget  deficit  is  expected  in  1998;  there  does  not
appear  to  be  sufficient  concern  about  the  deflationary  implications  of  this  course  in  the  short
term.
The measures now before the Japanese Parliament provide for a limited stimulus
to  domestic  demand  based  on  tax  reductions  that  should  amount  to  around  half  a  percentage
point of  GDP.  The  package  also  includes  a  plan  for  shoring  up  and  rescuing  the  financial  and
banking system involving very substantial resources, some $240 billion or 6 per cent of GDP.
The  long  period  of  expansionary  monetary  policy  in  Japan,  especially  from  the
spring of  1995  onwards,  has  substantially  increased  the  supply  of  yen  and  lowered  the  cost  of
yen financing. Japanese banks have considerably increased their supply of credit to international
markets;  their  external  liabilities  have  fallen  substantially  and  they  have  become  large  net
creditors.
The  expansion  in  the  credit  provided  by  the  Japanese  banking  system  has
occurred  in  a  period  which  has  been  marked  by  a  very  large  US  current  account  deficit,  at
present  on  the  order  of  $180  billion  a  year,  coupled  with  a  persistently  high  level  of  direct
investment abroad by American firms. The relatively slack economic conditions in most of the
industrial countries made it easier to finance the external deficits of the countries affected by the
crisis.
In  a  context  of  low  inflation,  both  actual  and  expected,  the  supply  of  money  at
very  low  interest  rates  has  been  reflected  in  long-term  yields  in  Japan  and  the  other  leading
markets.  The  yields  on  long-term  Japanese  securities  fell  to  2.1  per  cent  in  1997.  Japanese
overseas  portfolio  investment  amounted  to  more  than  $80  billion  in  1994  and  1995,  twice  the
level of the preceding years; it rose further in 1996 and the early part of 1997; around one fifth
of the outflow goes directly to the US market.
BIS Review   4/1998
- 4 -
Foreign investment in US securities amounted to more than $300 billion in 1996,
an  increase  of  50  per  cent  on  1994  and  1995;  compared  with  three  years  earlier  it  more  than
doubled.  Annual  disinvestment  is  on  the  order  of  $100  billion.  The  yield  on  ten-year  US
securities fell from 6.4 per cent in 1996 to 5.8 per cent at the end of 1997.
The  European  financial  system  also  received  much  larger  portfolio  investment
inflows  in  1996  and  1997  than  in  the  preceding  years.  More  than  $200  billion  flowed  into
Germany  in  1996,  compared  with  $125  billion  in  1995  and  $76  billion  in  1994.  In  1997  the
yields on medium-term securities fell faster in Germany than in the United States, reaching 5.3
per cent.
In some respects the abundance of liquidity in the international market appears to be a replay of
the  situation  in  the  early  1990s,  up  to  the  beginning  of  1994,  following  the  prolonged  US
monetary expansion. The Federal Reserve held short-term rates close to 3 per cent for nearly two
years.  In  these  circumstances  the  yields  on  medium  and  long-term  securities  in  the  leading
markets declined steadily and substantially until the last few months of 1993. Those on ten-year
US  Treasury  bonds  fell  from  7  per  cent  at  the  beginning  of  1992  to  just  over  5  per  cent  in
October 1993; the yields on German securities fell from 8 per cent to below 6 per cent at the end
of 1993. The yields on ten-year Italian Treasury paper fell from over 14 per cent in the autumn
of 1992 to below 9 per cent in the early months of 1994, after reaching 15 per cent during the
EMS crisis.
From  February  1994  onwards,  in  connection  with  the  shift  in  the  stance  of  US
monetary policy, interest rates rose rapidly everywhere; securities prices fell to their level of two
years earlier.
After the Mexican crisis, medium-term interest  rates  declined  gradually  again  in
all  the  main  markets  from  the  spring  of  1995  onwards.  Monetary  policy  was  tightened
moderately  during  1997  in  all  the  industrial  countries  except  Italy  and  Spain.  The  upward
pressures on interest rates are now being neutralized by the need to facilitate the solution of the
Asian crisis and the expectations of slower growth in the United States.
The  funds  that  have  been  withdrawn  from  the  Asian  economies  have  flowed  to
the  financial  markets  of  the  industrial  countries,  above  all  that  of  the  United  States,  providing
support for share and bond prices and the exchange rate of the dollar.
The  yen  has  been  constantly  weak,  but  in  general  outside  Asia  the  pattern  of
exchange rates has remained orderly.
On several occasions during the 1990s the Japanese government announced plans
for  fiscal  expansion.  Although  they  were  substantial,  the  composition  of  the  measures,  their
temporary  nature  and  incomplete  implementation  meant  that  they  produced  effects  of  limited
size and duration. The Japanese economy appears to be dominated by negative expectations for
the medium and long term connected  with  the  prospective  ageing  of  the  population.  The  large
fall in property and share prices at the beginning of the 1990s created difficulties for the banking
system,  which  have  now  been  aggravated  by  the  crisis  of  South  Korea  and  the  countries  of
South-East Asia, which have close commercial, financial and entrepreneurial ties with Japan.
The way to overcome the impasse -- given the size of the Japanese economy and
its  actual  and  potential  strength  in  terms  of  productive  capacity  and  saving  --  appears  to  be  to
BIS Review   4/1998
- 5 -
provide an effective stimulus to domestic demand. Monetary policy, with interest rates close to
zero, appears to have shot its bolt.
The  plan  now  under  discussion,  if  it  is  approved  by  Parliament  in  its  entirety,
appears to be on a sufficiently large scale as regards the rehabilitation of the financial system. By
contrast,  the  stimulus  for  economic  activity  appears  still  to  be  small.  More  incisive  budgetary
measures,  possibly  with  short  time  horizons,  could  improve  the  outlook  for  growth  in  Japan
without having adverse long-term effects on its public finances.
The  levels  reached  by  share  prices  in  the  economies  affected  by  the  crisis,  in
conjunction with the stabilization plans drawn up for some of them with the support of the IMF,
mean that there are likely to be profitable investment opportunities.
In the present phase the international economy is exposed to the risk of systemic
instability,  with  consequent  widespread  deflationary  effects.  International  portfolio  investment
flows have been of unprecedented size in the last few  years;  it  is  necessary  at  least  to  monitor
them and to some extent to govern them.
A recovery in domestic demand and an improvement in the prospects for growth
in Japan would also underpin the yen; they would bring direct benefits for  the  Asian  countries
and  indirect  benefits  for  the  world  economy.  There  is  an  increasingly  urgent  need  for  a  new
comprehensive approach to these problems conforming with the configuration of global markets
and today’s international financial system.
3. Europe in the global market
Europe’s  markets  are  increasingly  integrated  with  the  international  market  in
finance.
The  international  opening  of  the  Italian  and  French  financial  systems  has
proceeded  apace  in  the  1990s.  Germany  had  already  been  playing  an  important  role  in
international  markets;  at  the  same  time  the  share  of  finance  coming  from  abroad  has  steadily
grown  and  the  large  net  external  credit  position  built  up  above  all  in  the  1980s  is  tending  to
diminish. The international openness of the United Kingdom remains pronounced, reflecting the
presence of the world’s leading financial centre.
The  recent  monetary  developments  have  had  a  significant  effect  on  all  the
markets  of  continental  Europe.  The  last  three  years  have  seen  substantial  flows  of  portfolio
investment  into  Germany,  France  and  Italy  as  well  as  smaller  countries.  The  fall  in  long-term
yields, which occurred  simultaneously  everywhere,  has  reflected  the  stability  of  prices  and  the
reduction in government deficits within Europe; more immediately it is the consequence of the
large inflows of funds that have been a feature of all the European markets.
Policies  must  be  designed  to  maintain  in  the  European  Union  financial
investments  that  tend  to  be  of  a  temporary  nature.  The  small  inflow  of  direct  investment  into
some continental European countries, coupled with growth in EU outward direct investment, is a
cause for concern. There is a need to develop conditions of competitiveness and profitability in
productive systems that will attract the funds of international investors on a permanent basis.
The  competitiveness  of  the  financial  industry  in  continental  Europe  is  relatively
low. Costs are high; the quality of the services provided  is  still  inadequate.  Small  markets  and
BIS Review   4/1998
- 6 -
the  chronic  weakness  of  some  currencies  have  been  a  brake  on  the  development  of  a  more
modern financial industry able to compete in the global market.
In 1996 the current account of the European Union’s balance of payments showed
a  surplus  of  $86  billion  or  1  per  cent  of  the  area’s  GDP.  From  1990  onwards  the  external
accounts  of  the  EU  countries  fluctuated  between  deficit  and  surplus  against  a  background  of
rapid growth of the world economy and moderate growth of domestic demand within the area.
The  limited  increase  in  output,  the  steady  decline  in  industrial  employment  and
the rise in unemployment are indicators of insufficient competitiveness with respect to the rest of
the  world.  The  markets  for  goods  and  above  all  the  market  for  labour  are  more  rigid  in
continental Europe; unit labour costs in industry are comparable with those of the United States
and Japan, but much higher than those of newly industrialized countries in Asia, Latin America
and eastern Europe. The tax burden, and especially that relative to employee workers, is high.
Population  ageing  will  profoundly  alter  the  balance  between  the  economically
active  and  inactive  members  of  society.  The  low  level  of  economic  growth  depresses  the
propensity to invest.
The prospect of economic and monetary union has forced European countries to
take determined action to put their public finances back on a sound footing. To a large extent the
effort required to adjust budget deficits has been made. A high degree of monetary stability has
been restored. In several cases however, the tax burden has increased further.
Monetary  stability  is  the  primary  objective  of  the  unification;  it  serves  to  create
conditions conducive to investment and growth.
The parameters for government deficits and public debts are playing a key role in
achieving monetary stability in the area; they were nonetheless conceived in a context in which
the implications of the globalization of commerce and finance were still not sufficiently clear; it
is  also  necessary  to  try  and  reduce  the  burden  on  the  economy  of  some  items  of  the  public
finances and the ratio of taxes and social security contributions to GDP.
To seek to enhance the Union’s competitiveness through the exchange rate would
be  in  contrast  with  the  objective  of  monetary  stability.  Competitiveness  is  in  the  first  place  a
reflection of the share of resources absorbed -- directly in the form of wages, indirectly via some
items of public expenditure -- by labour. It must therefore be enhanced through a cost of labour,
a flexibility in its use and a level of direct and indirect taxation that are compatible with today’s
greater international openness of the markets for goods, services and especially finance.
Increasing the size and diversification of the capital  market  can  make  a  decisive
contribution to monetary stability and ultimately to the prosperity of the economy.
Europe  as  a  whole  is  a  net  creditor  with  respect  to  the  rest  of  the  world.  The
creation  of  a  single  financial  market  that  is  no  longer  segmented  by  different  currencies,  in  a
context of price stability and greater competitiveness, will offer considerable scope for growth in
the issue and trading of corporate bonds and shares, and for the development of related capital
market activities, benefiting enterprises and economic activity and supporting their extension to
world markets.
BIS Review   4/1998
- 7 -
Looking  ahead,  the  international  monetary  system  will  increasingly  be  divided
into three large blocs: those of the dollar, the yen and the European currency. The currencies of
smaller countries will tend to be grouped around, and refer to, the three of greatest importance.
The  strength  of  each  currency  will  depend  on  the  credibility  of  the  monetary
policies  adopted.  In  the  background  there  will  be  a  tendency  for  the  productivity  and
competitiveness of the real economy to take on renewed importance. It is necessary to foresee a
recomposition of the area’s value added in the medium term at the expense of more traditional
industries and to the benefit of more advanced services, especially financial services.
Important  opportunities  are  opening  up  for  Italian  and  European  operators  that
they  must  succeed  in  grasping  by  updating  strategies  and  professional  skills  and  by  correctly
assessing the related risks through the application of more advanced and complete models.
4. Italy
Italy recorded another surplus on its external current account in 1997, of the order
of 60 trillion lire or just over 3 per cent of GDP.
Towards the end of  the  year  the  country’s  net  external  position  returned  to  near
balance. Some 470 trillion lire of net government liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents (mostly short
and medium-term lira paper purchased on the Italian market, but with about one fifth consisting
of foreign currency bonds issued abroad) were matched by net assets of more than 350 trillion
held  by  the  non  bank  private  sector,  about  100  trillion  held  by  the  Bank  of  Italy  and  smaller
amounts held by banks and other financial operators.
The Bank of Italy’s gold reserves amount to 2,500 tonnes; in addition the central
bank’s external position improved from 51 trillion lire at the end of 1995 to 96 trillion at the end
of last year.
Households and firms have converted Italy’s substantial current account surpluses
into external financial assets. They first repaid foreign currency debts taken  on  in  earlier  years
and  then  increased  their  holdings  abroad.  Their  overall  position  in  foreign  currency  improved
from near balance in 1993 to a surplus of more than 200 trillion lire last September.
Capital  outflows  in  the  form  of  portfolio  investment  increased  from  a  monthly
average of 4.5 trillion lire in 1996 to one of about 9 trillion last year. This reflects a propensity
for portfolio diversification aimed at achieving a better combination of risk and return, a process
that  is  structural  and  that  is  bound  to  become  more  pronounced  over  the  next  few  years.
Increasingly,  these  outflows  are  being  channelled  through  Italian  and  foreign  intermediaries
specialized in asset management.
Despite  the  large  volume  of  capital  outflows  in  1997,  the  net  supply  of  foreign
currency in exchange for lire remained very substantially positive, enabling the Bank of Italy to
achieve the build-up in its foreign exchange reserves referred to earlier at stable exchange rates.
The supply of foreign currency  derived  not  only  from  the  trade  surplus  but  also
from a large volume of inward portfolio investment by institutional investors, banks and private
operators.  In  response  to  more  favourable  domestic  conditions  and  abundant  international
liquidity, the foreign investors continued to make very large purchases in 1997: 118 trillion lire,
in  line  with  the  previous  year.  At  the  same  time,  the  improved  climate  of  confidence  was
BIS Review   4/1998
- 8 -
reflected in a sharp reduction in the share of purchases foreign investors financed in lire in order
to hedge the exchange risk.
Net  purchases  of  Italian  government  securities  by  non-residents  exceeded  issues
by a wide margin. The economy’s regained credibility, the prospects for the consolidation of the
public  finances,  low  inflation  and  the  upward  trend  in  bond  prices  encouraged  investment  and
accentuated  the  decline  in  yields  on  medium  and  long-term  securities,  which  are  now
comparable to those in the markets with the most stable currencies.
Italian  savers  directed  the  bulk  of  their  investment  to  the  various  forms  of
managed  savings;  through  this  channel  they  increased  their  purchases  of  foreign  assets  and
Italian  shares.  Problems  may  arise  in  this  connection  with  respect  to  the  risks  that  households
and  firms  may  sometimes  run  with  this  new  configuration  of  their  portfolios.  The  declining
yields on Italian government paper and the lower liquidity of these alternative instruments also
strengthened the demand for money, and in particular for current account deposits.
The  climate  of  confidence  that  has  prevailed  in  the  markets  has  also  been
reflected in the surge in share prices, which has continued even after the outbreak of the Asian
crisis. Financial conditions facilitated major privatizations of public sector banks, coupled with
their recapitalization, along lines we had frequently suggested.
Economic  activity  remained  weak  in  the  first  half  of  1997,  bearing  out  the
forecasts we made at the end of 1996 and early last year. In 1997 the growth in GDP, which had
been a disappointing 0.7 per cent in 1996, would have been just over 1 per cent. Incentives for
the  purchase  of  consumer  durables  stimulated  economic  activity  despite  the  further  fiscal
tightening and permitted annual growth estimated at about 1.5 per cent.
Investment  in  plant  and  machinery  has  shown  signs  of  picking  up,  partly  in
response  to  favourable  conditions  in  Europe;  by  contrast,  the  construction  sector  continues  to
stagnate.
The  situation  with  regard  to  employment  is  not  improving,  however;  in  fact,  in
the  more  depressed  regions  it  is  deteriorating  further.  Growth  in  consumer  spending  is  still
hesitant, owing to the uncertain prospects for employment and the slow increase in households’
income.
Monetary policy has continued to be firmly directed to stabilizing inflation.
Consumer price inflation fell below 1.5 per cent on a seasonally adjusted annual
basis  in  the  second  half  of  1996  and  remained  at  that  level  until  the  summer  of  1997.  In  the
fourth quarter of last year it rose to around 2 per cent, reflecting the upturn  in  producer  prices
that had occurred in the second.
The  expectations  regarding  inflation  have  improved  continuously  and  now
indicate a rate of 2 per cent for 1998 and 1999.
The  lowering  of  official  interest  rates  from  the  middle  of  1996  onwards  was
calibrated in relation to actual and expected inflation and the outlook for the adjustment of the
public  finances,  the  condition  for  a  lasting  return  to  stability,  with  constant  attention  to  the
changes in residents’ portfolios and the inflows of foreign capital.
BIS Review   4/1998
- 9 -
We have kept the exchange rate consistent with the lira’s central parity,  with  no
need  for  support  intervention  in  the  moments  of  tension  of  international  origin  or  related  to
domestic political developments.
The  reduction  in  the  official  rates,  the  discount  rate  and  the  rate  on  advances,
decided  at  the  end  of  last  year  is  helping  to  sustain  conditions  that,  thanks  in  part  to  the  good
performance  of  exports,  are  likely  to  foster  investment.  The  growth  in  GDP  in  1998  could
exceed 2 per cent.
Italy is still faced with difficulties that will have to be overcome, thereby laying
the foundations for improvements tomorrow; there is a need for behaviour and policies that will
ensure  the  saving  available  is  used  to  strengthen  productive  investment  at  home.  Over  the  last
five  years  direct  investment  by  Italian  firms  expanded  substantially;  the  inflow  remained
virtually unchanged; the balance showed a deficit of 30 trillion lire.
The  quest  for  higher  profits  in  a  climate  of  renewed  confidence  in  stability  and
economic  growth  can  be  directed  towards  expanding  the  scale  of  production  and  investment,
with a view to creating employment.
Wage  moderation  must  be  maintained,  thereby  permitting  a  reduction  in  unit
labour costs; the albeit limited pressure on prices -- particularly producer prices -- must not be
allowed to increase.
Last  year  saw  substantial  progress  towards  the  consolidation  of  the  public
finances. On the basis of the latest data, general government net borrowing should be less than 3
per  cent  of  GDP.  A  start  has  been  made  on  reforms  aimed  at  improving  the  working  of  the
public administration and rationalizing the tax system. Cuts have been made in some expenditure
items and transfers to non-state public bodies reduced.
What  is  needed  now  is  action  of  a  structural  nature  to  consolidate  the  results
achieved.  Public  services  must  be  made  more  efficient  and  provide  effective  support  for
productive activity.
There  is  a  manifest  need  for  flexible  formulas  in  the  use  of  labour  that  will
enhance  its  productivity.  Unit  labour  costs  must  be  brought  down  substantially  in  the  less
developed regions, where both youth unemployment and the underground economy are present
on a large and growing scale and where the  labour  force  participation  rate,  particularly  among
women,  is  very  low.  It  is  indispensable  to  eliminate  the  rigidities  In  the  economic  relations
between  employers  and  employees,  which  prevent  wages  and  salaries  and  other  contractual
conditions  from  adjusting  to  the  level  of  productivity  and  the  demand  for  labour.  Excessively
high  labour  costs  lead  to  forms  of  hidden  employment;  they  prevent  most  young  people  from
embarking  on  a  career  in  the  regular  economy  and,  together  with  high  tax  rates,  give  rise  to
evasion of abnormal proportions.
A lack of effective demand is increasingly evident. A low level of investment is
common  to  all  the  European  economies;  it  lies  at  the  root  of  the  decline  in  employment  in
certain  sectors  and  the  rise  in  unemployment.  It  is  serious  in  the  more  depressed  regions,
particularly in southern Italy; together with high labour costs, the fall in private and public sector
investment  is  adversely  affecting  the  economic  and  productive  fabric.  Appropriate  policies  are
required  to  restore  higher  rates  of  investment.  Lower  unit  labour  costs  and  increased
competitiveness provide fertile ground for a recovery in investment.
BIS Review   4/1998
- 10 -
I  have  spoken  at  length  elsewhere  of  the  potential  and  actual  availability  of
private saving in Italy. I have endeavoured to show that a higher level of economic activity and
faster growth, combined with monetary and wage stability, can accelerate progress towards the
lasting adjustment of the public finances.
The price stability that we have regained with a monetary policy that at times has
had to be extremely rigorous, must be bolstered by a competitive and expanding real economy.
By  pursuing  a  stable  policy  from  the  summer  of  1994  onwards  we  brought  the
rate of inflation back into line with that of the leading industrial countries. Wage moderation, the
drastic reduction in the Treasury borrowing requirement in 1997 and the weakness of prices in
international  markets  have  helped  considerably  in  the  curbing  of  inflation;  as  a  consequence,
long-term  interest  rates  have  come  down.  These  results,  obtained  through  an  unwavering
commitment,  have  made  a  major  contribution  to  the  convergence  of  Italy’s  economy  towards
those of our European partners with a more firmly established tradition of stability.
The months from now until the decisions connected with the launch of Monetary
Union, but also the second part of this year, will prove especially delicate for the entire system
of  European  exchange  rates.  In  these  circumstances  monetary  policy,  while  it  will  continue  to
guarantee moderate medium-term inflation expectations, is now focused more on the stability of
the exchange rate.
If  economic  agents’  behaviour  is  consistent,  Italy  will  be  able  to  maintain  the
international  position  it  has  so  arduously  regained,  to  the  benefit  of  present  and  future
generations.
BIS Review   4/1998
