Mr.  George  discusses  macro-economic  sustainability  in  the  United  Kingdom
Speech  by  the  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  Mr.  E.A.J.  George,  at  the  Chemical  Industries
Association: Business Outlook Conference Dinner in London on 14/1/98.
I  am  particularly  pleased  to  be  associated  with  your  conference  theme  of
sustainability. The central banker’s mantra, with which we start our daily prayer meetings, is:
“Price stability is a necessary condition for sustainable growth”
And  sustainable  growth  we  see  as  effectively  synonymous  with  the  long-term
macro-economic prosperity which is what we are, of course, all seeking to achieve.
Now  I  suspect  the  same  is  true  at  the  micro-economic  level  -  the  level  of  the
individual firm.
There  are  certainly  differences  between  your  perspective  and  ours.  You,  in  the
chemical industry, for example, know what you are doing! I mean you know precisely what you are
doing at least in your production processes - where our business is much less precise - a behavioural
rather than an exact science, if it is a science at all.
And you are properly concerned with - indeed  responsible  to  shareholders  for  -  the
long-term prosperity of your individual businesses. Whereas we - much as we would wish to see you
all succeed individually - are concerned with stability and sustainable growth, leading to long-term
prosperity, in the economy as a whole.
Even so, I’d find it surprising if, at the micro-economic level, you, too, did not also
see  sustainability  and  long-term  profitability  as  necessarily  complementary  objectives  rather  than
conflicting  objectives.  In  any  event,  I  take  macro-economic  sustainability  as  the  theme  for  my
remarks this evening.
Many  people  think  that  -  because  the  objective  of  monetary  policy  is  typically
nowadays defined by governments in terms of permanently low inflation - that is seen as an end in
itself.
But in fact, as I say, we see low inflation - effective price stability - not just as an end
in itself but rather as a means to the end of sustainable growth and macro-economic prosperity.
Rising  prices  -  across  the  board  -  are  essentially  a  reflection  of  imbalance  between
aggregate demand in the economy and its supply-side capacity to meet that demand.
There is not much frankly that we can do - directly - to affect the supply-side capacity
of the economy. That is a function of its structural characteristics, including the productive abilities of
both sides of industry, which can be influenced over time by the whole raft of government policies.
Monetary policy operates essentially on the demand side - aiming to keep the growth
in aggregate demand more or less continuously in line with the underlying, sustainable growth in the
supply-side capacity of the economy.
I probably need not remind an industrial audience  what  happens  if  we  get  it  wrong
and  let  demand  run  ahead  of  supply.  The  inevitable  result  is  accelerating  inflation,  with  all  the
damage that can cause - by distorting the outcome of investment decisions and obscuring the relative
price signals that direct resource allocation.
BIS Review   3/1998
- 2 -
In the end we know that demand has to  be  brought  back  under  control.  The  choice
typically is not whether or not to tighten policy but whether to tighten sooner or later; and there is a
strong presumption that by tightening sooner - before excess demand really takes hold - we will need
to tighten less - to moderate the pace of growth of demand rather than bring it to a shuddering halt or
even send it in reverse.
Too  often  in  the  past  the  mistake  has  been  to  tighten  policy  too  little  and  too  late,
contributing to an exaggerated, boom and bust, economic cycle and thereby encouraging an unduly
short-term approach to both financial and physical investment.
So in trying to maintain effective price stability, in trying consistently to achieve the
Government’s inflation target, of 2½% for underlying retail price inflation, what we are really trying
to do is to  achieve  economic  stability  in  the  much  wider  sense  of  ensuring  that  aggregate  demand
grows  in  line  with  our  productive  potential.  If  we  are  successful  in  that,  then  the  financial  and
business communities will become more confident of making longer-term decisions, and in that way
we can contribute indirectly to improving the underlying supply-side of the economy.
This objective is now very widely understood and accepted. But it is, of course, much
more easily said than done.
Since the recession of the early 1990s we have in fact been reasonably successful in
maintaining this broader economic stability in this country. Inflation has been brought down to, and
maintained at, the lowest rate we have seen in a generation; but, even more important, we have also
seen  relatively  steady  growth  over  this  period  and  a  sustained  and  very  welcome  fall  in
unemployment.
But  it  has  to  be  recognised  that  the  going  is  now  becoming  more  difficult,  for  two
main reasons.
The first is that we began the present period of expansion in 1992 with a good deal of
slack, or spare capacity, in the economy - following the recession - and that slack has now been more
or less reabsorbed.
In the past year, in particular, the pace of expansion has picked up, to  close  to  4%,
under the impact particularly of strong domestic demand, and that is well above any realistic estimate
of the sustainable rate - the underlying rate of growth of supply-side capacity. And this is showing up
in the labour market in evidence of skills shortages and in some signs of higher pay settlements and
earnings.
If we are not now to run into a period of excess demand and accelerating inflation, the
rate of growth of the overall economy needs to moderate - quite soon and quite sharply.
And it almost certainly will moderate during the course of this year, and may indeed
have begun to do so. The growth of domestic demand is likely to be held back by the relatively tight
fiscal  policy  as  well  as  by  the  monetary  policy  tightening  since  May;  and  the  effect  this  year  of
“windfalls” as a result of building societies’ demutualisations will be very much smaller.
And  we  expect  a  deterioration  in  our  net  external  trade  position  as  a  result  of  the
strength of sterling’s exchange rate and now, too, as a result of the recent developments in Asia.
The difficult questions for policy relate to the timing and the extent of the slowdown
that is necessary on the one hand and likely on the other. These are difficult judgements at any time.
They are particularly difficult when the economy is already close to full capacity. It is not surprising
BIS Review   3/1998
- 3 -
that  commentators  differ  in  degree  in  their  assessments.  Economics  is  not  -  as  I  say  -  a  precise
science. Neither we at the Bank nor anyone else know with any great precision exactly where we are
in  relation  to  full  capacity  or  exactly  how  fast  capacity  is  growing;  and  we  don’t  know  precisely
either  how  demand  will  in  fact  respond  to  the  policy  tightening  that  is  already  in  place.  Our  own
best - and very carefully informed - guess is embodied in the forecasts that we publish each quarter,
and we monitor immensely carefully the new information that becomes available day by day in the
light of that forecast for early warning signs of emerging imbalance.
The  second  major  difficulty  in  our  present  situation  relates  to  the  strength  of  the
exchange rate. We are, of course, acutely aware of the problems that this is creating - and has been
creating for the past year or so - for those sectors of the economy that are engaged in international
trade and exposed to international competition. Given that the UK chemical industry exports nearly
two-thirds of its output, and that this country imports nearly 60% of the chemicals we consume, it is
just possible that one or two of you are suffering from the strong exchange rate. I only ask you to
believe that we both understand and share your concern. From a macro-economic standpoint it is - as
I say - important that the pace of growth of aggregate demand should slacken. But it is clearly not
desirable  -  either  in  terms  of  sustainability  or  in  terms  of  the  balance  of  the  economy  -  that  the
slowdown  should  simply  be  a  result  of  a  sharp  deterioration  in  our  balance  of  payments.  Our
problem, potentially, is excess domestic demand.
And that is the root of the dilemma. We have needed to tighten policy to moderate the
strength  of  domestic  demand.  That  has  no  doubt  contributed  to  the  continuing  strength  of  the
exchange  rate  -  although  you  can’t  plausibly  explain  anything  like  all  of  that  strength  in  terms  of
relative  interest  rate  movements  here  and  abroad.  It  certainly  has  a  good  deal  to  do  with  market
perceptions about the future strength of the euro.
We can, and have, and I hope will, take account of the exchange rate in our tactical
approach to monetary policy. But with the best will in the world, what we cannot sensibly do, is to
ignore the strength of domestic demand in order to shelter the exposed sectors. That would put the
whole of the economy at risk to accelerating inflation - including those sectors we were seeking to
protect.  And  it  would  not  be  of  much  help  to  them  in  anything  other  than  the  short  term.  The
monetary policy option is - as I say - not whether or not, it is sooner or later, and ultimately less or
more.
The elements of hope that I can hold out to you - and central bankers can never give
guarantees on this kind of thing - are first, that as we move into the euro process the markets  will
become increasingly persuaded that the ECB will, in fact, be committed to the stability of the new
currency, as I am sure it will: and, secondly, that relative monetary conditions will change as activity
picks up on the Continent and domestic demand moderates in this country.
Our  present  exchange  rate  dilemma,  Mr.  Chairman,  illustrates  rather  well  the
conflicting arguments about the euro project itself.
The  strengthening  of  sterling  and  its  effect  on  the  exposed  sectors  of  the  economy
point  up  very  vividly  the  very  real  advantages  of  the  exchange  rate  certainty  across  the  European
Union  area  which  only  the  euro  can  provide.  If  I  were  going  through  what  many  of  you  are  now
going  through  in  your  individual  businesses,  I  think  I  would  find  the  prospect  of  exchange  rate
certainty overwhelmingly attractive - given of course a reasonable starting point.
The  potential  downside,  from  a  macro-economic  standpoint,  is  that  just  as  now
directing monetary policy  to  lowering  the  exchange  rate  would  mean  losing  control  over  domestic
demand, so too, as a member of the euro area we might find that the single euro interest rate was not
necessarily appropriate to our domestic situation. We would certainly be facing a build-up of excess
BIS Review   3/1998
- 4 -
demand, and inflationary pressure, now, for example, if we were constrained to German-level interest
rates.  At  other  times  interest  rates  that  were  appropriate  in  Europe  as  a  whole  could  impose
unnecessary stagnation and rising unemployment in this country.
Serious divergence of this kind between the domestic monetary policy needs within
the euro-area is not, of course, inevitable. But, if it is to be avoided it is important that the economies
of  the  euro-member  countries  should  have  shown  at  least  a  minimum  degree  of  sustainable
convergence  -  before  the  project  goes  ahead.  That  was  recognised  very  clearly  in  the  famous
convergence criteria written into the Maastricht Treaty.
Assessing the extent to which sustainable convergence has in fact been achieved is the
unenviable  task  facing  the  European  Finance  Ministers  and  Heads  of  Government  at  their  historic
meeting at the beginning of May. Whatever they decide more widely, it is clear in my view that, for a
number of reasons, including the cyclical differences between our situation and that on the Continent,
we  cannot  now  be  confident  that  this  country  could  live  reasonably  comfortably  with  a  single
European interest rate. That is why I welcomed the Government’s decision last October to exercise,
for the time being, our opt-out, but to plan the technical preparation for our future participation, when
we are more confident that sustainable convergence has indeed been achieved.
BIS Review   3/1998
