Mr.  Heikenstein  discusses  the  advent  of  the  euro  and  EMU  in  relation  to
Sweden      Speech  by  the  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Sweden,  Mr.  Lars  Heikenstein,  at
World Trade Day ’98 held at the Stockholm Chamber of Commerce on 25/8/98.
I  should  like  to  begin  by  thanking  our  hosts  for  the  invitation  to  World  Trade
Day ’98.  The  introduction  of  a  new  currency  is  due  in  our  vicinity  in  little  more  than  four
months’  time.  This  is  the  first  instance  in  modern  times  of  a  large  group  of  sovereign  states
establishing  a  monetary  union  with  a  single  currency.  Along  with  the  collapse  of  the  Iron
Curtain, the creation of the European Monetary Union is probably the most significant European
event since World War Two.
Today  I  shall  be  focusing  on  what  the  birth  of  the  euro  may  mean  for
developments in the currency market. I shall not, however, be attempting to predict the  euro’s
future  strength  or  weakness.  Instead,  I  shall  begin  by  discussing  factors  that  could  affect  the
single  currency  in  the  course  of  the  changeover  and  the  somewhat  longer  term.  Then  I  shall
consider how the euro is likely to affect the position of Sweden’s currency, the krona. I can say
right now that, basically, I do not believe that the euro will fundamentally alter either the role of
the krona in Sweden’s economy or, for that matter, the value of the krona in the long run. In view
of  the  discussion  that  this  matter  occasions  from  time  to  time,  there  may  be  reason  to  say
something about the view of the Riksbank.
1. A new currency is created
A  new  currency  will  see  the  light  of  day  in  January  1999.  Eleven  countries  in
Europe are forming a monetary union and will accordingly be having a currency, a monetary and
exchange rate policy, and a central bank in common. The euro will be the domestic currency of a
major  economic  area.  Today,  the  euro  area’s  share  of  world  output  is  around  30  per  cent,  as
against around 35 per cent for the United States. As regards world trade, the share for EMU’s
external trade amounts to around 17 per cent and the United States around 15 per cent.
EMU is a central component in the process of European integration. This process
was initiated in the 1950s with agreements on the joint control of certain means of production,
the  European  Coal  and  Steel  Community.  The  idea  was  to  forge  economic  bonds  between
nations as a way of promoting peace in Europe. The establishment of the Common Market in the
1980s  was  a  further  step,  aiming  at  freedom  of  movement  within  the  Community  for  goods,
services,  capital  and  individuals.  With  the  introduction  of  a  single  currency,  the  countries  of
Europe will come still closer to each other in economic and political terms. At the same time, yet
another obstacle to the creation of a large internal market in Europe will be removed.
Thus, EMU is to be seen primarily as one aspect of a larger, political project. Most
analyses,  however,  have  tended  to  concentrate  on  the  union’s  pros  and  cons  in  an  economic
context.  The  advantages  that  have  been  cited  for  the  participating  countries  include  lower
transaction costs for trading in a common currency, increased transparency  and  competition  in
the single market, and low, stable inflation. The lack of an exchange rate as an instrument for
stabilisation policy is mentioned as one of the drawbacks.
Sweden’s  Parliament  decided  in  December  1997  that  Sweden  would  not  be
joining the monetary union from the start, mainly on account of the lack of public support. The
BIS Review   68/1998
- 2 -
decision was made after a committee of experts had reported on participation’s advantages and
drawbacks for Sweden. The commission was basically in favour of Sweden being a member of
EMU  but  was  of  the  opinion  that,  given  the  disadvantages  considered,  Sweden  should  not
participate from the start. The costs in terms of stabilisation policy were assumed to exceed the
benefits from economic efficiency. The report’s assessment of political aspects favoured Swedish
membership of EMU.
The report gave the Riksbank an occasion to present its appraisal of the monetary
union. This differed and amounted to a recommendation that Sweden should participate from the
start.  We  considered  that  the  commission  had  overestimated  the  costs  for  stabilisation  policy,
while the economic and  political  benefits  were  likely  to  be  even  greater  than  envisaged  in  the
report. Since the compilation of report, moreover, the political reasons for participating from the
start have grown in that more countries than expected will now be members from the beginning.
2. The euro’s stability
The  euro  will  exist  as  an  account-based  currency  as  of  next  January.  While
banknotes  and  coins  denominated  in  euro  will  not  yet  be  in  circulation,  it  will  be  possible  to
make transactions in euro. So what will be the euro’s role in currency markets? Will it be stable?
And  will  it  compete  with  the  dollar  as  an  international  reserve  currency?  As  we  all  know,
predicting  exchange  rate  movements  is  difficult.  In  general,  one  can  say  that  a  currency’s
nominal  exchange  rate  is  determined  by  the  real  exchange  rate  together  with  differences  in
inflation with the rest of the world. A currency’s real exchange rate can be described as the price
of goods and services in that country relative to the rest of the world. If a difference in inflation
grows,  a  corresponding  depreciation  of  the  currency  is  needed  to  keep  the  real  exchange  rate
stable.  The  current  exchange  rate  is  also  influenced  by  expectations  of  future  rates.  The
credibility  of  economic  policy’s  commitment  to  long-term  price  stability  is  thus  important  for
exchange  rate  tendencies.  The  value  of  a  currency  is  also  susceptible  to  influences  of  a  more
temporary nature. Cyclical factors may play a part. When the economy is in an upward phase, a
country  may  need  a  tighter  monetary  policy,  which  normally  leads  to  an  appreciation  of  its
currency. Deviations from the exchange rate’s more fundamental level may also be occasioned
by  matters  to  do  with  credibility.  In  addition,  the  exchange  rate  may  be  affected  by  transitory
shifts  in  the  currency  market’s  demand  and  supply.  Such  shifts  may  arise  from  portfolio
adjustments.  In  certain  periods  these  mechanisms  may  tend  to  accentuate  exchange  rate
movements even though economic fundamentals point in a different direction. One example of
this is the large movements in the US dollar.
Against  this  background  I  shall  now  look  at  some  factors  that  will  probably  be
important for the development of the euro. I shall take the fundamentals first and then point out
some factors that could be of transitory significance for the euro.
Fundamental factors
Provided  economic  policies  in  the  euro  area  focus  credibly  on  price  stability  -
accompanied by a corresponding low-inflation policy in the rest of the world - it is probable that
the  euro’s  nominal  exchange  rates  with  other  countries  will  display  a  high  degree  of  stability.
However,  cyclical  disparities  between  currency  blocs  and  some  uncertainty  about  monetary
policy signalling are factors that could generate certain fluctuations.
BIS Review   68/1998
- 3 -
EMU is constructed so that monetary policy will be formulated collectively by the
ECB’s  Executive  Council  and  the  national  central  banks  in  the  light  of  the  overall  picture  of
inflation in the euro area, while fiscal policies are formulated at the national level.
Monetary policy
The European Central Bank (ECB), which will be accountable for EMU’s single
monetary policy as of next January, was established on July 1st. The monetary policy objective is
price stability. The objective has not yet been defined more specifically but statements suggest
that there will probably be an intermediate money supply target and that price stability will be
represented by an inflation rate of 2 per cent or less. The latter has raised the question of whether
Sweden  ought  to  revise  its  inflation  target.  The  question  is  somewhat  premature  in  that  the
ECB’s target formulation has still to be finalised. Moreover, the suggested formulation is in line
with what has applied in Germany, where on average in recent decades monetary policy has not
resulted in a rate of inflation below 2 per cent. In view of this, together with the advantages of an
inflation target that is symmetrical, there are no grounds at present for considering any change in
Sweden’s inflation target.
The  ECB  has  been  given  a  high  degree  of  independence  in  fulfilling  the  price
stability  target  without  any  short-run  political  considerations.  The  institutional  conditions  for
monetary  policy  credibility  are  accordingly  good.  By  itself,  however,  this  is  not  enough.
Credibility  must  also  be  achieved  continuously,  through  a  responsible  monetary  policy  that  is
properly  understood  and  supported  by  society  in  general.  At  first  there  may  be  considerable
uncertainty  about  how  the  single  monetary  policy  functions  and  how  signals  from  the  ECB
should  be  interpreted.  Much  will  therefore  be  required  initially  of  the  ECB  in  explaining  its
policy,  presenting  the  analyses  behind  its  decisions  in  an  understandable  way  and  creating  a
broad understanding of the monetary policy in every part of the union. This understanding may
be tested particularly severely if price pressure in a particular country deviates from the average
so that the repo rate is not perceived as appropriate to the national situation. The national central
banks  in  the  euro  area  should  be  able  to  lend  a  hand  here,  both  in  communications  with  the
public and by providing sound analyses of tendencies in their home country.
This brings me to the discussion about the ECB Governing Council. Concern has
been  voiced  in  the  debate  because  the  composition  of  the  Council,  the  ECB’s  supreme
decision-making body, might lead to policy being influenced by strong national interests at the
expense of the total picture. One source of this concern is that so many of the Council’s decision
makers are national central bank governors, who might allow for national interests. Comparisons
are made with the US Federal Reserve, whose decision-making body has a smaller proportion of
regional governors. Another cause of this concern is that political accountability in the European
Community  is  essentially  exacted  at  the  national  level;  it  is  largely  in  the  national  arena  that
economic policy is discussed. While these problems cannot be dismissed out of hand, I believe
they have been exaggerated. The members of the Council are jointly responsible for making the
ECB a success and establishing price stability in the euro area. In this sense they are all in the
same  boat  and  nothing  is  more  likely  to  capsize  the  boat  that  a  national  preference.  That,  I
believe,  will  characterise  what  happens  in  practice.  In  any  event,  a  distinct,  transparent  policy
right  from  the  start  is  vital  in  order  to  avoid  unnecessary  uncertainty  that  could  result  in
exaggerated movements in exchange rates and interest rates.
Other components of economic policy
BIS Review   68/1998
- 4 -
In the long term it is the construction of monetary policy that determines the rate
of inflation. In the shorter run, however, price movements are also influenced by other economic
factors.  Other  components  of  economic  policy  -  that  is,  fiscal,  labour-market  and  structural
policies - therefore have to be constructed so that they support the policy drive for sustainable
price  stability.  If  these  components  do  not  work,  the  burden  on  monetary  policy  becomes
additionally heavy.
Economic policy apart from monetary policy will continue to be a national matter
in the euro area, even though it is the subject of agreements at Community level.
Fiscal policy will still be constructed by the national governments, though to some
extent  its  scope  is  restricted  by  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  to  which  all  the  EU  countries
subscribe.  This  Pact  requires  each  country  to  conduct  a  responsible  fiscal  policy,  defined  as
achieving  a  general  government  budgetary  balance  or  surplus  over  the  medium  term.  Each
country  is  also  to  allow  continuous  monitoring  of  its  government  finances  by  the  other  EU
countries.  A  government  budget  deficit  is  normally  not  to  exceed  3  per  cent  of  GDP,  though
there  is  room  for  certain  exemptions.  If  a  country  in  the  euro  area  does  have  a  budget  deficit
above  3  per  cent  and  this  cannot  be  explained  by  factors  that  are  exceptional  and  temporary,
sanctions  are  to  be  imposed.  EU  countries  outside  the  euro  area  are  not  liable  to  sanctions,
however; they are only included in the monitoring provisions of the Pact.
The task of establishing price stability in the euro area will be  facilitated  if  low
inflation in the area is also promoted by fiscal policies. The importance of fiscal policy lies both
in  creating  sustainable  government  finances,  which  contribute  to  the  general  credibility  of
economic policy, and in countering tendencies to excessive price pressure in the economy. In that
the single monetary policy is to be constructed in relation to the overall situation in the euro area,
more  will  be  required  of  fiscal  policy  in  the  context  of  national  stabilisation  policy  -  fiscal
instruments will still be available for stabilising national economic trends. But this in turn does
presuppose that there is room for manoeuvre in the national budgets. Partly on this account, the
Stability and Growth Pact’s medium-term objective of a government budget balance or surplus is
reasonable and it is highly important that the countries meet this undertaking. Today this is the
case in just a few countries, of which Sweden is one.
Monetary policy’s interaction with fiscal policy will be important, at both national
and EMU level, for the perceived credibility and consistency of economic policy in general. A
constructive  dialogue  is  therefore  needed  between  the  ECB  and  the  governments  of  the  euro
countries. The arrangements are not yet clear but an intense discussion of this and other matters
is now under way in Europe. The Treaty provides a number of opportunities for contacts between
the two spheres.
Functional economic structures must also be in place so that the single monetary
policy can establish low inflation without eliciting unnecessary economic tensions. A matter of
particular importance in this context is the workings of the labour market. A labour market that
functions properly reduces the risk of regional unemployment and thereby of political problems
that could ultimately pose a threat to the monetary union.
Temporary factors
BIS Review   68/1998
- 5 -
The  discussion  of  the  euro’s  development  has  included  the  point  that  the
introduction of the single currency will trigger widespread portfolio rearrangements, mainly by
private investors but also in public reserves.
The euro will alter the composition of exchange risks in investors’ portfolios and
this  could  result  in  flows  to  restore  the  degree  of  diversification.  Investors  who  achieved
diversification previously with holdings in German marks and Italian lire, for example, will have
to adjust their portfolios when both these currencies are replaced by euro. Demand for euro may
also be affected by the single currency’s conceivable international importance, so that the use of
euro exceeds what one would expect from the area’s economic weight. To achieve international
status, a currency needs to be stable, liquid and large. It should be born in mind that the German
mark is currently an international currency. So perhaps the changeover to the euro will not make
such a notable difference even if a potential exists for the position of the euro becoming even
stronger.
It  is  generally  assumed  that  exchange  rates  will  not  be  permanently  affected  by
portfolio rearrangements which do not stem from more fundamental considerations. But as the
euro’s entry into currency markets is something entirely new, it is hard to tell whether the scale
of portfolio changes will be such that euro exchange rates are influenced at least for a time. And
as the rearrangements will probably include both investment and borrowing in euro, neither is it
clear  what  their  net  effect  might  be.  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  the  development  of  the  euro  will
ultimately depend on expectations of inflation in the euro area relative to the rest of the world.
3. Role of the euro in Sweden
How will the euro affect Sweden’s currency, the krona? On the basis of theoretical
analyses of what ought to determine a country’s use of a currency, together with information the
Riksbank has obtained from interviews and surveys of Swedish firms and households, we have
concluded that the introduction of the euro will not appreciably alter the role of the krona in the
Swedish economy.
The  krona  has  important  functions  in  Sweden’s  economy,  both  as  a  means  of
payment and as a unit of account and a repository of value.
The krona is already exposed to competition from other currencies. EMU can be
seen  as  a  continuation  of  this  process.  One  indication  of  the  competition  is  the  very  sharp
increase in exchange market turnover. Since 1986 this turnover has grown by a factor of eight,
whereas  foreign  trade  and  GDP  have  no  more  than  doubled.  Only  5  per  cent  of  the  exchange
market turnover stems from transactions directly connected with foreign trade.
In what respects, then, might the advent of the euro alter the position of the krona?
What is the line of reasoning behind such a scenario?
The discussion about a marginalisation of the krona has started from the view that
Swedish  export  companies  will  choose  to  switch  to  euro  in  order  to  reduce  the  competitive
disadvantage  of  being  outside  the  euro  area.  With  this  area  as  an  important  field  for  trade,
Swedish  firms  have  to  meet  the  increased  price  competition  which  the  monetary  union  entails
without  reaping  the  benefits  which  their  euro  area  competitors  reap  from  decreased  exchange
costs and access to a large, liquid market for capital. In order to reduce these disadvantages, firms
can  try  to  match  their  euro  income  with  their  expenditures  in  Sweden,  for  example  for  wages
BIS Review   68/1998
- 6 -
costs and payments to suppliers. The exchange risk would then be passed on to domestic players
- households and firms - and these in turn would want to pay their bills in euro.
How  probable  is  such  a  scenario?  One  question  is  how  serious  the  competitive
disadvantages will actually be for export companies. Another aspect that can be discussed is the
extent to which households and Swedish-owned companies are prepared to accept an exchange
risk. They will want to receive income in the same currency as their expenditures. Otherwise they
take an exchange risk that makes the real income uncertain.
Even  when  the  monetary  union  has  started,  most  of  the  expenditures  of
households  and  Swedish-owned  companies  will  presumably  be  expressed  in  the  national
currency. Retailers set prices and accept payments in Swedish kronor. The status of the krona as
legal  tender  means  that  they  are  under  no  obligation  to  accept  payments  in  other  currencies.
Moreover, Swedish taxes and households’ fixed long-term loans are paid in kronor.
Besides the question of why export companies would want to switch to euro on a
large  scale,  it  is  thus  not  clear  that  they  would  be  able  to  pass  the  exchange  risks  on  to
households and suppliers.
Large Swedish companies might be interested, on the other hand, in changing over
to the euro as their unit of account, including the denomination of equity capital. Some business
representatives have made statements to this effect. By reporting equity, deciding dividends and
having their shares quoted in euro, companies with transactions in euro might possibly improve
their  access  to  the  euro  capital  market  and  reduce  their  costs  for  handling  currencies  in  the
management of liquidity. Swedish law does not currently permit the use of currencies other than
the  krona  but  the  possibility  of  having  other  currencies  as  the  unit  of  account  is  being
investigated.
Today,  many  companies  invest  their  surplus  liquidity  in  Swedish  kronor,  partly
because  their  dividends  are  paid  out  in  kronor.  If  companies  choose  the  euro  as  the  unit  of
account, this could have consequences for their asset management. One such consequence might
be  a  preference  for  investing  surplus  liquidity  in  euro.  This  alters  their  investment  portfolio,
which  brings  us  back  to  what  I  said  earlier  about  short-run  exchange  rate  movements.
Presumably, however, the portfolio adjustments would be gradual, leaving the krona’s exchange
rate  more  or  less  unaffected  by  the  flows.  And  even  if  the  flows  were  to  be  so  large  as  to
influence the krona’s rate, there is no reason to suppose that they would have a permanent effect
on the krona’s exchange rate against the euro. These flows would be accompanied by many other
types of currency transaction.
The  krona’s  long-term  level  will  depend  instead  on  Sweden’s  economic  policy.
When  economic  policy  is  credible  and  focused  on  low  inflation,  there  are  no  grounds  for
believing  that  the  krona  would  go  on  weakening  continuously  or  that  it  would  relinquish  its
position in Sweden’s economy.
4. Concluding remarks
To round off what I have been saying, the development of a currency - be it the
euro  relative  to  the  US  dollar  or  the  Swedish  krona  relative  to  the  euro,  for  example  -  is
dependent on the  direction  and  results  of  economic  policy.  If  the  policies  in  the  countries  and
BIS Review   68/1998
- 7 -
regions  we  have  been  discussing  are  credible,  focused  on  low  inflation  and  successful,  in  the
longer run the exchange rates ought not to diverge.
The legal framework for economic policy in EMU provides a good foundation for
a  credible  low-inflation  policy.  But  it  is  still  important  that  all  the  components  of  economic
policy back up the objective of price stability right from the introduction of the single currency.
The  ECB  can  do  this  by  conducting  a  credible  monetary  policy  and  explaining  it  clearly.  The
national governments can contribute by ensuring that combined fiscal policies in the euro area
comfortably comply with the Stability and Growth Pact; this is not yet the case. Measures that
improve  labour  markets  can  also  help  to  enhance  conditions  for  the  success  of  the  monetary
union.
In the same way, the institutional changes and economic developments in Sweden
in recent years herald good conditions for a stable krona. The framework for both monetary and
exchange  rate  policy  has  been  strengthened.  The  status  of  the  Riksbank  is  being  made  more
independent and the budget process is now considerably more disciplined. Certain flows in the
currency market may be generated simply as a consequence of the new currency’s introduction
but what ultimately matters is the economic fundamentals. This suggests that the advent of the
single currency - the euro - will not lead to any marked changes either in the krona’s role in the
Swedish community or in its value.
BIS Review   68/1998
