Mr. Kelley reports on the  Year  2000  progress  of  the  banking  and  financial
services sector in the United States   Testimony of Mr. Edward W. Kelley, Jr., a member of the
Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, on the Year 2000 progress of the banking
and financial services sector, before the Committee on Banking and Financial Services of the US
House of Representatives on 17/9/98.
Thank you for again inviting me to appear before this Committee to discuss the
Year 2000 issue. This problem poses a major challenge to public policy: the stakes are enormous,
nothing  less  than  the  preservation  of  a  safe  and  sound  financial  system  that  can  continue  to
operate in an orderly manner when the clock rolls over at midnight on New Year’s Eve and the
millennium  arrives.  The  Year  2000  problem  will  touch  much  more  than  just  our  financial
systems  and  could  temporarily  have  adverse  effects  on  the  performance  of  the  overall  US
economy as well as the economies of many, or all, nations if not corrected. As I said last April in
testimony before the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation, some of the
more  adverse  scenarios  are  not  without  a  certain  plausibility,  if  this  challenge  were  being
ignored. But it is not being ignored. While it is impossible today to precisely forecast the impact
of this event, and the range of possibilities runs from minimal to extremely serious, an enormous
amount  of  work  is  being  done  in  anticipation  of  the  rollover  of  the  millennium,  and  I  am
optimistic that this work will pay off.
In that spirit, let me update you on what the Federal Reserve has done to address
the Year 2000 issue. Since I last testified here in November 1997, the Federal Reserve has met
the goals that we set for ourselves. We have:
•  renovated  our  mission-critical  applications  and  nearly  completed  our  internal
testing;
•  opened our mission-critical systems to customers for testing;
•  progressed significantly in our contingency planning efforts;
 implemented a policy concerning changes to our information systems; and
•  concluded our initial review of all banks subject to our supervisory authority.
While  these  accomplishments  are  indicative  of  our  significant  progress  in
addressing the Year 2000 issue, much work remains. In the testing area, we are finalizing plans
for  concurrent  testing  of  multiple  mission-critical  applications  by  customers.  We  are
coordinating with the Clearing House for Interbank Payment Systems (CHIPS) and the Society
for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunications (SWIFT) to provide a common test day
for customers of Fedwire and these two systems. We have a System-wide project underway to
enhance  our  contingency  plans  to  address  failures  external  to  the  Federal  Reserve.  We  are
conducting a second round of supervisory reviews of banks subject to our supervisory authority
and also actively coordinating with various domestic and international Year 2000 organizations.
This morning I would like to discuss these achievements and the important aspects of the job that
remain ahead of us.
BIS Review   74/1998
Federal Reserve Readiness
- 2 -
The Federal Reserve has completed the renovation of its mission-critical systems,
and  we  are  nearing  the  conclusion  of  our  internal  Year  2000  testing  efforts.  Internal  testing
includes  both  individual  applications  and  application  interfaces,  such  as  the  exchange  of  data
between  Fedwire  and  our  Integrated  Accounting  System.  Testing  is  conducted  through  a
combination of two elements: one is future-dating our computer systems to verify the readiness
of our information technology, and the other is testing critical future date processing within our
business applications. Communications network components are also being tested and certified
in special test lab environments  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Automation  Services  and  the  Board  of
Governors. The Reserve Banks and the Board have implemented test century date change (CDC)
local area networks to verify the readiness of vendor provided products and internal applications
that operate in network-based computing environments. With the exception of a few systems that
will  be  replaced  by  March  1999,  we  will  complete  the  testing  activities  and  implement  our
mission-critical applications in production by year-end 1998.
On  June  29,  1998,  we  made  our  future-dated  test  environment  available  to
customers for Year 2000 testing; the crucial testing period will extend through 1999. Depository
institutions which are Federal Reserve customers, and thus rely on our payment applications such
as  Fedwire,  Fed  ACH,  and  check  processing  systems,  can  test  century  rollover  and  leap  year
transactions six days a week. On six weekends this fall, depository institutions will be able to test
Year 2000 test dates with several applications simultaneously. We are providing assistance to our
customers who test with us, and have provided them, through a series of Century Date Change
bulletins, with technical information and guidelines concerning the testing activity.
By  the  end  of  August,  almost  400  customers,  including  the  US  Treasury,  had
conducted CDC testing with the Federal Reserve, and the number scheduling tests is increasing
rapidly.  These  tests  encompass  ten  of  our  mission-critical  applications.  To  ensure  that  the
nation’s larger banks are taking advantage of this testing opportunity, we intend to contact any
that  have  not  availed  themselves  of  this  service.  Several  foreign  banking  organizations  have
begun  to  test  large  dollar  payment  systems  with  the  Federal  Reserve  and  CHIPS.  Most  large
foreign  banks  will  participate  in  the  September  26,  1998,  coordinated  test  in  which  Fedwire,
CHIPS, and SWIFT are participating.
Like most information technology environments, ours are composed primarily of
vendor  hardware  and  software  products.  To  assess  the  Year  2000  readiness  of  these
environments, as well as our building systems such as vault and climate control systems, we have
created  an  automated  inventory  of  the  vendor  products  that  we  use  and  are  tracking  the  Year
2000 compliance status of those products. Although the Federal Reserve has made progress in
independently testing vendor products, we will continue these efforts.
In  prior  testimony,  I  have  noted 
the  critical  dependence  of  banks  on
telecommunication services and the need to ensure the readiness of telecommunication service
providers.  To  foster  a  better  understanding  of  the  importance  of  information  sharing  by  the
telecommunications  industry,  I  wrote  to  Federal  Communications  Commissioner  Powell  about
this  issue.  Commissioner  Powell  has  been  responsive  and  has  provided  us  and  others  with
information regarding the FCC’s oversight and plans. The Federal Reserve is also participating in
the Telecommunications Sector Group of the President’s Council on Year 2000 Conversion. In
addition, the Federal Reserve is monitoring telecommunication carriers to assess whether those
used  by  the  Federal  Reserve  will  be  Year  2000  compliant.  We  are  pleased  with  the
BIS Review   74/1998
- 3 -
responsiveness of the telecommunications industry: plans for industry testing are well under way,
with participation from the major service providers, as well as their suppliers.
Contingency Planning
As  the  nation’s  central  bank,  the  Federal  Reserve  is  actively  engaged  in
contingency  planning  for  both  operational  disruptions  and  systemic  risks.  An  internal  CDC
Council consisting of senior managers is coordinating contingency planning across the Federal
Reserve’s  various  functions  and  is  fostering  a  cohesive  approach  to  internal  readiness  and
interaction  with  the  financial  community.  In  general,  the  banking  industry’s  focus  has  also
progressed  from  the  renovation  of  systems  to  business  continuity  and  contingency  planning.
Contingency planning for the Federal Reserve includes payments systems, currency availability
and distribution, information processing, the discount window, and the supervision function. We
will also play an important role in coordinating with the financial community concerning issues
such as systemic risk and cross-border payments.
Operational Contingency
The  Federal  Reserve’s  plans  for  operational  continuity  build  on  existing
contingency  plans.  As  you  know,  we  have  long  maintained  comprehensive  contingency  plans
that  are  routinely  tested  and  have  been  implemented  during  natural  disasters  and  other
disruptions.  These  plans  cover  our  internal  systems,  as  well  as  the  services  we  provide  to
depository institutions. In June 1998, each of the Federal Reserve’s business offices completed
assessments of the adequacy of existing contingency scenarios to address CDC risks.
Federal Reserve CDC contingency workgroups are identifying problems external
to  the  Federal  Reserve  that  may  arise  when  the  date  changes  to  2000,  such  as  those  affecting
telecommunications providers, large financial institutions, utility companies, other key financial
market  participants,  and  difficulties  abroad  that  affect  US  markets  or  institutions.  The
workgroups  are  developing  corresponding  recommendations  to  mitigate  those  problems.  The
Federal  Reserve  plans  to  finalize  contingency  plans  reflecting  these  recommendations  by
November  30,  1998.  We  will  continue  to  refine  our  CDC  contingency  plans  as  necessary
throughout 1999. In fourth quarter 1998, we will focus our efforts on how to test our contingency
plans to ensure their operational effectiveness at the century rollover.
Change Management
As a part of our operational readiness planning, the Federal Reserve is developing
procedures to manage the risks posed by changes to information systems in 1999 and the  first
quarter  of  2000.  After  the  scheduled  completion  of  testing  and  implementation  of  our  critical
applications, changes to Federal Reserve policies, rules, regulations, and services that generate
changes to critical information systems create the risk that those systems may no longer be CDC
compliant.  Consequently,  we  have  established  guidelines  to  significantly  limit  policy  and
operational  changes,  as  well  as  internal  hardware  and  software  changes,  during  late  1999  and
early 2000 in order to minimize the risks and complexities of problem resolution associated with
the introduction of new processing components.
By  limiting  changes  to  our  systems,  we  will  not  only  provide  a  stable  internal
processing  environment  entering  the  Year  2000,  but  we  will  also  minimize  changes  that  our
customers  could  be  required  to  make  to  their  applications  that  interface  with  our  software.  In
BIS Review   74/1998
- 4 -
addition,  we  intend  to  aggressively  coordinate  with  other  institutions  that  typically  generate
policy and operational changes in the financial industry. We intend to publish our guidelines to
assist other organizations facing similar issues and I would urge that Congress, as well as other
federal agencies, consider adoption of such change management policies as we move into 1999.
Currency
As I noted earlier, cash availability and processing is an issue we have considered
in the contingency planning process. We have regularly met the public’s heightened demand for
US currency in peak seasons or in extraordinary situations, such as natural disasters. We recently
submitted  our  fiscal  year  1999  currency  printing  order  to  the  Department  of  the  Treasury’s
Bureau  of  Engraving  and  Printing  and  we  increased  the  size  of  next  year’s  print  order  due  to
Year 2000 considerations. With this order, we will substantially increase the amount of currency
either in circulation or in Federal Reserve vaults over current levels by late 1999. We believe this
increase  in  the  level  of  currency  should  be  ample  to  meet  the  public’s  demand  for  extra  cash
during the period surrounding the century rollover. This is a precautionary step on our part -- we
believe  it  is  prudent  to  print  more  currency  than  we  think  will  be  required  than  to  risk  not
printing enough. While we do not anticipate any extraordinary demand for cash, we believe it is
important that the public have complete confidence that sufficient supplies of currency will be
available. In effect, the Federal Reserve is accelerating the timing of currency printing; we are
planning for a possible short-lived increased demand for cash and will be able to reduce future
print orders to lower-than-normal levels.
As we monitor the public’s demand for currency, we can introduce other measures
to further increase cash levels. First, the recent currency order with the Bureau of Printing and
Engraving is for the federal fiscal year 1999, so that there will be time to print additional notes in
the last three months of 1999. Second, we can change the print order to increase production of
higher  denomination  notes.  Third,  we  can  increase  staff  in  Reserve  Bank  cash  operation
functions to improve the turnaround time required to process cash deposits and move currency
back  into  circulation.  Finally,  as  a  last  resort,  we  can  hold  off  the  destruction  of  old  or  worn
currency.
Liquidity
Another contingency planning issue for the Federal Reserve is liquidity. Despite
their  best  efforts,  some  depository  institutions  could  encounter  problems  in  the  rollover  in
maintaining reliable computer systems, and these problems may or may not affect their funding
positions.  To  the  extent  necessary,  the  Federal  Reserve  is  prepared  to  lend,  in  appropriate
circumstances  and  with  adequate  collateral,  to  depository  institutions  when  market  sources  of
funding are not reasonably available. The terms and conditions of such lending may depend upon
the circumstances causing the liquidity shortfall.
Financial Sector Initiatives
The  Federal  Reserve  and  private  industry  have  intensified  cooperative  efforts  to
address contingency planning. The Year 2000 Contingency Planning Working Group of the New
York  Clearing  House  (NYCH),  the  Securities  Industry  Association  (SIA),  and  the  Federal
Reserve are developing coordinated contingency plans for the Year 2000 and will act as liaison
with other industry groups addressing contingency planning on behalf of banks, securities firms,
exchanges, clearance and settlement organizations, regulators, and international markets. Among
BIS Review   74/1998
- 5 -
other  things,  the  Working  Group  is  considering  plans  for  the  establishment  of  Year  2000
communications  centers  throughout  the  country,  and  perhaps  internationally.  Primarily,  such
centers  would  facilitate  the  exchange  of  up-to-date  information  on  developing  problems  and
issues  among  participants  and  enhance  the  development  of  consensus,  when  necessary,  to
coordinate timely responses to problems.
The  Federal  Reserve  is  assisting  in  the  government’s  coordination  of  the  Year
2000  effort  within  the  financial  industry  by  participating  in  the  Financial  Institutions  Sector
Group of the President’s Council on Year 2000 Conversion. A senior Board official who chairs
this Sector Group has been working with representatives of government financial organizations,
including  the  federal  banking  agencies,  the  Department  of  the  Treasury,  the  Securities  and
Exchange  Commission,  and  other  agencies  responsible  for  various  financial  intermediaries,  to
assess the Year 2000 readiness of the financial industry and formulate strategies for addressing
interagency Year 2000 issues.
Bank Supervision
I would now like to turn to our industry oversight activities. The Federal Reserve
met its goal, set in May 1997, of conducting a Year 2000 supervisory review of all banks subject
to our supervisory authority by June 1998. This public commitment and visible effort did much
to  stimulate  industry  action  on  the  Year  2000  issue.  We  have  also  established  ties  and  are
providing  significant  support  to  numerous  public  and  private  groups,  both  domestic  and
international, that are addressing the Year 2000 readiness of their respective constituencies.
As  part  of  our  outreach  program,  we  continually  emphasize  the  critical
significance of ensuring that computer systems and applications are Year 2000 compliant and the
complexity of the managerial and technological challenges that the required effort presents for all
enterprises. For entities such as financial institutions that rely heavily on computers to provide
financial services to customers, achieving Year 2000 compliance in mission-critical systems is
essential for maintaining the quality and continuity of customer services.
While bank supervisors can provide guidance, encouragement, and strong formal
and  informal  supervisory  incentives  to  the  banking  industry  to  address  this  challenge,  it  is
important to recognize that we cannot be ultimately responsible for ensuring or guaranteeing the
Year 2000 readiness and viability of the banking organizations we supervise. Rather, the boards
of directors and senior management of banks and other financial institutions must be responsible
for  ensuring  that  the  institutions  they  manage  are  able  to  provide  high  quality  and  continuous
services  from  the  first  day  in  January  of  the  Year  2000.  As  we  have  emphasized  continually
during  the  past  sixteen  months,  this  critical  obligation  must  be  among  the  very  highest  of
priorities for bank management and boards of directors.
Policy Guidance and Supervisory Reviews
The  Federal  Reserve  continues  to  work  closely  with  the  other  banking  agencies
that  comprise  the  Federal  Financial  Institutions  Examination  Council  (FFIEC)  to  address  the
banking industry’s Year 2000 readiness. A series of seven advisory statements has been issued
since  I  was  last  here  in  November  1997,  including  statements  on  the  nature  of  Year  2000
business risk, the importance of service provider readiness, the means to address customer risk,
the  need  to  respond  to  customer  inquiries,  the  critical  importance  of  testing,  the  urgency  of
effective contingency planning, and the need to address the readiness of fiduciary activities. As a
BIS Review   74/1998
- 6 -
result  of  these  advisory  statements,  the  extent  of  the  industry’s  Year  2000  efforts  has
significantly 
at
intensified.  These 
http://www.federalreserve.gov/Y2K.
statements 
can  be 
entirety 
found 
their 
in 
Compliance with these statements  is  assessed  during  the  conduct  of  supervisory
reviews. Through June 30, the Federal Reserve had conducted reviews of approximately 1,600
organizations.  Information  and  data  collected  during  these  reviews  has  proven  to  be  reliable,
consistent with our overall supervisory experience which is heavily dependent on an extensive
on-site examination program. These reviews have resulted in a significant focus of attention on
the subject matter within the industry and identified several issues warranting additional attention
by  the  supervisors,  particularly  the  need  for  the  supplemental  guidance  on  testing  and
contingency  planning.  It  is  critical  that  banks  avail  themselves  of  every  opportunity  to  test
mission-critical  systems  internally  and  with  their  counterparties,  and  recurring  testing  may  be
warranted as additional systems are renovated to assure that those systems already tested are not
adversely affected.
Based  on  the  reviews  completed  by  the  Federal  Reserve,  the  vast  majority  of
banking organizations are making satisfactory progress in their Year 2000 planning and readiness
efforts. About four percent are rated “needs improvement” and fewer than one percent are rated
“unsatisfactory”. In these cases, the Federal Reserve has initiated intensive supervisory follow-
up. Working closely with state banking departments, the Federal Reserve is making a concerted
effort  to  focus  additional  attention  on  those  particular  banking  organizations  that  are  deemed
deficient in their Year 2000 planning and progress.
Deficient  organizations  have  been  informed  of  their  status  through  supervisory
review  comments,  meetings  with  senior  management  or  the  board  of  directors,  and  deficiency
notification  letters  calling  for  submission  of  detailed  plans  and  formal  responses  to  the
deficiencies noted. Such organizations are then subject to increased monitoring and supervisory
follow-up including more frequent reviews. Restrictions on expansionary activities by Year 2000
deficient organizations have also been put into place. As a result of these letters, organizations
once  deemed  deficient  have  taken  significant  steps  to  enhance  their  Year  2000  programs  and
over half have been upgraded to satisfactory.
The Federal Reserve has commenced Phase II of  its  supervision  program  which
covers the nine months from July 1998 through March 1999. During this second phase, we will
conduct  another  round  of  supervisory  reviews  focused  on  Year  2000  testing  and  contingency
planning.  In  addition,  we  have  committed  to  conducting  another  review  of  the  information
systems service providers and will distribute the results to the serviced banks.
Assessment of Review Results
Based  on  these  reviews  and  other  interactions  with  the  industry,  it  appears  that
financial institution progress in renovating mission-critical systems has advanced notably since
the  Federal  Reserve  and  the  other  banking  agencies  escalated  efforts  to  focus  the  industry’s
attention  on  ensuring  Year  2000  readiness.  Banking  organizations  are  making  substantial
headway  toward  Year  2000  readiness  and,  with  some  exceptions,  are  on  track  to  meet  FFIEC
guidelines.
Specifically,  the  FFIEC  guidelines  call  for  the  completion  of  internal  testing  of
mission critical systems by year-end 1998. Most large organizations are nearing completion of
BIS Review   74/1998
- 7 -
the renovation of their mission-critical systems and are vigorously testing those that have been
renovated. Smaller organizations are working closely with their service providers in an effort to
confirm  that  the  efforts  under  way  will  assure  the  readiness  and  reliability  of  the  services  and
products on which they depend.
Information Systems Service Providers
The  banking  agencies  are  examining  the  Year  2000  readiness  of  certain
information systems service providers and software vendors that provide services and products to
a  large  number  of  banking  organizations.  These  examinations  are  often  conducted  on  an
interagency  basis.  The  Federal  Reserve  has  participated  in  reviews  of  sixteen  national  service
providers and twelve national software vendors. In addition, the banking agencies are examining
selected regional service providers and software vendors.
These  examinations  assess  the  overall  Year  2000  program  management  of  the
firms  and  confirm  their  plans  to  support  products  for  Year  2000  readiness.  To  help  banking
organizations assess the Year 2000 readiness and dependability of their service providers and to
encourage examined service providers to cooperate fully with the industry’s efforts, the banking
agencies  are  distributing  the  results  of  Year  2000  reviews  of  service  providers  and  software
vendors  to  the  serviced  banks.  The  information  in  the  reports  is  not  a  certification  of  the
readiness of the service provider, and it is still incumbent on each bank to work closely with its
service providers to prepare for the century date change. Service providers and software vendors
serving  the  banking  industry  are  keenly  aware  of  the  industry’s  reliance  on  their  products  and
services,  and  most  consider  their  Year  2000  readiness  to  be  their  highest  priority  in  order  for
them to remain competitive in an aggressive industry.
Credit Quality
FFIEC  guidelines  call  for  banks  to  have  a  plan  to  assess  customer  Year  2000
readiness  by  June  30,  1998,  and  to  complete  an  assessment  of  their  customers’  Year  2000
readiness  by  September  30,  1998,  in  order  to  better  understand  the  risks  faced  by  the  bank  if
customers are unable to meet their obligations on a timely basis. Even though our Phase I Year
2000  examinations  were  conducted  before  the  June  30,  1998,  milestone,  our  examiners  noted
that  most  organizations  either  had  begun  planning  or  had  initiated  their  customer  assessment
programs.
We have seen no signs that credit quality has deteriorated as a result of Year 2000
readiness considerations, although it is still early. Results from a Federal Reserve Senior Loan
Officer  Opinion  Survey  on  Bank  Lending  Practices  (May  1998)  indicated  that  respondents
generally  include  Year  2000  preparedness  in  their  underwriting  and  loan  review  standards.
Another  survey  of  Senior  Loan  Officers  is  to  be  conducted  in  November  in  order  to  obtain  a
more timely picture of any deterioration in credit quality related to the Year 2000.
Efforts have also been  made  to  prompt  the  nation’s  largest  banks  that  syndicate
large loans to address the Year 2000 readiness of their borrowers. Through the Shared National
Credit Program, banks that syndicate credits over $20 million are asked to provide the banking
agencies  with  information  pertaining  to  the  banks’  efforts  to  assess  the  readiness  of  the
borrowers.  This  initiative  has  helped  large  lenders  understand  that  they  need  to  consider  their
customers’ readiness in their risk management programs.
BIS Review   74/1998
Additional Outreach Initiatives
- 8 -
The  Federal  Reserve  is  participating  in  numerous  outreach  initiatives  with  the
banking  industry,  trade  associations,  regulatory  authorities,  and  other  groups  that  are  hosting
conferences,  seminars,  and  training  opportunities  focusing  on  the  Year  2000  and  helping
participants  understand  better  the  issues  that  need  to  be  addressed.  Partly  in  response  to  the
requirements of the Examination Parity and Year 2000 Readiness for Financial Institutions Act,
which  calls  for  the  banking  agencies  to  conduct  seminars  for  bankers  on  the  Year  2000,  the
federal banking agencies have been working with state banking departments as well as national
and local bankers’ associations to develop coordinated and comprehensive efforts at improving
the  local  and  regional  programs  intended  to  focus  attention  on  the  Year  2000.  In  the  first  six
months of 1998, the Federal Reserve has participated in over 230 outreach initiatives reaching
over 14,000 bankers. Another 100 outreach initiatives are scheduled for the third quarter of 1998.
In  addition,  our  public  web  site  provides  extensive  information  on  our  Year  2000  supervision
program and on other resources available to the industry to help prepare for the millennium.
International Coordination
International  cooperation  on  Year  2000  has  intensified  over  the  past  several
months because of the efforts of the public sector Joint Year 2000 Council (Joint Council) and
the private sector Global 2000 Coordinating Group (G-2000). As you recall from your hearings
on international issues in June, Mr. Ernest Patrikas, then Chairman of the Joint  Council  and  a
senior official of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, testified on the global efforts of the
Joint  Council  to  enhance  international  initiatives  by  financial  regulators.  His  successor  as
Chairman of the Joint Council, Federal Reserve Governor Roger Ferguson, is continuing those
efforts  and  is  working  closely  with  an  external  consultative  committee  composed  of
representatives  from  international  financial  services  providers,  international  financial  market
associations, financial rating agencies, and a number of other international industry associations.
The Joint Council is working to foster better awareness and understanding of Year 2000 issues
on the part of regulators around the world; for example, the Joint Council is sponsoring a series
of regional seminars for banking, insurance, and securities supervisors.
The  G-2000  includes  more  than  forty  financial  institutions  from  over  twenty
countries that are addressing country assessments, testing, and contingency planning, as well as
other  issues.  The  group  has  developed  a  standard  framework  for  assessing  individual  country
preparations  for  the  century  date  change  and  also  will  address  the  Year  2000  readiness  of
financial  institutions,  service  providers,  and  the  countries’  infrastructures.  This  framework  is
being used to collect information and assess the readiness of about twenty major countries by the
end of this year, with others scheduled for in-depth reviews in 1999.
The  Basle  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  continues  to  be  active  on  Year
2000  issues,  both  within  the  Joint  Council  and  separately,  as  part  of  its  normal  supervisory
activities.  Year  2000  will  be  a  major  issue  to  be  discussed  at  the  International  Conference  of
Bank Supervisors in October. The Basle Committee is also planning a follow-up survey on Year
2000 progress.
Closing Remarks
Financial institutions have made significant progress in renovating their systems
to  prepare  for  the  Year  2000  and  much  has  been  accomplished  to  ensure  the  continuation  of
BIS Review   74/1998
- 9 -
reliable services to the banking public at the century rollover. We are committed to a rigorous
program of industry testing and contingency planning and, through our supervisory initiatives, to
identifying  those  organizations  that  most  need  to  apply  additional  attention  to  Year  2000
readiness.  The  Federal  Reserve  has  renovated  its  mission-critical  applications,  and  we  are
nearing  the  completion  of  our  internal  testing  activities.  To  manage  the  risks  posed  by
subsequent  changes  to  these  systems,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  instituted  guidelines  to
significantly limit policy, operational, hardware, and software changes during late 1999 and early
2000.  Going  forward,  we  will  continue  our  industry  and  international  coordination  efforts,
including participation in the President’s Council on Year 2000 Conversion, the Joint Year 2000
Council, and trade associations, to assist the industry in preparing for the Year 2000.
In closing, I would like to thank the Committee for its extensive efforts to focus
the industry’s attention on this significant matter. Awareness of the extent and importance of this
challenge is a critical first step in meeting it, and the Committee’s participation has been most
helpful.
BIS Review   74/1998
