Mr.  Kelley  discusses 
  Testimony  of
Mr. Edward W. Kelley, Jr.,  a  member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve
System,  before  the  Committee  on  Commerce,  Science,  and  Transportation  at  the  US  Senate
on 28/4/98.
the  Year  2000 
issue 
 I  am  pleased  to  appear  before  the  Committee  today  to  discuss  the  Year  2000
computer systems issue and the Federal Reserve’s efforts to address it.  The stakes are enormous,
nothing  less  than  the  preservation  of  a  safe  and  sound  financial  system  that  can  continue  to
operate in an orderly manner when the clock rolls over at midnight on New Year’s Eve and the
millennium arrives.  So much has been written about the difficulties ascribed to the Year 2000
challenge  that  by  now  almost  everyone  is  familiar  with  the  basic  issue  -  specifically,  that
information  generated  by  computers  may  be  inaccurate  or  that  programs  may  be  terminated
because they cannot process Year 2000 dates.  The Federal Reserve System has developed and is
executing a comprehensive plan to ensure its own Year 2000 readiness, and the bank supervision
function  is  well  along  in  a  cooperative,  interagency  effort,  to  promote  timely  remediation  and
testing by the banking industry.  This morning I shall first focus on the potential macroeconomic
consequences of the Year 2000 issue.  Then I shall discuss actions being taken by the Federal
Reserve System to address its internal systems, including Reserve Bank testing with depository
institutions, and its bank supervision efforts.
The Macroeconomic Effects of the Millennium Bug
The  Year  2000  (“Y2K”)  problem  will  touch  much  more  than  just  our  financial
system  and  could  temporarily  have  adverse  effects  on  the  performance  of  the  overall  US
economy  as  well  as  the  economies  of  many,  or  all,  other  nations  if  it  is  not  corrected.    The
spectrum of possible outcomes is broad, for the truth of the matter is that this episode is unique.
We have no previous experiences to give us adequate guideposts.  A few economists already are
suggesting that Y2K-related disruptions will induce a deep recession in the year 2000.  That is
probably  a  stretch,  but  I  do  not  think  that  we  shall  escape  unaffected.    Some  of  the  more
frightening scenarios are not without a certain plausibility, if this challenge were being ignored.
But it is not being ignored.  While it is probable that preparations may in some instances prove to
be inadequate or ineffective, an enormous amount of work is being done in anticipation of the
rollover of the millennium.  It is impossible today to forecast the impact of this event, and the
range of possibilities runs from minimal to extremely serious.  In that spirit, let me review with
you some of the ways in which the millennium bug already is influencing the US economy and
discuss some of the possible outcomes for economic activity early in the next century.
Corporate  business  is  spending  vast  amounts  of  money  to  tackle  the  Y2K
problem.  To try to get a handle on the magnitude of these Y2K expenditures, we have reviewed
the most recent 10-K reports filed with the SEC by approximately 95 percent of the firms in the
Fortune  500.    These  are  the  largest  businesses  in  our  economy,  with  revenues  of  around
$5½ trillion  annually,  and  are  likely  to  be  on  the  cutting  edge  of  efforts  to  deal  with  the
millennium bug.  Before the end of the decade, these firms report that they expect to spend about
$11 billion in dealing with the Y2K problem.  (Of this total, financial corporations are planning
expenditures of $3½ billion, while companies in the nonfinancial sector have budgeted funds of
around $7½ billion.)
the  Y2K
reprogramming  efforts.    In  culling  through  the  10-K  reports,  we  found  that  many  companies
These  estimates  undoubtably  understate 
the  magnitude  of 
BIS Review   37/1998
˝
- 2 -
reported  incurring  no  additional  costs  associated  with  Y2K  remediation  efforts.    I  doubt  such
firms  are  unaware  of  the  problem.    Rather,  I  suspect  that  some  firms  did  not  view  their  Y2K
spending as having a “material” effect on their bottom line, and some companies probably have
funded Y2K programs with monies already budgeted to their information technology functions.
Making an allowance for all costs - whether explicitly stated or not - and recognizing that these
Fortune  500  firms  are  only  part  of  the  picture,  an  educated  guess  of  the  sunk  cost  of  Y2K
remedial efforts in the US private sector might be roughly $50 billion.  To put this number into
perspective,  the  Gartner  Group  has  estimated  that  Y2K  remediation  efforts  will  total  $300  to
$600  billion  on  a  worldwide  basis.    The  US  economy  accounts  for  about  one-fifth  of  world
output, and thus our estimate seems broadly consistent with the lower end of their range.  Given
the experience of our own Y2K efforts to date, I would expect to see costs rise further once all
these Y2K programs are fully under way - ultimately pushing costs up within the Gartner Group
range.
Corporate efforts to deal with the Y2K problem are affecting economic activity in
a  variety  of  ways.    On  the  positive  side,  an  important  element  in  some  Y2K  programs  is  the
replacement  of  aging  computer  systems  with  modern,  state-of-the-art  hardware  and  software.
Such capital expenditures - which I should note are not included in the $50 billion cost estimate -
will raise the level of productivity in those enterprises, and, in general, the need to address the
Y2K problem has increased the  awareness on the part of senior executives of the  complexity
and  importance  of  managing  corporate  information  technology  resources.    The  increased
replacement  demand  also  has  contributed  to  the  spectacular  growth  recently  in  this  country’s
computer  hardware  and  software  industries  -  a  process  that  I  would  expect  to  continue  for  a
while  longer.    But,  ultimately,  we  are  largely  shifting  the  timing  of  these  investment
expenditures:    Today’s  added  growth  is  likely  “borrowed”  from  spending  at  some  time  in  the
future.  And, if analyzing the dynamics of this situation were not already complicated enough,
some  firms  may  “freeze”  their  systems  in  the  middle  of  1999  -  effectively  forgoing  the
installation of new hardware and software systems just before the millennium.  This, too, could
influence spending on computer equipment - shifting some of it from 1999 into 2000.
While  Year  2000  remediation  efforts  may  give  a  temporary  boost  to  economic
activity  in  some  sectors,  the  net  effect  probably  is  negative.    I  suspect  the  majority  of  Y2K
expenditures should be viewed as increased outlays for maintenance of existing systems, which
are additional costs on businesses.  Other than the very valuable ability to maintain its operations
into the year 2000, few quantifiable benefits accrue to the firm - and overall productivity gains
are reduced by the extra hours devoted to  reprogramming  and testing.  Conservative estimates
suggest that the net effect of Y2K remediation efforts might shave a tenth or two a year off the
growth  of  our  nation’s  overall  labor  productivity,  and  a  more  substantial  effect  is  possible  if
some  of  the  larger  estimates  of  Y2K  costs  are  used  in  these  calculations.    The  effects  on  real
gross domestic product are likely to be somewhat smaller than this but could still total a tenth of
a percentage point or so a year over the next two years.
The  United  States  is  not  alone  in  working  to  deal  with  the  millennium  bug.
Efforts by our major trading partners also are under way, although in many cases they probably
are not yet at so advanced a stage as in this country.  In Europe, the need to reprogram computer
systems to handle the conversion to the euro seems to have taken precedence over Y2K efforts,
although  there  may  be  efficiencies  in  dealing  with  the  two  problems  at  once.    The  financial
difficulties of Japan and other Asian economies certainly have diverted attention and resources
in those countries from the Y2K problem, increasing the risk of a Y2K shock from one or more
of these countries.  But, on the positive side, large multinational corporations are acutely aware
of the Y2K problem, and their remediation efforts are independent of national boundaries.  There
BIS Review   37/1998
˝
- 3 -
also  are  anecdotal  reports  that  many  of  these  companies  are  extending  their  influence  by
demanding that their extensive networks of smaller suppliers prepare  themselves as a condition
of maintaining their business relationship.
Obviously, a great deal of work either is planned or is under way to deal with the
Year  2000  problem.    But  what  if  something  slips  through  the  cracks,  and  we  experience  the
failure of some “mission critical” systems?  How will a computer failure in one industry affect
the ability of other industries to continue to operate smoothly?  The number of possible scenarios
of  this  type  is  endless,  and  today  no  one  can  say  with  any  confidence  how  severe  any  Y2K
disruptions could be or how a failure in one sector would influence activity in others.
We have many examples of how economic activity was affected by disruptions to
the physical infrastructure of this country.  Although the Y2K problem clearly is unique, some of
these disruptions to our physical infrastructure may be useful in organizing our thinking  about
the consequences of short-lived interruptions in our information  infrastructure.  In early 1996, a
major winter storm paralyzed large portions of the country.  Commerce ground to a halt for up to
a  week  in  some  areas  but  activity  bounced  back  rapidly  once  the  roads  were  cleared    again.
Although individual firms and households were  adversely  affected by these disruptions, in the
aggregate,  the  economy  quickly  recovered  most  of  the  output  lost  due  to  the  storm.    In  this
instance,  the  shock  to  our  physical  infrastructure  was  transitory  in  nature,  and,  critically,  the
recovery  process  was  under  way  before  any  adverse  “feedback”  effects  were  produced.    Last
summer’s strike by workers at the United Parcel Service is a second example.  UPS is a major
player  in  the  package  delivery  industry  in  this  country,  and  the  strike  disrupted  the  shipping
patterns of many businesses.  Some sales were lost, but in many instances alternative shipping
services were found for high-priority packages.  Some businesses were hurt by the strike, but its
effect  on  economic  activity  was  small  in  the  aggregate.    Hopefully,  any  Y2K  shock  to  our
information infrastructure would also be transitory and would share the characteristics of these
shocks to our physical infrastructure.
What can monetary policy do to offset any macroeconomic effects?  The truthful
answer is “not much”.  Just as we were not able to plow the streets in 1996 or deliver packages
in 1997, the central bank will be unable to reprogram the nation’s computers for the year 2000.
The Y2K problem is primarily an issue  affecting the aggregate “supply” side of the economy,
whereas the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy works mainly on aggregate “demand”.  We all
understand how creating more money and lowering the level of short-term interest rates gives a
boost to interest-sensitive sectors (such as homebuilding), but these tools are unlikely to be very
effective in generating more Y2K remediation efforts or  accelerating the recovery process if a
company experiences some type of Year 2000 disruption.  We will, of course, be ready if people
want to hold more cash on New Year’s Eve 1999, and we will be prepared to lend to financial
institutions through the discount window under appropriate circumstances or to provide needed
reserves to the banking system.  But there is nothing monetary policy can do to offset the direct
effects of a severe Y2K disruption.  As a result, our Year 2000 focus has been in areas where we
can make a difference: conforming our own systems, overseeing the preparations of the banking
industry, preparing the payments system, and contingency planning.  Additionally, we are doing
all we can to increase awareness of this problem and to energize preparations both here at home
and in other parts of the world.
Background on Federal Reserve Year 2000 Preparations
The  Federal  Reserve  operates  several  payments  applications  that  process  and
settle payments and securities transactions between depository institutions in the United States.
BIS Review   37/1998
˝
- 4 -
These  systems  are  critical  national  utility  services,  moving  funds  much  as  the  national  power
grid moves electricity.   Fedwire is a large-value payments mechanism for US dollar interbank
funds transfers and US government securities transfers primarily used by depository institutions
and government agencies.  These applications, as well as the supporting accounting systems and
other  payment  applications  such  as  the  Automated  Clearing  House  (ACH),  run  on  mainframe
computer  systems  operated  by  Federal  Reserve  Automation  Services  (FRAS),  the  internal
organizational  unit  that  processes  applications  on  behalf  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Banks  and
operates the Federal Reserve’s national communications network.
The  Reserve  Banks  also  operate  check  processing  systems  that  provide  check
services  to  depository  institutions  and  the  US  government.    In  addition  to  centralized
applications on the mainframe, the Reserve Banks operate a range of applications in a distributed
computing  environment,  supporting  business  functions  such  as  currency  distribution,  banking
supervision and regulation, research, public information, and human resources.  The scope of the
Federal  Reserve’s  Year  2000  activities  includes  remediation  of  all  of  these  processing
environments and the supporting telecommunications network, called FEDNET.  Our Year 2000
preparations  also  address  our  computerized  environmental  and  facilities  management  systems,
such as power, heating and cooling, voice communications, elevators, and vaults.
Year 2000 Readiness of Internal Systems
The Federal Reserve is giving the Year 2000 its highest priority, consistent with
our  goal  of  maintaining  the  stability  of  the  nation’s  financial  markets  and  payments  systems,
preserving  public  confidence,  and  supporting  reliable  government  operations.    The  Federal
Reserve completed assessment of its applications in 1997; our most significant applications have
been  renovated;  and  internal  testing  is  underway  using  dedicated  Y2K  computer  systems  and
date-simulation  tools.    Changes  to  mission  critical  computer  programs,  as  well  as  system  and
user-acceptance  testing,  are  on  schedule  to  be  completed  by  year-end  1998.    Further,  systems
supporting the delivery of critical financial services that interface with the depository institutions
will be Year 2000 ready by this July and a depository institution test program will be in place at
that time.  This schedule will permit approximately 18 months for customer testing, to which we
are dedicating considerable support resources.
Our  Y2K  project  is  being  closely  coordinated  among  the  Reserve  Banks,  the
Board of Governors, numerous vendors and service providers, approximately 13,000 customers,
and  government  agencies.    We  are  stressing  effective,  consistent,  and  timely  communication,
both  internal  and  external,  to  promote  awareness  and  commitment  at  all  levels  of  our  own
organization and the financial services industry, more generally.
A significant challenge in meeting our Y2K readiness objectives is our reliance on
commercial hardware and software products and services.  Much of our information processing
and communications infrastructure, as well as our administrative functions and other operations,
is composed of hardware and software products from third-party vendors.  As a result, we must
coordinate  with  numerous  vendors  and  manufacturers  to  ensure  that  all  of  our  hardware,
software, and services are Year 2000 ready.  In many cases, compliance requires upgrading, or,
in  some  cases,  replacing,  equipment  and  software.    We  have  a  complete  inventory  of  vendor
components  used 
telecommunications,  and  distributed  computing
environments,  and  vendor  coordination  and  system  change  are  progressing  well.    We  are
particularly sensitive to telecommunications, an essential infrastructure element in our ability to
maintain a satisfactorily high level of  financial  and business services.  We have been working
with  our  financial  institutions  and  our  telecommunications  servicers  to  find  ways  to  facilitate
in  our  mainframe, 
BIS Review   37/1998
˝
- 5 -
preparations and testing programs that will ensure Y2K readiness.  Nonetheless, this is an area
that  many  financial  institutions  regard  as  needing  attention.    We  strongly  support  the  FCC’s
program 
the
telecommunications companies in the United States.
increased  attention 
the  progress  of 
issue  and 
the  Y2K 
to  draw 
to 
Oversight of Banking Industry Preparations
Ultimately,  the  boards  of  directors  and  senior  management  of  banks  and  other
financial  institutions  must  shoulder  the  responsibility  for  ensuring  that  the  institutions  they
manage are able to provide high quality and continuous services beginning on the first business
day in January of the Year 2000 and beyond.  This critical obligation must be among the very
highest  of  priorities  for  bank  management  and  boards  of  directors.    Nevertheless,  bank
supervisors can provide guidance, encouragement, and strong incentives to the banking industry
to address this challenge.  Accordingly, the Federal Reserve and the other banking supervisors
that  make  up  the  Federal  Financial  Institutions  Examination  Council,  the  FFIEC,  have  been
working  closely  to  orchestrate  a  uniform  supervisory  approach  to  supervising  the  banking
industry’s efforts to ensure its readiness.  Detailed information about our supervisory program is
attached as an Addendum to this testimony and is readily available on a web site maintained by
the Federal Reserve on behalf of these agencies.
Preparing the Payments Systems
In order to ensure the readiness of the payments system, the Federal Reserve has
prepared a special central environment for the testing of high-risk dates, such as the rollover to
the Year 2000 and leap year.  Testing will be conducted through a combination of future-dating
our  computer  systems  to  verify  the  readiness  of  our  infrastructure,  and  testing  critical  future
dates within interfaces to other institutions.  Internal testing is expected to be completed by July,
and external testing with customers and other counterparties will then commence and continue
throughout 1999.  Network communications components are also being tested and certified in a
special test lab environment.  We have published a detailed schedule of testing opportunities for
Fedwire,  ACH  transactions  and  other  services  provided  by  the  Federal  Reserve.    Our  test
environments  have  been  configured  to  provide  flexible  and  nearly  continuous  access  by
customers.  The Reserve Banks are implementing processes to identify which depositories have
tested with us, so that we may follow up on any laggards.
We  are  also  researching,  in  conjunction  with  our  counterparties,  the  benefits  of
Y2K  testing  that  would  span  the  entire  business  process.    As  part  of  this  effort,  the  Federal
Reserve is coordinating with the Clearing House for Interbank Payment Systems  (CHIPS) and
the  Society  for  Worldwide  Interbank  Financial  Telecommunication  (SWIFT)  to  provide  a
common  test  day  for  customers  of  all  three  systems  on  September  26,  1998.    The  New  York
Clearing  House  is  coordinating  an  effort  to  establish  common  global  test  dates  among  major
funds transfer systems during April and May 1999.
We are also coordinating with the international community of financial regulators
to help mobilize global preparations more generally.  These efforts are discussed more fully in
the  Addendum.    In  particular,  through  the  auspices  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,
international  regulators  for  banking,  securities,  and  insurance  along  with  global  payments
specialists  recently  jointly  hosted  a  Year  2000  Round  Table,  which  was  attended  by  over  50
countries.  A Joint Council was formed that will promote readiness and serve as a global clearing
house on Year 2000 issues.  In the final analysis, however, the regulatory community recognizes
that  it  cannot  solve  the  problem  for  the  financial  industry.    Every  financial  institution  must
BIS Review   37/1998
˝
- 6 -
complete its own program and thoroughly test its applications with counterparties and customers
if problems are to be avoided.
Contingency Planning
Despite our intensive efforts to prepare our computer systems, we must also make
plans for dealing with problems that might occur at the Year 2000 rollover.  As you know, the
Federal Reserve has been involved in contingency planning and has dealt with various types of
emergencies for many years.  In response to past disasters we worked closely with the affected
financial institutions to ensure that adequate supplies of cash were available to the community,
and that backup systems supported our operations without interruption during the crisis period.
These efforts primarily focused on the orderly resumption of business operations resulting from
hardware  failures  or  processing-site  problems.    In  addition  to  disruptions  to  hardware  or
processing sites, Y2K contingency planning must be directed at potential software failures and
interdependency problems with financial and non-financial counterparties.  Within this context,
business resumption is made more difficult because we cannot fall back to an earlier version of a
software  package  as  this  version  itself  may  not  have  been  readied  for  the  Year  2000.    Y2K
disruptions  to  utility  services  or  depository  institutions  can  also  directly  affect  the  Federal
Reserve’s ability to conduct business.  So, in order to plan for the continuity of services, it may
be necessary to consider available alternate ways to provide services if a Year 2000 problem is
identified.
The Federal Reserve has formed a task force to address the contingency readiness
of  our  payments  applications.    Although  we  have  no  grounds  for  anticipating  that  specific
failures  could  occur  and  we  cannot  act  as  an  operational  backstop  for  the  nation’s  financial
industry, we view it as our responsibility to take action to ensure that we are as well positioned
as  possible  to  address  major  failures  should  they  occur.    We  are  currently  focusing  on
contingency  planning  for  external  Y2K-related  disruptions,  such  as  those  affecting  utility
companies,  telecommunications  providers,  large  banks,  and  difficulties  abroad  that  affect  US
markets  or  institutions.    The  Federal  Reserve  has  established  higher  standards  for  testing
institutions  that  serve  as  the  backbone  for  the  transactions  that  support  domestic  and
international  financial  markets  and  whose  failure  could  pose  a  systemic  risk  to  the  payments
system.
We  recognize  that,  despite  their  best  efforts,  some  depository  institutions  may
experience operating difficulties, either as a result of their own computer problems or those of
their customers, counterparties, or others.  These problems could be manifested in a number of
ways  and  could  involve  temporary  funding  difficulties.    The  Federal  Reserve  plans  to  be
prepared to provide information to depository institutions on the balances in their accounts with
us throughout the day, so that they can identify shortfalls and seek funding in the market.  The
System will also be prepared to lend in appropriate circumstances and with adequate collateral to
depository institutions when market sources of funding are not reasonably available.
Our  preparations  for  possible  liquidity  difficulties  extend  as  well  to  the  foreign
bank  branches  and  agencies  in  the  US  that  may  be  adversely  affected  directly  by  their  own
computer systems or through difficulties caused by the linkage and dependence on their parent
bank.    Such  circumstances  would  necessitate  coordination  with  the  home  country  supervisor.
Moreover,  consistent  with  current  policy,  foreign  central  banks  will  be  expected  to  provide
liquidity support to any of their banking organizations that experience a funding shortfall.
Closing Remarks
BIS Review   37/1998
˝
- 7 -
To  sum  up,  the  macroeconomic  effects  of  Year  2000  preparations  are  quite
complex.  As I have discussed, some industries may benefit in the near term from increased sales
associated  with  the  accelerated  pace  of  replacement  of  obsolete  computer  systems,  and  their
customers presumably will have more productive systems in place sooner than might otherwise
have been the case.  But, in the aggregate, preparing for the Y2K problem is likely  exerting a
slight drag on the US economy.  The Y2K problem, in effect, raises the rate of depreciation of
the  nation’s  stock  of  plant  and  equipment.    It  forces  businesses  to  devote  additional
programming resources simply to maintain the existing flow of services from its computers.
As a provider of financial services to the economy, we are on schedule with our
own  internal  remediation  efforts  and  will  shortly  begin  testing  our  interfaces  with  financial
institutions.    While  we  have  made  significant  progress  in  our  Year  2000  preparations,  our
challenge now is to ensure that our efforts remain on schedule and that problems are addressed in
a  timely  fashion.    In  particular,  we  shall  be  paying  special  attention  to  the  testing  needs  of
depository institutions and the financial industry and are prepared to adjust our support for them
as required by experience.
As a bank supervisor, the Federal Reserve will continue to address the financial
services industry’s preparedness, monitor progress, and target for  special  supervisory  attention
those  institutions  that  are  most  in  need  of  assistance.    In  addition,  we  shall  track  the  Y2K
progress  of  external  vendors  and  critical  infrastructure  suppliers,  such  as  telecommunications
and electrical power utilities.
The problems presented to the world by the potential for computer failures as the
millennium arrives are real and serious.  Because these problems are unique to our experience in
many ways, and because the impact of computer-driven systems has become so ubiquitous, the
event is unlikely to be trouble free.  While we can’t predict with any certainty, there clearly is the
potential  for  problems  to  develop,  but  these  need  not  be  traumatic  if  we  all  do  our  part  in
preparation.    As  the  world’s  largest  economy,  the  heaviest  burden  of  preparation  falls  on  the
United States.  But it is truly a worldwide issue and, to the extent that some are not adequately
prepared  and  experience  breakdowns  of  unforeseeable  dimension,  we  shall  all  be  affected
accordingly.  There is much work to be done.  We intend to do our utmost, and hope and trust
that others will do likewise.
In this spirit, Mr. Chairman, I want to commend the Committee for inviting this
panel to testify together on Y2K issues.  This is the first time that the Board has testified next to
representatives  of  the  Departments  of  Commerce  and  Transportation,  and  the  FCC.    This  is
wholly appropriate because our success in preparing for the millennium will ultimately depend
very much on one another’s efforts.
Addendum:  Supervisory Elements of the Federal Reserve’s Year 2000 Preparations
1. Interagency Statements and Other Guidance
The  Federal  Financial  Institutions  Examination  Council(FFIEC)  -  composed  of
the Federal Reserve, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller of
the Currency, the Office of Thrift Supervision, and the National Credit Union Administration -
has  issued  a  series  of  six  advisory  statements  since  June  1996,  including  statements  on  the
BIS Review   37/1998
˝
- 8 -
Year 2000  effect  on  computers,  project  management,  business  risk,  readiness  of  service
providers,  guidance  to  address  customer  risk,  and  testing  for  readiness.    An  advisory  on
contingency planning is being prepared.  As a result of these advisory statements, the industry’s
awareness and the extent of its remediation efforts have significantly increased over the past two
years.  The FFIEC is considering additional guidance to financial institutions on the development
of  customer  awareness  programs  and  the  need  to  communicate  with  and  address  questions  of
retail customers regarding Year 2000 issues.
2. Supervisory Reviews
In May 1997, the banking agencies committed to conduct a supervisory review by
June 30, 1998, of all insured depositories to assess the state of their Y2K readiness.  Subsequent
reviews and examinations will continue throughout 1999.  Through March 31, 1998, the Federal
Reserve has conducted reviews of approximately 1,100 organizations.  The Federal Reserve and
the  other  agencies  appear  to  be  on  schedule  to  meet  their  stated  goal.    These  reviews  have
resulted  in  a  significant  focus  of  attention  on  the  subject  matter  within  the  industry  and  the
agencies as well.
Deficient  organizations  are  subject  to  increased  monitoring  and  supervisory
follow-up  including  more  frequent  reviews.    Restrictions  on  expansionary  activities  by
organizations that are deficient in their Year 2000 preparations have also been put into place.
3. Assessment of Supervision Review Results
The  Federal  Reserve  has  been  conducting  Year  2000  supervisory  reviews  of
financial  organizations  subject  to  our  supervisory  authority,  coordinating  closely  with  state
banking  departments  and  other  federal  banking  agencies  that  may  share  responsibility  for  the
banking  organizations.    Based  on  these  reviews,  we  conclude  that  management  awareness  of,
and attention to, the Year 2000 problem has improved notably since the Federal Reserve and the
other  banking  agencies  escalated  efforts  in  early  1997  to  focus  the  industry’s  attention  on
ensuring Y2K readiness.  Banking organizations are making substantial progress in renovating
their  systems  and,  with  some  exceptions,  are  on  track  to  meet  FFIEC  guidelines.    Most  large
organizations are actively engaged in the renovation and testing of their mission critical systems.
Smaller organizations are working closely with their service providers in an effort to confirm the
readiness and reliability of the services and products on which they depend.  Similarly, many of
the US offices of foreign banks are heavily dependent on their parent bank for their Year 2000
readiness.
4. Supervision Follow up
To address deficient organizations, the Federal Reserve  is  issuing  a  confidential
Deficiency  Notification  Letter  to  those  rated  less  than  satisfactory  with  respect  to  their  Y2K
readiness program.  We call for a corrective  action  plan  and  put  the  organization  on  a  30-day
reporting regimen to monitor its progress.  Given our concern that the organization needs to use
its resources to address its deficiencies, rather than expanding, the Federal Reserve also asks the
organization  for  advance  notification  before  entering  into  any  contractual  commitments  or
making  public  announcements  pertaining  to  prospective  acquisitions  that  require  Federal
Reserve  approval.    The  agency  can  then  determine  the  possible  effects  of  the  expansionary
BIS Review   37/1998
˝
- 9 -
proposal on the organization’s deficient Y2K readiness efforts, and possibly discourage or deny
expansion if financial and managerial factors are inconsistent with approval of the application.
5. Outreach Initiatives
The Federal Reserve is actively participating in numerous outreach initiatives with
the banking industry, trade associations, regulatory authorities and other groups that are hosting
conferences,  seminars  and  training  opportunities  that  focus  on  the  Year  2000  and  help
participants understand better the issues that need to be addressed.  Throughout the country, the
federal banking agencies have been working with state banking departments and local bankers
associations in order to develop coordinated and comprehensive efforts to improve the local and
regional  programs  intended  to  focus  attention  on  the  Year  2000.    These  efforts  will  continue
consistent with the requirements contained in the  Examination Parity and Year 2000 Readiness
for Financial Institutions Act (Public Law 105-164), enacted March 20, 1998, which call, in part,
for the banking agencies to conduct seminars for depository institutions on the implications of
the Y2K problem on their ability to conduct safe and sound operations.
6. International Scope
The  Federal  Reserve  has  worked  actively  within  the  Bank  for  International
Settlements (BIS) to ensure that financial regulators around the world are aware of the dangers
posed by the Year 2000 and are working to see that the markets and institutions they oversee are
ready  for  the  century  date  change.    Last  September,  the  G-10  Governors  issued  a  Year  2000
advisory that included a paper prepared by the Basle Committee on Banking Supervision (Basle
Supervisors)  describing  the  serious  nature  of  the  problem,  identifying  the  issues  that  must  be
addressed,  and  outlining  how  programs  to  address  the  issue  should  be  structured.    The  BIS
Committee  on  Payment  and  Settlement  Services  (CPSS)  has  established  a  web  site  on  which
payment  systems  around  the  world  are  posting  short  reports  describing  the  status  of  their
readiness in order to promote the transparent sharing of Year 2000 information.
We  continue  to  participate  in  international  meetings  focusing  on  the  Year  2000
issue in order to increase awareness and promote greater understanding and cooperation.  Earlier
this month, the BIS was the site for the Year 2000 Round Table sponsored jointly by the CPSS,
Basle  Supervisors,  the  International  Organization  of  Securities  Commissioners,  and  the
International  Association  of  Insurance  Supervisors.    This  meeting,  which  was  attended  by
financial  supervisors  and  representatives  from  the  private  sector  from  more  than  50  countries,
highlighted cross-border dependencies and the need for international cooperation to ensure that
the issue is managed to minimize any disruptions and possible economic ramifications.
As a result of the Round Table, a Joint Year 2000 Council of financial regulators
was formed with the First Vice-President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York serving as
the chair.  The Council will serve as a contact point between the financial market regulators and
market participants including private sector groups specifically focused on international issues.
It will also promote readiness, identify sound practices for dealing with the issue, and serve as a
global clearing house on Year 2000 issues more generally.
A survey by the Basle Supervisors conducted late last  year indicated that global
awareness of the issue is increasing rapidly but that much work remains to be done.  While most
central banks and regulators express cautious optimism that their payments systems and financial
BIS Review   37/1998
˝
- 10 -
institutions  will  generally  be  ready,  there  is  increasing  recognition  that  some  problems  are
inevitable.    To  this  end,  increasing  attention  is  being  focused  on  the  need  to  identify  likely
potential problems before reaching the century date change and to develop contingency plans to
ensure the stability of global financial markets.
The majority of foreign central banks are confident that payment and settlement
applications under their management will be Y2K ready.  Like the Federal Reserve, however, the
operation  of  foreign  central  bank  payment  systems  is  dependent  on  compliant  products  from
hardware  and  software  suppliers  and  the  readiness  of  telecommunication  and  electric  power
infrastructures.    Foreign  central  banks  consider  Y2K  readiness  testing  to  be  a  critical  and
complex  issue.    The  approach  of  foreign  central  banks  toward  raising  banking  industry
awareness varies widely.  We are aware that many European banks are stretched for resources as
a  result  of  the  world-wide  demand  for  information  technology  staff  resources  and  their
conversion  to  a  single  currency.    Similarly,  Asian  financial  institutions  are  focusing  on  their
well-known problems, possibly placing full Y2K preparations in jeopardy.
7. Communications Efforts
We have been working intensively to address the issues faced by the industry and
to  formulate  an  effective  communications  program  tailored  to  those  issues.    Our  public
awareness program concentrates on communications with the financial services industry related
to our Y2K readiness, our testing efforts, and our overall concerns about the industry’s readiness.
We  have  inaugurated  a  Year  2000  industry  newsletter,  have  published  periodic  bulletins
addressing  specific  technical  issues,  and  have  established  an  Internet  Web  site  that  can  be
accessed at the following Internet address:  http://www.frbsf.org/fiservices/cdc.  In addition, we
have  published  a  set  of  guidelines  for  small  businesses,  including  depository  institutions,  on
Year 2000 issues and project management.
On  behalf  of  the  FFIEC,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  developed  a  Year  2000
information distribution system, including an Internet Web site and a toll free Fax Back service
(888-882-0982).  The Web site provides easy access to policy statements, guidance to examiners,
and  paths  to  other  Year  2000  Web  sites  available  from  numerous  other  sources.    It  can  be
accessed at the following Internet address:  http://www.ffiec.gov/y2k.
The  Federal  Reserve  has  also  produced  a  ten-minute  video  entitled  “Year  2000
Executive  Awareness”,  intended  for  viewing  by  a  bank’s  board  of  directors  and  senior
management,  that  presents  a  summary  of  the  Year  2000  five-phase  project  management  plan
outlined in the interagency policy statement.  In introductory remarks on the video, it is stressed
that  senior  bank  officials  should  be  directly  involved  in  managing  the  Year  2000  project  to
ensure that it is given the appropriate level of attention and sufficient resources to address the
issue  on  a  timely  basis.    The  video  can  be  ordered  through  the  Board’s  Web  site:
http:\\www.bog.frb.fed.us/y2k.
BIS Review   37/1998
˝
