Mr. Brash points out some positive aspects of New Zealand’s situation in the
world economy   Address by the Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, Dr. Donald
Brash, to the Construction Liaison Group in Wellington on 26/6/98.
Introduction
Over  recent  months,  there  has  been  a  great  deal  of  negative  economic  news.  In
countries  as  diverse  as  Italy  and  Japan,  GDP  data  for  the  March  quarter  have  been  released
suggesting  economic  activity  is  slowing  down.  Growth  in  industrial  production  in  the  14
countries which we monitor most closely in preparing our own economic forecasts was projected
to  be  just  0.1  per  cent  in  1998  in  the  June  Consensus  Forecasts,  a  significant  fall  from  the
increase of 3.8 per cent expected last November, and even a fall from the 1.0 per cent increase
expected  as  recently  as  last  month.  Financial  markets  have  been  extremely  turbulent,  with
particularly volatile trading in the foreign exchange market and some equity markets. Where is
the world economy going, and how will New Zealand be affected?
It is always risky being too definitive in answer to questions of this kind, because
in reality nobody can know the answers with any confidence. But it is particularly dangerous to
give answers at this time. If one suggests that the world economy is in for a very rough ride, and
New Zealand with it, one is accused of undermining confidence and making the situation worse.
If one points out some of the positive aspects of New Zealand’s situation, one is accused of being
hopelessly unrealistic.
Today I will try to be totally realistic. You may not agree with me, but I will not
gild the lily.
The implications of the situation in Asia are serious for New Zealand
In  our  December  1997  Monetary  Policy  Statement,  we  estimated  that  growth  in
our trading partners would average 1 per cent less than otherwise over 1998/99 due to the events
in Asia, and in releasing that document I commented that the most obvious risk to our economic
projection  was  that  the  difficulties  in  Asia  would  turn  out  to  be  even  more  serious  than  we
assumed at that time.
In the intervening six months, the situation has indeed become markedly worse.
Whereas in November 1997, the Consensus Forecasts projected Japan’s industrial production to
grow  by  1.6  per  cent  in  1998,  the  comparable  estimate  in  June  1998  is  minus  4.0  per  cent.
Whereas in November 1997, the Consensus Forecasts projected Korea’s industrial production to
grow  by  8.2  percent  in  1998,  the  comparable  estimate  in  June  1998  is  minus  7.8  per  cent.
Whereas in November 1997, the Consensus Forecasts projected Indonesia’s industrial production
to grow by 6.9 per cent in 1998, the comparable estimate in June 1998 is minus 13.3 per cent.
Japan’s  banking  system  is  under  severe  strain,  and  this  is  hampering  the  recovery  of  that
economy. The same is true in many of the other countries of Asia. A number - potentially a large
number - of banks will fail unless the governments of the countries concerned are willing and
able to support  them.  Even  those  countries  which  have  strong  banking  systems,  such  as  Hong
Kong and Singapore, face very sharp slowdowns in economic activity and possibly recession in
1998. So the economic situation in Asia has deteriorated significantly in recent months and could
get much worse yet.
BIS Review   58/1998
- 2 -
With  the  exception  of  Japan,  Korea  and  Australia,  New  Zealand  has  a  bigger
exposure to Asian markets than does any other OECD country. In 1997, some 36 per cent of our
total exports went to the countries of East Asia. In that year, Japan was our second largest export
market, and Korea our fifth largest market. Of our 10 largest export markets, six were in the East
Asian area last year, or seven if Australia is included. And Australia itself has a huge exposure to
the  markets  of  Asia,  which  means  that  we  have  a  further  indirect  exposure  to  those  markets
through  that  country,  now  easily  our  largest  single  market.  Of  the  tourists  who  visited  New
Zealand in 1997, over 30 per cent came from East Asia.
This substantial involvement in the markets of Asia has been of great benefit to
New Zealand in the past, and will be of great benefit to us in the future. But right now, their pain
is also our headache. In the three months to April, for example, our exports to Korea were down
48 per cent compared with the same three months in 1997, while exports to Indonesia were down
69 per cent. Some commodity exports, such as logs and deer velvet, have been particularly hard
hit. This has had a severe impact on some industries and some regions.
Moreover,  there  are  other  risks.  If  the  Japanese  economy  moves  deeper  into
recession,  and  the  Japanese  yen  resumes  its  fall,  there  could  be  further  downward  pressure  on
other currencies in the region, as well as political pressures to build protectionist barriers around
other markets. Or, because of Asian difficulties or for some other reason, the US equity market
could turn down sharply, triggering an abrupt slowdown in the United States economy. As I said
in  releasing  our  May  Monetary  Policy  Statement,  it  is  not  at  all  difficult  to  envisage
circumstances where the New Zealand economy grows more slowly than projected. Indeed, it is
possible  to  imagine  scenarios  where  the  world  economy  at  least  is  quite  weak.  The  external
environment is not good, and could get markedly worse.
To complicate matters still further, New Zealand enters this period of international
turbulence with a balance of payments deficit exceeding 7 per cent of GDP, and a negative net
international  investment  position  (overseas  assets  less  liabilities  to  foreigners)  of  some  80  per
cent of GDP, both high figures by international standards.
But we have many strengths
So we face serious challenges. But having established that I am fully aware of that
fact, allow me also to note some of the advantages we have in dealing with those challenges.
First, while a little over one-third of our exports go to East Asia, almost two-thirds
do  not.  And  many  of  those  other  markets  continue  to  grow  strongly  at  this  stage.  In  the  three
months to April, New Zealand’s exports increased by nearly 30 per cent to the United States (our
third largest market) as compared with the same three months in 1997, while those to Belgium
and Italy increased by more than 50 per cent. Even exports to some parts of East Asia increased
during that period - to Hong Kong by 29 per cent and to Singapore by 27 per cent. While tourist
arrivals  from  Korea  in  the  month  of  May  were  down  89  per  cent  as  compared  with  the  year
earlier level, and from Thailand by 64 per cent, overall visitor numbers were down only 7 per
cent  as  a  result  of  increases  in  tourists  from  the  US,  Britain  and  Australia.  Our  exporters  and
tourist operators are showing considerable ability to switch from weak markets to more buoyant
markets.
The decline in the New Zealand dollar against the currencies of the United States
and Europe has greatly helped in this re-orientation of our markets.
BIS Review   58/1998
- 3 -
Secondly,  we  go  into  this  period  of  international  turbulence  without  the  grossly
over-inflated asset prices which have been such a serious problem in many of the countries of
Asia, and which were such a serious problem in Japan in the late eighties and early nineties. It is
the  pricking  of  these  asset  price  bubbles  which  has  often  done  so  much  damage  to  banking
sectors  and,  as  a  consequence,  to  the  real  economies  of  the  countries  affected.  Yes,  I  have  at
times  lamented  the  high  prices  paid  for  both  houses  and  rural  land  in  New  Zealand.  I  remain
convinced that some of these prices reflected unrealistic expectations of future income growth.
But the extent to which these prices got out of line with long-term trends was relatively minor
compared  with  the  inflation  in  asset  prices  in  some  of  the  countries  of  Asia.  We  are  quite
unlikely to see the 60 to 80 per cent fall in such prices which have been common elsewhere in
the  Asian  region.  And  we  have  not  (in  the  last  few  years)  seen  ‘price  bubbles’  in  either
commercial property or equities.
Of course, in part, the absence of significant asset price bubbles in New Zealand is
a  direct  result  of  the  fact  that  monetary  policy  here  was  leaning  hard  against  inflationary
pressures throughout the middle part of the decade. While that attracted a great deal of criticism
at  the  time,  it  now  means  that  we  don’t  face  the  painful  adjustments  which  inevitably  follow
when asset price bubbles burst.
Thirdly, and related in part to the substantial absence of asset price bubbles, we
have  a  banking  sector  which  is  arguably  as  strong  and  as  competitive  as  at  any  time  in  New
Zealand’s history. This is in marked contrast to the situation in all of the troubled countries of
Asia. Indeed, the troubled countries of Asia are in an important sense defined as those where the
banking sectors are in serious trouble.
Fourthly, we go into this period of turbulence with a ratio of net public sector debt
to GDP of only some 25 per cent, less than half the level as recently as 1992. This ratio is one of
the lowest in the OECD. While the Government does owe some of this debt to foreigners, the
foreign  currency  component  of  the  public  sector  debt  is  exactly  matched  by  foreign  currency
assets,  so  that  the  Crown  has  no  net  foreign  currency  debt  at  all.  As  everybody  knows,
Government has been running fiscal surpluses for the last five financial years, and is budgeting to
continue doing so for the next three years. This clearly gives the country considerably more room
to manoeuvre than if we were already running substantial fiscal deficits.
And  perhaps  most  important  of  all,  New  Zealand  has  a  floating  exchange  rate
regime,  and  has  had  since  March  1985.  This  has  two  hugely  important  implications.  First  it
means  that  the  value  of  the  New  Zealand  dollar  adjusts  day  by  day  and  month  by  month  as
supply and demand change. This in turn means that, if there is a perception that New Zealand is
in a difficult period, for whatever reason, the New Zealand dollar tends to fall in value (and vice
versa). This tends to offset some of the impact of a weaker international environment. And this is
precisely what has happened over the last year or so, with the New Zealand dollar down from its
peak by some 28 per cent against the US dollar and by 17 per cent against the Trade-Weighted
Index (TWI). As a result, though the average world price of the commodities that New Zealand
exporters sell declined by 10.8 per cent over the last year, the New Zealand price of those exports
actually rose by 9.3 per cent over the same period.
Furthermore,  having  a  floating  exchange  rate  regime  -  one  where  everybody
understands  that  neither  the  Government  nor  the  central  bank  will  interfere  in  the  foreign
exchange market to prop up the value of the dollar - strongly discourages banks and corporates
BIS Review   58/1998
- 4 -
from taking on unhedged foreign exchange liabilities.  This  means  that  when  the  New  Zealand
dollar moves substantially, as it has done over the last year or so, neither banks nor corporates
incur  the  huge  losses  which  have  been  commonplace  in  countries  which  have  been  forced  to
abandon  fixed  exchange  rate  regimes.1  To  the  best  of  my  knowledge,  there  has  been  nothing
which  could  be  called  a  foreign  exchange  crisis  in  any  country  with  a  floating  exchange  rate
regime since 1945.
In a recent editorial, the Christchurch Press suggested that ‘New Zealand is a child
out in the economic storm this week - out in the storm without a hat or coat and with gumboots
leaking’.2 Certainly, the weather is getting rough, and may get rougher. But in my own view, we
have good wet-weather gear and a sturdy four-wheel-drive vehicle.
Should policies be changed?
Are there things which Government should be doing to further assist the country
weather  the  storm?  Clearly,  one  of  the  issues  being  focused  on  currently  is  the  desirability  of
Government’s cutting back on some of its planned increase in expenditure  because  of  the  risk
that, with slower economic growth a possibility, the projected operating surplus may turn into a
deficit.
To the economist, cutting government expenditure in a growth slowdown seems
counter-intuitive.  Better,  surely,  to  allow  the  ‘automatic  stabilisers’  to  work,  with  the
Government’s operating position moving into a small deficit when the economy is in the trough
of the cycle and into a surplus at the peak. Moreover, there is quite a strong case for allowing
longer-term considerations to determine fiscal decisions, in the  light  of  considered  judgements
about  the  appropriate  size  of  the  public  sector  in  the  context  of  Government’s  economic  and
social objectives.
On the other hand, it must be acknowledged that the Government’s determination
to run fiscal surpluses throughout the cycle, and to achieve further reductions in net public sector
debt, has been one of the important reasons why foreign investors have been willing to finance
New  Zealanders’  insatiable  appetite  for  borrowing  in  recent  years.  Should  there  be  no
Government  fiscal  response  to  the  present  situation,  and  should  a  fiscal  deficit  subsequently
emerge,  the  confidence  of  foreign  investors  could  be  somewhat  undermined  -  with  resultant
upward pressure on interest rates and downward pressure on the exchange rate.
                                                     
1 
Last week, the Government Statistician announced that the gross overseas debt of New Zealand banks and
corporates had risen by $20.1 billion during the year to 31 March 1998, to reach a total of $79.0 billion.  Of
this increase, it was stated that $6.2 billion was on account of the increase in the New Zealand dollar value
of foreign currency debt. It was also noted, however, that the figures took no account of ‘hedging or other
financial derivatives used by companies to offset potential foreign currency risk.’  The significance of this
note has almost certainly been missed by many commentators, because it is quite clear that all banks, and I
suspect most corporates, hedge their foreign-currency denominated liabilities in full or in substantial part.
Certainly at 31 March 1998, the four largest banks, which have been heavy borrowers of foreign funds in
recent years, carried almost no foreign exchange risk on that borrowing.  This means that the increase in the
New  Zealand  dollar  equivalent  of  the  gross  overseas  liabilities  of  the  banking  system  as  a  result  of  the
depreciation  in  the  New  Zealand  dollar,  included  in  the  debt  figures  published  by  the  Government
Statistician, will have been almost exactly matched by gains on the banks’ currency hedges.
2
The Press, 23 June 1998.
BIS Review   58/1998
- 5 -
Moreover,  in  recent  years  it  has  been  possible  to  argue  that  New  Zealand’s
balance  of  payments  deficit  has  been  a  result  of  investment  exceeding  saving  in  the  private
sector;  the  public  sector  was  more  than  funding  its  own  investment  activities  through  its
operating surplus. In 1998/99, the budgeted operating surplus looks likely to be broadly similar
to  public  sector  investment.  If  the  operating  surplus  turns  out  to  be  less  than  now  budgeted,
perhaps because economic growth turns out to be slower than projected, it is possible that public
sector investment will exceed the operating surplus. In other words, if the operating surplus turns
out  to  be  less  than  now  budgeted,  the  public  sector  will  be  contributing  to  the  balance  of
payments deficit in 1998/99 for the first time in several years.
If Government were to cut back on its own spending, this would further dampen
demand in  the  domestic  (non-tradeable)  part  of  the  economy.  This  would  in  turn  permit  some
further easing in monetary conditions without putting price stability at risk, leading to stronger
investment in export and import-competing sectors of the economy. The economic benefit would
be  faster  reduction  in  the  balance  of  payments  deficit.  The  economic  cost  would  be  slower
growth in the domestic (non-tradeable) part of the economy.
To the best of my knowledge, all commentators project a gradual reduction in the
balance of payments deficit over the next few years on present policy. My own hunch is that the
deficit will in fact reduce somewhat more quickly than any of the official projections (including
that of the Reserve Bank) now suggest, as a result of the substantial fall in the real exchange rate
over  the  last  12  months  and  a  decline  in  imports  which  may  follow  an  increase  in  household
sector saving, in turn a result of a decline  in  house  prices.  It  is  already  evident  that  growth  in
bank lending to the household sector has slowed markedly in recent months. Offsetting that, of
course, is the risk of further reductions in export volumes as a result of the prolonged drought,
and the weakness in some of our export markets.
At  the  end  of  the  day,  this  decision  about  the  trade-off  between  the  speed  of
balance of payments adjustment and the strength of the domestic part of the economy must, of
course, be a political judgement.
Whatever Government chooses to do with fiscal policy, it is obviously important
to  continue  with  the  programme  of  microeconomic  reform,  which  can  play  such  an  important
role in building on the competitiveness of New Zealand producers in world markets.
What about monetary policy?
It  is  my  absolute  conviction  that  monetary  policy  targeted  at  maintaining  price
stability has a crucial role to play in the uncertain environment in which we now find ourselves.
Just  as  policy  aimed  at  price  stability  must  tighten  monetary  conditions  as
inflationary pressures increase, so policy aimed at price stability must ease monetary conditions
as inflationary pressures abate.
And  that  is  what  the  Reserve  Bank  has  been  doing  for  the  last  18  months.  For
much of 1997, before the Asian crisis became a present reality, we eased gradually from a level
of 1000 on our Monetary Conditions Index (MCI) in the  December  quarter  of  1996  to  around
650 in the December quarter of 1997. As it became obvious that the international environment
was deteriorating, we allowed conditions to ease substantially faster, to around 250 over the last
month.
BIS Review   58/1998
- 6 -
The MCI seeks to measure the effect of both interest rates and the exchange rate
on the real economy, and so on inflation. Perhaps not surprisingly, given New Zealand’s balance
of  payments  deficit  and  the  uncertain  international  environment,  the  easing  in  monetary
conditions over the last year or so has been entirely in the form of a fall in the exchange rate.
Indeed,  90-day  interest  rates  have  actually  risen  somewhat  over  that  period.  But  overall  the
easing which has taken place over the last 18 months is equivalent to  a  fall  in  90  day  interest
rates of over 7 per cent with unchanged exchange rate, a substantial easing in any language. Just
as it was the export sector which bore much of the brunt of policy tightening between early 1994
and late 1996, so it has been the export sector which has received all of the benefit, so far, of the
easing.
Ten days ago I attended an interesting conference in Stockholm on the best ways
of  conducting  monetary  policy.  One  of  the  papers  at  that  conference3  argued  that,  when  the
Swedish central bank became the first central bank to use monetary policy to try to maintain a
stable price level in Sweden in the ‘thirties, it had the important benefit that Swedish output and
employment were also maintained at markedly higher levels than was the case in other countries
at that time.
We in New Zealand do not target a price level but we have been charged with the
responsibility of keeping inflation tightly constrained below 3 per cent and above 0 per cent. This
does not imply that we can eliminate the economic cycle. The world is far too uncertain for that,
and the lags between taking a monetary policy action and the effects of that action are both too
long and too variable. (This means, incidentally, that there is nothing which monetary policy can
do at this stage to affect the growth in GDP in the June quarter, which indeed is virtually over.
There is virtually nothing which monetary policy can do at this stage to affect the growth in GDP
in the September and December quarters. As far as monetary policy is concerned, those quarters
are  already  substantially  beyond  influence.  Whether  they  are  quarters  of  strong  growth  or  of
weak growth will be determined by a range of domestic and international factors, one of which is
monetary policy in 1997.)
But, provided we take our responsibility to keep inflation above zero as seriously
as  we  take  our  responsibility  to  keep  it  below  3  per  cent,  monetary  policy  should  be  able  to
protect the economy from any prolonged deflation and the loss of output and employment which
that would entail. We have spent much of this decade fighting to keep inflation below the top of
the target agreed with Government. It is at least possible that, over the next year or two, we will
be  working  to  prevent  it  from  going  through  the  bottom  of  that  target.  We  will  be  as  single-
minded  in  that  objective  as  we  were  in  the  earlier  challenge.  Indeed,  we  have  been  easing
monetary conditions for more than a year with exactly that objective in view.
Having said that, we also need to be mindful of the risks in ignoring the long lags
with which monetary policy works. If we ignore those lags, we run the risk of making economic
cycles worse.
Alan Blinder, former vice-chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, sometimes uses
the analogy of the thermostat. Who has not checked into a hotel room and turned up the heating
because  the  room  is  too  cold?  Then,  after  having  a  shower,  turned  the  heating  up  some  more
                                                     
3 
‘Pioneering price level targeting:  the Swedish experience 1931-1937’, by Claes Berg and Lars Jonung.
BIS Review   58/1998
- 7 -
because the room is still cold. And finally woken up two hours later in a sweat, with the room
like an oven. It takes time for central heating to warm up a room. It takes time for an easing in
monetary  policy  to  offset  a  sharp  increase  in  deflationary  pressures.  If  we  keep  easing  until
activity actually starts picking up strongly, we run the risk that in a year or two we will need to be
slamming on the brakes. As we have  sanctioned  very  substantial  easing  over  the  last  year,  we
have been  conscious  of  this  risk.  We  have  been  conscious  also  that,  with  the  sharp  fall  in  the
exchange rate which has taken place, import prices may be pushed up, with a risk that this might
spill  over  into  more  generalised  inflationary  pressures.  We  recognise  that,  even  now,  with
confidence quite low among both businesses and households, there is a strong increase in activity
in some parts of the economy, particularly in those parts of the manufacturing sector which have
benefited most from the fall in the exchange rate.
In short, while we can not eliminate cycles in economic activity, we believe that
monetary policy aimed at price stability can smooth economic cycles to some degree. This means
that when inflationary pressures increase, we can be relied upon to tighten. It means that when
inflationary  pressures  fall  away,  perhaps  because  of  a  sharp  deterioration  in  the  international
environment, we can be relied upon to ease. It certainly does not mean, as some commentators
have  asserted,  that  we  operate  in  some  kind  of  strait-jacket  which  requires  us  to  suppress
economic  activity  at  every  opportunity.  Monetary  policy  aimed  at  delivering  predictably  low
inflation enables the economy to maximise sustainable growth and employment opportunities.
Conclusion
The sharp downturn in many of our major export markets may well turn out to be
the most serious shock to hit the New Zealand economy since the oil shocks of the ‘seventies. If
so,  the  benefits  of  recent  economic  reforms,  in  reducing  public  sector  debt  and  improving  the
flexibility and adaptability of the economy as a whole, will be evident for all to see. A monetary
policy aimed firmly at price stability is of enormous benefit in weathering the storm.
 NB   This BIS Review is available on the BIS World Wide Web site (http://www.bis.org).
 BIS Review   58/1998
