Mr Macfarlane talks about exchange rate regimes and Australia’s experience with them
Speech by the Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, Mr I.J. Macfarlane, to the Asia Pacific
Forex Congress in Sydney on 27/11/98.
Introduction
First, I would like to add to what Mr Hawke has already said by extending my personal welcome
to Australia for the 1998 Asia Pacific Forex Congress.
I am glad to see that the Asian Pacific Congress is continuing to thrive. A regional association
such  as  this  is  important  because,  according  to  the  latest  BIS  world  market  survey,  the  Asian
region accounts for about one quarter of global foreign exchange turnover. I am hopeful therefore
that, as the practitioners in this region, your discussions here over the next couple of days will
make a contribution to resolving some of the issues that recent events have exposed.
When this Congress last met in Hong Kong a year ago, the so-called “Asian crisis” had already
started,  but  few  could  have  anticipated  the  toll  it  would  eventually  take,  not  only  on  financial
markets but also on these countries’ economies more generally. None of us thought that most of
the economies of Asia would be in recession by now, or that the effects would have spread to
non-Asian emerging markets. I am sure the Congress this year will provide plenty of topics for
lively discussion because foreign exchange markets are so central to all that has happened. If we
cast  our  minds  back  to  July  last  year,  we  will  recall  that  initially  the  events  in  Thailand  and
elsewhere were seen as a “currency crisis” before they became a general economic crisis.
I am pleased that the Australian Government has been able to play a constructive role in helping
to  understand  the  difficulties  in  the  region,  and  then  to  assist  in  efforts  to  overcome  them.
Australia was, in fact, the only country apart from Japan which contributed to all three financial
assistance  packages  in  the  region.  The  Australian  authorities  were  able  to  play  a  useful  role
because they had been  building  an  understanding  of  regional  developments  for  many  years,  in
part reflecting the strong trade links with the region, but also a more general interest on the part
of  our  business  and  academic  communities.  Bureaucratic  ties,  including  among  central  banks,
had also been strengthened, particularly through EMEAP, the group of 11 regional central banks
and monetary authorities that has been meeting regularly since 1991.
This understanding led Australia to see more quickly than most other countries the difficulties
with the Indonesian rescue package, and it used what influence it had with the IMF to argue for a
more  flexible  approach.  Recently,  Australia  has  pressed  for  APEC  to  lend  its  support  to  the
proposed  reforms  to  the  international  financial  system  put  forward  by  the  three  G22  working
parties. We recognise that there is a danger that the momentum could be lost if governments in
this region do not keep up the pressure.
Exchange rate systems
One of the areas in which the reshaping of ideas has already begun to occur is that of exchange
rate systems. Until 1997, most countries in Asia maintained some form of pegged exchange rate.
In the case of Hong Kong, this was a type of currency board, while other countries maintained
exchange rates which, although often referred to as floating, were managed within a tight range
against the US dollar, or some weighted index dominated by the US dollar.
BIS Review   101/1998
– 2 –
Most of the latter  group  of  countries  have  had  to  abandon  their  systems  under  the  pressure  of
recent events. Currency boards such as Hong Kong’s (or  Argentina’s,  for  that  matter)  seem  to
have  survived  rather  better  (though  at  a  high  price  in  terms  of  lost  GDP).  As  a  result,  it  is
commonplace to hear these days the view that countries can choose to have a fixed exchange rate
by way of a currency board or a pure float, but not any of the possible systems in between.
I confess to some misgivings about this conclusion. I think it is mainly attractive to people who
like intellectually pure systems, but we live in a very impure world. I think a lot more analysis
needs  to  be  undertaken  before  we  can  be  confident  of  such  a  conclusion.  For  a  start,  Hong
Kong’s  version  of  a  currency  board  is  very  different  to  Argentina’s.  Secondly,  we  need  to
examine  countries  like  Singapore,  Taiwan  or  Chile,  which  do  not  fall  into  either  of  the  polar
cases, but whose economies seem to have done relatively well in difficult circumstances.
Whatever  the  solution  is,  it  will  involve  making  very  difficult  choices.  I  am  reminded  of  this
when I look back over the many meetings I attended with Asian central banks in the middle years
of this decade. The ever-present topic of conversation was what to do about the large inflows of
capital  they  were  attracting.  Everyone  knew  that  they  were  “excessive”  in  the  sense  that  they
were much larger than needed to cover the relatively small current account deficits, were difficult
for  the  economies  to  absorb  productively,  and  were  putting  a  lot  of  upward  pressure  on  their
relatively fixed exchange rates. There were basically three alternatives open to them:
Persevere  with  the  relatively  fixed  exchange  rates  and  sterilise  the  inflows  to  make  sure  that
money  supply  and  inflation  did  not  accelerate;  put  in  place  some  form  of  control  to  limit  the
amount of capital inflow; or float the exchange rate.
As we know, they chose the first alternative. We look at the result and say they made a mistake.
But the second alternative – capital controls – was effectively ruled out by international pressure
in  anything  other  than  a  crisis  situation.  Remember,  while  the  international  debate  has  now
reached some form of consensus that “Chilean” style controls on inflows can play a useful role,
this is a very recent development.
That leaves the third alternative – a move to a floating exchange rate – and  this  looked  rather
daunting to them. I am not aware of any country, including developed countries, that have made
the move without being forced to do so by some form of crisis.
The reality is that, even though the theoretical benefits of floating are clear enough, the transition
can be, and often is, difficult. Certainly, that was our experience in Australia in the mid-1980s.
In the case of the Asian economies, a move to floating may have brought things to a head sooner
in that it would have removed the exchange rate certainty that underpinned the capital inflows
that  were  driven  by  interest  rate  differentials.  But  exchange  rates  which  were  already  seen  as
being overvalued would have risen further, compounding the subsequent correction.
With the benefit of hindsight, it now seems clear to me that it would have been difficult to avoid
some  sort  of  crisis.  With  so  much  internationally  mobile  capital  pouring  into  economies  with
relatively small financial sectors, there was virtually no prospect of a smooth return to normality.
Australia’s exchange rate
So far, I have talked about possible exchange rate regimes and how difficult it has been for Asian
countries  to  come  to  terms  with  these  –  what  of  Australia’s  experience?  As  most  of  you  will
BIS Review   101/1998
– 3 –
know,  Australia  spent  the  first  40  years  of  the  postwar  period  trying  just  about  every  form  of
fixed exchange rate that was possible. First of all, the Australian dollar was fixed to the pound
sterling, then fixed to the US dollar, then fixed to a trade-weighted basket, then a variable peg to
a  trade-weighted  basket.  Finally,  we  floated,  and  in  two  weeks’  time  we  will  mark  the  15th
anniversary  of  the  float  of  the  Australian  dollar.  We  are  very  comfortable  with  the  floating
exchange rate, and I know of no serious body of opinion in Australia that would want it any other
way  now  that  we  have  come  to  terms  with  it.  In  fact,  it  is  widely  seen  as  being  an  important
factor helping Australia put in a good economic performance during the Asian crisis.
We certainly have allowed our exchange rate to adjust to reflect economic circumstances, most
particularly  the  international  cycle  in  economic  activity  and  commodity  prices.  We  have  not
resisted these broadly-based economic changes and  the  Australian  economy  has  benefited  as  a
result. Since 1986 the Australian dollar has fluctuated around a stationary average value, with the
cycle being quite pronounced: peak-to-trough movements of around 30% have been common.
While  we  are  prepared  to  accept  significant  moves  in  the  exchange  rate,  we  do  not  follow  an
approach of benign neglect. When the exchange rate moves, we ask ourselves if it is telling us
anything  about  policy  settings.  With  our  inflation-targeting  framework,  the  central  issue  is
always what the exchange rate move means for inflation, not only in the near term but also in the
longer term.
There have been instances when monetary policy has been adjusted in response to exchange rate
moves,  but  they  have  not  been  frequent.  We  have  also  used  intervention  to  influence  the
exchange  rate,  finding  it  particularly  useful  in  circumstances  where  market  imperfections  are
resulting in overshooting, as markets tend to do from time to time.
Judging when this tendency to overshooting exists is always difficult at the time, and – like most
things in life, including making the sorts of decisions you all make in foreign exchange trading –
usually easier with at least some hindsight. As a rule of thumb, however, the exchange rate is not
overshooting unless it has already moved a considerable way from its “normal” level, or at least a
level that can be explained by what is happening in the economic and financial environment.
As you know, there is considerable debate about the effectiveness of intervention, even among
central bankers. Some of this stems from a lack of clarity about what it aims to do. Intervention
should  not  be  viewed  as  a  substitute  for  necessary  adjustments  in  monetary  policy.  It  is  also
expecting a lot of it to think it can support a fixed exchange rate during times of crisis. But, in a
floating exchange rate regime, intervention can play a useful role in limiting extreme movements
in the exchange rate.
This is the approach we have taken in Australia. The result is that our interventions tend to be
infrequent, coming mainly at or near the peaks and troughs of the exchange rate cycle. By and
large, judged against our aims, we believe our interventions have been successful. They have also
been successful when judged against the test proposed by Milton Friedman, i.e. whether or not
they  are  profitable.  The  Bank  has  fairly  consistently  made  profits  from  its  intervention
throughout the post-float period.
During  the  past  year,  the  Bank  intervened  on  three  occasions.  These  occurred  after  the  rate
against the US dollar had already fallen by a considerable amount. In other words, our policy on
intervention has not prevented the exchange rate from falling enough to do the job we expect a
floating exchange rate to do. Australia has been able to maintain growth of about 4% in the past
year, at a time when most of our main trading partners in Asia have experienced negative growth.
BIS Review   101/1998
– 4 –
Our exchange rate system and the robustness of our financial sector have been two of the keys to
this performance.
I would hope that countries that have only recently entered the world of floating exchange rates
can draw some hope from this. The move from pegged to floating exchange rates is never easy.
Soon  after  the  Australian  dollar  was  floated,  it  fell  by  over  30%,  not  dissimilar  to  the  falls
recently  experienced  by  some  of  our  Asian  neighbours.  There  is  no  doubt  that  this  caused
considerable dislocation to the economy at the time, requiring strict and somewhat unpalatable
policy  decisions.  But  I  think  that  businesses,  markets  and  the  authorities  all  learned  from  that
experience, showing that it is possible to emerge from such disturbances with the economy and
the  financial  system  in  much  better  shape.  I  hope  that  this  will  also  be  true  for  the  countries
currently experiencing difficulties. The very recent signs of greater stability in regional markets
can give us some confidence that this will be the case.
BIS Review   101/1998
