Mr. Wellink gives a central banker’s view of price stability and monetary policy
Speech by the President of the Netherlands Bank, Dr. A.H.E.M. Wellink, on the Alumni Day of the
Tinbergen Instituut in Rotterdam on 23/10/98.
Introduction
It was only recently that some predicted that central bankers would soon be finding
themselves  in  never-never  land.  They  alleged  that  the  considerable  technological  advance  made
since the Second World War would make for structurally higher growth and low inflation. The world
economy had supposedly landed in an age of no inflation. But here the question arises whether this
really  is  a  new  era,  and  if  it  is,  how  it  was  brought  about.  Before  we  go  into  these  questions,
however, we need to look at the definition of price stability, as well as at the concept of prices as
such.
Price stability in central bank terms
It  goes  without  saying  that  European  monetary  policy  is  concerned  above  all  with
price  stability  within  the  euro  area.  That  is  after  all  the  mandate  given  by  the  EC  Treaty  to  the
European Central Bank. The euro’s exchange rate against, let us say the US dollar or the Japanese
yen, is not targeted. The euro zone is a comparatively closed economy where, contrary to what we
have been used to in our open European economies, the exchange rate plays a relatively minor role
in  price  determination.  The  emphasis  laid  on  the  internal  value  of  the  euro  is  the  greatest
contribution which the European System of Central Banks (ESCB) can make to the stability of the
international monetary system.
In their quest for internal price stability, the monetary authorities base their policies
notably on movements in the consumer price index (CPI). They do so for several reasons. To begin
with, there are various technical advantages to the CPI, such as its high publication frequency, timely
availability  and  transparency.  The  latter  is  reflected  in  its  well-founded  weighting  scheme,  which
covers a considerable proportion of final spending, viz. household consumption. This makes the CPI
a more attractive gauge than the broadest measure of inflation available, viz. the GDP deflator. The
GDP deflator is, however, no match for the CPI when it comes to monetary policy-making, because
its  figures  become  available  with  a  considerable  lag  and  not  as  frequently.  Moreover,  price
movements  over  time  lose  some  of  their  comparability  because  of  shifts  in  the  package  of  total
spending. But the CPI is useful for another, more basic reason as well. At the end of the day, central
banks are most interested in the ultimate net result of the gamut of price rises within the economy,
i.e. the increases in the prices paid by households for goods and services. In this context, the prices
of raw materials are, for instance, of a lesser importance. It must be kept in mind that price rises in
an  earlier  stage  of  the  production  process  need  not  necessarily  bring  about  tensions  within  the
economy, because they can be compensated for by other factors (such as increasing productivity or
competition).
However, this does not mean that central banks should not look at other price indices
as well. On the contrary. Movements in import prices may be barely relevant to the euro area, but
they  are  of  importance  to  small,  open  economies.  Because  import  prices  in  a  small  and  open
economy are determined largely by exchange rate developments, the latter may have a considerable
influence  on  the  general  price  level.  That  even  goes  for  the  euro  zone,  for  example,  when  the
exchange  rate  of  the  US  dollar  -  in  which  the  prices  of  numerous  commodities  are  expressed  -  is
subject  to  heavy  fluctuations.  Likewise,  movements  in  the  prices  of  non-final  goods  and  services,
BIS Review   89/1998
- 2 -
such  as  commodities  and  energy,  can  be  relevant  for  central  bankers  because  they  may  be  an
indication of inflationary tensions.
It is becoming harder for central bankers to do their work because doubts have arisen
about the traditional gauges of inflation. What is going on? The measurement of inflation has drawn
the  attention  of  the  academic  world,  as  well  as  that  of  the  central  banks.  Take,  for  instance,  the
Boskin Report published in the United States, and a comparable report published under the auspices
of the Deutsche Bundesbank. These studies indicate that the CPI has been systematically overstated,
in the United States by about 1 percentage point, and in Germany by three-quarters of a percentage
point.  It  is  worthwhile  taking  a  closer  look  at  this  matter,  because,  from  the  point  of  view  of
monetary policy, the importance of any distortions of the CPI increases in a world where inflation
has  dropped  to  low  levels.  After  all,  the  lower  the  rate  of  inflation,  the  greater  the  relative
significance of any statistical distortion. With inflation in the euro zone coming out at 1.2% over the
last  twelve  months,  measurement  errors  of  the  magnitude  which  I  mentioned  earlier  suggest  that
Europe is currently wavering between inflation and deflation.
The  errors  made  in  measuring  inflation  are  due,  first  of  all,  to  the  (fortunately)
progressing increase in product quality. This is known in academic circles as the quality bias. It is
not easy to distinguish between the price rises and quality improvements of sophisticated products
such  as  computers  and  telecommunications  equipment.  For  marketing  reasons,  technological
innovations  may  be  very  highly  priced,  for  one  thing  because  the  development  costs  need  to  be
recovered. Later generations of IT tools, by then mass-produced, are invariably much cheaper than
their predecessors. Falling prices and an impressive expansion of investment and profitability then
go hand in hand, which is a fairly unusual phenomenon macroeconomically. The variety of products
and their ever-shorter life cycle add to the risk that distortions in price indices increase over time.
The second cause of statistical distortions in inflation is the growing importance  of
services;  this  is  known  as  the  services  bias.  In  1997,  more  than  65%  of  the  nominal  value  added
within the Dutch economy was accounted for by the services sector. In 1950, it had still been less
than 50%. The shares of the agricultural sector and manufacturing industry have shrunk accordingly.
Within the services sector, the greatest expansions are accounted for by business services, banking
and  telecommunications.  The  problem  is  that  it  is  not  easy  to  determine  the  output  volume  of
services, which can usually only be calculated in a roundabout way. Because the growth of output is
underestimated, price movements in the services sector are systematically overestimated because of
these  measurement  problems.  This  (unduly)  low  estimation  of  output  growth  is  corroborated  by
studies made by the Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis. According to them, the total
productivity  of  business  services  in  the  Netherlands  between  1991  and  1995  came  out  at  minus
1.5%.  Compared  to  the  increase  in  productivity  in  manufacturing  industry  in  the  same  period,  of
1.75%, this figure is implausibly low. The problems inherent in measuring the CPI are compounded
further by the fact  that  services  have  come  to  make  up  an  increasingly  large  share  of  the  national
product.
The  third  factor  causing  measurement  problems  with  regard  to  inflation  may  be
termed  the  substitution  bias.  In  practice,  the  composition  of  the  package  of  goods  and  services
purchased by consumers changes fairly rapidly. That is especially true in this day and age, with new
and improved products being marketed all the time. The package composition underlying the CPI is
adjusted  for  such  changes  only  once  every  five  years.  The  basket  of  goods  and  services  used  to
calculate the CPI has  recently  been  harmonised  within  the  European  Union.  This  harmonised  CPI
will be used by the ESCB as a measure of inflation in their monetary policy-making. This means that
the differences between the national definitions used by statistical agencies have declined. However,
BIS Review   89/1998
- 3 -
the  process  of  harmonisation  has  not  yet  been  completed.  The  harmonised  CPI  in  fact  covers  too
narrow an area in terms of goods and services. Several components which are relevant to the general
price level are not included. Take, for example, rent increases.
Consequences for monetary policy
In view of the problems attending the measurement of inflation, people are right to
question  whether  central  bankers  still  have  sufficient  insight  into  inflationary  developments.  And
subsequently,  whether  central  bankers  are  still  capable  of  conducting  adequate  monetary  policies.
Such concerns are valid notably in times of low inflation, when the statistical distortions that we are
speaking about carry extra weight.
In a market economy, any difficulties encountered in the calculation of the index of
the general price level need not necessarily give rise to problems right away. An entrepreneur who
has decided to purchase new computer hardware will not be swayed by possible statistical distortions
in the CPI. Neither will you or I, when we visit the supermarket on Saturdays to stock up our larders.
The essential thing is that entrepreneurs, consumers and other economic agents have proper insight
into the value of individual goods.
But there is a catch. An inflation gauge which is closely monitored by a central bank
may  influence  the  behaviour  of  economic  agents.  Contracts  and  labour  agreements  often  refer
explicitly to an officially published inflation figure. Via this route, distortions in measured inflation
can thus affect functioning of the economy. In other words, it is of the utmost importance, not just
for the monetary authorities, that price rises be gauged as accurately as possible.
In spite of the uncertainties inherent in measuring inflation, the monetary authorities,
in formulating their policies, make use of a gauge that seeks to encompass the general price level.
How  otherwise  can  one  ascertain  whether  price  stability  has  been  achieved.  Moreover,  monetary
policy  should  in  principle  take  effect  at  the  macroeconomic  level.  However,  in  order  to  allow  for
possible measurement errors, price stability - as indicated by the inflation measure used - is defined
more broadly by the central bank. The Governing Council of the European Central Bank has recently
defined price stability as a rise in the (harmonised) consumer price level of less than 2%. On the one
hand, this definition, which is in line with that used in most countries of the euro area, implies that
measurement errors occur while, on the other, it stresses that it is one of the tasks of the European
System of Central Banks to prevent deflation. Some caution is in order when it comes to using the
word  “deflation”.  In  purely  technical  terms,  deflation  may  be  defined  as  a  fall  in  prices,  but  it
conjures up much more than that, viz. the depression of the 1930s. A slight decrease of the general
price level need not of course be attended by an overall collapse of demand. In 1987, for instance,
consumer prices in the Netherlands dropped by around 0.5%, a development which had a positive
impact on the economy because disposable income in real terms grew more than expected.
Returning  to  our  measurement  problem,  we  cannot  conclude,  on  the  basis  of  the
information  now  available,  that  the  distortions  in  the  official  price  indices  have  increased
substantially over time. That would have landed the monetary authorities with real problems. If, for
example,  inflation  had  been  increasingly  overstated,  monetary  policy  would  have  been  unduly
tightened,  with  negative  effects  for  economic  growth  and  the  employment  situation.  However,  we
cannot but admit that it has become more difficult over the past few decades to measure output and
price developments in the services sector in particular.
BIS Review   89/1998
A brave new world?
- 4 -
Now let us take a look at actual inflation. We can see from the various inflation rates
in  Europe,  and  even  throughout  the  world,  that  there  are  few  factors  which  could  make  for  rising
inflation. In the European Union and the United States, inflation has been structurally reduced since
the early 1980s, thanks to budgetary consolidation in both these areas, the deregulation of labour and
product  markets,  and  a  further  liberalisation  of  international  trade  and  capital  markets,  boosting
international  competition.  In  those  -  large  -  parts  of  the  world  which  have  been  affected  by  the
financial and economic crisis, deflation is in evidence.
This brings me back to the question which I posed at the beginning of this address:
what indications are there that we now find ourselves in a new era of permanently higher growth and
lower inflation, or to cite Alan Greenspan, in a new economy. This question is prompted notably by
the  developments  in  the  United  States  where  -  so  far  -  high  growth  has  been  attended  by  low
inflation.
But one swallow does not make a summer, as the saying goes. And that is true of the
United  States,  too.  Those  who  feel  that  high  growth  and  low  inflation  have  come  to  form  a
permanent  fixture  may  be  suffering  under  some  delusion.  After  all,  viewed  over  the  longer  term,
neither the duration of the upswing in the United States, nor the increase in productivity nor the rate
of inflation are unique. In fact, if the signs are not misleading, the American economy would seem to
be over the hill. Since the early 1950s, the expansion phases of the American business cycles have
on average lasted five years, two of them lasting longer than the current phase. Though accelerating,
the rise in labour productivity over the past few years (of 1-1.5%) still compares unfavourably with
the 3% average recorded during the first two decades following the Second World War. And, where
inflation  is  concerned,  it  may  be  noted  that  it  was  low  until  the  mid-1960s,  averaging  1.3%.  The
current developments in the United States, which are now beginning to tarnish somewhat, therefore
have much more in common with the situation in the first half of the post-war period (though there
are  also  quite  a  few  differences),  and  can  hence  hardly  be  called  exceptional.  It  is  all  the  more
imperative  to  exercise  caution  when  averring  that  inflation  has  been  banned  forever,  because  the
current  low  rate  of  inflation  in  the  United  States  and  Europe  is  accounted  for  largely  by  a  fall  in
commodity prices, which is temporary in nature. Obviously a role is also played by the collapsing
demand  in  South-East  Asia  in  particular  and  its  repercussions  elsewhere.  That  is  why  there  is  no
telling  what  the  underlying  inflation  rate  would  be  if  there  were  greater  economic  equilibrium
worldwide.  For  example,  suppose  oil  prices  in  1998  and  1999  continued  to  be  at  their  1997  level
($19.2  per  barrel  UK  Brent).  That  is  30%  more  than  the  current  price.  Inflation  in  the  European
Union  would  then  come  out  at  1.8%  this  year,  instead  of  the  current  estimate  of  1.5%.  In  1999,
inflation would then rise to 2.4% (according to the Netherlands Bank’s EUROMON model).
Conclusion
Let  me  conclude.  Central  bankers  will  never  be  at  a  loss  for  something  to  do.  Just
look at the current financial and economic crisis. And although the inflation genie will not emerge
from the bottle for the time being, central banks will need to keep an eye on price movements all the
time. Monetary policy is not asymmetrical, as some might feel, in the sense that a central bank only
takes action when prices soar. Falling prices, too, may be detrimental to the economy, and call for
some reaction from the central bank.
It is under these very conditions - low inflation worldwide and even deflation in some
areas - that measurement problems with regard to price movements, though not insurmountable, may
BIS Review   89/1998
- 5 -
prove  a  nuisance.  Although  the  central  banks  still  have  at  their  disposal  sufficient  monetary  and
economic beacons by which to steer their course, there is work to do for the statistical agencies, the
ESCB and the academic world. If problems with measuring inflation mean that inflationary tensions
may be hard to assess reliably, we must do all we can to ensure that the quality of the price indices
published is at least maintained and, where possible, improved.
BIS Review   89/1998
