Mr.  Chon  reports  on  recent  economic  trends  in  Korea  and  the  Bank  of
Korea’s monetary policy response to them   Speech by the Governor of the Bank of Korea,
Mr. Chol-Hwan Chon, at a press conference hosted by the Seoul Foreign Correspondents Club in
Seoul on 4/11/98.
I - Introduction
…
I  am  very  pleased  to  be  with  you  today  to  talk  about  the  recent  economic
developments in Korea.
Nowadays  almost  all  countries  around  the  world  have  become  closely  linked  to
each  other 
in  a  global 
in
telecommunications. The advisory role and influence that the international press exercises over
the economic development of any one country have correspondingly increased. You yourselves
as  foreign  correspondents  in  Korea  have  shown  keen  interest  and  provided  valuable  advice,
admonition and encouragement in our attempts to defuse the crisis that broke out a year ago.
information  community,  owing 
the  rapid  advances 
to 
We are most grateful. So, let me take this opportunity to voice my sincere thanks
to you all. And I hope that today’s meeting, although all too brief, will help you gain a clearer
understanding of the Korean economy today and the thrust of monetary policy in the future.
II - Recent Economic Trends in Korea
Real Economy
First, let us look at the recent performance of the Korean economy.
As you know, we have been going through serious hardships. Domestic demand in
terms  of  both  consumption  and  investment  has  been  deeply  depressed  by  the  shock  of  the
currency crisis and the effects of structural adjustment.
Exports have also been sluggish mainly because of the severely subdued demand
in our major markets, including Japan and Southeast Asian countries.
GDP  growth  for  the  first  half  of  this  year  was  down  sharply  to  -5.3  per  cent  as
against  the  4.9  per  cent  of  the  latter  half  of  the  previous  year.  Viewed  by  quarter,  the  second
quarter’s  growth  rate  slid  further  to  -6.6  per  cent  from  -3.9  per  cent  in  the  first  quarter.  GDP
statistics for the third quarter have not been compiled yet, but indicators related to production,
consumption and investment remained subdued.
Unemployment rose to 7.3 per cent in this September from 3.1 per cent at the end
of  last  year,  as  the  economic  recession  deepened  and  firms  downsized  in  the  process  of
restructuring.
And the number of unemployed shot up dramatically to 1.6 million in September,
which was more than three times as many as the half million a year before.
Consumer  prices  had  risen  steeply  in  the  period  from  last  December  to  this
February, affected by the massive depreciation of the Korean won. But they have held broadly
steady since this March. This can be put down to the stable movements of the exchange rate and
international raw material prices, along with the depressed domestic demand.
BIS Review   95/1998
- 2 -
Turning to the current account, we have seen a swing from a deficit of 8 billion
dollars in 1997 to a large  surplus  of  some  31  billion  dollars  for  the  first  three  quarters  of  this
year.
Much of this improvement, though,  must  be  attributed  to  the  sharp  reduction  in
imports, brought about by the subdued domestic demand, which has more than offset the effect
of the decline in exports.
Foreign Exchange and Financial Markets
Now let us move on to the foreign exchange and financial markets.
Helped by the large surplus on the current account and the conversion of most of
the  outstanding  short-term  foreign  debt  of  financial  institutions  to  long-term  obligations,  the
foreign exchange market has stabilized substantially. Usable foreign exchange reserves rose to 45
billion dollars at the end of this October, which was above the year-end target level of 41 billion
dollars agreed as a conditionality element of the IMF’s standby arrangements.
Since mid-March, the exchange rate has regained stability, moving in a range of
some 1,300 to 1,400 won per US dollar.
Total  foreign  debt,  as  defined  by  the  IMF  standard,  has  also  been  reduced  by  4
billion dollars since the end of last year. It stood at 151 billion dollars at the end of this August,
thanks largely to the considerable contraction in the foreign liabilities of the financial and private
sectors.  Moreover,  the  environment  for  the  rollover  of  outstanding  borrowings  by  Korean
financial institutions has become markedly more favorable in the international financial markets.
Fresh foreign borrowings, though, are still not so easy.
In step with the improved foreign exchange market conditions, the Bank of Korea
has steadily reduced its market intervention rate from a high of around the 35 per cent level in
December 1997 to its current 7 per cent. This has brought about a matching decline in market
interest rates, particularly since it cut its repo rate by 1 per centage point on September 30. The
overnight call rate is running at a level of 7 per cent and the long-term interest rate in terms of
yields on corporate bonds is at the 10 per cent level, both lower than prior to the outbreak of the
currency crisis.
Turning to money supply, the Bank of Korea has essentially maintained a stable
monetary policy stance. But, when necessary, it has been prepared to respond flexibly in order,
for instance, to soothe financial market instability that might arise in the course of corporate and
financial  sector  restructuring.  As  a  result  of  the  authority’s  focus  on  stability,  at  the  end  of
September,  reserve  money  reached  22  trillion  won,  which  was  somewhat  below  the  IMF’s
indicative  limit.  And  the  growth  rate  of  M3  has  slowed  smoothly  from  15.9  per  cent  in  last
December to 14.0 per cent this August.
As  financial  markets  have  regained  stability,  the  incidence  of  corporate  failures
has declined gradually. From this March onwards, the per centage of bills and checks dishonored,
which had shot up to 1.49 per cent toward the end of last year, has constantly receded. Recently it
has  been  running  at  around  the  0.3  per  cent  level.  The  monthly  numbers  for  corporate
insolvencies have shown a sharp decrease, from 151 this January to 42 this September.
BIS Review   95/1998
- 3 -
Having  said  this,  I  must  point  out  that  the  credit  crunch  has  not  yet  eased.
Financial  institutions  are  very  prudent  in  lending  to  firms,  mainly  because  of  the  heightened
credit risk of enterprises in the course of structural adjustment. Their need to maintain acceptable
BIS  capital  adequacy  ratios  is  also,  in  part,  a  factor.  Accordingly,  most  small  and  medium
enterprises, which mainly rely on indirect financing from banks, have been going through serious
financial difficulties.
III - Monetary Policy Response
Expected Economic Environment
Before I explain the thrust of monetary policy in the future, let me first sketch out
the expected economic environment. The recession will be prolonged into the fourth quarter due
to  the  ongoing  slackness  of  private  consumption  and  investment  demand,  and  the  substantial
slowing  of  export  growth.  Although  the  current  account  is  likely  to  continue  to  run  a  surplus
during the fourth quarter, its scale will be somewhat reduced.
Meanwhile,  consumer  prices  seem  likely  to  continue  the  stable  trend  of
movements they have maintained since this March.
In the foreign exchange market, the favorable supply-demand conjuncture will be
sustained  thanks  to  the  continuing  current  account  surplus  and  inflows  of  foreign  capital  both
from inward foreign direct investment and the proceeds of overseas disposal of corporate assets.
Consequently, the foreign exchange rate should continue to move within a stable range for the
time being. However, there are potential factors making for exchange rate instability including
the unrest in emerging markets, such as Russia and Latin American countries.
The overall demand for funds in Korean financial markets is unlikely to be large
given the deep-seated economic recession. Nevertheless the steady worsening of the cash flow of
enterprises will add to the demand for working capital.
So far this year, the burden that maintaining the BIS capital adequacy ratio places
on financial institutions’ management has been eased through the injection of public funds and
the disposal of non-performing loans. However, no major expansion of their lending is foreseen
in the near future, due to the persistently high credit risk of enterprises.
The Thrust of Monetary Policy
Although  structural  adjustment  is  never  without  pain,  a  deep  and  prolonged
depression could erode the country’s industrial base and sap Korea’s growth potential.
Therefore, the emphasis of future monetary policy is being placed on preventing
further contraction of the real economy and on promoting structural adjustment.
First,  the  Bank  of  Korea  will  maintain  a  policy  stance  favoring  the  stability  of
interest rates in order to encourage the recovery of the real sector, insofar as this does not conflict
with  sustaining  foreign  exchange  market  stability.  Seen  in  this  context,  the  recent  substantial
reduction  of  market  interest  rates  and  banks’  lending  rates  will  contribute  to  relieving  the
financial expenses of the corporate sector, and to restoring consumer and investment confidence.
BIS Review   95/1998
- 4 -
So  far  this  year,  banks  have  not  reduced  their  lending  rates  in  keeping  with  the
decline in market interest rates. However, the overall cost of their funds has come down with the
share of outstanding high-cost deposits declining as well as the rapid reduction in rates on new
deposits.
Thus there would seem to be greater scope for them to lower their lending rates.
Second, while maintaining the stable stance required under the agreement with the
IMF and this year’s inflation target, the Bank of Korea will manage market liquidity in a flexible
manner, closely watching financial market conditions. Action might be required, hypothetically
speaking, should interest rates rise to unacceptably high levels in response to the large-scale issue
of  government  bonds,  or  if  there  were  fears  of  bottlenecks  in  the  flow  of  funds,  or  financial
system instability in the process of structural adjustment.
Third, and most importantly, we intend to take such initiatives as may be needed
to solve the credit crunch that continues to bear so heavily on firms in a situation where they are
unable to access funds smoothly, despite the ample liquidity in the financial sector.
In this context, we will do all we can to encourage banks to expand their lending
to  small  and  medium  enterprises  by  strengthening  incentives.  In  this  connection,  we  are  now
considering  a  change  of  allocation  standards  for  individual  bank  quotas  under  the  aggregate
credit ceiling, to put more emphasis on lending performance to small and medium enterprises.
IV - Concluding Remarks
The  Korean  economy  is  now  placed  in  an  extremely  difficult  situation,  where
previous experience and received wisdom provide little guidance. However, all economic actors
fully realize that in order to tackle the problems which led to the crisis, there is no alternative
other  than  swift  and  intensive  structural  adjustment.  And  we  are  now  resolutely  and  patiently
fitting the blocks carefully together to build a sound new economy.
The Bank of Korea will do its utmost to support this structural adjustment, while
maintaining monetary stability. Of course, to some foreigners, Korea’s structural adjustment may
appear inadequate or incomplete in some aspects.
But  may  I  ask  you  as  informed  commentators  on  the  Korean  economy  to  have
confidence in our resolute determination to carry out thoroughgoing structural adjustment. Your
counsel and advice in this process will be greatly appreciated.
BIS Review   95/1998
