Mr Tietmeyer looks at the euro as a stabiliser in the international economic system
Speech  by  the  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  Prof  Hans  Tietmeyer,  given  at  the
conference  of  the  Luxembourg  Institute  for  European  and  International  Studies  and  the  Pierre
Werner Foundation in Luxembourg on 4/12/98.
I
There are just 28 days left until the start of monetary union, which is perhaps the most important
monetary event since the end of the Bretton-Woods system.
Some people may be thinking: ‘Just another 28 days, and then we’ve done it!’ before heaving a
sigh of relief as they relax in their armchairs.
That is a very human reaction, especially when one considers the great efforts and obstacles, all
the advances but all the reverses on the way to greater monetary cooperation in Europe as well.
Thirty years ago the subject of monetary union was already a topic on the agenda of the European
Community, which in those days consisted of just six member countries. It was at that time that
the road to monetary union was first jointly mapped out by you, Pierre Werner, and the Werner
Group named after you – in which I myself had the honour of working.
Luxembourg and its political representatives were always advocates of progress towards further-
going but clearly stability-oriented integration.
Important insights which were gained at that time are still highly relevant today. For example, the
currencies  of  the  participating  states  can  be  welded  together  to  form  a  permanently  stable
monetary union only
•  if there is an adequate degree of ongoing economic convergence between the countries,
•  if there are common preferred structures in monetary policy and the same priorities prevail,
and
•  if there is broad agreement on the basic political stance.
The  way  forward  proposed  at  that  time  was  different  to  some  extent  than  the  path  actually
charted  in  Maastricht.  It  was  envisaged  that  political  integration  would  develop  parallel  to
economic integration.
However, the consultations following the submission of the Werner Plan showed clearly that the
politicians  at  that  time  were  not  prepared  to  abandon  national  sovereignty  on  the  quite
considerable scale demanded. So the first attempt to launch monetary union fell at this hurdle.
On January 1, 1999 monetary union will therefore be launched at the second attempt. A number
of conditions have changed in the meantime:
•  Eleven countries will be taking part, as opposed to just six at the time of the first attempt.
•  These  11  countries  are  only  part  of  the  overall  European  Union.  Hence  there  will  be
differences in the level of monetary integration within the EU.
•  And the political framework for integrating the single currency is a rather loose structure.
The euro will have to cope with this as best it can.
BIS Review   105/1998
– 2 –
For the goal is not merely to ensure that the euro is stable at the beginning. The goal is to ensure
that the euro remains stable over the long term. And in the long term it is highly probable that the
euro will need a stronger political underpinning.
II
It is gratifying that the financial markets already seem to have largely accepted the euro.
At any rate, the euro has passed its first test.
The markets apparently have confidence in the preannounced exchange rates. So far there have
been no marked tensions between the exchange rates of the future participating currencies.
And  the  euro  has  already  begun  to  show  the  first  benefits.  In  the  context  of  problematical
developments in the financial markets which in some cases reached crisis-like proportions, the
euro has acquired the reputation of a safe haven – even before the actual launching of monetary
union – which has led to correspondingly low capital market rates in the future euroland.
None of these things should be taken for granted. They are the result of
•  the rigorous stability orientation of the Maastricht Treaty,
•  the large  degree  of  convergence  that  has  already  been  achieved  in  the  monetary  stability
policies of the central banks,
•  the careful preparatory work, and
•  the determined efforts that have been made to date to achieve greater convergence in fiscal
policy, too.
The safe haven function which the euro area has performed so far clearly demonstrates that the
introduction of the new currency is undoubtedly a ‘global event’. And a lot of hopes are being
placed on the future international role of the euro.
Clearly, the enlarged financial market in euroland will result in a wider range of products and a
broader choice of investment opportunities.
To  what  extent  these  greater  opportunities  will  actually  be  used  –  especially  by  enterprises  –
depends on other conditions as well.
These include the legal framework laid down by the EU and by the national parliaments of the
countries  concerned,  the  different  traditions  in  respect  of  financial  market  structures  and  also
questions of taxation.
It  remains  to  be  seen  just  how  quickly  traditional  financial  market  structures  move  closer
together.
And another thing which remains to be seen is the use to which enterprises will put the enlarged
capital market. For example, will there be a tendency towards greater concentration as firms seek
to exploit ‘economies of scale’ in euroland?
And what about the other question which central bankers are often asked in connection with the
international role of the euro:
BIS Review   105/1998
– 3 –
How fast and to what extent will the euro become a major international investment and reserve
currency? Can the euro take over the D-Mark’s role as the second most important investment and
reserve currency?
Naturally,  the  euro  will  play  a  significant  international  role  as  an  investment  and  reserve
currency.  If  this  does  not  turn  out  to  be  the  case,  it  will  be  an  enormous  –  and  scarcely
conceivable – surprise as well as a bitter disappointment.
The  fact  that  the  euro  area  is  already  regarded  as  a  safe  haven  confirms  this  assumption.  It  is
simply a fact of life that major international currencies are used by investors from time to time as
a safe haven.
However, this can also be a problem in certain situations, especially for the exchange rate.
But it is the future stability of the euro that will determine its actual role in the concert of world
currencies. And two key criteria for this will be
•  sensible monetary policy decisions by the ECB Governing Council, and
•  stability-oriented behaviour in those aspects of economic policy which remain a  national
responsibility, especially fiscal and wage policies.
Given such a policy mix, the euro can assume a major international role – in line with the size
and economic importance of euroland – and also make its contribution to global stability.
III
And that brings me to the subject of this conference: ‘The euro as a stabiliser in the international
economic system.’
This title expresses great expectations of the future single currency.
•  In what sense – if at all – does the international economic system need a stabiliser?
•  And if it needs one, how can a currency help to meet such a need?
Let me begin with the second question: as a general principle, currencies cannot solve structural
problems relating to the global real economy.
And  as  far  as  the  first  question  is  concerned,  it  must  be  said  that,  while  the  world  economic
setting is difficult at the moment, there is certainly no cause to talk of a fundamental instability.
In  recent  weeks  the  financial  markets  have  at  least  calmed  down  a  little.  The  world  financial
crisis which many people predicted looks unlikely to occur at the moment.
It  is  true  that  a  number  of  countries  are  currently  suffering  crises  entailing  considerable  local
growth losses:
•  In the South-East Asian countries this is a direct consequence of the financial crisis. But at
the moment there are some encouraging signs of an improvement in certain countries.
•  Japan  continues  to  suffer,  in  particular,  from  the  structural  problems  which  have
accumulated  in  its  financial  sector.  Happily,  it  has  now  taken  steps  to  put  its  financial
sector in order. These now need to be implemented resolutely.
BIS Review   105/1998
– 4 –
•  In Russia the transformation of the centrally planned economy into a market economy has
virtually come to a halt.
•  And  in  Latin  America  contagion  effects  manifested  themselves  in  the  wake  of  the
uncertainty  in  the  financial  markets.  Fortunately,  the  financial  markets  are  showing
renewed confidence and are tending more to reward the marked structural advances made
in a number of countries.
Nevertheless, these regional  crises  have  clearly  left  their  mark  on  the  global  economic  growth
process.
On the one hand, that does not mean that an overall world economic crisis is looming. The robust
state of the US and European economies clearly contradicts such gloomy views.
On the other hand, it is becoming more apparent that the international setting has created some
extraordinary  risks  and  uncertainties  which  are  beginning  to  retard  the  pace  of  economic
expansion in the industrial countries.
There  are  some  indications  that  the  euro  area,  too,  cannot  fully  escape  the  global  downward
pressure.
Fortunately,  this  comes  at  a  time  when  the  internal  monetary  conditions  in  Europe  are  rather
favourable. The goal of price stability has largely been achieved. Moreover, there seems to be no
obvious threat to maintaining price stability in the foreseeable future.
That has given European monetary policy the opportunity for a further round of cuts in central
bank interest rates.
As you know, for some weeks now the euro area as a whole has already experienced a period of
considerable  decline  in  the  average  interest  rate.  This  is  the  result  of  the  so-called  process  of
convergence of central bank interest rates.
At the beginning of this week the Council of the European Central Bank made a comprehensive
assessment of the monetary and economic situation in the euro area. This very thorough analysis
on the ECB Governing Council, as well as yesterday’s discussion on the Bundesbank’s Central
Bank  Council,  came  to  the  same  conclusion:  an  additional  coordinated  rate  cut  is  appropriate
which clears the horizon for a level of 3% for the start and the first stage of the euro.
Therefore,  this  cut  also  has  to  include  those  currencies  whose  interest  rate  already  lies  at  the
bottom of the current range. The Bundesbank’s decision to cut the repo rate by 30 basis points is
our contribution to that coordinated action.
The decision is compatible with both the monetary situation and the overall economic conditions.
The early announcement of the interest rate level for the launch of the euro may help stabilise
expectations  in  the  financial  markets.  But  of  course,  the  rate  cut  cannot  solve  the  severe
structural  problems  in  most  of  the  euro  countries.  This  is  particularly  true  of  the  structural
problems on the labour markets.
IV
Naturally, it is not only Europe that is suffering structural problems and, therefore, facing tough
challenges.
BIS Review   105/1998
– 5 –
To a large extent, it was structural problems occurring in the monetary and banking sector which
played a major calamitous role in the outbreak and course of the regional crises.
•  Many of the countries affected had excessively rigid exchange rate pegs.
•  Many of the countries affected placed their own monetary policy too much at the service of
these problematical exchange rate pegs.
•  Many of the countries affected have structural deficiencies in the area of financial market
supervision, in particular.
These structural problems in the monetary sector have to be solved first and foremost  through
suitable policy measures in these countries themselves.
How else could these internal structural problems be solved than
•  through a confidence-building economic policy,
•  through a greater measure of realism in the exchange rate pegs,
•  through a stability-oriented central bank policy, and
•  through an overhaul of the financial sector and an improvement of banking supervision?
Naturally,  international  cooperation  can  also  help,  but  not  so  much  through  currency
arrangements like the euro as through strengthening the overall functioning and viability of the
financial markets. This entails above all
•  improving international cooperation in the field of supervision,
•  involving private sector creditors in the task of overcoming crises, and
•  improving the transparency of the financial markets.
All this will sharpen the markets’ risk awareness and strengthen their functioning and viability.
But considerable structural problems exist in the industrial countries, too.
In  the  USA  the  already  low  private  saving  ratio  has  fallen  further  in  recent  years,  actually
showing a negative ratio of late. Despite the country’s balanced budget, the imbalances in foreign
trade have not therefore been reduced.
And in most of the euro countries unemployment remains too high. The euro will not be able to
solve this problem on it own. Instead the euro requires flexibility and competitiveness in the real
economy.
It is the politicians who must tackle these internal structural problems. In the longer run this is
the  best  contribution  that  can  be  made  towards  achieving  sound  financial  markets  and  a
prospering world economy.
V
Boldly  undertaking  the  necessary  reforms  in  the  euro  area  will  at  the  same  time  prepare  the
ground for sustained favourable growth and employment prospects.
Given more flexible structures in the markets, a lastingly stable euro will be able to fully exploit
the  undoubtedly  large  potential  for  economic  benefits,  and  then  it  will  also  be  able  to  foster
political integration.
BIS Review   105/1998
– 6 –
To sum up: the euro is not the final aim of European integration. Even in 28 days’ time it will
remain a future-oriented project.
For  it  is  not  just  a  question  of  introducing  the  euro.  The  euro  also  requires  ongoing  monetary
stability.  And  the  euro  requires  a  sufficient  degree  of  political  consensus  on  the  basis  of
economic dynamism and flexibility. Only in this way can potentially dangerous political conflicts
be avoided in the long run.
We are investing great hopes and expectations in this future-oriented project associated with the
euro. All those involved are responsible for doing what is necessary to ensure that these hopes
and expectations are fulfilled.
BIS Review   105/1998
