Mr  Crockett  considers  what  regulatory  consequences  should  be  drawn  from  the  most
recent crises in financial markets
Remarks  by  the  General  Manager  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  Mr  Andrew
Crockett, to the European Banking Congress in Frankfurt/Main on 20/11/98.
You have asked me to talk about the regulatory implications of recent crises. Before I do so, it is
important that we understand the relative roles of regulators and bank management in avoiding
excesses  and  managing  risks  appropriately.  As  you  all  know,  the  regulatory  and  supervisory
focus has shifted in recent years from quantitative controls and explicit rules to monitoring bank
soundness through the quality of internal controls and the banks’ risk management culture. With
this, greater emphasis has been placed on responsibility of bank management and stakeholders,
through market discipline, to ensure prudent operations. I think we all agree that bank managers
and market participants are better equipped and ‘incentivised’ for this task than supervisors. And
there is no going back to a world of quantitative controls.
At the same time, it is understandable that the ability of banks to repeatedly walk open-eyed into
massive overexposure should lead to questions being asked about the wisdom of this change in
regulatory  and  supervisory  focus.  I  will  not  address  this  question  here.  But  if  the  banking  and
wider financial community is to resist pressures for re-regulation, it is necessary that it should
pay much greater heed to the responsibilities for prudent operations that are now more explicitly
theirs and theirs alone.
What regulatory consequences should be drawn from the most recent crisis in the
financial markets?
Coming  to  the  question  you  asked,  I  think  it  is  useful  to  distinguish  between  the  crisis  in
emerging  markets  and  the  recent  heightened  volatility  in  financial  markets  in  advanced
economies. Even though there are undoubted linkages between them, the regulatory implications
to be drawn are rather different.
Concerning what has happened in emerging markets, there are at least three basic lessons from
recent  experience.  The  first  is  that  structural  weaknesses  in  the  financial  system  can  be  very
costly. The second is that there are important feedbacks between macroeconomic instability and
problems in the financial sector. And the third is that financial instability can spread contagiously
from  country  to  country.  The  Asian  crisis  began  when  the  overvalued  Thai  baht  had  to  be
devalued. The currency crisis then interacted with financial system weaknesses to produce a deep
economic recession. And the difficulties in Thailand were rapidly propagated across the region
and beyond.
From  this  experience,  the  most  important  regulatory  consequence  to  be  drawn  is  the  need  for
rapid strengthening of financial systems. Among  the  most  important  shortcomings  of  financial
systems  in  Asia  were:  severe  currency  and  maturity  mismatches;  excessive  concentration  of
lending;  insider  and  politically  directed  lending;  inadequate  accounting  and  loan  classification
procedures; weak capitalisation; and unsatisfactory supervision.
Correcting these fundamental problems will be neither quick nor easy. A strong financial system
requires  the  development  of  deep-rooted  ‘credit  culture’,  in  which  lending  instruments  are
properly  related  to  the  risks  they  are  used  to  finance.  Lenders  need  to  become  better  able  to
assess borrowers on an arm’s-length basis, understanding their businesses and their various risks,
matching  cash  flow  to  debt  servicing  obligations  and  appreciating  the  appropriate  role  of
BIS Review   105/1998
– 2 –
collateral.  And  supervisors  need  a  strengthened  capacity  to  identify  and  correct  sources  of
vulnerability.
Fortunately, there now exists a standard by which banking systems and supervisory arrangements
can be judged. This is the ‘Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision’ issued last year by
the Basle Committee on Banking Supervision. Virtually all countries have now accepted these
principles  and  pledged  to  adopt  them.  This  is  not  the  place  to  go  into  the  Core  Principles  in
detail. But let me just note four aspects of them that are of key importance. First, they cover all
phases  in  the  life  of  a  bank,  from  initial  licensing,  through  ongoing  supervision,  to  eventual
closure procedures. Second, they apply to both domestic and internationally active banks. Third,
the rules are applicable to banks operating in emerging markets as well as to those of industrial
countries.  And  fourth,  they  have  been  developed  by  an  internationally  representative  group  of
supervisors. The Core Principles therefore have the comprehensiveness and the legitimacy to act
as the basis for a thorough-going strengthening of banking systems worldwide.
The difficult part, of course, will be implementation. A major effort will be required involving
banks,  national  supervisory  authorities  and  international  organisations  and  expert  groups.  The
BIS  and  the  Basle  Committee  will  play  their  part  both  in  implementation  and  in  providing
training  and  technical  assistance  to  help  countries  bring  their  systems  up  to  scratch.  Although
primary responsibility for overseeing implementation of the Principles falls to the IMF, the Basle
Committee will be drawing up a compliance methodology for use by the IMF in its surveillance
activities.  And  as  regards  training,  we  have  recently  announced  the  establishment  of  the  BIS
Financial Stability Institute, which will be headed by Mr John Heimann, who is well known in
the banking community and Mr Erik Musch, former Secretary General of the Basle Committee. I
hope this Institute will make an important contribution to disseminating best supervisory practice
and supporting the effort to strengthen banking systems.
I now turn to the lessons to be learned in the industrial countries from the rather extraordinary
episode  of  market  turbulence  that  began  in  mid-August.  The  Russian  debt  moratorium  of
17 August sparked a widespread flight to quality, which was followed by a generalised drying-up
of liquidity in many markets. This prompted fears that lenders would ‘disengage’, leading to a
credit crunch.
Fortunately,  markets  have  more  recently  gained  a  certain  measure  of  stability.  But  we  should
certainly try to understand what went wrong and how we can avoid such episodes in the future.
One problem was that lenders had unrealistic expectations about the extent to which their loans
to emerging markets would be protected. It is therefore important that  cross-border  lending  be
assessed on a stand-alone basis, and that supervisors make sure that the pricing and management
of such exposures are not undertaken on a false basis. In other words, a tightening-up of credit
risk procedures is called for.
Another  source  of  difficulty  was  that  the  models  used  to  assess  market  risk  were  based  too
simplistically  on  established  statistical  correlations.  They  did  not  take  adequately  into  account
other types of risk, such as liquidity, volatility and event risk. Widely used value-at-risk models
caused financial intermediaries to liquidate assets when volatility in asset prices increased. This
selling, in turn, caused volatility to increase further and resulted in additional selling. The fact
that most market participants used the same basic model led  to  common  reactions,  amplifying
herd-like behaviour. Consideration therefore has to be given to ensuring that common behaviour
by market participants does not exacerbate market instability.
BIS Review   105/1998
– 3 –
It  has  to  be  recognised  that  all  model-based  approaches  to  controlling  market  risk  embody
assumptions, explicit or implicit, about market liquidity. The drying-up of liquidity in periods of
market turbulence, as market participants seek to disengage from exposure, invalidates a basic
premise on which risk management is built. It is therefore all the more important that VaR-based
approaches to risk containment are supplemented by stress-testing.
How do you think national governments have fared in implementing BIS rules?
The scorecard in this connection is not very good. If one looks back at the history of the past 10
or  15  years,  financial  crises  have  succeeded  themselves  with  depressing  regularity.  In  the
emerging  markets,  there  are  [15]  cases  in  which  the  direct  resolution  costs  of  banking  sector
crises  have  exceeded  10%  of  GDP.  And  among  the  industrial  countries,  systemic  strains  have
been  just  as  evident.  The  Savings  and  Loan  debacle  in  the  United  States;  the  Scandinavian
banking  crisis;  financial  fragility  in  Japan;  and  individual  cases  of  failure  or  severe  difficulty,
such as Barings and Crédit Lyonnais: all these episodes show there is much  to  be  done  in  the
advanced countries also.
Let me make a few simple points:
First, capital ratios do not mean much without prudent and consistent accounting practices. Time
after time, banks have failed even though they had shortly before declared strong capital ratios.
And whole banking systems have been declared sound at a certain moment, only to have severe
weaknesses revealed shortly afterwards. The reason, of course, is accounting practices that allow
bad  loans  to  be  called  good.  It  is  of  the  utmost  importance  that  asset  impairment  is  quickly
recognised.
Second,  the  Basle  rules  are  not  just  a  matter  of  capital  requirements.  Banking  is  about  the
management  of  risk.  Banks  need  systems  and  controls  at  all  levels  that  foster  the  accurate
measurement  and  monitoring  of  risk,  and  permit  risk  to  be  accurately  priced  and  rigorously
controlled. This goes well beyond the maintenance of certain balance-sheet ratios which, we all
know, are at best an imperfect measure of the riskiness of a portfolio.
Third, good supervision is no substitute for a developed ‘credit culture’. The best supervisors in
the world cannot enforce a culture when the basic soil is not receptive.  As  I  noted  earlier,  the
onus here lies squarely with banks’ management and their boards of directors.
Fourth,  to  keep  a  banking  system  healthy,  it  is  necessary  to  have  clear  procedures  for  dealing
with  institutions  that  get  into  difficulties.  Too  often,  troubled  banks  are  allowed  to  remain  in
operation  as  losses  mount  and  their  capital  erodes.  Forbearance  is  used  to  put  off  difficult
decisions in the hope that things will somehow get better on their own. Industrial countries have
been just as guilty as developing ones in this regard. Early intervention procedures therefore need
to be spelled out so that institutions in difficulties are dealt with before they infect the rest of the
system.
Let me conclude: the international financial system has had a close shave. With luck, and skilful
management from now on, there is a good chance that things will now get better. But there are
important lessons to be learned if the system is to be made more resilient on a durable basis.
BIS Review   105/1998
