Mr.  Macfarlane  speaks  to  banking  supervisors  on  the  challenges  for  the
world’s  economic  policymakers    Talk  by  the  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,
Mr. I.J. Macfarlane, on the occasion of the 10th International  Conference  of  Banking  Supervisors
held in Sydney on 21/10/98.
I would like to start by adding my voice to those who have already welcomed you
to this Conference and to the city of Sydney. It goes without saying that there could hardly be a
more propitious time for the international leaders in the field of bank supervision to be meeting.
When we first started planning this Conference a couple of years ago, we did not know whether
it would attract a lot of interest or would be greeted with a yawn. We now know it is the former,
and  we  in  the  Reserve  Bank,  and  our  colleagues  at  the  Australian  Prudential  Regulation
Authority, with whom we are jointly hosting the Conference, are sure that you will be in for a
very interesting couple of days.
It  is  hard  to  pick  up  a  newspaper  these  days  without  seeing  the  word  “crisis”
prominently displayed in a headline somewhere. First, we had the Asian crisis, then it spread into
being an emerging markets crisis, and now we hear so much talk of a world financial crisis. It is
interesting that, so far, the focus is on the word “financial” and not on the more general word
“economic”. It is also interesting that these troubling financial events are no longer confined to
emerging market economies. One consequence of these two trends is that the contrast between
economic  health  and  concerns  about  the  financial  sector  is  as  marked  in  the  world’s  most
powerful economy - the United States - as elsewhere. There is a big challenge, therefore, to the
bank supervisors of the world, and it seems to be equally large whether they are dealing with the
least, or the most, sophisticated of the world’s banking systems.
I  see  two  main  challenges  for  the  world’s  economic  policymakers  -  one  for  the
short term and one for the medium term.
In the short run, the challenge is to get through the current crisis - to make sure no
more dominoes fall through contagion. The region at risk is clearly Latin America, even though
many  of  these  countries  are  now  running  infinitely  better  macroeconomic  policies  than  could
have  been  imagined  a  decade  ago.  It  would  be  tragic  for  them  to  be  blown  off  course  by  the
spread of financial turbulence that they had no significant part in the making of. It would lead
more  countries  to  question  the  wisdom  of  adopting  sound  macroeconomic  policies  and  of
opening their economies.
One helpful recent development is the acceptance that there should be behind-the-
scenes discussions between a potential borrower and the IMF. If an IMF package does prove to
be necessary in the case of Brazil, for example, it will already have had its voice heard, and it
will know exactly what the conditions are in advance. It thus should be able to sign up on Day
One and so avoid the situation that occurred in Asia where countries put themselves in the hands
of the IMF without knowing what the conditions would be. Thus, the handling of the Brazilian
situation seems to be benefiting from one of the lessons of the Asian rescue packages.
What can bank supervisors do to assist in the resolution of the present situation?
Given that a major part of the problem is an increase in risk aversion by lenders and a possible
“credit crunch”, it seems to me that bank supervisors will inevitably have a very big influence on
the outcome. I would  like  to  endorse  the  remarks  I  recently  heard  Bill  McDonough  make  that
bank  supervisors  will  have  to  be  extremely  careful  not  to  inadvertently  encourage  banks  to
BIS Review   87/1998
- 2 -
become even more risk averse than they currently are. This will require great sensitivity on the
part of supervisors, and I am sure you will all rise to the challenge.
The second big challenge to all of us involved in international finance is to devise
a better system for the long run. None of us should be happy about how events have unfolded
over  the  past  five  years,  and  none  of  us  could  deny  the  claim  that  the  international  financial
system is prone to periods of extreme financial turbulence that leave lasting economic costs.
At first, this instability was attributed to deficiencies in the financial infrastructure
in some emerging market economies.
Soon, however, more thoughtful people saw the source of the instability as being
the combination of two things - large movements of short-term capital taking place in countries
that had small and not very well developed financial infrastructures.
We  now  know  that  there  is  a  third  important  factor  at  work  as  well  -  banks  in
developed countries (often in conjunction with hedge funds) have been taking much bigger risks
than their supervisors or their shareholders thought.
How do we go about devising a better system or, in current parlance, designing the
new international financial architecture? Obviously, this will be a very large task, and I can only
offer a few observations here this morning.
First,  we  all  recognise  that  access  to  the  international  capital  market  has,  on
balance,  bestowed  enormous  benefits  on  participating  countries,  particularly  developing
countries. The world is a much better place when it is outward looking - historical epochs where
large  international  transfers  of  capital  were  taking  place  were  those  where  living  standards
around  the  world  were  rising  fastest  and  where  poverty  declined  most.  I,  for  one,  would  be
saddened if a number of countries responded to the current turmoil in international markets by
cutting themselves off from the international marketplace thereby forgoing the benefits that the
use of foreign savings can bring. It goes without saying that Australia is completely happy with
its  policy  of  permitting  the  free  movement  of  international  capital  and  sees  no  case  for  any
change.
On the other hand, it is simplistic to insist on the totally free movement of capital
in  all  countries  and  in  all  circumstances.  To  do  so  would  be  to  ignore  the  lesson  from  recent
crises, to further risk the stability of the system and to invite a reaction which would make us all
worse  off.  We  need  to  devise  a  system  for  maximising  the  benefits  to  be  gained  from
international capital while limiting the risks. For example, I think Chile was probably quite wise,
and certainly within its rights, for a time to impose a tax on capital inflow which impinged most
severely  on  very  short-term  flows.  (Note,  however,  that  Chile  did  not  impose  controls  on
outflow.)  Like  Chile,  the  world  economy  has  to  reach  a  proper  balance,  and  I  think  there  is
increasing recognition that it will involve a few trade-offs.
Within  developed  countries,  a  number  of  institutions  have  been  designed  to
encourage investment and risk-taking - the joint stock company, the concept of limited liability,
bankruptcy laws and, of course, central banks as lenders of last resort. These are all accepted as
necessary  parts  of  a  developed  financial  system,  and  help  provide  the  right  balance  between
encouraging  enterprise  while  at  the  same  time  preventing  individual  financial  distress  from
turning  into  widespread  financial  panic.  All  these  things,  by  the  way,  have  the  by-product  of
BIS Review   87/1998
- 3 -
creating  an  element  of  moral  hazard.  Internationally,  on  the  other  hand,  despite  all  the  talk  of
globalisation,  a  borderless  world  and  the  integration  of  financial  markets,  there  has  been  a
reluctance to go very far down the path of finding an international equivalent to the bankruptcy
laws  or  the  lender  of  last  resort.  The  main  objections  have  traditionally  been  that  it  would
interfere with the free movement of capital and that it would create a moral hazard.
That  attitude  now  appears  to  be  changing,  and  the  recent  discussions  of  private
sector burden sharing can be viewed as, in some sense, an international equivalent to domestic
bankruptcy arrangements. In a company bankruptcy, failure to follow the right approach results
in  a  “fire  sale”  of  assets:  in  a  national  financial  crisis,  it  results  in  a  flight  of  capital  and  an
excessive fall in the exchange rate. The third Working Party Report to the G22 on International
Financial Crises addresses the problem where, in a crisis, all individual creditors look after their
own private interests and, in so doing, create a situation which is worse for them as a whole (and
for the debtor country). This is the problem known colloquially as “everyone rushing for the exit
at once”.  The  Report  makes  a  number  of  helpful  suggestions,  all  of  which  revolve  around  the
recognition that a tripartite agreement between creditors, debtors and probably the IMF would be
the best way of resolving a crisis once it has begun. The agreement would involve some sort of
standfast followed by a workout which would include rollovers of debt and rescheduling. This is
a very promising approach, but as recently as last year in the Asian crisis was dismissed on the
grounds that it represented an interference with the free flow of capital (which it does).
I should take this opportunity of saying how useful Australia has found the G22
Meetings. For a group that has only been in existence for a little over six months and has only
met twice at ministerial level, it has achieved a lot. The three Working Party Reports are the most
constructive effort to date in laying out some practical steps towards improving the international
financial architecture. I have already said how useful I thought the third Report was, but there is
also a lot of good sense in the first one which deals with transparency and disclosure, and in the
second one which deals with an improved financial system supervision.
Both  these  subjects  -  disclosure  and  supervision  -  have  relevance  for  the  very
topical  subject  of  hedge  funds.  In  fact,  the  first  Report  recommends  that  “a  working  party  be
formed as soon as possible to examine the modalities of compiling and publishing data on the
international exposures of investment banks, hedge funds and other institutional investors”.
We regard this cautiously worded recommendation as a big step forward, in that
for the first time to my knowledge, an official international body has proposed bringing hedge
funds into the disclosure net. But I wonder if it is still too cautious. The big macro hedge funds
have become, to some extent, an extension of the proprietary trading arms of major banks. There
is, in fact, a continuum running from commercial banks to investment banks to hedge funds, and
it is hard to see why some of this should be within the supervisory net and some without. This
alone would argue for some degree of supervision - for example, limits on gearing - rather than
just disclosure. The case becomes stronger when we take into account the fact that the New York
Fed has had to organise a support package for a large hedge fund on the grounds that its failure
would have had systemic consequences (both nationally and internationally). If, like banks, they
are important enough to have systemic consequences, it is hard to see why they should escape
supervision of some form or another.
I want to conclude by sympathising with you as bank supervisors because of the
inherent  difficulty  of  the  task  you  face.  To  some  extent,  the  biggest  challenge  is  to  bring  the
countries furthest behind world best practice up to standard, and the Core Principles are a very
BIS Review   87/1998
- 4 -
useful step in this direction. But as recent events have reminded us, even in the countries with the
most developed systems of bank supervision, we still continue to be surprised by the capacity of
the best and the brightest to take risks the magnitude of which even they do not understand. This
makes the task extremely hard for bank supervisors - you all have to run very hard just to keep up
with developments in markets, and perhaps, the nature of risk itself.
BIS Review   87/1998
