Mr.  Brash  gives  an  address  on  ‘Reserve  Bank  forecasting:  should  we  feel
guilty?’   Address by the Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, Mr. Donald T. Brash, to
The New Zealand Society of Actuaries inWaitangi on 21/10/98.
Introduction
Thank  you  for  the  invitation  to  address  you  today.  I  last  addressed  the  Society  in
April  1995  on  why  I  was  strongly  in  favour  of  the  Government’s  issuing  inflation-indexed  bonds.
Notwithstanding some concerns about the tax treatment of those bonds, and their inaccessibility to
small investors, I believe that the issue of the bonds has been successful, and I am very glad that the
Government proceeded to issue them.
Today,  I  want  to  talk  on  quite  a  different  matter.  You,  as  actuaries,  spend  a  lot  of
your  time  assessing  the  viability  of  pension  schemes,  and  in  doing  that  you  need  to  make
assumptions about the rate of inflation, the rate of return on investments, and a host of other things.
And of course sometimes your assumptions turn out to be wrong, because the one thing you can all
be absolutely certain of is that the future will never turn out to be quite the same as you assume it
will be.
Well, I have a great deal of sympathy for you. Like you, I as a central banker spend a
great  deal  of  my  time  trying  to  make  an  assessment  of  the  future.  And  like  you,  I  rarely  get  it
absolutely right.
Recently, the Reserve Bank has been severely criticized by a number of  people  for
having  misread  the  economy  in  recent  months,  and  in  particular  for  failing  to  head  off  the  two
quarters of negative growth which New Zealand experienced in the first half of this year. One major
newspaper has gone so far as to suggest that our forecasting record is ‘abysmal’. In recent days, with
the New Zealand dollar up sharply against the US dollar, we have also been criticized for allowing
this to happen. I believe the critics are wrong.
The accuracy of Reserve Bank projections
The Reserve Bank devotes very considerable effort to its projections. We study a very
wide  range  of  data  from  New  Zealand  sources  on  production,  prices,  wages,  money  supply,  bank
credit, business and household confidence, and much more. We have developed a series of so-called
indicator  models,  which  help  us  to  assess  what  is  happening  in  the  economy  at  the  present  time,
before we have the official GDP figures available to us. We have developed a sophisticated model of
the  whole  economy  to  help  us  with  medium-term  forecasting,  after  looking  carefully  at  the  work
done  in  other  similar  countries,  particularly  in  Canada  and  Scandinavia.  Before  each  quarterly
projection,  a  group  of  Reserve  Bank  staff  fans  out  across  the  country  and  talks  to  upwards  of  40
businesses and business organisations to get an up-to-the-minute impression of what a small number
of  -  hopefully  -  representative  firms  are  experiencing.  We  have,  for  example,  talked  with  54
companies and business organisations throughout the country in the last few weeks, in preparation
for our November Monetary Policy Statement. We get information from the non-executive Directors
of the Bank itself, and from a large number of informal sources, such as letters, phone calls, and the
meetings which I myself have throughout the country. We talk to Statistics New Zealand to try to get
an understanding of what lies behind some of the statistics. We talk to the producer boards to get an
understanding of what is happening in the agricultural sector. As a result, we go into each quarterly
projection ‘round’ armed with a very great deal of information on the New Zealand economy.
BIS Review   88/1998
- 2 -
We do not ourselves make forecasts of the international economy, but instead use the
monthly Consensus Forecasts, produced by Consensus Economics Inc. in London. These reflect the
assessment of a group of forecasters in each of the major countries to which New Zealand exports,
and historically the average of these forecasts has tended to outperform the forecasting performance
of  any  single  forecaster.  We  certainly  have  no  reason  to  believe  that  we  could  produce  better
forecasts  for  our  overseas  markets  than  can  the  forecasters  ‘on  the  ground’  in  the  countries
concerned.
But despite all this effort, we often end up wishing, with the benefit of hindsight, that
we  had  run  monetary  policy  slightly  differently.  Unfortunately,  it  is  inherent  in  the  way  in  which
monetary  policy  works  that  at  times  we  will  wish  we  had  done  things  a  little  differently.  Why?
Because monetary policy has its effect on the real economy with a considerable lag, and its effect on
inflation with an even longer lag. To make matters worse, the lags are not even stable. This means
that  to  avoid  making  errors  we  would  have  to  have  perfect  foresight,  and  of  course  I  am  not
embarrassed to admit that we have nothing of the kind.
Indeed, the situation is even worse than that. Not only can we not see into the future
with perfect foresight, we do not even know precisely where the economy is at present. To be sure,
we receive lots of anecdotes, and some of the data we analyse may only be a few weeks out of date.
But  the  most  comprehensive  measure  of  output  in  the  economy,  the  estimate  for  Gross  Domestic
Product, is not available for almost three months after the end of the quarter to which it refers - and
then for the next year or so that figure is subject to revision, often to very substantial revision. Thus
for example, the first estimate made by Statistics New Zealand for GDP in the March quarter of 1996
indicated  that  the  economy  was  growing  at  an  annualised  rate  of  some  1.5  per  cent.  A  year  later,
Statistics New Zealand estimated that the annualised growth rate for the March quarter of 1996 was
actually  some  4.2  per  cent.  The  policy  implications  of  those  two  numbers  are  radically  different.
Cynics have suggested that God made economic forecasters to make weather forecasters look good.
But at least weather forecasters can look out the window, and with reasonable accuracy know what
the weather is at the present time. Economic forecasters do not have that advantage.
If  monetary  policy  works  well,  it  can  help  the  economy  adjust  to  the  unforeseen
shocks which will inevitably hit us from time to time, whether these  be  sudden  changes  in  export
prices,  sudden  changes  in  import  prices,  or  whatever.  This  should  have  a  tendency  to  smooth
fluctuations in output to some extent. But it is quite unrealistic to expect that monetary policy can
eliminate the business cycle completely, and we have never claimed that we can do so. No matter
how prescient the Reserve Bank had been, the sudden collapse of the Korean economy was always
going to have a hugely negative impact on the New Zealand forestry industry, and on parts of the
New Zealand tourist industry. We  should  not,  and  do  not,  feel  embarrassed  about  being  unable  to
fully offset events such as that.
In  years  past,  some  economists,  recognising  the  very  great  practical  problems
involved in forecasting over the period relevant to monetary policy, suggested that as a substitute for
economic forecasting central banks should simply concentrate on keeping some measure of money
supply  growing  at  a  rate  consistent  with  the  inflation  target.  Alas,  central  banks  around  the  world
found that keeping money supply growing at a stable rate was not only very difficult to do in practice
but it also provided rather poor control over inflation. As a result, virtually all central banks admit to
having  abandoned  such  a  monetarist  approach  to  monetary  policy,  and  even  those  central  banks
which continue to base policy on money supply numbers to some degree often find it necessary to
depart from a strict adherence to those targets.
BIS Review   88/1998
- 3 -
Other monetary policy ‘rules’ have been devised, the most famous of these perhaps
being  that  named  after  Professor  John  Taylor  of  Stanford  University.  The  Taylor  rule  involves
setting interest  rates  in  response  to  deviations  in  the  rate  of  inflation  and  the  level  of  output  from
their targeted levels.
But all of these rules involve a simple rule of thumb as a guide to policy in a situation
where  the  central  bank  must  of  necessity  set  policy  for  an  economic  situation  which  is  18  to  24
months into the future, and therefore can not be foreseen with any certainty whatsoever. The only
way the Reserve Bank could avoid  the  embarrassment  of  being  wrong  about  the  future  at  least  as
often as being right would be to stop publishing our projections. Indeed, most central banks do not
publish detailed projections for either the economy or for inflation. The Bank of England does, as
does the Swedish central bank. But the Reserve Bank of Australia does not, the Bank of Canada does
not, the Federal Reserve Board in the United States does not, and the Bundesbank does not. We still
believe that publishing our projections is helpful to an understanding of what the Reserve Bank is
doing, but life would certainly be rather more comfortable for us if we did not.
What of the present situation? How seriously have we misread the situation? The first
point to note I think is that the Bank’s primary responsibility is to keep the inflation rate within the
target which has been agreed with Government. That is the measure against which the Bank should
be held accountable. The inflation target was originally 0 to 2 per cent, but has been 0 to 3 per cent
since December 1996. We first entered that inflation target in 1991 and, with the exception of the
year to June 1995 (when we exceeded the target by 0.2 per cent, in part as a result of a very sharp
increase  in  vegetable  prices  two  months  before  the  end  of  the  year),  and  1996  (when  we  were
slightly  above  the  target  throughout  the  year),  the  inflation  rate  has  been  within  the  agreed  target
throughout that period. For all of 1997 and for 1998 to date, we have not only been within the target,
but have been close to the middle of the target. At no  point  since  first  entering  the  target  band  in
1991 have we driven inflation  below  the  bottom  of  the  band,  and  indeed  at  no  point  has  inflation
gone below the mid-point of the band which applied at the time. This hardly suggests an abysmal
forecasting  record,  nor  that  the  Bank  has  operated  policy  excessively  firmly.  On  the  contrary:
overall, it suggests that the Reserve Bank has done its job well.
As an aside, I don’t propose to comment in detail here on why we have had to have
policy  rather  tighter  in  New  Zealand  in  recent  years  than  has  been  necessary  in  Australia.  That
matter has been dealt with in a good article in the Bank’s quarterly Bulletin not long ago. The key
point is that we clearly experienced a  conjunction  of  inflationary  pressures,  including  quite  strong
increases in housing prices, in the mid-1990s, whereas Australia had a rather different experience. If
inflationary pressures in the two countries converge, I have no doubt that in due course we will find
that  monetary  conditions  in  the  two  countries  will  converge  also.  Indeed,  that  seems  to  have
happened to a considerable extent in recent months.
But is it fair to suggest that the Bank was slow to ease policy in response to the Asian
crisis, or to the drought? It is worth recalling that the present easing cycle began when our Monetary
Policy Statement was issued in December 1996. At that time, an easing, even the relatively moderate
one which we indicated was appropriate, seemed a fairly bold move. Inflation had been outside the
top  of  the  target  band  all  year,  the  Government  had  announced  a  major  increase  in  government
spending  for  the  next  three  years,  and  a  major  reduction  in  income  taxes,  although  deferred  by  a
year, was within the period relevant to monetary policy. Moreover, financial markets were much less
confident than we were that inflation was trending down, and kept monetary conditions tighter than
we  felt  was  necessary  almost  constantly  for  more  than  the  next  four  months.  Nobody,  in  New
Zealand  or  elsewhere,  was  predicting  the  Asian  crisis  at  that  time,  though  it  was  at  that  time  that
BIS Review   88/1998
- 4 -
monetary conditions relevant to economic activity in the first part of 1998 were determined. Nobody,
in New Zealand or elsewhere, was predicting the drought at that time.
Throughout  1997,  the  Reserve  Bank  continued  to  ease  monetary  conditions
gradually. During the first months of 1997, most of the easing took the form of lower interest rates.
Through  the  balance  of  the  year,  the  easing  took  the  form  of  a  lower  exchange  rate,  with  interest
rates  somewhat  firmer.  But  in  interest-rate-equivalent  terms,  we  sanctioned  an  easing  of  some
3 percentage points between December 1996 and 1997.
And how reasonable was the assessment in the Monetary Policy Statement we issued
in  December  1997?  In  October  that  year,  the  World  Economic  Outlook  published  by  the  IMF
projected that world economic growth would continue at above 4 per cent per annum for the balance
of the decade. This projection was made in the knowledge of the emerging problems in Asia, but in
the expectation that relatively robust growth would continue in the United States and Europe. A few
weeks  later,  the  South  Korean  economy  was  clearly  in  serious  difficulty,  but  the  mean  of  the
November Consensus Forecasts projected that industrial production in Korea would grow by almost
8 per cent in 1998. Industrial production in Japan was projected to grow at what seemed like a very
modest  2  per  cent  this  year.  We  were  suspicious  that  perhaps  the  Consensus  Forecasts  were  not
picking  up  the  seriousness  of  the  deterioration  in  the  world  situation.  For  the  first  time,  we
deliberately departed from our traditional use of the mean of the Consensus Forecasts, and instead
used a pessimistic sub-set of those forecasts. We had a hunch that the situation could turn out even
worse than these numbers suggested but, with the overwhelming majority of international forecasters
continuing to project strong growth in key markets such as Australia, the United States, and Europe,
we stayed with that pessimistic sub-set.
Even though, with the wisdom of hindsight, it is clear that the growth we projected
for  the  New  Zealand  economy  in  1998  was  too  optimistic,  that  is  not  the  same  as  saying  that
monetary policy itself was flawed. Every quarter, the Bank produces a new quarterly projection, and
adjusts  its  position  in  the  light  of  new  data.  Perhaps  of  even  greater  importance,  the  Bank  allows
financial  markets  very  considerable  leeway  to  adjust  monetary  conditions  in  the  light  of  new  data
between  those  quarterly  projections.  The  real  issue  is  not  whether  the  Bank’s  projections  were
absolutely  correct;  they  will  never  be.  Rather  the  issue  is  whether  the  Bank  allowed  monetary
conditions to evolve appropriately in the light of new information, and I believe that we did.
Over  the  10  months  since  December  1997,  the  easing  of  monetary  conditions  has
accelerated  so  that  today  monetary  conditions  are  the  equivalent  of  almost  10  percentage  points
easier than they were in December 1997, and more than 9 percentage points easier than they were
projected  to  be  now,  back  in  December  1997.  Of  course,  not  all  of  that  easing  has  been  through
reduced interest rates: the exchange rate has fallen substantially also. But 90-day interest rates today
are  at  levels  last  seen  in  early  1994,  and  indeed,  apart  from  that  brief  period  in  early  1994,  New
Zealand  has  not  seen  lower  90-day  rates,  or  lower  floating  rate  mortgages,  since  the  very  early
1970s! Part of that easing has come about as the Bank has announced its new quarterly projection,
but most has occurred as the market has interpreted the new data to mean that inflationary pressures
are continuing to abate even more rapidly than the Bank’s forecasts envisaged. And while we have
from  time  to  time  sought  to  rein  in  the  speed  of  the  market  easing,  for  the  most  part  we  have
sanctioned it because we too could see that the emerging data justified easing beyond that envisaged
when our projections were completed. Remember that when market conditions change and the Bank
sanctions  that  change  by  its  silence,  the  Bank  has  effectively  taken  an  action.  Each  Wednesday
morning at 9.00 a.m. when the Bank says nothing, that silence contains deliberate meaning, which
the markets understand very well. In my business, silence does not mean abdication.
BIS Review   88/1998
- 5 -
Certainly,  both  the  March  and  June  quarter  GDP  figures  were  weaker  than  we  had
envisaged when we did our projections. But it is inappropriate to compare our published projection,
completed  six  weeks  or  so  prior  to  the  publication  of  the  GDP  estimates,  with  the  estimates  of
market  economists  immediately  prior  to  the  release  of  those  estimates  if  by  that  comparison
something meaningful is implied. All of us revise our estimates as new pieces of the jigsaw emerge,
and the fact that we have been revising down our own internal estimates is amply illustrated by the
extent to which we have been willing to accept conditions very much weaker than envisaged in our
projections.
The last few months illustrate the point rather well. In our August Monetary Policy
Statement, we estimated that the June quarter GDP figure would, when released, show that GDP had
contracted by 0.2 per cent. On that basis, we estimated that the economy would have a certain level
of  unused  capacity,  resulting  in  weak  inflation  pressures.  On  that  basis,  we  indicated  that  the
appropriate level of monetary conditions, on the MCI, would  be  around  zero  during  the  following
three months. By 25 September, when Statistics New Zealand  released  their  first  estimate  of  June
quarter GDP, it was clear that inflationary pressures were abating much more quickly than we had
expected in early August as we completed the Monetary Policy Statement, that GDP had probably
reduced by rather more than 0.2 per cent, and that easier monetary conditions would be appropriate.
And  in  fact  monetary  conditions  just  prior  to  the  release  of  the  June  quarter  GDP  numbers  on
25 September  were  not  zero  but  -290.  We  issued  a  ‘that’s  about  far  enough  for  the  moment’
statement on 7 October, by which time conditions had reached -370.
To  repeat,  the  real  issue  is  not  whether  our  quarterly  projections  were  correct,  but
rather whether those projections were reasonable in the light of the data available to us at that time,
and whether our response in terms of sanctioning easier monetary conditions was appropriate as new
data emerged. Certainly, monetary conditions have eased very substantially over the last 18 months
and, as we see it at the moment, that has been appropriate.
Do we feel in some sense ‘guilty’ that we did not ease earlier? Even looking back, the
decisions, which we took, seem reasonable in the light of the information available at that time. So,
no,  we  don’t  feel  ‘guilty’.  As  President  Harry  Truman  once  said,  ‘Any  schoolboy’s  hindsight  is
better than the President’s foresight’.
In summary, I have no doubt about the professional excellence of my staff, or about
the rigor they bring to our projections four times a year.
Inherent in the criticism, which has been made  of  the  Bank  in  recent  weeks,  is  the
view that we have unnecessarily constrained the economy by failing to allow monetary conditions to
evolve as the emerging data have suggested was warranted. If that’s true, we will  see  inflation  go
near  to,  or  below,  zero.  Well,  the  latest  annual  inflation  number  was  1.7  per  cent,  above  the
mid-point  of  the  inflation  target  agreed  with  the  Government,  and  slightly  above  market
expectations. I don’t know of too many commentators who are projecting inflation to go anywhere
close to zero over the next year or two.
Our projections are not an end in themselves; they are merely a guide to the markets
as to how the Reserve Bank is thinking given current data. Nobody who is informed expects them to
come  precisely  true,  because  the  world  is  always  changing.  That’s  why  we  constantly  allow  the
markets to adjust monetary conditions as new data emerge.
BIS Review   88/1998
- 6 -
Why, then, all the criticism? Partly it is that people always want someone to blame
when times are tough, and the Reserve Bank is an easy target for a cheap shot. Also, I think people
instinctively  want  certainty,  even  when  it  is  not  to  be  had.  In  that  sense,  the  Reserve  Bank  will
continue  to  disappoint  those  who  want  everything  to  be  black-or-white  for  as  long  as  the  Bank
continues to be open and honest.
What about the rising exchange rate?
The  only  other  point  I  would  like  to  touch  on  briefly  relates  to  the  sudden
strengthening  of  the  New  Zealand  dollar  over  the  last  few  weeks.  Since  23  September,  when  the
New Zealand dollar reached 0.492 against the US dollar, the kiwi has strengthened against the US
dollar by nearly 9 per cent (as of late 19 October). This is pretty dramatic stuff, and the appreciation
has  clearly  worried  some  exporters  who  fear  it  may  be  the  beginning  of  a  new  period  of  strong
exchange  rate  appreciation.  Indeed,  the  Meat  and  Wool  Economic  Service  of  New  Zealand  has
estimated, presumably on the assumption that no forward exchange cover has been taken at lower
exchange rates and that the appreciation is not soon reversed, that a 10 per cent rise in the exchange
rate would see farmers’ returns on lamb drop by 17 per cent, on beef by 14 per cent, and on wool by
12 per cent.
I  am  bound  to  say  that  the  present  mix  of  monetary  conditions  is  not  one,  which
makes  me  terribly  enthusiastic.  Given  the  propensity  of  us  New  Zealanders  to  borrow  as  soon  as
cash-flow constraints allow I worry that at present levels interest rates have become undesirably low.
I  certainly  don’t  see  much  evidence  that,  at  these  lower  interest  rates,  New  Zealanders  will  be
rushing to increase their savings in order to fund our on-going appetite for borrowing.
Even  at  the  higher  interest  rates  which  prevailed  earlier  in  the  year  -  allegedly  the
highest real interest rates in the developed world - New Zealanders were enthusiastic borrowers and
reluctant savers, at least in fixed-interest form, suggesting that, whatever the arithmetical calculation
implied about real interest rates, most New Zealanders did not perceive interest rates as particularly
high in real terms. Certainly, our real interest rates are not out of line with those in similar countries
today.
In any case, I have long ago had to face the fact that central banks have very limited
ability to affect the mix of monetary conditions. To be sure, we could push up interest rates, but only
at the cost of putting still further upward pressure on the exchange rate. I know of no way in which
the Reserve Bank can both reduce the exchange rate and increase interest rates. (Of course, we could
ease  monetary  policy  further,  thereby  reducing  both  interest  rates  and,  presumably,  the  exchange
rate, but the appropriate level of monetary conditions is something which we have to judge in the
light of the overall inflationary pressures, or lack of them.)
What we do know is that international foreign exchange markets have been through a
period of quite extraordinary turbulence in recent weeks. During one 24-hour period, the US dollar
depreciated  by  10  per  cent  against  the  Japanese  yen  in  the  biggest  one-day  movement  in  that
exchange rate since most currencies were floated in 1973. Over a three-day period, the dollar fell by
almost 20 per cent against the Japanese yen, again an unprecedented movement.
In  fact,  most  of  the  apparent  recent  strength  in  the  New  Zealand  dollar  has  been
simply  a  reflection  of  the  decline  in  the  US  dollar.  Against  the  German  mark  we  had,  as  of
19 October, appreciated by less than 5 per cent; against the Australian dollar we were almost exactly
unchanged;  and  against  the  Japanese  yen,  we  had  depreciated  by  8  per  cent.  The  Trade-Weighted
BIS Review   88/1998
- 7 -
Index had appreciated by little more than 1 per cent (all comparisons with rates on 23 September).
Throughout  this  recent  period  of  extreme  turbulence  in  international  financial  markets,  the  New
Zealand dollar has barely been outside a narrow range of 55 to 57 on the Trade-Weighted Index.
Moreover,  it  is  also  clear  that  the  New  Zealand  dollar  has  fallen  a  very  long  way
since  its  peak  in  April  1997,  at  69.1  on  the  TWI.  There  seems  not  the  slightest  risk  of  our
approaching these levels again in the near future. Indeed, there is some evidence to suggest that the
current  ‘bounce’  in  the  New  Zealand  dollar  has  a  great  deal  to  do  with  turmoil  among  the  hedge
funds in New York. Certainly, market gossip suggests that some of these funds have been selling out
of  so-called  short  kiwi  positions  in  recent  weeks,  causing  upward  pressure  on  the  New  Zealand
dollar as a result. But before you rush to denounce these funds for putting upward pressure on our
currency,  keep  in  mind  that  they  were  instrumental  in  putting  some  downward  pressure  on  our
currency in the process of establishing the short-kiwi positions which they now appear to have been
unwinding. When these short positions have been closed out, the upward pressure on the currency
could well dissipate quite quickly.
Having said that, neither I nor anybody else I know has a dogmatic view about the
appropriate, ‘fair’, or equilibrium exchange rate for the New Zealand dollar. My own guess is that it
is somewhat stronger than  the  present  exchange  rate.  Certainly,  on  an  inflation-adjusted  basis,  the
long-term average trade-weighted exchange rate is a little higher than the present level. But just as
the exchange rate almost certainly overshot during the period of almost four years in which it was
appreciating,  so  it  may  overshoot  ‘on  the  other  side’.  Given  New  Zealand’s  large  current  account
deficit,  and  still-heavy  dependence  on  world  commodity  markets,  some  further  weakness  in  the
currency in the short-term would not be at all surprising.
One  thing  we  know  with  confidence,  and  that  is  that  if  financial  markets  feel
disinclined  to  continue  investing  in  New  Zealand  in  large  amounts  at  current  low  interest  rates,
either interest rates will rise somewhat or the exchange rate will fall somewhat. The Reserve Bank’s
responsibility  is  to  ensure  that,  whatever  the  mix  of  monetary  conditions,  we  continue  to  deliver
price stability.
Conclusion
On  26  June  this  year,  I  gave  a  speech  entitled,  Monetary  Policy  in  a  Dangerous
World. Though delivered about two hours after the release of the weak March quarter GDP numbers,
it was, of course, written several days before that release. In it, I warned that we could well be facing
‘the most serious shock to hit the New Zealand economy since the oil shocks of the 1970s’. But I
also said that the reforms of the last 15 years, including a monetary policy committed to delivering
on-going price stability, put us in a good position to weather the storm. Nothing that has happened
since 26 June has changed my mind, either about the seriousness of the shock or about our ability to
weather the storm.
BIS Review   88/1998
