Bank of Japan’s monthly report of recent economic and financial developments1
BANK OF JAPAN, COMMUNICATION, October 1998.
The Bank’s View2
Japan’s economic conditions still continue to deteriorate.
With  respect  to  final  demand,  public  investment  has  bottomed  out.  Net  exports
(exports minus imports) are basically increasing mainly due to a decline in imports. Business fixed
investment, however, has been decreasing significantly partly because of financial constraints, and
housing investment has declined further. Private consumption has not yet shown a recovery despite
the  special  income  tax  reduction.  Against  this  background  of  weak  final  demand,  production  has
been  reduced  substantially.  As  a  result,  some  industries  have  shown  improvements  in  inventory
adjustments, but the level of inventories is still high as a whole. With the decline in expenditure and
production,  corporate  profits  are  worsening  rapidly.  Furthermore,  the  employment  and  income
conditions  have  deteriorated  further  as  the  unemployment  rate  marked  a  historical  high  and  the
decline  in  employee  income  has  accelerated.  In  these  circumstances,  corporate  perceptions  of
business conditions have worsened substantially and consumer sentiment has become cautious.
As the above  indicates,  there  remain  continued  negative  interactions  of  production,
income, and expenditure. With the effects of the comprehensive economic stimulus package and the
recent monetary easing, the deterioration of the economy is expected to moderate gradually toward
the second half of fiscal 1998. Nevertheless, the economy is hardly expected to recover immediately,
judged from the strong negative interactions mentioned above and the financial constraints such as
financial  institutions’  cautious  lending  stance  due  to  the  nonperforming-loan  problem.  In  these
circumstances,  there  is  an  immediate  need  to  rebuild  the  stability  of  the  financial  system.  In  this
regard,  bills  related  to  financial  revitalization  have  been  legislated,  and  a  bill  related  to  bank
recapitalization, including policy measures to strengthen banks’ capital base through injecting public
funds,  has  passed  the  House  of  Representatives  of  the  Diet.  It  is  desirable  that  functions  of  and
confidence  in  Japan’s  financial  system  be  restored  based  on  these  schemes.  Furthermore,  the
government is devising plans for economic recovery, including reduction in personal income taxes
and  corporate  taxes  as  well  as  additional  public  investment.  It  is  important  to  materialize  these
measures promptly, in such a way that they not only have sizable direct effects on the economy but
also contribute to restore corporate and household confidence.
With regard to prices, wholesale prices are on a downtrend reflecting the expanding
output  gap,  and  consumer  prices  have  fallen  below  the  previous  year’s  level.  With  respect  to  the
outlook, given the persistently strong negative interactions of production, income, and expenditure,
the  expansion  in  the  output  gap  seems  unlikely  to  cease  despite  the  expected  effects  of  the
comprehensive  economic  stimulus  package.  Furthermore,  the  continued  decline  in  wages  and  the
recent appreciation of the yen may exert downward pressure on prices. Hence, prices are likely to be
on a downtrend for some time.
In  the  financial  markets,  responding  to  the  further  monetary  easing  by  the  Bank  of
Japan on September 9, short-term interest rates declined as a whole after mid-September. However,
since the end of September, the Japan premium has expanded and interest rates on Euro-yen deposits
                                                     
1 
2 
This report was written based on data and information available when the Bank of Japan Monetary Policy Meeting was
held on October 13, 1998.
The Bank’s view on recent economic and financial developments, determined by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy
Meeting held on October 13, as the basis of monetary policy decisions.
BIS Review   88/1998
- 2 -
have rebounded slightly reflecting intensified market concern toward Japanese financial institutions’
funding in foreign currencies over the year-end. In the meantime, due to heightened uncertainty over
the economic outlook, long-term interest rates declined considerably.
Stock prices continued a downtrend reflecting the concern over the worldwide stock
market plunge, the further deterioration in economic indicators, and the persistent uncertainty over
the  resolution  of  the  problems  with  Japan’s  financial  system.  In  October,  stock  prices  recorded
historically low levels since the bursting of the economic “bubble”. Meanwhile, in early October, the
yen surged against the dollar with the emerged uncertainty over the outlook of the US economy.
With  regard  to  corporate  finance,  while  funding  needs  for  real  economic  activities
seem  to  be  decreasing,  some  firms,  especially  large  ones,  are  seeking  to  secure  ample  on-hand
liquidity to prepare for unexpected situations. Reflecting such increase in credit demand, the growth
rate in M2+CD has slightly recovered since the summer of 1998.
However,  Japanese  financial  institutions  have  become  more  cautious  in  extending
loans, facing up severe fund-raising environments and deteriorating business conditions of borrower
companies.  While  especially  large  firms  are  steadily  increasing  the  issuance  of  commercial  paper
and corporate bonds, small and medium-sized firms and relatively low-rated ones continue to face
difficult  conditions  for  fund-raising  in  capital  markets.  The  influence  of  these  severe  financial
conditions on business activities and on the economy continues to warrant careful monitoring.
BIS Review   88/1998
