Mr. Heikensten discusses monetary policy   Address by the Deputy Governor of the
Bank of Sweden, Mr. Lars Heikensten, at the Autumn Conference arranged by the Centre for Business
and Policy Studies on 14/10/98.
First a word of thanks for the opportunity to attend this meeting. The autumn conferences
are a fine tradition to which it is a pleasure to contribute.
On previous occasions I have used the opportunity to look back over the past year and
discuss  what  the  Riksbank  has  been  doing,  including  how  monetary  policy  is  conducted.  Then  I  have
tried to look ahead and pick out some issues of importance for monetary policy in the longer run.
My  approach  this  year  will  be  broadly  the  same.  First  a  review  of  what  has  happened
since last autumn, with comments on how the Riksbank’s assessment of inflation has evolved over the
year. Then, as  previously,  a  look  at  the  question  of  how  we  communicate  policy  and  how  it  has  been
perceived in financial markets.
On  this  occasion  we  are  in  the  throes  of  an  international  financial  crisis,  with  great
uncertainty as to what its real economic effects may be. Contagious effects of the crisis have gradually
become  larger  and  larger.  Looking  back,  one  can  clearly  see  how  the  economic  forecasts  of  most
observers have swung during the year, from a phase of concern about a future increase in inflationary
pressure to a phase of strong anxiety that the global economy will be hit by a recession.
Against this background I shall be discussing the current monetary policy appraisal of the
Swedish economy, together with some factors of importance for the final assessment. First, however, I
shall briefly outline monetary policy’s line of thought.
Forecasts and probabilities
Monetary policy’s overriding objective is to safeguard the value of money. The annual
rate of inflation, measured as the change in the consumer price index, is to be kept at 2 per cent. As it
takes time for the Riksbank’s monetary measures to work in full, our actions have to be based primarily
on an assessment of inflation’s future path. The policy horizon - the period in which most of the impact
of monetary policy materialises - is around twelve to twenty-four months.
The Riksbank’s assessment of future inflation is presented continuously in our Inflation
Reports. Since the first Report was presented in October 1993, the content has been developed and the
Riksbank  has,  for  example,  become  increasingly  explicit  in  its  assessments.  In  the  first  two  years  the
Report contained a more general account of how the inflation indicators and inflationary pressure in the
economy were developing. From November 1995 onwards the Riksbank has been attaching numbers to
its inflation assessments.
In the June 1996 Report the inflation assessment was underpinned for the first time with
an  overall  picture  of  the  cyclical  position.  A  further  step  was  taken  in  September  1997,  when  the
inflation assessment was supplemented with a path for inflation in the forecast period. In the next Report
our main path for inflation was flanked by uncertainty intervals. The probabilities of inflation following
various  alternative  paths  are  weighed  into  the  overall  picture  on  which  monetary  policy  decisions  are
based.
How, then, are the uncertainty intervals calculated? In practice, our forecasters construct
assessments  of  a  range  of  variables,  taking  into  account  both  their  current  uncertainty  and  how  this
compares with their normal uncertainty. This information is then incorporated in a fairly simple macro
model that is used to estimate future inflation. The probability distributions we obtain in this way are, of
course, highly subjective but they do give a consistent picture of how the Riksbank evaluates different
risks.
BIS Review   81/1998
- 2 -
While we are on the subject of the inflation assessments, it is particularly important to
bear in mind that they are predicated on the repo rate being unchanged throughout the forecast period. A
forecast  path  for  inflation  that  deviates  from  the  target  -  or  the  large  deviations  that  the  uncertainty
intervals  represent  as  conceivable  paths  -  constitutes  a  diagnosis  that  may  indicate  treatment.  When
called for, repo rate adjustments are used to bring inflation into line with the target. In reality, therefore,
the uncertainty about future inflation is not as great as the uncertainty intervals might suggest. Another
consequence is that our inflation forecasts become out of date as soon as the Riksbank alters the repo
rate.
Assessments in the past year
Much  has  happened  in  the  past  year  as  regards  economic  developments  and  the
conditions for monetary policy. The Riksbank, along with other official observers and market forecasters,
has revised its assessments in the light of the increasingly widespread effects of the international crisis.
•  Last autumn most observers counted on a strong economic trend, both in Sweden and
in the rest of the world. The crisis that had erupted in Southeast Asia was expected to
lead  at  most  to  a  welcome  easing  of  international  price  pressure.  In  the  Swedish
economy,  some  indicators  last  autumn  pointed  to  rising  inflationary  pressure.  In
particular,  a  gradual  increase  in  capacity  utilisation  was  judged  to  lead  in  time  to
inflation above the Riksbank’s target. Inflation expectations, moreover, were tending
to move up, having previously stabilised after a falling trend for a number of years.
In the December Report it was judged that inflation would exceed the target in 1999.
The Riksbank raised the repo rate 0.25 percentage points.
At  the  same  time,  the  Riksbank  underscored  that,  due  to  uncertainties  in  the
assessment, the outcome might differ from the main scenario. On the one hand, an
exacerbation of the crisis in Asia could result in weaker inflationary pressure; on the
other, there were risks that high wage increases and weak productivity growth would
fuel the rate of inflation. These two alternative scenarios were judged to be equally
probable.
•  During the spring the picture of inflation changed by degrees. In the March Report,
inflation prospects had altered somewhat in connection with the mounting crisis in
Asia  and  low  import  prices.  Subdued  inflation  expectations  and  restrained  wage
demands  pointed  in  the  same  direction.  In  view  of  a  weak  development  of
international  activity,  it  was  foreseen  that  full  capacity  utilisation  in  the  Swedish
economy would not be reached until the end of the forecast period, when inflation
was  assumed  to  be  marginally  above  the  target.  This  called  for  a  readiness  to
undertake some cautious tightening of the monetary stance later in the year.
At  the  same  time,  the  spectrum  of  risks  had  shifted,  with  less  risk  of  inflation
exceeding its expected path but a continued risk of development being weaker than
in the main scenario. In view of the uncertainty, the Riksbank chose to await future
developments.
•  At  the  beginning  of  the  summer  we  observed  that  inflation  was  following  a  lower
path than we had assumed in the main scenario in March. Weaker import prices were
contributing to this but so were other factors. Transitory effects - lower interest rates
and changes in indirect taxes and subsidies - were particularly prominent. Moreover,
on account of lower wage increases and stronger productivity growth than expected
earlier, it seemed that inflation in the longer run would be somewhat lower than the
Riksbank  had  predicted.  With  the  outlook  for  productivity,  it  was  likely  that  some
surplus capacity would continue to exist during the whole period.
BIS Review   81/1998
- 3 -
All in all, inflation prospects one to two years ahead were accordingly more subdued
than  before  and  predicted  inflation  was  below  the  target  throughout  the  forecast
period. In addition, there was judged to be a large risk of inflation being below the
path in the main scenario. Under these circumstances the repo rate was lowered 0.25
percentage points.
Notwithstanding  these  revisions,  the  economic  outlook  for  the  near  future  has  not
changed much in the past year, with expectations of good growth during 1998, to an increasing extent on
account of rising domestic demand. These predictions have been fulfilled. During the year, however, the
uncertainty about growth prospects further ahead has risen, above all in the late summer and autumn.
Transitory effects and lower import prices
Another matter to note is that although the cyclical picture has proved fairly accurate, the
path of inflation during 1998 has been markedly lower, mainly on account of large changes in transitory
effects and import prices.
At  the  beginning  of  the  year  it  was  foreseen  that  the  transitory  effects  would  largely
cancel out, with no impact at all on the course of inflation during 1998. With the spring decisions to cut
tobacco taxes and property tax, however, it was assumed that the transitory effects would act as a strong
curb on inflation. In the June Report it was foreseen that the transitory effects would have a downward
impact on inflation during 1998 of as much as 1.2 percentage points; in the September Report this figure
was adjusted upwards to 1.3 percentage points. For 1999 and 2000 the transitory effects on inflation were
assumed to be marginal.
Import prices have also been more subdued than expected. In the December assessment
last year the Riksbank assumed that during the forecast period the annual contribution to inflation from
import  prices  would  amount  to  about  half  a  percentage  point.  Some  downward  revision  was  made  in
March, followed by a further adjustment in June, when it was envisaged that the impact of import prices
on the CPI would not be sizeable. The lower outcome and the adjusted forecasts mainly reflect a price
fall  for  raw  materials,  though  the  international  price  trend  for  manufactured  products  has  also  been
weaker than expected, presumably in part as a consequence of the Asian crisis.
Rents are another CPI item that has been more subdued than foreseen in the spring. Since
the beginning of the year, the rate of rent increases has dropped to levels that are historically low. This is
partly attributable to lower mortgage interest costs and lower expectations for wages and inflation but it
also reflects the cut in property tax and decreased heating costs.
Wages seem to have developed more or less as the Riksbank foresaw. Today we count on
an annual wage rise of 3.5–4 per cent in the period 1998–2000; that is only a little below our estimate
last December before the wage negotiations had been completed. Opinions differ as to the effect which
the Riksbank’s actions may have had on the latest wage round. In the light of contacts with labour market
representatives, my view is that monetary policy’s influence on the wage settlements was positive. But
this was by no means the only factor. Contributions to the low outcome seem to have been made by this
wage round having been conducted both centrally, with efforts to hold wage formation together, if not
throughout  the  labour  market  then  at  least  in  large  segments,  and  decentralised  to  individual  firms.
Whether this model can be repeated is another matter.
Transitory  effects,  import  prices  and  rents  account  for  2  percentage  points  of  the
substantial  downward  revision  of  inflation  in  1998  by  a  total  of  2.2  percentage  points  between  the
Inflation Reports in December 1997 and this September. The same factors are responsible for about half
of the downward adjustments for 1999 and 2000 between the forecasts in March and June.
Monetary policy increasingly understood, but problems last spring
BIS Review   81/1998
- 4 -
For  some  years  now  the  Riksbank  has  been  working  hard  to  communicate  the  line  of
thought behind its decisions both to the general public and to market players. This is intended to heighten
the general understanding of how monetary policy functions and what it can do and also prevent, as far
as possible, market disturbances on account of uncertainty. The more clearly the market understands our
way  of  thinking,  the  smoother  should  short  interest  rates  adjust  to  new  information  about  inflation
prospects.
A  comparison  of  market  expectations  (as  expressed  in  implied  forward  interest  rates)
with the actual repo rate can serve as a indicator of the market’s error in foreseeing the repo rate. This
predictive error has, on the whole, decreased. With a reservation for other effects on this indicator from
various interest rate premia that may fluctuate over time, this suggests a growing understanding of our
policy.
With a longer time horizon, the predictive error naturally tends to be larger. With a one-
year  horizon  the  error  presumably  has  less  to  do  with  imperfect  communication  or  a  lack  of
understanding of how our policy functions; it is no doubt more a matter of shifts in the whole picture of
economic activity and inflation. Things are somewhat different in a three-month perspective; predictive
errors then presumably also arise from misinterpretations of the Riksbank’s signals.
During  the  past  year  the  repo  rate  has  been  raised  once  and  lowered  once.  This  has
required  a  great  deal  of  the  Riksbank  in  the  way  of  communicating  policy  to  the  outside  world  and
explaining the reasons for its measures.
A  study  of  the  market’s  prices,  predictions  and  statements  shows  that  the  repo  rate
increase in December 1997 was broadly expected. It was, in fact, just at last year’s Conference here that
an important piece of signalling took place. As regards the repo rate cut in June, on the other hand, the
pattern  of  market  expectations  changed  relatively  late.  The  implied  forward  interest  rate  curves  three
months  earlier  show  that  the  June  cut  had  not  yet  been  foreseen  by  market  players.  It  was  mainly  in
connection with an interview I gave some weeks before the decision that expectations shifted to a cut.
The Riksbank’s management of information about the repo rate cut came in for market
criticism.  We  were  said  to  have  been  indistinct  and  to  have  changed  our  inflation  assessment  too
abruptly. Some players used big words, claiming that the lack of clarity had damaged confidence in our
policy and would make it difficult to conduct an effective policy in future. I think that was overdoing it.
But the Riksbank should still have been able to make the market more prepared for what the future could
have in store.
It  should  also  be  underscored,  however,  that  the  tendencies  during  the  spring  were
difficult to assess. We certainly changed our opinion but not so abruptly and for a long time it was highly
uncertain what the next step would turn out to be. In such a situation, with a high degree of uncertainty,
communication is difficult.
One  reason  for  not  reacting  to  the  faulty  pattern  of  market  expectations  was  that  the
forecasts of market players were in line with our own. Thus it was not that we differed in the assessment
of inflation prospects but that, even though the path of inflation was below the target, market prices did
not  represent  a  view  that  the  Riksbank  would  lower  the  repo  rate.  To  put  it  bluntly,  market  players
seemed to share the Trade Union Confederation’s view that the Riksbank acted with a “bias”.
A clear lesson from events last spring is, in any event, the value for market observers of
constructing  independent  forecasts  of  inflation  as  a  foundation  for  their  repo  rate  predictions.  For  the
Riksbank,  what  happened  has  prompted  us  to  work  even  more  on  continuously  monitoring  market
opinions so as to be able to react in good time if the assessments of market players seem to be deviating
from our own.
Main scenario and balanced risks
BIS Review   81/1998
- 5 -
Now for a look ahead in the context of our current assessment of inflation.
In  the  latest  Inflation  Report,  published  at  the  end  of  September,  the  Riksbank
emphasised  that  inflation  prospects  contained  a  large  element  of  uncertainty.  The  cyclical  picture  had
changed  somewhat  since  June  in  that  growth  was  judged  to  be  strongest  this  year  and  then  slacken
somewhat.  But  we  still  counted  on  reasonably  good  activity,  with  annual  growth  in  the  coming  years
averaging almost 3 per cent. Inflation, measured as the 12-month change in the CPI, was assumed to be
below 2 per cent in 1998 and 1998 but to reach approximately 2 per cent at the end of the period.
The  composition  of  demand  had  also  undergone  a  shift.  The  international  crisis  was
expected  to  render  net  exports  weaker  than  assumed  earlier,  while  domestic  demand  was  likely  to  be
somewhat stronger than foreseen in June. The assessments were based on an assumed appreciation of the
Swedish krona from the current TCW index level of 124 to 120 in the coming year and just over 117 in
the year after that.
Inflationary impulses from the rest of the world were expected to be low in the forecast
period.
The  rising  domestic  demand  was  not  expected  to  result  in  an  alarming  increase  in
inflationary pressure. Investment growth and labour supply were judged to be sufficient to avoid general
problems with capacity during the period. The development of wages and productivity was expected to
be favourable for a moderate, though rising, rate of inflation.
Inflation  expectations  among  market  agents,  firms  and  households  were  still  low.
Inflation was expected to be below the target in the short run and then be in line with the target further
ahead.
With the fundamentally positive picture of the Swedish economy, including good growth
in the forecast period and a successive return to the targeted rate of inflation, the Riksbank left the repo
rate  unchanged.  As  uncertainty  had  increased  since  the  earlier  assessments,  however,  the  uncertainty
interval surrounding the main path was considerably wider. But the risk spectrum was symmetrical, that
is, the risks of inflation being higher than in the main scenario were judged to be as great as the risks of
lower inflation. International economic activity may result in inflation being even lower than in our main
scenario, at the same time as a lastingly weak exchange rate that has no counterpart in poorer economic
fundamentals could lead to upward pressure on prices.
Increased financial unrest
Financial unrest has grown since the September Report was published. It is difficult to
foresee to what extent the crisis that began in Thailand almost a year and a half ago will affect the real
industrialised economies in the West.
The direct real economic effects via foreign trade will probably be relatively small.
For  economic  activity  and  inflation  in  Sweden,  the  effects  that  could  arise  from
decreased general confidence are more important. Share prices in Sweden have gone on falling since the
September Report was published, wiping out not just the gains during 1998 but also a part of last year’s
increase. Since the high in July, the Stockholm Exchange1 has dropped nearly 30 per cent, giving a fall of
about 8 per cent from the level at the beginning of the year. Since the Inflation Report was published,
share prices have fallen nearly 6 per cent.
                                                     
1Affärsvärlden’s general index.
BIS Review   81/1998
- 6 -
Continued  unrest  and  falling  asset  values  would  affect  the  behaviour  of  firms  and
consumers. If households and firms postpone investment and consumption decisions, economic activity
will be lower. Some signs of this can be discerned; the latest figures suggest a minor blow to households’
expectations  of  Sweden’s  economy,  though  this  has  not  yet  affected  their  personal  economic
expectations. There has been some fall in the growth of business credits.
Another channel for effects on the real economy is the banking system. A more cautious
supply of bank credits could dampen economic activity. In this respect the international turbulence gives
cause for concern. The tendency in the late summer for investors to move to assets that were regarded as
generally  secure  -  a  flight  to  quality  -  has  developed  into  a  general  aversion  to  holding  risk,  with
investors  fleeing  instead  to  assets  that  are  more  liquid.  The  economic  fundamentals  in  particular
countries  are  currently  playing  little  part  in  investment  decisions.  This  has  hit  some  Third  World
countries very hard.
The financial system in Sweden is monitored very closely by the Riksbank. The available
statistics suggest that, compared with many international banks, Swedish banks are in a better position,
with  lower  exposures  to  countries  hit  by  the  crisis.  The  picture  also  seems  to  be  relatively  good  as
regards  exposures  to  hedge  funds.  This  low  exposure  is  probably  a  consequence  of  the  bank  crisis  in
Sweden in the early 1990s. So the risk of a domestically generated credit crunch should be small.
Weak currency
Besides 
increased  uncertainty  and  greater  risks  of  weaker  economic  activity,
developments since the September Report was written have involved downward pressure on the Swedish
krona. Since September 28th the krona has weakened almost 2 per cent in terms of the TCW-index, while
since the depreciation began last May the exchange rate has fallen about 9 per cent.
Just  as  on  previous  occasions,  financial  unrest  has  hit  the  Swedish  krona  as  investors
play safe and move to larger and more stable currencies. This time, however, the unrest seems to have
less to do with uncertainty about the future for Sweden’s economic fundamentals. Instead it appears to
involve general risk aversion among investors. Support for this interpretation is  to  be  found  in  market
letters (Swedish as well as foreign), et cetera, as well as in price setting of # and ##. That should point to
an appreciation in the next phase, when the general unrest has subsided and investors concentrate once
again  on  economic  fundamentals.  Judging  from  Prospera’s  surveys  for  the  Riksbank,  for  instance,  it
seems that market players are also allowing for this in their assessments.
The recent market weakening of the Swedish krona is a reminder of both the advantages
and the drawbacks of a flexible exchange rate. The weaker exchange rate can serve as a mechanism for
adjustment when international activity is slowing down. This could be valuable if the crisis is profound.
At  the  same  time,  the  recent  events  illustrate  that  our  vulnerability  with  a  flexible  exchange  rate  is
considerable.  The  krona  has  fluctuated  even  though  economic  policy  is  basically  focused  on  stability.
Other countries with a flexible exchange rate and an inflation target have  had  similar  experiences,  for
example Australia, Canada and New Zealand. It not only complicates assessments of the future path but
also probably entails costs in the form of a poorer real economic trend.
Conclusion
Monetary  policy  in  Sweden  has  been  conducted  with  an  inflation  target  and  a  flexible
exchange rate since January 1993. The results have been good in many respects. Since the upturn in the
summer of 1993, growth has been good compared with, for example, the years of high activity in the late
1980s. In contrast with that period, moreover, inflation has been low. Another point worth noting is the
good real wage trend. With the low price rise, the annual real wage increases have averaged 2.5 per cent
since 1994, which is more than in the 1980s, for example, when nominal wages rose rapidly but what
households actually gained in real terms was very modest.
BIS Review   81/1998
- 7 -
Monetary policy also seems to be better understood. Presumably this is mainly because,
in spite of everything, economic  development  in  recent  years  has  been  relatively  good.  The  change  in
attitudes  is  evident  in  surveys  of  how  people  perceive  the  Riksbank  and  monetary  policy.  A  similar
picture is obtained from the treatment of the Bank and monetary policy in the Swedish press. Our basic
line of thought has been broadly accepted, though from time to time there has naturally (and sometimes
perhaps even rightly) been criticism of what we do. Another point worth noting is that a large majority of
the  new  Riksdag  (Sweden’s  parliament)  backs  an  agreement  that  includes  safeguarding  the  value  of
money  as  a  statutory  objective,  as  well  as  a  more  independent  status  for  the  Riksbank.  The  earlier
discussion  suggests  that  an  understanding  of  the  Riksbank’s  actions  has  also  grown  among  market
players, though that does not rule out further improvements.
In recent weeks, instrumental rates have been cut in other countries. This is, of course, a
reflection of the increased concern about a deeper crisis that leads to lower inflation.  There  is  reason,
however, to be rather careful about citing interest rate cuts by other central banks as grounds for similar
action by the Riksbank, though this is frequently done in the debate. When making comparisons with the
United States, for instance, it should be borne in mind that the initial level of interest rates there is 1.15
percentage  points  higher.  Most  observers  consider,  moreover,  that  the  United  States  is  in  a  different
cyclical  phase.  When  making  comparisons  with  Continental  Europe,  it  is  particularly  important  to
consider exchange rates. The present weaker exchange rate represents an appreciable economic stimulus.
If  the  TCW  index  were  to  remain  at  the  present  level  in  the  coming  twenty-four  months,  it  would
represent an expansionary effect on the economy that is equivalent to an interest rate cut of something
like one or two percentage points.
The weeks that have passed since the Riksbank presented the Inflation Report have been
dramatic in financial markets. Our main scenario for the years ahead is still relatively good activity in the
Swedish economy, with inflationary pressure that gradually rises from a low level. But uncertainty about
the  future  path  has  been  further  accentuated  in  connection  with  the  financial  turbulence.  There  is  an
increased risk of a weak international development. In addition, the continued stock-market unrest has
made domestic demand more difficult to assess than before. Meanwhile, the weakening of the krona is
the opposite of the tendency on which our main scenario in the Report was based.
At the Riksbank we are keeping a close watch on developments. That is a self-evident
component of our work for promoting financial stability in the economy. It is also a necessary part of the
work on monetary policy. At present there are no grounds for altering the direction of interest rate policy.
BIS Review   81/1998
