Mr Jalan looks towards a more vibrant banking system
Inaugural address by the Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, Mr Bimal Jalan, to the Bank
Economists [apostrophe?]Conference (BECON’98) held at Bangalore on 16/12/1998.
Introduction
I  am  happy  to  join  this  special  gathering  of  bankers  and  deliver  the  inaugural  address  to  the
conference of bank economists . This year’s meeting of bank economists is particularly important
as it is being held against the background of one of the worst meltdowns of the financial system
experienced by a number of economies.
The  recent  financial  market  developments  show  that  we  have  come  to  live  in  a  world  of
considerable  uncertainty,  where  prudence  and  foresight  get  rewarded  while  errors,  inadequate
judgements  and  bad  decisions  impose  severe  costs  on  the  individual  financial  intermediary  as
well as on the financial system as a whole. In today’s liberalised financial environment, savers,
investors and financial intermediaries are widely dispersed, not necessarily confined to domestic
boundaries.  This  has  made  capital  extremely  fluid  and  highly  sensitive  to  policies  and
performance of the financial systems of the recipient countries. Pursuing policies and practices
that  ensure  improved  efficiency  and  continued  stability  of  the  financial  system  has  assumed
critical importance in the present context of a more open world economy.
In  India,  over  the  past  few  years,  we  have  made  substantial  progress  towards  improving  the
performance of our financial system and putting in place a new financial regime which relies less
on  detailed  controls  and  directions  and  more  on  initiative,  autonomy  in  decision-making  and
accountability. Policy initiatives since 1992 in this regard have been directed at building strength
and ensuring the safety and stability of the financial system. Compared with the experience of
many  developing  countries  embarking  on  financial  sector  reform,  we  have  trodden  cautiously
and in an orderly fashion, which has helped us in minimising the adjustment costs involved in
the process. This, however, should not lead to any complacency, particularly in the context of the
present  fluidity  of  international  capital  markets  and  the  increased  vulnerability  of  developing
economies  to  sharp  fluctuations  in  macroeconomic  situations.  These  disturbances  tend  to  get
exaggerated if the financial system is fragile and lacks depth in absorbing internal and external
shocks.
It is important to note that the number and frequency of bank failures in the world have increased
rapidly in recent years. These failures have occurred both in countries which followed relatively
more open policies as well as the ones exercising control in different degrees. Recent experiences
in East Asia and elsewhere have brought to fore the criticality of a financial system’s stability for
ensuring sustainability of openness in invigorating economic growth. In one important sense it
also  marks  a  departure  from  the  excessive  emphasis  laid  on  the  proposition  that  financial
liberalisation  per  se  will  lead  to  higher  growth.  While  developing  financial  institutions  and
markets  is  important  for  growth,  it  may  not,  however,  prove  sufficient  to  provide  desirable
outcomes if the safeguard systems are not very sound and the financial system is unstable.
It is in the above context that the theme of this year’s bank economists’ conference, namely to
strengthen the Indian financial system, assumes critical importance. Indeed this is a concern for
most  developing  countries  at  present.  Many  of  them  have  initiated  a  fresh  round  of  structural
reforms in their  financial  systems.  A  number  of  international  agencies,  including  the  Bank  for
 I would like to acknowledge with thanks the help of Shri M.S. Mohanty and Shri Partha Ray of the Reserve Bank of
India in the preparation of this lecture.
BIS Review   108/1998
– 2 –
International  Settlements  (BIS),  are  also  currently  engaged  in  identifying  factors  that  raise  the
vulnerability  of  financial  systems  and  devising  new  safety  standards  that  would  help  promote
stability.  In  India,  the  second  Report  of  the  Narasimham  Committee  has  recently  addressed  a
number of vital issues pertaining to the health and stability of the financial system and the action
that is necessary to strengthen it. Some of these recommendations have been implemented in the
recent monetary and credit policy announcements.
As professional bankers and economists, you are no doubt seized of the challenges that the recent
developments in international financial markets have posed for the Indian financial system. What
has  been  our  experience  of  financial  reforms  so  far?  Where  do  we  stand  in  terms  of  financial
stability considerations? What are the tasks ahead if the Indian financial system is to improve its
competitive strength substantially and strengthen itself to withstand the pressures of instability?
What role should the bank economists be playing in this environment? Let me try and address a
few of these issues in my remarks this morning.
A Review of Directions
The significance of the financial system for an economy arises from at least three major sources.
First,  it  performs  various  transformation  functions  relating  to  intermediation  of  funds  in  the
economy. Secondly, it provides the mirror image of the underlying real economy and the basic
macroeconomic balances. Thirdly, it is one industry whose basis of operation is underpinned in
public trust. The strength of this bond between the banking system and people in general depends
on how the financial viability of the banking system is perceived. The organisation and conduct
of  financial  markets  should  be  such  that  they  reflect  the  underlying  fundamentals  of  the
economy. The financial system as a whole must remain sound and stable in order to enjoy a high
level of public confidence.
Until recently, the improvement in various transformation functions of the financial system was
the focal point of reform initiatives in many developing countries. The basic issue was how to
create  a  competitive  environment  for  the  financial  system  and  to  put  in  place  a  policy  regime
which would lead to improved allocative efficiency of the financial sector and enhancement of
saving and investment activities of the economy for attaining faster rates of economic growth. As
financial  markets  developed  and  matured,  the  two-way  interaction  between  the  financial  and
nonfinancial policies grew in importance. In the recent years, the increased market exposure of
the financial system and its vulnerability to macroeconomic shocks have highlighted the need for
greater internal controls and the need for strengthening prudential norms and regulations. In an
environment  of  rising  importance  of  cross  border  capital  flows,  perceptions  and  expectations
play  major  roles  in  shaping  events  and  this  consideration  can  be  particularly  heightened  if  the
financial system is perceived to be weak and unsound. It is not surprising that financial reform
initiatives  globally  have  now  moved  to  the  strategic  considerations  of  ensuring  continued
stability of the financial system.
In India, since the formal announcement of the  first  initiative  of  financial  sector  reform  in  the
Union  budget  of  1991–92  to  the  Second  Report  of  the  Narasimham  Committee  in  1998,
considerable ground has been covered in putting in place a financial system which can meet the
requirements of a more competitive and open economy. By and large, financial reforms in India
have proceeded in four major directions.
First, setting the policy conditions right and removing the operational constraints of the financial
system.  What  the  reform  process  has  tried  to  achieve  is  to  lower  the  share  of  pre-empted
resources in the total resources of the banking system through gradual liberalisation of the cash
BIS Review   108/1998
– 3 –
reserve ratio and the statutory liquidity ratio. While the medium term target of 25% and 10% set
for the CRR and SLR, respectively, have been, by and large, achieved, these ratio levels are still
higher  than  what  would  perhaps  look  ideal  in  the  international  context.  Our  relatively  high
reliance  on  the  cash  reserve  ratio  has  been  necessitated  by  the  needs  of  monetary  policy
operations. As financial markets develop, allowing for a greater role for the interest rate in the
economy, the dependence on this instrument of monetary policy would need to come  down  in
future.
The second directional change has been in the area of creating a more competitive environment
in  the  financial  sector  through  reform  measures  such  as  relaxation  of  entry  and  exit  norms,
reduction in public ownership in the banking industry and letting banks access the capital market
in order to meet their funding requirements. The objective is to bring out the best result in terms
of pricing and quality of banking services over a period of time.
The  third  important  direction  of  reform  has  been  the  strengthening  of  market  institutions  and
allowing  greater  freedom  to  financial  intermediaries.  These  reforms  have  taken  the  form  of
gradual  liberalisation  of  interest  rates,  development  of  money,  capital  and  debt  markets  and
giving operational flexibility to banks in the management of their assets and liabilities subject, of
course,  to  prudential  guidelines.  In  simple  terms,  these  changes  imply  a  greater  degree  of
exposure  of  individual  financial  institutions  to  the  domestic  and  international  economic
environment.
In this connection, a distinction needs to be made between two types of market developments,
which  have  implications  for  the  financial  system.  One  is  developments  in  respect  of
macroeconomic fundamentals of the economy which impact on the interest rate, exchange rate
and other asset prices. This is a normal phenomenon in any economy and has implications for the
balance  sheets  of  the  financial  intermediaries.  Institutions  which  do  not  have  an  organised
approach  in  anticipating  events,  undertaking  pre-emptive  actions  and  designing  a  suitable
response to unanticipated developments can find themselves in a difficult situation, particularly
in  times  of  a  large  degree  of  fluctuations  in  macroeconomic  variables.  The  dangers  posed  by
market and credit risks arising out of macroeconomic shocks need to be given special attention in
a liberalised financial system. Our reform initiatives in this area are still in the formative stage.
The second type of market developments which have implications for the financial sector relates
to asset price bubbles, which may be related to a high concentration of bank lending to one or
two sectors which have a boom and bust cycle of their own. This form of market exposure can be
unhealthy  and  lead  to  irreparable  shocks.  Although  the  impact  of  such  cycles  on  our  banking
system is quite limited, international experience suggests that, unless prudential measures are in
place,  banks  can  be  potentially  vulnerable  to  asset  price  pressures  that  can  generate  systemic
risks for the financial system.
The  fourth  important  element  of  reform  concerns  the  “safety”  aspects  of  the  financial  system.
This is the core of the challenges facing the financial system at present. When the reform process
was started in 1992, there was a massive problem of cleaning the balance sheets of banks which
had  deteriorated  over  the  years.  Successive  reform  initiatives  in  this  area  have  been  aimed  at
prescribing certain prudential standards for the financial system and addressing certain structural
weaknesses  which  could  minimise  their  recurrence  in  future.  Measures  such  as  income
recognition  norms,  asset  classification,  meeting  minimum  capital  adequacy  standards  through
recapitalisation and devising a supervisory framework are steps in the direction of ensuring the
safety of the financial system.
BIS Review   108/1998
Where Do We Stand?
– 4 –
The  key  indicators  of  banking  sector  performance  during  the  past  few  years  mark  certain
noticeable  changes.  For  example,  the  net  profit  of  the  scheduled  commercial  banks  as  a
percentage of their total assets  has  been  turned  around  from  a  negative  figure  of  –1.0%  on  an
average during 1992–93 and 1993–94 to a positive of 0.5% during 1994–95 to 1997–98. In the
case  of  most  public  sector  banks,  business  per  employee  and  profit  per  employee  have  shown
improvement in the recent period. Certain other indicators also look good. By 1997, almost all
public sector banks had achieved the minimum capital adequacy norm of 8%. The gross and net
non-performing assets of the banking system as a percentage of advances declined to 16% and
8.2%,  respectively,  by  March  1998.  In  terms  of  percentage  to  total  assets,  gross  and  net  non-
performing assets declined to 7.0% and 3.3%, respectively, by March 1998.
I  think  the  present  statistics  are  not  unfavourable  for  the  banking  system  as  a  whole.  As  the
second report of the Narasimham Committee has observed, “this improvement has arrested the
deterioration in these parameters that had marked the functioning of the system earlier”. Keeping
in  view  the  current  macro  economic  and  international  financial  situation,  the  Committee  has
noted that:
“There  is  still,  however,  a  considerable  distance  to  traverse.  The  process  of  strengthening  the
banking system has to be viewed as a continuing one. There is no finite end to improving  the
levels of efficiency and profitability. In fact, the situation is one where the system has to cope
constantly  with  changes  in  the  broader  environment  in  which  it  functions  and  face  new
challenges that these developments impose on it” (p. 18).
The  banking  sector  indicators  in  India  need  to  be  seen  against  the  backdrop  of  increased
vulnerability  of  the  financial  systems  of  developing  countries  and  the  need  for  improving  its
efficiency and stability. The Narasimham Committee has presented a detailed analysis of various
problems  and  challenges  facing 
the  Indian  banking  system  and  made  wide-ranging
recommendations for improving and strengthening its functions. Let me shortlist a few key areas,
which must concern us at this stage.
The Indian banking system is still perceived as a relatively high cost banking. This is because of
the relatively high operating cost of the banking system. A comparative analysis  indicates  that
while  the  average  operating  cost  of  banks  as  a  percentage  of  assets  was  about  2.3%  in  India
during 1990–91 to 1995–96, it was 1.1% in China, 1.6% in Malaysia, 1.9% in Thailand, 1.0% in
Japan  and  2.1%  in  G10  Europe.  One  of  the  major  problems  posed  by  a  relatively  high
intermediation  cost  in  our  case  is  that  it  gives  rise  to  uneconomical  banking.  It  raises  the
necessity  of  maintaining  a  relatively  high  interest  income  spread  and  a  high  real  lending  rate.
This adversely affects financial intermediation and growth in the economy.
Operating  costs  depend  on  labour  productivity,  technology,  innovation  and  organisational
effectiveness  of  a  bank  to  harness  various  static  and  dynamic  economies  from  the  production
process. On the economy-wide scale, these factors differentiate the weak from the strong banking
system  and  provide  internal  strength  and  stability  to  the  system.  Without  gaining  sufficient
advantage  in  this  respect,  it  is  difficult  to  think  of  a  significant  improvement  in  the  banking
system in future.
A key issue relates to the banking sector’s non-performing assets (NPAs). The amount of gross
and net NPAs have been on the rise, although the rate of their growth has been below the overall
rate  of  expansion  of  advances.  Apart  from  absolute  size,  the  distribution  of  non-performing
BIS Review   108/1998
– 5 –
assets  is  skewed  across  banks.  Still  a  large  number  of  public  sector  banks  have  net  non-
performing assets ranging between 10 to 20% of net advances. The Narasimham Committee has
underlined the need to reduce the average level of net NPAs for all banks to 3% by 2002 and to
zero  for  banks  with  international  presence.  I  think  this  is  an  important  requirement  for  our
banking system and is crucial to maintaining the viability of the system in future. A two-pronged
strategy  identified  by  the  Committee  viz.,  to  reduce  the  backlog  NPAs  and  improve  the
management efficiency and stricter enforcement of prudential norms, has to be acted upon to deal
with this challenge.
Another critical aspect is the soundness of the banking system and how this is reflected in the
practices and principles followed by banks. Prudential norms and supervision are necessary, but
they are no substitute for the internal control system and sound business practices. The ability to
distinguish  between  a  normal  business  risk  and  an  abnormal  one,  managing  such  risks  and
defining a prudent limit for risks are essential functions for the bankers. For a long time, Indian
banking did not have a tradition of dealing with various forms of market risks. The critical role
of  managing  such  risks  has  now  come  into  the  open,  especially  against  the  experience  of  the
recent East Asian crisis, where markets fell precipitously because banks and corporates did not
accurately measure the risk spread that should have been reflected in their lending activities. Nor
did  they  manage  such  risks  or  provide  for  them  in  their  balance  sheets.  In  India,  the  Reserve
Bank has recently issued comprehensive guidelines to banks for putting in place an asset-liability
management system. Formal guidelines will be issued shortly in the light of suggestions received
from  banks.  But,  ultimately  risk  management  is  a  culture  that  has  to  develop  from  within  the
internal  management  systems  of  the  banks.  Its  critical  importance  will  come  into  sharp  focus
once  current  restrictions  on  banks’  portfolios  are  further  liberalised  and  are  subjected  to  the
pressure of macro economic fluctuations.
While developing a system of internal control and risk management is of critical importance for
the banking system, there is no escaping the fact that a permanent improvement in the state of
Indian  banking  is  not  possible  without  addressing  the  long-term  structural  weaknesses  of  the
system. Our banking system operates with a large continent-wide network of branches, yet the
scale  economies  in  the  banking  industry  are  limited,  owing    to  the  fragmented  organisational
structure. Today, size is becoming increasingly important for strategic business planning in every
sphere of the economy. The banking sector is no exception. When competition is the key issue, it
is the market structure and regulation that need careful attention. Furthermore, given the multi-
tier financial system of our economy, and the complementarity and synergetic relations among
these different tiers, it is difficult to isolate the efficiency of the banking system from that of the
long-term financial institutions, cooperatives, rural banks and non-bank financial companies. A
more  meaningful  reorientation  of  objectives  and  functions  of  various  tiers  of  financial
institutions  would  be  necessary  in  dealing  with  the  long-term  issue  of  enhancing  the
competitiveness  of  the  system  as  a  whole.  It  is  also  important  to  ensure  that  the  ownership
structure  of  Indian  banks  is  such  that  managerial  decision-making  is  not  affected  by  non-
economic  considerations,  and  banks  are  able  to  raise  sufficient  capital  in  line  with  their
increasing volume of business.
Another crucial issue, especially in the present context, relates to banks’ special role in the credit
delivery system. There is no inherent conflict between the canons of sound banking and banks’
proactive  role  in  credit  disbursements  to  promote  growth.  These  two  objectives  are
complementary  to  each  other.  High  growth  leads  to  high  credit  off-take  and  credit  availability
conditions influence growth prospects of an economy. Ultimately, it is the credit business which
is  central  to  the  profitability  of  the  banking  system.  To  the  extent  that  excessive  risk  aversion
BIS Review   108/1998
– 6 –
among bankers restricts credit growth in the economy, it has adverse effects on the profitability
of the banking system as well as on economic growth.
Credit disbursement to the rural sector and small-scale industries require special attention from
banks. The Gupta Committee recommendations involving greater flexibility and discretion to the
lending  banks  in  the  agricultural  sector  in  matters  of  collateral,  margin,  security,  no  dues
certificate, composite cash credit limits etc., have to be implemented by the banks expeditiously.
Similarly,  special  treatment  has  to  be  accorded  to  small-sector  units  in  improving  their
accessibility to institutional finance with a view to enabling them to emerge as profit centres for
the banking system. Given its critical importance in the manufacturing and export activities in
the  economy,  it  is  unlikely  that  the  banking  system’s  profitability  and  efficiency  can  grow
without  exploiting  the  opportunity  provided  by  the  small-scale  industrial  sector.  The  Kapur
Committee has recently made a comprehensive set of recommendations for improving the credit
delivery system for small-scale industries, which are being implemented in phases.
The International Context
An important effect of the Asian economic crisis, and of the recent developments in Japan, has
been  that  there  is  now  a  much  greater  international  focus  on  the  soundness  of  the  domestic
banking system in all countries – developed and developing. Unlike previous financial crises, the
persistent crisis in the real economy in East  Asia  and  also  Japan  is  generally  believed  to  have
been accentuated by the weakness in the financial sector rather than the other way  round.  The
health of the banking sector and the prudential and regulatory framework are thus  no  longer  a
matter  of  domestic  concern  only.  A  country’s  ability  to  access  capital  markets  as  well  as
investments abroad is likely to depend on whether the domestic financial system is perceived to
broadly conform to international prudential and supervisory norms. In fact, the world standards
themselves  are  being  put  to  a  severe  test  by  the  changing  nature  and  ramifications  of  banking
crises in several parts of the world. What were earlier considered to be the ideal prudential norms
for preventing individual bank failures have been proved to be severely inadequate to deal with
systemic instability or prevent the contagion effects.
In various international fora, an intensive effort is now underway to evaluate the existing norms
and  practices  being  followed  by  banking  systems  in  different  countries  and  to  assess  how  far
these  norms  have  helped  or  prevented  instability  in  the  banking  system.  India  has  been  fully
participating  in  these  discussions  and  is  helping  in  the  formulation  of  norms  and  guidelines
which  take  into  account  the  views  of  the  developing  countries,  where  market  structures  and
growth  objectives  are  different  than  in  industrial  countries.  Issues  currently  under  scrutiny
include:  the  corporate  governance  system  in  banks,  risk  management,  banking  regulation  and
supervision,  transparency  and  accountability  and  public  policies  relating  to  moral  hazards  in
banking sector. The Basle Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision have underlined the
need  to  adhere  to  25  basic  principles  for  adopting  an  effective  supervision  system  in  the
aftermath  of  the  East  Asian  crisis.  More  detailed  work  is  now  in  progress  after  the  recent
publication  of  three  reports  by  the  Willard  Group,  constituted  by  the  Bank  for  International
Settlements, on enhancing transparency and accountability, strengthening financial systems and
managing international financial crises.
The Willard Group reports have argued for improving the credibility and accountability  of  the
banking system through more transparent accounting practices and better disclosure norms. They
have  drawn  attention  to  the  need  to  develop  a  stable  and  efficient  financial  system  through
strengthening the corporate governance system and risk and liquidity management among banks
and  putting  in  place  a  proper  safety  net  arrangement  for  the  banking  system.  They  have  also
BIS Review   108/1998
– 7 –
argued  for  a  more  organised  approach  in  preventing  international  financial  crises  and  a  more
orderly system of creditor and debtor coordination and effective solvency laws.
The recent international consensus on preserving the soundness of the banking system has veered
around  certain  core  themes.  These  are:  effective  risk  management  systems,  adequate  capital
provision,  sound  practices  of  supervision  and  regulation,  transparency  of  operation,  conducive
public policy intervention and maintenance of macroeconomic stability in the economy.
An important issue which we, along with other countries, would need to address is how to ensure
that individual banks govern themselves according to the best practices in corporate governance.
This, as mentioned before, involves according utmost importance to prudent business practices,
such  as  developing  an  effective  internal  control  system,  monitoring  and  managing  the  whole
range  of  financial  and  commercial  risks,  and  instituting  a  proper  system  of  asset  and  liability
management in order to avoid term mismatches in portfolios. A proper cushion needs to be kept
by way of capital reserves against market exposure and capital size should set a limit for the risk
exposure of an individual financial institution. Apart from capital adequacy standards, the new
international norms of banking regulation and supervision require a more proactive role for the
regulator in enforcing an effective mechanism for evaluating, monitoring and managing risks in
the financial system. This in turn would need stricter accounting, valuation and reporting norms
on the part of banks.
The Basle core principles have also identified a number of challenging areas for regulators and
supervisors,  which  must  be  satisfied  to  ensure  orderly  conduct  of  financial  system  and  to
promote its soundness and stability. Transparency in banking operation is also something which
has  to  receive  top  priority  given  the  current  nature  of  capital  markets.  Transparency  and
accountability  demand  realistic  valuation  of  assets,  public  disclosure  norms  and  prudential
reporting by banks to help depositors and investors form an informed opinion about the state of
the financial system, thereby enabling them to react in an orderly fashion to asset price changes.
Moreover, public intervention policies in the form of explicit or implicit guarantees may have to
be such that they do not lead to “moral hazard” in the form of undue risk-taking by banks and
laxity in observing market disciplines.
India  must  remain  in  the  forefront  of  the  movement  for  ensuring  soundness  of  the  banking
system by adopting best practices and best international standards of performance and prudence.
Actions  have  already  been  initiated  in  this  direction.  The  challenge  now  is  to  accelerate  this
process  so  that  the  banking  and  the  financial  system  in  our  country  can  contribute  to  the
sustained growth of the real economy with price stability.
Role of Bank Economists
Before I conclude, let me say a word about the role of Bank economists in facilitating the reform
process. This annual conference is a testimony to the economic talent that our banking system
has  developed  over  the  years.  Almost  all  our  banks  have  economic  research  departments  or
economic cells which are staffed by highly qualified economists with long experience in banking
and  the  financial  sector.  The  issue  that  I  would  like  to  pose  before  this  conference  is:  are  we
making the best and most effective use of economists working in the banking sector to improve
the functioning of banks, and for that matter, the operational efficiency of the financial sector as
a whole? In commercial organisations like banks, economics departments have the advantage of
not being excessively burdened with day-to-day problems of running the banks or ensuring the
safety  and  profitability  of  individual  transactions.  They  are  in  a  position  to  take  a  strategic  or
longer-term view of the comparative or competitive advantage of their individual banks as well
BIS Review   108/1998
– 8 –
as identify areas of portfolio weaknesses and the costs/benefits of various kinds of services and
products offered by them. They also have the opportunity to study from their vantage point and
from a practical angle the working of the financial system and various improvements needed to
strengthen the financial intermediation function.
However,  for  bank  economists  to  be  able  to  perform  these  functions,  it  seems  that  some
reorientation  of  the  role  that  is  assigned  to  them  is  necessary.  There  is  also  a  need  for  some
“attitudinal” change on the part of economists themselves. Those who work in the commercial
banking sector have to be prepared to accept operational responsibility, to work in the field, and
to familiarise themselves fully with the commercial aspects of their bank’s work. Their work has
to  be  operationally  relevant,  and  it  must  contribute  to  the  financial  soundness  of  bank’s
operations. This is possible if bank economists also have branch-level experience and experience
of working in non-economic departments with line responsibility.
At present, the role of economists in our banking sector seems to be too narrowly defined. They
are viewed as keepers of data, particularly macroeconomic data, and undertake periodic review
or analysis of macroeconomic trends in the economy. They are seldom involved in undertaking
any  operational  work  or  in  developing  strategic  policy  choices  or  even  in  treasury  or  foreign
exchange  functions.  All  over  the  world,  with  deregulation  and  globalisation  of  the  financial
sector, the role of economists in the banking sector has been changing and becoming more and
more  focussed  on  the  analysis  and  valuation  of  the  risk  associated  with  various  alternatives,
particularly in emerging economies that are subject to greater volatility in the financial sector. In
India, however, the role of economists has been somewhat slow in changing.
It  may  perhaps  be  useful  for  this  conference  to  initiate  a  process  of  discussion  on  the  various
issues  and  to  reassess  the  role  that  members  of  this  distinguished  body  can  play  in  pushing
forward the process of reform in our country. The challenges ahead are gigantic, but they are also
exciting. Given the determination, I have no doubt that India can have one of the most vibrant
financial systems in the world.
I would like to acknowledge with thanks the help of Shri M. S. Mohanty and Shri Partha Ray of
the Reserve Bank of India in the preparation of this lecture.
 BIS Review   108/1998
