Mr  Duisenberg  reports  on  the  current  position  and  future  prospects  of  the  European
System of Central Banks
Keynote  address  to  the  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  Dr  W.F.  Duisenberg,  at  a
conference organised by the Royal Institute of International Affairs on European Economic and
Monetary Union Markets and Politics under the euro in London on 27/11/98.
Introduction
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  I  should  like  to  express  my  appreciation  at  being  invited  to  deliver  a
speech at this conference organised by the Royal Institute of International Affairs. It is a great
pleasure for me to be here, in London, today.
The  topic  I  am  going  to  address  relates  to  the  current  position  and  the  future  prospects  of  the
European System of Central Banks. I feel that this topic provides me with an opportunity to deal
with the objective of the ESCB and its contribution to the other policies in the Community. I will
also  briefly  touch  upon  the  decision-making  in  the  ESCB,  recall  the  main  features  of  our
monetary policy strategy and talk about our regard for openness and transparency. The final part
of my talk will cover the views of the ESCB on recent economic developments and the future
outlook for price stability in the euro area.
Independence, transparency and accountability
In  the  Maastricht  Treaty  the  ESCB  has  been  given  an  independent  status.  The  reason  is  that
politicians all over the world have come round to the view that monetary policy decisions taken
with too close a political involvement tend to take too short a time horizon into consideration.
The  consequence  is  that  in  the  longer  term  such  decisions  do  not  support  sustainable  gains  in
employment and income, but only lead to higher inflation. This view is confirmed by a host of
economic research.
Independence,  however,  requires  a  clear  mandate.  The  ESCB  has  such  a  mandate.  Its  primary
objective is to maintain price stability. Without prejudice to the objective of price stability the
ESCB will support the general economic policies in the Community. Price stability is not an end
in  itself:  it  creates  the  conditions  in  which  other,  higher-order,  objectives  can  be  reached.  In
particular,  I  share  the  deep  concerns  about  the  unacceptably  high  level  of  unemployment  in
Europe.  The  ESCB  will  do  what  it  can  to  contribute  to  the  solution  of  this  problem.  By
maintaining  price  stability  inflation  expectations  and  interest  rates  can  be  kept  at  a  low  level.
This  creates  a  stability-oriented  environment  which  fosters  sustainable  growth,  a  high  level  of
employment,  a  fair  society  and  better  living  standards.  Moreover,  in  specific  circumstances,  if
production, inflation and employment all move in the same direction, monetary policy can play
some  role  in  stabilising  output  and  employment  growth  without  endangering  price  stability.
However,  the  contribution  from  monetary  policy  can  generally  be  only  limited.  Given  the
structural  nature  of  the  unemployment  problems  the  solution  is  to  be  found,  above  all,  in
structural reforms aimed at well-functioning labour and product markets.
An independent central bank does not only need a clear mandate. It has also to be an open and
transparent institution, for at least three reasons. First, transparency enhances the effectiveness of
monetary  policy  by  creating  the  correct  expectations  on  the  part  of  economic  agents.  A
predictable monetary policy contributes to achieving stable prices without significant adjustment
costs and with the lowest interest rate possible. The second reason is that in a democratic society
BIS Review   100/1998
– 2 –
the central bank has to account for its policies. Finally, transparency towards the outside world
can also structure and discipline the internal debate inside the central bank.
Let me now turn to the ways and means of achieving transparency. As a first element the ESCB
has defined a quantitative objective for price stability. It reads as follows: price stability is a year-
on-year increase in the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) for the euro area of below
2%. Although I do not consider deflation to be likely in the current environment, I may add that a
situation of falling prices would not be consistent with price stability.
The  Governing  Council  has  made  it  clear  that  “price  stability  is  to  be  maintained  over  the
medium  term”.  The  ESCB  cannot  be  held  accountable  for  short-run  deviations  from  price
stability,  for  example  due  to  shocks  in  import  prices  or  specific  fiscal  measures.  A  monetary
policy reaction to short-run fluctuations in the price level would provide the wrong signals to the
market  and  cause  unnecessary  interest  rate  volatility.  In  summary,  the  ESCB  will  react  in  an
appropriate,  measured  and,  when  necessary,  gradualist  manner  to  economic  disturbances  that
threaten  price  stability  in  the  medium  term,  rather  than  in  an  abrupt  way,  in  order  to  avoid
unnecessary disruptions of the process of economic growth. That said, the ESCB will, whenever
necessary,  openly  discuss  and  explain  the  sources  of  possible  deviations  from  the  quantitative
definition of price stability.
In addition, let me remind you that by focusing on the HICP for the euro area, the ESCB makes it
clear that it will base its decisions on monetary, economic and financial developments in the euro
area as a whole. The single monetary policy has to take a euro area-wide perspective: it will not
react to specific regional or national developments.
The institutional implication is that the ESCB should develop into a strong unity, with a strong
centre and strong national central banks. It should become a  truly  European  institution,  with  a
truly European outlook. Of course, it may take some time to arrive where we ultimately want to
be. We have to get used to thinking in euro area-wide terms. In the ECB Governing Council we
are already “practising” that approaches and are making progress. I am confident that the ESCB
will indeed act as a unity.
Transparency  and  openness  will  be  apparent  from  the  way  in  which  the  ESCB  communicates
with the public. The ESCB will regularly present its assessment of the monetary, economic and
financial situation in the euro area and provide information about each specific monetary policy
decision, be it a move in interest rates or an absence of change. This will notably be done by way
of press releases, press conferences, publications and speeches. Press releases are made available
immediately after the fortnightly meetings of the Governing Council and, as you may know, they
always include a precise list of the decisions taken together with background information.
There  will  be  a  monthly  press  conference.  Such  a  press  conference  will  start  with  a  detailed
introductory statement, as has been the case so far, and these introductory statements will also be
published immediately, without delay. In this statement the Vice-President and I will present the
Governing  Council’s  view  of  the  economic  situation  and  the  underlying  arguments  for  its
monetary policy decisions, followed by a question and answer session.
The publications of the ESCB will include, in particular, an ECB Bulletin each month as well as
an Annual Report. As from 1999, a detailed analysis of the economic situation in the euro area
will be presented in the monthly Bulletin. Thematic articles in this Bulletin will include in-depth
analyses by the ECB on matters regarding the monetary policy of the ESCB and the economy of
BIS Review   100/1998
– 3 –
the euro area. Further, you may also recall that, as required by its Statute, the ESCB will publish
its consolidated balance sheet on a weekly basis.
My  colleagues  on  the  Executive  Board  of  the  ECB  and  I  intend  to  be  very  active  in  giving
speeches dealing with all issues of relevance for the conduct of monetary policy. I am convinced
that the Governors of the national central banks will also play their role in this respect.
Since I am talking about the communication and external relations of the ESCB, I would like to
underline that I am prepared to accept invitations to appear  before  the  European  Parliament  at
least  four  times  a  year  to  present  the  activities  of  the  ESCB  and  the  ECB’s  Annual  Report.
Finally,  it  should  be  noted  that  the  ESCB  would  have  a  regular  exchange  of  information  and
views  with  Ecofin.  Representatives  of  the  ECB  will  be  invited  to  Ecofin  meetings  whenever
issues of concern to monetary policy are discussed. A similar relationship will naturally also exist
with  the  euro-11,  whose  meetings  will  generally  be  attended  by  the  President  of  the  ECB,
whenever matters relevant to the ESCB are on the agenda.
Monetary policy strategy of the ESCB
We  are  now  approaching  the  start  of  stage  three  of  EMU.  The  decision-making  bodies  of  the
ECB  have  made  a  certain  number  of  important  decisions  since  the  ESCB  was  established.  As
part of these decisions, the monetary policy strategy of the ESCB was recently announced and
explained to the public. The selected stability-oriented strategy promotes as much continuity as
possible with the existing strategies of national central  banks  in  the  EU.  At  the  same  time,  its
design  is  adapted  to  the  unique  situation  of  introducing  a  single  currency  in  eleven  countries,
which  may  to  a  certain  extent  change  economic  behaviour.  Therefore  as  much  continuity  as
possible and as much change as required is the thrust of our strategy.
Our strategy consists of two pillars. The first is an important role for money and the second is a
broad-based assessment of the outlook for price developments in the euro area. The main reason
for assigning a prominent role to money is the empirically well-founded view that inflation, at
least in the long run, is a monetary phenomenon. This simple and obvious observation led the
Governing Council to announce a quantitative reference value for the growth of a broad measure
of  money.  This  choice  will  create  a  “nominal  anchor”  for  monetary  policy  and  therefore  help
stabilise private inflation expectations at longer horizons. The reference value will be derived in
a manner that is clearly consistent with – and serves the achievement of – price stability. It will
be  constructed  such  that,  in  the  absence  of  special  factors  or  other  distortions,  deviations  of
monetary growth from the reference value will signal risks to price stability.
However, it has to be clear that the reference value is different from an intermediate monetary
target,  as  the  ESCB  has  not  made  any  commitment  to  correct  deviations  of  actual  monetary
growth  from  the  reference  value  over  the  short  term.  In  particular,  it  has  been  realistically
recognised that the move to  a  single  currency  and  ongoing  financial  innovations  may  generate
fluctuations  in  the  selected  monetary  aggregate  which  are  not  necessarily  associated  with
inflationary or deflationary pressures. For this reason, it is important to continuously monitor the
relevance of temporary factors or even structural changes in order to avoid a mechanistic policy
reaction to deviations of the chosen monetary aggregate from the reference value. The results of
this analysis and its impact on the ESCB’s monetary  policy  decisions  will  be  explained  to  the
public.
Let  me  turn  now  to  the  second  key  element  of  the  monetary  policy  strategy,  the  broad-based
assessment  of  the  risks  to  price  stability.  The  information  contained  in  monetary  aggregates,
BIS Review   100/1998
– 4 –
while of the utmost importance, will by no means constitute the whole of the “information set” in
the hands of the ESCB. In parallel with the analysis of money growth, a wide range of economic
and  financial  variables  will  be  used  to  formulate  an  assessment  of  the  outlook  for  price
developments. The envisaged strategy will enable the ESCB to perform a crosscheck between the
information coming from the evolution of monetary aggregates and those from other economic
and financial indicators.
Recent economic developments and prospects
Let  me  turn  to  the  current  economic  situation.  The  euro  area  experienced  a  strengthening  of
economic growth in 1997, to 2.5%, and a further acceleration has been anticipated for this year.
The global environment has, of course, deteriorated in the meantime, but this has not so far had
an  observable  impact  on  growth,  which  has,  in  any  event,  been  increasingly  led  by  domestic
demand. Inflation has remained subdued and even fallen somewhat over the past year, partly as a
result  of  the  impact  of  weaker  global  demand  on  oil  and  commodity  prices.  However,  the
favourable  pattern  of  inflation  has  also  been  supported  by  domestic  factors,  such  as  a  very
moderate development in unit labour costs and industrial producer prices.
Concerning  recent  price  developments,  HICP  inflation  for  the  euro  area  fell  to  1.0%  in
September, due to a strong impact from food prices, but I would not want to read too much into
this latest decline as some price components can be relatively volatile over short periods. More
significantly, preliminary data suggest that various broad monetary aggregates for the euro area
are  increasing  at  between  3  and  5%,  and  thus  do  not  appear  to  signal  any  strong  incipient
inflationary or deflationary pressures. We are in line with the consensus view that inflation in the
euro area will rise moderately in 1999, but remain below 2%. I do not consider deflation to be a
serious risk for price stability at present.
So far, despite the worsening of the global environment, euro area-wide activity has continued to
expand at a fairly stable rate. At around 3%, annual real GDP growth was broadly unchanged in
the first half of 1998 from the solid growth seen in the second half of 1997. Industrial production
growth  has  slowed  somewhat  since  the  spring.  More  recent  evidence,  particularly  that  of  the
area-wide  survey  data,  may  also  suggest  a  moderation  in  the  pace  of  growth  and  further
developments  in  these  indicators  will  continue  to  be  monitored  closely.  Area-wide  growth
should, however, be supported by a number of domestic factors. One factor supporting continued
growth,  particularly  in  private  consumption,  is  the  gradual  improvement  in  labour  market
conditions.  Moreover,  the  lowest  short-term  interest  rates  in  the  euro  area  currently  stand  at
3.3%,  and  several  countries  have  cut  interest  rates  towards  this  level  recently  as  part  of  the
process  towards  interest  rate  convergence.  The  process  of  convergence  towards  this  level  has
been gradual, but should imply a reduction in the average short-term interest rate in the euro area
of about 0.5 percentage point since July. Long-term rates also stand at low levels. And there has
been a marked degree of exchange rate stability among countries participating in the euro. This is
undoubtedly a welcome development from the standpoint of encouraging trade and investment.
Thus,  our  assessment  is  similar  to  that  of  other  international  organisations,  that  –  unless  the
international environment deteriorates further, which is not currently expected – growth will be
somewhat weaker in 1999. Growth should, however, remain high enough to support continued
employment creation and, assuming a recovery in the international environment, there should be
a  pick-up  in  growth  in  2000.  At  the  meetings  in  December  the  ECB  Governing  Council  will
again assess the outlook for economic and price developments.
BIS Review   100/1998
– 5 –
Although the economic outlook may be less favourable than expected – let us say – half a year
ago, I believe that the conditions for a successful launch of the euro are in place. You can be sure
that the ESCB will do its utmost to make the euro a stable currency.
BIS Review   100/1998
