Mr. King examines the impact of the recent turbulence in international financial
markets on the UK economy      Speech  by  Mr.  Mervyn  King,  a  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of
England, to the National Council of Building Material Producers in London on 21/10/98.
Few industries have suffered more from volatility of the British economy than yours,
and the past few months have been more volatile than most. “The times they are a-changing” would
be an appropriate theme tune for all of us. What has changed the economic climate over the past two
to  three  months?  Here  at  home  the  most  obvious  sign  has  been  a  sudden  decline  in  business  and
consumer confidence. The fall in the CBI’s measure of business optimism over the last two quarters
is the largest seen since the early 1980s. The level of consumer confidence appears more robust, but
it too has also fallen since the middle of this year.
What has changed the economic climate over the past two to three months? Here at
home the most obvious sign has been a sudden decline in business and consumer confidence. The
fall  in  the  CBI’s  measure  of  business  optimism  over  the  past  two  quarters  is  the  largest  since  the
early 1980s. The level of consumer confidence appears more robust, but it too has fallen since the
middle of this year.
Away  from  home,  the  major  development  has  been  increased  fragility  in  the
international economy. Following the default on its debt by the Russian government, the imposition
of  capital  controls  by  Malaysia,  and  the  near  collapse  of  the  hedge  fund  Long  Term  Capital
Management, financial markets world-wide have exhibited extraordinary volatility, driven by a fear
of risk, a flight to quality and liquidity, and the beginning of a significant reduction in leverage by
financial institutions. What does this turbulence mean for the British economy?
Before answering that question, I want to say a few words about the Monetary Policy
Committee. Just under two weeks ago, the Monetary Policy Committee, for the first time in its short
history,  cut  interest  rates.  When  I  accepted  your  invitation  to  speak  today,  I  did  not  know  that  I
would be able to explain to you the reasons behind our latest decision. For, until today, the minutes
of our meetings were published with a lag of some five to six weeks. But, as the Bank announced
earlier this month, the minutes will now be published only two weeks after the monthly meetings.
And the minutes from our meeting on 7-8 October were published at 9.30 a.m. this morning. This
increase in transparency should help commentators and financial markets alike to assess the actions
of the MPC and to predict its future decisions. As I have said on other occasions, the aim of the MPC
is to pursue economic stability, not to spring surprises on an unsuspecting world. Surprises may be
good for newspapers, but not for most other businesses.
So what were the issues facing the MPC two weeks ago? Remember that the aim of
the MPC is to hit an inflation target of 22. Sometimes inflation will be above the target, sometimes
below. But over a run of years the outturn should be as close to 22 as possible. It is central to our
remit that deviations of inflation from the target are regarded symmetrically. Inflation can be too low
as  well  as  too  high.  For  over  thirty  years,  central  banks  have  not,  until  recently,  had  many
opportunities  to  show  that  they  understand  this.  I  can  assure  you  that  the  MPC  does.  When
circumstances change, as they have over the past few months, then so will our policy.
The recent turbulence in international financial markets brings a new set of problems
and risks, over and above those that resulted from the Asian crisis which started in the second half of
last year. It is important to distinguish between the crisis of the so-called “tiger” economies in Asia,
which,  although  clearly  impacting  on  world  trade,  was  indeed  largely  restricted  to  Asia,  and  the
BIS Review   86/1998
- 2 -
more  recent  financial  contagion  which  has  afflicted  almost  all  emerging  markets  and  affected  the
financial system of the industrialised world.
There are three aspects of the world economy which are relevant to our own position.
First, private capital flows to emerging markets have in many cases come to an abrupt halt. That will
have  consequences  for  trade  balances  and  activity  in  both  emerging  markets  and  industrialised
countries. Second, falls in equity prices around the world have reduced household wealth. And third,
the sudden increase in risk aversion in financial markets is changing the balance sheets of financial
institutions and some fear that this may lead to a credit crunch.
The  reduction  in  capital  flows  to  emerging  markets  started  over  a  year  ago  when
concerns about the foreign currency exposures of a number of countries led to withdrawals of funds
and  a  liquidity  crisis  in  Asia.  That  liquidity  problem  was  compounded  by  macroeconomic  and
structural problems which varied from country to country. But the net effect was that capital flows to
emerging  markets  in  Asia  fell  from  over  $110  bn  in  1996  to  only  about  $10  bn  in  1997.  That
retrenchment has continued during 1998. Why does this matter? In the absence of other sources of
finance, a reduction in net capital inflows has to be matched by a corresponding improvement in the
current  accounts  of  the  emerging  market  economies.  To  achieve  such  a  rapid  turn-round  in  the
current  account  required  significant  depreciations  of  their  currencies  and  deep  recessions.  The
counterpart  to  the  improvement  in  the  current  account  of  the  countries  affected  is  a  larger  trade
deficit, or smaller trade surplus, in the rest of the world. The UK is not immune to this change in
trade balances, and the impact of the Asian crisis on our exports has, of course, been compounded by
the rise in sterling since 1996.
If the Asian crisis affected most a relatively young, and only temporarily wounded,
tiger,  the  recent  turbulence  was  heralded  by  the  growl  of  a  much  older,  more  grizzly,  bear.  The
announcement by the Russian government on 17 August of its intention to restructure payments on
its  domestic  bonds  led  to  a  fundamental  reappraisal  of  international  investors’  willingness  to  bear
risk. The reappraisal caused the average cost of capital to emerging market economies - measured by
interest rates on their bonds - to rise to levels not seen since the immediate aftermath of the Mexican
crisis  in  1995.  This  increase  in  cost  is  likely  to  lead  to  a  further  reduction  in  net  capital  flows  to
emerging markets and so magnify the adverse trade effect faced by the industrialised world.
Second,  the  greater  aversion  to  risk  has  led  to  falls  in  equity  prices  throughout  the
industrialised world. The FT/S&P world stock market price index has fallen by nearly 12% since its
peak three months ago. In the UK, the FTSE All-Share fell by nearly 20% over the same period. The
fall in equity prices is likely to lead to both lower consumption growth, as consumers adjust to the
fall in net wealth, and lower investment growth, as firms react to the higher cost of capital.
Third,  the  heightened  aversion  of  financial  institutions  to  risk  has  led  to  fears  of  a
“credit crunch”. A credit crunch occurs when lending institutions try to reduce their exposure to risk
and, in so doing, the size of their balance sheets. In recent weeks, the desire of these institutions to
reduce the scale of their leveraging and move to less risky portfolios has led to a reduction in the
amount of capital available to support liquid financial markets. As a result, asset prices of all kinds
have  been  volatile.  So  far  the  consequences  of  turbulence  in  financial  markets  have  been  largely
restricted  to  securities  markets,  especially  in  the  United  States.  These  markets  are  somewhat  less
important  in  the  provision  of  corporate  finance  in  the  UK,  although  if  the  reduction  in  security
market issuance were to persist this could affect the ability of the personal and corporate sectors to
obtain finance from both banks and the capital market. As yet lending  by  UK  banks  has  not  been
BIS Review   86/1998
- 3 -
affected to any significant extent. The monetary statistics published yesterday show that total bank
credit grew by 0.7% in September, leaving the 12-month growth unchanged at 8.7%.
The MPC will watch carefully for any signs of a credit crunch developing. The Bank
monitors indicators of credit conditions in the financial markets on a daily basis. And the MPC has
asked the Bank’s regional Agents to conduct a survey of borrowing conditions faced by businesses
around the country in time for the MPC meeting in November.
The international situation is, of course, only one of the factors that influence interest
rates.  In  the  August  Inflation  Report,  the  MPC  made  clear  that  it  expected  -  indeed  wanted  -  the
growth of domestic demand to continue to slow throughout this year and into next. A slowdown is
necessary because, as the restraining effects on retail prices from the rise in sterling start to wear off,
domestically generated inflation must fall if the inflation target is to be met.
The  latest  data  from  the  Office  for  National  Statistics  show  that  domestic  demand
and  output  have  been  growing  broadly  in  line  with  the  desired  path.  But  survey  data  show  a
markedly  weaker  picture  for  output  and  orders,  both  over  recent  months  and,  more  importantly,
looking ahead. The lags with which changes in monetary policy affect the economy mean that the
MPC  can  not  wait  to  find  out  whether  the  surveys  provide  an  accurate  prediction  before  it  sets
policy.  Each  month  the  MPC  balances  the  information  contained  in  official  statistics,  surveys,
anecdote  and  the  impressions  of  conditions  in  industry  relayed  to  us  by  our  network  of  regional
agents.
An  issue  of  considerable  importance  is  the  state  of  the  labour  market.  The  August
Inflation Report argued that the outlook for inflation depended critically upon the labour market and,
in particular, on the behaviour of earnings. At the time of that Report the latest figure for earnings
growth was 5.4%. Given historical levels of productivity growth of around 2%, this level of earnings
growth was, on the face of it, incompatible in the long run with the inflation target of 22. That led to
an extended discussion during the summer, both within the MPC and among commentators  in  the
press and the City, about the extent to which those levels of earnings growth had been distorted by
the impact of bonuses during the Spring of this year and so might be expected to fall in due course
without the need for an easing of pressures in the labour market.
Since  August,  the  estimates  of  this  key  economic  statistic  have  been  revised  -  not
once, but twice. The good news - somewhat ironic given the amount of attention it attracted earlier
this year - is that as a result of these revisions the “great bonus debate” of the summer has become a
non-issue.  Bonuses,  we  are  now  told,  if  anything  subtracted  from,  not  added  to,  the  growth  of
earnings in March and April of this year. The bad news, however, is that if before the revisions it
was difficult to know how to interpret the impact of bonuses on earnings growth, it is, I think it is
fair to say, now extremely difficult to know how to interpret any aspect of the earnings data.
Statistics, official or otherwise, are neither right nor wrong. They are estimates which
are  often  revised  as  new  information  becomes  available.  But  what  is  striking  about  the  recent
revisions is that the changes do not result from any new information about earnings, but simply from
a change in the procedures used to weight together the earnings in different firms and industries. It
may be that this change has made it more difficult to make comparisons of earnings over time, and
hence to measure underlying earnings growth.
Whatever the explanation, there has certainly been a change in the estimated profile
of earnings growth over the past two years. The revised data suggest that instead of rising steadily
BIS Review   86/1998
- 4 -
throughout last year, as the economy grew at above-trend rates and the labour market tightened, the
rate of growth of earnings actually fell. From a peak of 5.3% in February last year, earnings growth
is  now  estimated  to  have  slowed  consistently  until  March  of  this  year,  when  it  reached  a  level  of
3.9%.  This  deceleration  in  earnings  growth  coincided  with  a  period  in  which,  according  to  the
Labour  Force  Survey,  the  labour  market  tightened  considerably:  employment  rose  by  360,000
unemployment fell by 320,000 and the unemployment rate fell from 7.8% to 6.5%. Over the same
period wage settlements accelerated. And the revised data imply that since March of this year, as the
pace of economic growth has slowed, earnings growth has accelerated, from 3.9% in March to 5.2%
in June.
It is not easy, therefore, to reconcile the revised earnings data with other information
on the labour market. And these data really matter for the MPC’s assessment of the UK economy. I
can promise you that the Bank, the Treasury and the Office for National Statistics will, as a matter of
urgency, be working together to try to understand what is happening to earnings.
Decisions on interest rates must take into account not only those factors which I have
highlighted  this  morning  -  the  international  economy,  the  possibility  of  a  credit  crunch  and
uncertainty about the trend in earnings growth - but also a wide range of other information relevant
to  the  outlook  for  inflation,  including  the  behaviour  of  the  monetary  aggregates,  which  are  still
growing  quite  rapidly,  and  the  fall  in  sterling’s  effective  exchange  rate.  Over  the  next  two  weeks
more important data will become available, including the first estimate of GDP growth in the third
quarter,  a  CBI  Industrial  Trends  Survey  and  the  monthly  report  from  our  regional  Agents.  At  our
next  meeting  on  4  and  5  November,  the  MPC  will  take  into  account  all  of  this  information,  and
occasions  like  today  are  part  of  the  process  by  which  we  obtain  more  information  and  exchange
views with those most directly affected by our decisions.
BIS Review   86/1998
