Mr Meister remarks on the role of credit institutions against the background of banking
supervision
Speech by Mr Edgar Meister, a member of the Directorate of the Deutsche Bundesbank, to the
GASC Forum on International Harmonisation in Frankfurt on 16/12/98.
I
IASC  (the  International  Accounting  Standards  Committee)  and  IOSCO  (the  International
Organization of Securities Commissions) have undertaken to develop internationally applicable
accountancy  principles  and  to  accept  them  worldwide  as  a  precondition  for  cross-border  stock
exchange listing of securities. This plan has aroused considerable interest among central banks
and  banking  supervisors.  A  theoretical  distinction  can  be  made  between  a  national  and  an
international  perspective.  In  practice,  however,  both  are  interlinked.  In  an  age  of  global
interdependency of goods and financial markets, it is no longer meaningful to lay down national
rules autonomously. The Asia crisis has once again highlighted - and has done so dramatically -
 that  crises  in  one  area  of  the  world  can  spread  like  wildfire  and  adversely  affect  financial
markets in other regions, however remote.
That  event  has  stepped  up  the  debate  on  how  the  international  financial  markets  can  be  made
more stable. Among the buzzwords we hear in this context are intensify banking supervision and
enhance transparency. There is no disputing the fact that one of the major preconditions for a
stable  financial  market  is  an  effective  system  of  banking  supervision - in  addition  to  sound
economic and fiscal policies. If banking supervision is to be effective, however, the preparation
and publishing of accounts are of major importance. As the member of the Bundesbank Board
responsible for banking supervision, I would like to focus my remarks on the role of the credit
institutions.
II
Banking supervisors  depend  on  institutions  fulfilling  their  reporting  requirements  and  deriving
the requisite capital adequacy on the basis of reliable accounts. Accounting functions such as the
provision  of  internal  information,  documentation,  ascertainment  of  profits  and  losses  and
informing  the  market  are  also  useful  for  banking  supervision.  It  will  therefore  come  as  no
surprise if I emphasise the advantages of a prudent determination of profit in the banking field
with the aim of capital maintenance. That does not necessarily imply undisclosed reserves, which
impair the informativeness of the annual accounts. However, the historical cost principle and the
principle of the lower cost or market should be retained in the case of banks, at all events where
the objective is to ascertain the profit eligible for distribution.
Furthermore,  thought  must  be  given  to  the  capital  adequacy  requirements  laid  down  by  the
supervisory authorities. As the equity capital ratio is derived from the risk assets and the market
risks, on the one hand, and from the capital resources, on the other, both the soundness of the
accounts  and  their  international  comparability  are  of  paramount  importance.  In  view  of  the
increasing number of ever-larger takeovers, the effects of different methods of accounting can be
considerable.  For  example,  differences  in  consolidation  procedures,  which  may  result  in  a
sizeable goodwill item in one country but not in another, would give rise to unequal competitive
conditions owing to the fact that the banking supervisors are required to deduct goodwill from
the liable capital. This means that the equity capital ratios would present a bank in too positive a
light if, for example, credit risks were not adequately reflected in the accounts.
BIS Review   107/1998
- 2 -
III
There is no doubt that the informative value of the annual accounts is the main consideration in
the  present  IASC-IOSCO  plan.  The  German  banking  supervisory  authority,  too,  is  giving  the
project its explicit support. It agrees that the market players on the international financial markets
must provide more transparency, thereby fostering the stabilisation of the financial markets. This
stabilisation will be achieved through improving market discipline. A better flow of information
will enable counterparties and shareholders of institutions to take more appropriate decisions on
investment  and  loans  and,  consequently,  will  influence  the  actions  of  the  banks.  Market
discipline is not  a  substitute  for  but  a  complement  to  banking  supervision,  and  should  prompt
credit institutions to pursue a risk-conscious and prudent business policy.
The  institutions  themselves  may  also  derive  benefit  from  improved  transparency.  Creating  a
modicum  of  trust  in  the  eyes  of  the  general  public  through  the  regular  flow  of  reliable
information lowers the level of susceptibility to market uncertainty, enhances the accessibility of
the  capital  markets  and  promises  more  favourable  refunding  conditions.  Again,  banking
supervisors  can  expect  compliance  with  prudential  rules  to  be  enhanced  as  well.  Naturally,
market  discipline  has  the  biggest  role  to  play  at  the  major  listed  institutions.  It  is  primarily
institutions  that  are  in  the  public  eye  that  have  to  expect  sanctions  as  a  result  of  insufficient
information. However, those institutions are among the major channels through which regional
crises are spread internationally.
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  there  is,  of  course,  also  scope  for  discretion  in  drawing  up  accounts.
These discretionary powers can substantially impair the flow of information if they are deployed
in  different  ways  according  to  the  interests  of  the  institution  concerned.  In  valuing  assets,  for
example,  the  institutions  have,  in  principle,  to  decide  on  their  own  initiative  the  basis  of  the
valuation; despite subjective elements, however, discretionary powers should not unduly restrict
the comparability of the results because information on the quality of a loan book can be assessed
to  some  extent  independently  of  the  valuation  basis  selected  according  to  objective  criteria.
Admittedly, there are other ways of assessing risk, as the example of Japan has taught us. It is
customary internationally and appropriate for different payment arrears in servicing debt to serve
as  a  yardstick.  Furthermore,  the  comparable,  because  appropriate,  use  of  discretionary  powers
when valuing assets is encouraged by the fact that, in principle, value adjustments on loans may
be  deducted  from  taxable  profits.  The  banking  supervisors  are  in  favour  of  this.  Indeed,  they
regard  it  as  an  incentive  to  make  appropriate  risk  provision  in  good  time.  By  contrast,  the
absence  of  such  an  incentive  may  be  a  destabilising  element  in  a  financial  system.  Japan  is  a
good  example  of  this,  too.  By  the  way,  including  value  adjustments  in  tax  assessment  is  also
consistent with the principle of taxing on the basis of performance. Having made these remarks
of rather a national nature, I shall now return to international transparency.
IV
The  Basle  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  which  was  established  by  the  central  bank
governors  of  the  G-10  countries  as  the  Committee  on  Banking  Regulations  and  Supervisory
Practices as far back as 1975, also issued statements on transparency and accounting as part of its
Core Principles in 1997. The Core Principles describe the preconditions for an effective banking
supervisory  system.  Principle  21  requires,  among  other  things,  that  “the  bank  publishes  on  a
regular basis financial statements that fairly reflect its condition”. Regarding accounts, it is said
that “market participants need access to correct and timely information in order for market forces
to  work  effectively,  thereby  fostering  a  stable  and  efficient  financial  system.  For  this  reason,
banks  should  be  required  to  disclose  to  the  public  information  regarding  their  activities  and
BIS Review   107/1998
- 3 -
financial position that is comprehensive and not misleading. This information should be timely
and  sufficient  for  market  participants  to  assess  the  risk  inherent  in  any  individual  banking
organisation.”
The Basle Committee has since explained and amended its Principles in various papers, the most
recent being in October 1998. This was a consultation paper on the balance sheet treatment and
valuation of credits and on the supply of information about credit risks in lending operations. A
constructive relationship  with  IASC  has  also  been  maintained  for  some  time  in  order  to  assist
that committee in its further development of internationally recognised accounting principles. It
is  therefore  also  in  the  interests  of  the  banking  supervisors  for  the  joint  project  of  IASC  and
IOSCO  to  reach  a  successful  conclusion.  Whether  the  last  core  standard  (on  financial
instruments) can actually be approved or not at the moment is not so important in my opinion.
What is important is that the other partner, IOSCO, is subsequently able to fulfil its part of the
agreement.  As  national  financial  markets  in  an  open  global  environment  can  no  longer  be
protected  by  national  rules  alone,  it  is  in  the  interest  of  all  of  us  that  international  accounting
standards are applied worldwide, especially in the emerging countries as well. IOSCO can make
a substantial contribution towards this goal by ensuring that the worldwide acceptance of IASC
standards is a precondition for stock exchange listing.
The IMF and World Bank, which, incidentally, have also recommended that the Core Principles
of  the  Basle  committee  be  used  worldwide,  are  focusing  during  their  country  inspections  on
whether  and  to  what  extent  internationally  recognised  principles  are  being  implemented  and
observed in the various countries. The Basle Committee itself supports  national  supervisors  in
the implementation of its principles.
V
Calls for greater transparency in the markets have also been made by the G-7 finance ministers
and central bank governors for some time now. The call of October 30, 1998 to IASC to submit
proposals  for  a  complete  range  of  accounting  standards  in  the  spring  of  1999  implies  a
strengthening  and  international  recognition  of  IASC  as  well  as  a  great  responsibility  and
commitment on the part of this body. The international organisations responsible for supervising
securities  trading,  insurance  and  the  banks  are  being  called  upon  to  put  these  standards  to  the
test.  Only  the  international  acceptance  of  these  standards  can  make  sense  in  the  end.  At  all
events, the Basle Committee will do all it can on the banking supervisory side to contribute to
this end.
VI
From  Germany’s  point  of  view,  it  is  particularly  gratifying  to  see  that  the  latest  core  standard
within  the  IASC-IOSCO  project  is  being  approved  during  a  German  Accounting  Standards
Committee forum.
A natural person as young as the GASC would not be able to talk yet.
The commitment of the G-7 finance ministers and central bank governors to apply the recognised
principles in their respective countries will necessitate some adjustments in Germany, too, which
will give rise to interesting discussions and make particular demands on our fledgling GASC. I
am  thinking  here  of  the  introduction  of  current  value  accounting  for  the  trading  portfolios  of
credit  institutions.  A  further  point  of  conflict  arises  in  the  application  sphere.  Can  the
information  function  of  the  annual  accounts  be  confined  to  the  overall  group  results?  Do  the
individual  accounts  remain  concerned  with  dividend  assessment  and  thus  with  the  traditional
BIS Review   107/1998
- 4 -
principle  of  caution?  Can  internationally  operating  institutions  be  subject  to  other  accounting
principles  and  disclosure  requirements 
than  nationally  or  merely  regionally  operating
institutions?  It  is  difficult  to  imagine  that  institutions  will  comply  at  national  level  with  the
traditional  accounting  principles  but  that  internationally  they  will  comprehensively  conform  to
the  recognised  international  accounting  standards.  In  the  light  of  this,  it  should  be  quite
understandable if the banking supervisors wanted to see capital maintenance aspects being taken
into account as well when the IASs are being developed. At all events, the banking supervisors
have difficulties where all financial instruments are deployed, no matter how the “fair” valuation
is arrived at.
BIS Review   107/1998
