Mr Bäckström reports on the current situation for monetary policy in Sweden
Speech  by  the  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Sweden,  Mr  Urban  Bäckström,  to  the  Standing
Committee on Finance in Stockholm on 13/11/98.
First  a  word  of  thanks  to  the  Committee  for  the  invitation  to  discuss  the  current  situation  for
monetary policy. A good deal has happened in the global economy since our previous discussion
with the Committee last March. The crisis in the emerging markets in Asia, regarded initially as a
regional concern, has continued to spread, first to emerging markets in other parts of the world
and  then,  mainly  via  financial  markets,  to  the  industrialised  countries.  This  has  altered  the
economic climate.
The Swedish economy in perspective
Five years with good growth and low inflation
Let  us  begin,  however,  by  shifting  our  attention  from  recent  events  and  noting  that  since  the
crisis in the early 1990s, economic development in Sweden has been rather good. Relatively high
growth has been combined with a rate of inflation that has remained low. Since the summer of
1993, total output (GDP) has been rising at an average annual rate of almost 3%. That more or
less matches the growth rate during the upswing in the 1980s (Fig. 1).
CPI and Underlying Inflation
yearly average
CPI
Underlying inflation
 Domestic underlying inflation
3
2
1
0
1995
1996
1997
1998
Source: Statistics Sweden
3
2
1
0
Fig. 1
It is markedly higher, however, than the average annual rate of 2% which was achieved in the
two decades from 1970 and 1990; it also exceeds what can be regarded as the sustainable long-
term rate. One important reason why inflation could still be kept at a low level in recent years is
that  in  this  period  the  economy  has  had  a  reserve  of  unutilised  capacity.  That,  in  turn,  is  a
consequence of the  deep  recession  that  preceded  the  upswing,  plus  the  fact  that  the  growth  of
capacity has been high. Moreover, inflation expectations have gradually stabilised around the 2%
inflation  target  (Fig.  2).  Recently,  however,  and  in  certain  earlier  periods,  transitory  price
BIS Review   101/1998
– 2 –
movements  have  brought  the  average  annual  change  in  the  consumer  price  index  (CPI)  just
outside the inflation target’s lower tolerance interval.
GDP growth 1982-1998
billions of SEK, seasonally-adjusted data
Trend 1993-1998
around 3%
Trend 1982-1990
around 3%
400
360
320
280
82
84
86
88
90
92
94
96
98
Sources: Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank
400
360
320
280
Fig. 2
Large transitory price effects
The nature of transitory price effects and the appropriate monetary policy response were matters
that  I  discussed  in  detail  with  the  Committee  last  March.  So  now  I  shall  simply  reiterate  the
Riksbank’s view that as long as more long-term inflation expectations are unaffected, transitory
price movements should be a subordinate consideration in monetary policy. A contrary opinion
would  necessitate  drastic  monetary  policy  measures  that  might  have  destabilising  effects  on
output  and  employment,  which  is  clearly  undesirable.  In  theory,  a  CPI  change  figure  that  is
higher than the current 0.4% could of course be engineered simply by raising the interest rate.
That would fuel CPI inflation via higher house mortgage rates. It need hardly be said that that is
not the way to conduct monetary policy. It should be borne in mind that a monetary policy target
formulated in terms of the change in the CPI has major advantages. The CPI is a broad and well-
known measure of inflation. But the construction of the CPI does pose problems, not least for
this  Committee,  when  it  comes  to  assessing  monetary  policy’s  past  performance.  This  will  be
still  more  important  if  the  Riksbank  is  accorded  the  independent  status  which  the  Riksdag
(Sweden’s parliament) will shortly be voting on. The use of a target variable, such as the CPI,
which necessitates frequent reference to factors that cause temporary deviations, is not an ideal
solution. There are grounds for supposing, however, that sizeable transient price movements of
the type we have  experienced  recently  are  not  commonplace.  They  derive  predominantly  from
the marked improvement in recent years in economic policy’s credibility. There have been few
periods in the past when, for example, house mortgage rates have dropped from about 14% to the
present level around 5%. So the problems with targeting CPI inflation should not be exaggerated.
In order to facilitate the assessment of monetary policy, the Riksbank has arranged for Statistics
Sweden  to  supplement  its  CPI  statistics  with  figures  for  various  indicators  of  underlying
inflation. Another matter to bear in mind is the lag before monetary policy measures affect the
economy. If the rate of inflation happens to move outside the tolerance interval in one month, the
BIS Review   101/1998
– 3 –
central bank is not capable of bringing inflation directly back on target in the following month.
That  is  why  the  central  bank  needs  to  present  an  inflation  forecast,  which  has  two  main
advantages. One is that the central bank can be explicit about the time horizon at which inflation
is  to  be  returned  to  the  target.  The  other  is  that  people  in  general  can  judge  for  themselves
whether monetary policy can be considered to be properly balanced. If the forecast deviates from
the inflation target at the time horizon at which monetary policy exerts its main effect – 12 to 24
months – then the instrumental rate has to be adjusted.
Jobless growth
Although  Sweden  has  experienced  five  years  of  good  economic  growth,  there  has  been  no
corresponding  reduction  of  unemployment.  The  picture  since  1993  speaks  for  itself:  a  clear
upturn  in  the  output  curve,  while  the  low  level  of  employment  is  still  virtually  unchanged
(Fig. 3).  This  suggests  that  neither  low  demand  nor  a  poor  growth  potential  are  primarily
responsible for the weak development of employment.
GDP and Employment
seasonally-adjusted data, index: Q3 1980=100,
GDP 
(left scale)
Employment 
(right scale)
140
120
100
80
115
110
105
100
95
90
82
84
86
88
90
92
94
96
98
Source: Statistics Sweden
Fig. 3
Part  of  the  problem  with  employment  may  be  that  much  of  the  growth  in  the  past  five  years
seems to have occurred in sectors that are capital-intensive. More balanced growth in the future
would  presumably  result  in  stronger  demand  for  labour.  But  the  weak  employment  trend
probably  also  stems  from  more  fundamental  factors.  For  several  decades  now,  the  general
structure of business activities in Sweden has tended to move towards a growing input of capital
at the expense of labour. The fact that certain countries have achieved a sustained improvement
in employment is often explained not so much by high growth as by a production process that has
been generally more labour-intensive. If an economy is characterised by the combination of high,
stable growth and weak employment, this points to the existence of structural problems. It should
be  added  that  Sweden  shares  the  problem  of  jobless  growth  with  other  countries  in  Europe,
though not with all.
BIS Review   101/1998
– 4 –
Monetary policy to date
Warning lights a year ago
A year ago there were many indications that economic growth in Sweden would continue at a
high rate. It also looked as though capacity utilisation would rise in the coming years and lead to
some increase in inflation. The crisis in Asia was expected to ease inflationary pressure to some
extent but not sufficiently. As most of the warning lights were thus blinking red, the Riksbank
adjusted its policy stance; in December 1997 the repo rate was raised from 4.10 to 4.35%. In my
statement  to  this  Committee  in  October  1997,  I  described  the  planned  policy  realignment  as  a
movement from an expansionary to a more neutral monetary stance. It amounted to keeping the
economy  moving  at  the  rate  which  is  structurally  feasible,  not  to  arresting  its  movement.  A
gradual monetary policy adjustment would bring the path of growth into line with the sustainable
long-term trend, thereby protecting the economy from capacity shortages and inflation. A small
interest rate increase at an early stage was intended to prevent problems from arising later on and
requiring larger interest hikes to bring inflation back to the targeted rate. In this way, both the
price level and growth would be more stable. In the December 1997 Inflation Report, however,
we included a risk scenario that pointed to lower inflation compared with the main scenario. We
noted: “As regards inflation, however, a substantial impact from the economic crisis in Asia does
presuppose  that  the  situation  deteriorates  so  much  that  international  activity  is  seriously
weakened.” As things turned out, the effects of the Asian crisis did exceed our assumption for
the main scenario. During the first half of this year the main assessment was revised successively
downwards. As a result, the monetary policy adjustment did not continue as envisaged earlier. In
view  of  the  risks  of  a  weaker  trend,  the  repo  rate  was  left  unchanged  during  the  spring.  In
connection with the June Inflation Report, the Riksbank concluded that inflation prospects had
changed;  our  inflation  forecast,  based  on  an  unchanged  repo  rate,  pointed  to  a  rate  of  price
increases  12  to  24  months  ahead  that  was  below  the  2%  target.  In  accordance  with  the
Riksbank’s procedure, at the beginning of the summer the repo rate was therefore lowered from
4.35% to 4.10%.
Increased financial market unrest and lower international growth
In the September Inflation Report the Riksbank noted that the real economic situation was still
relatively  bright.  In  our  main  scenario,  growth  was  expected  to  remain  stable  while  inflation
slowly  moved  up  towards  the  target  in  the  coming  one  to  two  years.  However,  this  path  for
inflation did start from a lower level. The risk of slower international growth on account of the
Asian  crisis  had  grown  but  the  picture  was  also  complicated  by  the  marked  weakening  of  the
krona, which could have a contrary effect on inflation. In the current exchange rate regime, the
Riksbank does not target the level of the exchange rate but this is still one of the factors that has
to be weighed into the assessment of future inflation. In the context of monetary policy, the most
pertinent aspect in recent years has proved to be the extent to which  the  exchange  rate  affects
inflation via its impact on production, primarily in the export sector. The effects that a weaker
exchange rate may have on import prices should be a secondary consideration, along with other
transitory  price  movements,  as  long  as  more  long-term  inflation  expectations  are  unaffected.
During  September  and  part  of  October  –  before  and  immediately  after  the  publication  of  the
Inflation Report – the monetary policy environment was turbulent and difficult to assess. Neither
was the uncertainty confined to the international scene. It also came from the general election in
Sweden and the future direction of fiscal policy. All in all, this prompted the Riksbank to keep
the  repo  rate  unchanged.  The  possibility  of  a  lower  rate  would  be  considered  when  inflation
prospects were clearer. During the autumn the financial unrest continued to grow. The Russian
Government’s  suspension  of  payments  in  mid  August  and  the  problems  that  emerged  in  late
BIS Review   101/1998
– 5 –
September with the U.S. hedge fund Long Term Capital Management contributed to the much
more nervous atmosphere. Share prices dropped around the world and the financial crisis went
on spreading to other emerging markets that had previously been spared. There was a risk that
the  falling  stock  markets  and  the  wider  extent  of  the  crisis  would  elicit  effects  via  decreased
export demand and more cautious behaviour among consumers and firms. At the same time, the
problems with Long Term Capital Management aroused fears of a considerably more serious risk
that had not attracted so much attention earlier –  the  risk  of  banks  becoming  so  cautious  with
credit  that  this,  by  itself,  would  paralyse  the  global  economy.  When  the  banks  are  bent  on
reducing exposures and slimming balance sheets in order to avoid loan losses, borrowers have
less  access  to  capital.  If  risk  aversion  becomes  unduly  pronounced,  even  sound  borrowers  are
liable to be hit, with serious effects on the total level of activity in the global economy. One sign
of  an  imminent  credit  squeeze  was  the  growing  spread  in  market  interest  rates  between  the
soundest borrowers and others. In this way it was envisaged that the financial crisis would have
negative  effects  on  the  real  economy.  Forecasters  altered  their  assessments  and  the  global
prospects for growth and inflation were revised downwards. The Riksbank likewise adjusted its
assessment of developments in the rest of the world.
The current monetary stance
Repo rate cut on 3 November
The assessment that growth in the rest of the world will be weaker than we counted on earlier led
the Riksbank to conclude that with an unchanged repo rate, in the coming 12 to 24 months the
rate of inflation would be below the target. Resource utilisation would be lower and inflationary
pressure  would  decrease.  Signs  of  this  were  discernible  in  recent  statistics:  net  exports  had
weakened,  stocks  were  accumulating  and  corporate  borrowing  was  rising  somewhat  more
slowly. The financial unrest had also had some negative impact on household confidence, which
could mean that consumption rises more slowly than expected earlier. The  effects  on  inflation
from  the  slowing  tendencies  were  judged  to  be  greater  than  the  stimulus  from  the  weaker
exchange  rate.  Moreover,  the  financial  market  unrest  had  tended  to  subside.  Under  these
circumstances, on 3rd November the Riksbank lowered the repo rate 25 basis points to 3.85%. It
should be noted that the Riksbank’s downward revision of demand and inflation prospects in the
Swedish economy is not dramatic. In the September Inflation Report the path for inflation was
already  below  2%  for  much  of  the  forecast  period.  But  the  revision  is  of  an  order  that  affects
conditions  for  the  Riksbank’s  operations.  In  order  to  provide  more  room  for  manoeuvre  in  the
formation  of  monetary  policy,  yesterday  the  Governing  Board  decided  to  lower  the  corridor
surrounding the repo rate: the deposit rate was reduced by 0.5 percentage points to 3.25% and the
lending  rate  likewise  0.5  percentage  points  to  4.75%.  The  concern  about  an  involuntary
contraction  of  credit  –  and  the  serious  consequences  it  might  have  –  has  also  prompted  the
central  banks  to  heighten  surveillance  of  the  financial  system.  For  the  Riksbank  this  concerns
contacts with the major banks as  well  as  increased  oversight  of  bank  financing  in  cooperation
with the Financial Supervisory Authority. On the whole, the Swedish banking system appears to
be stable. This conclusion is elaborated in the year’s second Financial Market Report, which we
published  yesterday.  Lending  to  the  most  problem-burdened  countries  is  relatively  low.
Moreover, the banks have built up liquidity reserves as a precaution against a worsening of the
situation in the international markets. The supply of credit in the Swedish market does not appear
to have suffered to date. Neither has the Riksbank seen any indications that the Swedish banks
intend to curtail their lending to domestic sectors. Recently the global financial unrest seems to
have become somewhat less pronounced. It is difficult to tell whether this could be a sign of the
calm associated with being in a hurricane’s eye – whether the international financial turbulence
will return or whether the cyclone is receding. The Riksbank is therefore continuing to analyse
BIS Review   101/1998
– 6 –
the banking system with heightened readiness until the  situation  has  become  more  stable.  The
course of events in the international arena has warranted measures of a short-term nature in order
to  safeguard  the  functioning  of  the  global  financial  system.  Interest  rates  have  been  reduced
recently  in  a  number  of  countries,  for  example.  In  the  longer  term,  work  must  focus  on  the
construction of international rules and systems that limit the risk of – and preferably prevent –
crises of this type from happening at all. What has happened reveals clear shortcomings in how
the global financial system functions. But it should also be underscored that “ free trade”  in the
financial domain can very probably confer large welfare gains, just as free trade does in the case
of  goods  and  services.  The  conditions  for  forecasting  in  general  and  for  inflation-targeting
monetary policy in particular have been illustrated by what has happened in recent years. A set of
indicators  has  to  be  relied  on  in  an  endeavour  to  form  a  definite  opinion  about  future
developments. Central banks are unfortunately not in a position to wait for a complete picture
before acting. It takes time for our actions to elicit their full effect; when all the pieces  of  the
puzzle  are  finally  available,  the  time  for  action  has  passed.  The  continuous  fulfilment  of  the
monetary policy target would then probably require more drastic measures; such a near-sighted
policy  would  lead  to  greater  economic  instability.  The  course  of  the  Asian  crisis  and  its
contagious effects in the industrialised countries is having a larger impact than we counted on
earlier.  I  cannot  rule  out  the  possibility  that  in  order  to  fulfil  the  inflation  target,  further
adjustments of the monetary stance will be called for in the same direction as recently. A weaker
development in the rest of the world also affects conditions in Sweden.
BIS Review   101/1998
