Mr  Macfarlane’s  statement  to  the  House  of  Representatives  Standing  Committee  on
Economics, Finance and Public Administration
Opening statement by the Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, Mr I.J. Macfarlane, to the
House  of  Representatives  Standing  Committee  on  Economics,  Finance  and  Public
Administration in Sydney on 15/12/98.
Thank you, Mr Chairman,
It is a pleasure to be here in front of your Committee again. As you mentioned, the need to make
adjustments to the composition of the Committee after the October Federal election means that
we are meeting about five weeks later than our normal timetable. Given the uncertainty about the
timing of the hearing, and the importance we attach to regular communication with  the  public
about  the  economy  and  the  Bank’s  activities,  we  decided  to  keep  to  the  regular  timetable  for
releasing our Semi-Annual Statement on Monetary Policy, which came out in early November.
So there is a substantial gap between the Statement and this hearing. On the whole, we feel that
our Statement still represents a reasonable summary of our views on events that had taken place
over the preceding six months. The world has not changed dramatically since the Statement was
issued. We have, however, made an adjustment to the stance of monetary policy, following the
December Board meeting. This was as a result of our continual process of evaluating incoming
information, and our assessment of the outlook for the year ahead, and the various risks attached
to  our  forecasts.  Our  judgement  was  that,  even  though  most  of  the  data  coming  in  were
suggesting  growth  was  running  ahead  of  earlier  expectations,  the  likelihood  was  that  growth
would decline in 1999. At the same time, the likelihood of overshooting the inflation target was
judged to have declined. Hence, we viewed a small further easing of policy as a prudent measure.
The  good  economic  outcomes  over  the  past  year  will,  I  suspect,  be  a  recurring  feature  of  our
discussion today. It might be helpful, therefore, if I start by reviewing the forecasts I presented
seven months ago and  make  some  observations  about  how  recent  developments  compare  with
them.
What I said last time could be summarised as:
• 
• 
• 
GDP would grow by about 3 per cent during 1998;
the unemployment rate would remain relatively stable;
we had passed the trough of inflation and it would rise gradually, reaching about 2 per cent
by the end of the year; and
the current account deficit would average about 5½ per cent of GDP for 1998.
• 
I  also  said  that  I  thought  this  combination  of  events  would  be  a  reasonably  good  result  for
Australia in view of the difficult external situation we were facing, particularly among our Asian
export  markets.  In  the  event,  the  external  situation  did  not  get  any  better,  but  Australia’s
economic  performance  has  exceeded  our  expectations,  and,  to  the  best  of  my  knowledge,  the
expectations of virtually all forecasters.
It now looks as though GDP growth during 1998 will be about 4 per cent, rather than the 3 per
cent that seemed likely in May. A good deal of the additional growth is attributable to stronger
outcomes than we had expected in the June and September quarters. The remainder is a result of
upward revision to earlier data across most of the recent quarters. Consistent with this stronger
than expected growth, the rate of unemployment has continued to edge down, rather than staying
flat. Over the past three months it has averaged 7.9 per cent, compared with 8.1 per cent in the
first quarter of 1998 and 8.7 per cent in the first quarter of 1997.
BIS Review   107/1998
- 2 -
On inflation, it seems clear that the trough has passed, and our best guess for the rise in the CPI
over the four quarters to December 1998 is, in round figures, still about 2 per cent. But it is also
true  to  say  that  inflation  shows  signs  of  not  increasing  by  as  much  as  historical  relationships
might have led us to expect, given the fall in the exchange rate. On the current account deficit, it
now looks as though it has averaged around 5 per cent of GDP in 1998 rather than the 5½ per
cent we expected at the last hearing.
I would summarise the situation as being one where the forecast errors were within the normal
ranges that occur with forecasts of this type. The thing we can take some comfort from, however,
is that no-one can accuse us of being Pollyannas because in each case the outcome was slightly
better than  the  forecast.  Growth  has  been  stronger,  the  widening  in  the  current  account  deficit
smaller and, at the margin, the rise in inflation slightly smaller than we had expected.
I  now  propose  to  make  a  few  general  comments  about  how  we  are  expecting  future  events  to
unfold.  Over  the  course  of  the  year  before  the  Asian  crisis  commenced,  that  is  1996/97,  the
economy grew by 4½ per cent. In the first year affected by the Asian crisis - 1997/98 - it grew by
4¼ per cent. Despite starting 1998/99 at a similar pace, we have to accept that we will  not  be
able to continue at this rate. Growth through 1998/99 is more likely to be somewhere between
2½ and 3 per cent. Implicit in this is that the coming quarterly growth rates will be noticeably
lower than the ones we experienced over the past year.
Some slowing seems to be inevitable, given the weaker outlook for the world economy. Since we
last  met  in  May,  most  forecasters  have  revised  down  expectations.  The  IMF,  to  take  just  one
example, has revised down its forecast for world growth in 1998 from 3 per cent to 2 per cent,
and for 1999 from 3¾ per cent to 2½ per cent. If these estimates are a reasonable guide, then the
external  environment  will  remain  difficult  and  income  from  external  sources  constrained.  Of
course,  domestic  demand  has  been,  and  remains,  much  stronger  than  external  demand,  and  so
Australia’s expenditure has run ahead of national income over the past year. But that gap cannot
be expected to continue to grow at the same pace indefinitely, and so both domestic demand and
GDP growth must be expected to come down over coming quarters. With slower growth in the
offing, we expect that the unemployment rate will flatten out. Of course, we said that last time;
now we are suggesting it will occur at a slightly lower rate of unemployment than we formerly
expected.
We expect the four-quarters-ended increase in the CPI to be about 2½ per cent by the end of the
financial year - that is, in the short term, we expect inflation performance to be consistent with
our  target.  Of  course,  any  forecast  of  inflation  beyond  that  period  is  only  as  good  as  its
assumption about the future path of the exchange rate.
Given  the  current  tendency  towards  lower  commodity  prices,  we  are  assuming  some  further
widening in the current account deficit to about 5½ per cent of GDP in 1998/99. With an annual
figure of this size, it would not be surprising to see a quarter or two of it running at over 6 per
cent of GDP. I made the same comment in March this year, and again in May at our previous
hearing. I expected that it would have come to pass by now, but it has not. It would not surprise
me, however, if it does happen some time in the next year.
This set of outcomes, or something like it, would represent a good performance for an economy
in  its  eighth  year  of  expansion  facing  a  difficult,  but  not  disastrous,  external  environment.  I
expect that it would be well received by the domestic and international investment community,
though one can never take this for  granted.  And,  of  course,  if  the  assumptions  we  are  making
about the world economy turn out to be too optimistic, all bets would be off.
I now come to the second part of my testimony, in which I attempt to answer the question of why
we  have  done  better  than  most  other  countries  in  Asia  or  the  Pacific  Rim.  In  doing  so,  I  am
BIS Review   107/1998
- 3 -
conscious that the story is not yet over, so this is really an interim report. I think a number of
factors have been involved and I will list them in no particular order. As we go through them, it
will become apparent that they are all intertwined.
First, I think the Asian crisis hit at a time when the Australian economy was in good shape, partly
for cyclical reasons. By mid-1997, the economy was growing strongly and inflation was lower
than our target. Had we not received a contractionary impulse from the Asian crisis, we may have
been facing the need to tighten policy because of a potential overheating. No-one will ever know,
but it is a possibility. I am conscious that attributing our performance over the past 18 months to
our good starting point is rather superficial because it does not explain why the starting point was
so good. But I will come back to that later.
Second, I think we have benefited from the flexibility of our exporters, who have switched from
the contracting Asian markets into the expanding North American and European ones, and into a
number of other markets we do not usually think of as being important to us. The nature of our
exports - with so much of them being commodities - has helped, but the efforts of our marketing
companies and authorities should not be ignored. Even so, it has not proved possible to prevent
exports from falling, and over the year to the September quarter they fell by 2 per cent in volume.
Third,  Australia  has  benefited  from  a  greatly  improved  perception  of  the  soundness  of  its
economic policies. The fact that the budget has moved back into surplus - where it should be in
the mature phase of an economic expansion - has been important. So has nearly a decade of low
inflation. Also important on this occasion has been the recognition that Australia scores well on
such factors as its regulation of banks, other financial institutions and stock exchanges, and that
its  underlying  body  of  commercial  law  and  accounting  practice  is  at  or  close  to  world  best
practice.
Not only have the international capital markets taken a better view of Australia, but we also seem
to  have  more  confidence  in  ourselves.  Business  and  consumer  confidence  initially  fell  as  the
Asian events unfolded, but they did not fall excessively - for the most part they fell from well
above average to about average. In the past three months, they have tended to  rise  moderately
again  as  figures  about  the  economy  have  confirmed  that  it  has  performed  better  than  most
expected.
The fourth explanation for why growth has held up is a catch-all one - the economy just seems to
be more flexible and adaptable than before. The only clear evidence of this is that productivity -
whether labour productivity or total factor productivity - has increased faster in the 1990s than in
earlier decades. For example, total factor productivity has increased at an average annual rate of
1.7 per cent during the expansion of the 1990s, compared with 0.7 per cent in the 1980s and 1.2
per cent in the 1970s. To me, this suggests that the painful adjustments that have been made over
the past decade or so are paying off. By this, I mean the changes that have been made to increase
competition  in  previously  sheltered  industries.  This,  of  course,  includes  greater  export
orientation,  but  also  greater  competition  in  utilities  and  transport,  which  has  reduced  costs  to
other  industries.  It  also  includes  the  downsizing  of  the  public  sector,  which  has  released
resources. Finally, our labour relations practices and wage setting machinery now have a degree
of flexibility that has surprised the sceptics.
I now come to a fifth factor, which most commentators view as being important - namely, the
fact that in response to a contractionary external shock, the Australian dollar was allowed to float
down. This is the way the textbooks say the situation should be handled, and is in sharp contrast
to the severe domestic squeeze that can result in the cases of countries with fixed or quasi-fixed
exchange rates.
BIS Review   107/1998
- 4 -
The domestic economy has benefited from the lower exchange rate because exporters’ incomes
have been held up and the incentive to export maintained (while at the same time assisting those
industries that are competing against imports). The domestic economy has also benefited because
we have not had to put up interest rates in order to maintain our external parity (as in  a  fixed
exchange rate) or to prop up a floating rate that threatened to fall so far that it would have had
undesirable  inflationary  consequences.  Raising  interest  rates  in  response  to  an  external
contractionary shock is not something that you normally would want to do, although in extreme
circumstances it may become necessary.
I have heard people say that it is a good thing that, unlike some other countries, we were relaxed
in the face of a falling exchange rate. I can assure you all that we were never relaxed. Having
followed the Australian dollar on virtually a daily basis for 15 years, I know that you can never
take it for granted. While the floating rate is the best system we have had, like all asset prices
freely determined in unconstrained markets the Australian dollar is prone to bouts of instability
or overshooting. On three occasions - in January, June and August - a downward overshooting
threatened and we responded with foreign exchange intervention. On each occasion, stability was
re-established and, unlike the experience of the mid-1980s, we did not raise interest rates. But
this does not mean that that option was not on the table. It was, and financial markets knew this;
as a result, 90-day rates were well above cash rates in both June and August. Fortunately, things
turned out well, and so the option did not have to be used.
Thus, the exchange rate was centre stage. The general direction of its movement was performing
a very useful function, yet the short-term dynamics were such that it often threatened to go too
far. It has been a delicate balancing act, but one with a favourable outcome. Over the past two
years,  the  economy  has  been  able  to  grow  at  over  4  per  cent  per  annum  without  significant
upward  pressure  on  inflation  (which  has  averaged  1.6 per  cent  over  the  same  period).  This  is
better than almost anyone expected.
Another  way  of  approaching  the  question  is  to  ask  why  we  at  the  Reserve  Bank  were  able  to
accept this continuation of high growth and depreciating exchange rate without having to tighten
monetary policy (in fact, being able to ease it slightly at the beginning of this month). The answer
is that the combination has not to date seriously threatened our inflation target. Why has it turned
out this way?
The  answer,  I  think,  is  that  we  are  beginning  to  receive  the  big  dividend  that  low  inflation
provides.
The  economy  has  gradually  adjusted  to  nearly  a  decade  of  low  inflation  and,  although  the
adjustment is still not complete, the benefits are becoming apparent. Inflationary expectations are
much lower and more stable; wage contracts are now often two or three years in duration; loans,
including  housing  mortgages,  often  have  interest  rates  fixed  for  long  periods;  and  businesses
know that they can no longer automatically pass on any cost increase secure in the knowledge
that  it  will  get  lost  among  the  multitude  of  other  price  increases.  This  new  less  volatile
environment allows the floating exchange rate to do its job of stabilising the domestic economy
in the face of an external shock. It does so by reducing the tendency for the expansionary effects
of  a  falling  exchange  rate  to  be  dissipated  in  the  form  of  rising  inflation.  It  also  goes  without
saying that the low inflation environment makes the task of monetary management a lot easier.
I think we can take some satisfaction about how events have turned out over the past two years,
but we should not become complacent. This particular episode, which started as a regional Asian
crisis,  is  far  from  over.  We  should  not  think  that  we  can  see  the  end  of  it  just  because  it  has
already been running for 18 months. For a start, the United States has only recently started its
slowdown, and uncertainty about the US outlook seems greater at present than for some time. In
addition,  Japan  remains  gripped  by  powerful  contractionary  forces.  That  could  put  continued
BIS Review   107/1998
- 5 -
pressure on commodity prices. Much has been said recently about how Asia has passed the worst
of its problems, and on many measures this is so. But the contractions have been very severe in
many cases, and no-one is expecting a quick or strong recovery.
I do not wish to say any more at this stage. You will note that I have dealt exclusively with the
domestic economy, but I think that is appropriate since I have spoken so much recently in other
places about Asia, the world economy, and international financial markets. My colleagues and I
are, of course, happy to answer any questions you may have on the topics I have not covered, or
for that matter, on the ones I have.
BIS Review   107/1998
