Yves  Mersch: Are  the  economy  and  monetary  policy  at  a  turning
point - and where are the European and US economies headed?
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the Panel at the Petersberger Sommerdialog, Königswinter, 30 June 2018.
Economic outlook
 The euro area economy is still growing, albeit at a slightly slower pace.
Euro area growth stood at 0.4% in the first quarter, following growth of 0.7% in the previous four
quarters. This moderation reflects some pull-back from last year’s exceptionally strong growth as
well as some temporary and supply side factors. At the same time, concerns about increasing
trade protectionism may have dampened business sentiment and expectations.
Nevertheless,  the  underlying  strength  of  the  euro  area  economy  persists.  It  has  now  been
growing above potential for 21 quarters. Both the non-accelerating inflation rate of unemployment
(NAIRU) and the output gap are in positive territory and sentiment indicators – while weaker – are
still above long-term averages for most sectors and countries.
The monetary policy measures introduced since 2014 have played a central role in supporting
euro area growth and employment.
In the euro area, there are now around 8.4 million more people employed than during the trough
in  mid-2013,  which  implies  that  all  of  the  jobs  lost  during  the  crisis  have  been  recovered.
Furthermore, unemployment is at its lowest level since December 2008, despite an increase in
the labour force of more than 2%.
Private consumption continues to be supported by these favourable labour market developments
as well as by the solid growth in households’ disposable incomes, higher asset values and an
accommodative  monetary  policy  that  has  contributed  to  a  lower  debt  burden  for  borrowers.
Looking  ahead,  private  consumption  growth  is  expected  to  remain  favourable  as  anticipated
improvements in the labour market should support consumer confidence.
The  business  investment  outlook  continues  to  strengthen  and  is  supported  by  the  favourable
financing conditions, an improvement in profitability and solid demand.
The euro area fiscal stance is expected to be expansionary in 2018 and should be broadly neutral
in 2019-20, in order to avoid procyclicality.
In addition the broad-based expansion in global demand is expected to continue, which should
support euro area exports.
More specifically, in the United States growth remained robust, expanding at an annual rate of
2.0% in the first quarter of 2018, having increased by 2.9% in the fourth quarter of 2017. Growth
in 2017 marked the eighth successive year of positive growth in the United States, compared
with  four  consecutive  years  of  positive  growth  in  the  euro  area.  Looking  ahead,  growth  in  the
United  States  is  expected  to  accelerate  on  the  back  of  solid  growth  in  investment  and
consumption  and  significant  fiscal  stimulus. At  the  same  time,  we  have  to  keep  an  eye  on  a
gradual  increase  in  long-term  interest  rates  in  the  United  States,  given  the  robust  economic
growth,  an  expansive  deficit  funded  fiscal  policy,  and  the  Federal  Reserve’s  exit  from  the
securities markets.
This ongoing broad-based economic growth is largely echoed in the June 2018 Eurosystem staff
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
macroeconomic  projections  for  the  euro  area.  Real  GDP  is  projected  to  increase  by  2.1%  in
2018, 1.9% in 2019 and 1.7% in 2020.
While  risks  to  growth  remain  broadly  balanced,  those  related  to  global  factors,  including  the
threat  of  increased  protectionism  have  become  more  prominent.  Moreover,  the  risk  of
persistently high financial market volatility warrants monitoring.
Turning to the nominal side, euro area annual inflation, as measured by the Harmonised Index of
Consumer Prices (HICP), increased to an estimated 2% in June, from 1.9% in May. On the basis
of current futures prices for oil, headline inflation is expected to remain around the current level
for the remainder of the year.
Measures of underlying inflation remain generally muted, but are higher than the low range that
prevailed  between  mid-2014  and  mid-2016.  Developments  in  domestic  pipeline  inflation  and
wages  suggest  strengthening  price  pressures.  A  continued  strengthening  in  domestic  cost
pressures is expected to be the main driver behind the expected pick-up in underlying inflation
towards the end of this year and the further gradual increase over the medium term.
This  assessment  of  inflation  is  broadly  in  line  with  the  June  2018  Eurosystem  staff
macroeconomic  projections  for  the  euro  area,  which  project  annual  HICP  inflation  of  1.7%  in
2018, 2019 and 2020.
This outlook depends on keeping the ample degree of monetary policy stimulus in place, as this
remains necessary for underlying inflation pressures to continue to build up and be maintained
over the medium term.
In  October  2017,  the  ECB  Governing  Council  announced  the  reduction  of  its  asset  purchase
programme by half, having announced in December 2016 that it would be scaled back from €80
billion  to  €60  billion.  We  gave  up  our  easing  bias  in  the  spring  and  at  the  June  meeting  the
Governing Council concluded that progress towards a sustained adjustment in inflation had been
substantial and decided to halve net purchases again and to end them completely in December
2018.
With longer-term inflation expectations well anchored, the underlying strength of the euro area
economy and the continuing ample degree of monetary accommodation provide grounds to be
confident that the sustained convergence of inflation towards our aim will continue in the period
ahead, and will be maintained even after a gradual winding-down of our net asset purchases.
Yet, an ample degree of monetary stimulus remains necessary for underlying inflation pressures
to continue to build up and support headline inflation developments over the medium term.
Looking  ahead,  monetary  policy  will  be  firmly  guided  by  the  outlook  for  price  stability  and  our
stance will evolve in a data-dependent and time consistent manner. Step-by-step normalisation
means that we anticipate the end of the net purchase programme in the short term, while only
announcing our expectations with regard to interest rates over the medium term. The difference
gives us an appropriate flexibility for our medium-term reaction function, i.e. we do not make any
unconditional  commitments  regarding  the  long-term  future  due  to  the  many  unknowns  and
uncertain developments.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
