Viral V Acharya: Understanding and managing interest rate risk at
banks
Speech  by  Dr  Viral  V Acharya,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  Fixed
Income Money Markets and Derivatives Association (FIIMDA) Annual Dinner, Mumbai, 15 January
2018.
 Let me at the outset wish all of you a happy and healthy New Year.
Thank  you  to  Fixed  Income  Money  Markets  and  Derivatives  Association  (FIIMDA)  and  its
organizing team for inviting me to deliver this keynote address at its Annual Meet. I will speak
today about understanding and managing better the interest rate risk at Indian banks. I will start,
however, by looking elsewhere and historically, often a very good place to start.
In the period after the Global Financial Crisis, bank exposures to sovereign debt have increased
significantly  in  many  economies,  including  advanced  ones,  deepening  the  linkage  of  bank
balance sheets with sovereign debt. Several important drivers are deemed to be at work behind
this phenomenon:
1.  Exceptionally  accommodative  monetary  policy  in  advanced  economies,  coupled  with  a
general post-crisis fall in the risk appetite of global investors, created a natural demand to
hold sovereign debt of safe-haven economies.
2.  Under Basel capital regulations for banks, sovereign bond exposures continue to attract 0%
risk  weight  in  home  countries  and  some  currency  unions,  besides  not  being  subject  to
concentration limits. This makes sovereign bonds a more attractive investment for banks
vis-a-vis  other  assets  of  similar  riskiness.  Liquidity  of  sovereign  bonds  as  well  as  such
securities  being  eligible  collateral  for  refinance  by  central  banks  only  further  adds  to  their
attractiveness.
3.  Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) regulation (under Basel-III) also requires banks to hold High
Quality Liquid Assets (HQLA). Though there are other securities eligible as HQLA, the cost
and ease of holding are the most attractive for sovereign bonds.
While sovereign bonds may be safer and more liquid than other instruments at a given point of
time,  there  is  no  guarantee  that  they  will  remain  so  as  both  credit  risk  and  liquidity  risk  of
sovereign  debt  are  dynamic  in  nature,  and  in  fact,  can  shift  deceptively  so  as  these  risks
materialize from seemingly calm initial states.
Sovereign debt-bank nexus and Eurozone sovereign debt crisis
The potential negative impact of sovereign debt-bank nexus and the need for addressing it has
attracted  much  international  attention,  particularly  in  Europe.  Exposures  of  resident  banks  to
domestic sovereign debts in countries that faced debt crisis (Greece, Italy, Ireland, Portugal, and
Spain,  or  GIIPS)  increased  significantly  during  and  after  the  crisis.  Moreover,  the  increased
exposure of banks to sovereign debts exhibited a domestic bias in case of the riskier sovereigns,
i.e., the GIIPS, with share of resident banks increasing while that of non-residents declining; the
holdings of resident banks continue to be at a high level (Chart 1).
 1 / 12
BIS central bankers' speeches
The large holdings of domestic sovereign debt by banks played a key role in exacerbating the
sovereign debt crisis in peripheral European countries. From January 2007 until the first bank
bailout announcement in late September 2008, there was a sustained rise in bank credit spreads
while  sovereign  credit  spreads  remained  low.  During  September-October  2008,  bank  bailouts
became a pervasive feature across developed economies and there was a significant decline in
bank credit spreads with a corresponding increase in sovereign credit spreads. In effect, bank
bailouts transferred credit risk from the financial sector to the sovereigns (Acharya, Drechsler
and Schnabl, 2012; 2015). However, and especially post the Greek default in 2010, sovereign
spreads in the GIIPS widened too over the German Bunds due to macroeconomic concerns in
the European periphery, causing significant valuation losses for banks and casting doubt on their
solvency.
 2 / 12
BIS central bankers' speeches
Concomitantly,  rising  yields  on  sovereign  bonds  enticed  banks  to  stock  up  on  their  domestic
sovereign  exposures.  With  continuing  access  to  short-term  funding,  notably  in  deposit  and
money markets, banks in GIIPS and even some non-GIIPS countries increased investments in
GIIPS  sovereign  bonds  so  as  to  purchase  “carry”  over  the  German  Bunds,  hoping  for  future
convergence of yield (Acharya and Steffen, 2015). This “carry trade” was particularly attractive
for  under-capitalized  banks  as  a  way  to  gamble  for  resurrection,  effectively  chasing  quick
Treasury gains with no additional capital requirement, but doubling up on economic risks if the
carry  were  to  widen  even  further...  and  it  did.  The  Greek  default  and  ensuing  sovereign  debt
crises in the GIIPS countries showed that banks having significant exposures to sovereign debt
were  the  most  susceptible  to  fluctuations  in  sovereign  borrowing  costs  and  faced  attendant
market plus funding consequences.
Such sovereign debt-bank nexus creates a two-way feedback loop. As banks are highly exposed
to  the  domestic  sovereign,  any  adverse  movement  in  yields  or  materialisation  of  a  sovereign
event  could  trigger  bank  under-capitalization  and  bailouts,  which  imply  further  sovereign
borrowing  and  rising  sovereign  yields,  leading  to  further  erosion  of  bank  capital  and  need  for
further bailouts, and so on (Acharya, Drechsler and Schnabl, 2012; 2015).
Understanding and managing well the banking sector’s exposure to risks embedded in domestic
sovereign debt is thus not just a matter of banking sector’s profits and capital, but in fact it is one
of overall macroeconomic stability.
The Indian context
In India, the linkage between sovereign debt and bank balance sheets has always been strong
given the Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) prescriptions for banks and the historical role that banks
have played in supporting public debt. Banks, under section 42 of the Reserve Bank of India Act,
1934, are required to maintain minimum liquid assets (basically Government securities – both
Central  Government  securities  or  G-Secs,  and  sub-sovereign  securities  called  State
Development Loans (SDLs)) as a percentage of Demand and Time Liabilities (DTL). This ratio
has historically been as high as 38.5%, but has gradually come down to 19.5% now (Chart 2),
being brought steadily in line with international levels of the Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) under
Basel-III.
The  resulting  large  holding  of  G-Secs  and  SDLs  by  banks  exposes  them  to  re-pricing  of
 3 / 12
BIS central bankers' speeches
governments’ borrowing costs which could rise due to inflationary, fiscal or other domestic as
well as global macroeconomic developments. I propose to (i) draw attention to the significance of
this interest rate risk exposure of Indian banks; (ii) urge banks to pay greater attention and devote
more resources to their Treasury operations; and, (iii) lay out some options available to banks for
managing the risk efficiently.
Understanding interest rate risk at banks
Let  us  start  by  first  principles.  Interest  rate  risk  is  most  simply  understood  by  looking  at  the
(approximate) price equation for a bond portfolio when there is a (small) change in the underlying
interest rates, such as the level of government’s borrowing cost:
∆P = – P × D × ∆Y, where
∆ denotes change; P denotes the portfolio’s market value;
D denotes the “duration", a measure of the interest rate sensitivity of the portfolio;
and,Y denotes an underlying interest rate (or portfolio yield).
In other words, the value of the investment portfolio is a function of three factors:
1.  The size of the portfolio denoted by P ;
2.  The duration denoted by D, which roughly captures the weighted average maturity of cash-
flows of bonds in the portfolio; and,
3.  The increase in yields denoted by ∆Y.
For example, a portfolio of size 1 trillion with 10 years of duration, falls in value by 10 billion upon
a 0.1% or 10 basis points (bps) rise in the 10-year G-Sec benchmark yield.
Let us consider each of these factors, in turn, in the present and historical Indian context.
1
Size of the portfolio
The share of commercial banks in outstanding G-Secs is around 40% (June 2017). Investment
of Scheduled Commercial Banks (SCBs) in G-Secs as a percentage of their total investment
was around 82% for FY 2016–17. The corresponding figure for Public Sector Banks (PSBs) for
FY 2016–17 is slightly higher at 84%. This exposure has noticeably increased since 2014 (Chart
3a).
 4 / 12
BIS central bankers' speeches
In spite of the relative stability of the consolidated Debt/GDP ratio of the government, the investor
base for G-Secs in India is primarily limited to domestic institutions. As a result, there are often
situations of oversupply of government bonds relative to demand. This appears to be the case
especially for Indian banks going by their high excess SLR holdings. One reason banks end up
holding high levels of government debt is because in the Indian milieu, they end up as residual
holders  in  case  of  relative  oversupply,  as  the  appetite  of  other  major  institutional  investor
categories  like  insurance  and  pension  funds  is  limited  by  their  investment  mandates. Another
important reason in recent times has been that excess liquidity in the banking system did not end
up  being  parked  at  the  Reserve  Bank’s  liquidity  mop-up  operations  which  would  have  kept
duration  risk  minimal.  Instead,  the  surplus  liquidity  found  its  way  into  G-Secs  as  domestic
sovereign debt is the most attractive investment for capital-starved banks looking for short-term
gains even if at the expense of greater duration (as I explained earlier, this was the case also in
the European context).
As  a  result,  the  size  of  banking  sector’s  balance-sheet  exposure  to  G-Secs,  and  hence,  its
interest  rate  risk,  is  high  in  an  absolute  sense,  and  is  relatively  elevated,  when  measured  in
proportion to total assets, for public sector banks relative to private banks (Chart 3b).
 5 / 12
BIS central bankers' speeches
Duration of investment book and the maturity structure of G-Secs
The high interest rate exposure of banks from their G-Sec portfolios is attributable to not only the
size  of  their  holdings,  but  also  to  the  increasing  maturity  of  primary  issuance.  The  weighted
average maturity of the stock of Government securities has increased steadily from 9.66 yrs in
2012–13 to 10.67 yrs in 2017–18 (Chart 4). The average tenor of annual issuance during the last
five years has been high at around 15 years.
What  are  implications  of  this  changing  maturity  structure  of  G-Secs  for  the  duration  of  bank
investment portfolios?
The  investment  portfolio  of  banks  is  classified  under  three  categories, viz.,  ‘Held  to  Maturity
(HTM)', ‘Available for Sale (AFS)’ and ‘Held for Trading (HFT)'. Banks normally hold securities
acquired by them with the intention to hold them up to maturity under HTM category. Only debt
securities  are  permitted  to  be  held  under  HTM  with  a  few  exceptions,  e.g.,  equity  held  in
subsidiaries. Holding securities under HTM provides cushion for banks from valuation changes.
However, holding in HTM book is subjected to a ceiling.
AFS and HFT categories together form the trading book of banks. Banks are permitted to decide
on the extent of holdings under AFS and HFT based on their trading strategy, risk appetite, capital
position, etc. Securities held under both these books are required to be marked to market. HFT
book is required to be marked to market on a more frequent basis than AFS. Valuation frequency
of  investment  is  typically  a  determinant  in  the  composition  of  investment  book  of  banks.
Correspondingly, shares of HTM, AFS and HFT are 55.4%, 42.5% and 2.1%, respectively, as on
September  2017  (Financial  Stability  Report,  RBI,  December  2017).  The  average  modified
duration of the AFS book of banks is currently around 2.9 years. The comparable figure for PSBs
is higher at 3.5 years and for PvtSBs is at 2.0 years.
With relatively high duration and concentration of G-Secs in investment portfolio, bank earnings
and  capital  remain  exposed  to  adverse  yield  moves,  especially  as  the  share  of  investment
income  has  been  on  the  rise  in  the  last  five  years.  Chart  5  captures  this  fact  succinctly  that
investment income of banks is highly sensitive to G-Sec yields – yields had by and large fallen in
recent years, and consequently, investment income went up. In turn, and given the muted credit
growth  over  this  period,  especially  at  PSBs,  investment  income  has  again  started  playing  a
 6 / 12
BIS central bankers' speeches
rather important role in determining bank earnings.
Movement in yields – Phases of sustained yield rise
G-Sec yields in India have undergone episodic phases of sustained rise of close to 200 bps at
regular intervals. Chart 6 identifies three major phases for the 10-year benchmark yield over the
past 15 years:
1.  Phase I – second half of 2004 when interest rate cycle turned up from 5.00% to over 7.00%,
following a prolonged rally;
2.  Phase II – post the global financial crisis when yields rose from around 5.25% in December
2008 to around 8.80% by November 2011; and,
3.  Phase III – during the taper tantrum episode when yields rose from around 7.25% at end-May
2013 to just below 9% by end-December 2013;
My  point  in  showing  this  time-series  and  episodic  phases  of  G-Sec  yield  movements  is  that
banks should not be surprised repeatedly when government bond yields rise sharply and their
investment profits drop. RBI’s Financial Stability Reports (FSR) have regularly pointed out the
impact of such large interest rate moves on capital and profitability of banks. Banks should know
and understand this risk rather well. Perhaps they do, and the issue is really one of incentives
that lead to their ignoring this risk, which I will turn to next.
 7 / 12
BIS central bankers' speeches
Heads I win, tails the regulator dispenses
How have these episodic phases of sustained rise in G-Sec yield played out?
During Phase I, responding to the clamour for regulatory forbearance, banks were permitted to
hold G-Secs up to the mandated Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) of 25% of Demand and Time
Liabilities (DTL) under the Held to Maturity (HTM) accounting category. Regulation also enabled
banks to shift securities from other accounting categories into the HTM category, as a one-time
measure, a feature that has now acquired an annual dimension.
A similar one-time transfer was extended during Phase III, in addition to deferment in recognition
of valuation losses by six months, from September 2013 to March 2014.
The impact of the persistent rise in yields during Phase II was eased to a great degree by regular
open market purchases by RBI, which are typically employed for durable liquidity management
and to ensure the proximity of money market rates to the overnight policy rate, rather than for
management of long-term G-Sec yields.
These  are  also  the  sort  of  measures  some  banks  have  again  requested  RBI  to  adopt  in  the
current phase of rising yields, wherein yields have moved up from around 6.50% at end-August
2017 to around 7.45% now.
Interest  rate  risk  of  banks  cannot  be  managed  over  and  over  again  by  their  regulator.  The
regulator, in interest of financial stability, is caught in such situations between a rock and a hard
place, and often obliges. However, the trend of regular use of ex post regulatory dispensation to
ease  the  interest  rate  risk  of  banks  is  not  desirable  from  the  point  of  view  of  efficient  price
discovery in the G-Sec market and effective market discipline on the G-Sec issuer. Nor does it
augur  well  for  developing  a  sound  risk  management  culture  at  banks.  Recourse  to  such
 8 / 12
BIS central bankers' speeches
asymmetric options – heads I win, tails the regulator dispenses – is akin to the use of steroids.
They  get  addictive  and  have  long-term  adverse  effects  in  the  form  of  frequent  relapse  even
though their use may be justified to relieve occasional intense pain. Hence, it would be better for
the banking system to build its own immunity and strength, i.e., emphasise internally – and put in
2
place processes for – efficient management of interest-rate risk.
Let me then discuss what could be done by banks to achieve this.
Managing interest rate risk at banks
Management of the increasing interest rate exposure of the banking system needs to address
both sides of the sovereign-bank nexus. While the long-term investor participation in government
bond  market  needs  to  be  deepened  –  both  domestically  and  internationally,  and  the  maturity
structure of government debt kept sensitive to implications for bank balance-sheets, banks also
need to manage the interest rate risk on the balance sheet by dynamically managing its size and
duration as well as accessing markets for risk transfer.
The desirable options follow from the bond price equation I presented earlier:
∆P = – P × D × ∆Y.
Interest rate risk management options can thus be categorised as follows:
1.  Measures that address P, viz., the G-Sec portfolio size of banks;
2.  Measures that address D, viz., the duration risk; and,
3.  Measures that address the valuation impact in scenarios with potentially large changes in
yield.
Measures that address the G-Sec portfolio size of banks
The size of the G-Sec portfolio of banks is mainly a function of balance sheet choices made by
banks  among  competing  assets.  Recognizing  at  the  outset  that  G-Sec  portfolio  is  subject  to
interest rate risk, a risk-management strategy can be put in place along the following lines:
1.  The bank’s Board in discussions with the Treasury head and Chief Risk Officer (CRO) can
approve  the  risk  limit  for  the  portfolio  in  terms  of  the  capital  that  can be  put  at  risk.  This
assigned risk capital, much like a corporate budget, should transform into a risk strategy and
be guarded in a manner that adjusts for changing risks rather than merely serving as an
easy-to-game compliance limit.
2.  The  assigned  risk  capital  should  not  get  wiped  out  under  reasonable  stress  scenarios,
which can be modelled as high confidence level tail events for bond yields under value at
risk or expected loss approach. In other words, banks should not lose capital allocated to
the Treasury function other than with an extremely small likelihood.
3.  Given the non-linearity in yield movements (the risk that risk will change, or in other words,
yield  volatility  being  stochastic),  as  manifested  in  the  episodic  volatility  phases  I  showed,
banks should also factor in historical stress scenarios. Under these historical stress tests
as well, capital allocated to the Treasury function should not get wiped out.
4.  In addition, banks should conduct reverse stress tests, i.e., ask the question as to what kind
of  G-Sec  yield  movements,  parallel  shift  at  a  minimum  but  ideally  also  yield-curve
steepening, would wipe out the allocated capital? Indeed, such reverse stress tests have
been  recommended  by  the  Reserve  Bank  and  could  become  part  of  Board-level  risk
discussions.
 9 / 12
BIS central bankers' speeches
5.  However, no stress test is perfect; and, no risk measure such as value at risk or expected
losses  which  use  historical  distributions  can  anticipate  fully  the  nature  of  future  yield
movements. Hence, banks also need to adopt robust risk controls for resilience. This can
involve concentration limits, so banks do not exceed their exposure to G-Secs beyond an
internally agreed total proportion of assets; or the excess SLR should be commensurate in
risk terms with the bank’s capital allocation for investments.
6.  In order to further address Treasury-level incentive issues, banks may consider imposing
dynamic  stop loss  limits.  In  order  to  avoid  further  losses  once  they  exceed  a  particular
percentage of assigned risk capital, any risk addition must slow down, potentially even stop
(depending  on  the  extent  of  realized  capital  loss),  and  not  be  gerrymandered  through
security rotation or by senior management turning a blind eye. Instead, the realised losses
and  residual  risks  should  escalate  through  CRO  to  the  bank  Board  and  the  risk  in  the
investment portfolio gradually scaled down in a time-bound manner depending on its size.
7.  In addition, there should be ex-post settling up as a career incentive for the Treasury head
and all significant risk-takers: those who swing bank investment portfolio for the fences and
put  bank  capital  at  excessive  limits  relative  to  the  approved  levels  should  be  held
accountable when their bets go bad due to poor or no risk management. Not all volatility is
due to “black swan” events that deserve risk-takers being carried through.
8.  Finally, there is usually an uninspiring chatter every time G-Sec yields show a sustained rise
that the market is irrational in its movements. Not only is it not difficult to separate rational
market movements from irrational ones at high frequency, such proclamations are a sign
that those betting on government bonds while chatting such are clueless about the drivers of
market movements. Isn’t that a good time for the bank senior management to rein in their
Treasury portfolio risks?
None  of  this  is  rocket  science  but  does  require  at  the  highest  level  of  bank  governance
mechanisms  a  recognition  of  interest  rate  risk,  an  incentive  to  manage  it,  and  a  top-down
organizational strategy to implement it.
Measures that address the duration risk of banks
How may banks better manage their duration risk?
The efficiency with which this risk is currently managed leaves a lot to be desired. While duration
risk management is constrained by the G-Secs issuer’s choice of maturity structure and liquidity
in the secondary bond market, the risk can be managed more nimbly by also availing of hedging
markets.  PSBs  account  for  about  70.6%  of  the  banking  sector  assets.  However,  their
participation  in  such  hedging  markets  is  limited  or  negligible.  While  their  share  in  secondary
market trading of G-Secs is about 33%, their share in hedging activity in the Interest Rate Swap
(IRS) and Interest Rate Future (IRF) segments is only 4.61% and 13.40%, respectively.
Let me elaborate. RBI introduced Rupee interest rate derivatives in the OTC market, viz., Interest
Rate Swaps (IRS) and Forward Rate Agreement (FRA), in 1999. Interest Rate Futures (IRFs)
were  first  introduced  in  the  Indian  markets  in  2003  but  only  the  current  bond  future  contract,
introduced  in  2014,  has  seen  reasonable  activity.  Liquidity  in  the  interest  rate  products  has
generally been low. The open interest and daily volume in the interest rate futures market are
usually  between  Rs.20–30  billion  while  the  daily  volume  in  the  Overnight  Indexed  Swap  (OIS)
interest  rate  swap  market  is  around  Rs.150  billion.  Besides,  only  a  section  of  the  banks  are
active  in  the  OIS  market.  Compared  to  an  average  daily  bond  market  volume  of  Rs.400–500
billion, interest rate derivative markets are thus rather thin.
Wider participation by banks in interest rate derivative markets – both futures and swaps – is
necessary for improving liquidity in these markets, which is necessary for banks to off-load their
 10 / 12
BIS central bankers' speeches
significant duration risk onto  others. As  more  hedgers  access  these  markets,  there  would  be
incentives for market makers to allocate more capital to these activities, kicking off a virtuous
cycle of interest rate risk-sharing and leading over time to a more vibrant derivative market.
In other words, the Treasury functions at banks need to be modernized with urgency, subjected
to careful scrutiny by Boards, overlaid with prudent risk management practices, and trained to
employ hedging instruments specifically targeted at managing interest rate risk.
This takes me to the important issue of how banks should manage large changes in yields.
Measures that manage the impact of potentially large changes in yield
Given  the  nascent  stage  of  our  interest  rate  derivative  markets,  banks  need  to  manage
exposures  to  large  changes  in  yield  with  a  multitude  of  instruments  and  trading  platforms. All
options  should  be  on  the  table. An  oft-cited  reason  for  the  lack  of  such  comprehensive  risk
management by banks is that hedging markets that can enable neutralization of large changes in
yield lack the size or depth or liquidity to meet the needs of large banks. True as this argument is
at some level, it is the very lack of participation by large banks that makes these markets illiquid
and  small.  RBI  systematically  engages  with  the  market  to  take  necessary  steps  to  create  an
enabling  environment  for  markets  to  develop  –  creating  trading,  settlement  and  reporting
infrastructure; introducing products; easing processes; etc.
India’s  G-Sec  market  infrastructure  is  arguably  the  best  in  the  world.  We  have  enabled
guaranteed settlement in G-Secs, forex and interest rate swaps. Despite the existence of the
facility to short sell and availability of futures and swap markets, it appears that for most banks
investment activity essentially consists of two steps – buying and hoping for the best. But hope
should not be a Treasury desk’s primary trading strategy.
RBI  has  also  permitted  money  market  futures  about  a  year  back.  Those  directions  were  a
significant  deviation  from  the  earlier  prescriptive  approach.  Exchanges  were  given  complete
freedom to design and introduce products. We are yet to receive any proposal for approval.
Similarly, interest rate options were also permitted sometime back, but market has still not kicked
off.  Years  back  RBI  introduced  the When Issued  market  and STRIPS, but neither has gained
traction.
Does all this imply that these interest rate products have no use for any participant? Or is it just
that the market, dominated by banks, is not used to availing of risk management options, hoping
instead for regulatory forbearance when episodic yield increase rears its ugly head?
Conclusion
Let  me  summarize.  Market  liberalization  does  not  just  involve  the  regulator  easing  business
processes, introducing new products and creating new markets; it also requires participants to
take initiative to reskill themselves for constantly evolving market conditions and products. Market
development is a two-way interactive process between market participants and regulators. We
are hoping that FIMMDA can rally banks and play its part going forward.
Finally, it is encouraging that FIMMDA is developing the Code of Conduct covering its members’
activities in the interest rate markets. Along with FEDAI’s recent adoption of the Global Foreign
Exchange  Code,  the  entire  range  of  bond,  currency  and  related  derivative  markets  would  be
subject to professional conduct in line with best international practice, once FIMMDA adopts the
code. I hope that this process can be hastened and FIMMDA members adopt the code signing it
on a public website by the end of the current quarter.
References
 11 / 12
BIS central bankers' speeches
1. Viral V. Acharaya, Itamar Drechsler, and Philipp Schnabl (2012), “A tale of two overhangs: the
nexus  of  financial  sector  and  sovereign  credit  risks,”  Financial  Stability  Review,  Banque  de
France, April 2012.
2.  Viral  V. Acharaya,  Itamar  Drechsler,  and  Philipp  Schnabl  (2015),  “A  Pyrrhic  Victory?  Bank
bailouts and sovereign credit risk,” Journal of Finance, 69(6), 2689–2739.
3. Viral V. Acharaya and Sascha Steffen (2015), “The “greatest” carry trade ever? Understanding
Eurozone bank risks,” Journal of Financial Economics, 115, 215–236.
4.  Bruegel  database  of  sovereign  bond  holdings  developed  in  Merler  and  Pisani-Ferry  (2012)
(updated  as  of  March  2017)-  Silvia  Merler  and  Jean  Pisani-Ferry,  “Who’s  afraid  of  sovereign
bonds”, 
February
2012 bruegel.org/publications/datasets/sovereign-bond-holdings/.
Contribution 
Bruegel 
Policy 
2012, 
1
2
Government  securities  are  defined  under  law  as  both  Central  Government  securities  (G-Secs)  and  State
Development Loans (SDLs). In terms of management of interest rate risk in the investment book, both are
equally important. In this speech, however, data and charts pertain to only G-Secs for simplicity. Inclusion of
SDLs  would  not  change  the  broad  conclusions,  and  as  they  contribute  to  interest-rate  risk,  would  only
strengthen them.
There are other reasons for banks to focus more closely on interest rate risk that I haven’t touched upon in
interest of simplicity and brevity. For instance, banks face not just the interest rate risk of the investment portfolio
but also to the risk in the banking book. The present guidelines require banks in India to compute change in
economic value of equity (ΔEVE) and net interest income (ΔNII) for the entire balance sheet and not just for the
banking book positions. However, in order to promote global consistency, transparency and comparability of
interest rate risk in the banking book (IRRBB) with that of global banks, banks would be required going forward
to compute IRRBB separately and disclose it based on revised BCBS standards. Similarly, the Report of RBI’s
Internal  Study  Group  to  Review  the  Working  of  the  Marginal  Cost  of  Funds  based  Lending  Rate  (MCLR)
System has recommended that floating rate loans be referenced to an external benchmark. Once introduced,
this would expose banks to higher market risk, necessitating more active management of interest rate risks.
 12 / 12
BIS central bankers' speeches
