Yves Mersch: Euro clearing - the open race
Keynote speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central
Bank, at the Frankfurt Finance Summit, Frankfurt am Main, 29 May 2018.
 During the 2008 financial crisis, counterparty risks became infamous. Obviously, every finance
textbook deals with the risk that, when you enter into a financial contract, the other party may not
fulfil  their  part  of  the  agreement  and  may  even  default  on  their  obligation.  But  the  failure  of
Lehman Brothers and the large losses suffered by AIG in over-the-counter derivatives markets
revealed that there were counterparty risks throughout the entire financial system. This was due
to the domino effect of counterparty defaults in leveraged products.
As a response, G20 leaders agreed at the 2009 summit in Pittsburgh to move all standardised
derivatives contracts to clearing through central counterparties (or CCPs). CCPs address the
weaknesses exposed during the crisis by insulating counterparties from each other’s default risk.
They specialise in managing counterparty credit risk, and by doing so they reduce the risk of
defaults spreading across the financial system.
But CCPs can only make the financial system safer if they are safe themselves. In the European
Union,  they  are  subject  to  a  comprehensive  regulatory  framework.  The  European  Market
Infrastructure Regulation (or EMIR) ensures that they hold robust resources to deal with financial
distress. And  it  introduces  a  cooperative  approach  to  CCP  supervision,  involving  all  relevant
supervisors  and  central  banks  in  “supervisory  colleges”  to  ensure  that  CCPs  are  properly
overseen across Member States.
The global regulatory push towards central clearing has contributed to making CCPs extremely
important parts of the global financial system. In 2009, just 40% of all interest rate derivatives
1
contracts were cleared through CCPs, but by 2017 this had increased to 83% .
New developments and current challenges
The rising importance of CCPs means that their supervisory framework needs to be reformed.
Most clearing is now done across borders and is strongly concentrated in a limited number of EU
CCPs, which have become systemically important for the EU as a whole.
Two of these CCPs are based in the United Kingdom. Currently, they clear around 95% of euro-
denominated  interest  rate  derivatives  and  around  30%  of  euro-denominated  repos.  Thus,  a
significant  disturbance  involving  a  major  UK  CCP  could  affect  financial  stability  and  market
functioning across the EU. On top of this, most of the liquidity provided by central banks tends to
be channelled through the repo market.
The  United  Kingdom’s  withdrawal  from  the  EU  means  the  supervisory  framework  for  non-EU
countries must be adapted. EU authorities must continue to be able to not only closely monitor
UK CCPs but ensure they comply with EU regulations.
The importance of central clearing for central banks and their monetary policy mandate
So precautions have to be taken to ensure that CCPs do not become a weak point for monetary
policy  and  the  currencies  issued  by  central  banks.  CCPs  can  pose  significant  risks  to  the
smooth operation of payment systems and to monetary policy transmission in times of market
stress. Let me give you some examples.
Market  volatility  or  failures  in  CCPs’  risk  management  may  affect  liquidity  within  the  financial
system  and  that  of  CCP  users,  who  are  typically  monetary  policy  counterparties  and  key
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
participants in payment systems. In extreme situations, liquidity shortfalls could foster contagion
and lead to CCPs and banks becoming distressed. This could mean the ECB needs to provide
liquidity  to  systemic  CCPs  or  to  their  members  to  ensure  that  payment  systems  continue  to
function smoothly and that monetary policy can be transmitted effectively. It is clear that, in such
cases, liability and control need to be well aligned: the ECB must be able to monitor and control
the risks posed by CCPs.
CCPs are also directly relevant for payment systems. Cleared markets represent a significant
share of financial markets as a whole, meaning that CCPs are settling large payment volumes. In
order to ensure that payment systems continue to function smoothly, the ECB must ensure that
CCPs have appropriate arrangements in place for liquidity management and settlement in euro.
Moreover, in the past CCPs have increased margins and collateral haircuts beyond the levels
required by prudential standards or their own risk models. But doing so they may cause liquidity
strains and increase volatility in bond prices which, in turn, affects the transmission of monetary
policy. To be clear, CCPs should of course make sure they remain resilient to liquidity risks. But
they  should  do  so  in  a  predictable  manner  and  based  on  sound  risk  models  that  should  not
undercut monetary policy decisions.
Recent regulatory reforms
These challenges were widely recognised when, in June of last year, the European Commission
proposed amending the EMIR framework for the supervision and regulation of CCPs.
The Commission acknowledges the essential role played by central banks of issue (or CBIs) in
monitoring  and  addressing  risks  posed  by  CCPs  to  their  currency,  and  has  proposed  an
enhanced and binding role for CBIs under the EMIR framework.
This  would  mean  that  central  banks  would  become  non-voting  members  in  the  European
Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA) structure responsible for CCPs. ESMA aims to improve
the  functioning  of  financial  markets  in  Europe  by  strengthening  investor  protection  and
cooperation between national competent authorities.
The enhanced role for central banks would tend to avoid harmful mismatches between prudential
decisions and monetary policy. And it would grant central banks a flexible and effective role in
determining the conditions under which CCPs that are not located in an EU Member State are
allowed to provide services in the EU.
I welcome the proposal to strengthen the role of CBIs. It would reinforce coordinated supervision,
while reflecting the responsibilities of the ECB – as a CBI – within the supervisory framework.
The role of the central bank of issue
Background and rationale for the ECB recommendation
However,  although  EU  legislators  can  incorporate  a  role  for  CBIs  into  the  processes  for
supervising CCPs, the regulation cannot go so far as to confer on the ECB the sort of binding
instruments this enhanced role requires, which the ECB thought it had until challenged in court
by the United Kingdom.
In  2015,  the  General  Court  held  that  the  ECB  does  not  have  the  competence  to  regulate  the
activity of securities clearing systems, including CCPs. Moreover, the Court stated that the ECB
would need to request an amendment to Article 22 of the Statute of the ESCB and of the ECB,
which  already  enables  the  ECB  to  make  regulations  for  clearing  and  payment  systems,  if  it
considers this necessary for the proper performance of its tasks under the Treaties .2
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
3
The  ECB’s  Governing  Council  therefore  unanimously  adopted  a  recommendation  to  amend
Article 22  to extend it to cover derivatives, give legal effect to the ECB’s role under EMIR, and
give  the  ECB  the  flexibility  and  autonomy  to  act  outside  EMIR  where  clearing  would  pose  a
severe threat to the stability of the euro.
Amending Article 22 of the Statute – procedure
Let me briefly explain the procedure for amending the Statute.
The Statute is found in a Protocol to the EU Treaties. Such protocols form an integral part of the
Treaties. This means that, in principle, the Statute can only be amended as part of a revision of
the Treaties.
However,  some  provisions  of  the  Statute  –  like Article  22  –  can  be  amended  by  means  of  a
“simplified amendment procedure”. The ECB can recommend a change; the Commission can
give its opinion; and the Council and European Parliament can then adopt a decision to amend
the Statute by simple majority.
Given that the simplified amendment procedure is an exception, we have to be very careful what
we  change  in Article  22  and how we go about changing it. Any change must comply with the
other  provisions  and  principles  of  the  Treaties,  which  enjoy  a  higher  constitutional  rank.  For
example, any change to Article 22 must respect the principle of central bank independence and
the exclusive competence of the ECB to conduct monetary policy.
Amending Article 22 of the Statute – substance
But  what  does  this  mean  for  the  substance  of Article  22,  which  is  part  of  Chapter  IV  of  the
Statute, entitled “Monetary functions and operations of the ESCB”?
The Statute grants the ECB flexibility and autonomy over the instruments available for conducting
monetary policy. The Treaty drafters provided for various instruments , including the possibility to
conduct  open  market  and  credit  operations,  and  to  make  regulations  to  ensure  efficient  and
sound payment and clearing systems.
4
This means that the ECB can react effectively to unforeseen circumstances. For example, the
ECB  was  able  to  take  the  unconventional  monetary  policy  measures  it  saw  fit  to  address
unprecedented  economic  developments  –  and  thus  to  achieve  its  primary  objective  of
maintaining price stability in the euro area.
This flexibility and autonomy is a clear expression of the principle of central bank independence,
and of the Eurosystem’s exclusive competence to define and implement monetary policy.
The simplified amendment procedure does not give us carte blanche to rewrite the Treaties and
the principles that underpin the ECB and the Eurosystem. Rather, it allows us to make targeted
adjustments to our monetary policy toolkit.
I have three things in mind here.
First, Article 22 should not be changed to contain an inflexible and exhaustive list of measures
the ECB can take. This would constrain monetary policy. The ECB needs broad discretion to
take the necessary measures and address risks to monetary policy and the smooth operation of
payment systems. Extreme market events are impossible to predict and central banks have the
unique  expertise  and  exclusive  competence  to  assess  and  address  the  risks  they  pose  to
monetary policy.
Second, Article 22 cannot subordinate ECB measures to the level of secondary Union law, for
example  by  requiring  them  to  be  consistent  with  secondary  legislation.  This  would  create  a
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
hierarchy of internal market legislation over monetary policy measures. This cannot happen. We
cannot  open  a  Pandora’s  box  and  end  up  in  a  situation  where  monetary  policy  is  no  longer
shielded  against  political  influence.  Moreover,  any  such  subordination  would  imply  that  the
objective of the Internal Market is superior to the objective of Economic and Monetary Union. This
is not the case; these are equal and complementary objectives of the European Union. Moreover,
as the ECJ made clear in the Pringle case, “[…] each institution of the Union is to act within the
limits  of  the  powers  conferred  on  it  in  the  Treaties,  and  in  conformity  with  the  procedures,
5
conditions and objectives set out in them.”
And third, there is a limitation: Article 22 cannot confer general regulatory competences on the
ECB – it can only adjust the ECB’s monetary policy toolkit by clarifying that the competence for
clearing and payments covers derivatives. The Treaty drafters made the ECB’s objectives and
tasks very clear. As the European Court of Justice said, a measure falls under the responsibility
of the ECB when it is intended to pursue an objective such as the consistency of monetary policy
or the proper transmission of monetary policy. This objective, in turn, contributes to the primary
monetary policy objective of maintaining price stability . The reason why monetary policy needs
to cover CCPs’ liquidity is that derivatives clearing has become a cornerstone of the financial
system.
6
We must not forget that ECB measures must also comply with the principle of proportionality.
This means that any ECB actions in the field of clearing will have to be appropriate for attaining
monetary policy objectives and cannot go beyond what is necessary to achieve those objectives.
And it goes without saying that the ECB will not be acting in a legal vacuum – in considering the
proportionality of its actions, it will have to take into account existing secondary law and justify
any  measures  it  takes.  And  the  Court  of  Justice  would  be  the  ultimate  arbiter  to  determine
whether the ECB is respecting the principle of proportionality.
Conclusion
Let me conclude.
It has become evident that disturbances affecting CCPs can have an impact on monetary policy,
on payment systems and, ultimately, on price stability. The Commission’s proposal to amend the
EMIR framework is a step in the right direction as it reflects the responsibilities of the ECB – as a
central bank of issue – in the supervisory framework.
However, we also need to adjust the ECB’s monetary policy toolkit to ensure it can fulfil its role.
This requires amending Article 22 of the Statute in a manner that respects the principle of central
bank  independence  and  the  ECB’s  exclusive  competence  for  monetary  policy.  Moreover,  any
change to Article 22 must preserve the ECB’s flexibility and autonomy to react to unforeseen
circumstances and effectively address risks to its mandate.
Ultimately, amending both EMIR and Article 22 will establish a comprehensive legal framework to
address the risks CCPs pose to the Union – both its financial markets and its currency. It will
ensure that the EU’s legislators, supervisors and central bank – acting in their respective roles –
can adopt the wide range of measures needed to safeguard stability.
Let’s make sure we don’t waste this opportunity.
1
2
3
4
Notional value outstanding; see: www.bis.org/statistics/d7.pdf.
See Judgment of the General Court (Fourth Chamber) of 4 March 2015, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland v European Central Bank (ECB), Case T-496/11.
See www.ecb.europa.eu/ecb/legal/pdf/oj_joc_2017_212_r_0004_en_txt.pdf
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
4
5
6
Listed in Chapter IV of the Statute.
See Judgment of the European Court of Justice, §153 in case C 370/12 (Pringle case).
See  Judgment  of  the  Court  (Grand  Chamber)  of  16  June  2015,  Peter  Gauweiler  and  Others  v  Deutscher
Bundestag, Case C 62/14.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
