Remarks for the Convocation Ceremony at the Meghnad Desai Academy of 
Economics 
Mumbai, August 3rd 2018 
Urjit R. Patel 
 1. 
The “Class of 2018” & their parents, guests & students, Lord Meghnad Desai, 
Chairman  of  the  Meghnad  Desai  Academy  of  Economics,  and  the  academic 
fraternity  of  the  Academy,  I  am  deeply  honoured  to  be  invited  to  the  convocation 
ceremony. It reminds me fondly of my graduation ceremony three decades back.  
2.  Although his enormous standing and body of work is well known, let me say a 
few  words  about  Lord  Meghnad  Desai,  the  Academy's  Chairman,  Professor 
Emeritus  at  the  London  School  of  Economics,  a  renowned  academic  and  a 
prominent  global  public  figure.  His  contributions  to  the  field  of  economics  and 
education,  and  particularly  his  commitment  to  teaching  at  the  London  School  of 
Economics,  are  the  stuff  of  legend.  He  has  also  been  an  enlightened  institution 
builder,  a  shining  example  of  which  is  the  Centre  for  the  Study  of  Global 
Governance  that  he  established  in  1992.  Lord  Desai  has  written  extensively, 
covering international political economy, Marxian economics, monetary economics, 
economic  history  and  globalisation  (as  an  aside,  Lord  Desai’s  book  “Testing 
Monetarism” was required reading for macro courses in the UK in the 1980s).  He 
has  also  worked  extensively  on  issues  relating  to  the  Indian  polity  and  has  also 
been  a  sagacious  influence  in  the  political  life  of  the  UK.  In  recognition  of  these 
contributions to society at large, he was bestowed with the Lordship of St. Clement 
Danes in 1991 by the United Kingdom and the Padma Bhushan by the Government 
of  India  in  2008.  From  where  I  hail,  Lord  Desai  delivered  the  First  Brahmananda 
Memorial  Lecture  in  September  2004,  a  lecture  instituted  by  the  Reserve  Bank  of 
India  in  the  fond  memory  of  an  eminent  teacher  and  scholar  of  economics,  Prof. 
Page 1 of 6 
 P.R.  Brahmananda.  It  was  most  apposite  that  the  first  memorial  lecture  was 
delivered by one of his most distinguished students. 
3.  As  I  understand,  the  Meghnad  Desai  Academy  has  been  established  as  an 
institution of excellence to provide graduate students with the academic rigour and 
technical skills to meet the needs of a more challenging profession  that gets more 
demanding  with  every  passing  day for  academics, policy  makers and  practitioners 
in  markets,  industry,  policy  think  tanks  and  government.  It  is  befitting  that  the 
Academy  has  been  initiated  by  some  of  India’s  leading  economists  and  finance 
professionals, bringing in rich and diverse perspectives for students. 
Role of economists/researchers in shaping policy 
4. 
In keeping with the occasion, let me say a few words about economists. Their 
vital  role  in  shaping  public  perceptions  and  discourses  and  in  designing  strategic 
policies  in  the  corporate  sector,  central  banks,  governments  and  multilateral 
institutions, is more often than not unsung. Rigorous research and training helps in 
formulating informed set of policy choices and consequent decisions. In the domain 
of  public  policy,  we  have  to  distinguish  between  the  direct  and  the  indirect  impact 
that economists can make. The former is what we usually think of when we consider 
how experts might affect formulation of a policy, say, minimising the subsidy burden 
on  the  exchequer.  However,  their  greatest  contribution  to  policymaking  may  take 
place  through  less  direct  routes  such  as  through  their  research  by  nudging 
policymakers to think about economic problems/challenges in newer/different ways. 
5.  Policy makers too have a crucial role in creating an enabling environment for 
economists to contribute to society. In this context, the Government of India has to 
be  lauded  for  instituting  three  land  mark  reforms  in  recent  years.  One  cannot  and 
Page 2 of 6 
 should not underestimate the sagacity and uncommon courage of the Government 
to undertake reforms that can only be described as truly transformative. These will 
shape, for the better, our economic evolution in the years and decades to come. 
6. 
In 2016, the Government  legislated amendments to the RBI Act to invest the 
Reserve  Bank  of  India  with  the  specific  mandate  to  operate  the  monetary  policy 
framework of the country whose primary objective is to “maintain price stability while 
keeping  in  mind  the  objective  of  growth”.  This  was  a  fundamental  shift  in  the 
institutional architecture for the conduct of monetary policy, with the formal transition 
to  a  flexible  inflation  targeting  framework  and  the  relinquishing  of  the  monetary 
policy decision by the Governor to a six member monetary policy committee (MPC). 
Another  momentous  reform  is  the  establishment  of  the  GST  council  whereby  the 
Government of India has created one of the most effective institutional mechanisms 
for  cooperative  federalism.  Along  with  the  State  Governments,  it  has  offered  a 
refreshing  counter-narrative  to  the  divisive  course  of  the  international  federal 
dialogue,  voluntarily  choosing  to  relinquish  and  then  pool  sovereignty  for  a  larger 
collective cause. Also, the enactment of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 
(IBC)  is  a  watershed  towards  improving  the  credit  culture  in  our  country.  The  IBC 
provides  for  a  single  window,  time-bound  process  for  resolution  of  assets  with  an 
explicit  emphasis  on  promotion  of  entrepreneurship,  maximisation  of  value  of 
assets,  and  balancing 
the 
interests  of  all  stakeholders.  These  steps  are 
unprecedented  in  the  history  of  our  nation  in  that  they  show  the  Government’s 
commitment to sound public policy by establishing institutions and ceding power to 
them  to  perform  functions  vital  for  securing  and  entrenching  macroeconomic  and 
financial stability. 
 Page 3 of 6 
7.  Economists  are  often  misunderstood  and  at  times  maligned.  To  illustrate, 
economists  are  heaped  with  the  criticism  that  they  failed  to  see  and  predict  the 
2007-08 global financial crisis, and this has dented the credence of their profession.  
To my mind this is patently unfair. Doctors understand diseases but cannot predict 
when one will fall ill. The fundamental mission of economists is not to forecast crises 
but to explain how mankind behaves in the ordinary business of life and in doing so 
they  do  warn  of  crisis  formations,  suggest  pre-emptive  strategies  and  formulate 
mitigating  policies  that  address  those  crises  that  slip  through  macroeconomic 
surveillance.  More  often  than  not,  they  meet  with  resistance.  Hyman  Minsky 
laboured in relative obscurity from the start of his academic career in the 1950s until 
1996, when he died.1 His research about financial crises and their causes attracted 
little  mainstream  attention  back  then.  It  was  only  in  2007  when  the  subprime-
mortgage crisis erupted, that everyone started turning to his writings as they tried to 
make  sense  of  the  chaos  engulfing  global  financial  markets.  The  eruption  of  a 
financial  crisis  from  a  state  of  dormancy  or  calm  is  now  often  referred  to  as  the 
“Minsky”  moment.    In  another  striking  example,  George  Akerlof’s  landmark  paper 
“The  Market  for  Lemons”,2  was  rejected  by  several  journals  before  it  was  finally 
published.  As  time  passed,  his  seminal  paper  brought  home  the  wisdom  that 
adverse selection was a fundamental cause of market failures and the idea turned 
into a foundation stone of information economics. 
8.  New and fresh ideas often meet a wall of resistance as they tend to challenge 
inertia in the existing shores of thinking. So as you go into the world to answer your 
calling, be fearless and experimental in opening up your minds and  in thinking out 
                                                           
1 Hyman Minsky [1986], “Stabilising an Unstable Economy”, McGraw-Hill Professional, New York. 
2 George Akerlof [1970], “The Market for Lemons: Quality Uncertainty and the Market Mechanism”, 
Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 84, pp. 488–500. 
 Page 4 of 6 
of the box. I am confident that young  minds  like  you  can think differently, produce 
new  thinking  and  bring  more  creativity  into  empirical  scrutiny  of  the  ideas  you 
theorise. Your “millennial” generation must strive to challenge the accepted wisdom 
so that we can have more ‘creative destruction’ in society and a brave new world. 
9. 
In my own profession as central banker, thinking new and fresh is demanded 
by the ever changing world in which we operate. To give an example, we have been 
trying  to  understand  household  and  firm  behaviour  through  our  surveys  and 
analysis.  However,  the  need  now  is  to  understand  micro-level  price  formation 
dynamics  in  new  dimensions  such  as  e-commerce,  digital  transactions  and  big 
cross  sectional  data.  This  applies  to  domains  such  as  banking,  non-banking 
financial intermediation, payments, currency management and financial inclusion as 
well. In the absence of this type of research, policy choices could yield sub-optimal 
outcomes at times. There is an acute information deficit regarding the unorganised 
sector  in  India,  despite  its  significant  role  in  income  and  employment  generation. 
The  absence  of  official  or  non-official  statistics  has  not,  however,  prevented 
economists from conducting survey-based studies to help understand its dynamics. 
10. 
In closing, I would like to quote Paul Romer, a pioneer of endogenous growth 
theory,  from  his  much  cited  paper  “The  Trouble  with  Macroeconomics”:3  “Even 
when it works well, science is not perfect….Scientists commit to the pursuit of truth 
even though they realise that absolute truth is never revealed. All they can hope for 
is  a  consensus  that  establishes  the  truth  of an  assertion  in  the  same  loose  sense 
that the stock market establishes the value of a firm. It can go astray, perhaps for 
long stretches of time. But eventually, it is yanked back to reality by insurgents (my 
                                                           
3 Paul Romer [2016], “The Trouble with Macroeconomics”, The Commons Memorial Lecture of the 
Omicron Delta Epsilon Society, January 5, 2016. 
Page 5 of 6 
 emphasis)  who  are  free  to  challenge  the  consensus  and  supporters  of  the 
consensus who still think that getting the facts right matters.”  
11.  As you pass out as young economists remember that you have the power to 
shape  the  destiny  of  this  country  and  touch  the  lives  of  its  millions.  You  are  the 
harbingers of our enlightened society of tomorrow; equipped with ideas and also the 
ability  to  convert  them  into  a  better  reality  for  all.  I  congratulate  all  the  new 
graduates of the Academy, and wish you all a very bright future ahead. 
  Page 6 of 6 
