Beverly Hirtle: Structural and cyclical macroprudential objectives in
supervisory stress testing
Remarks by Ms Beverly Hirtle, Executive Vice President and Director of Research of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, at the conference "The Effects of Post-Crisis Banking Reforms",
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City, 22 June 2018.
 Good morning.  It is my pleasure to make the opening remarks at this conference on post-crisis
regulatory  reform  in  the  banking  industry.    It’s  exciting  to  see  such  a  distinguished  group  of
researchers and supervisors in the room, all focused on developing a deeper understanding of
the effects of the many significant regulatory changes that were put in place in response to the
global financial crisis.  I hope that the day is filled with productive discussion and debate.  And,
before  I  continue,  I  want  to  note  that  my  comments  today  reflect  my  own  views  and  not
necessarily the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System.
We are approaching the ten-year anniversary of the worst financial crisis in generations. Many
regulatory  and  supervisory  reforms  have  been  made  since,  including  changes  to  regulatory
capital  requirements,  the  introduction  of  new  liquidity  requirements,  the  redesign  of  the
supervisory program for systemically important banks by the Federal Reserve’s Large Institution
Supervision  Coordinating  Committee  (LISCC),  the  introduction  of  the  Comprehensive  Capital
Analysis and Review (or CCAR) program, requirements about recovery and resolution planning,
and myriad other regulations under the Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-
Frank Act). 
In my remarks today, I want to focus on one particular post-crisis change, the introduction of
supervisory stress testing, as embodied in CCAR and the stress tests required by the Dodd-
Frank Act (DFAST).  In my personal view, supervisory stress testing and the CCAR are the most
significant and impactful of the many regulatory and supervisory changes implemented following
the  global  financial  crisis.    The  CCAR  and  stress  testing  introduced  a  forward-looking
perspective  to  capital  adequacy  and  capital  planning,  something  that  static  book-value-based
regulatory capital measures lacked.  We felt this acutely during the financial crisis, when market
values of bank equity plunged while book values evolved only very slowly, based on accounting
measures of losses.  Aside from the stress-test-based quantitative requirements, the CCAR also
requires large complex banks to do systematic capital planning, including developing criteria for
when  dividends  and  share  repurchases  will  be  made,  increased  or  curtailed.    This  is  an
important innovation, as banks were slow to reduce dividends during the financial crisis, even as
1
losses mounted and share prices fell.
2
I want to examine supervisory stress testing through the lens of a paper I wrote in 2009 with
former colleague Til Schuermann and current colleague Kevin Stiroh, now head of the New York
Fed’s Supervision Group.   That paper looked at the very first set of stress tests conducted by
the  Federal  Reserve  and  other  federal  banking  supervisors.    The  Supervisory  Capital
Assessment Program, or SCAP, was a watershed moment in the financial crisis.  The program
covered the 19 largest domestic bank holding companies—firms with assets of at least $100
billion—accounting  for  two-thirds  of  the  assets  and  one-half  of  the  loans  in  the  U.S.  banking
system at that time.  Collectively, these firms spanned nearly every business area in the U.S.
banking  industry—including  commercial  and  consumer  lending,  real  estate  lending,  trading,
derivatives, custody services and investment banking.   
The  key  point  in  our  paper  was  that  the  SCAP  was  a  program  that  used  microprudential
supervisory tools to achieve macroprudential objectives.  I am sure that everyone here is familiar
with these two terms, but let me provide a quick overview.  Microprudential objectives focus on
the health, performance, safety and soundness of individual firms.  This was the perspective that
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
dominated supervision prior to the financial crisis.  In contrast, macroprudential objectives focus
on the stability and performance of the entire banking and financial system, emphasizing links
among  firms,  how  their  activities  can  interact  and  the  impact  of  the  financial  sector  on  the
broader  economy.    This  perspective  has  become  more  prominent  since  the  global  financial
crisis.
Macroprudential objectives can themselves be divided into two distinct groups. The first is what
might  be  called structural objectives,  which  focus  on  the  impact  large,  systemically  important
institutions  have  on  the  rest  of  the  system  when  they  fail  or  become  distressed.    Structural
macroprudential objectives motivate regulatory tools such as additional capital requirements for
systemically important banks (“SIFI surcharges”), which aim to reduce the probability that a large
institution  fails,  and  resolution  and  recovery  planning,  which  seeks  to  limit  the  damage  in  the
event of failure. 
The second set of macroprudential objectives are cyclical objectives, focusing on the build-up of
risks  during  credit  and  asset  price  booms  and  the  consequent  pull-back  in  financial
intermediation during periods of stress.  Cyclical macroprudential goals motivate regulatory and
supervisory tools that “lean against the wind” in good times and “lean into the wind” during stress,
such as the countercyclical capital buffer, the design of stress test scenarios, and time-varying
loan-to-value restrictions, which are imposed in some countries.    
The macroprudential objectives of the SCAP reflected both structural and cyclical concerns.  The
primary goal was to ensure that large banks had sufficient capital to withstand an even-worse-
than-expected economic downturn and still be able to lend—a structural perspective.  Each of
the  19  banks  was  required  to  raise  additional  capital  if  the  stress  tests  indicated  a  shortfall
relative  to  the  supervisory  target.    However,  the  SCAP’s  objectives  also  embodied  cyclical
concerns, namely, to provide confidence that banks could continue current lending (“leaning into
the wind”) and thus reduce the likelihood of a worse-than-expected economic outcome.
In  the  paper,  we  identified  six  elements  that  we  argued  made  the  SCAP  a  successful
macroprudential exercise:  comprehensiveness; consistency; multiple, independent estimates;
diverse perspectives; transparency of process and results; and clear and predictable goals and
actions.    Today  I  will  use  these  elements  to  talk  about  the  current  supervisory  stress  testing
regime and assess whether it continues to address macroprudential objectives.  I should note
that  my  focus  today  is  on  the  broad  structure  of  supervisory  stress  testing  and  not  on  any
specific  set  of  stress  test  results.    As  you  know,  the  2018  DFAST  results  were  released
yesterday and the corresponding CCAR results will be released next week.  I am not going to
discuss these results or draw any inferences from them.
Comprehensiveness
Let me start the discussion with the first of the elements:  comprehensiveness. As noted, the set
of banks participating in the SCAP accounted for a large portion of the assets and loans in the
U.S. banking industry and spanned nearly all significant banking industry activities.  In 2009, we
argued  that  this  comprehensiveness  was  essential  in  achieving  the  SCAP’s  macroprudential
goals as the collective stress test results provided a view into a large share of the industry.  More
important,  through  the  subsequent  capital  raises,  the  SCAP  helped  ensure  that  this  large
segment  was  sufficiently  well  capitalized  to  provide  a  buffer  to  the  broader  economy  against
possible future bad outcomes. 
After  the  SCAP,  the  Dodd-Frank  Act  expanded  the  set  of  banking  companies  subject  to
supervisory  stress  testing  to  include  all  bank  holding  companies  with  assets  exceeding  $50
billion—about another 15 to 20 firms, including the U.S. operations of many large, foreign-owned
banks.  In 2018, a total of 35 firms participated in the CCAR and DFAST stress tests.  However,
with the recent passage of the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief and Consumer Protection
Act,  many  of  these  will  no  longer  be  subject  to  DFAST  supervisory  stress  testing  or  could
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
participate  only  on  a  periodic  basis.    The  very  largest  and  most  systemically  important  firms,
including all domestic bank holding companies with assets exceeding $250 billion, will continue
to be required to participate in DFAST supervisory stress testing on an annual basis.
These recent changes are consistent with an emphasis on structural macroprudential concerns,
in  that  they  focus  the  DFAST  stress  tests  on  the  set  of  firms  that  are  individually  the  most
systemically  important.    The  intention  seems  to  be  to  balance  the  burden  of  the  supervisory
stress testing regime against the negative impact that distress at one of these firms could cause
to other banks and the rest of the financial system—part of the broader tailoring of the regulatory
framework  to  the  size  and  risk  profile  of  different  types  of  institutions.     At  the  same  time,
however, reducing the set of firms subject to annual DFAST supervisory stress testing seems
less  consistent  with  cyclical  macroprudential  concerns,  as  it  could  narrow  the  window  that
stress test results provide on the build-up of risks and the loss-absorbing capacity of the banking
system.    Whether  the  set  of  banks  that  continue  to  be  subject  to  annual  DFAST  supervisory
stress testing represents a large enough share of the overall banking industry and sufficiently
spans the range of banking activities to provide a comprehensive perspective is something that
merits monitoring and analysis.
Consistency
3
The second element we identified as contributing to the SCAP’s macroprudential effectiveness
was consistency.  In the SCAP, as in the current supervisory stress testing regime, all banks
were subject to the same hypothetical stress scenario—that is, the same set of assumptions
about  the  path  of  economic  activity,  interest  rates,  asset  prices  and  volatility  over  the  future
stress test horizon.  In SCAP, the scenarios were defined in a very parsimonious way, using just
three  variables  (GDP  growth,  unemployment  and  housing  prices).    In  contrast,  the  current
supervisory  stress  test  scenarios  involve  more  than  two  dozen  variables  describing  U.S.  and
foreign economic activity, interest rates and asset prices. 
Then,  as  now,  the  common  scenario  provided  a  consistent  framework  for  assessing  the
vulnerability not just of the individual banking companies, but of the banking system as a whole. 
This  consistency  is  especially  important  to  address  cyclical  macroprudential  objectives,  as  it
provides  a  unified  assessment  of  the  performance  of  the  overall  industry.   And  of  course  the
stress  scenarios  are  themselves  an  important  cyclical  macroprudential  element,  as  they  are
designed to impose more stress—in particular, a larger increase in the unemployment rate—
during periods of strong expansion.
But  a  single  scenario  will  not  be  equally  stressful  for  all  firms.    Depending  on  each  firm’s
business focus, geographic reach and customer base, any single scenario will result in variable
degrees of stress, potentially undercutting structural macroprudential objectives.  In the current
stress testing regime, the bank-generated stress tests required as part of the CCAR go a long
way to addressing concerns that stress tests based on a single supervisory scenario will not be
tailored  enough  to  expose  capital  vulnerabilities  at  all  firms.    In  these  exercises,  banks  are
supposed to identify scenarios that are uniquely stressful to them.  Evaluating these scenarios to
ensure that they capture firm-specific risks is a key part of the CCAR qualitative review.  This
seems a very constructive way to think about consistency across firms, with the emphasis on
each  firm  having  robust  risk  identification  and  thorough  consideration  of  the  kinds  of  stress
environments that would uniquely test its business model. 
Multiple, Independent Estimates and Diverse Perspectives
Our 2009 paper described the benefits of the SCAP’s use of multiple, independent estimates of
losses, revenue and expenses, as well as bringing diverse perspectives to bear on the design
and implementation of the exercise.  At that time, the technology of firm-wide stress testing was
in its infancy, and the SCAP results were based on a combination of bank-generated estimates,
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
(somewhat  primitive)  supervisory  models,  and  high-level  “top  down”  estimates  of  possible
stressed  loan  losses.  Given  the  early  state  of  the  art,  the  SCAP  team  brought  together
supervisors,  economists,  attorneys,  accountants,  financial  analysts,  regulatory  capital  experts
and others from the Fed and the other supervisory agencies involved in the program.  This kind
of multi-disciplinary approach is now embedded in many aspects of supervision, including the
LISCC,  which  includes  economists,  attorneys  and  financial  market  experts,  as  well  as
supervisors.
The blending of bank-generated and supervisory estimates may be the aspect of the supervisory
stress testing regime that has evolved most significantly since the SCAP.  Supervisory stress
test results are now based on models developed by supervisors that rely on detailed firm-specific
data filed through regulatory reports, so the results now represent a fully distinct and independent
supervisory view.   And, as described above, banks are required to generate their own stress
test  estimates.    Public  disclosure  of  both  sets  of  results  based  on  the  common  supervisory
scenarios has provided diverse perspectives on banks’ capital vulnerabilities.
4
Diverse  perspectives,  especially  those  from  outside  the  banking  industry  and  supervisory
community,  continue  to  be  critical  in  supporting  stress  testing’s  macroprudential  objectives. 
Academic economists can play an especially important role in helping to foster innovation and
creativity by advancing thinking on stress test scenario design and on modeling techniques that
better capture the impact of the external environment on bank financial condition.  A particularly
ripe area for fresh thought, in my view, concerns modeling revenues and non-credit expenses—
so-called  pre-provision  net  revenue,  or  PPNR—an  area  that  is  notoriously  difficult  to  assess. 
More broadly, developing practical ways to model realistic interactions among banks and other
financial  institutions  and  between  the  financial  and  real  sectors  of  the  economy  would  be
important advances.
Transparency of Process and Results
The  next  element  we  identified  as  contributing  to  the  SCAP’s  success  as  a  macroprudential
exercise was transparency, both of the process and, especially, of the results.  The SCAP was
groundbreaking because it disclosed firm-specific supervisory estimates in detail, including loss
amounts and rates on different types of loans, projections of net revenues, and the amount of
capital  each  firm  would  have  to  raise  to  meet  publicly  disclosed  supervisory  targets  ratios. 
These disclosures formed the template for subsequent DFAST and CCAR stress test results. 
Current stress test disclosures deliver not just insight into individual banks’ ability to withstand
stressful  economic  outcomes,  but  also  provide  a  broader  perspective  about  the  exposure  of
different  segments  of  bank  lending,  securities  and  other  activities  to  adverse  economic  and
financial  market  developments.  These  segment-level  results,  aggregated  across  banks,  are
important because they have the potential to serve as public warning signals about over-heating
or a build-up of risk that can supplement other cyclical macroprudential analysis.
While the transparency of the supervisory stress test results was a groundbreaking element of
the  SCAP  in  2009,  subsequent  discussion  has  focused  largely  on  the  transparency  of  the
process of generating the results, in particular, information about supervisory stress test models.
The  Fed  discloses  descriptive  information  about  the  models,  including  the  general  statistical
approach  and  key  variables,  but  does  not  release  the  code  or  detailed  equation  estimates. 
Industry  groups  and  individual  banks  have  called  for  the  Fed  to  release  more  detail  about  its
5
models, including the specific formulas and equations.   
On one level, full disclosure of the Fed’s supervisory stress test models might seem like good
public policy.  Such disclosures would provide insight into how the stress test calculations are
made, making the results predictable to the banks subject to the tests.  Greater predictability of
the  stress  test  results  could  enhance  banks’  ability  to  do  capital  planning,  because  any
constraints arising from the supervisory stress test results would be known ex ante.  Detailed
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
disclosures  could  also  enhance  the  credibility  of  the  stress  test  regime  by  allowing  external
parties to critique the Fed’s models, a form of “peer review” that could lead to improved modeling
techniques or identify areas of emerging risk that the Fed’s models do not adequately capture.
But these benefits could come at significant cost to the broader goals of the supervisory stress
testing  regime.    My  co-author,  Til  Schuermann,  has  argued  that  increased  reliance  on
supervisory models, especially in the context of the CCAR program, provides powerful incentives
for  banks  to  abandon  innovation  in  stress  test  modeling  and  instead  devote  their  energy  to
mimicking  the  Fed’s  models.  In  the  extreme,  these  incentives  could  result  in  “model
monoculture,” in which all actors use very closely related models.  This risk becomes especially
acute the more is known about the details of the supervisory models.
6
A lack of modeling diversity would be especially concerning from a macroprudential perspective,
since it would mean that the entire industry would be capturing the same risks in the same way
—a  form  of  collective  blindness  to  new  industry  practices  and  products  and  emerging  risk
developments.  As important, banks have incentives to optimize around the stress test and other
risk  models,  engaging  in  strategies  that  maximize  returns  while  minimizing  measured  risk
exposures.    Widespread  use  of  very  similar  models  could  mean  widespread  loading  on  the
same  kind  of  risks  and  adopting  the  same  hedging  or  mitigation  techniques—increasing
systemic risk. 
A final concern that I want to mention is based less in economic theory and more on the practical
realities  of  implementing  and  updating  regulations.    The  more  stress  test  models  are  “hard
coded” in regulation, the more difficult it is to change them as modeling practices improve or as
new risks emerge.  The models and parameters can quickly become stale and inferences from
the  models  inaccurate.    For  those  interested  in  a  real-life  case  study  of  such  an  outcome,  I
recommend a paper by Scott Frame, Kristopher Gerardi and Paul Willen about the stress test
models  used  by  OFHEO,  the  agency  that  oversaw  Fannie  Mae  and  Freddie  Mac  before  the
financial crisis.     The  paper  documents  the  large  understatement  of  the  agencies’  credit  risk
exposures  stemming  from  “hard  coded”  models  that  failed  to  capture  innovation  in  mortgage
underwriting. 
7
In  fact,  the  Fed  has  proposed  additional  disclosures  about  its  stress  test  models,  including
indicative loan loss rates and loss results based on standardized portfolios.  These enhanced
disclosures  aim  to  provide  greater  insight  into  the  Fed’s  modeling  approaches  and  thus  to
facilitate “peer review,” while maintaining the rigor of the stress testing regime.  This is another
area where academic economists can help enrich the debate.  There is already a literature on
the impact of the disclosure of supervisory stress test results;  that literature could usefully be
extended  to  consider  the  impact  of  underlying  model  disclosure,  especially  in  the  context  of
macroprudential goals.
Clear and Predictable Goals and Actions
8
9
The final element we identified supporting the macroprudential goals of the SCAP was that the
exercise had clear and predictable objectives and actions.  Our paper argued that the financial
crisis  environment  gave  the  SCAP  a  very  clear  goal  of  providing  confidence  that  the  banking
system could continue to lend even under more dire economic conditions as a way of mitigating
the chance that those dire economic conditions actually materialized.  In that sense, the SCAP
was very much a “lean into the wind” macroprudential exercise.
In the current environment, I’d argue that the goals of the supervisory stress testing regime are
more  diffuse.  There  are  clearly  microprudential  “safety  and  soundness”  objectives  related  to
sound capital planning, risk identification and capital adequacy at each of the firms participating in
the  exercise.    These  are  critically  important  objectives.    The  focus  on  the  largest,  most
systemically important banks also seems consistent with the structural macroprudential channel
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
—by reducing the risk that these most systemic firms become distressed, we reduce the risk of
the externalities that such distress places on other financial institutions and, most important, on
consumers and businesses. 
What  is  less  clear  to  me  is  what  role  cyclical  macroprudential  concerns  play  in  the  evolving
stress testing regime.  Clearly, the design of the stress test scenarios, which embed a number
of counter-cyclical features, is an important channel for “lean against the wind” or “lean into the
wind” efforts.  However, narrowing the set of firms subject to DFAST supervisory stress testing
potentially pushes away from the broader cyclical perspective. Less of the banking industry will
be covered by the stress tests and assessments of the strength of the industry will be based on
a smaller part of the whole. 
In pointing out these implications, I am not making any judgments about whether the focus on
microprudential and structural macroprudential goals is optimal from a public policy perspective. 
In my view—and I really cannot say this strongly enough—ensuring that the largest and most
systemically  important  banks  do  robust  capital  and  liquidity  planning,  have  strong  internal
controls, do good risk identification and have very healthy amounts of capital (especially common
equity)  and  liquidity  resources  is  fundamental  to  fostering  a  stable  banking  system  that  can
perform  its  critical  financial  intermediation  role  in  both  calm  and  stressed  economic
environments.  What I hoped to do today is simply to point out that one of the key objectives of
the original SCAP stress program—leaning into the wind during a severe economic downturn—
might  be  getting  less  emphasis  as  the  time  since  the  financial  crisis  grows,  the  economic
expansion continues, and the supervisory stress testing regime evolves.
Thanks for your attention this morning.  I hope that you enjoy the rest of the conference.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
 See, for example, Viral Acharya, Irvind Gujral, Nirupama Kulkarni and Hyun Song Shin. 2012. “Dividends and
Bank Capital in the Financial Crisis of 2007 2009.” CEPR Discussion Paper No. 8801. February 2012; Beverly
Hirtle. “Bank Holding Company Dividends and Repurchases during the Financial Crisis.” Federal Reserve Bank
of New York Staff Report No. 666. March 2014; and David S. Scharfstein and Jeremy C. Stein. 2008. “This Bailout
Doesn’t Pay Dividends.” New York Times. October 21, A29.
Beverly Hirtle, Til Schuermann and Kevin Stiroh. Macroprudential Supervision of Financial Institutions: Lessons
from the SCAP, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report no. 409. November 2009.
Randal K. Quarles. Early Observations on Improving the Effectiveness of Post-crisis Regulation, Speech at the
American Bar Association Banking Law Committee Annual Meeting. January 19, 2018.
An important exception to this is that losses on trading book positions and counterparty exposures as a result of
the global market shock continue to be based on sensitivities generated by bank models.
The  ClearingHouse. The ClearingHouse Offers Recommendations to Improve Stress Testing Transparency,
January 22, 2018.
Til Schuermann. “The Fed’s Stress Tests Add Risk to the Financial System.” Wall Street Journal. March 19,
2013.
W. Scott Frame, Kristopher Gerardi and Paul S. Willen. The Failure of Supervisory Stress Testing: Fannie Mae,
Freddie Mac and OFHEO, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Working Paper 2015–3. March 2015.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Federal Reserve Board requests comment on package of
proposals that would increase the transparency of its stress testing program, December 7, 2017.
See, for instance, Itay Goldstein and Haresh Sapra. “Should Banks’ Stress Test Results be Disclosed? An
Analysis of Costs and Benefits.” Foundations and Trends in Finance. Vol. 8. March 2014.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
