Stephen S Poloz: Three things keeping me awake at night
Remarks  by  Mr  Stephen  S  Poloz,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Canadian  Club
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, 14 December 2017.
Introduction
 The holiday season is traditionally a time to reflect on the events of the past year, and to look
ahead at what may be in store for next year. Speaking from an economic perspective, I think we
can look back at 2017 with considerable satisfaction. And 2018 is looking positive, too.
The  Canadian  economy  is  on  pace  for  about  3  per  cent  growth  in  2017,  which  would  be  the
strongest  among  the  Group  of  Seven  economies.  Most  sectors  and  regions  are  now
participating. Over 350,000 full-time jobs have been created so far this year, and wages have
recently shown signs of picking up. This is supporting robust consumer spending.
Exports  and  business  investment  have  long  been  the  laggards  in  our  recovery  story.
Encouragingly, though, business investment has grown for the past three quarters in a row. As
well,  the  government’s  infrastructure  program  is  becoming  increasingly  evident  in  the  data.  In
contrast,  exports  have  not  been  stellar.  They  started  the  year  strong,  but  faltered  during  the
summer.  Nevertheless,  the  most  recent  data  show  a  broad-based  upturn,  supporting  our
forecast  that—after  looking  through  all  the  noise—exports  will  continue  to  be  pulled  along  by
rising foreign demand.
That brings me to inflation, our policy anchor. Inflation spent the year within our
1 to 3 per cent target band, although it has tended to fall a little short of the 2 per cent midpoint.
We did a lot of work this year to satisfy ourselves that our fundamental understanding of inflation
remains valid. It does, once you take account of short-term effects in the data.
I have talked before about the process of bringing the economy back home—at the intersection
of full capacity and 2 per cent inflation. Our return home was made even longer by the detour we
took when oil prices collapsed back in 2014. But, today, we find ourselves quite close to home,
and getting closer, with the economy now running close to full output and inflation expected to be
around 2 per cent later in 2018.
That is all good. But as an economist, and as a central banker, I find myself preoccupied with a
number of slower-moving, nagging issues that I expect will be with us for a long time. They keep
me awake at night because I wonder if we have done all we can to address them. I have chosen
three of these things to talk about today.
These personal preoccupations are a little different from the more pressing, immediate risks to
the economy that economists usually think about. I can assure you that the Bank is fully engaged
on a wide range of such issues, from the effects of technology on inflation to uncertainty over the
future  of  the  North  American  Free  Trade  Agreement  (NAFTA)  and  the  response  of  housing
demand to mortgage rule changes, to cite just a few.
I am not trying to spoil everyone’s holiday cheer with my topic today. Rather, I have found over
the  years  that  issues  that  appear  daunting  often  become  less  so  when  we  understand  them
better.  What  is  more,  a  better  understanding  of  the  issues  helps  everyone—from  the  various
government authorities to the public at large—determine what should be done to resolve them.
So, with that, let me share with you three things that are keeping me awake at night, and bring
you up to date on developments surrounding them. 
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Cyber Threats
The first issue I want to touch on is the potential for a cyber attack that leads to a major disruption
of our financial system.
People  take  for  granted  the  efficiency  and  convenience  of  today’s  financial  system,  as  they
should. It was not all that long ago that your choices for making a retail purchase were a personal
cheque, a credit card or cash—and cash was an option only if you remembered to get to your
bank  branch  before  it  closed.  Today,  e-commerce  is  pervasive.  People  can  have  electronic
access  to  their  accounts  instantly,  almost  anywhere.  The  infrastructure  that  underpins  our
financial system is a public good, every bit as important to the health of Canada’s economy as
our roads, bridges and airports.
I  am  not  exaggerating.  Every  day,  Canada’s  major  payments  systems  process  millions  of
transactions, large and small, and billions of dollars change hands. These transactions happen
so routinely and with such accuracy that it is easy to overlook how critical these systems are.
The process looks completely risk-free, but it is not. And to be without these systems for any
length of time could have a significant impact on the economy.
Our financial system is as good as it is today because of major advances in communications
and financial technology, and a high degree of connectivity between institutions. However, this
connectivity also creates a vulnerability. It means that a problem in one institution may spread to
others and be amplified. As such, a successful cyber attack on one institution can become a
successful attack on many. These attacks can be launched from anywhere and spread across
global networks.
The good news is that all the major participants in the financial system are taking this threat very
seriously. They are collaborating with each other by sharing information and best practices. As
for  the  key  payments  systems  that  connect  everyone  together,  the  Bank  of  Canada  has  the
legislative  authority  to  oversee  them  and  to  ensure  that  they  follow  strong  risk-management
practices,  including  those  aimed  at  preventing  cyber  attacks.  We  are  also  collaborating  with
partners in the federal government who are working to ensure that Canada is resilient to cyber
threats.
However, we cannot assume that our financial system is immune, despite best-in-class cyber
defences. We need to be prepared to recover our systems should a cyber attack succeed. The
Bank is working closely with our financial institutions and payments systems to ensure that we
have robust joint recovery plans in place. Further, the Bank is making significant investments in
its own operational redundancies, increasing the resilience of our systems and our people. It is
vital that we be able to “fail over” quickly so our key functions will be maintained in the event of a
major disruption, be it a cyber attack, natural disaster or some other crisis. This is a matter not
just of operational continuity, but of maintaining confidence in our financial system in stressed
situations.
The bottom line is that I am confident that we are doing everything we can on this issue. Still, the
system may be only as robust as its weakest link, and that keeps me thinking.
High House Prices and Household Debt
My second preoccupation is the state of Canada’s housing markets and the associated level of
household debt. The Bank said in last month’s Financial System Review that these vulnerabilities
are showing early signs of prospective easing, which is good. However, these vulnerabilities are
elevated,  and  are  likely  to  remain  so  for  a  long  time.  Remember,  it  took  years  for  these
vulnerabilities to build up in the first place.
It is not just the amount of debt; it is also its composition and distribution. More than 80 per cent
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
of  household  debt  is  composed  of  mortgages  and  home  equity  lines  of  credit  (HELOCs).
Increasingly, mortgages are being combined with HELOCs, to the point where about 40 per cent
of all housing-backed loans are blended with a HELOC component.
HELOCs have been a very convenient tool for many households. They give borrowers flexibility
to finance renovation projects  or  handle  emergencies—such  as  when  your  furnace  dies  on  a
cold  February  night.  Their  popularity  shows  how  useful  these  lending  arrangements  are.
However, there are some potential risks that borrowers need to manage.
HELOCs usually allow the borrower to pay only the interest on the loan each month, leaving the
principal amount unchanged. Indeed, about 40 per cent of HELOC borrowers are not regularly
paying down their principal, which means that debt loads may persist longer than in the past.
Furthermore,  some  may  be  using  their  HELOC  to  speculate—for  example,  to  fund  a  down
payment  on  a  second  house  with  the  intention  of  flipping  it.  Given  the  potential  for  volatility  in
house prices and for higher interest rates, such activity may be adding to the overall vulnerability
of the system.
We have seen several rounds of macroprudential measures to tighten mortgage finance rules.
These include measures last year that were aimed at high-ratio mortgages—those where the
down payment is less than 20 per cent of the value of the home. Since then, there has been a
sharp  drop  in  the  number  of  highly  indebted  Canadians  obtaining  these  mortgages—and  by
highly-indebted we have in mind people with a ratio of debt to income that is more than 450 per
cent. But we have also seen an increase in low-ratio mortgages with risky characteristics, such
as  extended  amortization  periods.  New  lending  guidelines  for  low-ratio  mortgages,  which  will
come into effect next year, should work to limit the number of low-ratio mortgages going to highly
indebted households.
These mortgage rule changes will help build up the resilience of the financial system over time,
as each new mortgage will be stress-tested to ensure that the borrower can manage a higher
interest rate at renewal time. It is important to remember that the purpose of these rule changes
is  not  to  control  house  prices.  Ultimately,  the  laws  of  supply  and  demand  will  determine  the
direction of house prices.
At  the  same  time,  there  is  little  doubt  that  these  rule  changes  will  mean  less  growth  in  our
housing sector. In the wake of the global financial crisis, ultra-low interest rates have helped our
economies  weather  the  storm,  but  an  important  by-product  has  been  exceptional  growth  in
housing. For some time now we have been expecting a rotation away from housing and toward
other  engines  of  growth,  such  as  exports  and  investment.  We  are  seeing  signs  of  that
fundamental rotation now.
A key issue for the Bank, then, is understanding how people will react when they are told that,
under the new rules, they do not qualify for the mortgage they would like. Staff examined data
from new mortgages issued last year by federally regulated lenders. They found that about 10
per cent of low-ratio mortgages—around 36,000 loans, representing about $15 billion worth of
borrowing—would not have qualified last year under the new stress test.
Of course, there is more than one way for people to respond. The most likely response is for
people to look for a less-expensive house with a smaller mortgage so they qualify under the new
rules. Others might try to boost their down payment, or delay the purchase until they can do so.
But people might also look for a lender that is not bound by these new mortgage rules so they
can avoid facing the stress test. No doubt, certain non-federally regulated lenders will step up to
compete  for  that  business,  although  other  regulators  may  choose  to  impose  the  same
guidelines. In any event, to those people who hope to avoid the rules, I offer this advice: testing
yourself to make sure you could handle your mortgage payments if interest rates were higher at
renewal is a very good idea, whether it is a rule or not.
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
One  final  issue  related  to  indebtedness—we  expect  that  high  levels  of  debt  will  make  the
economy as a whole more sensitive to higher interest rates today than in the past. This issue
has obvious implications for monetary policy, so we have done a lot of work this year to enhance
our models to capture it. As we said in our October Monetary Policy Report and in our interest
rate announcement last week, this is one of the key issues we will be monitoring in real time as
we consider the appropriate path for interest rates.
The Tough Job Market for Young People
My third long-term preoccupation is the state of our labour market; specifically, how hard it has
been for so many young people to find work. I mentioned earlier that more than 350,000 full-time
jobs  had  been  created  this  year.  However,  only  about  50,000  of  those  have  gone  to  young
workers.
A decade ago, the proportion of people aged 15 to 24 participating in the workforce peaked at
almost 68 per cent. That figure hit a trough earlier this year at nearly five percentage points lower
—the lowest in almost 20 years. If we could return the youth participation rate to its level before
the global financial crisis, more than 100,000 additional young Canadians would have jobs.
Of course, this is not only a problem for youth. We know of people in all age groups who are
working part-time when they would prefer a full-time job. We also know people who cannot find
jobs that match their skill set and are underemployed. And we know there are people who have
lost the job they held for years when their factory closed, and have faced extreme difficulty in
finding new work in a similar field. These are all serious concerns. But I want to concentrate on
young  people,  for  whom  a  long  period  of  unemployment  can  leave  a  scar  that  could  last  a
lifetime.
I know there are legitimate explanations for why more young Canadians are staying out of the
labour  force.  Enrolment  in  post-secondary  schooling  has  increased  in  recent  years,  and  we
expect some of this rise will be permanent. Some of these youth are looking to gain the skills that
will match what employers are demanding. There are more than 250,000 job vacancies in the
economy  today,  the  highest  on  record.  Canadian  business  leaders  say  that  most  of  these
vacancies are unfilled because they cannot find workers with the right skills.
Let me suggest that responsibility for addressing this skill mismatch rests with all of us, not just
the  students  and  the  education  system.  There  surely  is  room  for  more  ambitious  on-the-job
training programs in this picture.
This issue is taking on greater urgency because the economy is reaching the stage where more-
efficient job matching and increased workforce engagement will be our main means of building
economic  capacity.  With  more  economic  capacity  comes  the  opportunity  for  more  non-
inflationary  growth  and  a  permanently  higher  level  of  Canadian  GDP,  and  more  income  for
everyone. Clearly, that is something worth having.
Let me elaborate. Right now, we are at a point in the economic cycle that I think of as the “sweet
spot.” We know that a majority of Canadian companies are running flat out. They may have been
hesitating  to  invest  in  new  capacity  until  now,  perhaps  because  of  lingering  economic
uncertainty, or concerns over the future of NAFTA, for example. But, despite these uncertainties,
companies are moving to expand their capacity now, which augurs well for the future.
Most  expansions  of  capacity  have  two  elements—more  capital  equipment,  and  more  people.
Attracting  the  right  people  to  new  jobs  may  require  higher  wages,  and  this  in  turn  can  cause
people to re-enter the workforce. We may be seeing early signs of this happening. I mentioned
earlier  that  measures  of  wages  have  turned  higher  over  the  past  couple  of  months  and,  in
November, the participation rate for young people jumped back to more than 64 per cent. These
are encouraging signs, but it will take awhile before they become trends.
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
The Bank is watching these indicators very carefully at the moment, for they will help us manage
the risks that monetary policy faces at this point in the business cycle. Our current policy setting
clearly  remains  quite  stimulative.  With  the  economy  operating  near  potential,  a  mechanical
approach  to  policy  would  suggest  that  monetary  policy  should  already  be  less  stimulative.
However, as we said in last week’s interest rate announcement, we still see signs of ongoing,
albeit diminishing, slack in the labour market.
Fundamentally, this is an exercise in risk management. The facts that the economy is operating
near its capacity, and that growth is forecast to continue to run above potential, together pose an
upside risk to our inflation forecast. At the same time, our belief that there remains some slack in
the labour market poses a downside risk to our inflation forecast. Given the unusual factors at
play,  the  Bank  is  monitoring  these  risks  in  real  time—the  term  we  use  for  this  is  “data
dependent”—rather than taking a mechanical approach to policy setting.
And One More Thing…
So there we have it, three preoccupations that are keeping me awake at night. I could give you
even more, but these are my top three, and you do not have all afternoon.
Actually, there is one more thing keeping me awake at night, which perhaps I should mention,
and that is all the noise I keep hearing about cryptocurrencies, especially Bitcoin. There is a lot of
hype around Bitcoin, and markets are evolving quickly to allow wider access, including to retail
investors. So perhaps you will allow me to make a couple of points.
To begin with basics, the term “cryptocurrency” is a misnomer—“crypto,” yes, but “currency,” no.
For  something  to  be  considered  a  currency,  it  must  act  as  a  reliable  store  of  value,  and  you
should be able to spend it easily. These instruments possess neither of these characteristics, so
they do not constitute “money.”
So, what are cryptocurrencies, exactly? Characteristics vary widely but, generally speaking, they
can be thought of as securities. The Canada Revenue Agency agrees. That means, if you buy
and sell them at a profit, you have income that needs to be reported for tax purposes. What their
true value is may be anyone’s guess—perhaps the most one can say is that buying these things
means buying risk, which makes it closer to gambling than investing.
To  be  absolutely  clear,  I  am  not  giving  investment  advice.  I  never  do. All  I  will  say  to  people
intending to buy a so-called cryptocurrency is that you should read the fine print and make sure
you know what you are getting into. The Bank of Canada does not regulate these instruments
and their markets, just as we do not regulate traditional securities and their markets.
But one question that does preoccupy me is, what does the arrival of cryptocurrencies mean for
the cash in your pocket? Supplying the Canadian dollars you need to carry out your business is
one of the Bank’s most important mandates.
It is often forgotten that the cash provided by a central bank is the only truly risk-free means of
payment. With cash, buyers and sellers can be certain that payment is final. This is an absolutely
vital public good, which has always been provided by the central bank. All other payment types,
from debit cards to credit cards to cheques, work through intermediaries in the financial system.
Yes, of course, they are safe. But, fundamentally, they can never be quite as risk-free as cash.
Just  ask  yourself—if  you  were  concerned  that  an  imminent  cyber  attack  was  about  to  hit  the
financial  system,  would  you  not  want  to  carry  some  extra  cash  until  everything  was  back  to
normal?
Nonetheless, it is natural that transactions using electronic payments, such as debit and credit
cards,  continue  to  grow  in  volume  and  value  relative  to  cash.  It  is  certainly  possible  that  the
demand for digital cash could grow over time. If so, there could be very strong arguments for the
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
central  bank  to  provide  it,  given  its  obligation  to  fulfill  the  public  good  function.  Bank  staff  are
exploring the circumstances under which it might be appropriate for the central bank to issue its
own digital currency for retail transactions. All central banks are researching this. We will have
more to say about the subject in the months ahead.
Conclusion
Now I am ready to conclude. Cyber threats, elevated household debt, youth underemployment—
these are all long-term issues that will continue to be major preoccupations for myself personally,
and for the Bank of Canada.
I hope I have not spoiled your festive, pre-holiday mood by talking about my preoccupations. In
case I have, let me repeat that the economy has made tremendous progress over the past year,
and it is close to reaching its full potential. We are very encouraged by this, and we are growing
increasingly confident that the economy will need less monetary stimulus over time.
Nevertheless,  a  number  of  uncertainties  remain  around  our  outlook,  many  of  which  I  have
touched on today. As Senior Deputy Governor Carolyn Wilkins said in an important speech last
month, it is critical that we take these uncertainties on board in our policy-making. So, allow me
to  repeat  what  we  said  in  our  interest  rate  announcement  last  week:  We  will  continue  to  be
cautious in our upcoming policy decisions, guided by incoming data in assessing the economy’s
sensitivity to interest rates, the evolution of economic capacity, and the dynamics of both wage
growth and inflation.
By sharing my preoccupations with you today, I hope that I have also raised your understanding
of them, so that they appear somewhat less daunting. The Bank will continue to work on these
issues while doing our part to help bring about a strong and stable economy. This has been the
Bank of Canada’s role since our beginning. And it will remain our role for years to come.
Let me wish you all the best for the holidays, and for a prosperous 2018.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
