Nestor  A  Espenilla,  Jr:  Opening  remarks  for  the  Q2  2018  BSP
Inflation Report Press Briefing
Opening remarks by Mr Nestor A Espenilla, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP,
the central bank of the Philippines), for the Q2 2018 BSP Inflation Report Press Briefing, Manila,
20 July 2018.
 A pleasant morning to everyone. Welcome to the press conference on the BSP’s Inflation Report
for the Second Quarter of 2018.  Today, we wish to discuss with you the developments and the
analysis that underpinned the BSP’s monetary policy decisions during the second quarter of the
year.  Our objective is to enable market participants and the general public to better understand
the  underlying  developments  as  well  as  the  reasoning  and  analysis  behind  the  BSP’s  policy
actions.
We begin with the global economic environment. The overall prospects for global output growth
have  improved  since  our  last  briefing  in  April,  owing  to  faster  rates  of  expansion  in  key
economies.  In particular, economic activity in advanced economies has gained further traction.
Consequently, the unwinding of accommodative monetary policy in the US and other advanced
economies will likely continue and drive capital flows away from emerging economies, including
the  Philippines.  Meanwhile,  global  inflation  remains  elevated  in  Q2  2018  amid  geopolitical
tensions between the United States and some key oil producers.  Nevertheless, plans by major
producers like Saudi Arabia and Russia to boost production, coupled with higher output coming
from the US, could exert downward pressure on oil prices.   
In the Philippines, we continue to feel the weight of supply-side price pressures, as reflected in
the uptick in the prices of certain food items and domestic petroleum products. Average headline
inflation using the new 2012-based Consumer Price Index (CPI) series rose to 4.8 percent during
the quarter from 3.8 percent a quarter ago, bringing the year-to-date average to 4.3 percent. This
is higher than the upper end of the National Government’s target range of 2-4 percent for the
year. Similarly, core inflation increased to 3.8 percent in Q2 2018 higher than the quarter- and
year-ago rates of 3.0 percent and 2.5 percent, respectively.
Moreover, inflation expectations of private sector economists also increased during the quarter,
with analysts attributing their higher projections to volatile global oil prices, a weaker peso, and
the transitory effects of recent tax measures on the prices of domestic goods and services.
Meanwhile,  domestic  output  expansion  remains  robust  on  account  of  the  expansion  in  capital
formation  and  household  consumption,  as  well  as  strong  performance  of  the  services  and
industry sectors. Recent high-frequency sector indicators of economic activity also continue to
point to firm growth prospects in the near term.
The growth momentum was also supported by a strong and stable Philippine banking system.
During  the  review  quarter,  banks’  balance  sheets  exhibited  sustained  growth  in  assets  and
deposits. Furthermore, asset quality indicators remained healthy while capital adequacy ratios
continued to be above international standards.  Domestic liquidity also remained ample, driven by
robust credit growth.
However,  amid  this  resilience,  the  Philippine  economy  is  being  tested  by  external  headwinds
emanating  from  the  recent  and  planned  interest  rate  hikes  by  the  US  Fed  and  brewing  trade
tensions among key economies.  These are exerting depreciation pressures on the peso. The
country’s current account deficit and higher inflation also dampened investor sentiment during
the quarter.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
These  developments  formed  the  backdrop  for  the  BSP’s  policy  decisions  during  the  second
quarter of 2018. In brief, the BSP raised its policy rate by 25 basis points each in May and June,
bringing the overnight reverse repurchase (RRP) rate to 3.50 percent from      3.0 percent a
quarter ago. The interest rates on the overnight lending and deposit facilities were likewise raised
accordingly.
In deciding to hike the policy rate during the quarter, the Monetary Board noted that the increase
in inflation expectations and in the risks of possible second-round effects argued for timely and
decisive monetary policy actions from the BSP. Although inflation expectations remain within the
target  range  for  2019,  elevated  expectations  for  2018  highlighted  the  risk  posed  by  sustained
price pressures on future wage and price outcomes. Equally important, upside risks continued to
dominate the inflation outlook, as various measures of core inflation continued to rise. Meanwhile,
the  BSP  kept  a  close  eye  on  developments  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  and  noted  their
potential impact on inflation in the coming months.
The  BSP  believes  that  its  monetary  policy  actions  during  the  quarter  signal  its  strong
commitment to safeguard macroeconomic stability in an environment of rising commodity prices
and  ongoing  normalization  of  monetary  policy  in  advanced  economies.    The  BSP  likewise
reiterates  its  support  for  carefully  coordinated  efforts  with  other  government  agencies  in
implementing  non-monetary  measures  to  help  mitigate  the  impact  of  supply-side  factors  on
inflation and social welfare.
Accordingly, the BSP will sustain its utmost vigilance. In particular, we are taking into account the
potential price pressures of excessive volatility in the foreign exchange market. While we believe
that  our  fundamentals  remain  solid  and  healthy,  sustained  pressures  on  the  peso  could
adversely  affect  inflation  expectations.    Further,  some  demand  side  pressure  may  also  be
already feeding into inflation. All of these warrant a firm and timely monetary response. Therefore,
let me say that the BSP is considering strong follow-through monetary adjustment at the next
meeting  of  the  Monetary  Board  in  August.  The  pace  and  magnitude  of  policy  tightening  will
necessarily be dependent on our comprehensive and rigorous assessment of all relevant data
and  forecasts.    This  is  consistent  with  our  long-standing  disciplined  approach  to  inflation
targeting. We stand by our primary mandate of promoting price stability conducive to a balanced
and sustainable growth of the economy.
In  a  moment,  we  will  provide  you  with  a  more  detailed  discussion  of  the  factors  behind  the
Monetary Board’s recent decisions and its assessment of price and output conditions. Also, we
will have a brief discussion of the results of the BSP’s latest quarterly loan officers’ survey. We
look  forward  to  your  questions  at  the  end  of  these  two  presentations.    Thank  you  and  good
morning.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
