1 
Financial stability and credit markets in Europe:  
Opportunities and risks in the current setting  
Professor Claudia M. Buch 
(Deutsche Bundesbank) 
 Dinner talk at the second Süddeutsche Zeitung conference on the topic of “private debt and 
direct lending” 
Frankfurt am Main 
18 September 2018 
  It is nearly ten years ago to the day that the global financial crisis reached its initial peak. The 
global economic crisis that followed was the most severe since the Great Depression. In the 
wake of the crisis, reforms to the financial markets were introduced with the aim of making 
financial  markets  more  resilient,  and  many  of  these  reforms  have  already  been 
implemented.  After  all,  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  is  a  key  prerequisite  for  an 
efficient and dynamic economy. Just as preventive medical care and a good immune system 
help to limit the effects of disease, a prudent approach coupled with good defences helps 
the financial system to mitigate the effects of economic shocks. The question today is how 
far the international financial system is better placed to deal with unexpected developments 
than it was just a decade ago. 
The global economy is currently fraught with  uncertainty on a number of fronts. Geopolitical 
tensions  have  escalated,  and  trade  disputes  have  erupted,  some  of  which  threaten  to  tip 
into a trade war. In Europe it is unclear under what circumstances the United Kingdom will 
leave the European Union. Germany's economy may be booming right now, but every period 
of growth, no matter how long it lasts, ultimately gives way to an economic downturn. How 
well  prepared  is  the  German  financial  system  to  face  a  potential  economic  slump?  What 
happens if risks materialise? 
 
  
1  With the global economy in good shape and interest rates low, risks can 
be underestimated. 
2 
The  world  economy  is  currently  doing  well.  According to  calculations  by  the  International 
Monetary Fund (IMF), global growth will amount to 3.9% both this year and next year (IMF 
2018). For the coming year, the IMF is forecasting only a slight fall in growth from 2.4% to 
2.2% for industrial countries and from 2.2% to 1.9% for the euro area.  
At the same time, the IMF has emphasised that this growth is not without risk and that some 
risks  are  already  materialising.  For  example,  the  debt  level  in  some  emerging  market 
economies has gone up sharply in recent years, and these liabilities are often denominated 
in foreign currency. This has created vulnerabilities which have surfaced in recent weeks and 
months. For example, the Turkish lira has lost nearly 40% of its value in the year to date, and 
the  Argentine  peso  as  much  as  50%,  or  thereabouts.1  Thus  far,  market  participants  have 
regarded  these  issues  as  relatively  isolated  incidents.  Currently,  the  effects  on  global 
financial markets are small. But possible contagion effects and interactions with global risks 
are difficult to forecast.  
Public and private debt, which are close to their all-time highs in global terms, are one of the 
global  financial  system’s  vulnerabilities.  Industrial  countries  which  bore  the  brunt  of  the 
crisis have seen public debt levels balloon, largely on the back of measures to shore up the 
financial sector. This has shifted risk from the private sector to the government sector. In 
many emerging market economies, by contrast, it is above all (non-financial) private sector 
debt that has increased. In fact, it has more than doubled in recent years. Compounding this 
situation further, some of these sectors are highly exposed to currency risk.  
                                                      
1 Source: Bloomberg, 14 September 2018. 
 3 
 Banking  sector  debt  has  generally  diminished  in  recent  years.  Measured  in  terms  of  risk-
weighted assets, the capitalisation of the banking sector at the end of 2017 stood at roughly 
17%  in  the  euro  area,  compared  with  14.2%  in  the  United  States.  However,  measured  in 
terms of total (unweighted) assets, these ratios were significantly lower, at 5.8% in Europe 
and  9.3%  in  the  United  States  (CGFS  2018).  It  should  be  noted  that,  due  to  the  differing 
accounting standards, these figures are not directly comparable.  
In Germany, banks’ tier 1 capital ratio – i.e. tier 1 capital in relation to risk-weighted assets – 
has climbed from from 9% at the start of 2008 to 16.4% at the start of 2018 (Chart). The 
unweighted capital ratio, i.e. tier 1 capital in relation to total assets, rose in the same period 
from 3.1% to 6.2%. 
  4 
 Furthermore,  capital  adequacy  levels  sometimes  vary  significantly  from  one  bank  to  the 
next. The tier 1 capital ratio of the large, systemically important financial institutions in the 
first quarter of this year stood at 16.9%, while the unweighted capital ratio came to 4.9%. 
For small and medium-sized banks, the equivalent figures were 15.6% and 8.1%. 
The wide variation in capital ratios shows that the amount of capital banks have to cushion 
against unexpected events depends not least on how well future risks are captured by the 
risk weights. At the moment, the economic environment in Germany is highly favourable. 
The  German  economy  has  now  been  expanding  for  nine  consecutive  years,  which  is  the 
 5 
longest  period  of  growth  since  German  reunification.  According  to  the  Bundesbank’s 
projections, the economic boom is set to continue, with gross domestic product forecast to 
rise  by  2%  this  year  and  1.9%  next  year  (Deutsche  Bundesbank  2018).  Enterprises  and 
households  alike  can  borrow  cheaply,  and  they  have  accumulated  comfortable  capital 
buffers.  The  number  of  insolvencies  and  credit  defaults  is  low,  and  valuations  in  financial 
markets  are  high.  This  upbeat  macroeconomic  situation  is  conducive  to  a  gradual  rise  in 
interest  rates.  Assuming  the  economy  does  indeed  follow  its  expected  path,  the  risks  to 
financial stability will probably be limited.  
But  what  if  the  economy  takes  an  unexpected  turn  for  the  worse?  What  if  there  is  an 
unforeseen  downturn  in  real  economic  momentum  and  interest  rates  remain  low  –  and 
close  to zero  –  for  even  longer, or  if  political  risks  materialise  and risk  premiums  spike  in 
financial markets?  
A  resilient  financial  system  needs  to  be  in  a  position  to  weather  such  scenarios,  which 
though  unexpected,  cannot  be  fully  ruled  out.  This  is  especially  true  in  boom  periods, 
because  the  longer  these  continue,  the  more  market  participants  tend  to  take  them  for 
granted and not prepare for gloomier times. Unexpectedly weak growth and an increase in 
volatility could then have even greater repercussions. 
Scenarios like this are not out of the question, even for Germany. The German economy is 
closely  interlinked  with  the  global  economy,  so  it  would  be  hit  hard  by  possible  abrupt 
corrections  in  international  markets.  Possible  negative  effects  can  be  amplified  if  many 
market participants are exposed to similar risks. 
2 
The German financial system is vulnerable to negative macroeconomic 
developments. 
Over  the  last  decade,  German  banks  have  improved  their  resilience  and  built  up  capital. 
However, this capital is also counterbalanced by greater macroeconomic risk. The effects of 
risks on individual banks is something that supervisors keep a watchful eye on. However, an 
assessment  of  the  overall  risk  situation  needs  to  look  at  more  than  just  individual 
participants or sectors in isolation. A macroprudential, or systemic, perspective is therefore 
needed to complement the microprudential approach. This way, it is possible to take into 
account contagion mechanisms in the financial system that can give rise to systemic risks. 
After all, problematic developments in individual parts of the financial system can ripple out 
across  institutions  and ultimately  take their  toll  on  the  real  economy.  These  amplification 
effects  can  particularly  come  to  bear  if  many  banks  are  exposed  to  the  same  risk  and  if 
macroeconomic risks correlate strongly with each other. 
 6 
Monitoring systemic risk in Germany is the task of the German Financial Stability Committee 
(AFS).  The  Committee  consists  of  representatives  from  the  Federal  Financial  Supervisory 
Authority (BaFin), the Deutsche Bundesbank, and the German Federal Ministry of Finance, 
which acts as chair. In its latest report to the German Bundestag, the Committee examined 
the state of Germany's financial system (German Financial Stability Committee 2018). 
At  present,  there  is  a  danger  that  future  economic  risks  might  be  underestimated.  For 
example,  there  could be  an  unexpected downturn  in  the  economy,  which  would  result  in 
insolvency rates and thus credit risks rapidly rising. Reserves and capital might be insufficient 
to cover the losses from such an unexpected event, particularly if risk assessments scarcely 
take  into  account  periods  of  crisis  fraught  with  economic  downturns  and  correspondingly 
higher credit default rates, or even ignore them altogether.  
In the current long period of economic expansion, there is the possibility that credit risks are 
being  underestimated  in  the  real  estate  market.  This  market,  which  is  significant  for 
Germany in macroeconomic terms, could harbour risks to financial stability. This would be 
the  case,  for  example,  if  a  sharp  increase  in  real  estate  prices  led  to  an  excessive  rise  in 
lending  and  a  loosening  of  credit  standards.  Prices  are  continuing  to  rise  dynamically. 
Bundesbank  estimates  indicate  that  house  prices  in  German  towns  and  cities  were 
overvalued by between 15% and 30% in 2017. Growth in residential loans currently stands at 
4.3%  (second  quarter  2018)  and  thus  below  its  long-term  average  of  4.8%.2  At  the  same 
time, there is no clear evidence to suggest that banks have loosened their credit standards 
for residential loans. However, given the strong upward pressure on prices in recent years, it 
cannot be ruled out that the value of loan collateral is being overestimated. The value of 
loan collateral will probably turn out to be lower, particularly in the event of an economic 
downturn.  This  increases  the  risk  of  unexpected  losses  arising  as  a  result  of  defaults  on 
loans.  
One key macroeconomic risk that the German financial system is exposed to is interest rate 
risk. In recent years, banks have sharply increased the share of new loans with long interest 
rate lock-in periods. The share of newly issued loans with an interest rate lock-in period of 
over ten years stood at 45% in the second quarter of 2018; at the start of 2010, this share 
was markedly lower, at 26%. By contrast, bank funding tends to be of a short-term nature, 
and often at variable interest rates. This means that banks have become more vulnerable to 
a potential rise in interest rates. An abrupt increase in interest rates would drive up banks’ 
financing costs, but their interest income would rise less quickly to begin with.  
                                                      
2   See the Bundesbank’s system of indicators for the German residential property market: 
https://www.bundesbank.de/Navigation/EN/Statistics/Enterprises_and_households/System_of_indicators/
system_of_indicators.html 
 7 
If  risks  materialise  that  are  larger  than  expected,  this  could  set  negative  momentum  in 
motion  in  the  financial  system.  In  the  short  term,  a  critical  situation  is  a  particularly 
inopportune time for banks to raise capital in the markets, at the very time this capital would 
be needed to absorb losses. Individual banks would then have to shrink their balance sheets 
in order to fulfil the increased capital requirements. They would have to sell assets, scale 
back existing lines of credit to the real economy, or cut back on the issuance of new loans. If 
fire  sales  send  securities  or  real  estate  prices  plummeting,  this  can  also  take  its  toll  on 
institutions for which loan losses were barely an issue to begin with. 
3 
Now is the time to strengthen the financial system’s resilience in 
readiness for tougher times ahead. 
“The time to repair the roof is when the sun is shining”.3 The International Monetary Fund 
has repeatedly drawn attention to this principle in recent times. Public sector budgets need 
to be put on a sustainable footing, debt levels need to be reduced, and budgetary leeway for 
more difficult times needs to be created.  
That  said,  protection  against  unexpected  macroeconomic  developments  also  needs  to  be 
put in place in the financial system, too. Everyone should make provisions for unexpected 
developments  to  ensure  that  they  can  still  service  their  debt  if  the  economic  conditions 
worsen. Unexpected developments can happen in the home market, but they can also occur 
in emerging market economies or other industrial countries and then spill over to Germany. 
Many  mature  economies  are  currently  experiencing  buoyant  economic  conditions,  output 
gaps have been closed in many cases, and cyclical risks in the financial system are mounting. 
Financial institutions with higher levels of capital are more robust and thus also make the 
financial system as a whole more resilient. If all market participants have strong defences, 
the risk of contagion falls. Unexpected events will then have less severe consequences.  
However, resilience needs to be built up in good time – once a recession has begun it may 
already be too  late.  It's rather  like building up protection against  the flu.  Once  a  wave  of 
influenza has broken out, it is too late to get vaccinated. The only problem is that when the 
weather is fair and you feel well, it is all too easy to forget that times may also take a turn for 
the worse. 
It  is  therefore  important  to  take  preventive  action.  If  the  financial  system  is  not  resilient 
enough, this can amplify an economic downturn. Banks would then excessively curtail their 
                                                      
3 This quote is attributed to John F. Kennedy. 
 8 
lending precisely when the economy is already running into difficulties. This is precisely what 
happened around the globe in the last crisis. Defences therefore have to be built up when 
times are good.  
Currently,  the  sun  is  shining  on  the  markets,  we  are  experiencing  the  longest  period  of 
growth  since  the  1970s,  and  credit  losses  are  low.  Now  is  the  time  to  build  up  sufficient 
capital, which will strengthen the resilience of individual institutions and the financial system 
as a whole in the event of an economic downturn.  
 
 9 
 
4 
Committee on the Global Financial System – CGFS (2018). Structural changes in banking after 
List of references 
the crisis, CGFS Papers No 60, January 2018. 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2018). June 2018 Monthly Report. 
German Financial Stability Committee (2018). Fünfter Bericht an den Deutschen Bundestag 
zur Finanzstabilität in Deutschland, June 2018. 
International Monetary Fund – IMF (2018) World Economic Outlook Update, July 2018. 
 