Peter Praet: Assessment of quantitative easing and challenges of
policy normalisation
Speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at the
The ECB and Its Watchers XIX Conference, organised by the Institute for Monetary and Financial
Stability, Frankfurt am Main, 14 March 2018.
 The  financial  crisis  that  erupted  in  2008  posed  unprecedented  challenges  for  central  banks
across the world in the pursuit of their statutory mandates.   A main feature of central banks’
response  to  the  crisis  was  the  deployment  of  additional,  and  in  some  cases  novel,  monetary
policy instruments. One of these instruments was what’s known as “quantitative easing”. In the
case  of  the  euro  area,  this  tool  has  not  been  used  in  isolation,  but  rather  as  part  of  a
comprehensive package of complementary measures taken to combat the disinflationary forces
that intensified in mid-2014.
1
Today I will first look at the impact of our policies on financial conditions and macroeconomic
variables. The correct measure of the efficacy of unconventional monetary policy measures has
been the subject of some debate in recent times. In particular, the durability of the imprint that
such  unconventional  policies  have  left  on  financial  conditions  has  been  called  into  question.
Overall,  diverse  empirical  approaches  to  quantifying  the  impact  of  our  package  of  measures
support the same conclusion: the actions we took have had a strong and lasting effect on market
conditions,  and  more  importantly,  achieved  a  potent  pattern  of  propagation  to  the  broad
economy.  We  cannot  yet  declare  “mission  accomplished”  on  the  inflation  front,  but  we  have
made substantial progress on the path towards a sustained adjustment in inflation.
I will then turn to the key challenge we face as we move towards normalisation. For several years
net  asset  purchases  have  been  the  primary  instrument  for  calibrating  our  monetary  policy
stance. Looking forward, once the Governing Council has assessed that the criteria have been
met for a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation, the challenge will be to pivot to a more
normal  situation  where  interest  rates  and  guidance  on  their  likely  evolution  will  once  again
become the primary instrument for adjusting our stance, while ensuring that financial conditions
remain supportive of inflation convergence towards levels of below, but close to, 2% over the
medium term.
The impact of the ECB’s non-standard measures
By mid-2014, the euro area economy was facing disinflationary pressures that risked spiralling
into  outright  deflation.  With  the  deposit  facility  rate  held  at  zero  since  July  2012,  our  ability  to
provide  the  necessary  degree  of  monetary  stimulus  using  conventional  policy  measures  was
very limited.
Under  these  conditions,  the  focus  of  providing  monetary  accommodation  shifted  from  an
approach based on adjusting the interest rate corridor of our monetary policy framework – which
steers  the  very  short  end  of  the  yield  curve  –  to  one  that  more  directly  affects  the  whole
constellation  of  interest  rates  across  the  yield  curve.  Specifically,  the  instruments  we  have
employed since June 2014 are negative interest rates on the deposit facility, which provide the
floor of the corridor; a reinforced form of forward guidance on the evolution of the interest rate
corridor  in  the  future;  targeted  longer-term  refinancing  operations  (TLTROs);  and  the  asset
purchase programme (APP).
With policy rates at exceptionally low levels, the APP soon became the primary instrument for
calibrating the monetary policy stance. How effective have our asset purchases been in helping
the ECB to accomplish its statutory objective in the medium term? Answering this question is
 1 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
inherently difficult because of the complex interaction of our APP with other policy instruments as
well  as  our  evolutionary  communication  about  the  purchase  programme,  through  which  we
signalled our intention to start buying bonds and, later, to recalibrate the size and duration of our
bond-buying programme in advance. Hence, in assessing the impact of the APP, we must also
take  into  account  the  other  policy  tools  used  since  mid-2014,  because  the  instruments  were
designed to be complementary and mutually reinforcing.
The four instruments that have determined the stance of our monetary policy since mid-2014
have been designed to reap the full benefits of their complementarities. Two examples highlight
the role played by complementarities in policy design. First, the negative interest rate policy has
supported the portfolio rebalancing channel of our APP by encouraging banks to lend to the broad
economy instead of hoarding liquidity.  Second, the APP has supported rate forward guidance
via the signalling channel. Generally, asset purchases are thought to provide a strong signal that
policy rates will remain low for an extended period of time. For the ECB, this effect is reinforced
by the sequencing of our instruments through which we have indicated that our policy rates will
likely remain at their current levels “well past the horizon of our net asset purchases”.
2
3
Our overall assessment – and that of a growing body of empirical literature – is that non-standard
measures  have  had  a  sizeable  and  lasting  impact  on  broad  financing  conditions  [Chart
1].   These  improvements  are  not  limited  to  the  asset  classes  included  in  our APP,  but  have
spilled  over  to  other  market  segments  [Chart  2].  In  addition,  easier  market  funding  conditions
have been passed through to bank lending rates.   Importantly,  these  findings  are  based  on  a
range of econometric techniques and are therefore robust to the limitations associated with any
individual methodology.
4
 2 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
5
Sources: ECB, ECB calculations.
Event studies – which measure the impact of central banks’ bond purchases in a narrow interval
around the time of the announcement – play a part in informing our view on the efficacy of our
purchases. But we also use model counterfactuals to complement the impact metrics that we
derive from event studies, and to test whether or not the impact of our announcements endures
beyond the very short term. In this context, dynamic term structure models of the type that have
become  standard  in  contemporary  fixed  income  finance,  augmented  with  a  factor  capturing
central  bank  bond  holdings,  have  consistently  confirmed  the  inference  we  draw  from  event
studies. They indicate that our purchases have had a sizeable and durable influence on long-
6
term yields.
At present, the current and anticipated size of our APP portfolio – which has been increased in
various recalibration steps and is expected to be maintained “for an extended period of time” after
the  end  of  net  asset  purchases  –  is  still  putting  downward  pressure  on  euro  area  long-term
yields. The longer the expected period of reinvestment, the stronger the downward pressure on
yields. If one takes current surveys of market participants’ views about the time over which the
ECB is anticipated to roll over its APP securities, and assumes the modal expectation of a two-
year  period,  one  finds  that  the  downward  pressure  that  APP  asset  holdings  –  current  and
expected – are exerting on longer-term interest rates is in the order of 100 basis points [Chart 3].
 3 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
 4 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
7
Source: Eser, Lemke, Nyholm, Radde, and Vladu (mimeo).
Downward pressure on yields is expected to be very persistent and to decline only gradually, but
consistently, as we move forward in time, because of what is referred to as the “portfolio ageing”
effect. The effects of our purchases of long-dated assets on market yields are principally due to
the  fact  that  we  withdraw  duration  from  private  hands,  and  as  the  securities  we  hold  in  our
portfolio draw closer to maturity and “lose duration” progressively, the overall amount of duration
contained  in  our  portfolio  has  a  tendency  to  melt  away. And  this  gradual  loss  of  duration  will
8
reduce downward pressure on yields [Chart 3].
There has been a strong pass-through of our non-standard measures to financing conditions.
For example, model-based counterfactual simulations attribute more than half of the 126 basis
point decline in lending rates to non-financial corporations since June 2014 directly to our non-
standard measures [Chart 2]. The APP has supported the provision of loans to customers at
better  terms  and  conditions.   Banks  themselves  –  when  asked  to  assess  the  effects  of  our
measures on their intermediation business – have reported that the APP has positively impacted
their market financing conditions.
9
As a consequence of this generalised easing in financing conditions, our measures have had
substantial  macroeconomic  effects.  Taking  into  account  all  of  the  monetary  policy  measures
taken between mid-2014 and October 2017, the overall impact on euro area growth and inflation
is  estimated,  in  both  cases,  to  be  around  1.9  percentage  points  in  cumulative  terms  for  the
period between 2016 and 2020.
To sum up, the available evidence strongly supports the conclusion that the APP – together with
our  other  non-standard  measures  –  has  been  effective  and  probably  decisive  in  warding  off
troublesome macroeconomic outcomes. It has certainly propelled the economic recovery into a
robust and broad-based expansion. And very likely, it has prevented the disinflationary pressures
 5 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
of 2014 from spiralling into a self-reinforcing deflationary vortex [Chart 4]. We cannot yet declare
“mission accomplished” on the inflation front, but we have made substantial progress on the path
towards a sustained adjustment in inflation.
Sources: Bloomberg, Reuters, ECB calculations.10
 6 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
The conduct of our monetary policy
Our  monetary  policy  reaction  function  has  always  been  firmly  anchored  to  our  objective  to
maintain inflation at levels below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. Our monetary policy
has therefore evolved in line with the outlook for price stability and in a consistent manner over
time.
The unprecedented challenges we faced in the pursuit of our price stability mandate led us to
introduce  a  complex  and  multi-dimensional  monetary  policy  package.  The  transmission  of
unconventional  instruments  to  financial  conditions,  and,  further  down  the  road,  to  economic
activity and price developments, is surrounded by a high degree of uncertainty. This begs the
question: how should monetary policy be conducted in such an environment?
Over the past 50 years, a number of economists working in both academia and central banks
have argued for a gradual adjustment in the monetary policy stance as an optimal approach to
policy conduct in a world of uncertainty. Following the seminal work of Brainard,
  a  case  for
gradualism can be made in the context of the uncertainty inherent in economic data, models and
parameters,  notably  in  times  of  unconventional  monetary  policy.  In  the  absence  of  perfect  or
complete  knowledge  about  the  way  market  participants  will  react  to  the  announcement  of
monetary policy adjustments, and about the way those uncertain reactions will transmit to our
objective, it may be optimal to adjust policy more cautiously and in smaller steps than if we had
11
 7 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
perfect knowledge.
More generally, the policy calibration exercise should not be viewed as one in which the central
bank decides on the speed at which it should approach a given target level for its instrument or
instruments, but rather as an iterative and interactive process where the central bank learns from
the  markets  as  much  as  the  markets  learn  from  the  implementation  of  the  central  bank’s
policies.
It is through this feedback loop that central banks and markets alike learn about the nature and
strength  of  the  monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism.  In  that  process,  a  change  in  the
instrument(s) has an impact that is uncertain ex ante in respect of the induced adjustments in
the yield curve and other financial prices and, as a consequence, in respect of the likelihood of
achieving the objective. Market adjustments are not known until they are observed, and we can
only work out what their implications might be for the achievement of our objective once they
have materialised.
In  these  conditions,  the  Brainard  rationale  for  gradualism  applies  with  great  force:  do  it  as
carefully  and  prudently  as  possible,  at  least  when  you  have  good  reason  to  believe  that  the
degree of uncertainty as to the direction and size of market reactions is atypically large. Present
times, where policy is defined by a multiplicity of instruments that interact in ways that are very
imperfectly known, are characterised by an abnormal amount of uncertainty.
Gradualism is not a doctrine, but a pragmatic approach that is generally suitable to situations
characterised by significant uncertainty about the impact of available policy instruments. A more
aggressive  monetary  policy  response,  however,  is  warranted  when  there  is  clear  evidence  of
heightened  risks  to  price  stability,  i.e.  when  it  is  established  that  the  degree  of  inflation
persistence  is  likely  to  be  high  and  risks  disanchoring  inflation  expectations.  In  this  case,  a
forceful,  frontloaded  monetary  policy  response  to  weak  or  excess  inflation  may  become
necessary  to  signal  the  central  bank’s  commitment  to  its  objective,  and  thus  nudge  inflation
expectations towards that objective and make them less backward-looking.
12
For example, when confronted with the risk of a disanchoring of inflation expectations and a too
prolonged  period  of  low  inflation,  the  Governing  Council  stated  in  May  2014  that  it  would  “act
swiftly” and was “unanimous in its commitment to using also unconventional instruments within
its mandate” as needed. This was followed a month later by the announcement of the battery of
non-standard  measures  I  already  mentioned.  In  addition,  in  late  2015,  we  signalled  our
determination to bring inflation back to our policy aim “without undue delay”, which justified an
aggressive recalibration of stimulus at that time.
Let  me  now  turn  to  some  concrete  examples  of  a  gradual  approach.  Our APP  has  evolved
gradually,  subject  to  its  “sustained  adjustment”  conditionality,  i.e.  the  Governing  Council’s
intention to continue its net asset purchases until it sees a sustained adjustment in the path of
inflation  consistent  with  its  inflation  aim.  The  purchase  universe  was  first  expanded  beyond
asset-backed  securities  and  covered  bonds  to  include  public  and  corporate  sector  securities.
Over time, we also extended the purchase horizon and adjusted the monthly purchase volumes
to  fine-tune  the  programme  in  line  with  our  assessment  of  progress  towards  a  sustained
adjustment in the path of inflation consistent with our inflation aim.
Market  expectations  have  internalised  the  conditionality  framework  that  governs  the  size  and
duration  of  the APP  quite  well.  Data  show  that  market  expectations  of  our  policy  are  highly
correlated  with  the  outlook  for  inflation,  as  for  example  captured  by  medium-term  inflation
expectations. This applies both to expectations regarding the horizon and volumes of the APP
and  to  expectations  relating  to  our  “well  past”  guidance  on  policy  rates  [Chart  5].  Looking  at
survey  medians,  the  residual  difference  between  market  expectations  regarding  the  size  and
horizon  of  our  net  asset  purchases  and  the  indications  about  the  size  and  horizon  of  the
programme announced by the ECB is today very small. In periods of persistent disinflation, this
 8 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
difference  was  very  large.  The  convergence  of  market  expectations  towards  the  ECB’s
indications about the size and horizon of net asset purchases has proceeded in tandem with the
gradual rise of inflation expectations towards our medium-term policy aim. Likewise, there is a
strong co-movement between markets’ views of the convergence of inflation towards the ECB’s
aim on the one hand and, on the other, the length of the interval between the end of net asset
purchases and the first rate rise fully priced into market rates. This suggests that our monetary
policy reaction function is well understood.
Sources: Bloomberg and ECB.13
 9 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
Source: Bloomberg, ECB calculations.
Sustained adjustment and beyond
14
Last week, we introduced a further gradual adjustment to our monetary policy stance, removing
from our official communication the so-called APP easing bias, i.e. a sentence in which – since
December 2016 – we had expressed our readiness to increase the monthly pace and/or extend
the  horizon  of  our  net  asset  purchases  if  certain  unfavourable  macroeconomic  or  financial
conditions  materialised.  This  step  followed  earlier  adjustments  to  our  policy  stance,  namely
reductions in the pace of purchases and the removal of the easing bias on policy rates. This
decision conveys our improving confidence that the strong and broad-based cyclical momentum
will eventually lead to a convergence of inflation towards our aim.
Overall, however, it is fair to say that we are still some way short of achieving full and durable
convergence  of  medium-term  inflation  towards  levels  below,  but  close  to,  2%.  The  Governing
Council  has  three  criteria  for  assessing  whether  there  is  a  sustained  adjustment:  first,  the
convergence of headline inflation to our medium-term aim; second, confidence in the realisation
of the expected inflation path; and third, the resilience of inflation convergence even after the end
of our net asset purchases.
Signals showing the convergence of inflation towards our aim are increasingly positive and we
 10 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
are becoming more confident that inflation will reach a level of below, but close to, 2% over the
medium  term.  Nevertheless,  from  today’s  perspective  domestic  inflation  pressures  are  still
subdued  and  a  substantial  degree  of  monetary  accommodation  remains  necessary  for  price
pressures to build up and for inflation to converge sustainably towards our aim.
We must be patient, persistent and prudent with our policy. Patience is needed because it takes
time for underlying inflation dynamics to gain momentum and support a durable convergence of
inflation towards our aim. Persistence is needed because the recovery in inflation is predicated
on a substantial degree of monetary policy accommodation. And prudence is essential because
of uncertainties about the transmission of unconventional monetary policy measures on the way
to normalisation.
This leads me to the question of how monetary policy will evolve once the Governing Council
judges that the criteria for a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation have been met. The
answer to this question is essentially already indicated in our forward guidance and in the clear
sequencing of policy measures that we have communicated.
Once the Governing Council judges that the criteria for a sustained adjustment have been met,
our net asset purchases will end. Only one of the instruments that are currently contributing to
the economic expansion and to inflation convergence will then expire. The monetary support that
will still be necessary to accompany inflation along the path towards a durable convergence will
continue to be provided by the remaining instruments: reinvestments and policy interest rates
that  are  expected  to  remain  at  their  present  levels  well  past  the  horizon  of  our  net  asset
purchases.
As regards reinvestments, we will maintain the stock of securities in our portfolio for an extended
period of time after the end of our net asset purchases and in any case for as long as necessary.
As I have explained elsewhere , stock effects exert downward pressure on term  premia.  My
colleague Benoît Cœuré recently referred to one further mechanism behind such a compression
of  term  premia:  the  fact  that,  as  price-sensitive  investors  offload  their  holdings  of  eligible
securities onto the Eurosystem, the marginal seller to the programme becomes an investor type
whose supply of securities is more rigid.
 This perpetuates and in some cases even amplifies
the effect of purchases on market prices.
15
16
Reinvestment is also consistent with a prudent policy approach because it means the duration
leakage effect – which dampens the stimulus over time – will play out only gradually.
While reinvestment will be important to ensure that longer-term interest rates remain sufficiently
supportive  beyond  the  horizon  of  our  net  asset  purchases,  the  ECB’s  key  interest  rates  and
forward  guidance  on  their  expected  evolution  will  once  again  become  our  principal  means  of
steering the policy stance.
Our  key  interest  rates  are  expected  to  remain  at  their  present  levels  well  past  the  end  of  net
asset purchases, in line with our forward guidance. Financial markets are currently pricing our
forward guidance on rates into the yield curve, which today is fostering steady progress towards
a  sustained  adjustment.  In  the  light  of  the  interactions  and  complementarities  between  our
different instruments, it will be important to monitor the reaction of the yield curve to the end of
our net asset purchases.
With the passage of time, the indication that policy rates will remain at their present levels well
past the end of net asset purchases will gradually cease to provide sufficient guidance about the
likely evolution of the monetary policy stance. So, our forward guidance on the path of our policy
rates will have to be further specified and calibrated as appropriate for inflation to remain on the
sustained adjustment path towards levels below, but close to, 2% over the medium term.
1
 11 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
I would like to thank Danielle Kedan for her support in preparing this speech.
Praet,  P.  (2017),  “Calibrating  unconventional  monetary  policy”,  speech  at  The  ECB  and  its  Watchers  XVIII
Conference, Frankfurt am Main, 6 April.
For a summary of the literature on the effectiveness of non-standard measures, see ECB (2017), “Impact of the
ECB’s non-standard measures on financing conditions: taking stock of recent evidence”, Economic Bulletin,
Issue 2.
See also Praet, P. (2017), “The ECB’s monetary policy: past and present”, speech at the Febelfin Connect event,
Brussels/Londerzeel, 16 March.
The impact of credit easing is estimated on the basis of an event-study methodology which focuses on the
announcement effects of the June-September 2014 package; see the ECB Economic Bulletin article entitled
“The transmission of the ECB’s recent non-standard monetary policy measures” (Issue 7 / 2015). The impact of
the deposit facility rate (DFR) cut rests on the announcement effects of the September 2014 DFR cut, while the
impact  of  the  subsequent  DFR  cuts  is  difficult  to  disentangle  from  the  simultaneous  APP  adjustments.
Therefore,  both  effects  are  shown  jointly. APP  encompasses  the  effects  of  the  asset  purchase  measures
adopted  at  the  January  and  December  2015  Governing  Council  meetings,  the  March  and  December  2016
meetings and the October 2017 meeting. The January 2015 APP impact is estimated on the basis of two event-
study exercises by considering a broad set of events that, starting from September 2014, have affected market
expectations  about  the  programme;  see  Altavilla,  C.  Carboni,  G.  and  Motto,  R.  (2015)  “Asset  purchase
programmes and financial markets: lessons from the euro area”, ECB Working Paper No 1864, and De Santis,
R. (2016), “Impact of the asset purchase programme on euro area government bond yields using market news”,
ECB Working Paper No 1939. The quantification of the impact of the December 2015 policy package on asset
prices  rests  on  a  broad-based  assessment  comprising  event  studies  and  model-based  counterfactual
exercises. The impact of the March 2016 and December 2016 policy packages is assessed via model-based
counterfactual exercises. The impact of the October 2017 policy package is assessed using two models: a term
structure modelling framework similar to Li, C. and Wei, M. (2013), “Term Structure Modeling with Supply Factors
and the Federal Reserve’s Large-Scale Asset Purchase Programs”, International Journal of Central Banking,
9(1), pp. 3-39 and an ISIN-by-ISIN regression framework akin to D’Amico, S. and King, T. B. (2013), “Flow and
stock  effects  of  large-scale  treasury  purchases:  Evidence  on  the  importance  of  local  supply”,  Journal  of
Financial Economics,108(2), pp. 425-448.
To this end, for instance, an estimated term structure model is used following Li, C. and Wei, M. (2013), “Term
Structure Modeling with Supply Factors and the Federal Reserve’s Large-Scale Asset Purchase Programs”,
International Journal of Central Banking, 9(1), pp. 3-39. In this framework, yields are driven by three factors: the
level and slope of the yield curve (‘yield factors’) as well as a factor related to the central bank’s bond holdings
(‘quantity factor’). In quantifying the impact on bond yields, the model thus takes into account the effect of the
central bank’s current and future expected bond holdings, including the impact of reinvestment.
Euro area yields are proxied by the GDP-weighted long-term yield of the four largest euro area jurisdictions. The
10-year yield impacts are obtained from a version of the Li-Wei (2013) model used at the Federal Reserve to
convert the SOMA portfolio of securities into yield impacts. Impacts are shown for different APP reinvestment
scenarios,  defined  by  the  horizon  indicated  in  the  legend.  The  marginal  impact  of  each  additional  year  of
reinvestment is given by the distance between the scenario curves. Latest observation: February 2018.
Praet, P. (2017), “Maintaining price stability with unconventional monetary policy measures”, speech at the MMF
Monetary and Financial Policy Conference, London, 2 October.
See the euro area bank lending survey, October 2017.
This chart shows the risk-neutral probability distribution function implied by 2-year zero-coupon inflation options.
These risk-neutral probabilities may differ significantly from physical, or true, probabilities. They are estimated
on the basis of call (“caplets”) and put options (“floorlets”) with different strike rates on the (three-month lagged)
euro area HICP index excluding energy, food and tobacco, assuming Black-Scholes option pricing and implied
volatilities that vary across strike rates (“volatility smile”).
Brainard, W. (1967), “Uncertainty and the Effectiveness of Policy”, The American Economic Review, 57(2), pp.
411-425.
Söderström, U. (2002), “Monetary Policy with Uncertain Parameters”, The Scandinavian Journal of Economics,
104(1), pp. 125-145.
 12 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
13
14
15
16
APP expansion expectations are defined as the difference between median expected APP volumes according to
Bloomberg surveys and the publicly announced overall envelope at the time of the survey. Inflation expectation
deviations  from  the  aim  are  derived  as  the  difference  between  1.9%  and  the  5-year-in-5-year  inflation
expectations implied by inflation-linked swap rates. Dashed vertical lines mark the first survey following each of
the four APP recalibrations (survey dates: 14 December 2015; 18 April 2016; 16 January 2017; 11 December
2017). Latest observation: 2 March 2018.
The “well past” horizon is derived as the difference between the date at which the forward curve prices in a full
10 basis point hike and the median expected APP end-date based on Bloomberg surveys. The grey area and
the dashed section of the blue line refer to implicit “well past” intervals prior to the announcement of the “well
past”  communication  on  10  March  2016.  Inflation  expectation  deviations  from  the  aim  are  derived  as  the
difference between 1.9% and the 5-year-in-5-year inflation expectations implied by inflation-linked swap rates.
Last observation: 19 January 2018 for the Bloomberg survey and inflation expectations, 20 February 2018 for the
forward-implied lift-off horizon.
Praet, P. (2017), “Maintaining price stability with unconventional monetary policy measures”, speech at the MMF
Monetary and Financial Policy Conference, London, 2 October.
Cœuré, B. (2018), “The persistence and signalling power of central bank asset purchase programmes”, speech
at the 2018 US Monetary Policy Forum, New York City, 23 February.
 13 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
