Liviu Voinea: Europe - managing the upswing in uncertain times
Speech by Mr Liviu Voinea, Deputy Governor of the National Bank of Romania, at the Conference
CEPS-IMF Spring 2018 Regional Economic Outlook, Brussels, 15 May 2018.
 Dear Governor Smets,
Dear Director of the IMF’s European Department Thomsen,
Dear CEPS Director Gros,
Thank you for having me here. It is an honor for me to speak at the launch of the IMF Regional
Economic Outlook for Europe. This report is remarkable in many respects: it is comprehensive,
well-documented  and  clearly  written,  with  strong  messages  and 
judicious  policy
recommendations. It comes in times of uncertainty, when the European economy is rebounding,
but challenges remain; in particular, the business and financial cycles of advanced economies
are so dissimilar to those of the new member states that a distinct analysis is warranted.
The first chapter of the report is entitled “Managing the upswing in uncertain times”. The report
shows that growth has recovered in advanced European economies and even picked up in the
new member states, some of which are now having large positive output gaps. Moreover, growth
forecasts  are  strong  in  2018,  but  growth  is  not  taken  advantage  of  to  advance  with  fiscal
consolidation and structural reforms. This recovery has created more than 12 million jobs in the
EU  since  2013,  exceeding  pre-crisis  peaks.  Consequently,  unemployment  fell  by  a  total  of  5
percentage points in NMS and 3 percentage points in EU-15 over the same period.
Uncertainty, however, does not mainly come from the economic environment; it comes from the
erosion of trust, based on an unbalanced distribution of globalization benefits, a long and slow
recovery,  decentralization  and  fragmentation  –  as  the IMF’s  First  Deputy  Managing  Director
David  Lipton  pointed  out  in  a  recent  speech   .  The  REO  also  speaks  about  the  weakening
support  for  globalization,  which  affects  global  trade  and  long  term  growth  prospects,  a  thesis
linked to the apparent retreat from cross-border integration and the move from multilateralism to
bilateralism.
1
And  the  report  is  right,  in  my  view.  After  3  decades  of  deregulation  and  liberalization,  the
consensus is being threatened by the return to protectionism. East European countries, being at
the receiving end of capital movements, are the short term losers of what it looks like an exit from
globalization as we knew it. I call this exit from globalization “Glexit” – which is much more than
Brexit or any other individual exits. In the banking sector, Glexit means further deleveraging and
higher financial burden for already over indebted nations, companies and households.
We can do more, together, to rebuild trust in institutions, to improve the governance, and to make
sure that the economic upswing that we are now enjoying will be more evenly distributed, that it
will reach every household and company. While this is a long time-effort, we need to do more to
put our house in order now.
Jerome  Powell,  the  chairman  of  the  Federal  Reserve,  referring  to  the  assessment  of  risks  in
emerging  economies,  said  that three  elements  are  important:   first,  the  vulnerabilities  in  the
EMEs themselves; second, the evolution of advanced-economies monetary policies; and, third,
how  markets  might  respond  to  that  evolution.  Emerging  economies  are  takers  in  the  global
markets;  we  cannot  do  much  about  the  last  two  elements  mentioned  above,  which  are
exogenous. Our job, our duty, is to prevent the accumulation of domestic vulnerabilities, because
deterioration in a country’s economic conditions makes it more vulnerable to adverse external
shocks.
2
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
High growth in emerging economies is good as long as it is sustainable. I would recall here a
famous answer from Henry Ford, the father of the car industry, when he was asked about his
preferred color for the new T-model: “Any color, as long as it’s black”. Any growth is good, as
long  as  it  is  sustainable  and,  I  would  add,  fairly  distributed.  True,  emerging  economies  need
higher growth rates to catch-up with the more advanced economies. True, potential GDP is a
non-observable  variable,  like  many  others  such  as  inflation  expectations,  non-accelerating
inflation rate of unemployment, or the one to which it is directly linked – the structural deficit. New
Member States have probably higher potential growth rates than the ones we are now estimating,
and this estimation is subject to constant change, based on new information in the data series,
but also on improved endowment with and efficiency of labor and capital. Nevertheless, these
non-observable  variables  become  visible,  sooner  or  later,  in  two  indicators  that  eventually
separate oil from water: the twin deficits.
Let me start with the case of Romania. In the aftermath of the global financial crisis, we had one
of the largest adjustments of the budget deficit in the EU: from 9.5% in 2009 to less than 1% in
2015.  Romania  exited  the  excessive  deficit  procedure  in  2013  and  also  in  2013  reached  the
Medium Term Objective of 1% of GDP structural deficit, down from 8.8% of GDP in 2009. Since I
was the Budget Minister in 2013 and for most of 2014, and I was responsible for the IMF and EC
negotiations,  I  can  praise  the  role  played  by  the  IMF  and  the  EC  in  the  three  successive
agreements (2009–2015). The current account adjustment was also impressive, from –13% in
2007  to  just  –1%  in  2013–2015.  However,  in  the  last  couple  of  years,  the  trend  of  fiscal
consolidation  has  been  reversed.  This  has  also  impacted  the  current  account,  which  has
deteriorated by 2.2% of GDP, of which 2.1% of GDP came from the budget deficit widening. The
main  advantage  of  the  country  is  its  low  level  of  public  debt,  but  this  can  be  reversed  in  the
medium term unless a prudent policy mix is implemented, including a gradual return to MTO.
Broadening our perspective, all EU countries have adjusted their budget deficits over the last 10
years. Most of them also adjusted their current account deficits. In fact, the downsizing of current
accounts  can  be  attributed  to  both  public  and  private  sectors.  This  means  that  aggregate
demand was affected for a longer period, and measures to stimulate it, when the economies
experienced negative output gaps, were needed. Despite very low interest rates, credit was not a
main  driver  of  the  recovery;  and  public  investments,  as  the  report  outlines,  are  on  average  2
percentage points of GDP lower than their pre-crisis levels.
Although it is nowadays a demand-led recovery, we do not have sufficient demand-push inflation,
with the notable exception of countries that have closed the output gap – and these are the New
Member States. This justifies the report recommendation of further accommodative policies from
the ECB. However, as Mr. Thomsen highlighted in his presentation, policymakers need to seize
the good times to advance further with fiscal consolidation and structural reforms. But the low
rate environment and the strong sovereign-bank nexus are feeding the beasts and provide the
wrong incentives for reforms.
This is where policy trade-offs step in. Monetary policy has been overburdened in times of crisis,
trying to address the market failures and the pro-cyclical fiscal policy. Yet, monetary policy is not
a  universal  medicine,  and  it  cannot  work  in  isolation.  Jens  Weidmann,  the  President  of
Bundesbank,  once  made  an  analogy  between  monetary  policy  and  Coca-Cola’s  all-round
curative properties: monetary policy is also currently being branded as a cure for assorted ills. As
well  as  its  own  actual  mandate  of  keeping  prices  stable,  some  people  seem  to  be  under  the
impression  that  it  should  be  used  to  strengthen  growth,  lower  unemployment,  safeguard  the
financial system and guarantee citizens adequate interest rates” . Yet, monetary policy can only
buy  time  for  structural  reforms  in  the  short  run,  while  tensions  are  accumulating  in  the
background.
3
One major source of tensions refers to the wage policy. Chapter 2 of REO discusses in much
detail the “European wage dynamics and labour market integration”. The main messages of this
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
part can be summarized as follows: a) in EU 15 wages are subdued because they respond very
slowly to changes in unemployment and are closely related to inflation and inflation expectations,
which  are  unusually  low;  b)  in  NMS  wage  growth  responds  very  quickly  to  changes  in
unemployment, and inflation expectations play a lesser role; c.) average wage increases in NMS
were much higher since 2012 than in EU-15; d.) about one quarter of wage growth in Europe can
be explained by EU-wide and group-level factors; e.) there was a decrease in unemployment, but
also  an  increase  in  involuntary  part-time  employment;  f)  migration  plays  a  role  in  the  faster
increase in wages in the countries of origin.
One hot debate topic in Europe these days –reflected in the report- is the flattening of the Philips
curve. Subdued wage growth, together with subdued inflation, are presented among the risks in
the euro-area – while the divergent wage growth trends between euro area and emerging Europe
are considered to reflect differences in labor market slack. Alternative explanations provided by
recent international literature for the disappearance of the Philips curve refer to under-measuring
the amount of spare capacity (slack) in the labour market; a lower natural rate of unemployment;
lower or more anchored inflation expectations; and changes in expectations of real pay growth.
The  IMF’  REO  presents  an  innovative  econometric  model  reshaping  the  wage  Philips  curve
against a measure of unemployment gaps. This shows that the Philips curve is flatter in the euro
area than in the NMS, but that in general it still works. However, caution in interpreting the results
is needed because this model splits the EU countries into three distinctive groups (Germany a
group of its own, some euro-area countries and some NMS countries including euro and non-
euro  area,  but  excluding  Romania  and  Bulgaria  –  probably  because,  in  particular  for  these  2
countries,  any  measure  of  unemployment  should  be  regarded  prudently  given  the  large
emigration and underground economy).
Let us remember that catching-up is an inflationary process in itself, as postulated by Balassa-
Samuelson.  Maybe  not  much  convergence  is  taking  place  between  North  and  South,  but
catching-up  has  continued  throughout  the  crisis  between  East  and  West  –  as  Daniel  Gros
recently concluded in a CEPS study. Migration has led to upward pressures on wages in the
emerging  Europe  and  to  downward  pressures  in  the  advanced  EU.  The  contribution  of  net
emigration to the middle income trap for emerging economies should also be further studied.
4
Still,  I  would  like  to  share  with  you  some  preliminary  results  of  a  work  in progress   that  I  am
undertaking on the relationship between wage growth and inflation. If we think in terms of stocks
instead of flows, we can introduce the concepts of wage gap and inflation gap (just like the IMF’s
REO discusses about unemployment gap, and the classical theory has the output gap). Wage
gap refers to the cumulated gap between current wage and a peak reference wage value in the
past. The permanent income hypothesis is fundamentally flawed in times of crisis, because of
uncertainty of future income. The only certain reference value lies in the past, not in the future:
and  that  is  why  current  consumption  is  influenced  by  past  income. A  recession  is  a  game  –
changer.  In  a  crisis,  the  reference  is  not  ahead  of  us,  but  it  is  rather  in  the  past.  Retirement
savings and linear employment prospects are uncertain. People relate to their peak gains in the
not  so  distant  past  rather  than  to  uncertain  future  gains.  Inflation  gap  refers  to  the  cumulated
deviation of present inflation from the target inflation or, in the absence of such, from its long-time
average. We also allow for the wage Philips Curve to be non-stationary: it moves over time, and
it  is  absolutely  normal  to  do  so.  Reference  wage  values,  social  preferences,  jobs’
characteristics, skill endowments and even Central Banks’ targets, they all change over time –
hence, the impact of wage gaps on inflation cannot be the same in different time periods. The
preliminary finding of our model is that inflation does not increase close to or above its target level
until the wage gap is closed. For Philips Curve to work, the loss of welfare from a negative wage
gap  has  to  be  fully  compensated  first  –  as  a  stock  measure,  not  as  a  flow.  The  policy
recommendation from here is that countries which closed their wage gap should be much more
prudent in further wage increases – because they will be seen in inflation much faster and larger
than in the recent past. And for countries which have not closed their wage gap the implication is
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
that inflation will remain subdued until this happens.
I fully agree with the IMF’s recommendation that central banks in NMS with their own currencies
should  be  alert  to  the  inflation  risks  of  higher  wage  growth,  while  bearing  in  mind  that  raising
policy rates could trigger capital inflows and exchange rate appreciation – which could further
deepen current account imbalances. While the real monetary policy stance may differ between
euroarea and emerging Europe, there is broad heterogeneity even among emerging Europe. This
is why it is important not to give the wrong incentives to capital flows.
This reminds me of my days as a child when, being asked what I want to become when I grow
up, I confessed that I wanted to be a firefighter. It turns out that I am now a central banker, which
is not far from being a firefighter in these uncertain times.
National Bank of Romania has started the tightening cycle of the monetary policy, to contain the
higher inflation and inflation expectations. Although most of it is supply-side and temporary, and
fighting fiscal loosening with monetary tightening is a sub-optimal policy mix, we considered that
the 3 rate hikes we implemented this year were warranted to preserve a hard-fought public good:
price stability.
Coming to an end of my intervention, I would like to express a few thoughts on one of the most
important remarks of the REO. It states that “the recovery provides an opportunity to move faster
to  deepen  the  Economic  and  Monetary  Union”.  The  report  details  three  lines  of  action  in  this
regard: completing the Banking Union, creating a central fiscal capacity, and advancing with the
Capital Union.
Too  much  financial  innovation,  deregulation  and  the  blind,  theological  belief  in  self-regulating
markets have brought us here, back to the era of re-regulation; but coordination is needed for
that, and Glexit is threatening this coordination.
It is however undeniable that the completion of the Banking Union is of paramount importance.
However,  there  is  still  no  consensus  on  operationalizing  the  EDIS,  on  debt  mutualization,  on
setting the minimum requirement for own funds and eligible liabilities, on the features of the fiscal
union, and the list could go on. I think that the Union should also clarify the fine balance between
the  consolidated  microprudential  supervision  of  banks  and  national  accountability  in  terms  of
resolution. The home-host issue has not been dealt with yet. Moreover, the European financial
architecture is populated with unfinished, incomplete, or untested mechanisms created after the
crisis. Even so, my message on the reform of the European financial sector is twofold. First, the
reform  is  fundamental  for  the  success  of  the  European  project.  Romania  welcomes  all  the
European  Commission’s  initiatives  aimed  at  enhancing  supervision,  consolidation,  and
accountability in this area, and we will do our best to help reach a consensus on these proposals
during  our  incoming  EU  Presidency.  Second,  it  is  also  fundamental  for  the  integrity  of  the
European  project  that  euro-area  should  not  be  ring-fenced;  the  reform  should  still  make  it
possible for non-euro countries to join euro, when they will be ready, on a level playfield.
 Lipton, David (2018), “Trust and the Future of Multilateralism”, Introductory Remarks for the
Price stability and financial stability are two sides of the same coin. You can’t have one without
the other – this is a lesson that history has recently taught us. And none of them is possible
without credible public policies.
1. 
Eurofi High Level Seminar, Sofia, Bulgaria, April 30, 2018.
2.
    Powell,  Jerome  H.  (2017),  "Prospects  for  Emerging  Market  Economies  in  a  Normalizing
Global Economy," speech delivered at the 2017 Annual Membership Meeting of the Institute of
International Finance, Washington, October 12.
3.
  Weidmann, Jens (2017), “Monetary policy and the architecture of the euro area”, speech at
the Deutsche Bundesbank's Capital City Reception, Berlin, 29 May 2017
4
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
4
.  Voinea, L. (2018), “Explaining the Post-Crisis Philips Curve: Wage Gap Matters for Inflation”,
manuscript
   5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
