  23.05.2018 
 “Strengthening the economic governance of the euro: short-term 
priorities and the long-term view” 
High Level Seminar. Banco de España 
 
Luis M. Linde 
Governor 
 
  Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Let me first extend a warm welcome to you all to the Banco de España. Thank you for joining 
us  today  in  this  seminar  that  addresses  the  pressing  and  very  important  topic  of  the 
Economic Governance of the Euro: Short-term Priorities and the Long-term View.  
I would like to thank the panelists who have been so kind to accept our invitation; we are 
very pleased to have among us a long list of distinguished participants that would certainly 
throw much welcomed light on the discussion.  
The timing of this conference is particularly relevant. After years of low growth, Europe is 
now  experiencing  a  robust  recovery  which  opens  up  a  window  of  opportunity  to  make 
progress  in  the  governance  reform  agenda  before  the  next  economic  downturn  unfolds. 
Supported by expansionary monetary policy, real GDP in the Euro Area has expanded for 
19 quarters in a row. Stronger price dynamics are yet to materialize, but we are confident 
that if we are prudent, patient and persistent, our monetary policy measures will be effective 
in achieving the medium-term goals.  
Price  stability  is  a  necessary  but  not  a  sufficient  condition  for  achieving  sustained  and 
balanced growth. In fact, one important lesson we can draw from the first twenty years of 
the EMU is the need to improve the area’s resilience to large macroeconomic shocks and 
to increase its stabilization capacity.  
In this context, we currently find ourselves at a crossroads in what refers to the pace of the 
governance reform agenda.  
Despite  evident  progress  since  the  peak  of  the  crisis,  the  building  of  a  more  cohesive 
monetary union, as proposed in the Van Rompuy’s Report of June 2012 (the so-called Four 
Presidents’ Report) and in the Juncker’s Report of June 2015 (the so-called Five Presidents’ 
Report), is, we all know  that, a very difficult task. As a matter of fact,  there has been no 
significant step forward since the establishment of the Single Resolution Fund in June 2014.  
Recently, several initiatives have attempted to re-launch the debate on the future of euro 
area’s  governance,  including,  in  December  2017,  the  European  Commission’s  report  on 
“Further steps towards completing Europe's Economic and Monetary Union: A roadmap”, 
or,  in  January  of  the  present  year,  the  Center  for  Economic  Policy  Research’s  report  on 
“Reconciling  risk  sharing  with  market  discipline:  A  constructive  approach  to  euro  area 
reform”, which, as many of you probably know, we discussed in a recent seminar here at 
the Banco de España.   
The package of reform measures put forward by the EC cover a broad set of issues, from 
the completion of the Banking Union and the design of mechanisms that reconcile market 
discipline and risk sharing to the establishment of a European Union Finance Minister. The 
panelists today will share their views and analysis on these central issues. Let me briefly 
reflect upon them.  
The Euro-Summit on 15th December 2017 resulted in a renewed political commitment to 
foster further progress on EMU´s architecture during the first semester of the present year. 
The  aim  was  to  trigger  the  necessary  discussions  and  achieve  material  progress  in  the 
 3/5 
 months  preceding  the  closure,  in  spring 2019,  of the  current legislature  of the  European 
Parliament.  
Our  political  leaders  assigned  priority  to  the  completion  of  the  Banking  Union,  with  the 
establishment  of  a  common  fiscal  backstop  for  the  Single  Resolution  Fund,  and  the 
introduction of a common European Deposit Insurance Scheme (EDIS) with eventual full risk 
mutualisation.  Both  are  essential  elements  to  severe  the  links  between  banks  and 
sovereigns and to bolster the ability of the area to deal with large macroeconomic shocks. 
The development of the Capital Markets Union is surely another key project that deserves 
to be mentioned at the top of the political agenda. 
Leaders also agree on the need to reduce risks in banks’ balance sheets, including –but not 
only- the stock of non-performing loans, which is still too large in some jurisdictions. Current 
proposals to create Sovereign Bond-Backed Securities (SBBS) could contribute to reduce 
current home-bias in bank´s sovereign holdings if accompanied by regulatory reforms that 
ensure acceptance by investors. But these reforms should be carefully calibrated to avoid 
hindering liquidity and price formation in sovereign bond markets. 
But there are other issues that will require more time to agree and to put in motion. As most 
of the empirical evidence points out, risk sharing channels are substantially weaker in the 
euro are than in other monetary unions, but also when compared with large countries inside 
the euro area, so that a larger share of idiosyncratic or national shocks to income cannot 
be smoothed out. Upgrading the efficiency of risk-sharing channels, both private and public, 
and better exploiting the synergies among them would provide the euro area with the shock-
absorption  capacity  and  the  improved  access  to  cross-border  equity  finance  that  is 
currently lacking.  
On the fiscal front, the euro area needs to achieve eventually a more complete fiscal union. 
Some  form  of  semi-automatic  cyclical  insurance  mechanism  against  asymmetric  shocks 
could  be  designed  to  make  it  possible  more  risk-sharing  without  entailing  permanent 
transfers  between  countries.  Depending  on  modalities,  such  an  instrument  could  also 
contribute to smooth aggregate shocks, achieve a more balanced policy mix and increasing 
sharing responsibilities with monetary policy. 
In addition, the EU rule-based fiscal framework needs to gain in simplicity and transparency. 
Recent  proposals,  which  seek  to  give  greater  weight  to  public  debt  as  a  medium-term 
anchor  and  to  the  expenditure  rule  as  an  operational  tool,  deserve  consideration.  At  the 
same  time,  increased national ownership  should  be  fostered  by  enhancing the  oversight 
role of independent fiscal authorities. The aim being to generate enough room for maneuver 
during good times, so that the stabilising capacity of fiscal policy may  be larger at crisis 
times.  
In sum, a lot of work remains to be done both in the near- and in the medium-term. These 
perspectives underpins the agenda of today’s Seminar, which we have organized around 
two panels.  
A first panel, on Short-term Challenges towards a Complete EMU, will discuss the reform 
agenda that is feasible to pursue in the current European parliamentary cycle (until 2019).  
4/5 
  In a second panel, on Long-term Prospects for a Cohesive EMU, we would like to address 
the medium- to long-run steps necessary to increase the euro area’s capacity to prevent 
crisis and to manage them.  
Finally, Economy Minister Ramón Escolano will close the Seminar explaining the strategic 
vision  underlining  the  recent  proposals  on  EMU  architecture  articulated  by  the  Spanish 
government. The proposals constitute, in my view, a politically realistic program to advance 
the process of governance reform in the short-term without losing sight of the longer-term 
needs. The final goal being providing the EMU with a more solid institutional framework that 
help  ensure  the  prosperity  and  well-being  of  euro  area  citizens  and  improve  the  public 
perception of the integration project.  
Now, according to the agenda, I give the floor to the moderator of the first panel, Paloma 
Marín.  
  5/5 
