Gent Sejko: Albania's economic and financial developments in 2017
Introductory statement by Mr Gent Sejko, Governor of the Bank of Albania, presenting the Annual
Report 2017 to the Parliamentary Committee on Economy and Finance, Tirana, 17 May 2018.
Honourable Speaker,
Honourable Members of Parliament
 The Bank of Albania views the accountability process as an essential element in its activity. This
process complements our institutional independence, enhances transparency and  reliability  of
the Bank of Albania and improves the effectiveness of our policies.
Therefore, I have the pleasure of presenting today the work and the achievements of the Bank of
Albania in 2017.
I  would  like  to  start  my  reporting  with  three  key  messages  that  reflect  the  conclusions  of  our
analysis and have been the common thread in our public communications over the past year.
First, the economy and financial system in Albania marked progress during 2017. The positive
development  trend  is  illustrated  by  the  acceleration  of  economic  growth  pace,  upswing  in
employment and decline in unemployment, and the improvement of financial balance sheets of
the public and private sectors. This progress has brought our economy closer to its potential and
has strengthened short and medium-term factors that support economic growth.
Second,  the  activity  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  in  the  past  year  has  been  in  line  with  our  legal
obligations and the Recommendations of the Parliament. Our policy and instruments have had a
positive, across-the-board contribution to our activities:
Promoting economic growth, through an accommodative monetary policy stance;
Strengthening financial stability, through a prudent and proactive supervisory and regulatory
policy;
Fostering  development  and  enhancing  financial  system  efficiency,  through  continued
financial  education,  and  cooperation  and  joint  initiatives  with  other  foreign  and  domestic
agencies and partners.
Third, I would like to draw the attention on the fact that, albeit positive development outlook, the
Albanian  economy  continues  to  face  medium  and  long-term  development  challenges.
Identification and mitigation of economic and financial vulnerabilities, prevention of potential risks,
and  continuation  of  structural  reforms  to  accelerate  the  growth  pace,  are  among  the  main
challenges  we  face.  Our  duty,  as  policy  makers,  is  to  draft  and  implement  action  plans
consistently and persistently, in order to duly address all the problems we face.
Let me now explain these issues in greater detail the issues, starting with a general overview of
key economic and financial developments in the past year.
1. Albanian economy and financial system in 2017
 Year 2017 marked progress for the Albanian economy and financial system.
According  to  INSTAT  data,  the  volume  of  economic  activity  grew  3.8%  in  2017,  registering  a
positive dynamics compared to 2.2% and 3.4% growth rates recorded in 2015 and 2016.
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
The economic activity expanded on a broad base and was underpinned, from the perspective of
aggregate demand, by the growth in consumption, investments and exports. Economic growth
benefitted  from  the  improvement  in  the  external  environment,  and  was  supported  by  the
domestic favourable financing conditions and economic agents’ confidence.
From the sectoral perspective, the expansion of aggregate demand contributed to the growth of
activity mainly in the services sector and in certain branches of the industry sector. A notable
development in 2017 was the positive performance in tourism, which provided a positive impulse
to economic growth.
Owing to economic growth, 79 thousand new jobs were created in the private non-agricultural
sector.  Total  employment  increased  by  3.3%  in  2017,  driven  largely  by  the  increase  in  the
services  sector.  In  parallel  to  the  increase  in  employment,  the  unemployment  rate  fell,  from
14.2% at the end of 2016, to 13.4% at the end of 2017.
Inflation has trended upward in 2017, averaging 2.0% from 1.3% in the previous year. The uptick
in  inflation  reflected  the  improvement  of  economic  activity  and  strengthening  of  domestic
inflationary  pressures.  Yet,  this  indicator  continues  to  undershoot  our  target,  reflecting  the
presence of spare capacities in the economy, the low inflation rates in our trading partners and
the appreciated exchange rate.
The expansion of economic activity is accompanied by the improvement of some of the main
economic and financial balances for Albania.  Thus:
The current account deficit decreased at 6.9% of the GDP in 2017, from 7.6% recorded in
the previous year. Its improvement reflected the growth in tourism and other services of the
business.
Fiscal indicators registered consolidation, reflected in a low level of the budget deficit and in
maintaining control over public debt.
Lastly, the financial situation of enterprises has been improving, as illustrated by their high
liquidity levels and the progressive decline in the non-performing loans ratio.
Interest  rates  in  the  financial  markets  remained  low  and  soundness  indicators  of  the  banking
system have been improving. The Albanian banking system maintained good levels of liquidity,
and improved the profitability and capitalisation indicators. The Capital Adequacy Ratio recorded
16.6% at the end of 2017, upward by around 0.2 percentage point from a year earlier. As at end
of 2017, the share of banking sector assets stood at 92.5% of the GDP.
The activity of the banking sector was stable, reducing the risks to financial stability. In particular,
the credit risk marked significant reduction in this year. The ratio of non-performing loans fell to
13.2%  at  the  end  of  the  year,  down  by  around  5  percentage  points  from  a  year  earlier.  The
liquidity risk in banking activity continues to be low, while the banking system exposure to market
risks remains present and subject to monitoring.
The  improvement  of  the  cyclical  position  of  Albania  and  the  encouraging  signals  on  the
economic growth outlook have also reflected the results of the work of the Bank of Albania. Let
me explain in greater detail.
2. Bank of Albania activity highlights in 2017
The activity of the Bank of Albania has been and remains oriented toward fulfilling our mission
and legal obligations.  Regarding the operational aspect, our activity in 2017 was guided by the
Medium-term Development Strategy 2016–2018.
The two main aspects in our activity were monetary policy and banking sector supervision and
regulation.
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
The monetary policy of  the  Bank  of Albania  continued  to  maintain  the  accommodative  stance
during  2017,  in  the  presence  of  still  incomplete  utilisation  of  production  capacities  and  weak
inflationary  pressures.  The  monetary  stimulus  was  transmitted  through  maintaining  the  policy
rate at the lowest historical level, at 1.25%, increasing the volume and average duration of the
liquidity injected in the interbank market and the forward guidance tool.
The positive effects of the monetary policy were present in several aspects.
First, in lower costs of financing consumption and investments. The volume of lek credit to
the private sector increased by 7.2% in 2017, providing the main contribution to total credit
growth.
Second,  in  reducing  uncertainties  of  economic  agents,  encouraging 
consumption and investments.
Third,  in  mitigating  appreciation  pressures  of  the  exchange  rate,  contributing  to  the
improvement of the balance of trade exchanges and further growth of economic activity.
Fourth,  in  strengthening  of  financial  stability. The  financial  environment  with  low  interest
rates  has  improved  the  financial  balances  of  borrowers,  through  boosting  aggregate
demand, easing the service cost of debt, as well as encouraging the restructuring of existing
loans.
toward
them 
Our assessments on the monetary policy impact show that its contribution to economic growth
for 2015, 2016 and 2017 is around 0.2, 0.4 and 0.7 percentage points, respectively.
Also, the Bank of Albania has continued the efforts to improve the monetary policy transmission
mechanism. Throughout 2017, we have worked on three main aspects:
First, promoting the use of the national currency.
The high euroization renders the monetary policy pass-through more difficult, as it exposes the
private agents and the financial system to exchange rate volatility.  Aware of this fact, the Bank of
Albania, the Ministry of Finance and Economy and the Albanian Financial Supervision Authority
signed a Memorandum of Cooperation “On increasing the use of the national currency (ALL) in
the Albanian  financial  system  and  economy”.  In  this  memorandum,  the  signatory  institutions
commit to identifying and undertaking actions within their area of competence. In this framework,
the  Bank  of  Albania  identified  a  package  of  measures,  following  the  consultations  with  the
banking industry, and which shall enter into force over the second half of 2018.
Second, enhancing the appetite of banks to expand lending.
Banks’  appetite  for  lending  continues  to  remain  relatively  low,  by  reflecting  the  effect  of  two
factors: (i) deleveraging policies for reducing exposure in the countries of the region, including
Albania, implemented by parent banks from the euro area; and, (ii) perception of credit risk at
home.  The  Bank  of  Albania,  to  address  this  issue,  has  continued  the  collaboration  with  the
European  Banking Authority  Supervisory  College,  to  exchange  information  and  harmonise  the
supervisory  policies. Also,  our  institution  continues  to  implement  the  measures  set  out  in  the
national plan for reducing the non-performing loans and improving the lending environment.
Third, fostering the development of financial markets and expanding the range of financial
instruments.
In 2017, the Bank of Albania, the Ministry of Finance and Economy and the World Bank explored
options  for  developing  the  secondary  market  of  Government  securities  and  improving  the
functioning of the primary market. This project will help to: increase the Government securities
trading; enhance the investors’ base, and better manage the liquidity.
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Regarding the financial stability, the Bank of Albania has continued to implement a prudential and
pro-active regulatory and supervisory policy.
In 2017, fourteen full-scope and partial examinations were performed in banks, non-bank financial
institutions, and savings and loan associations. The examinations showed that the performance
of  the  banking  sector  improved  in  terms  of:  the  quality  of  internal  policies  and  their
implementation;  the  establishment  of  adequate  risk  management  processes;  and,  the
implementation  of  the  supervisory  regulatory  framework.  Moreover,  the  non-bank  financial
institutions are assessed to have still space to ensure proper effectiveness, independence and
authority.  The supervisory practice improved, regarding the methodology for banks control, the
approximation of standards with Basel principles and the efforts to adopt the best international
practices.
Particular attention was given to the consolidating processes and strategic plans of the banking
system.
Also, the Bank of Albania, in 2017:
compiled  and  approved  the Macro-prudential  Policy  Strategy,  which  orients  the  use  of
regulatory instruments for enhancing the financial stability of Albania;
prepared the regulatory framework on the Internal Capital Adequacy Assessment, compiled
in the light of Basel principles and EU directives. The Internal Capital Adequacy Assessment
Process complements the supervisory perspective with the self-assessment dimension of
banks;
made significant changes regarding the prevention process of money laundering, through
the revision of the relevant regulatory framework;
continued the work for the revision of the supervisory methodology on the assessment of the
corporate governance in banks; of the functioning and independence of their committees; of
the internal audit structure in assessing the risks and their functioning. In this project, we
partnered with the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Notwithstanding  the  progress  made  in  reducing  the  non-performing  loans,  attention  has  been
paid  to  the  achievement  of  banks’  annual  objectives  regarding  non-performing  loans  and  the
compilation of the Recovery and Resolution Plans for larger borrowers. Banks report regularly to
the Bank of Albania on the level of their relations with every borrower, as well as the expectations
and plans on future developments, in compliance with our requirements. With assistance from
the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund, a regulatory framework, aiming to foster
banks collaboration and coordination for addressing common borrowers, is being compiled.
The Law ‘'On the recovery and resolution of banks in the Republic of Albania” entered into force
in  2017.  This  Law  designates  the  Bank  of Albania  as  the  Resolution Authority  for  banks  and
branches of foreign banks that conduct their activity in Albania.  This Law is another step toward
adopting the European standards in the regulatory framework of the Bank of Albania. In its role as
the Resolution Authority, the Bank of Albania increases the security of the banking system.
In parallel with the above-mentioned aspects of its work, the Bank of Albania has paid attention
and has worked to: strengthen the development of the payment system; improve the procedures
and modalities for foreign reserve management; improve communication with public; deepen the
research work; expand and improve statistics; increase financial literacy and financial inclusion;
collaborate with domestic and international institutions.
I  would  like  to  highlight  that  Bank  of Albania  has  been  attentive  not  only  to  realising  the  legal
objectives, but also to strengthen its institutional governance. In this context, the Medium-term
Development  Strategy  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  together  with  the  medium-term  budget,  was
updated  in  2017.  For  the  first  time,  the  capital  expenditures  and  the  projects  included  in  the
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
budget  were  preliminary  approved  by  the  Capital  Expenditure  Committee.  Also,  the  Audit
Committee continued the work throughout 2017. This committee conducts a monitoring function
independently from the Bank of Albania management. In 2017, the Supervisory Council approved,
for the first time, the level of tolerance to the operational risk at the Bank of Albania. It will help the
efficient risk management, through the early identification and management of operational risk, in
line with the established procedures.
We deem that the implemented policies and the undertaken measures have served to promoting
monetary  and  financial  stability,  by  contributing  to  safeguarding  the  economic  and  financial
balances, necessary for a sustainable economic growth.
Honourable Speaker,
Honourable Members of Parliament,
As  I  stated  at  the  beginning  of  my  speech,  the  development  perspective  of Albania  remains
positive.    Nevertheless,  we  have  and  will  continue  to  face  challenges,  which  should  be
addressed with courage, vision and determination.
At the end of my presentation, allow me to present the vision of the Bank of Albania on the future
of the economy and financial system, as well as on adequate development policies.
3. Development perspectives and challenges
Supported by the favourable financing conditions, the further recovery of global economy and the
strengthening of confidence in economy, the cyclical improvement of the Albanian economy is
expected  to  continue  in  the  medium-term  horizon  in  the  next  two-three  years.  The  growth  of
aggregate demand will encourage the further increase of employment and a faster rise in wages.
The fuller utilisation of production capacities will enable the return of inflation to target within the
medium-term horizon and will help improving the overall economic and financial equilibriums.
The realisation of this scenario is conditioned by the lack of internal or external shocks on the
Albanian economy or financial system. Also, it requires continuing the accommodative monetary
policy stance and maintaining the consolidating fiscal policy trend. These policies’ coordination is
vital for strengthening the macroeconomic stability of Albania. On the one hand, it maintains a
stimulating resultant trend of main economic policies and, on the other hand, it addresses the
various vulnerabilities.
Looking beyond the medium-term horizon, the Bank of Albania assesses that more needs to be
done  for  strengthening  the  economic  growth  pace  and  increasing  the  Albanian  economy’s
resilience against shocks. Though the accommodative monetary policy provides a support in this
regard, it cannot substitute the structural reforms needed for improving the whole functioning of
the Albanian economy.
We deem these structural reforms should address some key issues:
Further  improvement  of  business  climate,  through:  continuation  of  measures  to  reduce
informality and promote fair competition; a thorough improvement and harmonisation of the
legal  framework  and  law  enforcement;  and  cutting  on  bureaucracy  and  improving  public
administration  efficiency.  The  improvement  of  the  business  climate  is  vital  for  attracting
foreign investments and promoting domestic ones.
Expansion  of  markets  for  Albanian  products,  through:  promotion  of  Albanian  products
trademarks;  promotion  of  regional  integration;  and  acceleration  of  European  integration
process.
Increase  of  Albanian  economy  efficiency,  through:  further  investments  in  infrastructure,
education  and  health;  encouraging  the  increase  of  participation  in  labour  force;  and
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
improvement  of  business  management  standards.    Increased  efficiency  in  the  economy
implies higher growth rates and higher welfare standards for the Albanian society.
Increase  flexibility  and  resilience  of  the  Albanian  economy,  through:  encouraging  the
restructuring  process  of  enterprises;  further  improving  the  supervisory  architecture  and
financial system regulation; and increasing prudence for public and private debt indicators. A
more  resilient  and  flexible  economy  weathers  shocks  easier  and  is  re-oriented  faster  to
development opportunities.
Further  expansion  and  diversification  of  financial  markets,  by  working  in  parallel  with  the
increase of savings in the Albanian economy, for a studied development of other segments
of  the  financial  market  and  for  the  prudent  introduction  of  new  products  and  financial
instruments. The development and diversification of financial markets improves access to
finance,  by  increasing  the  base  of  potential  entrepreneurs  and  by  providing  a  better
management of personal finances. Also, it improves the financing structure of the Albanian
economy and paves the way to the development of the country, in non-distant future, when,
potentially, the role of banks and banking industry will be more reduced.
The Bank of Albania deems that the European integration process should be the guiding anchor
to all development policies of the country. The pursuit of this objective requires collaboration and
energies by all the relevant actors in this process, implying their willingness to afford the costs of
the necessary policies and reforms for the integration of the country.
Honourable Speaker,
Honourable Members of Parliament,
 Concluding, I would like to assure you that the Bank of Albania remains committed to complying
with its legal objectives, and to fulfilling our institutional tasks and engagements.
Thank you for your attention!
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
