Nestor A  Espenilla,  Jr:  Providing  an  enabling  environment  at  the
crossroads of digital transformation
Speech by Mr Nestor A Espenilla, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank of the Philippines), at the Annual Convention of the Association of Philippine Correspondent
Bank Officers (APCB), Puerto Princesa, Palawan, 30 June 2018.
 Thank you Association of Philippine Correspondent Bank Officers (APCB) for the opportunity to
speak and share the BSP’s initiatives.  ACPB President Arthur Vincent Chung, members, key
players and stakeholders in correspondent banking, ladies and gentlemen, Good morning!
 
Your  theme,  “Digitalization  and  the  Future  of  Correspondent  Banking”,  is  very  relevant.
Digitalization and the integration of finance and technology or “fintech” are fast revolutionizing the
banking and the global financial services industries.  Digital innovations drive increasing demand
for new and better financial products and services.  Globally, consumers and clients expect quick
and  immediate  response  rates,  and  faster  and  shorter  transaction  and  payment  processes.
There  is  also  a  rise  in  public  confidence  in  making  electronic  payments  and  in  using  digital
channels, a clear culture change! 
So how do we keep up?  While correspondent banks are concerned with digitalizing its services
and leveraging on technology to facilitate cross-border trade, remittance flows and payment and
settlement transactions, the BSP is also on its toes.  The BSP under the strategic direction of
“Continuity  Plus  Plus”  is  committed  to  providing  a  strong  macroeconomy  and  an  enabling
operating environment for you, our regulated and supervised entities and market players.
 
At the BSP, we recognize the potential of new digital technologies. We are keenly aware that
financial institutions that leverage on technology are granted greater opportunities to diversify. 
Technology  use  allows  them  to  widen  the  products  and  services  offered.    We  note  that
technological  change  is  exponential,  allowing  the  emergence  of  an  even  greater  variety  of
services.  We anticipate that with greater use, needs of financial consumers evolve and become
more sophisticated.  
 
We at the BSP anticipate the emergence of a new competitive space where service innovation
must  be  encouraged.  We  allow  room  for  new  business  models,  technologies,  industry  wide
collaborations and partnerships to be developed. 
 
Not  only  does  technological  change  and  digitization  facilitate  efficient,  real-time  settlement  of
financial transactions, but they promote greater financial inclusion as well.
 
As regulators, our primary goal is to provide an appropriate and enabling regulatory environment. 
We  seek  to  encourage  innovation  while  effectively  managing  ensuing  risks.    We  continue  to
design  and  implement  a  regulatory  framework  that  will  support  the  market  infrastructure  and
which will also promote market discipline.  The safety and integrity of the financial system is our
primordial consideration.
The Current Fintech Landscape in the Philippines
The  current  fintech  landscape  is  complex.    It  is  characterized  by  a  multitude  of  payments,
insurance, deposit-taking, lending, capital-raising, investment management and financial market
infrastructure linkages.
 
As  of  end-2017,  payments  had  the  largest  market  share  of  the  fintech  landscape.    Forty-four
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
percent of players offered innovative solutions to facilitate payments and settlement transactions.
Of  the  recorded  60  players,  about  27  percent  have  direct  interactions  with  the  BSP  or  its
supervised financial institutions either as a BSP registered, licensed or supervised entity.
 
We  advise  that  since  technology  is  portable,  scalable  and  cost-attractive,  market  players  and
regulators alike must remain vigilant and watchful of the rapidly evolving nature of fintechs and
how it is revolutionizing digital banking in the Philippines.
 
The BSP’s Regulatory Sandbox
 
Regulatory policies and standards must evolve alongside emerging technologies and the digital
transformation of the banking system.
 
The BSP espouses a flexible “test-and-learn” approach to financial innovation.  We call this, the
“regulatory  sandbox.”  Essentially,  the  sandbox  provides  a  testing  ground  for  new  business
models to guide us as regulators, in assessing potential risks. The ultimate objective is to be
aware  of  the  risks,  to  employ  mitigating  actions  as  needed,  and  also  allow  room  for  market
players to leverage on new technologies.
 
Guided by the sandbox approach, the BSP ensures that regulation is calibrated according to the
defined activity’s identified risks. The approach also encourages dialogue and multi-stakeholder
collaboration among fintechs and various financial sector players.  The purpose is to achieve a
“whole-of-government approach”  to ensure policy consistency and prevent regulatory arbitrage.
Ultimately, fintech innovations must work for the benefit of consumers.  This would include the
underbanked and unbanked sectors. In this regard, digitalization has great potential to promote
inclusive growth.  With financial inclusion as the goal, as regulators, we need to ensure that the
design and deployment of digital financial solutions meet the highest standards of transparency,
product suitability, security and confidentiality.
With  this  in  mind,  we  have  further  refined  existing  regulations  to  more  effectively  respond  to
digitalization  of  banking  services,  fintech  developments  and  emergence  of  technology-related
risks  while  remaining  supportive  of  financial  innovation.  Some  of  these  regulations  have
significant impact on correspondent banking.
Staying Competitive in the Midst of Digital Revolution
The rapid evolution of digital technology, particularly the widespread use of smart phones at the
turn  of  the  new  millennium,  revolutionized  financial  product  and  banking  service  delivery.
Customers now have unprecedented access to a wide array of electronic platforms.  Included in
these  are  virtual  financial  services  platforms,  which  allow  customers  to  perform  banking
transactions and make payments anytime, anywhere, and at their own convenience.
 
Recognizing  that  electronic  banking  expands  client  reach  and  improves  financial  access,  as
early as 2000, we allowed banks to engage in electronic banking.
 
In  parallel,  we  have  implemented  a  cash  agent  model.    This  provides  an  innovative  service
delivery channel through combining e-banking self-service online and real-time transactions, with
cash-in, cash-out (CICO) provided by third-party cash agents.
 
Emerging  digital  solutions,  products  and  services,  push  banks  to  keep  pace  with  increasing
competition  posed  by  even  non-bank  players.    Non-bank  players  offer  financial  products  and
services  with  thoughtfully  designed  user  interfaces.  One  recent  development  with  significant
impact to correspondent banking is the rise of blockchain or distributed ledger technology (DLT).
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Hence, correspondent banks must embrace this wave of innovation and rethink strategies. To
grow markets in the midst of competition, new customer solutions through efficient operations
should be delivered.
 
Technology-based  solution  providers  suggest  that  blockchain  or  DLT  could  be  harnessed  to
alleviate  some  correspondent  banking  issues.    This  can  be  achieved  by  enabling  better  risk
management, reducing costs, and providing an alternative payment platform, especially in terms
of transferring small-value payments.
 
In  this  connection,  the  BSP  is  working  closely  with  market  innovators  and  industry  players  to
explore tie-ups of correspondent banks with DLT providers. We believe that collaboration and
strengthening  partnerships  with  other  fintech  players  is  a  way  to  boost  digital  capabilities  of
correspondent banks.
 
We  recently  approved  a  project  under  the  test-and-learn  approach.    The  project  will  facilitate
creation of a real-time domestic and overseas remittance corridor without the need to establish a
central  operator.    This  will  prove  beneficial  to  our  remittance  sector  which  relies  heavily  on
correspondent banking for the safe and efficient settlement of transactions.
   
The  Bankers Association  of  the  Philippines  (BAP)  is  also  spearheading  a  project  to  develop
digital IDs powered by blockchain technology.
Establishing a Safe and Efficient Retail Payments System  
In  2015,  the  National  Retail  Payments  System  (NRPS)  was  launched.    The  NRPS  will  help
create  a  safe,  efficient,  affordable,  interoperable,  and  reliable  retail  payments  system  in  the
country. The NRPS and the resulting envisioned payment ecosystem will serve as a platform for
fintech innovations. Industry players can utilize fintech solutions and provide services within an
organized, commercially-viable and efficient retail payments system. 
 
Since its launch, critical milestones reached include: (1) establishment and operationalization of
the  industry-led  payment  system  management  body  (PSMB);  (2)  transitioning  of  the  batch
interbank fund transfer service of the Philippine Clearinghouse Corporation (PCHC) into PESO
Net, the first multilateral automated clearing hours in the country; and (3) the launch of InstaPay
which allows 24/7 low-value electronic fund transfers.
 
Enhancing the Regulatory Environment for Money Service Businesses (MSBs)
 
Meanwhile, the regulatory framework on the operations of money service businesses or Money
Service  Businesses  (MSBs)  has  been  rationalized.  Specifically,  the  customer  due  diligence
requirements to re-balance financial integrity and financial inclusion objectives of policy reform
were enhanced.
 
Under  our  amended  anti-money  laundering  (AML)  rules  (which  covers  MSBs)  customer  due
diligence/Know-Your-Client 
low-risk
customers/accounts/transactions.    This  is  provided  certain  conditions  are  met  to  ensure  that
residual money laundering/terrorist financing (ML/TF) risks are adequately managed.
requirements 
relaxed 
(KYC) 
were 
for 
Regulating the Use of Cryptocurrencies/Virtual Currencies
The  rise  in  cryptocurrency  or  virtual  currency  (VC)  presents  an  immediate  threat  to
correspondent banking.  This is because it allows peer-to-peer transfer of value without going
through  intermediaries  or  central  counterparties.  The  BSP  recognizes  that  VC  systems  can
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
revolutionize financial services delivery, particularly for payments and remittances.
 
Thus, we established a framework to regulate VC exchanges and similar entities operating in the
Philippines. Under the new framework, VC exchanges are classified as Remittance and Transfer
Companies  (RTCs).    They  are  subject  to  registration,  minimum  capital  requirements,  internal
controls,  regulatory  reporting  and  compliance  with  the  anti-money  laundering  rules  and
regulations.
   
In  particular,  we  keep  close  track  of  the  use  of  virtual  currency  for  trading  and  fund-raising
through initial coin offerings (ICOs) and the emergence of private digital currencies and Central
Bank-Issued Digital Currencies (CBDCs).
 
We are collaborating with other regulators for a harmonized regulatory approach on ICOs and
VC trading activities. We are also working closely with BSFIs on their respective plans to launch
private digital currencies and other pioneering VC technologies. Presently, we are looking into the
issue  of  CBDCs  and  what  it  means  for  the  supply  of  credit  and  the  impact  on  the  financial
system.
 
These initiatives take time and warrant thorough consideration.  In all this, the BSP is carefully
monitoring emerging technologies to balance the rewards of innovation against the overall safety
and integrity of the financial system.
Promoting Enhanced Cybersecurity in the Philippine Financial System
 
There is also a need to address cybersecurity on a broader scope. This is a must for a digital,
financial ecosystem to thrive.
 
To respond to this challenge, we established a framework that provides parameters and best
practices to identify, prevent, detect, respond to, and recover from cyber-attacks. In November of
last year, we issued information security guidelines.  These require BSFIs to manage information
security risks within acceptable levels through a dynamic interplay of people, policies, processes,
and technologies.
 
In this regard, the board and senior management of BSP-supervised financial institutions (BSFIs)
play  a  critical  role.    As  the  ones  ultimately  responsible  for  their  respective  institution’s  risk
oversight  and  governance,  the  board  and  senior  management  of  BSFIs  must  safeguard
information security.
Exploring RegTech Solutions 
Fintech  products  and  services  are  susceptible  to  cyber  threats,  money  laundering,  and  other
fraudulent  activities.  Cognizant  of  this,  regulatory  technology  or  RegTech  solutions  have
emerged as an important technological supplement to existing regulatory and supervisory tools. 
This allows the effective address of regulatory challenges in the financial services sector.   
 
The  BSP  is  currently  investigating  and  will  pilot  RegTech  solutions  to  streamline  supervisory
functions,  particularly  to  address  regulatory  compliance  and  reporting  requirements  of
supervised financial institutions.
Engaging in Regional Cooperation Agreements       
Lastly,  we  are  enhancing  our  cross-border  presence  through  multi-sectoral  and  regional
collaborative engagements. Last November 2017, the BSP entered into a Fintech Cooperation
Agreement with the Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS). Under this agreement, both countries
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
can  share  information  about  emerging  fintech  trends  and  developments  and  work  on  fintech
projects together.
Concluding Remarks
 
As key players in the financial system, we trust in the continued partnership of APCB. To fully
reap  the  rewards  of  financial  innovation,  we  need  to  strike  a  balance  between  optimizing  the
benefits of digitalization against the overall safety and soundness of the financial system.
 
Digital  transformation  in  correspondent  banking  is  not  a  future  event.    It  is  a  present  reality.
Recognizing this, we need not be apprehensive.  Instead, we must start working together, always
keeping a positive mind-set.
In closing, I emphasize the importance of sustained collaboration among stakeholders.  This is
needed  to  create  a  safe,  efficient  and  reliable  digital  environment.     As  new  technologies  like
mobile banking, social networking, big data, and cloud computing advance, so must banks need
deeper  and  wider  understanding  of  trends.    Stakeholders  would  do  best  to  identify  growth
opportunities  and  establish  synergies  with  new  players  and  industries  and  with  each  other  to
remain competitive and relevant.
I look forward to joining this afternoon’s panel discussion. 
Thank you very much and good morning.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
