N  S  Vishwanathan:  It  is  not  business  as  usual  for  lenders  and
borrowers
Speech by Mr N S Vishwanathan, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the National
Institute of Bank Management, Pune, 18 April 2018.
 1. Chief guest, Shri M. Damodaran, Dr. Dhingra, Director NIBM, other dignitaries on the dais,
distinguished  bankers,  faculty  and  staff  of  the  institution,  proud  parents,  and,  all  graduating
students, and of course, friends from media, I thank NIBM for giving me the opportunity to be part
of this occasion and share some thoughts when another batch of bank management graduates
is passing out.
2.  Martin  Luther  King  Jr.  once  said  “Intelligence  plus  character  –  that  is  the  goal  of  true
education”. If I can paraphrase what he said in the context of management education, I would say
that  the  true  goal  of  management  education  is  to  teach  business  acumen  and  professional
ethics. When it is a degree from an institute specializing in banking & finance, the emphasis on
ethics  becomes  even  greater.  The  need  to  do  the  right  thing  in  the  right  manner  cannot  be
overemphasized today, given the overhang of large stressed assets that we are dealing with.
3.  When  the  banking  regulator  speaks  to  bank  management  graduates  in  today’s  scenario,  it
cannot  but  be  on  the  resolution  of  stressed  assets,  because  we  have  to  get  over  with  this
problem soon, so that our banking system dominated by Public Sector Banks (PSBs) can attain
a  sustainable  growth  path  in  near  future. Accordingly,  I  will  explain  the  recent  steps  that  the
Reserve Bank has taken in this direction and as a part of this, I will dwell at some length on the
new framework for resolution of stressed assets that we articulated in our circular of February
12, 2018.
Stressed assets
4. The graph below shows the evolution of stressed assets, including Non-Performing Assets
(NPAs) of the banking system in India. It is beneficial to look at stressed assets as whole rather
than NPAs only, to avoid errors in inter-temporal comparison because an account becomes an
NPA only when it is recognized as such. As I had clarified in a speech in August 2016 on the
topic Asset  Quality  of  Indian  Banks:  Way  Forward  (rbi.org.in/scripts/BS_SpeechesView.aspx?
Id=1023), this growth in stressed assets was in turn the outcome of rapid credit growth during
2006–2011. During this time, the nominal credit growth was in excess of 20% Y-O-Y and far in
excess of the nominal growth in industry.
 1 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
5. As may be seen from the graph, stressed assets have registered a steady growth since 2011;
but if we were to look at NPAs, the growth was muted until 2014 and has been more dramatic,
particularly  after  2015–16.  This  is  because,  the  Reserve  Bank  undertook  an  Asset  Quality
Review (AQR) that led to recognition as NPA of several loans, which banks had then considered
to be standard assets. Indeed, NPAs went up from 4.62% in 2014–15 to 7.79% in 2015–16, and
were as high as 10.41% by December 2017.
Asset quality review
6. In February 2014, the Reserve Bank issued the framework for resolution of stressed assets.
An important part of the framework was the setting up of the Central Repository of Information on
Large Credits (CRILC). CRILC captured all exposures of banks above Rs 50 million. The data
was accessible not just to the Reserve Bank but also to banks. For the first time we created a
supervisory  database  of  this  nature,  which  gave  Reserve  Bank  a  comprehensive  view  of  the
banking system’s exposure to a large borrower and how the exposure to the same borrower was
classified differently by different banks. While our stand has been that asset classification should
be  based  on  the  record  of  recovery  with  individual  banks,  CRILC  gave  us  the  wherewithal  to
objectively assess whether the divergent classifications were indeed justified. It also gave us a
better insight into movement of funds from one bank to the other to keep an account standard.
7. This way, the AQR, backed by CRILC, enabled us to get a banking system-wide view of large
bank  credits  and  make  a  holistic  assessment  of  the  true  state  of  health  of  those  exposures.
Together, they led to identification of NPAs that had not been recognized as such by the banks
and also of accounts that would require to be downgraded over various timelines, if necessary
closures such as resolution or account upgrade were not achieved. The resulting recognition of
true asset quality at banks largely explains the spurt in NPAs during the last three years.
Evolution of resolution frameworks in India
8. Before I come to the framework enunciated in the circular of February 12, 2018, it would be
good  to  have  a  quick  look  at  the  resolution  frameworks  we  had  in  place  before. The  normal
principle  for  restructuring  is  that  an  account  should  be  downgraded  if  any  amount  is
forborne.  The  Reserve  Bank  put  in  place,  in August  2001,  the  Corporate  Debt  Restructuring
(CDR) mechanism for restructuring of debt without the need for an asset quality downgrade if the
restructuring  plan  met  certain  conditions.  The  CDR  mechanism  worked  well  initially.  In  later
years,  its  asset  quality  forbearance  was  used  more  as  a  tool  for  avoiding  recognition  of  non-
performance of stressed assets and less for their effective resolution. Therefore, in May 2013,
we announced the decision to withdraw the forbearance on asset classification effective
April 1, 2015. However, in the wake of the mounting NPAs, the Reserve Bank allowed asset
classification benefits for certain types of restructuring schemes. These included the Strategic
Debt Restructuring (SDR), Flexible Structuring of Project Loans and the Scheme for Sustainable
Structuring of Stressed Assets (S4A). Thus, while the principle that a restructuring would call for
downgrade of the asset was in place, a window of exception was opened, provided the contours
of restructuring met certain conditions.
9. It has been our view that the restructuring schemes were required at a time when we did not
have  an  effective  bankruptcy  law  in  place.  The  schemes  essentially  created  a  framework  for
resolution that should normally happen under the aegis of an insolvency and bankruptcy law. The
focal points of the schemes were deep restructuring of stressed assets, change of ownership /
management of stressed borrowers, optimal structuring of credit facilities, and haircuts wherever
the exposures were economically unviable.
10.  In  2016,  the  Insolvency  and  Bankruptcy  Code,  2016  (IBC),  which  is  a  comprehensive
bankruptcy  code,  was  enacted  and  notified. The  Code  envisages  timely  resolution  of
borrower defaults through collective decision making by the creditors. The Code is both
 2 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
process-oriented  and  time-oriented.  It  is-process-oriented,  in  that  it  lays  down,  in  detail,  the
various steps that need to be followed once a borrower is admitted for insolvency; and it is time-
oriented because it specifies strict timelines for insolvency resolution, failing which the borrower
would have to be taken into liquidation.
11. The general approach of bankers to stress in large assets has been one of avoiding the de
jure recognition of non-performance of such accounts. This is why we have a history of a
large  number  of  cases  of  failed  restructuring  as  the  schemes  were  used  for  avoiding  a
downgrade rather than resolving the asset. Prolonging the true asset quality recognition suited
both the bankers and the borrowers. The former could make their books look cleaner than they
actually were; the latter could avoid the defaulter tag even while, in fact defaulting. Governor had
referred to this in his March 14, 2018 speech (www.rbi.org.in/home.aspx) as the borrower-banker
nexus, which may not have a pejorative connotation, but implied that the banks indulged in the
proverbial  act  of  extending  and  pretending.  It  is  instructive  to  mention  here  that most  cases
where the SDR scheme was invoked did not result in change of management,  implying
that the scheme was used only for the asset classification benefit during the standstill period of
18  months.  The  strike  rate  in  case  of  S4A  was  somewhat  better,  because  there  were
preconditions to the applicability of the scheme and the Overseeing Committee (OC) ensured
strict adherence to the framework upfront. However, the total value of such cases in the overall
scheme of things was not that significant.
12.  The  amendments  to  the  Banking  Regulation Act,  1949  empowering  the  Reserve  Bank  to
direct banks to refer specific cases of default for resolution under IBC were a clear indication that
an external nudge was required for banks to file insolvency application against large borrowers.
As you may be aware, RBI constituted an Internal Advisory Committee (IAC) in 2017 to determine
cases to be referred under IBC. Based on its recommendations, a total of 41 accounts were
identified for such reference in two tranches. The IAC opined that RBI should evolve a steady-
state  framework  for  filing  insolvency  applications  in  future,  rather  than  identify  cases  itself
periodically.
The new paradigm
13. The recommendation of the IAC made eminent sense for the following reasons. Firstly, the
IBC is a comprehensive and time-bound framework for dealing with corporate stress. Secondly,
a clear articulation of policy in this regard will bring certainty to all the stakeholders. Thirdly, a
steady-state framework for reference under IBC was the logical outcome of the amendments to
the BR Act; it would not have been equitable, if the powers were used for a limited time for a
limited  number  of  cases.  Finally  and  more  importantly,  the  IAC  recommendation  was  in
consonance  with  Reserve  Bank’s  preference  all  along  for  an  efficient  legal  framework  for
insolvency and bankruptcy over regulatorily mandated schemes.
14. It was therefore, decided to go ahead with the recommendation of the IAC. Since a process-
oriented Code was enacted in the country which also provided for exploring resolution options
before  liquidation,  another  process-oriented  regulatory  framework  for  out-of-court  resolution  of
stressed assets was considered redundant. The Reserve Bank decided that rather than having
two process-oriented frameworks, it would be beneficial to have two complementary frameworks
that seamlessly align with each other – one which provides full flexibility for out-of-court workouts
to be explored within a reasonable period after default, failing which, the other, viz., the statutory
process under the IBC would kick in.
15. The new framework for resolution of stressed assets outlined in the Reserve Bank’s circular
of February 12, 2018 is an outcome of the above philosophy. You would notice that unlike the
earlier  frameworks, this  is  more  outcome-oriented  and  leaves  considerable  flexibility  to
banks to determine the process as well as the contours of the restructuring plan.  The
revised framework removes various process and input constraints which were embedded in the
 3 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
earlier regulatory schemes for restructuring. Instead it provides as much flexibility as possible to
lenders and the stressed borrowers so long as a credible resolution plan is implemented within a
specified timeframe. If lenders and the stressed borrowers are unable to put in place a credible
resolution plan within the timelines, then the structured insolvency resolution process under the
IBC should take over.
16. Let me highlight some other noteworthy features. The revised framework tries to reduce the
arbitrage the borrowers are currently enjoying while raising funds through borrowing from banks
vis-à-vis raising funds from the capital markets. If a borrower delays coupon/principal payment
on  a  corporate  bond  even  for  one  day,  the  market  would  penalize  the  borrower  heavily  –  the
rating would be downgraded, the yields on the bonds would shoot up, cost of further financing
would increase, suits would be filed by investors, etc., to name a few. So far, defaults in bank
borrowings  have  not  attracted  similar  reactions.  Only  when  the  overdues  stretch  beyond  90
days,  the  loans  would  be  classified  as  non-performing  assets;  hence,  efforts  by  lenders  and
borrowers  have  been  to  avoid  the  account  having  to  be  de  jure  classified  as  NPA,
notwithstanding the de facto status. What this means is that debt contract embedded in bank
loans in India has been continuously losing its sanctity, especially where the borrowing is
large. There is a need to change this and restore the sanctity of the debt contract, lest bank debt
becomes  subordinate  even  to  equity.  The  new  framework  is  precisely  aimed  at  doing  this.
Prompt repayment to banks is critical because they access unlimited uncollateralized funding
from among others, the common persons, on the strength of the banking licence.
17. What the revised framework also does is to enjoin upon the banks as creditors to enforce
their contracts or renegotiate their contracts with their borrowers so that they are not in default in
the first place. Where the contracts are renegotiated, banks books should reflect this through
asset classification and provisioning. This is why the framework requires banks to report even
one day default and draw up resolution plans thereupon such that the borrower is not in default
as  on  180th  day  from  the  date  of  such  default. You  would  have  noted  that  while  it  is
mandatory  to  report  defaults  on  a  weekly  basis,  the  classification  of  loans  as  non-
performing  assets  will  still  be  on  the  90-day-past-due  criterion. As  such,  the  idea  is  to
nudge lenders and borrowers to take timely corrective action so that the deterioration in the asset
quality  is  avoided  to  the  extent  possible. At  the  same  time,  with  defaults  being  reported  to  a
central  database,  which  is  accessible  to  all  banks,  the  credit  discipline  is  expected  to  further
improve.
18.  There  has  been  some  commentary  on  the  sufficiency  of  timelines  provided  for
implementation of the resolution plan under the revised framework. The new framework requires
lenders to put in place a resolution plan within 180 days of default and some have commented
that 180 days is insufficient to put in place a resolution plan, especially where multiple lenders are
involved.  However,  one  has  to  note  that  ‘default’  in  payment  is  a  lagging,  not  leading,
indicator of financial stress of a borrower and the framework provides 180 days after a default
to put in place a resolution plan. Lenders need to be proactive in monitoring their borrowers and
be  able  to  identify  financial  stress  using  a  combination  of  leading  indicators  and  renegotiation
points  in  the  form  of  loan  covenants  rather  than  wait  for  a  borrower  to  default.  Such  early
identification  of  stress  and  loan  modifications  in  response  would  provide  sufficient  time  for
lenders to put in place the required resolution plan.
19.  Another  major  change  that  has  been  introduced  under  the  revised  framework  is
that resolution  plans  can  now  be  implemented  individually  or  jointly  by  lenders.
Previously, the lenders had to form a Joint Lenders Forum (JLF) wherein a decision taken by the
majority of lenders was to be binding on the minority lenders. Of course, the latter had an option
to exit the JLF. In the revised framework, the Reserve Bank has withdrawn the instructions on the
JLF. Complete discretion and flexibility has been given to banks to formulate their own ground
rules in dealing with borrowers who have exposures with multiple banks. In the earlier regime, the
resolution plan was mostly the same across banks. Under the revised framework, the lenders
 4 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
can  implement  resolution  plans  that  are  tailored  to  their  internal  policies  and  risk  appetites.
Therefore, unlike the perception in some quarters, the new framework does not seek unanimity.
However, if at the end of the 180 days of first default, the borrower is in default to a bank, that
bank  is  mandated  to  refer  the  case  under  IBC.  So  what  the  regulations  require  is  that  the
borrower  should  not  be  in  default-  under  the  existing  contract  if  there  is  no  restructuring,  and
under  the  restructured  repayment  schedule  if  there  is  a  restructuring.  So  let  me  be  crystal
clear: there is a chatter that the new framework mandates unanimity across lenders but
the fact of the matter is the exact opposite. We are not mandating anything on this aspect. In
fact, the guiding principle of the framework is to impose as few mandatory prescriptions on the
process as possible.
20. As  I  have  emphasized,  the  revised  framework  relies  more  on  outcome  check  rather  than
process check. The lenders have complete freedom to decide on the contours of the resolution
plan.  However,  the  credibility  of  the  resolution  plan  is  sought  to  be  ensured  through  the
requirement  of  independent  credit  evaluation  by  credit  rating  agencies. To  ensure  greater
credibility of the rating opinion, contrary to the “issuer pays” model of credit rating, the
new framework prescribes “user pays” model for credit opinions – user here being the
banks.  For  credit  rating  agencies,  the  incentive  to  not  give  erroneous  or  questionable  credit
opinion is the credibility and reputation of the agency in the market, which is its main currency for
sustained  business.  Going  forward,  we  will  put  in  place  necessary  evaluation  standards  for
assessing the performance of rating agencies on this score.
21.  Some  concerns  have  been  expressed  that  the  1-day  default  clause  is  onerous.  These
concerns  are  not  well  founded.  Let  me  tell  you  why. For  cash  credit  account,  the  30-day
trigger has been retained. For term loans, where the repayment schedules are predetermined,
borrowers  need  to  and  indeed  have  enough  notice  to  arrange  funds  in  time.  It  is  a  behaviour
change in repayment of credit that has to come about. I must say here, on the basis of first few
reports  received  from  banks  under  the  new  reporting  system,  that  non-payment  on  due  date
appears to be seen as par for the course by the banks and the borrowers. The data shows that
a  large  number  of  borrowers,  even  some  highly  rated  ones,  have  failed  on  the  1-day
default norm. This has got to change. If borrowers fail to pay on the due date because of a cash
flow problem, banks should see that as an early warning indicator warranting immediate action. If
borrowers,  with  ability  to  pay  on  the  due  date,  delay  it  routinely  or  because  they  see  other
arbitrage  options,  that  must  change  too. Bankers  should  warn  their  customers  that  1-day
default will lead to their being on watch for resolution. Borrowers too should realise that they
have to meet payment obligations as per the contract and it is no more sufficient to pay up only
by 60/90 days past due date.
22.  This  brings  me  to  the  next  commentary  on  the  revised  framework.  One  of  the  general
refrains  is  that  there  are  delays  in  payment  by  buyers  including,  rather  predominantly,
government  bodies  and  that  it  could  lead  to  a  significant  increase  in  slippages.  First,  the
repayment schedules of loans should take into account such idiosyncratic risks and accordingly
be customized to suit the cash flow pattern of the borrowers. Second, there must be enough skin
in  the  game  from  the  borrower  so  that  there  are  adequate  buffers  (debt  service  reserve
accounts) to tide over temporary cash flow volatility. The present problem is that banks allow
excessively high leverage thus leaving out any possibility that the borrower can be made to deal
with emergencies. This has been possible in an environment in which both the lender and the
borrower were not too keen to maintain the sanctity of the debt contract. Such poor credit culture
must be incentivized to change and the revised framework is aimed to precisely achieve this
objective. I  want  to  mention  here  that  for  the  small  borrower  who  may  not  have  the
wherewithal to bring funds swiftly in the event of non-payment by clients, the framework
makes an exception. The framework for restructuring has been consciously made non-
applicable to the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) with borrowings of Rs 250
million and less. We have left their resolution framework unchanged from what was outlined for
 5 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
them in March 2016.
23. One of the features notices in the past was evergreening of loans to avoid the recognition of
non-performance. At  the  same  time,  it  is  necessary  to  distinguish  evergreening  from  grant  of
additional finance for meeting genuine business needs. The revised framework requires grant of
additional credit facilities to a firm in financial difficulty to be treated as a case of restructuring and
lists out the criteria for determining whether or not the borrower is in financial difficulty. Some
have expressed the view that the criteria are too broad. The banks, through policies approved by
their boards, should fix the parameters and ensure strict adherence thereto. We would expect
boards to be reasonable in setting the parameters and will not accept case specific exceptions.
24.  Some  question  the  timing  of  the  February  12th  circular.  I  would  say  certain  changes  are
sooner  brought  in  than  later.  The  search  for  that  perfect  time  for  a  long  overdue  reform  can
become a never ending exercise. I am not sure whether the protagonists of the view that the
reform was untimely know when the right time is other than that it is some time in future!. Having
said that, I would want to point out that the Sixth Bi-monthly Monetary Policy Statement, 2017–18
observed that there are early signs in the economy of a revival in investment activity as reflected
in  improving  credit  off  take,  large  resource  mobilisation  from  the  primary  capital  market,  and
improving capital goods production and imports. Further, the process of recapitalisation of PSBs
has got underway, which has enhanced their ability to provide for credit losses as well as, in
case  of  better  capitalized  banks,  to  contribute  to  the  credit  growth.  The  Reserve  Bank  has
directed banks to file insolvency applications against large distressed borrowers as mentioned
earlier, and these accounts are getting resolved under the IBC. All these steps should improve
credit  flows  further  and  create  demand  for  fresh  investment,  which  may  further  accelerate
growth. The Reserve Bank believes that a focused framework for resolution of distressed
borrowers which respects and enforces the sanctity of the debt contract is required to
make sure that the excesses observed during the last credit cycle are not repeated and
we don’t end up in a similar situation few years down the line.
25.  There  is  also  an  important  equity  perspective  to  the  revised  framework.  As  successive
Financial  Stability  Reports  of  the  Reserve  Bank  have  pointed  out,  the  proportion  of  stressed
assets in the larger advances is higher than the share of larger advances in the total advances
(see chart below). If the stress in larger advances is not handled in a manner such that both
probability of default and loss given default are contained, the resultant low risk-adjusted return
on  bank  assets  may  have  to  be  compensated  in  the  form  of  higher  borrowing  rates  for  the
smaller  borrowers. Alternatively,  it  may  mean  a  low  return  on  bank  equity,  which  may  have
externalities through the fiscal channel given the principal shareholder of many stressed banks is
the government.
 6 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
There is another issue from the equity perspective. One must understand that smaller firms and
new entrants, which create dynamism and enterprise within sectors of the economy, get unfairly
competed out when large borrowers are routinely able to obtain soft landing even upon defaults
and under-performance.
26. Finally, you may be knowing that banks are required to keep provisions for loans on their
books,  to  cover  for  future  expected  losses.  This  means  that  as  the  likelihood  of  income  or
recovery  from  a  loan  decreases,  the  amount  to  be  kept  as  provisions  by  the  banks  should
increase. If the resulting drain on bank profits has to be contained, the action to address stressed
assets  should  commence  no  sooner  than  the  emergence  of  early  signs  of  stress.
Thus, bankers should be alive to the increase in risk as the probability of default increases
and  take  adequate  measures  to  contain  the  loss  given  default,  such  as  through  loan
covenants, increased collateral, and/or higher risk premium, with promptitude. If such measures
are not undertaken in time, it becomes too late to do anything outside of bankruptcy proceedings.
The following table and graph provide enough evidence to suggest that quicker action by banks
while  the  borrowing  business  is  still  a  going  concern  results  in  much  lower  loan  loss.  It  is
instructive to note that the resolution regime has a bearing on the ease of doing business ranking
of a country and the new framework alongwith the IBC will be an important step in improving the
ranking.
 7 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
In fact, such timely intervention should be second nature to a bank. Similarly, paying dues on
time should be the natural behavior expected from a borrower. The revised framework seeks to
inculcate such a behaviour in both lenders and borrowers so as to create a credit culture that is
conducive to a safe and sound banking system and a vibrant business environment.
27. Let me then summarise my comments on the revised framework of February 12, 2018:
(a)  The  new  framework  brings  our  regulatory  framework  for  stressed  assets  on  par  with
international norms shorn of all forbearances.
(b)  It  has  been  made  possible  because  the  IBC  provides  a  time-bound  legal  framework  for
dealing with debt resolution if the lenders cannot sew up a resolution quickly.
(c) Not putting this framework in place would be tantamount to letting go waste the landmark
economic legislation that IBC is.
(d)  The  framework  undoes  many  intrusive  regulations  by  specifying  outcomes  rather  than
processes.
(e) Finally, the framework seeks a fundamental change, for the better, in behaviour of lenders
and borrowers, for it can’t be business as usual.
28. Before I sign off, let me throw in one more word of caution. There appears to be taking hold a
herd movement among bankers to grow retail credit and the personal loan segment. This is not a
risk-free segment and banks should not see it as the grand panacea for their problem riddled
corporate loan book. There are risks here too that should be properly assessed, priced and
mitigated.
29. I hope that the new tools and lessons that you have learnt as NIBM students, will help us build
a  strong  and  resilient  banking  system  in  which  banks  and  borrowers  understand  the  new
restructuring and resolution paradigm, appreciate it, assimilate it, and live by it. Let me conclude
by  extending  my  heartiest  congratulations  once  again  to  all  the  graduates  on  successfully
completing  the  prestigious  Post-Graduate  Programme  in  Banking  and  Finance.  These  are
challenging but exciting times and as you stand on the threshold of a new or renewed career in
banking and finance, I trust you will continue to cherish dreams of youth, and among other things,
endeavor to build a strong credit culture wherever you go and thereby make a success of the
 8 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
new paradigm that I have outlined.
I thank you all for your kind attention.
 9 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
