Andreas Dombret: Digital natives? The future of banking in an era
of digitalisation
Speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank,
at the "Unlock the Block" Hackathon, hosted by the University of Cape Town, Cape Town, 24
January 2018.
 1. Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen
It is a pleasure to be here in Cape Town and also to speak at a hackathon. Central bankers in
general  and  banking  supervisors  in  particular  rarely  get  an  opportunity  to  address  such  a
technically  adept  audience.  Still,  to  those  of  you  who  are  participating  in  the  event  and  who
received their first day of blockchain training today, I would like to say that the following session is
going to be quite a non-technical one – even though we at the Bundesbank have done our own
research on the promising blockchain technology and are always eager to discuss insights with
experts such as you here today in this room. We even launched a blockchain project of our own
in cooperation with the Deutsche Börse, the stock exchange in Frankfurt in 2016.
Today,  I  would  like  to  make  the  most  of  you  and  today’s  audience,  by  considering  a  wider
question: why exactly is it so difficult for many banks to fully embrace the many opportunities
presented  by  the  digital  era  and  become  successful?  Numerous  issues  have  already  been
addressed at length, such as the role of IT legacy, the question whether banks are frequently “too
big to innovate", and even the “economics of QWERTY", an argument about path dependence.
I would like to focus on a different subject, namely the role of “digital natives” and their conflicts
with conventional bankers. How does this relate to successful banking in the digital era?
 
2. "Digital natives” and “digital illiterates” – a clash of cultures
When  I  say  “digital  natives",  I  am  not  just  referring  to  those  born  since  1980,  as  some  have
defined the term , but to people with a certain attitude towards the digital world.
1
I consider most folks here in this room to be digital natives – at least by profession or by choice.
And I expect you won’t still be mulling over whether a blockchain could generally be useful or not.
To digital natives, the upside is perfectly clear. Digital natives are focused on the opportunities of
the digital age. Everything that is imaginable is worth considering.
But the financial industry is by no means inhabited exclusively by digital natives. At the other end
of the scale are those who take quite a dim view of most digital innovations. And there are others
who might generally be considered “digital friendly” but have never actually crossed paths with
programming code or network plans. I guess this is true for the vast majority of people – I would
count myself to this cluster. This entire group might be labelled “digital illiterates".
The  problem  with  both  groups  is  that  when  they  interact,  there  are  bound  to  be  frictions.  For
example, you often hear IT staff complaining about fuzzy communication with non-specialists.
Conversely,  experienced  bankers  might  also  have  a  hard  time  with  digital  innovators,  simply
because the latter lack an understanding of banking.
So the question is this: if digital natives are from Mars, and old-style bankers are from Venus –
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
will they get along? Or could the future of banking in an era of digitalisation possibly belong to just
one group?
My short answer is this: they don’t get along naturally – but they will need to.
Let  us  go  through  some  observations  about  the  clash  between  these  two  cultures.  For  that
purpose, I believe it helps to see things from each group’s viewpoint.
 
3. How digital illiteracy might hamper financial institutions
Let me begin with the perspective of digital natives as I have defined them. And I will concentrate
on three predispositions of non-specialists which, to my mind, are most substantial for financial
institutions.
1.  IT matters are oversimplified
2.  IT risks are underrated
3.  Digital opportunities are underestimated
You may have witnessed some of these biases yourselves. Let me give examples of each of
them from my experience of banking supervision.
Oversimplifying IT matters is a common attitude outside ITdivisions.
If  you  ask  managers  about  their  interaction  with  the  ITdepartment,  something  you  might  hear
them say, time and again, is this: “What they should be doing is finding an easy solution for every
problem right away! What they are actually doing is burning money!"
All of us who haven’t worked in an IT department, let us be honest: we all have thought that way
already.
From the perspective of the IT division, the same interaction would often be characterised as a
failure due to “digital illiteracy". IT experts are already grateful to encounter non-specialists with
enough imagination to grasp what can be done with code, computers and networks. But when
non-specialists actually ask for digital solutions, they frequently fail because they oversimplify the
job  of  IT  specialists.  For  example,  they  fail  to  accurately  specify  the  goal  and  the  desired
properties of an application. Partly because they don’t speak the right language and regard the
actual solutions as a black box; partly because they simply don’t bother.
Unfortunately, incoherent concepts at the outset frequently lead to dirty fixes and workarounds,
both  of  which  turn  out  to  be  costly  and  inconvenient  in  the  long  run.  And,  frustratingly
for ITexperts, it makes them look incompetent in the end.
Also,  co-workers  are  often  not  sufficiently  aware  of 
the  various  other  challenges
which IT departments face in their day-to-day work. Just think of the need to make a software
application  stable,  secure  and  efficient,  to  make  it  adaptable  to  changes  of  purpose  or  to
changes in the “outside world", and to make it useable for the “dumbest assumable user". These
are  regular  trade-offs.  They  require  strategic  decisions.  But  in  this  regard,  top  management
needs to understand the trade-offs first.
This leads to another, overarching issue: scarce resources. Top management is often reluctant
to allocate sufficient resources to an IT project. This is quite a common finding in our supervisory
inspections.  That  puts  long-lasting  solutions  out  of  reach.  While  this  may  often  be  due  to
“short termism” (as IT projects often pay out only in the mid- or long term), it can also be caused
by underestimating their value.
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Let me now turn to a second bias of top management, namely underrating IT and cyber risks.
Nowadays, a large majority of households and enterprises will have experienced cyberattacks for
themselves. But even though awareness of potential threats has risen in previous years, it is still
the case that, far too often, incidents are interpreted as a stroke of fate, as mere bad luck. To be
fair,  having  reliable  defence  mechanisms  is  indeed  challenging  for  many  applications  and
larger IT systems because threats constantly evolve. And so does technology, opening up new
loopholes all the time – just take the weaknesses in computer processors which came to light
just recently.
Still, the likelihood of a successful cyberattack can be significantly reduced by measures that are
well-known – at least in ITdepartments. So in theory, companies should know ways to ensure
proper  management  of  their  IT  and  cyber  risks.  But  of  course,  they  need  support  from  top
management to be effective, because defence does not end at the user interface. So all in all,
digital  illiteracy  in  the  top  management  of  a  financial  institution  like  a  bank  can  impede  the
effectiveness  of  its  IT  department  significantly.  Our  banking  supervisors  have  observed  this
pattern quite often. IT experts often even welcome the critical remarks we make in inspections –
because  it  helps  them  initiate  changes  toward  more  reliable  IT  solutions,  rather  than
workarounds and hot fixes.
 
4. Why the future of finance and banking is still unwritten
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  cultural  clash  between  “nerds”  and  non-specialists  in  banks  goes
beyond everyday operational topics. It shows up in strategies as well. This means that views
about the priority of digitalisation are to some extent rooted in one’s own digital biography.
While bank management teams these days are often busy stabilising their firms in the face of
challenges such as the market environment and changes in regulation, those who think and live
digitally are pushing for further strategic realignments. Their proposition is that, in the digital age,
banks can either vanquish or vanish. 
And  of  course,  there  is  a  good  case  for  being  prepared  for  change.  Financial  practices  are
definitely  evolving  –  and  it’s  a  one-way  street.  We  are  seeing  change  in  every  segment  of
banking, from instant payments to mobile banking and robo advice. Some institutions offer their
services  solely  on  smartphones.  In  countries  like  South  Africa,  especially,  bricks-and-mortar
banks are increasingly being replaced by smartphone banking. And one important component of
change  concerns  customers:  some  institutions  underestimated  what  users  want  and  how
quickly  they  can  adapt.  Fifteen  years  ago,  most  customers  would  probably  still  have  stood
patiently in line to receive local services. Today, digitally savvy users will probably get annoyed if
an online service is temporarily not available for just a minute or two.
Furthermore,  there  are  good  reasons  to  believe  that  this  evolution  will  continue,  because
technological  transformation  and  customer  habits  are  co-evolving.  And  even  though  some
innovation hypes have now entered the “trough of disillusionment", there is no reason for banks
to  turn  a  blind  eye  to  further  advances  in  banking.  In  the  short  term,  progress  may  be
overemphasised, but in the long term, changes are often underestimated.
So there are indeed many questions facing the banking industry that still need to be answered:
how  will  digitalisation  impact  on  bank  earnings?  How  much  profit  will  be  siphoned  off  by  new
markets  entrants?  And  how  many  institutions  with  similar  services  are  needed  in  a  digital
financial economy? 
These questions are unsettling ones, and there might still be some bank managers who, fearful
of the future, prefer to assume that banks are still special and that the market forces of the digital
era do not apply.
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
But, on the other hand, does that imply in any way that banks are outdated? And do digital natives
actually offer a concrete and compelling way forward?
I would like to spend the second part of my talk discussing biases and fallacies on the part of
digital natives. In other words, while I do support the general projection of ongoing change in the
financial sector, it would be wrong to be blinded by the spirit of optimism among digital natives. 
First of all, digital natives need to be wary of getting overconfident about the evolution of digital
banking.
There are several reasons to remain cautious. Even if the digitalisation of finance is irreversible,
technologies are constantly evolving in as yet unknown directions – some are refined, others are
discarded. Good arguments why digital innovations will triumph will remain theoretical as long as
most  people  simply  don’t  use  these  innovations.  For  example,  smartphones  came  onto  the
market back in the 1990s, but they were largely ignored back then. So it’s sometimes the case
that  technical  innovations  are  ahead  of  their  time.  We  should  judge  technology  not  by  its
innovativeness, but by its probability to penetrate the market.
There is another source of digital overconfidence that I would like to mention. This concerns the
association of the digital era with entirely new and self-contained “laws". One trailblazer of that
movement was the “Declaration of the Independence of Cyberspace” in 1996,  which suggested
that the virtual world could be governed by forces other than those in the real world. This vision
has informed the way digital natives see themselves to this day. For example, many new market
entrants were thrilled at designing super-efficient and convenient services that could outperform
banks in any dimension.
2
But as of today, new market entrants have discovered that even in a digital era, good products
are  assembled  through  hard  work.  And  the  digital  world  doesn’t  offer  services  at  no  cost.
Regarding bitcoin, this became clear to a wider audience when the huge electricity costs went
public. Also, there is no free lunch. There are trade-offs like the one that concerns convenience
versus  security.  In  Germany,  for  example,  various  smartphone  payment  apps  were  hacked
because the two-factor authentication principle was considered too inconvenient for fast-moving
customers.
So  even  if  anything  is  possible  in  a  digital  world,  there  are  still  costs  and  trade-offs  involved.
Digital natives have to learn to accept those limits and trade-offs. They need to learn not to be
blinded by theoretical ideas and mere digital ideology. Proof of work is what counts in the end.
 
5. Why digital natives may themselves be prone to fallacies
And there is a second observation about digital natives colonising the financial sector. They are
prone to both misconceiving and underestimating the existing financial system.
Let me address the issue of misconceptions. Lately, amidst the widespread media attention paid
to  bitcoin  and  other  crypto  currencies,  there  has  been  a  great  deal  of  confusion  about  what
exactly crypto currencies are. As a central banker following the news, it’s easy for me to see that
part of the puzzle is the fact that conventional money systems aren’t widely understood to begin
with. But if people cannot elaborate on the difference between different kinds of currencies and
other financial instruments, digital innovations can even become dangerous.
This brings me to my most important point. However convenient and innovative digital evolution in
the  financial  sector  will  be  –  financial  institutions,  as  defined  by  the  law,  continue  to  play  an
eminent  role  for  society.  Customers  entrust  banks  with  their  savings,  firms  need  financial
services they can rely on, the economy at large requires credit. Being part of the backbone of the
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
broader economy, banks need to ensure a reliable, trustworthy and sustainable flow of financial
services.
So banks are indeed still special in a way. And this is why they also still require special treatment
in the digital age.
For example, banks in Germany can outsource IT services and infrastructure, but they cannot
shrug off their accountability towards customers in any way. So if a credit institution wants to
move contents to an external cloud provider, it has to demonstrate that it is still able to manage
all the risks involved in its services.
Thus, those who claim that the end of banks is near will face the following comeback: banks are
still special, and for good reason.
 
6. So how to deal with the clash of cultures?
As I said before, the digital era of banking is irreversible – but how should banks deal with that? In
my talk, my question was more specific: how to deal with the clash of cultures between digital
natives and digital illiterates in financial companies? Are “traditionalists” merely standing in the
way of better finance? Or, inversely, is finance too exceptional to be advanced by IT experts?
I strongly believe that the future of banking is not about eradicating one of these two cultures, as
they are both essential for success.
From my previous observations, there are – at least – three lessons to be learned:
1)   Learn to appreciate the work of one another
While there are many reasons to press ahead with digital banking, banks continue to serve a
special  role  in  the  economy.  Therefore,  the  digital  era  does  not  do  away  with  the  need  for
experienced  bankers.  In  Germany,  most  fintechs  and  incumbent  banks  have  put  their
confrontational policies to one side and are now striving to reap mutual benefits. Prescriptions on
how to do banking will still be necessary in the future.
2)   Acknowledge that communicative frictions will occur naturally and target them
Banks  and  other  companies  should  not  resort  to  highly  standardised  interactions,  where
misunderstandings  are  bound  to  happen,  but  go  the  extra  mile.  “Agile”  projects,  as  they  are
known,  are  one  way  of  achieving  more  effective  interaction.  In  parallel,  it  is  possible  to  foster
mutual understanding. At the Bundesbank, we launched an internal, company-wide awareness
project on cyber risks, which was framed as a tour through the “cyber jungle". Of course some
staff  members  poked  fun  at  this  scenario.  But  if  mockery  is  the  first  step  towards  deeper
awareness and greater understanding, that is fine with me.
3)   Lastly, banks have to foster the presence of digital natives in their top management 
German  banking  supervisors  have  acted  accordingly  and  made  it  easier  for  digital  specialists
without  an  explicit  banking  and  credit  business  background  to  become  board  members  at
banks. 
All in all, whether you consider yourself a digital native or the very opposite, a digital illiterate, in
the  digital  era  of  banking,  there  are  some  uneasy  truths  to  face  up  to.  The  future  of  banking
should be more about acknowledging the differences and aligning them as smoothly as possible.
Players who achieve that are also likely to be among the most successful in their business.
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Thank you for your attention
1
2
See John Palfrey and Urs Gasser: Born Digital: Understanding the First Generation of Digital Natives (2008).
John  Perry  Barlow  (1996),  A  Declaration  of  the  Independence  of  Cyberspace".  Online  available  (19-01-
2018): www.eff.org/cyberspace-independence
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
