Nestor A Espenilla, Jr: Of commitments and navigation
Speech by Mr Nestor A Espenilla, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank of the Philippines), at the Reception for the Banking Community, Manila, 27 July 2018.
 Good evening everyone.  On behalf of my co-hosts, members of the Monetary Board -  Finance
Secretary  Sonny  Dominguez,  Phillip  Medalla,    Jun  de  Zuniga,  Peter  Favila,  Tony Abacan  and
Bruce Tolentino... welcome to the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas. 
As you know, the BSP hosts a reception for the banking community annually in January.  It is a
time of fellowship and networking.  It is an opportunity for us to share the economic outlook for
the year, and our plans, initiatives and policies moving forward.
Tonight’s special event is part of our month-long 25th anniversary celebrations.  We sincerely
thank you for being a part of it, despite your very busy schedules, braving Friday evening traffic.
Last July 3 marked a full quarter of a century’s dedication to the BSP’s mandates of promoting
price stability, financial stability and maintaining an efficient payments system. 
Tonight,  I  reiterate  these  commitments  in  the  context  of  the  BSP’s  anniversary  theme,
“Navigating the Future.”
Commitment to Price Stability
The BSP’s commitment to price stability has supported a balanced and sustainable growth of the
economy.  We have enjoyed 77 quarters of uninterrupted economic growth since the 1997 Asian
Financial Crisis.  Our six-year consecutive growth of above 6 percent makes the Philippines one
of the fastest growing economies in the world. This growth streak is projected to continue for the
medium term despite challenges in the global and domestic economic landscape.
Our  sound  macroeconomic  fundamentals  and  growth  prospects  have  led  to  positive  investor
sentiment and have attracted more foreign investments. We gained our investment grade status
from international rating agencies in 2013. This year, Standard & Poor’s upgraded our sovereign
ratings outlook from STABLE to POSITIVE while both Fitch and Moody’s reaffirmed our sovereign
credit ratings with a STABLE outlook.
We have record high foreign direct investments —  a total of USD 8 billion and USD 10 billion in
2016 and 2017, respectively.
Our gross international reserves (GIR) continue to provide an ample external liquidity buffer. The
end-June 2018 GIR of USD 77.5 billion is equivalent to 7.5 months’ worth of import of goods and
services.
Domestic  liquidity  continues  to  expand  to  meet  the  needs  of  the  economy  even  as  we  have
demonstrated our resolve to tighten monetary policy whenever the situation calls for it.  In the
face of rising threats to the inflation target, we hiked policy rates last May and June.  We are
ready to follow-through to secure our inflation target.  The BSP remains firmly committed to its
primary mandate of price stability.
We  stand  steadfast  and  undaunted  by  the  headwinds.    Rising  global  rates.    Trade  wars. 
Geopolitical  risks.    We  face  unpredictable  currents.    Distributed  ledger.   Artificial  intelligence. 
Cyber-threats.  We rely on the navigational skills we have honed over the years to manage the
constant challenge.
Commitment to Financial Stability
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Coming to the BSP’s mandate of promoting financial stability, our friends from the industry know
that the strong banking system we have proudly nurtured is a product of decades of hard work,
commitment to reforms, and decisiveness.
Total assets of the banking system increased by 12.2 percent year-on-year (YoY) as of end-May
2018.  The  expansion  was  funded  by  the  12.5  percent  growth  in  deposits  mostly  deployed  to
lending activities. Loans were broad-based across various borrower and industry types.
The banking system is healthy and profitable. Overall profitability is buoyed by the increase in
core income from lending activities.
With staunch commitment and consistent dedication, capitalization of the overall banking system
is now above the regulatory thresholds.
Banks  continue  to  adhere  to  sound  credit  underwriting  standards  as  shown  by  the  very
satisfactory quality of the banking system’s loan portfolio.  Moreover, banks are well prepared to
bear credit losses as they have set up adequate provisions for possible defaults.  They maintain
an NPL coverage ratio of over 100 percent.
Moving  forward,  we  expect  further  expansion  of  the  banking  system,  sound  asset  quality,
adequate liquidity and rising capital buffers. The trajectory for profit growth will continue, driven
mainly by strong growth outlook, upbeat lending activities, product innovations, and more cost-
efficient and technology-enabled operations.
As  the  main  provider  of  credit  to  key  production  sectors,  the  banking  system  is  key  to  the
Philippine growth story.   
On behalf of the Monetary Board and the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, I personally commend you
—  leaders  of  the  banking  industry  for  being  our  staunch  partners  as  we  pursue  meaningful
reforms:  raising  risk  management  standards,  and  aligning  corporate  governance  with
international best practices. 
Through the years, we have built a banking system that is resilient, robust and responsive.
Congratulations to everyone. I believe these achievements warrant a round of applause.
Navigating the Future with Progressive and Proactive Financial Sector Reforms
Truly, there is reason for celebration.
But, from experience -  and I dare say, out of habit -  we shall not rest on our laurels.  We are
ever mindful of the need to improve to level up.  Last 19 January, during the reception for the
banking community, I said that market development and efficiency is a theme that will underlie
our reform agenda.  I said you should expect this. Continuity ++. In my message that evening, I
underlined  the  importance  for  financial  markets  to  discover  prices  efficiently  and  for  self-
correction mechanisms to be encouraged. 
We have started to deliver.  A total of 200 bps reduction in reserve requirements ratio (RRR) this
year is consistent with our strategy of the phased and gradual reduction of RRR from 20 percent
to  single-digit  level  over  a  six-year  period.   At  the  same  time,  we  were  able  to  neutralize  the
liquidity impact through our open market and FX operations.  Indeed, reducing the RRR to single
digit by the end of my term is attainable without compromising effective monetary control.  We
are  ready  to  resume  this  initiative  next  year  just  as  inflation  returns  to  target  based  on  our
forecast. We remain firm in our pursuit of structural reforms so that the banking industry remains
guided even as you develop your long term strategic plans.
As  challenges  evolve  globally  and  domestically,  we  continue  to  improve  our  open  market
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
operations and expand our policy toolkit.  We are currently studying and conducting consultation
with the industry for operational refinements meant to further strengthen our ability to guide short-
term  market  interest  rates  to  move  closely  with  the  BSP  policy  rate  and  strengthen  the
transmission of monetary policy to the rest of the economy.  We are tying this closely to the
broader capital market reforms especially in developing the domestic debt market.
Another integral part of our policy toolkit is the flexibility of the exchange rate.   Deepening the FX
market  is  therefore  another  key  priority  agenda.    Our  ambitious  FX  reforms  have  three  core
elements:    (1)  FX  liberalization;  (2)  stronger  oversight  over  non-bank  financial  institutions;  (3)
clearer governance arrangements towards a more organized FX trading market. 
With these efforts, we hope to encourage FX flows from the parallel market to the formal market.
We have streamlined FX requirements for the banking system to reduce market fragmentation
and increase FX liquidity.  
We expect responsible behavior among market players. We have a collective responsibility to
consistently build our markets to rise above the desire for short-term gains.
On the regulatory front, we are pursuing continuous improvement aligned with global standards
and best practices.
The BSP is rolling-out the enhanced liquidity risk management framework.
We are prescribing guidelines on the adoption of accounting standards to promote transparency
and fairness in both financial and prudential reporting.
The BSP is also continuously working to ensure that financial industry participants are sensitive
to, and proactive in, addressing emerging cyber threats. We are enhancing as well our AML-CFT
compliance posture.
The BSP continues to create a supportive policy environment for financial inclusion.  Banks are
now allowed to use third party cash agents for increased on-boarding of the unbanked.  We allow
reduced Know-Your-Customer (KYC) rules for certain low-risk accounts and use technology for
face-to-face contact requirements to promote bank account ownership.  We have created the
framework for opening basic bank accounts.  The BSP is also working closely with the national
government  for  the  implementation  of  a  biometric-based  national  identity  system  to  facilitate
maximum access to financial services.
We  are  also  making  big  leaps  in  developing  the  country’s  payment  system  even  as  we
continuously improve the existing arrangements.  Today, we are capable of producing 43 million
pieces of high quality currency notes per month, up from just 6.5 million pieces 25 years ago. 
We also produce 200 million pieces of coins per month. 
Our real time gross settlement system, Philpass, processes 6,000 transaction valued at Php 1.4
trillion  per  day.    But  we  are  upgrading  it  further  to  do  more  as  we  roll  out  the  National  Retail
Payment System that will pave the way for the digitalization of our financial system.  Already, we
have  together  launched  PesoNet  and  Instapay.    More  inter-operable  and  cooperative  payment
schemes will follow soon.
Closing Remarks
As I close, I remind that as market stakeholders, to better navigate a more interconnected and
sophisticated financial market system, we must be mindful of changes that are reshaping it.  We
must  embrace  the  work  that  needs  to  be  done,  to  stay  ...    not  only  abreast,  but  ahead  of
developments.
This task of navigation is, and has, never been an easy task.   But with collaboration, constant
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
communication, coordination and cooperation, the challenges we face will be easier to hurdle.
We at the BSP thank you — our valued stakeholders for ensuring the continuity of policy reforms
to guide the economy and shape our banking and financial system into being among the world’s
most resilient.
Let us now offer a toast^.
Dear  pillars  of  the  financial  system,  fellow  public  servants,  honored  guests,  friends  from  the
private  sector,  media  and  the  academe,  we  at  the  BSP  re-affirm  our  commitment  to  our
mandates.  To Continuity ++.  We reiterate our gratitude for your partnership and look forward –
jointly and collectively – to navigating the future together. 
Cheers!
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
