Dimitar  Bogov:  A  new  normal?  The  global  economic  expansion,
inflation  dynamics,  financial  stability  and  its  meaning  for  asset
management
Speech by Mr Dimitar Bogov, Governor of the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia, at the
High  Level  International  Conference  on  Monetary  Policy  and  Asset  Management,  Skopje,  16
February 2018.
 Distinguished guests,
Ladies and gentlemen,
It is my great honor and pleasure to welcome you to the High-Level International Conference on
Monetary Policy and Asset Management. The conference has been organized as a joint effort of
the National bank of the Republic of Macedonia and Reinventing Bretton Woods Committee. We
are delighted for this partnership whose results have been built into the conference program that
is both rich in the topics to be covered and in many prominent speakers to lead the discussions.
The  title  of  the  conference  is  “A  New  Normal?  The  Global  Economic  Expansion,  Inflation
Dynamics, Financial Stability and  its  Meaning  for Asset  Management”  that  comes  as  a  timely
event to draw upon the lessons learned of the GFC, to assess the current state of the global
economy and its future prospects and advice on the challenges facing central banks and asset
managers.
This  decade  has  been  a  truly  challenging  time  for  policymaking  and  asset  management.  The
world has gone through financial, economic and debt crises. We have witnessed major central
banks using unconventional policies and ultra-accommodative monetary policy stance. What did
mark the post-crisis period was the financial system reform mainly with respect to the banking
industry and reconsideration of central banks mandate with respect to financial stability. Financial
turbulence,  low  yields  and  divergent  monetary  policies  in  the  US  and  the  EU  caused  asset
managers  to  diversify  and  optimally  balance  risk  and  return.  The  global  recovery  has
strengthened recently, but still there have been concerns with respect to its sustainability. Low
productivity keeps clouding the prospects of future economic prosperity and growth, and inflation
remains  muted  in  many  countries.  In  addition,  there  are  geopolitical  risks,  risks  of  excessive
indebtedness and financial sector resilience to potential new shocks.
All of these critically relevant issues for the policy makers and asset managers will build in our
agenda  for  today.  The  program  will  start  with  a  keynote  speech  followed  by  four  sessions.
Session  1  will  cover  issues  related  to  the  current  and  prospective  conjuncture  of  the  global
economy, monetary policy and the future of interest rates. Session 2 will tackle upon financial
stability issues, and how well are we equipped to deal with potential turbulence. In Session 3,
central bankers and asset managers will put forward their views on strategies for effective risk
mitigation  and  how  should  asset  managers  prepare  for  the  “new  normal”  in  the  converging
monetary policies. Session 4 will focus on South East Europe and the perspectives of the region
for European integration and growth.
I am particularly delighted that we have prominent speakers and excellent panelists to address
the topics of the conference.
Allow me to express my sincere gratitude to Mr Benoît Cœuré, Executive Board member of the
ECB  and  Mr.  Tao  Zhang,  Deputy  Managing  Director  at  the  IMF,  for  honoring  us  with  their
presence today.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
It is a pleasure to have Mr. Luiz Awazu Pereira da Silva, Deputy General Manager at BIS and
Governor Gudmundsson to address the audience.
I  would  also  like  to  express  my  appreciation  to  all  other  distinguished  panelists  in  the  today’s
sessions – deputy governors, representatives from international organizations, global banks and
investors and other honorable speakers for contributing to the event.
It is an honor to have Mr. Dragan Tevdovski, Minister of Finance of the Republic of Macedonia
and Mr. Vladislav Goranov, Minister of Finance of the Republic of Bulgaria to give their reflections
on SEE region perspectives.
I  look  forward  to  your  discussions  and  wish  all  the  delegates  an  enjoyable  and  rewarding
conference day. I thank you all for coming, particularly given that many of you had to travel long
distances to come to Skopje. I hope that all of you will enjoy the agenda and find the conference
productive and worthwhile.
In  closing,  I  would  like  to  thank  all  of  those  who  have  worked  very  hard  to  make  this  event
happen.  My  most  sincere  thanks  and  appreciation  goes  to  our  co-organizer  Marc  Uzan,
Executive  Director  of  The  Reinventing  Bretton  Woods  Committee.  Marc’s  work  is  well-
recognized among the global economic community. With the mission of promoting stability of
international financial architecture and monetary system, he has organized roughly 100 seminars
around  the  world  facilitating  dialogue  among  high-ranking  officials,  academics  and  market
participants. I had the pleasure of attending some of his seminars and can only compliment to
his expertise and passion to do great work at any time.
Marc, it is a true pleasure and privilege working with you. I hope that we will be able to do this
again. Please, the floor is all yours.
Thank you!
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
