Dimitar  Bogov: Around  a  decade  after  the  crisis  -  heading  to  the
new global cycle and monetary policy normalization
Opening  speech  by  Mr  Dimitar  Bogov,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  the  Republic  of 
Macedonia,  at  the  7th  Annual  Research  Conference:  Around  a  Decade  after  the  Crisis: 
Heading to the New Global Cycle and Monetary Policy Normalization, Ohrid, 12  April 2018.
 Honorable Governors, Your Excellences,
Dear representatives of central banks,
Ladies and gentlemen
 Let me welcome you all to our 7th Annual Research Conference this year in the beautiful city of
Ohrid. Considering the current global surrounding, this year’s conference “Around a Decade after
the Crisis: Heading to the New Global Cycle and Monetary Policy Normalization” addresses a
relatively long period since the onset of the global crisis and the need to face new challenges. At
this point, the questions to ask ourselves and to discuss during the conference would be: how
strong and sustainable is the ongoing global recovery, what are the reasons behind the subdued
inflation,  what  should  be  the  pace  of  monetary  policy  normalization,  are  the  banks  now  more
resilient, are we better prepared to prevent the risks? Maybe they are simple questions, however,
like  in  many  other  cases  in  real  life  and  a  real  economic  framework,  there  are  no  simple
answers.
The current global economic recovery is broadly spread across different regions in the world and
associated with positive economic sentiment indicators. Along with the ongoing monetary policy
normalization in the US economy, the new US fiscal package and its impacts on the economy
also absorbs attention. In the EU, as already clearly announced, the accommodative monetary
policy, although with lower amount of assets purchase, is expected to apply by September this
year or beyond and interest rate changes to take place later. However, the positive global outlook
has  still  been  surrounded  by  various  risks,  including  the  still  pending  outcome  of  Brexit
negotiations,  geo-political  risks  and 
the  US
administration.
the  possible  protectionism  measures  by 
However,  besides  the  sound  and  wide  spread  recovery,  an  important  feature  of  the  global
environment is the generally subdued inflation, not always in line with the model-based forecasts
and standard empirical findings. In this view, the flattening of the Phillips curve based on current
economic data, points to possible altering of the standard relation between the economic cycle
and inflation, raising discussion on one of the basic empirical findings in the macroeconomics in
the academic and central banking community. The subdued inflation nowadays is mainly due to
global factors that are not exclusively related to the commodity prices fluctuations, but also to the
impacts  of  the  globalization  of  production  and  digitalization  of  trade  worldwide,  both  having
impact  on  competition  and  prices  in  each  economy.  In  such  surrounding  of  prolonged  lower
inflation,  the  re-assessment  of  the  time  lag  in  affecting  the  inflation  as  well  as  the  inflation
measurement,  the  outlook  of  inflation  expectations  and  their  possible  de-anchoring  are  to  be
considered.
The current economic developments and outlook point to new a global cycle and the need of
gradual  normalization  of  monetary  policy.  Gradual  approach  is  required  to  avoid  the  so-called
“taper tantrum” episodes that financial markets have already experienced during the US tapering.
A  stronger  and  clear  monetary  policy  communication  should  be  in  favor  of  preparing  market
agents for the future monetary policy changes and smother reaction when they take place.
1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
The monetary policy normalization in advanced economies could produce different impacts for
emerging economies and their monetary policy. Any capital outflows would be highly dependent
on the size and structure of the financial liabilities, especially regarding the existence of interest
rate sensitive capital flows, that is not always the case in emerging economies with lower level of
financial  integration,  where  more  usual  are  the  direct  investment,  trade  credits  and  banking
sector  capital  flows.  On  the  other  hand,  the  more  restrictive  financial  conditions  in  advanced
economies  in  a  medium  run  could  eventually  lead  to  lower  external  demand  in  the  emerging
economies. The impacts on the fiscal policy are more serious, implying stricter conditions for
external budget financing, signaling the need to start or continue with fiscal consolidation, in the
emerging  economies  where  it  has  already  started.  Having  in  mind  country  specific  reasons,
monetary policy normalization in emerging economies may come with different lag.
Speaking about the Macedonian economy and countries from Western Balkan region in terms of
facing  the  new  global  cycle,  we  have  to  mention  some  strong  points  and  some  still  existing
weaknesses. Generally, sound and stable banks have additionally strengthened due to the new
capital requirements during the last several years, as well as due to the stronger efforts for better
nonperforming  loans  management  and  resolution.  Current  account  deficit  region-wide  has
reduced as a result of the favorable price impact, in line with commodity prices slowdown and in
the  Macedonian  case,  due  to  the  contribution  of  new  companies  with  foreign  capital  that
significantly  changed  our  export  structure  into  higher  value  added  products.  We  have  seen
positive results in the dealing with unemployment as one of the main problems in the region. In
Macedonia,  it  has  significantly  reduced  due  to  new  jobs  creation,  measures  against  informal
economy and active labor market measures.
However,  the  countries  of  the  region  should  continue  strengthening  their  potential  growth,
productivity  and  competitiveness.  The  total  factor  productivity  growth  in  many  emerging
economies  registered  a  slowdown  during  the  crisis  mainly  reflecting  the  slower  growth  and
technological  progress  in  advanced  economies.  However,  the  emerging  economies  must
strengthen their activities towards higher efficiency on all levels of operation, building institutional
capacity and further implementation of structural reforms that all together should improve total
factor productivity contribution and boost the overall convergence towards advanced economies.
The public debt and fiscal consolidation are still an area that requires additional vigilance by the
policymakers in emerging economies, especially in light of changing financial conditions in the
upcoming period.                                      
Around  a  decade  after  the  global  crisis,  we  have  seen  that  the  banks,  globally,  are  in  a  quite
better shape. However, the reforms and Basel requirements should be fully implemented in order
to build resilient banks. The digitalization is yet another interesting phenomenon of today’s life and
unavoidable element of the current global environment. Fintech in banking industry provides new
revolutionary  approach  to  the  supply  of  banking  services,  as  a  response  of  the  banks  to  the
changing  habits  of  their  clients.  This  creates  new  opportunities,  but  also  risks  that  regulatory
authorities must be aware of. Therefore, globalization and innovation in financial sector call for
deepening the international cooperation between authorities in different fields of operation.
This conference is just one of the possible forms of this international cooperation. Today, we will
discuss the empirical findings from the research papers received upon our Call for papers, on
different  and  very  important  central  banking  issues,  while  tomorrow  we  will  have  panel
discussions on policy issues with high-level representatives from central banks and international
institutions.  I  believe  that  all  together,  we  will  make  contribution  by  answering  the  pending
economic questions that I mentioned earlier and exchanging experiences that will enable us to
better cope with the future challenges.
I wish you interesting conference, fruitful discussion and pleasant stay in Ohrid!
Thank you. 
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
