Nestor A Espenilla, Jr: Coming together for MSME development
Speech by Mr Nestor A Espenilla, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank of the Philippines), during the MOA signing of the BSP, DTI, MCPI and APPEND, Manila, 17
September 2018.
 Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) Secretary Ramon M. Lopez;  Mr. Kamrul H. Tarafder,
Board Trustee of the Microfinance Council of the Philippines, Inc. (MCPI); Mr. Edgardo F. Garcia,
Chairperson  of  the Alliance  of  Philippine  Partners  in  Enterprise  Development,  Inc.  (APPEND);
members of the Monetary Board; co-workers in government; fellow BSPers and advocates of
financial inclusion and MSME development; ladies and gentlemen; good afternoon.
The  MSME  sector  is  a  crucial  driver  of  the  economy,  making  up  99.6%  of  our  country’s
enterprises or registered business firms.  MSMEs generate 61.6% of employment. 
Thus,  developing,  empowering,  building  the  capacities  of  MSMEs  and  including  them  in  the
financial system, fuels the foundation of our economy as the engine for broad-based growth.  
There are currently many existing initiatives for MSMEs. DTI’s Negosyo Centers, among many
other programs, serve as “one-stop-shops” for MSME registration, business development and
advisory  services,  and  market  exposure,  among  others.  Our  network  of  microfinance  non-
government organizations (MF NGOs) is a significant source of financial products and services
for our country’s microentrepreneurs. 
But despite existing efforts, challenges with MSME development still persist.  These challenges
include lack of access to resources such as technology, skilled labor, and information. Today,
however, we shall focus on the particular issue of financial access.
MSMEs are unable to reach their full potential because of difficulty of credit and financial access. 
Currently,  only  6.6%  and  9.8%  of  total  loans  in  the  banking  system  and  total  businesses
comprise investments to MSMEs.  This low level of investment in MSMEs translates to capital
constraints  compelling  MSMEs  to  resort  to  internal  savings  or  earnings. A  World  Bank  report
states  that  81.2%  of  Philippine  enterprises  rely  mostly  on  internal  funds  to  finance  their
investments. Only 10.1% of enterprises use bank financing. 
As a staunch advocate of financial inclusion and of promoting broad-based growth, we at the
BSP  are  very  concerned  about  these  numbers.    We  are  committed  to  providing  a  regulatory
environment to address financial access barriers such as cost, information asymmetry, and lack
of infrastructure, among others.
At the BSP, we continually undertake prudential reforms to improve the overall environment for
credit allocation.  We issued Circular No. 855 to encourage banks to focus on cash flow analysis
and  ability-to-pay  rather  than  collateral  when  determining  a  borrower’s  creditworthiness. 
Complementing this is Circular No. 950 on the implementation of the Anti-Money Laundering Act
which  reduces  Know-Your-Customer  (KYC)  rules  for  certain  low-risk  accounts.    This  is  to
facilitate frictionless customer on-boarding and reach unserved and underserved markets.
The BSP oversees the Credit Surety Fund (CSF) Program, a credit enhancement scheme to
improve MSME credit worthiness.  
Through  the  promotion  of  fintech  and  use  of  digital  payments,  we  aim  to  achieve  a  more
expanded physical and virtual reach of financial services, more competition, easier on-boarding
of customers, and more protection for financial consumers.  Our MSMEs will surely benefit from
initiatives  to  broaden  their  customer  reach,  reduce  the  costs  of  managing  cash,  and  provide
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
greater access to credit.
There is much to be done but it is only when we work together that we can succeed.
Through  this  event,  we  forge  a  partnership  which  will  leverage  on  the  existing  strengths,
expertise and initiatives of our agencies and institutions so that we could, collectively deliver a
responsive and holistic approach to MSME financing. 
With a more stable and secure source of much needed funds, coupled with access to resources
such as technology and capacity building, we hope to catalyze the development of the MSME
sector. 
We  envision  that  each  Negosyo  Center  will  be  fully  capacitated  to  provide  the  full  suite  of
services  required  by  our  MSMEs,  including  a  referral  mechanism  to  appropriate  financing
windows. With an institutionalized partnership, financial institutions will likewise benefit from rich
insights  and  a  deeper  understanding  of  the  market,  which  will  be  most  useful  in  customizing
financial products and services for their constituents.
As a champion for microfinance and financial inclusion, and as Chair of the National Strategy for
Financial  Inclusion  (NSFI),  the  BSP’s  interest  lies  in  bridging  existing  networks  to  serve  as
comprehensive platforms to harmonize initiatives and cultivate sectors in need.  This effort is
also  in  line  with  our  vision  of  synergizing  efforts  and  forging  more  efficient,  collaborative
mechanisms to achieve the shared financial inclusion objective.  I am sure more partnerships
anchored in the NSFI are yet to come.
From experience, we know that to effectively address challenges of financial inclusion, a multi-
agency, multi-stakeholder, collaborative approach is needed.  This realization is the driving force
behind the NSFI on which today’s partnership and coordinating efforts are founded. 
While we are starting with microfinance and MF NGOs, we hope to eventually bring on-board,
other financial institutions so that the range of available products and services for MSMEs can be
completed.
While  this  is  our  long  term  goal,  our  partnership  celebrated  today,  definitely  brings  us  a  step
towards greater developments in the current financing ecosystem.
 We extend our gratitude to our partners and look forward to jointly shaping the future of MSMEs.  
Let this signing ceremony be the start of a fruitful undertaking!
Maraming salamat po sa inyong lahat! 
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
