     03.09.2018 
 
 
 
Welcome address 
Second Annual Research Conference of Banco de España 
3 September  2018 
 
 
Pablo Hernández de Cos 
Governor 
 
 Good morning. 
I would like to welcome you to the second Annual Research 
Conference, which this year is jointly organised by Banco de 
España and the Institute for Fiscal Studies.1  
Let me start by thanking our colleagues from IFS. The IFS is 
a  benchmark  for  rigorous  policy  analysis,  far-reaching 
influence and frontier academic research, and it is indeed an 
honour for us to collaborate with them. 
This meeting has become our flagship research conference 
with the main goal of bringing together leading scholars and 
policy-makers  to  discuss  frontier  research  on  recent 
economic developments and the policy options to address 
them.  
Last year the conference focused on macro, monetary and 
macroprudential  policies.  This  year  we  want  to  turn  our 
attention to tax and transfer systems. 
After  several  years  of  sustained  recovery,  the  Great 
Recession has left a legacy of high public debt ratios, low 
potential  output  growth  and  rising  inequality  in  some 
countries. For instance, the euro area aggregate public debt 
                                                   
1  I would like to thank Olympia Bover and Roberto Ramos for their contributions to this speech. 
       1  
stands at close to 90% of GDP, almost 25 percentage points 
up  on  its  pre-crisis  level.  Also,  the  IMF  estimates  that 
potential  output  growth  in  the  major  advanced  economies 
has  been  declining  since  the  early  2000s,  this  trend  being 
further  aggravated  by  the  global  financial  crisis.  Currently, 
potential output for this group of economies is thought to be 
at  around  1.5%,  a  significant  drop  from  the  2%  growth 
estimated  in  the  pre-crisis  period.2  At  the  same  time,  the 
percentage  of  wealth  held  by  the  richest  10%  of  the 
population  of  the  United  States,  France  or  the  United 
Kingdom  has  risen  by  between  5  pp  and  9  pp  in  the  last 
25 years.3 
Moreover, 
far-reaching 
transformations 
such 
as 
globalisation, the digital revolution and demographic trends 
are all shaping the world economy today, and will continue 
to do so in the years to come.  
Against this backdrop, tax and transfer systems can play a 
crucial  role  in  providing  sound  public  finances,  increasing 
potential  output  and  delivering  sustainable  and  inclusive 
growth.  However,  meeting  these  goals  poses  some 
significant challenges. And not only because of the intrinsic 
distortionary  nature  of  taxation  and  the  different  existing 
trade-offs among these three dimensions, but also because 
                                                   
2 See Chapter 3 of the April 2015 World Economic Outlook. 
3 See Alvaredo, F., L. Chancel, T. Piketty, E. Saez and G. Zucman (2018), World Inequality Report 2018, Harvard University Press. 
 2      
 some of these global phenomena, in particular globalisation 
and the digital revolution, can adversely affect the capacity 
of  governments  to  collect  taxes.  As  recently  stressed  in  a 
newspaper article, the challenge is to define a system where 
taxes  target  rents,  preserve  incentives  and  are  hard  to 
avoid.4 
Let me highlight some avenues of research that I consider 
relevant in this context.  
First, the well-known equity-efficiency trade-off of taxation 
has  given  rise  to  a  fruitful  literature  on  the  mechanisms 
driving the behavioural response of taxpayers and the size 
of such reactions.5  
While the initial focus of this literature relied on labour supply 
responses6, some recent contributions have emphasised the 
importance of accounting for additional mechanisms, such 
as tax avoidance or rent-seeking activities by top earners. 
For example, one such contribution finds that the incentive 
to bargain for more compensation in an environment of low 
top tax rates drives the bulk of the behavioural reaction of 
                                                   
4 See “Taxation. Stuck in the past”, The Economist, 11th August 2018. 
5 In this regard, it is worth noting that the early empirical literature found a very large elasticity of taxable income with respect to the 
marginal net-of-tax rate, while the subsequent research, part of it based on non-US experiences, has lowered this number to around 0.05 
and 0.4; see Saez, E., J. Slemrod, and S. H. Giertz (2012): “The elasticity of taxable income with respect to marginal tax rates: A critical 
review,” Journal of Economic Literature, 50 (1), pp. 3-50; and Kleven, H. J., and E. A. Schultz (2014): “Estimating taxable income responses 
using Danish tax reforms”, American Economic Journal: Economic Policy,6 (4), pp. 271-301 
6 See, for example, the discussion in Feldstein M. (1995), “The effect of marginal tax rates on taxable income: A panel study of the 1986 
Tax Reform Act.”, Journal of Political Economy 103 (3), pp. 551-572. 
       3  
top  earners,  while  the  reaction  of  the  labour  supply  is 
modest.7 
For  policymaking,  it  is  crucial  to  know  the  direction  and 
extent  of  these  behavioural  reactions.  On  one  hand, 
because  they 
inform  the  need  for  policy  evaluation 
frameworks  that  go  beyond  the  simple  estimation  of 
morning-after  effects.  On  the  other,  because  behavioural 
responses  are  at  the  root  of  the  optimal  design  of  the  tax 
and  transfer  system.  As  a  consequence,  accounting  for 
them  is  central  to  addressing  a  host  of  current  policy 
debates, such as the optimal level of progressivity.  
Second, one influential avenue of research has documented 
a consistent trend of income concentration at the top of the 
distribution in some OECD countries in the last few decades. 
One explanation behind this pattern points to the concurrent 
fall  in  top  marginal  rates,  whereby  some  authors  have 
established  a  causal  link.  For  example,  it  has  been 
documented  that  the  top  1%  income  share  in  the  US  has 
increased  from  around  8%  in  the  early  1960s  to  18%  in 
recent  years,  this  trend  having  been  accompanied  by  a 
dramatic fall in the top marginal tax rate from 85% to 35%.8 
Nonetheless,  other  economists  suggest  that  skill-biased 
technological change - by favouring top earners relative to 
                                                   
7  See  Piketty,  T.,  E.  Saez,  and  S.  Stantcheva  (2014):  “Optimal  taxation  of  top  labor  incomes:  A  tale  of  three  elasticities,”  American 
Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 6 (1), pp. 230-271. 
8 See, Piketty T., E. Saez and S. Stancheva (2014), op. cit. p. 245. 
 4      
 average earners - is at the root of this income concentration 
pattern.9 This debate has by now reached the public arena. 
Third, from a macro perspective, a growing segment of the 
literature  advocates  a  move  from  the  standard  new 
Keynesian  framework,  based  on  representative  agents,  to 
models that account for household and firm heterogeneity, 
in order to better understand the transmission channels of 
monetary and fiscal policy. This literature speaks directly to 
central bankers, since it challenges some of the basic tenets 
of  our  traditional  understanding  of  monetary  and  fiscal 
policy.  
For  example,  a  heterogeneous  household  framework  is 
crucial to assess the extent to which additional revenue can 
be raised by making income taxes more progressive. In this 
regard, a recent paper emphasizes that the revenue impact 
of  a  more  progressive  tax  schedule  in  the  US  should  be 
assessed in light of the reaction of agents along the income 
distribution,  and  the  aggregate  changes  triggered  as  a 
result.10  
And  fourth,  the  emergence  of  the  digital  economy  poses 
significant  challenges  and  opportunities  for  tax  systems 
                                                   
9 See, for instance, Card, D. and J. E. DiNardo (2002): “Skill-biased technological change and rising wage inequality: Some problems and 
puzzles,” Journal of Labor Economics, 20 (4), pp. 733-783. 
10 See Guner, N., M. Lopez-Danieri and G. Ventura (2016): “Heterogeneity and government revenues: Higher taxes at the top?” Journal 
of Monetary Economics, 80, pp. 69-85. 
       5  
around  the  globe.  For  instance,  research  for  the  US 
suggests that profit-shifting to low-tax jurisdictions reduces 
the tax bill of US-owned companies by about 20%.11 Thus, 
globalisation and the growing reliance on intangible assets 
demand new ideas to limit the erosion of corporate income 
tax.  In  this  situation,  the  international  dimension  of  tax 
design emerges at the forefront of the policy debate. Against 
this  backdrop,  for  instance,  the  OECD  has  launched  a 
welcome  initiative,  known  as  the  Base  Erosion  and  Profit 
Shifting Project (BEPS), which brings together 115 countries 
with  the  aim  of  ensuring  that  profits  are  taxed  where  the 
economic activity takes place and where value is created.12 
As you can see in the conference programme, we have an 
excellent menu of papers covering a large amount of topics, 
related to these and other issues. They will provide new and 
valuable  insights  in  the  realm  of  fiscal  policy,  and  will 
therefore improve our understanding of this field, both from 
a theoretical and an empirical perspective. 
Why are all these questions relevant for central banks? In my 
view,  there  are  sound  reasons  to  argue  that  the  research 
effort of a central bank need not necessarily be confined to 
the traditional fields of macro and monetary policy. On the 
contrary, the deeper and broader our understanding of the 
                                                   
11  See  Gabriel  Zucman  (2014),  “Taxing  across  Borders:  Tracking  Personal  Wealth  and  Corporate  Profits”,  Journal  of  Economic 
Perspectives, volume 28 (4), pp. 121-148. 
12 See http://www.oecd.org/tax/beps/. See also the Chapter 2 of the April 2018 Fiscal Monitor of the IMF. 
 6      
 economy  is,  the  better  we  will  be  able  to  fulfil  our  task  of 
producing good analyses in monetary and financial matters.  
In the particular case of tax and benefit systems, they have 
sizable effects on investment, labour-force participation and 
productivity, and hence on potential output growth and the 
level  of  the  natural  rate  of  interest.  In  addition,  apart  from 
potential  discretionary  decisions,  tax  and  benefit  systems 
are  the  main  ingredient  of  automatic  fiscal  stabilisers  in 
advanced  economies.    A  deep  understanding  of  tax  and 
benefit systems is therefore crucial to anticipate aggregate 
demand  and 
inflation  dynamics  and 
to  assess 
the 
appropriate stance of monetary policy and, more generally, 
of the overall policy mix.  
From  the  standpoint  of  Banco  de  España,  the  foregoing 
arguments in favour of a wide view on our research activities 
are even more compelling since our responsibilities include 
providing  advice  to  the  Spanish  government  on  economic 
policies. In so doing, we have not remained indifferent to the 
transformations  referred  to  above  and  the  avenues  of 
research inspired by them.  
Consistent  with  this  broad  perspective  on  central  bank 
research, our economists engage in an extensive variety of 
topics, some of which go beyond the more traditional focus 
       7  
of  central  banks.  For  example,  we  have  recently  placed 
emphasis on the study of the aggregate effects of structural 
reforms  in  product  and  labour  markets,  the  distributional 
consequences  of  tax  policies,  the  evolution  of  income 
inequality and  the assessment of the financial competences 
of the population, to name but a few. 
More generally, we believe that high-quality theoretical and 
empirical  analyses  are  necessary  to  fulfil  one  of  our  core 
mandates: understanding and  monitoring developments in 
the euro area and Spanish economies. We see high-quality 
research  as  an  indispensable  tool  to  adopt  sound  policy-
making decisions.  
In this regard, in recent years Banco de España has aimed 
to further improve the standard of its research activity and 
to  strengthen  collaboration  with  other  institutions.  Overall, 
these endeavours reaffirm our commitment to research, as 
the fundamental basis for good policy decisions, and I hope 
they will enhance our research output in the future. 
I  would  not  like  to  miss  this  opportunity  to  underline  the 
importance of relying on accurate and available statistics for 
economic analysis and research. It is my view that allowing 
independent  researchers  to  access  high-quality  data  is  a 
necessary step to advance in the knowledge of the issues 
referred to above.  
 8      
 In this regard, over the years more and more countries are 
easing  the  requirements  to  work  with  the  micro  and 
administrative data produced by the public sector.13 I believe 
that Spain should not lag behind in this endeavour.  
In keeping with this assessment, Banco de España provides 
researchers  with  the  micro  data  of  some  of  the  surveys  it 
conducts,  such  as  the  Survey  of  Household  Finances  and 
the Survey of Financial Competences. But more needs to be 
done.  In  this  regard,  we  are  committed  to  extending  the 
availability  of  micro  data  to  other  products,  such  as  the 
balance sheet data of non-financial corporations and some 
banking data. In this respect, Banco de España has recently 
joined INEXDA, a network of central banks whose aim is to 
exchange experiences in the management of granular data 
in order to facilitate their use by external researchers.  
Also, we must strive to have other public institutions join us 
in this initiative. Although the Spanish public sector currently 
provides samples of administrative data regarding, among 
others,  tax  returns  and  social  security  records,  there  is 
ample room for improvement in this area.  
                                                   
13 See Arellano, M. (2018), “El acceso a los microdatos administrativos públicos: la nueva frontera de la investigación económica y social”, 
presentation  at  XVIII Aula  de  Verano  Ortega  y  Gasset,  UIMP, Santander, 20-21 Agosto 2018,  http://www.cemfi.es/~arellano/arellano-
presentacion-uimp-2018.pdf 
 
       9  
In this respect, enlarging the number of available datasets, 
enabling  access  to  the  universe  of  observations  and 
allowing for the merger of different databases are measures 
that  would,  for  sure,  deepen  our  understanding  of  the 
Spanish economy and help design better public policies. In 
this connection, the experience of the Nordic countries is a 
success story, and could be used to guide our efforts in the 
future. 
Let me conclude. 
Tax and transfer systems around the world face significant 
challenges to provide inclusive growth and fund the public 
policies that the population demands. Meetings such as this 
conference provide an excellent opportunity to enhance our 
understanding of these fascinating issues and to strengthen 
the links between central bankers and academics.   
Allow  me  to  recall  in  this  regard  the  figure  of  Sir  James 
Mirrlees,  who 
has 
recently  passed 
away.  His 
groundbreaking  academic 
contributions  and  deep 
involvement in public policy design provide an outstanding 
example  of  intellectual  achievement  and  commitment  to 
improving  the  society.  He  rightly  gave  his  name  to  the 
influential  Mirrlees  review,  which  has  become  an  essential 
guideline  for  policymakers  involved  in  tax  design.  I  would 
like  to  convey  my  sympathy  to  our  colleagues  of  the  IFS, 
 10      
 who had the opportunity to work in close collaboration with 
him, and to the academic community in general for this loss.   
Finally,  let  me  express  my  gratitude  to  the  organisers  for 
making  this  conference  possible  and  to  all  of  you  for 
attending. 
I wish you a very productive meeting and a pleasant stay in 
Madrid.   
Thank you very much for your attention. 
       11  
