Johannes  Beermann:  Mind  the  unknowns  –  on  the  future  of
banking
Speech  by  Dr  Johannes  Beermann,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche
Bundesbank,  at  the  German-Singaporean  Financial  Forum  (GSFF)  "The  Future  of  Banking  –
Evolution, Revolution or Big Bang", Management University, Singapore, 16 April 2018.
 1. Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen
Thank you for your kind invitation. It was easy for today’s organisers to convince me of giving a
keynote  at  this  seminar,  because  today’s  topic,  the  future  of  banking,  is  currently  among  the
most exciting fields not only for financial actors, but also from a central banker’s point of view.
And the big question of today – evolution, revolution or big bang – is certainly not just a marketing
trick to lure you to this seminar.
We have witnessed major digital transformations in other sectors already:
Small  start-up  companies  with  innovative  ideas  have  quickly  gained  a  share  of  the  market,
previous “top dog” companies have been brought to their knees, and completely new process
chains and work environments have come into being.
What  does  this  mean  for  the  banking  sector,  which  is  currently  undergoing  a  wave  of
digitalisation?
Pretty much everyone involved in banking is currently asking this question, and I’m sure that you
here today are no exception.
People want to know where things will be in three, five or ten years’ time – and they want to know
in as much detail and as soon as possible.
In  the  20  minutes  I  have  been  allocated,  I  would  like  to  talk  about  a  few  recently  discussed
scenarios  on  the  future  of  banking  and  then  –  from  the  perspective  of  a  central  bank  and  a
supervisory authority – offer a somewhat more conservative perspective.
2. Can we know where things are heading?
When looking at the future of banking, it naturally makes sense to begin with the technological
and societal changes that digitalisation is bringing about – changes which have an impact on the
way banking is organised and the value it creates.
A recently published study entitled “Digital Banking 2025” has done just that.
The authors conclude, for example, it will be necessary for the “client journey” to be the prime
consideration when developing new services.
Customers are becoming more discerning and can click their way to the competition faster than
before.
So-called application programming interfaces (or APIs) and a trend towards specialisation will
atomise  the  value  chain  –  which  is  the  very  opposite  of  the  previous  trend  to  offer  as  many
banking services as possible under one roof.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Banking  could  also  be  reshaped  by  big  data,  whereby  banks’  financial  knowledge  of  their
customers could feed into a comprehensive, very powerful customer profile enabling value to be
created via interfaces with completely different sectors.
There are still other far-reaching scenarios under discussion, but I will not be able to fully explore
with you all of these nor their underlying economic theories, as my time is limited.
However, even though these economic considerations are important, things can also be shaped
in  a  decisive  way  by  the  course  of  day-to-day  developments.  This  is  why  we  speak  of  path
dependence.
I would like to illustrate this point with the topic of disruption, which has often been discussed in
connection with the path taken by banking.
Disruption  means  the  fear  that  fintechs,  and  especially  tech  giants,  might  offer  far  more
innovative financial services much more cheaply, which would very quickly transform them into
overpowering rivals for traditional institutions.
That is not as far-fetched as it may sound – we have already seen disruption in other sectors.
And  there  have  already  been  disruptive  developments  in  the  financial  sector.  Just  take  stock
market trading, for example, much of which left the trading floor quite some time ago.
But  thus  far,  disruption  has  only  affected  individual  components  of  banking.  No  technological
innovation has been able to fully replace the economic functions of banks.
From our experiences with banking transformation in Germany, I don’t see widespread disruption
happening today or in the foreseeable future. Right now, day-to-day relations between fintechs
and banks in Germany can best be described as “complicated".
We are currently seeing almost every model conceivable in the business world, from traditional
fintech takeovers and white label banking to the idea of the bank as a digital ecosystem.
While  fintechs  started  off  being  quite  feisty  towards  the  established  institutions,  we  are  now
seeing  a  diverse  coexistence  based  on  competition,  cooperation  and  expanding  the  service
offering.
The  takeaway  from  what  I  have  said  so  far  is  that  that  the  story  of  digitalisation  is  still  being
written, paragraph for paragraph.
Much depends on external events: What payment methods will play a role in future? How much
personal contact will customers need in matters that require a high level of trust? How relevant is
the wish to receive all services from a single provider? How much of a given technology is simply
hype?
Therefore  it  is  not  a  surprise,  that  many  questions  about  the  future  of  banking  remain
unanswered. For example, what impact will digitalisation have on banks’ earnings?
To what extent will profits be skimmed by new market entrants? And how many institutions with
similar services will be necessary at all in a digital financial sector?
From my perspective, a wide range of needs and lively competition are likely to be permanent
fixtures in the future banking landscape.
One thing is clear, however – competition with new and fast-moving rivals, the ease with which
customers can switch providers, and the agility that this will call for will almost inevitably increase
the pressure on market participants – and this may prove too much for some. So if you ask for
my opinion on which business model will survive, I am inclined to say: the best business models
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
of many.
Whether you share this view or not: we must be careful that we ourselves do not contribute to
the  hype  cycle  through  the  forecasts  we  provide,  and  that  we  continue  to  analyse  what  is
happening with the required degree of openness and curiosity.
3. In the digital age, risks won’t disappear: the supervisory perspective
We supervisors, too, are grappling with the question of where banking is headed.
For  example,  in  a  working  group  of  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  scenarios
have been drawn up which are plausible in light of technological developments.
But  it  was  less  the  changing  business  opportunities  that  we  were  interested  in  than  the
associated risks which these entail.
After  all,  it  needs  to  be  clearly  understood  that  risks  do  not  disappear  just  because  files  and
processes are digitalised. In fact, new risks actually emerge.
The physical files we used to have were not at risk of cyberattack – but today’s digital files are.
In the second part of my speech, I would therefore like to address the risks of digital banking and
what that should mean to us.
From our supervisory experience we can say that too many senior managers are still not treating
operational risks – and especially IT related risks – with the same care and attention as traditional
banking risks.
Maybe this is because IT risks are rather unintuitive. They materialise rarely or very rarely, but
when they do, their impact can be colossal. But every player in the digital financial sector needs
to be fully aware that digital services also require trust.
Whether this trust is earned through years of reliable service or is given in good faith to a new
enterprise upfront, in both cases it is one of the most valuable assets and should be protected.
Supervisors  are,  in  any  case,  working  day  in  and  day  out  to  ensure  that  these  risks  are
recognised  and  limited.  After  all,  as  IT  is  part  of  the  financial  infrastructure,  it  cannot  afford
weaknesses that might be acceptable elsewhere, as even short disruptions can be expensive.
Outsourcing is a key topic here. It certainly enables significant savings, but the risks shouldn’t be
underestimated.
In Germany, this means that banks cannot use outsourcing as a pretext for not accepting the
responsibility for losses incurred by customers or within their own organisations.
It  is  therefore  all  the  more  important  to  keep  risks  under  control  when  outsourcing.  Is  this
guaranteed if the servers are located on a different continent?
Generally speaking, when value chains are broken up, it must be ensured that end-products are
reliable, and that not everyone can simply pass the buck if something goes wrong. Banks have a
particular duty in this regard.
Another challenge that has become hugely more significant in recent years is cyber risks. And let
us bear in mind that cyber defence is not a trivial matter – and you cannot rely upon defence
strategies from the analogue world.
Back in the Middle Ages, it may have been relatively easy to defend castles: by building moats
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
and fortresses.
And  it  was  mostly  clear  from  what  direction  the  enemy  –  often  the  same  enemy  –  would
advance. The reality of IT is a different matter altogether:
Enemies are unknown and almost never come out into the open. In some cases, professional
hackers hide for months on end within a company’s fortress walls.
This was for example the case with the Carbanak gang which invaded the IT of banks across the
planet.
And even if a company has detected a system breach, this does not mean for one moment that
the assailant has been driven out of the system – this requires, in some cases, top-of-the-line
criminology techniques.
We  should  therefore  think  of  a  company’s  IT  security  as  being  more  like  an  immune  system
rather than a simple wall. And you can very well imagine that it takes more than a good antivirus
scanner and a firewall to provide this immune system with adequate protection.
Very often, the weakest link in the chain when it comes to security measures are people.
At the Bundesbank, a Bank-wide awareness project on cyber security was recently launched that
took employees on a journey through the “cyber jungle".
This might seem a bit gimmicky to some employees, but it is absolutely crucial that they know
what to do, and what not to do, as they navigate the digital world each day.
This  brings  me  to  another  topic:  the  risks  not  only  affect  existing  institutions,  but  also
newcomers.
They are not immune to problems. Let us briefly look at the story of fintechs so far. The wave of
digitalisation coincided with a great deal of dissatisfaction among customers with “banks".
That is why fintechs presented themselves as a counterpoint to traditional institutions, dressed in
hoodies rather than a suit and tie, and claiming to be “small, no-frills outfits” rather than “too big to
fail".
But  does  a  sense  of  a  new  dawn  breaking  and  a  customer-centric  culture  alone  really  make
such  a  huge  difference?  Does  the  image  which  fintechs  have  of  themselves  really  justify
supervising them less strictly?
In my view, it is concrete evidence of safety and reliability that counts. There have been news of
problems and failures at fintechs companies, combined with isolated cases of fraud at fintechs
around  the  world.  They  show  that  mishaps  and  misconduct  cannot  be  eliminated  through
technology and a fresh appearance alone.
That  is  why,  in  Germany,  we  have  so  far  had  good  experiences  with  the  principle  of  “same
business, same risks, same rules".
If, for example, you’re engaged in banking business – that is, you take in deposits and grant loans
– you’re going to be treated as a bank by supervisors. You’ll need a licence and be expected to
satisfy supervisory standards.
It  doesn’t  matter  whether  a  bank  only  appears  on  a  smartphone  screen  and  most  of  the
standardised processes run automatically, or whether it is a well-established high street bank.
So if a fintech in Germany remains exempt from supervision, that is simply because its business
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
model contains nothing which, from today’s perspective, presents a risk that must be regulated
and supervised.
4. Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen
What, then, can we say today about the future of banking?
My speech has hopefully made clear that we can’t just look at simplistic scenarios.
The future of banking is not only about innovation, it is also about doing things right.
Therefore, in my view, digitalisation will reward not those who “reinvent the wheel” but those who
are generally more competent at what they do.
This also means keeping the risks of digitalisation in check, what should also be the benchmark
for institutions.
It  is  not  individual  ideas  we  are  talking  about,  but  a  bank’s  overall  package  –  including  risk
management.
Thank you.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
