  
Reforming the international monetary and financial system and 
preserving monetary and financial stability in financially integrated 
small and open economies 
 
 
Már Guðmundsson, Governor of the Central Bank of Iceland, panel 
comments in the 50th Anniversary Conference of the Central Bank of 
Malta, Valletta, 4 May 2018.  
 
Let me begin by congratulating all at the Central Bank of Malta on the Bank’s 
50th  anniversary  and  thank  Governor  Vella  for  the  invitation  to  speak  at  this 
conference. I spoke in a Central Bank of Malta conference here in Valetta around 
the middle of the 1990s. At that time Iceland had more or less fully liberalised 
its  capital  account  and  had  a  pegged  exchange  rate.  Malta  also  had  a  pegged 
exchange rate but still had some capital controls. The world has changed since 
then  and  our  understanding  of  it  even  more.  We  in  Iceland  went  towards  a 
flexible exchange rate and inflation targeting, while you entered monetary union. 
Overall, we have both done well, but our road in Iceland has been bumpier. 
 
The heading of this panel is Challenges facing central banks after the financial 
crisis.  That  is  a  big  menu.  For  my  introductory  remarks  I  choose  two  related 
issues that have been high on my mind for  years, both as a policy maker in a 
small, open and financially integrated economy and during my tenure at the BIS. 
These are potential reforms to the international monetary and financial system 
(IMFS) and how small, open and financially integrated economies (SOFIEs) can 
preserve  monetary  and  financial  stability  in  a  world  of  global  financial 
integration  and  large  and  volatile  capital  flows.  Both  of  these  are  unfinished 
business and the road ahead is foggy. 
 
The post-war global economic order was initially based on the principles of free 
trade  in  goods,  current  account  convertibility,  and  monetary  stability  through 
fixed  but  adjustable  exchange  rates  vis-à-vis  the  US  dollar.  Open  capital 
accounts were the exception, however. At the time, trade integration was seen to 
be more important for economic progress than financial integration. 
 
It worked well for a long while, and some call the period from 1950 to 1970 the 
golden years.  Yet there were inherent flaws in this set-up that contributed to its 
demise in the early 1970s, not least the well-known Triffin dilemma regarding 
the conflict between the domestic economic objectives of the country providing 
the main reserve currency and the required international supply of that currency. 
In this case it was the US dollar. Then capital accounts were opened up, with 
strong  momentum  in  the  1980s  and  early  1990s.  Capital  controls  were 
increasingly  undermined  by  technology  and  financial  innovation,  and  strong 
arguments were being made to the effect that open capital accounts would bring 
significant benefits. After all, ongoing real economic integration at a global level 
demanded  at  least  some  degree  of  global  financial  integration.  In  turn,  freer 
capital  movements,  the  ongoing  cross-border  financial  integration,  and  the 
 1 
 growth of private capital flows that followed undermined pegged exchange rates 
and thus contributed to the spread of flexible exchange rate regimes and inflation 
targeting in many parts of the world, but in the European Union this development 
provided part of the rationale for a monetary union.  
 
The  current  international  monetary  system  and  the  official  part  of  the  global 
financial safety net largely reflect the contours of the global economy as they 
were  before  global  financial  integration  and  private  capital  flows  reached  the 
level we have seen in this century.  
 
Back  then,  the  global  macroeconomic  problem  was  related  to  global  current 
account  imbalances  and  asymmetric  adjustment.  Keeping  your  own  house  in 
order was in most cases both necessary and sufficient for maintaining economic 
stability in  individual countries.  IMF  facilities to lend to  sovereigns of debtor 
countries facing balance of payments difficulties were the most important part 
of the global financial safety net (GFSN).   
 
The world we currently live in is different. Financial imbalances in both net and 
gross balance sheets can be more important than current account imbalances and 
certainly were so in  the  build-up to  the  great  financial  crisis  (GFC). This is  a 
world  of cross-border spillovers and spillbacks.  It  is  a world  where, for small 
and  open  economies  (SOEs),  keeping  your  own  house  in  order  is  certainly 
necessary  but  no  longer  sufficient,  at  least  not  if  we  restrict  ourselves  to 
traditional  demand  management  and  prudential  instruments.  Financially 
integrated  small  and  open  economies  can  still  be  overwhelmed  by  large  and 
volatile capital flows driven by push factors. It is a world that needs additions to 
the GFSN, some of which we partly have – such as FX liquidity provisions to 
internationally active banks through central bank-swaps – but some of which we 
do not have.  
 
The  international  community  is  certainly  aware  of  these  issues.  The  IMF  has 
done  good  analytical  work  in  this  area  and  proposed  reforms.  Work  has  been 
done  under  the  auspices  of  the  G20  looking  at  potential  reforms  to  the 
international monetary sytem (IMS), and currently the Eminent Persons Group 
is working on a report to the G20 to be delivered at this year’s autumn meetings 
of the IMF. But progress in this area is slow and with current set-ups we are not 
going to get far without having the main reserve currency country on board. 
 
This  raises  the  question  that  I  will  turn  to  next:  in  the  absence  of  global  (or 
regional)  reforms,  what  will  individual  SOEs  have  to  do  in  order  to  reap  the 
benefits of cross-border financial integration in safe manner? In order to answer 
this  question,  we  need  to  understand  how  cross-border  financial  integration 
affects the ability of SOEs to preserve both monetary and financial stability.1  
 
First, a simple theory. If we have a world made up of one very large country and 
several very small countries, with full cross-border financial integration (in the 
                                                 
1 For a more expanded version of what follows, see my published work, in particular 
Gudmundsson (2008) and Gudmundsson (2016). 
 2 
 economic sense of these terms rather than the legal one), and assume that relative 
risk premia are constant, then long-term interest rates in the small countries will 
be pegged to long-term rates in the large one. This, of course, is an “unrealistic” 
theoretical simplification. But it gives us a reference point to start to think about 
these  issues,  and  it  indicates  the  direction  we  might  be  heading  in  as  global 
financial integration progresses. 
 
In this type of world, the small countries could still have independent monetary 
policy of a sort, provided that they have a flexible exchange rate regime. They 
could  pick  their  own  inflation  targets  and  set  their  own  short-term  rates  that 
would affect economic activity in the short run and inflation in the long run. In 
this case, monetary policy works mostly through the exchange rate channel. If 
exchange  rates  are  “well  behaved”  and  the  financial  sector  is  sufficiently 
regulated and supervised, then a floating exchange rate and “keeping your own 
house  in  order”  is  sufficient  for  independent  monetary  policy  and  financial 
stability. 
 
The  problem  is,  however,  that  exchange  rates  are  sometimes  far  from  being 
smooth  reflections  of  underlying  fundamentals.  The  evidence  suggests  that 
foreign  exchange  markets  exhibit  excess  volatility  and  that  exchange  rates 
diverge from fundamentals for protracted periods. In some sense, the existence 
of carry trade can be construed as evidence of this,  as it involves betting that 
interest  rate  differentials  are  not  fully  compensated  by  exchange  rate 
movements; i.e., that uncovered interest rate parity does not hold, except at long 
horizons, and then often through sharp and disorderly corrections.  
 
This, in turn, gives rise to two concerns: first, regarding detrimental effects on 
the traded goods sector , and second, on financial stability where volatile capital 
flows,  currency  mismatches,  and  rollover  risk  of  foreign  currency  debt  are 
among the key players. Adverse effects on financial stability can be particularly 
severe when a blocked interest rate channel and an erratic exchange rate channel 
interact badly with other economic and financial risks that can face small, open, 
and  financially  integrated  economies  –  such  as  the  global  financial  cycle, 
domestic financial vulnerabilities, and policy conflicts. 
 
We saw trends before the GFC that were consistent with this story. Data on long-
term  interest  rates  and  spreads  in  small  advanced  economies  and  in  many 
emerging markets economies showed strong and growing correlations with long-
term rates and spreads among core rate setters (mainly the US and the eurozone), 
although still some way  from  the theoretical  limiting case. The GFC reversed 
this process somewhat, as risk premia skyrocketed, cross-border banking partly 
retreated to home base, and restrictions on capital movements were in some cases 
reintroduced. It has come back to a significant degree.  
 
Before  the  crisis,  some  argued  that  these  patterns  could  be  due  to  common 
shocks, convergence of monetary policy frameworks, and increased credibility 
of those frameworks. However, case studies, comparisons of the pre- and post-
 3 
 crisis  periods,  and  other  observations  make  it  more  and  more  plausible  that 
global financial integration is the main driver. 
 
The  bottom  line  is  that  it  is  becoming  more  difficult  to  conduct  independent 
monetary  policy  in  small,  open,  and  financially  integrated  economies,  and 
although a flexible exchange rate is a necessary condition for doing so, it might 
not  be  sufficient,  especially  when  we  factor  in  the  financial  stability  aspects. 
This, I think, is why we find on occasion that we are closer to facing a dilemma 
than  a  trilemma.  I  think  it  is  still  a  trilemma,  but  with  trade-offs  of  variable 
severity.2 
 
What can individual countries do about this?  
 
First, those that have the option can enter a monetary union. That has its own 
pros and cons, as you all know very well. But for a SOE were the MU constitutes 
the biggest trading partner, issues of excess exchange rate volatility and domestic 
currency mismatches become much less pronounced.  
 
Second,  they  can  give  up  on  independent  monetary  policy  while  maintaining 
their own currency by either pegging the exchange rate or pegging interest rates 
to those of global rate setters. The problem with the first is that, as history shows, 
it can be difficult to maintain with free capital movements. The problem  with 
both is that other policies, such as fiscal policy, will then have to take care of 
domestic economic stabilisation. But will they? 
 
Third, they can use FX intervention to reduce the effect of volatile capital flows 
on the exchange rate.  
 
Fourth,  they  can  increase  resilience  and  the  ability  to  live  with  exchange  rate 
fluctuations  (reduce  the  fear  of  floating)  by  strengthening  financial  regulation 
and supervision or employing macroprudential tools. 
 
Fifth,  if  everything  else  fails,  they  can  introduce  tools  aimed  directly  at  the 
financial integration part in order to regain greater monetary independence and 
shift the effect of monetary policy more to the interest rate channel and towards 
the non-traded goods sector. These so-called capital flow management measures 
are probably most needed when countries are faced with large capital inflows at 
the same time as domestic conditions warrant significantly higher interest rates 
than among core rate setters.   
 
In Iceland, we have used many of these tools in recent years. We have used FX 
intervention to reduce short-term exchange rate fluctuations and, in recent years, 
to  lean  against  strong  appreciation  pressures.  We  have  introduced  a  liquidity 
coverage ratio and a net stable funding ratio in foreign currencies. In 2016 we 
were faced with strong capital inflows that flattened the yield curve as the policy 
rate was being increased and more was signalled. We then introduced a special 
                                                 
2 Rey (2013) and Obstfeld (2015) analyse this issue and provide somewhat different views on 
whether it is a dilemma or a trilemma. 
 4 
 non-renumerated reserve requirement of 40% with a holding period of a year on 
capital inflows into the bond market and high-yielding deposits. It worked, and 
monetary transmission through the interest rate channel was restored. As a result, 
we  also  avoided  the  build-up  of  significant  carry  trade  positions  with  the 
associated risk to financial stability. We see such instruments as temporary and 
only  to  be  used  as  a  third  line  of  defence.  Furthermore,  it  remains  an  open 
question whether they will be seen to be more in the nature of macroprudential 
tools  or  as  infringements  on  our  treaty  obligations  to  maintain  free  capital 
movements. We are hoping that everybody has learned the lessons of the crisis 
where large and volatile capital flows played a key role.3 
 
In concluding, let me come back to the IMFS and ask what I have said about the 
plight of SOFIEs means in terms of desirable reforms. First, we need to continue 
to adapt IMF surveillance and facilities and other parts of the GFSN to modern 
realities. Second, we need to further reduce financial regulatory flaws and gaps 
at the regional and global level regarding capital flows and cross-border banking. 
Third, we need to try to find ways to make central bank swaps a more transparent 
and reliable part of the GFSN. Finally, international organisations and treaties 
need to accommodate but monitor SOFIEs’ use of macroprudential and capital 
flow management tools. With time, we might develop a new consensus on the 
rules of the game.   
 
                                                  
3 For more information on the special reserve requirement on certain capital inflows in Iceland, 
see Central Bank of Iceland (2017). 
 5 
  
References: 
 
Central Bank of Iceland (2017). Special reserve requirement on capital inflows. 
Monetary Bulletin 2017/4. Available at www.cb.is.  
 
Gudmundsson, Már (2008). Financial globalisation: key trends and implications 
for  the  transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  policy.  BIS  Papers  No  39. 
Available at www.bis.org. 
 
Gudmundsson,  Már  (2016).  Global  financial  integration  and  central  bank 
policies in small, open economies, Singapore Economic Review. 
 
Obstfeld,  Maurice  (2015).  Trilemmas  and  trade-offs:  living  with  financial 
globalisation. BIS Working Papers 480. Available at www.bis.org.  
 
Rey, Helene (2013). Dilemma not Trilemma: The Global Financial Cycle and 
Monetary 
at 
www.kansascityfed.org/publicat/sympos/2013/2013Rey.pdf.  
 
 
Independence. 
Available 
Policy 
 6 
