BANK OF UGANDA 
   Remarks by 
  Louis Kasekende (PhD) 
Deputy Governor, Bank of Uganda 
 At the 2017 Financial Reporting (FiRe) Awards  
    Kampala Serena Hotel; November 09, 2017 
  1 
   CEO of Capital Markets Authority, 
President of the Institute of Public Accountants of Uganda 
All captains of industry, and sponsors of the FiRe Awards, 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
 Good evening! 
 I  would  like  to  begin  by  thanking  the  CEO  of  the  Institute  of  Certified 
Public  Accountants  in  Uganda  for  inviting  me  to  be  chief  guest  at  this 
wards dinner and to commend the Institute and the other organisers and 
sponsors  –  the  Capital  Markets  Authority,  the  Uganda  Securities 
Exchange and the New Vision – for this very commendable initiative.  
I  hope  it  will  lead  to  a  greater  understanding  among  the  business 
community  in  Uganda  of  the  benefits  which  firms  can  derive  by 
preparing  financial  accounts  that  comply  with  best  practise  and  global 
reporting standards. 
 I  want  to  reflect  in  these  remarks  on  the  contribution  which  financial 
reporting makes to a developing economy and in particular the growth of 
a  modern  business  sector.  The  business  sector  in  Uganda  is  dominated 
by  small  and  medium  scale  enterprises  (SMEs);  the  most  recent 
comprehensive  data  which  are  available  from  the  Census  of  Business 
Establishments  indicates  that  the  average  number  of  employees  of  a 
registered business is only 2.3. As is the case elsewhere in Africa, SMEs 
in  Uganda  struggle  to  expand.  The  vast  majority  of  them  never  expand 
enough to become large firms. Of the approximately 460,000 registered 
businesses in Uganda, less than 1,000 have more than 50 employees. 
  2 
One  of  the  reasons  why  SMEs struggle  to  expand is  the nature  of  these 
firms.  The  majority  are  owned  by  a  single  proprietor  or  by  a  group  of 
related family members. The proprietor of the firm is often the manager. 
The governance of these firms, including financial governance, tends to 
be  informal,  without  transparent  rules,  records  and  procedures.  This 
type of informal governance may be adequate for small companies but it 
is a major barrier to their growth and expansion.  
 Firms cannot expand without mobilising capital for investment. Beyond 
a  relatively  small  size,  the  investment  needs  of  a  firm  outstrip  the 
financial resources of a sole proprietor or a single family. Hence finance 
must  be  mobilised  from  outside  sources;  i.e.  from  outside  of  the  firm’s 
immediate  ownership.  From  a  business  perspective,  the  ideal  form  of 
finance  for  firm  expansion  is  equity  capital,  because  this  is  long  term 
finance and its returns are linked to the performance of the firm. Equity 
capital  from  outside  sources  can  be  mobilised  through  private  equity 
placements or by selling shares on the stock market. 
 But  to  mobilise  equity  capital  from  outside  sources,  the  existing 
proprietor  or  proprietors  must  be  prepared  to  share  ownership  of  the 
firm  with  new,  probably  minority  shareholders.  For  their  part,  new 
investors  will  only  purchase  equity  in  a  firm  if  they  are  confident  that 
they will, as non-controlling shareholders, be treated equitably by those 
who control the firm.  
 Some  SMEs  try  to  avoid  bringing  in  outside  shareholders  to  fund  their 
expansion  by  relying  on  debt  finance  instead  of  equity.  But  this  often 
leads  to  the  failure  of  the  firm.  The  maturity  of  debt  finance  is  often 
much  shorter  than  the  payback  period  of  capital  investments.  Thinly 
 3 
capitalised  firms  often  have  to  devote a  large share  of  their  revenues  to 
servicing their debt and so are very vulnerable to adverse shocks to their 
revenues or to the costs of debt servicing.   
 A  second  fundamental  change  which  firms  must  make  if  they  are  to 
expand successfully is the separation of ownership and management. As 
a  firm  grows  larger,  its  management  becomes  more  complex  and 
demanding  of  professional  and  technical  expertise.  As  such,  a 
professional  manager  or  management  team  becomes  essential.  This 
means that the micro-management of the firm by a sole proprietor is no 
longer  a  tenable  business  practise.  The  proprietor  or  proprietors  of  the 
firm must be prepared to step back from its everyday management and 
instead focus on playing an oversight role as board directors of the firm. 
 These two types of changes which are essential for firm expansion – the 
diversification  of share  ownership  and  the  separation  of  ownership  and 
management – require fundamental changes in the governance of a firm. 
The  type  of  informal,  non-transparent  governance  which  characterises 
small firms managed by a sole proprietor is no longer adequate for larger 
and  more  complex  firms  with  multiple  shareholders  and  professional 
managers.  The  governance  structures  of  the  latter  must  be  much  more 
formal and transparent, so that all of the different types of stakeholders 
in a firm can be confident that their own legitimate interests are properly 
taken into account in the management of the firm. 
 One  of  the  reasons  why  formal  and  transparent  corporate  governance 
structures are necessary in larger firms is that complex organisations are 
often vulnerable to what economists call “principal agent problems”. An 
agent  is  someone  endowed  with  executive  authority  by  a  principal  to 
 4 
serve  the  interests  of  the  latter.  For  example  a  chief  executive  officer  is 
appointed  by  the  shareholders  of  a  firm  to  serve  their  interests;  in  this 
case the CEO is the agent and the shareholders the principals.  
 Principal  agent  problems  usually  arise  when  agents  have  incentives  to 
act in ways which are not in the interests of their principals and when the 
latter lack the means to properly monitor and control the actions of the 
former.  Three  main  types  of  principal  agent  problems  can  occur  in  the 
management  of  firms:  between  managers  and  owners,  between 
controlling and non-controlling shareholders and between a firm and its 
creditors.  
 Proper  corporate  governance  structures  are  a  means  to  mitigate 
principal  agent  problems  and  thus  ensure  that  a  firm  can  be  managed 
efficiently  for  the  mutual  benefit  of  all  of  its  stakeholders.  Because  the 
operations  of  a  large  complex  firm  involve  a  host  of  non-controlling 
stakeholders,  without  effective  corporate  governance  structures  to 
mitigate  principal  agent  problems,  modern  business  would  not  be 
possible.       
 One  of  the  most 
important  components  of  effective  corporate 
governance structures are  accurate  and  reliable  financial reports.  Other 
key  aspects  are  a  clear  legal  framework  which  delineates the  rights  and 
obligations of all of the different stakeholders and which can be enforced 
effectively  in  the  courts,  and  appropriate  management  and  oversight 
structures within the firm, with clear responsibilities for the firm’s board 
of directors. Financial reports provide a window into the operations of a 
firm which can give all of its stakeholders the information that they need 
 5 
to  conduct  transactions  with  confidence  that  they  are  not  being  taken 
advantage of in any way.  
 For  example,  without  accurate  financial  reports,  minority  shareholders 
cannot be certain that the firm in which they have invested their wealth 
is  being  managed  in  the  best  interests  of  all  shareholders  and  not  just 
those who control the firm’s management. Financial reports are essential 
to enable a firm’s board of directors to evaluate the managers they have 
appointed.  They  are  an  essential  tool  for  a  firm’s  board  of  directors, 
which  is  why  a  firm’s  internal  auditor  usually  reports  directly  to  the 
board and not to the management, so that the board can be confident in 
the veracity of the financial reports.  
 The  requirements  of  modern  firms  for  credit  cannot  be  accommodated 
satisfactorily by lenders unless the latter have confidence that a firm can 
service  its  debts  from  its  future  revenues  as  a  going  concern,  but  such 
confidence  is  only  possible  if  lenders  have  access  to  reliable  financial 
information  with  which  to  evaluate  the  firm’s  business  prospects.  For 
those  firms  seeking  to  mobilise  capital  by  issuing  equity  or  corporate 
bonds  on  the  capital  market,  a  history  of  financial  reports  is  a 
prerequisite,  because  the  institutional  investors  who  are  the  main 
customers  for  corporate  stocks  and  bonds  rely  heavily  on  financial 
reports to evaluate prospective investments.  
 To  maximise  the  benefit  of  financial  reports  for  all  stakeholders,  it  is 
essential  that  they  be prepared  according  to  international  best  practise, 
such  as  the IFRS  9,  which  will  become  mandatory  in  Uganda,  as  in  the 
rest  of  the  world,  from  the  beginning  of  2018.  A  common  set  of 
internationally  recognised  standards 
for 
financial  reports  allows 
 6 
everyone  to  understand  precisely  what  the  information  contained  in 
them means. We also require high calibre professional accountants with 
the  requisite  expertise  to  prepare  financial  accounts  to  the  highest 
standards.  In  this  regard,  I  would  like  to  commend  the  Institute  of 
Certified  Public  Accountants  of  Uganda  for  their  efforts  to  uphold  the 
highest standards of accountancy and financial reporting in this country.  
 Finally, let me conclude by congratulating all the companies which have 
won Financial Reporting Awards this year.  
 Thank you for listening. 
    7 
