Abu Hassan Alshari Yahaya: SMEs and financial inclusion
Speech by Mr Abu Hassan Alshari Yahaya, Assistant Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia
(Bank  Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  Credit  Guarantee  Corporation  Malaysia  Berhad  (CGC)  SME
Awards 2018, Kuala Lumpur, 27 June 2018.
 It is my pleasure to address you this evening at the SME Awards hosted by Credit Guarantee
Corporation Malaysia Berhad (CGC). I would like to commend CGC for the continuous effort in
championing the SME cause, and in recognising the banking and financial industry players that
have made meaningful contribution in supporting the SMEs.
As  mentioned  by  Dato’ Agil,  ‘Digital  Disruption’  has  become  the  new  normal  not  only  for  the
banking  and  financial  industry,  but  also  for  other  sectors  and  industries.  We  have  seen  the
fortunes  of  traditional  businesses  changing  overnight  with  technological  disruption.  In  fact,  the
financial  industry  may  at  times  need  to  play  catch  up  to  ensure  products  and  services  are
relevant in a new digital economy. We believe CGC will continue in its efforts to be agile and
dynamic in embracing the higher expectations of meeting the financing needs of SMEs moving
into the future.
SMEs and Financial Inclusion
In broad terms, financial inclusion means access to affordable financial products and services
that meet the needs of individuals and businesses and that are delivered in a responsible and
sustainable manner. At Bank Negara Malaysia, we recognise the impact of financial inclusion on
the  broader  economic  performance  of  our  country.  Financial  inclusion  facilitates  productive
financing and investments which generates income for the underserved, improves equality and
contributes  to  sustainable  growth.  Having  an  inclusive  financial  system  is  also  important  to
ensure  economic  and  social  progress  on  the  development  agenda  is  achieved.  Therefore,
CGC’s  goal  of  ensuring  access  to  financial  services  for  SMEs  via  a  fair  and  transparent
marketplace  for  financial  products  and  services,  including  extending  credit  that  provides  a
pathway towards balanced economic growth and prosperity for all Malaysians should be lauded.
Based  on  the  Economic  Census  2016:  Profile  of  Small  and  Medium  Enterprises  by  the
Department  of  Statistics,  Malaysia  (DOSM),  SMEs  in  Malaysia  constituted  98.5%  of  the  total
business  establishments.  Majority  of  the  businesses  were  in  services  sector,  mainly  in
wholesale  &  retail  trade,  followed  by  manufacturing,  construction,  agriculture  and  mining  &
quarrying.
Financial  institutions  are  the  major  source  of  financing  for  SMEs. As  at  end-2017,  growth  in
financing  to  SMEs  continues  to  be  sustained  above  5%,  outstripping  financing  growth  to
households and large corporates. The approval rate for financing applications by SMEs of 75%,
has also been consistently higher than that for all customers. The share of SME financing over
total business financing has steadily trended upwards to more than 50% from 38% in 2010. This
reflects an increased focus on SMEs as a strategic growth driver for financial institutions.
According to the latest bi-annual survey by SME Corporation Malaysia (SME Corp), 97% of SMEs
which applied for financing from FIs affirmed that they were able to obtain financing. Of this, 27%
were first time borrowers and 23% were without collateral and credit guarantee.
Nevertheless, our work is far from done. There are pockets of SMEs, particularly the start-ups
and those operating in new and high risk segments that continue to face challenges in obtaining
financing.  When  businesses  have  insufficient  access  to  financial  products  and  services,  they
may be deprived of a chance to pursue new business opportunities, and as a nation, we are
deprived of the benefits of their potential contributions to the economy.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Over  the  past  45  years,  CGC  has  played  a  crucial  role  in  bridging  the  gap  between  financial
institutions and underserved SMEs via its innovative products and services. I commend CGC’s
efforts for its latest venture in developing a dedicated online referral platform that connects the
banks  and  the  SMEs,  known  as  imSME.  The  imSME  has  the  potential  to  transform  the  SME
Financing Landscape in the country, by matching SMEs’ financing needs with suitable products,
thus reducing search costs and improving financing prospects for SMEs. 
The  implementation  of  imSME  exemplifies  the  importance  of  technology  in  increasing  SMEs’
financing access. SMEs are now able to submit financing applications 24 hours a day, without
the  need  to  visit  individual  financial  institutions  to  search  for  suitable  product  offerings.  The
Platform also facilitates the partnership between key collaborators to deliver end-to-end solution
for  SMEs  that  face  higher  hurdles  to  obtain  financing.  With  the  Financial  Advisory  Team  in
imSME,  unmatched  or  unsuccessful  applicants  will  be  further  motivated  to  enhance  their
capacity  and  capability  with  relevant  trainings  aimed  at  improving  their  chances  to  secure
financings or loans in the future.
The imSME complements existing initiatives in the SME financing ecosystem, such as BNM’s
Fund  for  SMEs,  alternative  financing  channels  such  as  equity  crowdfunding  and  P2P  lending,
and the Small Debt Resolution Scheme.
BNM’s Role to Encourage Financial Inclusion & SME Financing
SMEs is a pertinent component of Malaysia’s economy. To reap their full potential, SMEs must
be  continuously  nurtured,  guided  and  developed  to  become  more  competitive.  The  financial
services  industry  needs  to  play  its  role  in  continuously  innovating,  adapting  to  the  digital
disruption and be the frontier in driving the national SME agenda, by ensuring adequate access to
financing.
Technology has the potential to transform financial services. Most notably it
dramatically  reduces  the  costs  of  providing  access  to  financial  services,  particularly  in
remote locations and to small borrowers;
transforms  credit  decision-making  ability  by  enabling  lenders  to  tap  into  alternative  data
sources. This has made it possible for people without collateral or credit histories to borrow;
and
simplifies  finance  and  enabling  providers  to  significantly  improve  the  quality  of  customer
interactions.
There is a need to advance new ways to deliver financial services to the underserved, beyond
the provision of access points. In particular, the potential to effectively integrate the delivery of
financial  services  with  the  day-to-day  activities  of  underserved  segments  remains  largely
untapped. More effective utilisation of technology to improve customer engagements can also
increase confidence in the use of financial services.
To  this  end,  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  will  continue  providing  an  enabling  regulatory  environment
and active facilitation to increase the impact of technology on financial inclusion. This is being
driven through several strategic initiatives by the Bank, including the regulatory sandbox, adoption
of  digital  identities  for  SMEs  and  piloting  the  use  of  psychometric  tools  for  SME  credit
evaluations.
Role of the Financial Industry to drive efforts in SME Financing and Financial Inclusion
It  has  become  increasingly  important  for  the  financial  industry  to  come  forward  and  address
related  perceptions  on  SME  financing  matters.  The  industry  should  actively  address  issues
affecting  access  to  financing  by  SMEs,  by  advocating  the  players  to  adopt  best  practices  in
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
lead 
initiatives 
to  reform 
inefficient  practices.  Key  strategic
financing  activities  and 
recommendations  should  be  made  to  the  Government  and  regulators  to  enhance  the  SME
financing ecosystem, particularly in supporting new growth areas and increase contributions by
financial  institutions  to  SME  sector.  In  this  regard,  the  financing  ecosystem  needs  to  be
complemented  with  comprehensive  SME  development  strategies  and  initiatives  to  strengthen
SMEs’  capacities  and  capabilities.  This  includes  efforts  towards  training  and  retraining  of
workers, adoption of technologies in business and operating process, as well as in governance,
finance and accounting practices.
The  financial  industry  should  also  address  any  negative  perceptions  by  having  an  effective
communication strategy and ensuring swift response time to SME customers, as these are vital
in  maintaining  the  integrity  and  public  image  of  financial  institutions.  Moving  forward,  it  is
imperative and almost inevitable for financial industry to undertake measures to advance financial
literacy and capabilities of SME customers.
The commitment to better serve the SME segment would reinforce the critical role of the financial
industry  in  supporting  the  Government’s  development  agenda  in  a  well-functioning  financial
system.
CGC has demonstrated that efforts to assist underserved SMEs can be achieved in a financially
sustainable  manner  through  its  suite  of  innovative  financial  products  and  services.  Financial
institutions should also explore strategic partnerships with adjacent industries such as telcos and
fintechs to reduce market gaps and reliance on Government subsidies for the SMEs. Importantly,
the financing ecosystem needs to be complemented with a comprehensive SME development
ecosystem to nurture and elevate our SMEs towards greater size and competition.
I hope today’s recognition and appreciation of FIs and CGC customers would spur both parties to
become more innovative, resilient and progressive. My heartfelt congratulations to all the winners
and may you continue to inspire and set benchmarks on SME financing landscape.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
