Yves Mersch: Central bank risk management in times of monetary
policy normalisation
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the International Risk Management Conference, Paris, 8 June 2018.
 Risk  management  has  come  a  long  way  since  Edward  Altman  introduced  the  z-score  to
measure  the  likelihood  of  bankruptcy  in  1968,  and  the  financial  crisis  has  brought  about
significant changes in risk management for commercial banks and central banks alike.
But as we now emerge from the crisis, we would do well to reflect on what should persist from
that period, and what the “new normal” for risk management should be. So today I would like to
discuss what risk management has meant for the ECB in recent times, and what changes we
can expect as we approach a phase of monetary policy normalisation.
But before I elaborate on this, I should note that we have entered the quiet period before the next
monetary policy meeting of the ECB Governing Council, and therefore my remarks should be
understood as high-level reflections and not be interpreted as containing any commitments or
comments on upcoming monetary policy decisions.
Parallels between risk management at commercial and central banks
Risk  management  has  gained  in  importance  in  recent  years  for  both  commercial  and  central
banks.
The regulations that emerged following the crisis have led commercial banks to bolster their risk
functions in a number of ways. They are now subject to more detailed and demanding capital
requirements, higher standards for risk reporting and, in particular, more detailed rules for the
building of internal models. More recently, the Targeted Review of Internal Models (TRIM) was
launched  to  assess  banks’  compliance  with  these  requirements  and  thereby  reduce
inconsistencies and unwarranted variability in the outputs of their internal models.
The  ECB’s  involvement  in  risk  management  is  perhaps  most  familiar  in  this  context:  as  a
banking  supervisor.  But  the  management  and  measurement  of  risks  has  also  been  of  great
significance for the monetary policy side of our operations. The ECB, like other central banks,
has expanded its balance sheet substantially in recent years, resulting in several changes in our
risk management framework. For example, we have expanded the range of eligible collateral for
our lending operations and begun purchasing financial assets outright, including a wide array of
private sector assets.
While there are many parallels in the way that we and the commercial banks have managed
risks, there are also important differences due to our public mission as laid down in our mandate.
First,  we  conduct  a  single  monetary  policy  for  the  euro  area  as  a  whole.  Though  our  credit
operations  and  risk  mitigation  measures  are  in  some  ways  similar  to  collateralised  lending
operations by commercial banks,  the financial assets we take as collateral and the lending rate
we set are the same for all borrowers. That, in turn, requires a risk control framework which aims
to achieve risk equivalence across all assets accepted as collateral.
1
Second,  our  primary  goal  is  to  maintain  price  stability.  So,  unlike  commercial  banks  whose
fiduciary responsibility is to maximise their financial income, central banks have to consider the
wider macroeconomic picture when they set their risk management frameworks.
This is why central banks’ exposure to financial risks can – and may indeed have to – increase in
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
order  to  honour  their  mandates,  while  commercial  banks  typically  aim  to  reduce  risks  during
crises.  In  exceptional  times,  central  banks  may  need  to  take  more  risk  on  their  own  balance
sheets so as to reduce risks for the financial system as a whole. This contributes to financial
stability and, ultimately, to price stability.
Still,  this  is  not  to  say  that  managing  financial  risks  is  not  important  for  implementing  the
Eurosystem’s  monetary  policy.  Quite  the  opposite,  in  fact!  Just  as  a  commercial  bank  must
comply with its regulations, a central bank must follow its mandate and the risk management
principles therein.  For us at the ECB, these principles, which were established long before we
embarked on non-conventional policies, underpin all our policy measures.
2
Broadly speaking, the principles are protection, consistency, simplicity and transparency. They
imply that – if there are several monetary policy options that we can take to fulfil our mandate –
we  should  select  the  measures  that  minimise  our  own  exposure  to  financial  risks.  This  idea,
which  underpins  all  risk  management  (including  in  commercial  banking),  is  known  as  risk
efficiency.  In  addition,  our  principles  require  risk  management  to  be  an  integral  part  of  our
decision-making.  And  we  embody  transparency  and  simplicity  by  being  rules-based  and  as
predictable as possible in our operations.
This commitment to risk efficiency is vital for several reasons. First, central bank revenues are
public funds, meaning any losses by central banks are losses for the public purse in each euro
area  country.  Second,  losses  can  affect  the  financial  independence  of  central  banks  and
therefore, potentially, their operational independence. Third, losses can harm our credibility and
reputation in the eyes of the public, and thus their confidence in the central bank to maintain price
stability.
For these reasons, our principles will continue to guide our approach to risk management in all
our policy decisions. But as we now move towards a new phase of monetary policy, it is worth
reflecting on what these principles imply for the future risk management framework.
In my view, we should aim to return as closely as possible to the pre-crisis state. But we also
need to consider carefully whether some of the temporary measures should remain part of our
toolkit. And since we have taken on new risks that will be on our balance sheet for a long time,
we may need to retain certain elements of our current risk management framework.
As  monetary  policy  begins  to  normalise,  there  are  three  areas  in  particular  where  our  risk
management framework needs to be reviewed.
Risk management principles while returning to a more conventional monetary policy
The first relates to the changes we made to our collateral framework during the crisis to enable
greater access to central bank liquidity.
When we launched the various vintages of our longer-term refinancing operations, we introduced
in  parallel  a  number  of  adjustments  to  our  collateral  eligibility  criteria.  These  adjustments
contributed to the sizeable take-up of our operations and their effectiveness in reinvigorating the
bank lending channel. And maintaining risk equivalence in haircuts meant that broadening the set
of eligible assets did not reduce the level of protection for the Eurosystem.
But some of the measures introduced fragmentation into our collateral framework.
Before the crisis, the Eurosystem operated on the concept of a single list. Its purpose was to
enhance  the  level  playing  field  across  the  euro  area,  to  promote  equal  treatment  for
counterparties and issuers, and to increase the overall transparency of the collateral framework.
This  changed,  however,  with  the  introduction  of  the  temporary  additional  credit  claims  (ACC)
3
framework in 2012.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  temporary  ACC  framework  deviates  from  the  single  list  principle  by  allowing  individual
national central banks to specify their own frameworks adapted to their local needs, albeit fulfilling
certain  agreed  minimum  risk  management  requirements.  This  was  acceptable  to  combat  the
severe  financial  tensions  and  the  uneven  distribution  of  collateral  in  the  euro  area  at  the  time
ACCs  were  introduced.  But  clearly,  once  out  of  crisis  mode,  we  would  not  want  such  a
renationalisation of our collateral framework to persist.
So I do not see the case for maintaining national extensions to the common collateral framework
in the form they are in today. At the same time, since ACCs represent a considerable source of
collateral  for  our  long-term  lending  operations,  there  might  be  a  case  for  retaining  them  in  a
different form.
One  option  would  be  to  return  to  the  fully  fledged  single  list  of  collateral  that  excludes ACCs.
Another  would  be  to  introduce  stronger  harmonisation  into  any  future ACC  framework,  which
could either be part of the regular framework or part of a state-contingent framework. The key
issue is that any future framework should remove the fragmentation we see today.
Other temporary measures introduced during the crisis have less bearing on fragmentation. For
instance, we also widened eligibility requirements for collateral, such as for certain asset-backed
securities, and accepted non-euro denominated collateral.  We did all this to achieve a specific
monetary policy goal; but once we reach that goal and liquidity demand declines, there should be
less need for those exceptional measures to continue. Of course, they will remain “on the shelf”
to be used again, as necessary, to fulfil our monetary policy aim.
4
A  central  bank  should  be  flexible  and  may  need  to  have  many  instruments  at  its  disposal  to
achieve its mandate. But it should not take higher risks than necessary.
So as we head down the path of monetary policy normalisation, we will have to decide whether
some temporary measures need to be jettisoned, included in a state-contingent framework, or
transformed into harmonised, more permanent measures.
Since the last of our long-term lending operations will only mature in the first quarter of 2021, this
discussion does not need to be concluded today – and many questions are still open. But in any
case,  changes  in  this  area  will  involve  careful  consideration,  since  experience  has  repeatedly
shown that each crisis needs a tailored response.
The second area where our risk management framework needs to be reviewed is the risk control
framework for our asset purchase programme (APP).
We  will  retain  this  framework  beyond  the  horizon  of  our  net  asset  purchases  since,  for  an
extended  period  of  time  past  that  horizon,  principal  payments  from  maturing  securities
purchased under the APP will be reinvested. For as long as we keep outright portfolios on our
balance  sheet,  the  principles  behind  the  risk  control  measures,  including  eligibility  criteria,
purchase limits, benchmarks ensuring diversification and the different risk-sharing agreements,
will continue to apply.
Still,  in  the  reinvestment  phase,  some  criteria  and  risk  control  parameters  may  warrant
recalibration. This is to ensure that – given changes in portfolio composition when bonds mature
and  proceeds  are  reinvested  –  overall  risk  exposure  does  not  increase.  Moreover,  with
significantly lower volumes of purchases and the related increase in operational flexibility, some
parameter adjustments may be possible that would actually contribute to risk efficiency gains.
The  third  area  for  review  is  how  our  counterparty  and  collateral  framework  should  adapt  to  a
post-crisis financial system. Certainly, in the future we will rely more on our own judgement on
the  quality  of  assets  and  counterparties  and  consider  further  expanding  the  Eurosystem’s
internal  credit  assessment  capabilities.  The  crisis  highlighted  the  importance  of  having  more
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
information on these aspects.
This implies, among other things, further enhancing our due diligence on external credit ratings,
for which greater transparency on the judgements underlying these ratings is essential. And it
implies  making  better  use  of  supervisory  information.  The  introduction  of  European  banking
supervision  has  brought  about  fundamental  improvements  in  this  regard,  as  it  facilitates  the
assessment of relevant information within the legal limits of the separation principle.
Moreover, we will have to balance the aim of returning to the simplicity of our previous framework
with adapting to the new realities of the financial system. For example, we will need to keep the
flexibility  to  apply  the  collateral  framework  to  financial  innovations,  especially  complex  new
financial products. The new “simple, transparent and standardised” securitisation regulation is a
case in point. It will allow us to better assess the collateral we accept.
At the same time, if financial innovations simply present new types of risks, we will not be so
accommodating. This is also a key lesson of the crisis. We will forcefully deal with new types of
securities whose risks may not yet have been fully appreciated.
Conclusion
Let me conclude.
Thanks to our stable principles, the Eurosystem’s risk management framework has successfully
weathered the challenges of the financial crisis. The size and type of our operations changed, as
did the assets we accepted as collateral. But our principles stayed the same.
Like risk management in the banking sector, central bank risk management has to evolve with
the times. So we need to reflect on where our principles will lead us in a post-crisis landscape.
Most importantly, we need to start thinking about a financial risk management framework that will
be appropriate in an environment of more conventional monetary policy.
While  the  benchmark  for  this  future  framework  should  be  the  pre-crisis  state,  it  is  not  clear
whether we can return entirely to the previous status quo. Instead, we might have to apply what
we have learnt from the crisis, retain what is useful for the future, and leave behind things whose
time has passed.
This will enable us to rely on a framework that is transparent and robust, but also flexible enough
to deal with the challenges of the future.
1
2
3
4
ECB (2015), “The financial risk management of the Eurosystem’s monetary policy operations”.
In 2010, the Governing Council approved a set of “Principles of the risk control framework for the Eurosystem’s
credit operations”.
The ECB’s Governing Council also decided in December 2011 to enable national central banks to accept as
collateral performing additional credit claims (ACCs) that satisfy specific eligibility criteria. Such assets do not
belong to the single list and they are also subject to a separate ECB Guideline: Guideline of the ECB of 9 July
2014  on  additional  temporary  measures  relating  to  Eurosystem  refinancing  operations  and  eligibility  of
collateral and amending Guideline ECB/2007/9 (recast) (ECB/2014/31).
This  expansion  included  certain  short-term  debt  instruments  and  derogations  for  own-use  of  government-
guaranteed bank bonds. Non-euro denominated eligible assets included those denominated in pound sterling,
US dollars or yen.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
