Guy Debelle: Twenty-five years of inflation targeting in Australia
Address  by  Mr  Guy  Debelle,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of Australia,  at  the  RBA
Conference 2018, Sydney, 12 April 2018.
 This draws on a number of pieces I have written on inflation targeting over the past two decades,
both at the RBA and the IMF. Thanks to Claudia Seibold for her assistance with the data.
Introduction
It has been 25 years since Australia adopted an inflation-targeting regime as the framework for
monetary policy. At the time of adoption, inflation targeting was in its infancy. New Zealand had
announced its inflation target in 1989, followed by Canada and Sweden. The inflation-targeting
framework was untested and there was little in the way of academic analysis to provide guidance
about the general design and operational principles. Practice was very much ahead of theory.
Now 25 years later, inflation targeting is widely used as the framework for monetary policy. While
there  are  differences  in  some  of  the  features  across  countries,  the  similarities  are  more
pervasive than the differences. And generally, the features of inflation-targeting frameworks have
tended to converge over time.
It is interesting to firstly examine how the inflation-targeting framework in Australia has evolved
over the 25 years. Secondly, it is also timely to reassess the appropriateness of the regime. The
first is the main task of my paper, the second is the task of the conference collectively.
In terms of the first, the main point I will make is that the Australian framework has not changed
much  over  the  past  25  years.  The  flexible  nature  of  the  framework,  which  was  there  at  its
inception,  has  proven  to  be  resilient  to  the  quite  substantial  changes  in  the  macroeconomic
environment that have taken place since. This is in contrast to some other countries that have
moved from an initially rigid definition (which may well have been appropriate at their inception)
toward something more flexible. The framework in Australia was adaptable from the start, which
caused  some  issues  in  convincing  some  people  of  the  seriousness  with  which  the  Reserve
Bank was adopting an appropriate monetary framework.
While the specification of the regime has not materially changed, one thing that has changed is
the  degree  of  confidence  that  the  regime  might  actually  work. Australia,  like  other  countries,
came to inflation targeting  after  trying  a  number  of  alternative  approaches  to  monetary  policy.
These  approaches  had  not  delivered  either  the  desired  price  stability  nor  acceptable
macroeconomic  outcomes.  Inflation  targeting  was  the  next  attempt  to  try  and  better  achieve
these outcomes. There was no guarantee of success. Now, after 25 years, there is considerably
greater confidence that the regime can contribute to sound macroeconomic outcomes in terms
of both inflation and growth. The proof of the pudding has been in the eating. There is greater
confidence and understanding about the framework from the public, from the political process,
from financial markets and from the policymakers themselves.
There is also now a large academic literature supporting inflation targeting and examining and
advising on various questions about the appropriate design and operation of the framework. That
has validated many of the decisions taken by policymakers in setting up their inflation-targeting
frameworks, but has also questioned some features of the framework.
One  noteworthy  change  in  the  inflation-targeting  framework  in  Australia  (and  elsewhere)  is
communication. The content and scope of the communication has increased considerably over
25 years. I will spend some time outlining these changes and the motivation for them.
 1 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
As I said, the second question about the appropriateness of the regime is very much the theme
of this conference. What, if any, changes to the framework might be worth considering? In the
final  section  I  will  raise  some  questions  that  will  be  considered  by  later  speakers  at  the
conference and provide some brief observations on them.
When  Glenn  Stevens  and  I  wrote  in  1995  about  the  motivations  for  the  (then)  new  inflation-
targeting framework in Australia, we said: ‘if, some years hence, we can look back and observe
that the average rate of inflation has a “2” in front of the decimal place, that will be regarded as a
success’.  We are now quite some years hence and we can look back and observe that the
average rate of inflation has a “2” in front of the decimal place.
How did the regime come about?
1
Unlike a number of inflation-targeting countries, the adoption of an inflation-targeting framework in
Australia was evolutionary rather than revolutionary.  It was not accompanied by a change to the
central bank’s legislation as was the case in New Zealand. Nor did it result from a rapid departure
from an exchange rate regime as in the UK and Sweden. But, like those other cases, it reflected
the recognition that previous monetary frameworks had not been successful in delivering either
price stability in the form of low inflation, nor desirable macroeconomic outcomes in terms of
sustainable full employment.
2
The inflation target in Australia was outlined in a number of speeches by the then Reserve Bank
Governor Bernie Fraser in 1993 and 1994.  It was a low-key launch, in part reflecting the political
climate of the time. As Steve Grenville and Ian Macfarlane noted, it was in the context of locking
in the low inflation that had occurred in the aftermath of the early 1990s recession.
3
The  target  was  the  operational  interpretation  of  the  goals  of  monetary  policy  set  out  in  the
Reserve Bank of Australia’s founding legislation in 1959, namely:
the stability of the currency of Australia
the maintenance of full employment in Australia; and
the economic prosperity and welfare of the people of Australia.
The stability of the currency goal reflects the fact the legislation was written when fixed exchange
rates were the norm. It has been interpreted as preserving the purchasing power of the currency
and hence is consistent with the maintenance of low and stable inflation.
As  noted,  the  inflation  target  was  first  adopted  by  the  Reserve  Bank  in  1993.  It  was  verbally
endorsed by the government of the day. But it was not formally endorsed by the government until
1996,  when  the  first  Statement  on  the  Conduct  of  Monetary  Policy was  signed  jointly  by  the
incoming government and the new Reserve Bank Governor, Ian Macfarlane. The political support
for the inflation target has been bi-partisan. The Statement has been renewed at the start of the
term of each of the subsequent two Governors. It has also been endorsed with each change of
government.
The Reserve Bank Act 1959 states that monetary policy has both nominal and real objectives.
Consistent with that, the Statement on the Conduct of Monetary Policy makes it clear that the
inflation-targeting  framework  recognises  both  nominal  and  real  objectives.  The  flexibility  of  the
target in terms of specifying that the inflation goal will be achieved over the cycle (subsequently
adjusted  to  be  ‘in  the  medium  term’)  is  the  feature  that  recognises  the  dual  mandate.
To maintain  full  employment  requires  that  the  economy  be  on  a  sustainable  path.  Thus  the
trajectory  of  economic  growth  matters,  as  does  the  presence  of  low  inflation  and  financial
stability.
In  the  case  of  demand  shocks,  there  is  not  a  material  conflict  between  the  real  and  nominal
 2 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
objectives, as the monetary response is effectively the same. That said, the flexibility of the target
potentially allows for greater inflation variability to achieve lower variability in the real economy.
However, the experience of other inflation-targeting central banks suggests that this difference is
not substantial in practice.
In  the  case  of  supply  shocks,  where  the  monetary  response  to  achieve  the  real  and  nominal
objectives is likely to be in conflict in the short term, the medium-term horizon of the inflation
target in Australia allows for a greater weight to be placed on output stabilisation and a more
gradual return of the inflation rate to target, than with a strict inflation target. Again, the practice of
most central banks over the past two decades has tended to evolve towards the sort of flexibility
explicitly recognised in the Australian target, notwithstanding the lexicographic ranking of inflation
4
and output objectives in the specification of some other inflation targets.
The  Statement  has  not  undergone  much  change  since  1996.  The  current  formulation  is:  ‘the
appropriate target for monetary policy in Australia is to achieve an inflation rate of 2–3 per cent,
on average, over time.’ Beyond some drafting changes that simply reflect the passage of time,
the most substantive change has been the articulation of the financial stability objective of the
Reserve Bank, which I will return to later. In terms of the description of the inflation target itself,
the  only  change  has  been  the  objective  from  keeping  ‘underlying  inflation  between  2  and
3  per  cent,  on  average,  over  the  cycle’  to  keeping  ‘consumer  price  inflation  between  2  and
3 per cent, on average, over time’. I regard this as purely a presentational change without any
5
operational consequences.
6
As I noted in a speech at the Bank of England   last  year,  inflation  targeting  and  central  bank
independence are sometimes conflated given their similar birth dates in a number of countries. In
large part, this is because both were a response to the inflation experience of the 1970s and
1980s. In Australia, just as the inflation target was evolutionary rather than revolutionary, so too,
greater central bank independence also evolved through time rather than there being a distinct
break  from  past  practice. As  Ian  Macfarlane  stated:  ‘the  Reserve  Bank,  by  virtue  of  its Act  in
1959, was always given a high degree of general independence as an institution. The fact that it
had  been  unable  to  exercise  this  independence  in  monetary  policy  for  much  of  the  post-war
period  was  due  to  a  practical  impediment  –  it  did  not  possess  the  instruments  of  monetary
policy.’ As  these  impediments  were  removed,  the  Reserve  Bank  was  able  to  become  more
independent  in  its  setting  of  monetary  policy.  Thus  while  the  formal  recognition  of  this
independence was not completely visible until the first Statement on Monetary Policy in 1996, the
practical independence had been there some time before that.
The inflation target in practice
How has the inflation target in Australia actually delivered in practice?
 3 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
The inflation target can be thought of as a ‘thick point’.  This doesn’t mean that inflation with a 2
in front of it implies a zone of policy inaction. It simply acknowledges that inflation will obviously
7
 4 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
vary through time and that there is probably not much to be gained from being too precise about
the appropriate inflation rate, whilst also recognising that the specification of the inflation target
plays an important role in anchoring inflation expectations. It would appear that the latter goal has
been achieved because the inflation expectations of the public have generally been consistent
with the target.Graph 1 shows the outcomes for inflation and unemployment (as well as the cash
rate, the instrument of monetary policy) and Table 1 summarises the macroeconomic outcomes
since  the  early  1970s.  It  updates  a  similar  table  in  Stevens  (2016).  The  table  shows  that  the
average inflation rate over the inflation-targeting period has been 2.5 per cent. So the inflation
target has been achieved over its period of operation.
At times, the inflation rate has been above the band, at times it has been below the band (though
none  of  these  deviations  have  been  that  persistent).  This  also  illustrates  the  flexibility  of  the
framework, which I will discuss in more detail in the next section. Of note, as is apparent in the
graph, the inflation outcomes in the past decade have been at the lower end of the distribution of
outcomes over the period. That is, as in other countries, inflation in Australia has been lower in
the post-crisis period than in the decade preceding it. I will return to this point later in discussing
some of the current challenges.
While the average inflation rate has been consistent with the target, the real economic outcomes
have also been good. The average unemployment rate in the most recent decade is lower than
the one in the decade preceding it, which in turn was lower than the one prior to that.
8
Clearly, these outcomes are also a function of the macroeconomic environment, and cannot be
solely  attributable  to  the  inflation  target.  Part  of  the  first  period  of  inflation  targeting  was  the
NICE  decade and macroeconomic outcomes in the late 1990s and early 2000s were better in
many countries, regardless of whether they had a (formal) inflation target or not. That said, many
of  the  early  adopters  of  inflation  targets  had  continued  to  experience  sub-par  economic
outcomes in the 1980s, particularly in terms of high inflation, when other countries had been able
to achieve successful disinflations.
But it is important to note that the period for which the inflation-targeting framework has been in
place  has not been that benign. Most obviously, it has included the Asian crisis and the global
financial crisis, as well as one of the largest rises (and falls) in the terms of trade in Australia’s
economic history – an event that has been the undoing of the Australian economy a number of
times in its history. Moreover, to paraphrase some words from Glenn Stevens in his final speech
as  Governor:  ‘had  anyone  [in  1993]  accurately  forecast  all  the  international  events  and
simultaneously predicted that things would turn out in Australia as they have, they would not have
9
been believed. But here we are.’
The variability in global output has been higher in recent years, but by contrast in Australia it has
been  lower.  At  the  same  time,  the  table  shows  variability  of  inflation  has  been  lower  in  the
inflation-targeting period than in the period prior to that.
When inflation targeting was in its infancy, there was a lot of research in central banks examining
the trade-off between output and inflation variability and assessing the ability of different policy
rules  to  achieve  different  points  on  that  trade-off.
  This  work  followed  on  from  that  of  John
Taylor,  along  with  Dale  Henderson  and  Warwick  McKibbin.  The  inflation  target  has  been
associated  with  the  inflation/output  variability  curve  in Australia  shifting  in,  notwithstanding  the
volatility  of  the  world  more  generally. As  Glenn  noted,  one  significant  contributor  to  the  lower
output volatility in Australia has been the avoidance of a large downturn. But the avoidance of a
large downturn is in part a function of the avoidance of an inflation breakout, which in turn, I would
argue can be attributed, to a reasonable extent, to the operation of monetary policy under the
inflation target.
10
Hence, when we look back over the past 25 years: the inflation target has been achieved; real
 5 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
growth  has  been  robust;  average  unemployment  has  declined  through  time;  and  nominal  and
real  variability  has  been  lower.  So,  I  think  it  is  reasonable  to  argue  that  the  inflation-targeting
framework  in Australia  does  seem  to  have  played  some  part  in  contributing  to  the  improved
outcomes.
Flexibility in practice
I  will  use  four  episodes  over  the  past  25  years  to  illustrate  some  different  features  of  the
operation of the inflation target in Australia, in particular illustrating the flexibility of the target in
practice, as well as its forward-looking nature.
 The first episode is the first tightening cycle with
the inflation-targeting framework in 1994/95; the second, the response to the Asian crisis a few
years later. The third episode is the introduction of the Goods and Services Tax (GST) in 2000
where  the  price  level  was  boosted  by  3  per  cent  overnight.  The  fourth  episode  is  the  period
around the onset of the global financial crisis in 2007–08.
1994/95
11
By the middle of 1994, inflation pressures were building as economic growth was accelerating.
The unemployment rate had declined by 3 percentage points in two years and wage pressures
were evident.
There  were  doubts  about  whether  the  Australian  inflation-targeting  regime  was  sufficiently
serious  enough  to  be  able  to  curtail  these  burgeoning  inflation  pressures.  Indeed  there  were
doubts about whether we even really had an inflation-targeting framework. One manifestation of
this was that the Bank of England was organising a conference on the nascent area of inflation
targeting and wasn’t sure whether Australia should be invited or not. Graciously they did end up
including us and invited Glenn Stevens and me to talk about the Australian model alongside the
stricter frameworks of New Zealand and Canada.
12
The flexible specification of the inflation target in Australia was seen as a vulnerability. It didn’t
have  the  electric  fence  of  the  more  hard-edged  inflation  targets  in  some  other  countries.  The
‘over the cycle’ language was too ‘fuzzy’. Reflecting such concerns, bond yields had risen quite
significantly in 1994 in anticipation of a material increase in inflation.
But inflation was still at its post-recession lows of 2 per cent when the Bank increased the cash
rate by 275 basis points in three moves over the second half of 1994. This pre-emptive tightening
was  assessed  to  be  necessary  to  curtail  the  Bank’s  forecast  that  inflation  would  rise.  It  is
noteworthy that the tightening occurred with inflation still only 2 per cent. Financial markets had
anticipated that significantly more tightening would be required, reflecting their lack of faith in the
new framework. Subsequently, inflation did actually rise to slightly above 3 per cent. The flexibility
of the target allowed the avoidance of an unnecessary cost to the real economy of trying to cap
the rise in inflation to below 3 per cent, consistent with the dual mandate.
In 1996, as demand pressures were easing, the Bank’s forecast was for inflation to decline. The
stance of policy was eased, even though inflation was still above 3 per cent. The flexibility of the
target, and its forward-looking focus, allowed the assessment of whether the inflation target was
at risk in the medium term sense to determine the appropriate policy response.
That episode went a long way to enhancing the credibility of the framework with wage and price
setters as well as with financial markets. It also increased the confidence within the Bank that the
inflation-targeting framework would be successful in achieving the Bank’s legislated goals.
The Asian crisis and exchange rate shocks
At the onset of the Asian crisis, the Australian economy was growing at around trend rates, with
domestic  demand  beginning  to  accelerate,  and  underlying  inflation  at  1.6  per  cent.  Monetary
 6 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
policy  had  been  eased  over  the  prior  year  or  so  in  anticipation  of  the  decline  in  inflation  that
subsequently occurred. Thus the Asian crisis hit the Australian economy at a time when it was in
reasonable shape with the stance of monetary policy already relatively expansionary.
Exports to east Asia accounted for around one-third of Australia’s exports at the time. In the year
following the onset of the crisis, Australia’s exports to the region declined by nearly 20 per cent,
directly subtracting around 1 percentage point from aggregate growth. Thus the decline in output
in  the  east  Asian  region  represented  a  significant  negative  demand  shock  to  the  Australian
economy.  Australia’s  terms  of  trade  also  fell  sharply  as  commodity  prices  declined,  further
exacerbating the decline in export demand.
In the event, inflation in Australia rose by less than was forecast, in part because of the decline in
the  pass-through  of  the  exchange  rate  depreciation,  as  well  as  a  greater-than-expected
disinflationary impulse from the Asian region that put downward pressure on import prices.
If policy had been set to ensure that inflation did not rise above 3 per cent, the necessary rise in
interest  rates  would  have  exacerbated  the  contractionary  shock  to  foreign  demand.  With  the
benefit of hindsight, given the lower-than-expected inflation outcomes, this would have resulted in
a significant undershooting of the inflation target.
The flexible inflation target served as a useful framework to think about the Asian crisis. Strong
consideration  was  given  to  the  goal  of  output  stabilisation  because  the  inflation  target  in  the
medium term was not felt to be in jeopardy. In addition, the policy credibility that had built up since
the adoption of the inflation-targeting regime also allowed the Reserve Bank greater flexibility in
its policy response.
Gst 2000
On 1 July 2000, a 10 per cent goods and services tax was introduced. As a result, the price level
as measured by the CPI increased by 3 per cent overnight. Hence inflation as measured by the
CPI was boosted, in a year-ended sense, by 3 percentage points for the next 12 months. The
increase in the price level was fully anticipated by the public and financial markets.
 7 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
The Bank did not seek to offset the effect of the GST on the price level. Its assumption was that
the boost to the price level would be once-off, and that the (by now well-enhanced) credibility of
the  inflation  target  would  ensure  that  medium-term  inflation  expectations  would  remain  well
anchored.  The  Bank  communicated  that  this  was  its  assessment  well  in  advance  of  the
introduction of the GST to help condition expectations.
Again, the specification of the regime allowed the Bank the flexibility to look through the increase
in the price level. It is worth noting that such flexibility would be more problematic under a price
level targeting regime, or even a nominal income target. With a strict price level target, the effect
of  the  GST  in  boosting  the  price  level  would  have  to  be  unwound  over  some  period  of  time,
notwithstanding that households were compensated for the change by income tax cuts.
In  the  event,  the  credibility  of  the  target  and  the  Bank’s  strategy  was  demonstrated.  Inflation
expectations remained anchored. Nearly all of the public discussion at the time focused on the
inflation  rate  net  of  the  GST  effect.  While  policy  was  tightened  around  that  time,  it  reflected
standard sources of price pressure such as strong growth, a rise in oil prices and a depreciating
exchange rate, not the effect of the price level shock.
While the mid 1990s episode went a long way to building the credibility of the framework, the
GST  episode  confirmed  that  the  framework  was  well  entrenched  in  wage  and  price-setting
behaviour in the Australian economy.
2007/08
From around 2006, it became clear that inflation pressures were again growing in the Australian
economy. The Bank’s forecasts for inflation were revised upwards in late 2007 and into 2008.
Monetary  policy  was  tightened  to  contain  the  rise  in  inflation  as  the Australian  economy  was
 8 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
overheating. Inflation reached as high as 5 per cent.
But as the events in the global economy turned south sharply, the Bank was able to change the
settings of monetary policy quickly and rapidly, even with inflation still high. As the facts changed
and the outlook changed, in this case quite dramatically, the Bank changed its assessment about
the appropriate setting of policy. The fact that inflation was still high as these events unfolded did
not constrain the decision to reduce the cash rate. Again, the flexibility and forward-looking nature
of the framework together with its recognition of both the real, as well as the nominal goals, of
monetary policy provided the necessary scope for action.
13
So throughout its 25 years, the specification of the framework has allowed the Bank to focus on
the medium-term outlook for inflation and not be unnecessarily constrained by any current level
of the inflation rate. That seems obviously appropriate behaviour now, and reflects the decision-
making process in all inflation-targeting frameworks today. But it was not obvious that this was
the appropriate approach to monetary policy back at the inception of inflation targeting. While the
confidence in being able to use the flexibility in the framework has undoubtedly increased, the
willingness to use it has always been there. You will note that I have not included the current
cycle of monetary policy in this assessment. That is still to play out and I will leave it to a later
iteration of this conference to conduct a post-mortem.
Communication
While  the  flexible  operational  approach  to  inflation  targeting  has  been  present  throughout,  the
communication by the Bank has changed quite substantially.
Prior  to  the  introduction  of  the  inflation  target,  the  principal  vehicle  for  the  Bank’s  economic
commentary  was  the Annual  Report  and  the  RBA Bulletin.  This  commentary  often  ran  to  no
more than a few pages. There were speeches on macroeconomic issues by the Governor and
Deputy Governor. Changes in the stance of monetary policy had been announced since 1990
(which was quite innovative at the time), but were generally a one line statement announcing the
decision to change the cash rate. That was the extent of the public communication. There was
not much information to understand the central bank’s general approach to monetary policy or
the central bank’s reaction function. Financial markets had to employ large teams of analysts to
divine the central bank’s intentions.
The advent of the inflation-targeting framework saw communication increase, though it should be
noted  that  this  was  a  worldwide  phenomenon  and  not  confined  to  inflation-targeting  central
banks.  Why  was  there  such  an  increase  in  communication?  One  reason  that  I  have  stated
before is that the inflation-targeting central banks did not have a good track record of monetary
policymaking. So there was a need to build that track record. A track record requires a track and
inflation targeting provided that track. But then you also need to make it clear to people how you
are progressing along that track and that is where the communication is important.
Given  the  relatively  poor  starting  point,  a  high  level  of  communication  and  transparency  was
necessary to build credibility as quickly as possible, to enhance the effectiveness of monetary
policy and to help anchor inflation expectations. Mervyn King described this as ‘trust building by
talk’.
 That was very much the goal of communication when inflation targeting was in its infancy.
14
Similarly, communication was a mechanism to deliver accountability. As I noted earlier, inflation
targeting often went hand in hand with greater central bank independence. The quid pro quo for
greater independence was greater accountability. In Australia’s case, the need for accountability,
and communication as one mechanism to deliver that accountability, was reflected in the first
Statement on the Conduct of Monetary Policy, which stated that ‘it is important the Bank report
on  how  it  sees  developments  in  the  economy,  currently  and  in  prospect,  affecting  expected
inflation  outcomes’.  It  noted  that  this  would  include  the Statements on Monetary Policy,  public
 9 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
addresses and required semiannual appearances of the Governor before the parliament.
Today, the extent and nature of communication have increased still further. The  Statement on
Monetary  Policy  is  a  comprehensive  document  detailing  the  assessment  of  the  current
conjuncture, the Bank’s outlook for the economy, the risks and uncertainties around that outlook,
and an explanation of the Board’s assessment of the monetary policy settings. The scope and
content of these documents have grown materially over the past 25 years.
All  monetary  policy  decisions  are  accompanied  by  a  statement  explaining  the  basis  of  the
decision (whether the stance is change or not). Minutes of the Board’s decision-making meeting
are published two weeks later.
 The number and frequency of speeches by the Governor and
Deputy  Governor,  as  well  as  other  senior  Bank  staff,  have  increased.  The Financial  Stability
Review is published twice each year providing the Bank’s assessment of those issues. There is
a website which makes this material, as well as other material describing the monetary policy
framework, readily available to the public. There is an extensive business liaison program and
recently an increase in focus on public education about the Bank’s role.
15
So the volume of communication and overall transparency have increased materially.
In considering the changed nature of the communication, it is important to ask two questions:
what is the objective of the communication, and to whom are we communicating?
One of the critical roles of communication is a vehicle for accountability. That communication is
directed to the parliament and the public, to whom the Bank is accountable. It is also important
that the public and parliament have a good understanding of the inflation-targeting framework to
enhance understanding as to why policy decisions are being taken. They may not always agree
with them, but it is important that they can understand the rationale behind them.
Communication  can  help  anchor  inflation  expectations,  which  in  turn  helps  enhance  the
effectiveness of the regime. There is strong evidence that anchoring of inflation expectations has
been enhanced over the past 25 years.
16
It  is  also  important  the  central  bank’s  reaction  function  is  understood.  That  is  helpful  for  the
effective and timely transmission of monetary policy. It helps ensure that inadvertent monetary
policy surprises don’t occur, which serves to enhance the overall credibility of the regime. This
communication  is  important  for  businesses  and  households  in  their  decision-making.  On  the
basis of their outlook for the economy, they can have confidence in how the central bank is likely
to react and what that would imply for their borrowing costs. An understanding of the reaction
function is also important for financial markets participants in setting financial market prices that
form an important part of the transmission mechanism of monetary policy actions.
The effectiveness of communication or transparency is sometimes measured by interest rate
surprises.  While  this  might  be  appropriate  in  some  cases,  sometimes  the  surprise  happens
through  a  previous  signal  by  the  central  bank.  In  my  view,  the  surprise  should  be  primarily
confined to data or event surprises. That is, with a well-understood reaction function, the vast
bulk of surprises should come from unexpected developments, not unexpected actions by the
central bank.
The amount and content of communication has been one of the most substantive changes over
the past 25 years. That has, in my opinion, been clearly beneficial for the accountability of the
Reserve Bank, as well as the effective functioning of the inflation-targeting framework. That said,
it  is  always  worth  checking  that  the  increased  communication  is  delivering  signal  rather  than
noise. That is, the quality of the message is more important than the quantity.
 10 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
Open issues
I have argued that the inflation target has delivered macroeconomic outcomes that have been
beneficial for the Australian economy. I think a strong case can be made that it has contributed
materially to better economic outcomes than the monetary frameworks that preceded it. I have
also  noted  that  the  framework  in  Australia  has  not  changed  much  over  the  25  years  of  its
operation, with the notable exception of communication.
So does that mean that the current configuration of the inflation target is the most appropriate or
that even that is the most appropriate framework for monetary policy? What changes could be
contemplated? Those questions are going to be addressed in other papers at this conference.
But let me raise some here and discuss issues worth considering around each of them.
18
17
The first is the role of financial stability in an inflation-targeting framework. The Reserve Bank
research conference last year considered this issue at some length.
 As I said earlier, financial
stability is now articulated in the Statement on the Conduct of Monetary Policy. I talked about this
issue at the Bank of England  last year and Ben Broadbent is addressing it at this conference.
One question that arises is how the financial stability goal interacts with the inflation target. Is it a
separate goal that sets up potential trade-offs or is it aligned with the inflation-targeting goal? In
the  latter  case,  a  potential  reconciliation  is  the  time  horizon.  When  it  materialises,  financial
instability is likely to be detrimental to inflation and unemployment/output: the global recession of
2008  and  the  subsequent  slow  recovery  in  a  number  of  economies  bears  testament  to  the
potential costs of financial instability (although here in Australia we didn’t experience this to as
great  an  extent).  So  over  some  time  horizon,  potentially  quite  long,  the  inflation  target  and
financial stability are aligned. But translating this into monetary policy implications over a shorter
time horizon is a large challenge, which still seems to me to be far from resolved.
19
What about alternative regimes? Price level targeting is one that has been considered in some
countries, including Canada, and has been proposed in the academic literature.
 One argument
for a price level target is that it delivers predictability of the price level over a long horizon. It is not
clear to me that this is something that is much valued by society. By revealed preference, the
absence of long-term indexed contracts suggests that the benefits are not perceived to be high. I
struggle to think of what contracts require such a degree of certainty. To me the benefits mostly
derive from having inflation at a sufficiently low level that it doesn’t affect decisions. That supports
an  inflation  target  rather  than  a  price  level  target.  One  important  difference  is  that  an  inflation
target allows bygones to be bygones, whereas a price level target does not. In a world where
there  are  costs  to  disinflation  (and  particularly  deflation),  the  likely  small  gains  from  the  full
predictability of the price level that comes with a price level target are not likely to offset the costs
of occasional disinflations following positive price level shocks. Another challenge is how fast the
price  level  should  be  returned  to  its  target  level.  This  presents  both  a  communication  and
operational challenge as the speed is likely to vary with the size of the deviation.
While the argument at the moment is that a price level target allows the central bank to let the
economy grow more strongly after a period of unexpectedly low inflation, again I do not think that
practically  this  will  deliver  better  outcomes  than  a  flexible  inflation  target.  That  is  an  empirical
question in the end which is worth testing.
The appropriate level of the inflation target is currently being debated in some parts of the world,
including the US. The argument for a higher target rate of inflation is that it might reduce the risk
of hitting the zero lower bound because a higher inflation rate would result in a higher nominal
interest rate structure. In thinking about this, we should ask the question as to whether what we
have seen is the realisation of a tail event in the historical distribution of interest rates (for a given
level of the real interest rate).? While this event has now lasted quite a long time, if you thought it
was a tail event, then you would expect the nominal rate structure to revert back to its historical
mean at some point. If it is a tail event, and the world has just been unlucky enough to have
 11 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
experienced a realisation of that tail event, then there would not obviously be a need to raise the
inflation  target.  We  also  need  to  question  whether  the  real  interest  rate  structure  has  shifted
lower permanently, because of permanently lower trend growth say, which would also shift down
the nominal rate structure and increase the likelihood of hitting the zero lower bound.
Also, as with price level targeting, in thinking about this question, it needs to be taken into account
that it is highly beneficial to have the inflation target at a level where it doesn’t materially enter into
economic decision-making. Two to three per cent seems to achieve that. We know that some
number higher than a 2–3 per cent rate of inflation will materially enter decision-making, because
we have had plenty of experience of higher rates of inflation that demonstrates that. How much
higher though, we don’t really exactly know.
Another consideration in answering the question of whether the inflation target is at the right level
is the range of policy instruments in the tool kit. Over the past decade, this tool kit has expanded
in a number of central banks. For example, we now know that the zero lower bound is not at
zero. Asset  purchases  have  been  utilised  and  these  have  included  sovereign  paper  but  also
assets issued by the private sector. An assessment of the effectiveness of these instruments is
still  a  work  in  progress.  We  also  need  to  think  about  whether  they  are  part  of  the  standard
monetary policy tool kit or whether they should only be broken out in case of emergency.
Nominal income targeting is another alternative regime to inflation targeting. I am not convinced
that  flexible  inflation  targeting  of  the  sort  practiced  in  Australia  is  significantly  different  from
nominal  income  targeting  in  most  states  of  the  world.  I  also  think  that  there  are  some  quite
significant communication challenges with nominal income targeting. Firstly, nominal income is
probably more difficult to explain to people than inflation. Secondly, as a very practical matter,
nominal  income  is  subject  to  quite  substantial  revisions,  which  poses  difficulties  both
operationally and again in communicating with the public.
Finally, one criticism of inflation targeting more generally is that central banks are fighting the last
war. The fact that for a number of years now, inflation globally has been stubbornly low is not
obviously  the  signal  to  declare  victory  over  inflation  and  move  on.  Indeed,  the  declaration  of
victory may well be the signal that hostilities are about to resume and that inflation will shift up
again.  Moreover,  even  if  victory  can  be  declared  that  doesn’t  mean  you  should  go  off  to  fight
another war in another place without securing the peace. Inflation targeting can help secure the
peace.
Conclusion
Today, inflation targeting is now the default framework for monetary policy. This is stark contrast
to  the  situation  25  years  ago,  when  inflation  targeting  was  greeted  with  a  large  degree  of
scepticism.  At  its  heart,  inflation  targeting  is  a  simply  expressed  acknowledgement  of  what
monetary policy can achieve and what it can’t. The flexible version of inflation targeting that has
been present in Australia since its inception was regarded as an outlier but now we have seen
most other regimes evolve in that direction, either through explicit changes to the regime or in
practice.  The  dual  mandate  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia  is  embodied  in  the  flexible
expression of the target.
Over the past 25 years, there have not really been material changes in the specification of the
inflation target in Australia. The extent and content of the communication has increased, in line
with the general trend across all central banks. This has helped to enhance the understanding of
the public of what the Reserve Bank is aiming to achieve and thereby helped the effectiveness of
monetary policy.
The  inflation  target  has  made  a  material  contribution  to  the  very  satisfactory  macroeconomic
outcomes that the Australian economy has enjoyed over the past 25 years. Inflation has been
consistent with target. The unemployment rate on average has been lower and less variable than
 12 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
in  earlier  periods.  This  has  gone  a  long  way  to  fulfilling  the  mandate  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of
contributing to the welfare and prosperity of the Australian people.
But it is important to continue to question whether the framework remains the right framework
going forward and whether there are enhancements that could be made to it. There is now a
much greater community to draw on to help answer those questions, both from central banks
and from academia, in contrast to the situation 25 years ago when inflation targeting was a new
frontier.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
Stevens G and G Debelle (1995), ‘Monetary Policy Goals for Inflation in Australia’, in A Haldane (ed), Targeting
Inflation:  a  conference  of  central  banks  on  the  use  of  inflation  targets  organised  by  the  Bank  of  England,
Proceedings of a Conference, Bank of England, London, pp 81–100.
For detailed accounts of the conception of inflation targeting in Australia, those present at its birth are the best
source: Grenville S (1997), ‘The Evolution of Monetary Policy: From Money Targets to Inflation Targets’, in P Lowe
(ed), Monetary Policy and Inflation Targeting, Proceedings of a Conference, Reserve Bank of Australia, Sydney,
pp 125–158;  Macfarlane I (1998), ‘Australian Monetary Policy in the Last Quarter of the Twentieth Century’,
Shann Memorial Lecture, University of Western Australia, Perth, 15 September; Stevens G (2003), ‘Inflation
Targeting: A Decade of Australian Experience ’, Address to South Australian Centre for Economic Studies April
2003 Economic Briefing, Adelaide, 10 April.
Fraser B (1993), ‘Some Aspects of Monetary Policy’, RBA Bulletin, April, pp 1–7. Fraser B (1994), ‘ Managing the
Recovery’, RBA Bulletin, April, pp 20–28.
For example, the Bank of England Act 1998 states that the objectives of the Bank of England shall be (a) to
maintain price stability, and (b) subject to that, to support the economic policy of Her Majesty’s Government,
including its objectives for growth and employment. See Kuttner K (2004), ‘A Snapshot of Inflation Targeting in
its  Adolescence’,  in  C  Kent  and  S  Guttman  (eds),  The  Future  of  Inflation  Targeting,  Proceedings  of  a
Conference, Reserve Bank of Australia, Sydney, pp 6–42.
The change from underlying inflation in large part reflected the change in the measurement of the CPI to exclude
mortgage interest rates.
Debelle G (2017), ‘Central Bank Independence in Retrospect’, Address at Bank of England Independence: 20
Years On Conference, London, 28 September.
Stevens and Debelle (1995) op cit.
Non-Inflationary Continuous Expansion.
Stevens G (2016), ‘An Accounting’, Address to the Anika Foundation Luncheon, Sydney, 10 August.
Stevens G and G Debelle (1995), op cit, is an example of this. See also De Brouwer G and J O’Regan (1997),
‘Evaluating Simple Monetary-policy Rules for Australia’, in P Lowe (ed), Monetary Policy and Inflation Targeting,
Proceedings of a Conference, Reserve Bank of Australia, Sydney, pp 244–276.
Debelle G (2009), ‘The Australian Experience with Inflation Targeting’, Speech at Banco Central do Brasil XI
Annual Seminar on Inflation Targeting, Rio de Janeiro, 15 May.
Haldane  A  (ed)  (1995),  Targeting  Inflation:  a  conference  of  central  banks  on  the  use  of  inflation  targets
organised by the Bank of England, Proceedings of a Conference, Bank of England, London.
In this instance, most central banks responded in a similarly flexible way. In large part, I would argue this
reflects the convergence to more flexible frameworks by this time.
King  M  (1997),  ‘Changes  in  UK  Monetary  Policy:  Rules  and  Discretion  in  Practice’,  Journal  of  Monetary
Economics, 39(1), pp 81–97.
The RBA’s accountability is collective rather than individual so the minutes represent the collective view of the
Board rather than conveying any individual’s views. The Board as a whole is accountable, in large part reflecting
its  composition  where  the  majority  of  members  are  business  people  rather  than  practising  economists.
Individual accountability in the RBA’s case may compromise the ability of the business members of the Board to
 13 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
take  decisions  in  the  national  interest  rather  than  their  sectoral  interest  (Stevens  G  (2007),  ‘Central  Bank
Communication’, Address to the Sydney Institute, 11 December).
This is very evident in consensus forecasts and surveys of union inflation expectations, inter alia.
Hambur  J  and  J  Simon  (eds)  (2017),  Monetary  Policy  and  Financial  Stability  in  a  World  of  Low  Interest
Rates, Proceedings of a Conference, Reserve Bank of Australia, Sydney.
Debelle (2017), op cit.
Ball L, N Gregory Mankiw and R Ricardo (2005), ‘Monetary Policy for Inattentive Economies’, Journal of Monetary
Economics, Elsevier, 52(4), pp 703–725, May.
16
17
18
19
 14 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
