Andreas  Dombret:  How  will  Brexit  change  the  map  of  global
finance?
Speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank,
at  the  2018  Europe  -  US  Symposium  of  the  Harvard  Law  School  Program  on  International
Financial Systems, Armonk, New York, 11 April 2018.
 1. Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen
It  is  a  pleasure  and  a  privilege  to  be  at  this  Symposium  –  it’s  the  second  such  event  I  have
attended, and I really must say how much I value the refreshing and inspiring interaction here.
That’s  why  I  chose  my  topic  –  Brexit  and  the  future  of  cross-border  finance  –  so  reluctantly.
Because as important as this topic is, it does very much feel as though a wedge is being driven
into the community of international policymakers and supervisors.
I will speak openly about the pending issues, because I think openness is crucial to maintaining a
trusting relationship. I very much look forward to engaging in a frank and solutions-driven debate
with you afterwards.
Brexit will change the map of global finance. That much is clear.
But whether these changes will be just modest amendments or seismic shifts is less clear – it is
still too early to tell.
In  the  long  term,  Brexit  may  very  well  prove  to  be  a  tipping  point.  It  might  set  in  motion
fundamental  changes  which  impact  on  where  banks  do  business  and  how  international
supervision works.
So  there  is  good  reason  to  think  carefully  about  how  we  limit  and  regulate  the  cross-border
provisioning of financial services after Brexit – because the decisions we take now may become
the principles of international financial supervision in the future.
In  my  speech  here  tonight,  let  me  raise  two  crucial  questions  –  and  try  to  provide  tentative
answers. The first question is: How fragmented will financial services – and their supervision –
be in the EU and the UK after Brexit? The second question is important not just to the United
States, but also to other third countries to the EU: Will we see changes in the general approach
to the regulation of foreign firms in the EU?
2. Will Brexit fragment financial services and their supervision?
Let’s begin with the question about the future relations between the UK and the EU.
Brexit talks made substantial progress recently: so much so that agreement has been reached
on a transition period;  moreover, a general free trade agreement between the EU and the UK
also seems within reach.
1
The  main  question  for  me,  then,  is  how  far-reaching  this  free  trade  agreement  can  be.  For
example, an agreement without tariffs would be highly valuable and feasible.
There  is,  however,  no  clear  case  against  non-tariff  barriers  like  product  standard  regulations.
Rules  like  these  safeguard  public  interests  such  as  food  safety  and  financial  stability.  Public
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
authorities need to have sovereignty to defend these standards – although, it is important that
they not abuse this power for protectionist motives.
This is something we can see clearly in the financial services sector. Public interest in financial
stability is the reason why a far-reaching free trade agreement in this area is rather unlikely.
That’s  because  the  UK  government  has  chosen  to  leave  the  single  market  and  the  customs
union,  and  withdraw  from  the  associated  regulatory  framework.  Supervisors  cannot  allow  a
foreign  bank  to  provide  financial  services  in  their  market  without  having  the  possibility  to  curb
behaviour that endangers financial stability.
That’s why I believe – and I’m sure many other supervisors would agree with me on this point –
2
that a chapter on financial services in a free trade agreement (FTA) would be very limited, if that.
And  it  looks  like  negotiations  are  moving  in  that  direction.  At  its  last  meeting,  the  European
Council of EU leaders laid down two important negotiation guidelines regarding financial services:
the first is to assess the possibility of adding a chapter to a future FTA that covers some aspects
of  financial  services.  There  would  not  appear  to  be  much  scope  for  liberalisation,  however,
because  the  current  point  of  reference  is  CETA,  the  Comprehensive  Economic  and  Trade
Agreement between Canada and the EU. While CETA is one of the few Free Trade Agreements
that has a section on financial services, the freedoms it provides are quite limited.
3. How to supervise cross-border banking after Brexit?
Whether there is an FTA containing a financial services chapter with limited freedoms or not, the
pivotal  question  remains  the  same:  how  will  each  side  ensure  that  the  other  side’s  firms  are
sufficiently regulated and supervised?
That’s what the second negotiation guideline is all about. Even limited cross-border freedoms
would be only possible if, say, the EU supervisor could ensure that the UK firm is subject to high
supervisory standards in the UK. Short of asking these firms to apply for a full local licence, this
can  be  done  through  the  equivalence  approach  to  regulation.  The  UK  firm  would  be  able  to
provide services if the EU supervisor could ensure that the UK rules are equivalent to those in the
EU.
The  EU  already  has  that  kind  of  approach  in  place  –  most  notably,  there  is  an  equivalence
agreement with the US on the supervision of central counterparties, or CCPs for short. But the
EU approach is built on a law-by-law basis, where equivalence can only be granted when the
specific  piece  of  legislation  has  an  explicit  provision.  There  is,  for  example,  no  basis  for  an
equivalence  decision  when  it  comes  to  the  licensing  of  banks.  The  European  Council  has
therefore asked the Commission and the Brexit negotiation team to analyse whether it would be
prudent to enhance this approach.
These two guiding principles – an analysis of the possibility of adding a limited financial services
chapter,  and  enhanced  equivalence  –  combine  to  form  a  spectrum  of  three  different  types  of
potential negotiation outcomes:
3
At  one  end  of  the  spectrum  there  is  the  scenario  of  a  financial  services  chapter  whose
scope  is  similar  to,  or  even  wider  than,  CETA,  with  high  supervisory  standards  ensured
through enhanced equivalence.  I call this the “enhanced equivalence option".
At  the  other  end  of  the  spectrum  there  is  the  scenario  of  striking  no  deal  on  financial
services,  combined  with 
requirement  of  something  known  as
“subsidiarisation”  –  that  is,  the  establishment  of  independent  subsidiaries  in  each  other’s
market. Equivalence would remain largely unchanged. I call this the “subsidiarisation option".
In between lie several combinations of quite limited financial services agreements – that are
the  supervisory 
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
less encompassing than CETA – plus a less ambitious revision of the equivalence regime,
ie an extension of the law-by-law approach to encompass other regulatory areas that are
currently not out of scope.
Now this is already a lot to take in over a dinner speech – so I won’t discuss the merits of these
approaches; and in any case, it is still too early to make a final call on which is the best option.
But let me give you my take on what the next steps should be.
None of the remaining options for financial services are ideal. So we will have to make do with
complicated, second-best solutions. And in the debate about the merits of each of these options,
I am seeing considerable bias. That bias is that many people from the industry, and policymakers
and  journalists,  too,  weigh  liberalisation  and  low  costs  for  firms  higher  than  they  do  financial
stability and democratic accountability.
For example, if one were to follow the preferences of industry groups, a new equivalence regime
would ensure a high level of liberalisation for financial services, and regulatory equivalence would
be  managed  by  a  technical  committee  of  EU  and  UK  supervisors,  with  independent  arbiters
dealing with cases of conflict – these solutions have many labels, a prominent one being “mutual
recognition".
I am rather sceptical about the mutual recognition approach and about similar approaches based
on  regulatory  harmonisation 
independent  arbitration
mechanisms.
technical  committees  and 
through 
For one thing, a solution where technical committees impede regulatory divergence could quite
clearly  undermine  the  sovereignty  of  jurisdictions  to  set  their  own  rules  and  the  ability  to
safeguard financial stability.
Moreover, these approaches are built on a premise: that more liberalisation is always better, and
that  less  liberalisation  is  costly  to  economic  growth.  I  think  it  is  far  from  clear  that  more
liberalisation is always better, as it also comes with problems – increased financial instability for
example.
Thus, while a smart system of enhanced equivalence might be sensible, we would first have to
find a suitable approach.
On  the  other  hand,  the  subsidiarisation  option  –  ie  requiring  a  foreign  bank  to  establish  an
independent  subsidiary  –  would  not  only  be  well  suited  to  preserving  financial  stability  and
democratic  accountability.  It  might  actually  also  be  less  costly  than  a  full-blown  mutual
recognition regime.
My point is this: There is no ideal option on the table, nor is any one of the three second-best
solutions clearly better than the others. Since there will no longer be a single market for the UK
and  the  EU,  it  is  futile  to  try  to  tie  policymakers’  and  supervisors’  hands  as  far  as  possible
through technical agreements – this would undermine sovereignty, potentially weaken financial
stability, and from a societal perspective, it might not even be the most cost-efficient option on
the table.
4. Three questions about post-Brexit cross-border supervision
Instead, we need to carefully analyse which divergence option is best suited. In this analysis we
need to focus on three crucial questions:
The first concerns the scope of a financial services chapter, assuming there is one: Which
financial services should be allowed to be provided across borders; and which should be
allowed to only be provided through an independent, locally licensed subsidiary?
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  second  question  is  about  equivalence:  Can  equivalence  be  expanded  systematically
without  hurting  democratic  accountability,  sovereignty  and  financial  stability?  As  the
approaches debated so far do not meet these criteria: How could this be done?
And the third question concerns subsidiarisation: Is this maybe a less costly option than it
intuitively  appears?  Since  it  will  play  a  greater  role  in  any  of  the  remaining,  realistic
scenarios, how can we best administer this – that is to say, what should we expect to be
ring-fenced in both jurisdictions, and what shouldn’t?
You  see,  this  remains  an  open-ended  process.  The  key  takeaways  are  that  two  sovereign
regulatory jurisdictions will emerge, that free cross-border trade in financial services will be rather
limited, and that the remaining options all require further analysis and thought.
No matter which direction we take, our decisions will have an indirect, albeit substantial impact
on other third countries to the EU. But how? Let’s take a look at this second question of my talk.
5. Will Brexit alter relations with other third countries?
And, naturally, I will focus on the US case. Brexit could affect two avenues which give financial
firms access to the EU market: namely, decisions of supervisory equivalence, and the licensing
process. Let’s take a look at each one in turn.
A new equivalence framework could be more systematic. Yet its precise calibration still remains
to be seen. Again, one example can be found in the world of CCPs. The EU is currently revising
the European Market Infrastructure Regulation, or EMIR for short. The consensus in the Council
of Ministers and the Commission clearly points in one particular direction, which is to move away
from  a  quite  flexible,  outcome-driven  equivalence  approach  to  one  where  EMIR  requirements
have  to  be  met  more  precisely  by  foreign  CCPs.  To  give  you  just  two  examples,  EU
supervisors   would  have  clearer  compliance  expectations  and  would  review  an  equivalence
decision at more regular intervals. Ultimately, where equivalence cannot be achieved this could
lead to an entity being required to relocate to the EU.
4
For third-country CCPs, this enhanced equivalence is attractive, as it makes the decision more
predictable and transparent, whilst ensuring the possibility of providing clearing services across
borders without the need to operate a fully licensed subsidiary.
But  where  US  CCPs  are  concerned,  this  approach  may  not  be  appropriate  or  necessary;
because we already have a robust equivalence decision. Given the thorough process of mutual
assessment  that  we  carried  out,  there  is  a  case  for  sustaining  this  outcome  –  for  example,
through a bilateral US-EU agreement on CCP equivalence. It is important that authorities on both
sides of the Atlantic enter into pragmatic dialogue.
One  important  question,  however,  remains  unsolved,  namely  that  of  how  to  resolve  an
internationally active CCP. And a lot of work still needs to be done on this score.
The  second  avenue  via  which  Brexit  could  affect  how  financial  firms  gain  access  to  the  EU
market  are  higher  demands  for  licensing  foreign  bank  branches  and  subsidiaries.  Take,  for
example,  the  discussion  about  a  draft  law  proposing  to  introduce  EU  intermediate  parent
undertakings, or IPUs for short. Similar to the US IHCs, foreign banks would have to bring their
EU operations under a single holding company. This will most likely become law; and for good
reason, because we need to have a better, consolidated understanding of what is going on at
international banks doing business in Europe. What’s more, we need to be able to act reliably in
times  of  turmoil.  Otherwise,  we  would  not  be  able  to  fulfil  our  mandate  of  ensuring  financial
stability. But to be clear, this instrument is by no means intended to make market entry more
difficult for foreign banks – and the Bundesbank will continue to advocate fair access for foreign
banks.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
To sum up: from the perspective of US banks and those from other third countries, Brexit will
impact on how they can do business in the EU single market. Both the new IPU requirements
and a potential enhanced equivalence approach mean a more systematic approach to ensuring
fair, transparent and stable rules for the provisioning of cross-border financial services. While
this may imply some new requirements, it might end up streamlining the rules and promoting
clear supervisory dialogue. I am confident that US banks will not face any new barriers of any
substance – that would not be in the EU’s interest.
6. Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen, as Brexit changes the map of global finance, we need to think carefully
about how we limit and regulate the international provisioning of financial services – because the
decisions of today may become the principles of international supervision of tomorrow.
The  EU  and  the  UK  will  become  two  sovereign  regulatory  jurisdictions,  between  which  free
cross-border provision of financial services will be limited, relative to today. We need to carefully
analyse which divergence option will be best suited – in terms of financial stability, democratic
accountability, and cost efficiency.
No matter which direction we take, these decisions will have an indirect, albeit substantial impact
on the US and other third countries to the EU. While potentially burdensome at the outset, in the
long  run  the  changes  in  licensing  and  equivalence  might  provide  a  sounder  footing  for  future
cross-border activities – on the one hand setting strict expectations, but on the other hand also
providing greater transparency and certainty.
I am confident that we can expand upon our strong partnership in this new environment.
Thank you for your attention. I wish you a fruitful and successful symposium.
1
2
3
4
I.e. a period during which the UK is no longer part of the EU but will remain within the single market and the
customs union; this 21-month phase, which starts on 30 March 2019, creates time: time for policymakers to
develop the rules of a new partnership; and time for businesses to adapt to the new reality strategically and
thoughtfully – rather than hastily.
The options still on the table are a “no deal” scenario and one with quite limited freedoms for financial services,
as set out in CETA (the Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement between Canada and the EU). These
scenarios would mean two things for financial transactions between the UK and the EU. First, the “no deal”
scenario would mean that the EU and UK would trade under rules set by the World Trade Organization – where
coverage of services sectors is thin at best. Services providers would then have to apply for comprehensive
licenses in both jurisdictions and have all the necessary elements of a fully functioning bank ready in both
places. And second, even a CETA-like deal would most likely not mean far-ranging freedoms to provide financial
services in the respective foreign jurisdiction – and thus force services providers to apply for comprehensive
licenses in both jurisdictions.
This could be achieved either through a general revision of the EU’s equivalence procedure and its scope, or by
agreeing a bilateral arrangement with the United Kingdom.
The European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA) is most likely to become responsible for EMIR-related
decisions of equivalence.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
