Yves Mersch: Monetary policy in the euro area - solid expansion
with timid price pressure
Contribution by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank,
to the EUROFI magazine, submitted on 21 March 2018 and published on 26 April 2018.
 The euro area economy currently is solidly expanding and the upswing is broad-based. Recent
data indicate that in the near term the economy is likely to expand even faster than had been
expected.  The  monetary  policy  measures  introduced  since  2014  have  effectively  supported
growth and employment, with real GDP growth expected to remain consistently above potential
growth in the coming years.
In spite of the favourable growth dynamics, underlying inflation continues to be subdued. While
our policy measures have been successful in preventing the disinflation of 2014 from spiralling
into deflation and are contributing to an improved inflation outlook, an ample degree of monetary
accommodation remains necessary to secure a return of inflation rates towards levels that are
below, but close to, 2% over the medium term.
Looking  ahead,  the  evolution  of  monetary  policy  will  be  firmly  guided  by  the  outlook  for  price
stability. In this regard, the transition towards policy normalisation will begin once the Governing
Council assesses that there has been a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation. Such a
judgement will be based on three criteria for inflation: convergence, confidence and resilience.
Convergence implies that headline inflation will need to be on track to reach levels below, but
close  to,  2%  within  a  medium-term  horizon.  The  Governing  Council  will  also  need  to  have
confidence that the upward adjustment in inflation has a high enough probability of materialising
and that it can do so on a sustainable basis. Thirdly, resilience, it will need to be ensured that the
sustained adjustment in the path of inflation will be maintained even without additional net asset
purchases.
In fact, confidence has recently risen and convergence is being confirmed – partly because the
temporary  decline  in  the  inflation  rate  has  been  weaker  than  our  internal  calculations  had
predicted when we had reduced the purchasing program from EUR 60 billion to EUR 30 billion.
More resilience will follow eventually. Still, patience and persistence with respect to our monetary
policy is required. The former is necessary as it takes time for price pressures to build-up and
the latter reflects the fact that the pick-up in inflation still needs to be supported by the prevailing
monetary policy stance.
Once  the  Governing  Council  judges  that  progress  towards  meeting  the  three  criteria  is
sufficiently advanced, our net asset purchases will be brought to an end. This is in line with our
guidance on the expanded asset purchase programme (APP). Thereafter, the monetary support
necessary  for  inflation  to  converge  to  our  aim  of  below,  but  close  to,  2%  will  be  provided  by
reinvestments  continuing  for  an  extended  period  of  time  and  policy  rates  remaining  at  their
present levels well past the end of our net asset purchases. Policy decisions will continue to be
firmly  guided  by  the  outlook  for  price  stability  for  the  euro  area  as  a  whole  and  not  for  any
individual country.
The ECB remains committed to its price stability mandate, but other actors need to do their part
to  boost  the  resilience  of  the  euro  area  and  individual  economies.  Governments  should  take
advantage of the increasingly solid and broad-based recovery to rebuild their fiscal buffers in line
with  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  (SGP). At  the  same  time  measures  to  increase  euro  area
economies’ productivity should be forcefully pursued. And finally, the completion of the banking
and financial unions would be a substantial step towards strengthening the euro area’s capacity
to withstand any future shocks.
1 / 1
BIS central bankers' speeches
