Stephen S Poloz: Release of the Monetary Policy Report
Opening  statement  by  Mr  Stephen  S  Poloz,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  the  press
conference following the release of the Monetary Policy Report, Ottawa, Ontario, 18 April 2018.
 Good morning. Senior Deputy Governor Wilkins and I are happy to be with you to answer your
questions  about  today’s  interest  rate  announcement  and  our Monetary  Policy  Report  (MPR).
Before  taking  your  questions,  let  me  briefly  offer  a  few  insights  into  Governing  Council’s
deliberations.
Inflation  is  on  target  and  the  economy  is  operating  close  to  potential.  That  statement  alone
underscores the considerable progress seen in the economy over the past 12 months.
That said, interest rates remain very low relative to historical experience. This is because the
economy is not yet able to remain at full capacity on its own. Furthermore, the sustainability of
this level of activity is not assured; although we expected the economy to moderate in the second
half of 2017, that moderation has extended into early 2018 and has been more pronounced than
expected. Governing Council considered recent economic data very carefully and concluded that
the softness early this year was due mainly to two temporary factors.
The first relates to changes to mortgage rules that went into effect at the start of the year. These
caused house sales to be pulled forward into the fourth quarter of 2017. Although we are still
expecting  the  housing  sector  to  moderate  in  2018  compared  with  last  year,  we  can  expect  a
partial recovery of activity in the second quarter.
The second factor is the unexpected drop in exports during the first quarter, much of which was
related to transportation bottlenecks. This points to a partial recovery in the second quarter and
later in the year. Notice that we are expecting only a partial recovery in the level of exports—an
issue I will return to in a moment.
Accordingly, we expect a strong rebound in the second quarter after a lacklustre first quarter,
with an average growth rate of about 2 per cent in the first half of the year and a return to near-
potential growth thereafter. Fiscal stimulus, both provincial and federal, is playing a role in this
forecast. We will be monitoring the data for the second quarter very closely in the weeks ahead.
Assuming our forecast remains on track, it is Governing Council’s view that interest rates will
need  to  move  higher  over  time  to  keep  inflation  on  target.  We  acknowledge  that  the  forces
weighing  on  the  economy  mean  that  monetary  policy  is  likely  to  remain  stimulative  to  some
degree, even if it is less stimulative than today. By this, we mean that interest rates may need to
remain  below  the  neutral  range  until  various  forces  have  dissipated.  These  would  include,  in
particular, the uncertainty around trade conflicts and escalating geopolitical risks.
We have reviewed our work on the neutral interest rate and concluded that it still lies somewhere
in the range of 2.5 to 3.5 per cent, given a 2 per cent inflation rate. Another useful benchmark that
entered our discussions was the real policy rate, which takes into account the rate of inflation on
the  policy  rate.  Today,  this  benchmark  is  at  minus  0.75  per  cent.  It  is  the  view  of  Governing
Council  that  the  need  for  a  negative  real  policy  rate  continues  to  diminish  steadily,  albeit
gradually.
Most of our deliberations, therefore, concerned the appropriate pace of interest rate increases.
As  we  have  said  repeatedly  in  the  past,  this  is  an  intensely  data-dependent  process  of  risk
management. We continue to be faced with four key sources of uncertainty around the outlook
for  inflation.  Each  of  these  represents  the  potential  for  either  upside  or  downside  risk  to  the
inflation outlook, and therefore needs to be assessed to ensure that our risks remain balanced
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
around the 2 per cent target.
First is the issue of economic capacity. We have done our extensive annual reassessment of
economic potential and revised its profile higher, both in terms of its level and growth rate. This
means that we have a little more room for demand growth within our 2 per cent inflation target
than  we  believed  before.  Related  to  this,  it  is  becoming  increasingly  evident  that  Canada’s
international competitiveness challenges are hampering our export performance. Many firms are
operating  at  or  above  their  capacity,  but  are  hesitating  to  invest  in  new  capacity  given  the
uncertain future of the North American Free Trade Agreement, transportation bottlenecks and a
shortage of skilled workers, to name a few issues. This reluctance to expand capacity, in turn,
also serves to limit growth in our exports.
It  is  possible  that  this  represents  a  structural  change  in  the  Canadian  economy,  and  the
resolution would lie beyond the capability of monetary policy. For the central bank, the net effect
on the inflation outlook will be our guide. The Bank is continuing to work on these issues and will
offer more research in time for our next MPR in July.
The  second  issue  is  the  dynamics  of  inflation  itself.  Recent  data  have  been  very  reassuring.
Indeed, the convergence of our three core measures around 2 per cent, as we forecast last year,
has helped buttress confidence in our inflation models. Our forecast now shows inflation rising
modestly above 2 per cent due to temporary factors, and then easing back to about 2 per cent
during 2019. In this respect, it is worth underscoring that our target is a range of 1 to 3 per cent
and that the average rate of inflation in the last few years has been below the midpoint of the
range.
The third issue is wage dynamics. Recent data have been encouraging. Our summary measure
of  various  wage  series,  called  wage-common,  shows  that  wage  growth  has  picked  up
significantly  in  the  last  18  months.  We  have  noted  before  that  we  would  expect  wages  to  be
growing by around 3 per cent in an economy operating close to capacity. We are approaching
that  zone  now,  although  the  latest  figures  have  been  boosted  temporarily  by  minimum  wage
increases  in  some  provinces.  Furthermore,  Governing  Council  acknowledged  that  these  data
can be difficult to interpret after a prolonged period of labour market slack. For example, wages
tend not to decline during periods of high unemployment as much as our models might predict,
and  when  the  economy  recovers,  there  is  a  lag  before  average  wages  respond.  All  things
considered then, we continue to believe that there are elements of excess capacity in the labour
market, as well as the possibility of productivity-enhancing labour market churn, that will add to
the economy’s capacity.
Fourth, Governing Council has been monitoring the data for evidence that the sensitivity of the
economy to interest rates has risen with household indebtedness. This issue will take longer to
assess, especially given that the housing market and mortgage lending have also been affected
by  the  new  mortgage  guidelines.  However,  we  did  note  that  household  credit  growth  has
continued to moderate, an important signal that is consistent with the idea that households are
beginning to adjust to higher interest rates and the new mortgage rules.
Some progress has been made on the key issues being watched closely by Governing Council,
particularly the dynamics of inflation and wage growth. This progress reinforces our view that
higher  interest  rates  will  be  warranted  over  time,  although  some  degree  of  monetary  policy
accommodation likely will still be needed to keep inflation on target. The Bank will also continue to
monitor  the  economy’s  sensitivity  to  interest  rate  movements  and  the  evolution  of  economic
capacity.  In  this  context,  Governing  Council  will  remain  cautious  with  respect  to  future  policy
adjustments, guided by incoming data.
With that, Senior Deputy Governor Wilkins and I would be happy to answer your questions.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
