Nestor  A  Espenilla,  Jr:  Reflecting  and  acting  on  our  immediate
economic past, present and future
Speech by Mr Nestor A Espenilla, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  Joint  Meeting  of  Rotary  Club  of  Manila,  Rotary  Club  of  Makati
West, and Rotary Club of Forbes Park, Makati City, 4 January 2018.
A very happy and prosperous New Year to everyone! 
 Rotary Club of Manila (RCM) President Jimmie Policarpio, Rotary Club of Makati West (RCMW)
President    Dave  Caldwell,  Rotary  Club  of  Forbes  Park  (RCFP)  President  Edwin  Salonga, 
distinguished  officers  (past  and  present),  members,  esteemed  guests,  ladies  and  gentlemen,
magandang hapon! 
It has been a tradition of RCM, for the last twenty (20) years, to invite the Governor of the Bangko
Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP) to speak at its first General Assembly.  As the BSP is turning twenty-
five years this 2018 (your tradition is only five years shy of our Anniversary), this then makes me
the fourth BSP Governor to continue this custom.  This year, though, is unique, as I have the
privilege of addressing not only members of Rotary Club of Manila but also Rotary Club of Makati
West, and Rotary Club of Forbes Park.
Time is a curious thing.  As it passes, mindful individuals would do well to reflect on one’s past –
taking stock of lessons learned and allowing oneself to be heartened by successes in the face of
challenges...  ponder on one’s present, think of how it has been molded by previous years and at
the same time, embrace the future with an openness to change and a willingness to adapt. 
Historical and contemporary accounts have shown that engagement in reflection such as this
accounts  for  how  generations  and  nations  have  erstwhile  survived  and  have,  magnificently
flourished.  Sadly, the inverse is also true.    We have seen how even in individual lives, a lack of
reflection can result in ruin... 
It  is  thus  my  distinct  privilege  to  discuss  a  tiny  but  significant  piece  of  the  narrative  with  you,
focusing,  on  what  you  have  requested  me  to  speak  about  –  the  Philippine  economic  outlook
given  factors  in  the  immediate  past,  work  we  are  doing  in  the  present,  and  plans  to  face
challenges of the future.  Hopefully this would inspire us and aid us in thriving even more.
In doing so, I have structured my message in four (4) parts: (1) recent developments in the global
economic environment and its varied effects on financial and banking stability with mention of the
BSP’s  policy  thrusts  and  initiatives;  (2)  BSP’s  delivery  on  its  mandate  of  maintaining  price
stability;  and  (3)  the  challenge  of  digitization  and  how  our  payments  and  settlements  system
plays a role; and (4) finally, I shall share the BSP’s mindset for embracing the future.  It bears
noting that in framing the message this way, I have touched on our mandates, and what the BSP
regards as its pillars of central banking.
The global economy and domestic financial stability
2017  saw  increased  momentum  in  global  economic  growth.  Many  central  banks  reverted  to
more neutral positions, while some signalled the possibility of a tighter monetary policy stance
over the horizon.
Positive US growth momentum prompted the US Federal Reserve, just last month, to raise its
target fed funds rate anew.  The European Central Bank continues to ponder on how and when
to start tapering its own asset purchase program.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
With  the  prospect  of  higher  home  market  interest  rates,  some  funds  have  moved  back  from
emerging markets. 
Last  year,  we  saw  some  capital  flow  reversals.    But  despite  an  overall  balance  of  payments
deficit, our year ended with a very manageable external position.
In 2017, we also saw the peso’s depreciation.  Even as foreign direct investments flowed in, a
reversal of foreign portfolio investment flows as well as loan prepayments was felt in the financial
account.  The BSP’s first line of defense has been to maintain a flexible exchange rate while
providing  foreign  currency  liquidity  from  its  amply  supply  of  FX  reserves  to  manage  sharp
movements.
But we also saw a recovery in our exports as major markets picked up. This bodes well for our
current account in the coming year.  This partially offsets the potential increase in imports of raw
materials  and  manufactured  goods  due  to  accelerating  public  investment  in  infrastructure.
Moreover,  the  steady  inflow  of  remittances  from  overseas  Filipinos,  receipts  from  BPOs  and
tourism are seen to provide solid buffers to maintain a manageable balance of payments.
Despite uncertainties and volatility in the global economy and financial markets brought about by
Brexit and inward-looking and populist policies of the US, domestic sources of strength have kept
the Philippine economy growing strongly last year.
In the first three quarters of 2017, our economy grew by 6.7 percent due to robust production and
domestic spending.  Market expectations were surpassed and we remained one of the fastest-
growing economies in Asia.
A sound and liquid financial system also provided support to Philippine economic activity in 2017.
Banks’  balance  sheets  expanded  with  a  double-digit  growth  in  assets  and  deposits.  Credit
continued  to  flow  steadily  to  productive  sectors  and  sustained  efforts  by  the  BSP  and  the
financial  sector  to  enhance  liquidity  and  risk  management  practices  kept  threats  to  financial
stability at bay.
But  we  are  not  resting  on  our  laurels.    While  banks  have  provided  resilience  and  support  for
economic growth, we also believe in developing deeper and more efficient domestic capital and
money  markets  over  the  medium  term.    This  will  reduce  the  country’s  reliance  on  external
funding and help insulate the country from external sources of risks.  Diversifying the sources of
funding for economic activity also allows for better distribution and management of risks in the
entire financial system.
We  have  started  this  by  implementing  the  Philippine  local  currency  debt  market  development
roadmap  towards  a  more  balanced  financial  ecosystem  where  the  banking  system  is
complemented by a deep and liquid capital market.
The  reform  agenda  officially  unfolded  in  November  2017  with  the  launch  of  the  Government
Securities  Repo  Program.  This  was  supported  by  enabling  policies  of  zero-percent  reserve
requirement and exemption from Documentary Tax Stamp (DST) which minimize friction costs
on  repo  transactions  under  said  Program.    Over  the  year  2018,  we  shall  be  rolling  out,  in
coordination with other government agencies, industry associations, and market participants, the
remaining initiatives under the roadmap.  This includes the launch of the enhanced government
securities eligible dealers (GSED) program to support secondary market liquidity, enhancements
in  financial  market  infrastructure,  increase  in  volume  and  consistency  of  treasury  primary
issuances, and the issuance of improved interest rate benchmark guidelines.
Reinforcing our efforts to further build resilience of our domestic economy are complementary
foreign exchange (FX) reforms.  Maintaining a flexible and market-determined exchange rate can
better  insulate  our  economy  from  external  shocks  that  could  disrupt  the  pace  of  economic
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
growth.    In  this  regard,  we  have  embarked  on  more  ambitious  FX  reforms  to  achieve  more
efficiency and ease of doing business.  Over the medium term, the FX reform agenda aims to
encourage  innovation,  improve  transparency,  facilitate  price  discovery  and  enhance  market
conduct, towards a deeper and better organized FX market. 
The  reforms  are  undertaken  in    well-calibrated  and  carefully  sequenced  phases,  considering
prevailing conditions in the local and global economy, and ensuring that measures are in place to
allow the BSP to continue to capture data on these transactions for analysis of developments,
policy review and crafting of appropriate measures.  This started with further liberalization of FX
rules  covering  foreign  loans  which  the  Monetary  Board  approved  last  December  21,  2017.    It
features  the  lifting  of  prior  BSP  approval  for  purely  private  sector  foreign  loans  that  can  be
serviced  from  the  banking  system.    Further,  registration  processes  were  streamlined,
registration fees were waived, and documentary requirements were further reduced. A window
was  likewise  opened  for  six  months  providing  an  amnesty  period  during  which  private  sector
loans previously obtained without prior BSP approval can register and be eligible for servicing
from the banking system.   These changes commence on January 15, 2018.
We are currently drafting further amendments to adopt similar measures on trade and non-trade
transactions, and on foreign investments.
The BSP also closely monitors for signs of excessive credit and leverage.  We stand prepared to
deploy appropriate measures such as macroprudential policies to prevent economic overheating.
In this regard, the BSP intends to build on its existing frameworks for market surveillance and risk
management to help identify and mitigate the build-up of systemic risks at an early stage.
We have remained vigilant and proactive as we launch new and ambitious reform initiatives.
These provide the solid foundation for confidence in our prospects for 2018 and beyond.
Just this December, Fitch Ratings upgraded the country’s credit rating anew, noting that sound
policies and strong investor sentiment continue to underpin the country’s growth momentum.
Price stability: targets and results
In 2017, consistent with market expectations and projections, inflation slightly rose due mainly to
higher  international  crude  oil  prices.  Nonetheless,  average  inflation  stayed  firmly  within  the
National Government’s target range of 2-4 percent.
We expect inflation to remain within target range until 2019. However, further increases in global
crude oil prices may result in inflation trending in the upper bracket of the target range.
Once  the  National  Government’s  tax  reforms  take  effect,  there  could  be  some  transitory
pressures  on  prices.  On  the  whole,  these  reforms  will  result  in  productivity  gains  over  the
medium term.  Also with these tax changes in mind, BSP   looks out for possible price spirals. 
You can count on us to timely adjust the monetary policy stance to ward off any threat to our
inflation target.
Meanwhile,  further  refinements  to  the  interest  rate  corridor  (IRC)  framework,  which  we
introduced  in  2016,  should  ensure  more  effective  transmission  of  any  monetary  policy
adjustments to the real economy.
Payments and settlements system and digitization
An  efficient,  secure,  and  reliable  payments  and  settlements  system  reduces  the  cost  of
exchanging goods and services.  It is essential for the smooth functioning of money and capital
markets.  The  development  of  accessible  payment  systems  is  also  crucial  towards  promoting
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
financial inclusion.
This  is  why  the  BSP  continues  to  champion  the  development  of  the  country’s  backbone  for
payments and settlements. Two years since its launch in December 2015, the National Retail
Payments System (NRPS) initiative reached critical milestones in 2017.  An industry-driven self-
governing body was established to drive the responsible development and operations of the retail
payment system.  Further, the BSP adopted the NRPS framework through the issuance recently
of Circular No. 980 which requires BSP-supervised financial institutions (BSFIs) to ensure that
the retail payment systems they participate in demonstrate sound risk management and efficient
interoperability.    One  of  the  two  priority  multi-lateral Automated  Clearing  Houses  (ACHs)  was
launched.  This is PESONet.  Through PESONet, the government, private businesses, as well
as individuals will be able to conveniently initiate electronic fund transfers and recurring payments
to each other’s transaction account.
These are all part of the initiatives for the Philippines to transition from a cash-heavy to a cash-lite
economy.  Other automated clearing houses will also be launched this year, including “InstaPay”,
which enables 24/7, real-time low-value electronic fund transfers that will support e-commerce. 
The  BSP  has  also  set  its  sights  on  digital  innovation  to  reach  the  financially  unserved  and
underserved.    For  this  reason,  we  support  the  inter-agency  initiative  to  establish  a  biometric
National Identification system to improve the accessibility and delivery of financial services.
We  realize  this  will  require  a  responsive  security  management  framework  to  help  guard  our
financial system against cyber-threats. In this regard, we have upgraded our preparedness.
2018 and beyond: taking on challenges
Characteristics of strength, resilience and the capability to innovate will come in most handy as
we navigate through the challenges this year.  An alarmist mindset is not necessary as we draw
from our experience.
At the BSP, we try very hard to be pro-active. We carefully survey the landscape for potential
threats. We ensure that our tools to deal with them remain sharp. We strive to stay on top of
developments, and to always be prepared, so that we can address risks appropriately and in a
timely manner.
This  mindset  motivates  much  of  the  BSP’s  policy  thrusts  not  just  in  2018  but  beyond.  Our
intention is to continue laying down foundations for the economy to withstand potential shocks.
In closing, while the coming year is likely to bring continued challenges for the Philippines, we are
well-placed to deal with these challenges.
The  country’s  firm  growth  momentum  and  manageable  inflation  environment  provide  ample
space to respond appropriately to evolving domestic and global conditions. On the part of the
BSP, we have enough instruments in our expanded toolkit to address the challenges that could
arise.
On this note, mindful of the past, vigilant in the present and excited for the future, let me wish
everyone a happy and fruitful New Year. Thank you, and good afternoon.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
