Yves Mersch: Interview with Reuters
Interview with Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank,
conducted by Mr Balazs Koranyi on 14 March 2018 and published on 16 March 2018.
 Mario  Draghi  took  a  cautious  view  on  inflation,  arguing  that  economic  slack  may  be
bigger than earlier thought. What is the implication of this unexpected slack?
The policies we have undertaken, especially since 2014, have been quite successful in getting us
closer to our inflation aim. But there are uncertainties about the process of inflation, given factors
like  globalisation  and  technological  changes.  Mario  Draghi  raised  important  questions,  which
have  been  discussed  among  central  bankers:  what  is  the  non-accelerating  inflation  rate  of
unemployment (NAIRU), what is the output gap and how big is the slack? He was exploring the
possibility that the degree of slack might be bigger than what you find in classical assessments.
We  are  continuously  surprised  by  the  response  of  the  labour  market  to  increasing  aggregate
demand of a growing economy because rising demand has been leading to continuous positive
supply reactions in the labour market.
ECB  staff  estimates  that  the  euro  area  output  gap  is  closed,  and  there  is  already  a  positive
output gap in Germany. But there is little inflation. Maybe there is another explanation. Perhaps
we  are  getting  a  supply  of  labour  that  is  pushing  the  frontier  out.  In  Germany  we  know  that
migration  from  Central  and  Eastern  European  countries  with  relatively  comparable  skills  is
making an impact. Without such a labour supply reaction, you would have had wage inflation
about 1 percentage point higher, and as a consequence, higher inflation.
Would that mean that the output gap is not yet closed?
That  is  an  open  question.  We  are  all  surprised  by  the  reaction  of  the  labour  market  to  better
economic conditions. The increasing participation of women and older people is certainly making
an impact. In term of hours worked, we have not yet recovered the level of 2007. But in terms of
employment, we have. It seems there is a trend for people to work less or part time.
Now we are reaching a floor for unemployment but it’s not so clear if we’re going to see wage
increases and Mario Draghi was opening the conversation on the possibility that there may be
more slack in the economy. That still needs to be confirmed but we already have strong evidence
of a strong labour supply reaction.
The survey of professional forecasters indicates that unemployment will fall to 7.5 percent in 5
years. It’s not clear if that’s the new NAIRU. Economists have been surprised by the fact that the
NAIRU  has  been  continuously  revised  downwards.  The  supply  of  labour  has  increased  more
than expected, so there were reservoirs of labour. It could be migration or longer working hours.
It is clear that if you believe that the degree of slack is higher, then the process of convergence to
below, but close to, 2% over the medium term would be drawn out.
We  should  not  draw  implications  for  policy  immediately  but  it  shows  you  the  richness  of  the
discussion  at  a  stage  where  the  economy  is  booming  and  we  don’t  see  very  strong  wage
increases and little pass through to prices.
However, we still see improvements in the path of inflation, so the bottom line is not bad at all. It
means that the economy may have unexploited potential capacity.
If slack is bigger, wouldn’t it mean that the path would be shallower?
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Well, other things being equal, it would be shallower.
Another explanation for low wage growth is that there is some backward looking behaviour in the
wage-setting mechanism and in inflation expectations. For the time being I take an open view.
Monetary policy also plays a role. Our asset purchases programme has a minimum horizon of
end September, or beyond, if necessary, and in any case until we see a sustained adjustment in
inflation. It is true that when we communicate about what happens beyond September, we want
to have confirmation of data. Things are going in the right direction but there are a number of
uncertainties. So the message is patience, persistence and prudence.
When do you need to communicate what happens beyond September?
It can’t be on the very last day, but I argue that it shouldn’t be too early, either. There are not too
many Governing Council meetings between now and then.
Can you see a scenario that you use the June projections to set up the decision and then take
the actual decision in July?
The  projection  exercise  is  always  important.  There  are  four  per  year  and  there  will  be  one  in
June. It’s true that projections in general are useful to guide and structure the discussion. But I
would caution against concluding that there is a pattern. We should not put too much weight on
the projections.
You  mentioned  earlier  that  market  expects  the  first  rate  hike  between  the  first  and
second quarters of next year. How comfortable with those expectations?
The expectation implicit in the forward curve currently fluctuates around April and May. Market
analysts’ surveys indicate expectations of a slightly delayed lift-off.
I don’t want to directly answer this question. But we try to judge if market expectations reflect
fundamentals and if market expectations fit with our views. It’s a two way street: we learn from
markets and markets learn from us.
Markets have a certain expectation about the end of the net asset purchase programme (APP).
We try to see if this fits with the narrowing between the inflation objective and market indicators
of inflation expectations. For example, I look at the gap between the objective of below, but close
to, 2% and the 5-year/5-year forward swaps-derived inflation rate, which is now at 1.7 percent.
So the gap is narrowing, which is why markets don’t expect us to continue the APP much longer.
Market prices seem to be coherent with the narrowing of the gap between market-based inflation
expectations  and  our  objective.  It’s  a  good  sign.  There  is  a  convergence  between  market
expectations and our intended end date, with the optionality.
When approaching the end of our net asset purchases, our forward guidance on policy rates will
have  to  be  further  specified  and  calibrated  as  appropriate  to  keep  inflation  on  a  sustained
adjustment path towards our inflation objective.
So what happens afterwards?
Our resilience criterion for inflation is not always understood well. It means that for us to stop net
asset  purchases,  we  have  to  be  sure  that  the  financial  conditions  resulting  from  that
announcement will not compromise the adjustment path of inflation.
This  path  is  by  itself  conditional  on  easy  financial  conditions. And  financial  conditions  are  the
result  of  three  instruments:  net  purchases,  re-investments  and  our  forward  guidance  on  the
short-term policy rates. Today we say that our policy rates will stay at their present levels well
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
past the horizon of our net asset purchases. This indication is an important conditioning variable
– together with net purchases and re-investments – behind the convergence path that we project
today. As we move forward in time, as is natural, the relative importance of the three policy tools
will  change,  and  the  main  tool  for  shaping  the  policy  stance  will  become  the  path  of  our  key
interest rates and the forward guidance about their likely evolution.
Today, by and large, markets quantify the “well past” interval as ‘up to next spring’. But at some
point  that  ‘well  past’  indication  will  not  be  sufficient  any  longer  to  give  the  public  enough
information about the most likely outlook for our policy.
Once  you  stop  net  asset  purchases  the  signaling  aspect  of  the  APP  disappears  and  you
therefore have to be much more precise about the future path of the short term rates. We will
then have to re-specify our forward guidance on interest rates. Most likely, we will calibrate it as
appropriate for inflation to remain on the sustained adjustment path to our inflation aim. So, as in
the past, we will ensure that monetary policy controls the short end of the yield curve.
We will proceed at a gradual pace, or a measured pace as Mario Draghi said, in a way that is
most appropriate for inflation convergence – taking into account continued uncertainty about the
size of the output gap and the responsiveness of wages to slack.
You said you would have a discussion about revising your guidance in early 2018. Should you
revise the guidance at the same time as you decide what happens beyond September?
Indeed, early this year, we have removed the easing bias on our APP. Looking forward, I wouldn’t
say there is a date or a deadline. The fact that the two of us are talking about this now is already
very telling. However, I would not revise the guidance too early, because that could send wrong
signals about the end of our net asset purchases, which in any case are intended to run until the
Governing Council sees a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation.
When the first rate hike comes, will you only raise the deposit rate until the interest rate
corridor is symmetrical again?
I think it is premature to discuss this question. What counts in the markets is the level and the
expected path of the very short term rate at which banks borrow from each other. Because of
sizeable excess liquidity expected to prevail over the coming years, the deposit facility rate is the
policy rate that can steer those interbank conditions most effectively.
Benoît  Cœuré  argued  that  given  your  oversized  balance  sheet,  you  can  retreat  from
asset buys without risking an unwarranted rise in term premia. Do you agree with this
argument?
The float – the share of government bonds held by the private sector – has decreased with our
purchases. The marginal intervention you have when the float is smaller has the potential to have
some bigger effects on prices. But it is a relatively short term consideration. The main argument,
and I think it is widely shared, is indeed that the stock becomes very important.
But we need to consider that, as the stock ages automatically, there is a ‘duration leak’, if you do
nothing  about  reinvestments.  That’s  where  the  reinvestment  comes  in.  And  we  say  we  will
reinvest  for  an  extended  period  of  time.  It’s  another  element  that  in  the  future  will  have  to  be
clarified.
Obviously, reinvesting in short term debt has not the same impact on duration as investing in
longer term debt. The Fed tries to be relatively market neutral. That’s something we may wish to
clarify in the future.
Clearly, we will remain an important participant in the bond market. But we do not dominate the
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
market. Markets will continue to play a very strong role. That means our actions are very much
scrutinized.
The influence we have on market prices reflect the credibility of our policy, of the central bank
and the inflation objective.
Is tapering at the end of the programme necessary?
Let me start with what I read from markets: markets expect us to avoid cliff effects. I think it is a
good illustration of the interaction I mentioned before. It’s again a question about being coherent
with  what  you  say.  When  you  say  you  have  a  policy  of  prudence,  because  of  a  number  of
uncertainties,  what  you  will  do  at  the  end  of  the  program  must  be  coherent  with  that  sort  of
communication.  So  people  can  judge  what  is  coherent  with  a  notion  of  prudence  and  could
conclude that we will gradually bring net asset purchases to an end once the Governing Council
sees a sustained adjustment path. I think it is well understood by the market.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
