Jens Weidmann: National sovereignty and global challenges
Speech by Dr Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  and  Chairman  of  the
Board of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, at the awarding of the Karl Klasen
Journalism Prize, Hamburg, 30 January 2018.
 1. Welcome
Senator
Mr Klasen
Mr Erlanger
Ladies and gentlemen
Please  accept  my  sincere  congratulations,  Mr  Erlanger,  on  being  awarded  the  Karl  Klasen
Journalism Prize.
As the Chief Diplomatic Correspondent for Europe at The New York Times, you make a valuable
contribution to the strengthening of transatlantic relations – something which mattered greatly to
Karl Klasen.
It is an admirable, and at the same time, demanding task, explaining the workings of Europe and
the European Union.
2. Damaging isolationist tendencies
Since the year 2000, the official motto of the European Union has been "United in diversity". That
slogan is intended to convey the idea that Europeans work together for peace and prosperity, and
that they view their cultural and linguistic differences as an asset.
In the light of recent events, a fair number of those gathered here today are probably thinking that
the issue of diversity has pushed the concept of unity into the background.
Here I am thinking in particular about Brexit, which represented the first backwards step in the
process  of  European  integration.  Parties  criticising  the  euro  and  the  European  Union  have
enjoyed considerable electoral success in many countries, Germany included, and EU member
states  have  shown  themselves  to  be  anything  but  united,  not  least  in  the  dispute  about  the
reception and redistribution of refugees.
Exacerbated isolationist tendencies haven’t been confined to Europe, though. Protectionism has
returned to the international economic policy agenda. Demands for a more restrictive trade policy
have been voiced not only in the United States of America, but in other industrial countries too.
The  USA’s  recent  imposition  of  punitive  tariffs  on  producers  of  solar  panels  and  washing
machines is an example of rhetoric being followed by action.
Trade-restrictive measures often provoke backlashes, and these harbour the risk of erupting into
trade wars in which there can only be losers. The US Solar Energy Industries Association, for
instance, is expecting a net loss of 23,000 jobs in this year alone. The punitive tariffs on solar
panels  and  components  will  also  drive  up  domestic  production  costs,  and  probably  depress
demand for solar panels. This is turn means that fewer solar panel fitters will be required.
Avoiding conflicts like this, which hurt everyone, is the goal of free trade agreements, remember.
Yet campaigns against multilateral trade agreements such as TTIP or CETA are finding support
among broad sections of the population.
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Varied though these individual patterns may be, they can, in many cases, be traced back to a
common  cause,  namely  that  some  sections  of  society  are  afraid  –  afraid  of  the  economic
implications of globalisation, afraid of others having unfair advantages, or afraid of losing control.
Public concerns surrounding the impact not just of globalisation but of technological progress,
too, are something we need to take seriously, even if protectionism and isolationism aren’t the
answer to the problem.
Economists  are  broadly  in  agreement  that  international  trade  improves  welfare.  But  open
markets don’t necessarily boost prosperity for everyone. Globalisation does have its losers – and
lower-skilled workers in industrial countries are chief among these.
Studies show that a substantial proportion of the industrial jobs lost in the US are down to the
increase in Chinese imports. However, the majority of jobs fall victim to technological advances,
which ultimately have much the same effect as globalisation. And lower-paid workers, especially,
1
find it hard to get a new job in a different sector.
Viewed from a macroeconomic perspective, the industrial jobs lost in the United States are more
than compensated for by job growth in other sectors. What’s more, consumers are benefiting
from having access to cheaper goods from China.
If a pair of jeans made in America from 100% US cotton cost half as much again as the same
pair  of  jeans  manufactured  abroad,  having  access  to  imported  goods  obviously  means  that
consumers  can  make  considerable  savings.  That’s  completely  aside  from  the  fact  that
international  trade  promotes  the  proliferation  of  productive  ideas  and  of  new  and  improved
products, propelling economic growth.
That said, someone who’s just lost their job probably won’t take comfort from being able to buy a
cheap  smartphone,  though.  So  there’s  a  real  danger  that  people  might  begin  to  turn  against
globalisation.
But rolling out protectionist measures would remove a cornerstone of prosperity, even if they do
promise to alleviate the situation in the short term. In my view, Canadian trade economist Daniel
Trefler sums this up perfectly with the following comparison: "Insular policies are about as useful
as a blowdryer in an igloo." It’s pleasantly warm at first, but at some point the roof is going to
collapse over your head.
The right course of action should be to enable people to reap the rewards of globalisation and
technological  progress  themselves.  Better  schools  and  universities,  and  lifelong  learning,  can
equip people to make more of the benefits which an ever-changing environment can offer. And
flexible  labour  and  product  markets  are  another  catalyst  that  can  facilitate  structural  change
without producing stubborn unemployment because new jobs are created more quickly than the
old ones are lost.
I, for one, firmly believe that open markets and economic structures that are more conducive to
growth  boost  productivity,  employment  and  incomes.  They  also  allow  social  hardship  to  be
cushioned by a targeted tax and transfer system, just like the one we have in Germany.
This  is  how  we  can  make  Ludwig  Erhard’s  promise  of  "Prosperity  for  all"  a  reality  and  tackle
public fears of globalisation and technological advances.
3. Valuable multilateral cooperation
Ladies and gentlemen
International  and  multilateral  cooperation  is  more  essential  than  ever  in  a  globalised  and
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
interconnected world. It is only through international collaboration that a number of challenges
can  be  tackled  at  all.  Take  climate  change,  the  fight  against  terrorism  or  the  regulation  of
international financial markets, for example.
The financial crisis offered a vivid demonstration of how international cooperation  – particularly at
the G20 level – can pay off. Cooperation among the 20 most important industrial countries and
emerging market countries proved to be a huge asset when tackling the crisis and addressing its
causes.
One of the great achievements of the G20 is that its members withstood the temptation to resort
to large-scale protectionist measures after the 2008-09 crisis in order to protect their domestic
economies  from  the  fallout  of  the  global  slump  in  demand.  They  refrained  from  "beggar  thy
neighbour" strategies which would have stimulated their national economies at the expense of
other countries. The G20 countries also reiterated their commitment to open markets in principle
and agreed to combat protectionism at their Hamburg summit.
The second major achievement of the G20 is that they succeeded in learning major lessons from
the financial crisis by pulling together as a team. All the milestones on the path towards reforming
international financial market regulations were backed by the G20 countries.
Strengthening the financial sector’s resilience would have been unthinkable if there hadn’t been
political unity among the G20 countries. After all, we all know that capital is extremely mobile, and
national loopholes within the G20 would blunt effective regulation.
A key component in this regard is the Basel III framework, which had already been completed in
principle  in  2010.  However,  the  last  remaining  aspects  of  the  reform  package  proved  to  be  a
major sticking point, and it was only towards the end of last year that the members of the Basel
Committee were able to endorse a compromise.
That agreement now needs to be implemented quickly and in full. This of course means that the
decisions will be integrated into national law not just in Europe but by all of the members of the
Basel Committee, so in the United States as well. Because this is precisely the point of having
the Basel standards – having as uniform a playing field as possible.
Thanks to long transition periods, institutions that now have additional capital requirements have
sufficient time to build them up. There is therefore no reason to fear a credit crunch.
In fact, the opposite is the case: in a well-capitalised banking system, there is no need to be
afraid of bottlenecks in lending, even if the economy does take a turn for the worst. And already
Basel III has caused banks to raise their capital levels noticeably.
German banks nowadays hold far more capital, and of a much higher quality, too, than they did
just a few years ago. By way of example, Germany's large institutions improved their average tier
1 capital ratio from 5.4% in 2011 to 12.7% at the end of 2016. The buffer has therefore more than
doubled in size.
The death of the French celebrity chef Paul Bocuse a few days ago reminded me of a quote of
his: "If an architect makes a mistake, he grows ivy to cover it. If a doctor makes a mistake, he
covers it with soil. If a chef makes a mistake, he covers it with some sauce and says it is a new
recipe."
Danièle Nouy, chair of the SSM Supervisory Board, once used this quote and elaborated on what
Bocuse might have said about the mistakes of banks. Nouy suspects he would have said, "If
banks make mistakes, they tend to cover them with taxpayers’ money." This is precisely what
should happen less often thanks to the new banking regulations, which include much more than
just Basel III, namely taxpayers that have to step in and bail out banks.
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Germany’s presidency, besides wrapping up Basel III, albeit shortly after the end of the country’s
tenure, also achieved progress on other fronts. For instance, a uniform framework for evaluating
the  financial  market  reforms  that  have  already  been  implemented  was  endorsed,  as  were
principles for boosting the resilience of the G20 economies.
Of course, these topics don’t really grab the headlines. The riots surrounding the summit here in
Hamburg attracted greater media attention in any case. All the same, these are valuable steps
towards making the economic and financial system more crisis-proof.
4. Germany pilloried unjustly
Many people would also consider a reduction in what have been dubbed global inequalities as a
step towards a more crisis-proof economic system. Again and again, these inequalities are used
to justify calls for protectionist measures.
This is shown by the fact that some countries run long-term current account surpluses while
others produce nothing but deficits. Thus, Germany and China have been running surpluses for a
number of years, while the United States has a chronic current account deficit.
But this state of affairs tells us nothing about how the spoils of international trade are distributed.
And yet Germany in particular has been at the centre of international criticism for many years.
Time and again, Germany is urged to adopt active economic policies as a way of scaling back
the surplus, such as recently at a conference in Frankfurt organised jointly by the Bundesbank
and the IMF.
However,  Germany’s  surplus  can  be  traced  back  to  the  wide  variety  of  decisions  made  by
domestic and foreign consumers and enterprises; it is not the outcome of mercantilist policy.
Given  demographic  changes,  it  is  wholly  appropriate  for  Germany  to  run  current  account
surpluses because, put simply, there is a shrinking number of us to generate national product
and proportionally there are more and more who consume it.
A current account surplus allows external assets to grow, and these can be run down at a later
point  in  time  as  more  and  more  employees  retire  and  draw  on  their  savings. Also,  when  a
country reduces its debt ratio, it implicitly improves the sustainability of statutory pensions. In a
manner of speaking, the state saves on behalf of the population so that the future tax burden
remains bearable.
Because growth in Germany is expected to be relatively weak in the coming decades, it is right to
tap more dynamic growth elsewhere. That said, a surplus of 8% of GDP, which is the level we
are seeing today, cannot be put down to demographics alone. Likewise, the low oil price, which
has diminished the cost of imports, and the expansionary monetary policy explain only part of the
high surplus.
It is striking that, for a long time, German enterprises built up high levels of savings. This partly
reflects German enterprises’ investment restraint, which only gave way to a cyclical upturn last
year.  One  way  to  reduce  the  current  account  surplus,  then,  would  be  to  create  attractive
investment conditions within Germany, for instance by implementing the energy U-turn quickly
and predictably, or by extending the country’s digital infrastructure.
The latter might also mean spending more on public infrastructure, for which there is currently
some  financial  leeway.  It  would  be  important,  however,  to  ensure  that  investment  needs  are
calculated precisely and covered cost-effectively.
Business investment has climbed sharply of late on the back of upbeat industrial activity, and this
cyclical upswing is likely to continue in the near future. Taken in isolation, it is probable that this
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
will ultimately have a dampening effect on the current account surplus.
Over the longer term, however, the challenge lies in tackling the ever more apparent lack of high-
skilled  labour  effectively,  as  this  is  another  factor  that  will  dampen  business  investment  in
Germany.
By contrast, it would be wrong-headed to aim to reduce the surplus by specifically hampering the
competitiveness  of  German  enterprises,  or  by  rolling  out  debt-financed  public  spending
programmes that would temporarily continue to fuel demand in periods that already have high
levels of production capacity utilisation, ie they would have a procyclical impact.
5. Strengthening the European Union
Ladies and gentlemen
International trade, then, is not a zero-sum game in which gains and losses cancel each other
out. The same holds true for the European Union.
And much like I said at the start of my speech here today, perhaps not every country profits to the
same degree, but everybody does profit.
A  majority  of  voters  in  the  United  Kingdom  saw  things  differently,  however.  Brexit  supporters
evidently  saw  more  negatives  than  positives  to  EU  membership,  wagering  that  the  United
Kingdom would be able to take back national sovereignty by leaving the EU.
How  far  the  economic  fallout  of  this  decision  can  be  mitigated  very  much  depends  on  the
substance of the divorce agreement as well as the nature of future UK-EU relations.
On this topic, Steven Erlanger wrote in The New York Times that: "Britain is now but a modest-
size ship on the global ocean."
In  an  era  of  global  challenges,  this  longing  for  profound  national  sovereignty  seems  to  be
somewhat reactionary.
Of  course,  there  are  tasks  that  can  be  done  better  at  the  European  level  than  the  national.
Conversely, there are tasks that are still more at home at the domestic level.
Looking at the resurgent debate on the future of Europe, what I feel really counts is deciding, as a
first step, whether there are any additional responsibilities that would make sense to transfer to
the EU. From an economic standpoint, these might include Europe-wide public assets and policy
areas with cross-border externalities, in particular. The second step would then be to clarify how
these joint responsibilities should be funded.
In his speech at the Sorbonne, French President Emmanuel Macron singled out a number of
policy  areas  that  he  believes  should  be  mutualised,  such  as  defence,  border  security,  and
climate protection.
At the same time, however, the principle of subsidiarity enshrined in the EU Treaty needs to be
applied  more  effectively.  For  this  reason,  I  am  delighted  to  see  that  European  Commission
President Jean-Claude Juncker has established a Task Force on Subsidiarity to look into which
tasks could be re-delegated to member states.
One area of responsibility that will certainly not be put back into the hands of member states is
monetary policy. This, incidentally, is not what the public at large wants, either.
According to the latest Eurobarometer survey, three-quarters (74%) of respondents in the euro
area are in favour of the single currency, while only one in five (21%) is against the euro. In some
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
countries,  Germany  included,  the  approval  rating  is  higher  than  80%  even.  The  euro  sees  its
lowest level of support in Italy, although, even there, its supporters still outnumber detractors two
to one.
That said, the crisis in the euro area revealed just how fragile the architecture of monetary union
is. This fragility, however, is not due to any fundamental flaw in the single currency itself. Rather,
it  is  more  the  interplay  between  the  single  monetary  policy  on  the  one  side  and  national
sovereignty in matters of economic and fiscal policy on the other that makes the monetary union
susceptible to crisis.
Recognising that this balancing act can be problematic for the stability of the single currency is
anything but a new insight. As far back as 1970, Karl Klasen emphasised that "a single monetary
policy can only be effective if the monetary effects of public finances are also subject to common
2
control."
This,  incidentally,  just  goes  to  show  how  long  the  specific  groundwork  needed  to  forge  a
monetary union characterised by long-term stability has been under discussion.
In any case, it was clear to Klasen, who was Bundesbank President at the time, that "deeper
integration in monetary policy must go hand in hand with equally deeper integration in other areas
of  economic  policy  as  well  as  fiscal  policy."  Nearly  five  decades  on,  we  in  Europe  are  still
debating the right path towards deeper integration.
In my opinion, it is crucial that any proposals tabled in this debate take consideration of the need
to strike a balance between action and liability. After all, responsible decisions are only likely to be
made if the decision-makers also have to own the economic consequences of their actions. This
applies in economics just as it does in politics.
If deepening European integration is pared down to simply increasing risk sharing and mutual
liability, it will do nothing to make Europe and monetary union any more stable.
As long as there is a lack of willingness to transfer decision-making and intervention powers to
the  European  level,  then  only  one  other  path  to  stable  monetary  union  remains:  making  the
individual member states more responsible for their own fiscal affairs again.
Specifically,  this  would  mean  restoring  the  credibility  of  the  no-bail-out  principle  set  out  in  the
Maastricht Treaty and strengthening the binding force of the fiscal compact.
Ladies and gentlemen
There is one thing we should not forget when discussing the future of monetary union: from the
very outset, the euro was also a political project. This, incidentally, is a point that Karl Klasen
made in the article I cited earlier.
Bearing  this  in  mind,  there  can  be  no  question  that  political  factors  feature  prominently  in  the
discussion on deepening monetary union. Incentives to pursue stability-oriented policy should be
maintained at all costs, however.
The monetary union must remain a stability union. Failure to achieve this will cause the single
currency to fall out of favour. And that would undoubtedly be a heavy burden for the future of
Europe.
6. Conclusion
European politics are becoming increasing difficult for the general public to understand. All the
more important, then, that there are journalists who are not only interested in stories about public
figures,  but  who  also  get  to  grips  with  complex  topics  and  relationships  to  make  them
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
comprehensible for their readers. And the less the reader is personally affected by a story, the
harder that becomes.
As the Chief Diplomatic Correspondent for Europe at The New York Times, you, Mr Erlanger,
have  the  challenging  task  of  bringing  Europe  closer  to  a  predominantly American  readership.
Please allow me to say that, with your engaging as well as informative articles, you accomplish
that task with panache.
Once  again,  please  accept  my  sincere  congratulations  on  being  awarded  the  Karl  Klasen
Journalism Prize. And to you, the audience, thank you for your attention.
1
2
Deutsche Bundesbank (2017), The danger posed to the global economy by protectionist tendencies, Monthly
Report, July, pp 77–91, and the literature cited there.
K Klasen (1970), Die Verwirklichung der Wirtschafts- und Währungsunion in der EWG aus Sicht der Deutschen
Bundesbank, in Europa-Archiv, 13, p 453.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
