Stephen S Poloz: Canada's economy and household debt - how big
is the problem?
Remarks by Mr Stephen S Poloz, Governor of the Bank of Canada, at the Yellowknife Chamber
of Commerce, Yellowknife, Northwest Territories, 1 May 2018.
I would like to thank Jing Yang for her help with this speech.
Introduction
 Shakespeare wrote, “Neither a borrower nor a lender be.” Well, that may have been reasonable
advice back in Hamlet’s day, but it is hard to imagine a modern economy like ours functioning
under that dictum.
For most Canadians debt is a fact of life, at least at some point. Borrowing can help someone
get a higher education, or buy a new car, or purchase a home. Simply put, debt is a tool that
allows people to smooth out their spending throughout their life.
The amount of debt held by Canadian households has been rising for about 30 years, not just in
absolute terms but also relative to the size of the economy. At the end of last year, Canadian
households owed just over $2 trillion. Mortgages make up almost three-quarters of this debt.
While debt is indispensable for our modern way of life, it has been a growing preoccupation for
the  Bank  of  Canada  for  several  years  now.  That  is  because  high  debt  levels  can  make  us
vulnerable to negative events—individuals as well the entire economy.
There  are  two  ways  to  look  at  this.  Traditionally,  our  focus  has  been  on  the  vulnerability  of
Canada’s financial system arising from elevated indebtedness. This means analyzing how our
banks  would  manage  a  serious  economic  recession  with  high  unemployment  and  increasing
debt defaults. But the Bank is also focused on the vulnerability of our economy to rising interest
rates,  given  high  household  debt.  There  is  little  doubt  that  the  economy  is  more  sensitive  to
higher interest rates today than it was in the past, and that global and domestic interest rates are
on the rise.
So, today I want to talk about household debt in Canada—the dynamics that led to its buildup,
how  big  a  problem  it  is  for  Canadians  now,  and  how  we  can  manage  the  risks  in  the  years
ahead.
How did we get here?
Two trillion dollars of debt is a big number. Let us try to put some context around it. A common
way to measure household debt is to compare it with the amount of disposable income people
have. In Canada’s case, household debt is around 170 per cent of disposable income. In other
words, the average Canadian owes about $1.70 for every dollar of income he or she earns per
year, after taxes.
That ratio is a Canadian record, and up from about 100 per cent 20 years ago. Although this ratio
is on the high side, other economies such as Sweden, Norway and Australia have even more
household debt relative to disposable income.
This international comparison reveals some common factors. Like Canada, the countries I just
mentioned  have  all  seen  decades  of  steadily  rising  house  prices.  They  all  have  high  rates  of
homeownership  and  deep,  well-developed  mortgage  markets.  Like  Canada,  mortgages  in
Australia  are  typically  amortized  over  25  to  30  years.  In  Norway  and  Sweden,  you  can  find
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
mortgages where the homeowner is only making interest payments, and the principal is passed
on from one generation to the next.
Aspiring to own a home is part of our culture. It is also a way to build wealth for the future, as
house  prices  have  tended  to  rise  faster  than  incomes.  My  colleague,  Deputy  Governor  Larry
Schembri, took an in-depth look at the drivers of house prices in a speech in 2015. He found
many factors working on both supply and demand to push prices up.
On the supply side, Canada is a highly urbanized country, and many of our cities have land-use
constraints that limit supply, such as green belts and other zoning restrictions. Geography, in the
form of mountains and water, also helps to limit supply and support prices.
In  terms  of  demand,  several  factors  have  reinforced  an  extended  trend  toward  higher  prices.
These include demographics and a long period of low long-term interest rates. But the point I
want to stress here is that when you combine a strong desire for homeownership with rising
house prices, you will naturally find increasing levels of debt.
Monetary policy, demand and house prices
The  connection  between  low  interest  rates,  rising  house  prices  and  increasing  debt  levels  is
worth considering in more detail. The goal of our monetary policy is to deliver low and predictable
inflation by keeping supply and demand in the economy in balance. If inflation is too low, we can
lower our key policy interest rate and expect to stimulate demand for goods and services. When
we raise interest rates, we expect to cool demand.
You  would  expect,  then,  that  relatively  low  interest  rates  would  lead  to  strong  demand  for
housing. Looking back, mortgage rates shifted into a lower range in the late 1990s. In part, this
reflected a global trend toward lower inflation and interest rates. But it also reflected the fact that
the Bank of Canada had built some credibility around its inflation-targeting policy, which began in
1991. Canadians had come to expect that inflation would remain low, and interest rates moved
lower accordingly. This is when our long-term rise in household debt took root.
The situation took another dramatic turn in the wake of the global financial crisis in 2008. Central
banks slashed interest rates, in some cases to zero and beyond, and kept them at historically
low levels for an extended period.
Internationally coordinated fiscal and monetary actions from 2008 to 2010 provided stimulus and
helped  the  world  avoid  a  second  Great  Depression.  But  our  economy  has  struggled  to  gain
traction in the last 10 years, not least because our recovery was interrupted by the collapse in oil
prices  in  late  2014.  Today,  inflation  is  on  target  and  the  economy  is  operating  very  close  to
potential. However, given the lingering effects of the shocks we have faced, the economy still
requires stimulus.
Let me make a very basic and important point here. Policy stimulus has a cost, whatever form it
takes. Whether delivered by monetary or fiscal policies, stimulus encourages growth by bringing
forward household spending and business investment, financed with debt.
I spoke about these debt dynamics in the Purvis lecture two years ago. If fiscal policy takes the
lead  in  stimulating  the  economy,  this  can  result  in  a  buildup  of  government  debt.  If  monetary
policy takes the lead, this brings about a buildup in household debt. In both cases, stimulus leads
to  a  buildup  of  debt  over  time,  whether  public  or  private. And  excessive  debt  levels  create  a
vulnerability, making the economy less resilient to future shocks. This is why policy-makers need
to consider the debt consequences of the mix of fiscal and monetary policy.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
The burden of debt
Ultimately, what matters most is the burden of servicing debt relative to income. In other words,
the lower the interest rate, the more debt a given household can afford to carry. For this analysis,
we  look  at  the  debt-service  ratio,  which  is  the  required  payments  of  interest  and  principal
expressed as a percentage of income.
Remarkably, the aggregate debt-service ratio on mortgages for Canadian households has been
very stable, remaining within a range of 5 to 7 per cent since the early 1990s. What this means is
that  Canadians  have  taken  advantage  of  lower  interest  rates  to  carry  a  higher  level  of  debt,
thereby keeping the debt-service ratio fairly constant.
You can see how this would arise. Financial institutions are mainly interested in a borrower’s
ability to service his or her debt out of regular income. So, lower interest rates make it possible to
purchase a more expensive home. Further, with improved access to credit—in particular, the
widespread  use  of  home  equity  lines  of  credit,  or  HELOCs—it  becomes  largely  a  matter  for
households themselves to choose their overall level of mortgage debt, and to use that debt for a
wider range of purposes.
Indeed, Canadians, regardless of their age group, are increasingly relying on mortgages. Among
people under 35 years old, the percentage of homeowners with a mortgage has edged higher
from about 85 per cent in 1999 to 90 per cent in 2016. For people in the 55 to 64 age bracket, the
increase was more dramatic—from 34 per cent to 46 per cent. This casts a new light on that 170
per cent debt-to-income ratio I cited before.
Notice  that  the  170  per  cent  figure  represents  an  average  across  Canadian  households.  It
includes all those who have little or no debt, which means, to make the average level of debt so
high, it also must include some very highly indebted Canadians.
In fact, about 8 per cent of indebted households owe 350 per cent or more of their gross income,
representing  a  bit  more  than  20  per  cent  of  total  household  debt.  These  are  the  people  who
would be most affected by an increase in interest rates. We are closely watching the vulnerability
represented by this group and the debt they carry, and how it poses a risk to both the financial
system and the economy. And it is important for these households to understand how personally
vulnerable they may be.
In  this  context,  recent  changes  to  mortgage  regulations  are  particularly  welcome—including
those that require people to show that they can service their debt at higher interest rates. These
regulations  are  helping  reduce  the  economy’s  vulnerability,  since  new  borrowers  will  be  more
resilient than existing borrowers. There are signs that these and other rules are working, as we
are already seeing a significant reduction in the issuance of very high loan-to-income mortgages.
 
High debt levels and monetary policy
However, these regulations apply only to new mortgages. The stock of household debt, including
the $1.5 trillion in existing mortgages, will persist. And this debt has increasing implications for
monetary policy. As I said at the beginning, a significant issue for us now is gauging how much
more sensitive consumers, and the whole economy, have become to changes in interest rates.
This is particularly important right now because the economy will require higher interest rates
over  time  to  meet  our  inflation  goals.  Given  current  levels  of  household  debt,  we  expect  that
moves in our policy rate will have a stronger impact in cooling demand than they did in previous
years.  But  this  is  a  significant  uncertainty—the  sensitivity  could  be  larger  or  smaller  than  we
expect.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Since last July, the Bank has raised interest rates three times, taking the policy rate from 0.5 per
cent to 1.25 per cent. However, it is still too soon to know just how strong an impact these moves
will have. There are many reasons why interest rate changes take time—up to two years—to
fully work through the economy. For example, consider that the majority of mortgages in Canada
have a fixed interest rate, which is usually adjusted only at the end of the term—most often every
five years. Those fixed-rate mortgages that have not been renewed since last July have yet to be
affected by the interest rate increases. Some of the people renewing in the last few months may
have been given a rate similar to the one they received five years ago. Of course, those who
have opted for a floating rate—some 25 per cent of mortgages—have already seen their rate
resetting higher.
That said, we are seeing some other evidence of the impact of higher interest rates. Banks have
increased  the  interest  rates  on  new  loans—not  just  mortgages,  but  also  other  forms  of
consumer and business borrowing. We have also seen signs that the growth rate of borrowing
has begun to moderate.
You may be wondering where interest rates are headed. We know there is some level for our
policy rate that is considered neutral—where it will neither stimulate nor cool the economy. This
neutral rate cannot be observed, and we do not control it. What is more, it can move around over
time as the global and domestic economies evolve.
Despite this uncertainty, it is a useful reference point for central banks, for three reasons. First,
the  further  the  policy  rate  is  from  the  neutral  rate,  the  greater  the  impact  on  the  economy.
Second,  because  the  neutral  rate  does  change,  any  given  policy  setting  can  become  less  or
more stimulative over time, even if the central bank keeps it unchanged. And third, if the neutral
rate  in  an  economy  falls  far  enough,  it  may  be  difficult  for  a  central  bank  to  provide  enough
stimulus in the event of a serious downturn.
In our Monetary Policy Report (MPR) last month, we published our latest estimate of Canada’s
neutral rate, saying it falls in a range between 2.50 and 3.50 per cent, assuming that all shocks
affecting the economy have dissipated. At 1.25 per cent, our current policy rate is still well below
our estimate of the neutral rate.
With supply and demand in our economy currently close to being balanced, you might expect our
policy rate to be much closer to neutral. But several forces appear to be still acting to restrain the
economy.  We  talked  about  these  in  the  MPR.  They  include  the  new  mortgage  rules,  ongoing
uncertainty  about  US  trade  policy  and  the  renegotiation  of  the  North  American  Free  Trade
Agreement,  and  a  range  of  competitiveness  challenges  affecting  Canadian  exporters.  These
forces  will  not  last  forever. As  they  fade,  the  need  for  continued  monetary  stimulus  will  also
diminish and interest rates will naturally move higher.
Another benchmark for measuring monetary stimulus is the real rate of interest, defined as our
policy rate, less the rate of inflation. Today, our inflation-adjusted policy rate stands at –0.75 per
cent. As the economy progresses and the forces acting against it fade, the need for an inflation-
adjusted policy rate below zero is steadily diminishing.
Managing the risks
All this to say that we are becoming more confident that the economy will need less monetary
stimulus over time. Still, as we approach every interest rate decision, we need to consider all the
risks the economy is facing relative to our forecast, including those related to household debt.
If we raise rates too quickly, we risk choking off growth and falling short of our inflation target. If
we move too slowly, we risk a buildup of inflation pressures that would cause an overshoot of our
inflation  target.  At  the  same  time,  moving  too  slowly  would  mean  a  further  accumulation  of
household  debt  and  rising  vulnerabilities,  while  moving  too  quickly  could  trigger  the  sort  of
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
financial stability risk we are trying to avoid.
As you can imagine, getting the path of monetary policy right involves a lot of judgment. Bank
staff have recently developed an important new way to evaluate these trade-offs and help inform
this judgment, and we are publishing a staff analytical note today on this work.
Briefly, the framework uses our models to calculate the risks to the economy associated with
various hypothetical interest rate paths. By examining many such paths, we are able to sketch
the trade-offs involved in choosing any particular path. Intuitively, higher interest rates will mean
slower economic growth; but they will also mean reduced financial vulnerabilities. As a result, the
impact on the economy of a major financial stability event would be less.
the  new  mortgage  guidelines.  By  reducing 
From this starting point, the framework then allows for the inclusion of macroprodential policies,
such  as 
financial  vulnerabilities  directly,
macroprudential  policies  improve  the  trade-off  policy-makers  face  in  choosing  when  to  adjust
interest rates higher. Put another way, macroprudential policies allow monetary policy to deliver
similar results for growth and inflation without exacerbating financial vulnerabilities.
Conclusion
It is time for me to conclude. If Shakespeare were writing today, he might say that our financial
system gives Canadians more choices than ever in deciding whether to be, or not to be, in debt.
Today’s record level of household borrowing reflects the evolution of the financial system and the
comfort level of Canadians in taking on debt. But it also reflects a prolonged period of very low
interest rates and rising house prices.
At the Bank of Canada, we have been watching these debt levels closely because of the growing
risks  they  pose  to  financial  stability  and  the  economy.  We  know  that  a  portion  of  Canadian
households are carrying large debts, and the concern will become larger for them as interest
rates rise. Of course, higher interest rates would likely reflect an economy that is on even more
solid ground and less prone to a major economic setback. Furthermore, our financial system is
resilient, and the new mortgage rules mean that it is becoming progressively more so. Even so,
our  economy  is  at  risk  should  there  be  an  unexpected  increase  in  bond  yields  or  a  global
slowdown,  because  both  effects  would  be  magnified  by  their  interaction  with  high  household
debt.
Ultimately, the Bank’s job is to look at the economy as a whole and judge the outlook for inflation.
Today, the view is quite good, even with the shadow cast by household debt. This debt still poses
risks to the economy and financial stability, and its sheer size means that its risks will be with us
for some time. But there is good reason to think that we can continue to manage these risks
successfully.  The  economic  progress  we  have  seen  makes  us  more  confident  that  higher
interest rates will be warranted over time, although some monetary policy accommodation will
still be needed. We will continue to watch how households and the entire economy are reacting
to higher interest rates. And we will be cautious in making future adjustments to monetary policy,
guided by incoming data.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
