Excellence in Payments 
 Shri  B.  Mahapatra,  Chairman,  NPCI,  Shri  Dilip  Asbe,  MD,  NPCI, 
distinguished  guests,  fellow  bankers,  captains  of  the  industry  and  the 
Honourable members of the Jury – it gives me great pleasure to be amidst 
you all as NPCI today recognises the significant work done by the innovators 
in  payment  systems  of  the  country.  Let  me  begin  with  a  quote  by  Robin 
Sharma, the motivational speaker, who says ‘Small daily improvements over 
time  lead  to  stunning  results’.  No  one  can  disagree  with  him.  This  is  most 
applicable  to  the  area  of  payment  systems  in  India  which  has  got 
international recognition. Giant strides taken by India in respect of payment 
and settlement systems and the retail payment space stand out prominently. 
The role played by NPCI in this regard is immense and it is only befitting that 
the  awards  instituted  by  them  reflect  the  importance  ascribed  towards 
innovations in payment systems.  
Retail payment systems in India : the Background  
 
1.  Thrust  on  digitisation  of  payment  systems  in  India  have  had  a  relatively 
recent origin. The NPCI, envisioned as an umbrella organisation for retail 
payment  systems  in  the  country,  was  set-up  with  the  guidance  and 
support  of  the  Reserve  Bank  and  Indian  Banks’  Association  (IBA)  in 
December 2008.  
2.  The Payments Systems Vision Document 2005-08 of Reserve Bank had 
envisaged  a  new  institutional  structure  for  Retail  Payment  Systems, 
preferably  owned  by  banks  and  other  financial  institutions,  with  the 
objective  of  a)  optimally  using  the  resources  through  consolidation  of 
Keynote  Address  by  Shri  B.  P.  Kanungo,  Deputy  Governor,  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  NPCI  National 
Payments Excellence Awards function, Mumbai, on May 29, 2018. Inputs received from the Department of 
Payment & Settlement Systems are acknowledged. 
existing  infrastructure  and  building  new  infrastructure  to  enable  national 
reach in a seamless manner; and b) creating a robust technology platform 
which  provides service of the highest quality to customers at affordable 
price.  Accordingly,  in  the  year  2009,  the  NPCI  started  its  role  as  a 
payment  system  provider  by  operating  the  ATM  network  when  IDRBT 
handed over to it the National Financial Switch (NFS). Thereafter, the RBI 
requisitioned  the  NPCI  to  operate the  Cheque  Truncation  System  (CTS) 
on its behalf.  
3.  The objective of an umbrella organisation is to provide swift, convenient, 
anytime-anywhere  payment  services  which  are  easy-to-use,  simple, 
secure,  fast  and  cost-effective  for  customers.  NPCI  over  the  years  has 
operated various retail payment systems viz. IMPS, UPI-including BHIM, 
National  Unified  USSD  Platform  (NUUP)  for  mobile  payments,  RuPay, 
NACH,  Aadhaar  based  AePS,  including  Aadhaar  Pay,  APBS,  BBPS, 
NETC, etc., some of which are available for use on a 24x7 basis. In all the 
payment  systems  the  main  role  of  NPCI  has  been  to  offer  switching 
services  and  the  attendant  clearing  and  settlement  facilities.  This  has 
involved  creating  technology  platforms,  setting  up  standards,  framing 
procedural guidelines, creating risk management structure, etc. which, in a 
way has changed the retail payments scenario of the country. Thus initial 
expectations of the Reserve Bank, have been largely fulfilled.  
 
Retail Payment Systems : The Rise of India in the Global Map  
 
4.  India has been always been a country which has fostered innovation and 
development  in  the  area  of  payment  and  settlement  systems.    The  past 
Keynote  Address  by  Shri  B.  P.  Kanungo,  Deputy  Governor,  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  NPCI  National 
Payments Excellence Awards function, Mumbai, on May 29, 2018. Inputs received from the Department of 
Payment & Settlement Systems are acknowledged. 
decade has witnessed the blossoming of a myriad of payment systems, all 
for the convenience of the common man.  
5.  For  a  country  which  has  a  large  dependence  on  cash,  the  only  major 
payment  system  until  the  90s  was  the  cheque  clearing  system.  We  still 
process over 90 million cheques per month. This is important as cheques 
are  also  non-cash  transactions  and  are  often  not  given  due  importance. 
This system was also unique in the sense that there were more than 1000 
clearing houses in the country – a big number by any standard. The initial 
steps towards the change in the payment systems was the mechanisation 
of the clearing houses managed by the Reserve Bank in the late eighties 
by  the  introduction  of  the  MICR  technology  for  cheque  processing.  This 
not only ushered in computerisation of clearing, but also sowed the seeds 
for  the  digitisation  of  payments  in  the  years  to  come.  The  initial  steps 
towards electronic products were all set up by the Reserve Bank and once 
the level of maturity was reached, the market was allowed to develop and 
thus  came  about  the  emergence  of  interoperable  ATMs.  The  NFS  has 
proven  that  in  a  large  country  like  India,  networked  ATMs  can  function 
very well and that costs are shared by competing entities as well. Today, 
the  growth  in  ATM  usage  has  migrated  away  from  the  metropolitan 
centres, to the Tier 3, 4 and 5 cities and the evolution of White label ATMs 
is proof of the large potential that ATMs have brought in. 
6.  India is among a few countries which has settlement / funds available for 
cheque clearing on a T+1 basis with finality. India has pride of place in the 
form of the UPI for retail payments. We are also having the one of its kind 
Aadhar enabled payment systems as well the most ubiquitous QR code-
based processing. All these retail payment systems have resulted in the 
Keynote  Address  by  Shri  B.  P.  Kanungo,  Deputy  Governor,  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  NPCI  National 
Payments Excellence Awards function, Mumbai, on May 29, 2018. Inputs received from the Department of 
Payment & Settlement Systems are acknowledged. 
availability of a wide choice for the common man and more importantly, at 
reasonable rates.  
 
Excellence in Retail Payments  
 
7.  Retail payments have grown by nearly 45 per cent in volume and 30 per 
cent  by  value  during  2017-18.  Retail  payment  systems  in  India  are 
characterised  by  large  volumes  and  this  makes  it  necessary  that  the 
systems are available whenever and wherever they are required. If these 
systems are to deliver at the desired levels of expectations, then there is a 
need  to  focus  on  certain  key  essential  features  of  ‘excellence’.  Let  me 
dwell a bit on each of these six excellence features: 
8.  The  first  most  important  requirement  in  this  regard  is  ‘AVAILABILITY’. 
Retail  payment  systems,  by  their  very  nature  have  to  be  available  on 
demand, at all times – generally 24 by 7 – and at all convenient locations 
and modes. While most of our systems do reflect this, the bottleneck is in 
terms of digital connectivity. Addressing infrastructure constraint is critical 
to making available retail payment services to the population. Currently, a 
large  number  of  RRBs,  rural  cooperative  banks  and  district  central 
cooperative banks are yet to be part of retail platforms (NEFT, IMPS and 
NACH).  To  encourage  participation  of  citizens  in  semi-urban  and  rural 
India,  there  is  a  need  to  bring  all  RRBs,  rural  cooperative  banks  and 
district  central  cooperative  banks  on  various  retail  electronic  platforms 
subject to their technological capability. 
9.  The  second  requirement  is  ‘EFFICIENCY’.  In  a  country  such  as  ours 
where  the  diaspora  of  population  and  the  attendant  requirements  are  of 
Keynote  Address  by  Shri  B.  P.  Kanungo,  Deputy  Governor,  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  NPCI  National 
Payments Excellence Awards function, Mumbai, on May 29, 2018. Inputs received from the Department of 
Payment & Settlement Systems are acknowledged. 
multiple levels, it is essential that the systems are available at very cost 
effective rates and that they also perform as per the levels of expectations. 
10.  The third crucial requirement is ‘CONVENIENCE’. Today’s customer is 
very  discerning  and  choses  convenience  over  cost  –  a  feature  which  is 
observed prominently among the young population. The large scale use of 
Mobile Banking, app based payment systems, QR Code are all testimony 
to this fact. 
11.  The  fourth  hallmark  of  excellence  is  ‘SAFETY’.  All  payment  systems 
should  display  explicit  levels  of  safety.  It  would  be  necessary  that  the 
systems not only meet the requirements of safety but are also subjected to 
safety audits at periodic intervals. 
12.  The fifth essential necessity is ‘SECURITY’. This is perhaps the central 
pivotal requirement since the entire world of today is grappling with issues 
relating  to  cyber  security.  It  is  of  utmost  importance  that  the  risk 
management  practices 
to  ensure  smooth  clearing  and  settlement 
(settlement  guarantee  fund,  default  fund,  line  of  credit,  margins,  debit 
caps,  etc.)  are  implemented  with  a  conservativeness  in  approach  and 
ruthlessness  in  implementation  across  each  and  every  product.  There 
have been incidents involving misuse of the payment systems / networks 
to defraud the participant institutions and / or their customers. Whether the 
fraudsters could have been prevented from doing so can be a matter of 
debate, but there cannot be differing opinion that attention to security on 
an ongoing basis can greatly mitigate this risk. Failure to do so by one / 
few entities can put the entire payment system to peril. While it is gratifying 
to  note  that  NPCI  –  in  collaboration  with  IDRBT  –  is  providing  optimal 
security to their retail payment systems, there is an essential need for the 
Keynote  Address  by  Shri  B.  P.  Kanungo,  Deputy  Governor,  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  NPCI  National 
Payments Excellence Awards function, Mumbai, on May 29, 2018. Inputs received from the Department of 
Payment & Settlement Systems are acknowledged. 
entire eco system to have security as an integral component and ensure 
that security  becomes  a  culture.  It  is  necessary  to  keep  in  mind  that  no 
system  can  be  100%  fool  proof.  While  experimenting  security  standards 
that are best in class, periodically testing them for vulnerability, mitigating 
the  risks,  it  is  equally  important  to  build  in  resilience  so  that  the  service 
continues  uninterrupted  or  recovers  within  a  short  period  if  there  is  any 
failure.   
13.  The sixth indicator of excellence is ‘ADAPTABILITY’. In a fast changing 
world, product life cycles are becoming very short and thus adapting them 
for quick changes is a virtual requirement. I may at this stage indicate that 
while the RBI introduced the MICR cheque clearing with the reader sorter 
based processing, it also closed it a few years ago and brought in Cheque 
Truncation. This is a good example of adaptability coupled with evolution.  
 
Way Forward  
14.  Let me flag a few aspects, which apply to any payment service provider 
and products, and may need to be examined going forward.  
i.  Performance  Assessment:  As  I  look  at  the  landscape  of  retail  payment 
systems, the question of whether we have too many products/variants could 
be contemplated. Products that have outlived its utility could be eased out. 
The process of consolidation, exit route for products and players should be 
actively pursued. May be markets/users themselves could take care of this. 
It  is  also  useful  to  make  the  systems  inter-operable  to  harness  their  true 
potential. 
ii. Customer Grievance Redressal Mechanism: (a) The e-BAAT programmes 
and the recent media workshops that RBI has conducted reveal one striking 
Keynote  Address  by  Shri  B.  P.  Kanungo,  Deputy  Governor,  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  NPCI  National 
Payments Excellence Awards function, Mumbai, on May 29, 2018. Inputs received from the Department of 
Payment & Settlement Systems are acknowledged. 
feature.  Lack  of  consumer  awareness  not  just  on  the  various  payment 
options  and  features  available,  but  even  on  the  grievance  redressal 
mechanisms available. This illiteracy transcends across all geographies and 
regions, not just rural or semi-urban, north or south and is equally true of the 
staff at the front desks of bank branches.  Are we doing enough to educate 
the public? Should it be the responsibility of the regulator alone? The answer 
is  no.  Let  us  all  strive  to  build  consumer  awareness  consciously  and 
rigorously. An informed customer is a crucial cog in the payment ecosystem.  
(b) We get many complaints related to failure of transactions. In our country, 
when new users are being initiated into digital financial transactions, if their 
early experience is less than wholesome, they are put off, and fall back on 
non-digital means. It is imperative that we harness technology to ensure this. 
Payment systems must ensure 100% accuracy.  
(c) While we are on the subject of consumers, let me also highlight the need 
for effective redressal mechanisms. While an elaborate machinery is in place 
for redressing banking-related customer complaints, the same cannot be said 
about redressal of complaints in the digital space and need to be put in place. 
Member  institutions  and  payment  service  providers  must  strengthen  their 
grievance  redressal  mechanism  to  handle  complaints,  which  should  be 
transparent, easy and effective. 
 
15.  The Reserve Bank has been placing its Vision for payment systems in 
the public domain right from 2001. Work on the next vision document for 
the  ensuing  period  has  now  commenced.  The  future  will  hold  more 
challenges  and  the  time  would  be  ripe  for  consolidation  as  also  growth.  
RBI  has  always  favoured  competition  and  innovation  in  every  field 
including  payments  systems.  Allowing  non-banks 
the  payment 
Keynote  Address  by  Shri  B.  P.  Kanungo,  Deputy  Governor,  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  NPCI  National 
Payments Excellence Awards function, Mumbai, on May 29, 2018. Inputs received from the Department of 
Payment & Settlement Systems are acknowledged. 
into 
ecosystem was done to foster this with permission given to non-banks to 
issue  PPIs,  establish  while  label  ATMs,  innovation  and  competition  has 
gathered  momentum.  This  will  guide  the  regulatory  philosophy  in  the 
coming years also. 
16. 
In  addition  to  issues  highlighted  above,  we  have  also  been  receiving 
inputs  for  the  road  map  for  payment  systems  over  the  next  three-four 
years. While we are working on the same, there is a need to debate and 
put in [place the following in the best possible manner. They are–  
a.  Robust data collection, big data analysis and analytics framework for 
creating benchmarks.  
b.  Platforms for industry wide sharing of fraud data.  
c.  Need  for  Self-Regulatory  Organisations  amongst  various  industry 
sectors  
d.  Security standards for mobile payments, including Internet of Things’ 
devices and security aspects of social networks based payments. 
e.  Leveraging block chain or distributed ledger technology. 
f.  Encouraging  contact  less  payments,  including  through  QR  code, 
tokenisation. 
g.  Innovation through regulatory sandbox. 
 17.  Last but not the least, the payment systems in India which, as indicated 
earlier  -  are  amongst  the  best  in  the  world.  This  has  happened  only 
because of the collaborative efforts of all stake holders.  RBI, on its part 
has always followed a consultative process with all the stakeholders while 
framing 
innovation  must  be 
encouraged, the regulator has to be mindful of stability of the system. For 
regulations.  While  competition  and 
Keynote  Address  by  Shri  B.  P.  Kanungo,  Deputy  Governor,  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  NPCI  National 
Payments Excellence Awards function, Mumbai, on May 29, 2018. Inputs received from the Department of 
Payment & Settlement Systems are acknowledged. 
example, dilution of KYC, AML framework can seriously undermine public 
confidence in the system itself and must be eschewed.  
18.  The  spirit  to  leverage  technological  innovation  to  safely  and  securely 
bridge the gap in payment systems should continue to be our watchword. 
If today’s awards of excellence is any indication, I am optimistic that the 
future is bright. Let us not be a part of the future – let us create the future 
and make it successful. 
19.  My  congratulations  to  the  winners  of  award  today.  The  award  should 
goad  them  to  further  excellence  and  inspire  others  to  create  a  payment 
system that is safe, secure, efficient, convenient and best in the world. 
I wish NPCI will play a stellar role in achieving this. 
 
Thank you.  
Keynote  Address  by  Shri  B.  P.  Kanungo,  Deputy  Governor,  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  NPCI  National 
Payments Excellence Awards function, Mumbai, on May 29, 2018. Inputs received from the Department of 
Payment & Settlement Systems are acknowledged. 
