John  Iannis  Mourmouras:  Some  reflections  on  post-globalisation
and Trump's trade war
Keynote speech by Professor John Iannis Mourmouras, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Greece,
at a conference jointly organised by the Society of International Economic Law and the European
University of Cyprus, Nicosia, 14 April 2018.
Your Excellency, Ambassador Mavroyiannis, 
Former Minister, Professor Flogaitis, 
 Esteemed colleagues, 
Dear students, 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
First of all, I would like to thank the organisers, the Society of International Economic Law and the
European University of Cyprus for the kind invitation to address a conference that features such
a dynamic group of participants, comprising distinguished Professors, but also young scholars
from the legal profession with promising futures. It is the second time in the recent past that I am
addressing a law conference. The first time was a speech on the future of the Economic and
Monetary Union (June 2016) addressed to members of the Committee on International Monetary
Law  of  the  International  Law  Association  (MoComILA)  upon  the  invitation  of  my  good  friend,
Professor Christos Gortsos, Chair of the Board of Directors of the ILA’s Greek branch. In my
keynote speech today, I will discuss the issue of globalisation and its diminishing role in today’s
world,  an  era  that  has  become  known  as  post-globalisation  and  also  talk  about  the  worrying
prospect of a global trade war and its implications.
After a brief introduction presenting the waves of globalisation throughout history, I will present
my hypothesis on the future of globalisation and whether it has come to an end. The third section
of my speech relates to the economic aspect of post-globalisation, that is, its economic effects
with  particular  emphasis  on  trade  and  finance.  The  fourth  section  addresses  the  aspect  of
politics  and  security  in  the  new  multipolar  world  as  regional  poles  thrive.  The  fifth  section
discusses the adverse distributional effects of globalisation. The sixth section takes a closer look
into the populist phenomenon as a reaction to globalisation, particularly in our continent, Europe.
In the final section of my speech, I discuss the prospect of a global trade war being triggered by
the latest unilateralist moves and shift in the United States’ trade policy under President Donald
Trump.
1. Introduction
 In order to set the background for my speech today, we are now at an inflection point for the
process  of  globalisation,  which  started  in  the  late  19th  century.  A  lot  has  been  said  about
globalisation.  Some  consider  it  a  curse,  others  a  blessing.  Two  noteworthy  quotes  are  the
following:
 “The US basically wrote the rules and created the institutions of globalisation.” (Joseph Stiglitz) 
“It has been said that arguing against globalisation is like arguing against the laws of gravity.”
(Kofi Annan)
To begin with, a little bit of history: The first wave of globalisation, from 1870 to 1913, was linked
to colonialism, industrialisation and substantial gains in productivity from cross-border linkages
 1 / 26
BIS central bankers' speeches
with steam-powered rail and shipping, which considerably lowered trade costs and eased the
movement  of  goods.  This  wave  collapsed  abruptly  as  the  world  descended  into  war.  In  the
interwar  period  with  the  1929  Great  Depression,  economies  resorted  to  inward-focused
measures, erecting trade barriers; isolationism and protectionism were responsible for about half
of the decline in global trade. The second wave followed after the end of World War II, when a
new rules-based global order based on multilateral agreements and financial institutions such as
the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, the OECD, NATO, and the European Economic
Community,  which  united  the  old  enemies  of  the  war,  France  and  Germany.  The  US  dollar
gained a dominant role as an anchor after the 1944 Bretton Woods conference, where the Allies
decided that the US dollar, backed by gold, would be the international reserve currency to which
exchange rates would be fixed.
The third and last wave of globalisation dates from the early 1990s, as shown in Figure 1. This
wave  of  globalisation  following  the  end  of  the  Cold  War  and  the  collapse  of  communism  has
been marked by increased international integration, economic growth driven by increased global
trade  flows,  and  the  predominance  of  supranational  institutions,  such  as  the  World  Trade
Organisation (WTO), the North American Free Trade Association (NAFTA), and the World Bank,
in the global multilateral order based on the rule of law. Trade liberalisation has been a key driver
of  global  GDP  growth  over  the  past  decades,  allowing  countries  to  import  goods  that  are
relatively more expensive to produce. During the same period, there were dramatic policy shifts
in  advanced  countries  such  as  the  US  and  the  UK  with  tax  cuts  and  deregulation  packages
implemented  by  President  Reagan  and  Prime  Minister  Thatcher,  respectively.  Emerging
countries such as China and India experienced rapid economic growth and entered the global
trade  system.  The  European  Union  became  the  world’s  largest  single  market  for  goods,
services,  capital  and  workers,  while  Japan  witnessed  an  economic  stagnation  driven  by  its
rapidly ageing population.
 2 / 26
BIS central bankers' speeches
  3 / 26
BIS central bankers' speeches
2. My hypothesis on the future of globalisation
The world economy has now entered a new era known as ‘post-globalisation’, which has the
following  features:  higher  rates  of  unemployment  (which  has  been  particularly  acute  in  the
European  continent),  a  surge  in  migration  flows,  and  rising  income  inequality.  These  may  be
attributed to the uneven distribution of the income gains of globalisation across different parts or
countries  of  the  world  and,  most  importantly,  different  segments  of  the  population  within  the
same country.
My hypothesis with regard to the future of globalisation rests on two pillars: Firstly, its adverse
distributional effects are behind the rise in populism, albeit sporadically (thankfully not everywhere
in  the  world),  with  a  leading  example  being  the  US  under  the  sui  generis  populism  of  its
President, Donald Trump. Populism is unfortunately not a US exception; it has been on the rise
also over this part of the little pond, not least in the UK (with the Brexit vote) and Italy (and the win
of  two  populist  parties  at  the  latest  elections),  but  also  in  European  countries  like  Poland,
Hungary, Austria, etc.
The second pillar of my maintained hypothesis is that we are not facing an end of globalisation,
or ‘deglobalisation’ as some may call it, but a new kind of globalisation with new regional poles or
centres that will start to take the place of the existing multilateralist rules-based global order. The
shift towards a multipolar world with strong regional spheres of influence, by definition, implies a
reduced role for globalisation, but I will go into that later. Right now I will focus on specific aspects
of the post-globalisation era; first of all, on the uneven distribution of the benefits of globalisation
which has led to the strong rise of anti-globalist forces of populism in various countries around
the  world.  I  will  also  discuss  the  surge  in  regional  blocs  to  the  detriment  of  existing  global
alliances that have so far helped to stabilise the world and maintain the rules-based global order,
and, finally, the prospect of a global trade war, in light of the latest international developments.
 4 / 26
BIS central bankers' speeches
 3. The economic aspect of post-globalisation
3.1 Distinction between the dimensions of trade and finance
Globalisation  is  a  multidimensional  process  that  affects  all  aspects  of  economic,  political  and
social  life.  For  the  purposes  of  this  speech,  I  would  like  to  make  the  distinction  between  two
different dimensions of globalisation: trade and finance (these are also referred to in the relevant
literature as the de jure and de facto dimensions of globalisation), on which I will provide some
evidence later on. The first relates to economic liberalisation in the sense of increased volumes
of trade through the removal of (de jure) barriers to imports, customs tariffs, etc. The second is
related  to  (de  facto)  cross-border  capital  flows,  foreign  direct  investment,  portfolio  investment
and  income  payments  to  non-residents,  liberalised  through  lower  taxes  on  commercial
transactions and the removal of capital account restrictions.
  5 / 26
BIS central bankers' speeches
 
3.2 On the reduced role of globalisation (evidence)
The dimension of trade
An increasing body of evidence suggests a slowing trend in globalisation for the past decade or
so, at least in terms of trade flows, which are the most basic representation of globalisation.
 As shown in Figure 4 above, according to World Bank and OECD national accounts data, global
flows of trade in goods and services measured as a share of gross domestic product (GDP) had
been on a steady rise until 2008, when they reached their upper limit at about 61% of GDP and
have remained sluggish, having fallen further to 56% in 2016 (from 58% in 2015).
 6 / 26
BIS central bankers' speeches
  7 / 26
BIS central bankers' speeches
The dimension of finance
The emergence of information and communication technology, or ICT, in banking and financial
markets,  along  with  the  liberalisation  of  financial  and  capital  accounts  that  allows  foreign
investors into more countries, unleashed a huge wave of foreign capital movements starting in
the 1980s. Now the rapid pace of financial integration has slowed down, but continues. In order to
get  the  full  extent  of  the  slowdown  in  globalisation,  we  also  need  to  take  into  account  the
dimension of finance, through indicators such as capital flows and FDI.
Cross-border capital flows show that today globalisation is in retreat. Having reached their peak
at 12.4% of GDP in 2007, that is, before the onset of the global financial crisis, global cross-
border capital flows have been following a steady downward trend, to 4.3% in 2016 (see Figure 6
below).
 8 / 26
BIS central bankers' speeches
Indeed,  the  flow  of  new  cross-border  investment  has  been  declining  relative  to  GDP,  which
shows  that  globalisation  might  be  slowing  down.  But  the  stock  of  (existing)  foreign  direct
investment  (or  FDI)  relative  to  global  GDP  shows  that  globalisation  has  not  come  to  a  halt.
Financial globalisation is becoming more stable, given that the more stable FDI flows account for
a larger share of capital flows today than they did a decade ago, and the more volatile cross-
border  lending  flows,  principally  short-term  interbank  lending  and  other  purchases  of  complex
debt  securities  that  were  behind  the  global  credit  bubble,  have  declined  since  2007.  More
countries are participating in capital reallocation and risk-related regulation has become stricter,
reducing the risk of a balance-of-payments crisis.
Between  1990  and  2000,  the  stock  of  foreign  investment  liabilities  relative  to  GDP  more  than
doubled, from 42% of world GDP to 96%. Having almost doubled between 2000 and 2007, to
185% of GDP (the ‘financial market peak’), the stock of foreign investment liabilities as a share of
GDP fell only slightly after the global financial crisis, to $132 trillion or 183% of world GDP (see
Figure 7 below).
 9 / 26
BIS central bankers' speeches
Especially  with  regard  to  financial  services  which  follow  the  rapid  pace  of  technological
innovations, known under the generic term ‘Fintech’, we should expect more integration. Already
available digital technologies reduce transaction costs and increase the ease of capital transfers
(signalling  a  trend  towards  perfect  capital  mobility).  Just  like  the  Internet  revolutionised
communications and the way we work, travel and do business, blockchain technologies, to be
discussed  in  this  afternoon’s  session,  are  expected  to  transform  finance  by  enabling  direct
international money transfers without intermediaries and high transaction costs.
The  emergence  of  global  value  chains  through  intangible  flows  of  services  and  data  and  the
transfer of technology from developed to emerging economies and vice versa should change the
speed of financial globalisation.
 In the post-globalisation era, a country’s technological capabilities should be the most important
determinant  of  its  long-term  development  and  its  ability  to  reap  the  benefits  of  the  broader
financial interconnectedness around the world.
As a result of the rapid knowledge-driven technological change, the face of globalisation will be
very different in the following decades. In the figure below, one can see that global flows of data
have outpaced traditional trade and financial flows (see Figure 8).
 10 / 26
BIS central bankers' speeches
 
 3.3 An increased role for regional poles
The rise of powerful regions is visible in economic terms, as the centre of gravity of the economy
has  been  moving  to  the  east.  This  new  multipolarity  leads  to  new  relationships  of
interdependence between nations, widening their common interests and creating new regional
blocs around the world’s major superpowers. 
The  rise  of  China  is  certainly  indicative  of  the  shift  to  a  multipolar  world  away  from  a  world
exclusively dominated by the economic power of the US, along with its western European allies.
China  has  already  become  an  economic  superpower  and  the  economies  comprising  the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), now the world’s fourth largest trading bloc in
terms of GDP, have significantly benefited from the China’s rise, given that China is ASEAN’s
most important trade partner. 
 Trade  volume  between  China  and ASEAN  countries  hit  a  record  high  in  2017  at  US  $514.8
billion, having recorded the fastest growth pace (13.8%) year-on-year between China and any of
its major trading partners. Total ASEAN trade has increased by about US$1 trillion between 2007
and 2014, with intra-ASEAN trade comprising the largest share of ASEAN’s total trade by partner.
China’s exports to ASEAN countries reached US $279.1 billion in 2017, up by 9% year-on-year,
while  imports  grew  by  20%  year-on-year  to  stand  at  US  $235.7  billion.  China  is  also Africa’s
largest economic partner in terms of goods trade, infrastructure financing and new FDIs.
 11 / 26
BIS central bankers' speeches
   Trade regionalism is also evident in our own continent. Figure 10 shows that half of eurozone
cross-border investment is within the region!
 12 / 26
BIS central bankers' speeches
 4. The aspect of politics and security
Globalisation  has  multiple  benefits.  It  contributes  to  economic  growth,  creates  export-oriented
jobs, helps the transition of more countries to capitalism and democracy, which in turn has a
potential to enhance growth and improve the well-being of people suffering from tyranny and civil
war,  but  also  reducing  the  number  of  weak  or  failed  states  that  host  terrorists  and  criminal
cartels. It has also linked potential adversaries in mutually beneficial relationships, thus making
the prospect of war less appealing and creates hopes for a more peaceful world.
  In  the  post-globalisation  era,  the  universal  push  towards  democratisation  seems  to  have
reached its limits. Some of the most striking examples of the stronger focus on isolationism are
the UK vote in favour of its exit from the EU and the Trump Presidency in the US. Donald Trump
won the US presidential elections by countering his opponent’s more globalist approach with a
campaign  built  on  the  principle  of  “America  first”,  a  slogan  which  was  initially  used  by
Congressman Charles Lindbergh for promoting the case for the US to stay out of the war against
Nazi Germany. In the Brexit campaign, the “Leave” camp appealed to voters by promising to take
back  control  of  their  national  destinies  and  sovereignty  previously  relinquished  to  the
“technocratic” European Union.
Post-globalisation  also  has  the  potential  to  affect  the  existing  global  governance  system
comprising  institutions,  rules  and  alliances,  which  have  underpinned  global  prosperity  since
World  War  II.  One  such  institution  is  the  164-member  World  Trade  Organisation,  the
cornerstone of the multilateral trading system. The WTO has seen its stature diminish lately and
now faces an uncertain future, partly also as a result of rising protectionist trade practices and
interventionist economic policies (as opposed to free market policies) that are even adopted by
some of the world’s great powers, circumventing the multilateral system’s rules and bypassing
the  WTO’s  central  role  as  an  arbitrator  in  global  trade  conflicts.  Yesterday’s  sessions  on
contemporary issues in the WTO and the institutions and governance of international economic
law offered some useful insights into the future of the organisation, that are particularly poignant
at this turning point for globalisation.
The economic and political expansion of regional poles such as China has marked a shift away
from  the  conventional  US  hegemony  and  towards  authoritarianism  around  the  world,  e.g.  in
Turkey. The third globalisation era following the end of the Cold War has indeed been a time of
unprecedented stability under America’s primacy. China has already demonstrated that it seeks
a more visible role on the world stage and wants to put itself at the heart of globalisation – as
 13 / 26
BIS central bankers' speeches
outlined  in  President  Xi’s  speech  to  the  World  Economic  Forum  in  Davos  a  year  ago.  This
rhetoric has been supported by China’s ‘Belt and Road Initiative’, which has received more than
$50 billion in financing since its inception in 2013. Another major project is China’s ASEAN Silk
Road, the high-speed rail line expected to run from Kunming to Singapore and run through Laos,
Thailand, Malaysia and Singapore. Despite geopolitical tensions arising from China’s claims over
the South China Sea and the authoritarian regime in North Korea, ASEAN unity has largely been
restored  as  more  countries  have  either  warmed  to  China  or  at  least  indicated  a  greater
acceptance  of  its  clout  against  the  background  of  reduced  US  commitment  and  the  latest
unilateralist  decisions  by  President  Trump.  It  is  clear  that  the  modern  distortions  in  the  world
economy and disruptions in the global order need to be addressed through close cooperation
and maintained regional balances of power, rather than bilaterally. Just a quick note here on the
alarming increase in Chinese military spending: it has now exceeded US$400 billion dollars, i.e. it
has  doubled  in  ten  years,  and  to  give  you  a  point  of  reference:  Russia’s  military  spending  is
estimated at around $200 billion and that of the United States at US$600 billion.
  Looking  at  the  other  major  geopolitical  pole,  tensions  between  Russia  and  the  West  (US,
Canada,  EU)  are  as  high  as  they  have  been  for  years. A  fortnight  ago,  we  saw  the  largest
coordinated  expulsion  of  Russian  diplomats  since  the  Cold  War  from  more  than  twenty
countries, members of NATO and the EU, as a retaliatory measure against the use of a Russian
nerve agent in the UK, violating the prohibition of chemical weapons under the 1997 Chemical
Weapons Convention, an international convention that Russia had agreed to and signed. Or the
recent blow-for-blow developments unfolding in Syria, a joint attack of the US, the UK and France
was  launched  last  night  and  the  rest  of  the  world  is  following  with  grave  concern  about  what
comes next.
5. On the adverse distributional effects of globalisation
 Before coming to perhaps more boring economic data and figures, let me make a short pause
here for a joke, which actually shows that economists and lawyers have lots in common!
 A university committee was selecting a new dean. They had narrowed the candidates down to a
mathematician,  a  statistician  and  a  lawyer.  Each  was  asked  this  ‘tricky’  question  during  this
interview. How much is ‘two plus two’? The mathematician immediately answered, “Four”. The
statistician also answered almost immediately, “Four, plus or minus two percent (the statistical
error)”. Finally, the lawyer stood up and motioned silently for the committee members to gather
close to him and in an emotional tone he replied: “How much do you want ‘two plus two’ to be?”
By the way, this could also be an economist’s answer to the same question!
 5.1 World income inequality
The globalisation process has brought prosperity to large parts of the world’s population, lifting
more  than  500  million  people  out  of  poverty  in  developing  countries.  But  the  world  has
concurrently  experienced  a  significant  rise  in  inequality.  Since  1980,  income  inequality  has
increased  rapidly  in  North  America  and  Asia,  increased  more  moderately  in  Europe,  and
stabilised at very high levels in the Middle East, Africa and Brazil, as shown in the following figure
(see Figure 12).
  14 / 26
BIS central bankers' speeches
In other words, the distribution of the benefits of globalisation has been uneven and unbalanced
between various parts of the world. Rising inequality is obviously a global phenomenon, with wide
variability  despite  similar  experiences  with  globalisation  and  technology.  Even  in  advanced
countries, there have been parts of the population that have not been able to reap the rewards of
globalisation,  also  known  as  the  ‘left-behind’.  Strong  income  growth  for  a  large  share  of  the
world’s population in poor countries, and especially the recent growth of a wealthier middle class
in  China,  has  been  accompanied  by  the  stagnation  of  incomes  across  the  lower  and  middle
classes in some advanced countries, e.g. the US. According to World Inequality Lab (WID) data,
the United States has become the most unequal country, surpassing in 2007 the inequality peak
recorded in 1928. The ‘superrich’ of the US, or the group of people belonging to the top 1% of
income in the US, now hold 20% of the country’s national income up from 11% of the national
income in 1980. At the same time, there has been a dramatic collapse in the income share of the
bottom 50%, which had 21% of income in 1980, falling to 13% in 2016 (see Figure 13).
 15 / 26
BIS central bankers' speeches
 5.2 Persistent economic divergences in Europe
The  European  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  (EMU)  was  expected  to  foster  greater
macroeconomic convergence on the basis of nominal and fiscal indicators of harmonisation, that
is, inflation, long-term interest rates, exchange rate stability, the fiscal deficit, and the government
debt  to-GDP-ratio.  However,  the  euro  area  sovereign  debt  crisis  has  exposed  trends  of
economic divergence. While there has been nominal convergence of inflation and interest rates,
there  is  still  evidence  of  divergence  in  relation  to  GDP  per  capita,  unemployment  rates,  and
current account balances.
Real convergence of per capita income levels has not occurred among the original euro area
members since the advent of the common currency. Income convergence stagnated in the early
years of the common currency and has reversed in the wake of the global economic crisis.
In contrast with countries in the core of the eurozone with high GDP per capita and relatively low
unemployment led by Germany, countries in the periphery, of which four have had to undergo
year-long  economic  adjustment  programmes,  have  large  debt  burdens,  high  unemployment
rates  and  experienced  drastic  declines  in  their  standards  of  living  as  a  result  of  austerity
measures  which  dampened  economic  activity  and  increased  social  hardship  undermining
economic and political stability. Germany, the Netherlands and Luxembourg record sizeable and
persistent current-account surpluses, while periphery countries have had a tendency for current-
account deficits, as shown in Figure 14.
 16 / 26
BIS central bankers' speeches
The convergence machine has brutally stopped in the southern part of the EU and has moved
into reverse in Greece, Portugal and Spain, whereas in Italy it has been falling behind since the
early 1990s.
Regional unemployment rates since 2008 show that labour markets in the Spanish and Greek
regions have been hardest hit. According to Eurostat data as at April 2017, five Greek regions
(Ipeiros, Dytiki Ellada, Thessalia, Sterea Ellada and Kriti) experienced falls in their employment
rates between 2006 and 2016 that were greater than 10 percentage points; the largest was 11.9
percentage points in Kriti. Among all 28 EU regions where the fall exceeded 4 percentage points,
20 were in Greece and Spain (10 each), while five others were also in euro-periphery countries:
two in Italy, one in Portugal, one in Ireland and there was also one here in Cyprus. Germany was
the only country where unemployment rates have declined in all regions since 2008.
 17 / 26
BIS central bankers' speeches
6. The rise of pupulism
6.1 Populism and economic globalisation
The  existing  version  of  globalisation  is  a  very  easy  scapegoat  and  has  often  been  seen  as
synonym to job losses, income inequality, social injustice, the erosion of national identities and
local traditions, as well as low standards in terms of the protection of the environment, labour
safety and personal data (privacy) and lax fiscal policies, with the pre-dominance of all-powerful
multinational  corporations  aiming  at  maximum  profit. At  this  point,  I  have  a  few  remarks  as  a
macroeconomist  in  favour  of  free  trade.  Trade  and  commercial  exchanges  in  general  are
associated by their very nature with job displacement and have an impact on the distribution of
income that may result in the loss of income for some population groups.
As part of the process of globalisation, international trade may come in contrast to established
norms in a domestic economy. Popular discontent has been targeted at economic globalisation,
choosing to disregard the economic benefits arising from the globalisation process. It is true that
it is very easy to blame trade for effects that in reality may be more attributed to technological
advances  and  the  spread  of  automation. According  to  the  IMF,  only  around  a  quarter  of  the
overall  decline  in  the  labour  share  of  income  that  occurred  in  advanced  economies  between
1990  and  2015  was  due  to  increased  globalisation,  while  around  half  can  be  attributed  to
technological  change.  The  picture  is  different  when  it  comes  to  emerging  economies,  where
participation in global value chains was the key driver of declines in labour shares. As shown in
the following figure (Figure 15), populism is not a recent phenomenon, but has been on the rise
 18 / 26
BIS central bankers' speeches
over the past decades.
 The populist phenomenon has been particularly triggered by the discontent of the so-called “left-
behind” of the globalisation process, i.e. those who have failed to fully benefit from past economic
growth. In Europe, the populist phenomenon is mainly fed by immigration fears and the shock
caused by the massive refugee influxes from war-torn countries bordering the European Union. 
Especially  with  regard  to  the  migration  crisis,  it  is  one  of  the  most  contentious  aspects  of
globalisation. The share of international migrants among residents of more developed countries
rose  from  less  than  10%  in  2000  to  14%  in  2017.  In  Germany,  international  migrants  now
account for 15% of the population according to UN data (see Table 4 below).
Table  4  Number  of  international  migrants  (millions)  and  migrant  share  of  global  and
national populations in listed countries (2017)
 19 / 26
BIS central bankers' speeches
 20 / 26
BIS central bankers' speeches
 Such  rapid  migration  can  have  disruptive  effects  without  the  appropriate  policies  that  would
address the new challenges. Given the rise of inequality and the emerging cleavage between the
“losers” and the “winners” of globalisation, the political balance of power has changed in many
countries in Europe. Public opinion, which has been turning more towards new political parties
created across Europe, offering a mix of xenophobia and populism, with a notable example being
the Alternative for Germany (AFD), which won 13.3% at the German Federal elections, as the
third  biggest  party.  The  populist  phenomenon  has  been  reinforced  by  public  opinion
dissatisfaction  with  traditional  political  parties,  a  strong  decline  in  trust  in  the  EU  and  a
generalised lack of interest in politics as indicated by the very low voter turnout in elections over
the past decades. As shown in Figure 16 below, the rise in populism in Europe over two decades
has been more than four-fold, from below 5% in the late 1980s to more than 20% in 2011–2015.
 
6.2 Recent examples of European populism
As populist parties win a rising share of the electorate, but not the overwhelming majority of votes
in national elections, there has been a repeated pattern of inconclusive electoral results in many
EU countries over the past few years. As a result, government formation has become even more
difficult, but even in countries with a strong tradition of coalitions such as Germany!
Italy
Following  the  unprecedented  long-drawn  negotiations  for  the  formation  of  a  coalition  in  Berlin,
Italy is now at a political standstill, facing a drawn-out period of political consultations between the
 21 / 26
BIS central bankers' speeches
President of the Republic and the parliamentary groups to form a coalition. The lack of clarity
around governments’ actions particularly in terms of their fiscal and trade policies has increased
downside  risks  to  trade  and  growth.  Two  Eurosceptic  and  strongly  anti-establishment  parties
have come out as the two biggest parties, the centre-right League (having won up to 50% in the
wealthy north) and the 5 Star movement (winner of more than 50% in the troubled south, where
poverty rates have increased by half since the crisis). The classic political division between ‘right-
wing’ and ‘left-wing’ variants of populism does not apply in this case. The League’s opposition to
globalisation mostly focuses on resentment against foreigners, whereas the 5 Star movement
mostly  appealed  to  voters  by  proposing  a  universal  basic  income  for  all.  Despite  their  major
political  and  economic  differences,  the  two  parties  might  form  an  all-populist  government  and
ultimately  manage  to  completely  wipe  mainstream  parties  off  the  electoral  map  of  Italy.  We
should  not  take  this  prospect  lightly,  as  Italy  can  be  seen  as  a  miniature  representation  of
Europe.
UK
Another disguised version of populism taking advantage of the Brexit prospect can be seen in the
promise for broad-scale renationalisation, which would mean a return to the 1970s, by the British
opposition party leader, who has announced his intention to return to the model of nationalisation
of banks, water industries, transport etc. through the back door. Based on the pretext of market
failures  identified  in  their  privatisation,  full  government  control  of  such  industries  would  be
disastrous for the UK economy and the world, with a ‘megatone’ effect, 10 times bigger than
Brexit. 
In Austria, a far-right party forms part of the government coalition and in Hungary, the right-wing
eurosceptic, populist Viktor Orban has been elected once again to lead his country. Mr Orban
has focused on a message against migration and the need to protect Hungary’s interests from
what he perceives as outside interference from the EU and the UN, for instance! In Poland, the
populist President has caused trouble with ignoring the rule of law and trampling on democratic
principles. In light of all the above, it is clear that populism is no longer a marginalised trend, but
is coming increasingly into the mainstream. 
Section 7 Trump’s trade war
7.1 Some figures on Trump’s trade war
Coming now to the prospect of a global trade war, on 23 March, the US President decided to
impose tariffs on imports from some countries, including China, of steel at 25% and of aluminium
at 10% on national security grounds which are estimated by the Peterson Institute to cover $46.2
billion of US imports from China in 2017 (see Figure 18a). This justification is carefully chosen
given that national security considerations are explicitly exempted from trade issues over which
the WTO dispute settlement mechanism is competent. The US also threatened tariffs on other
Chinese  products  estimated  to  be  worth  US  $150  billion.  US  moves  have  already  provoked
retaliatory  measures  by  China,  which  announced  it  will  impose  retaliatory  tariffs  targeting  a
limited number of American goods, which would cover an estimated $49.8 billion of US exports to
China (see Figure 18b).
 22 / 26
BIS central bankers' speeches
 At the moment, the proposed tariffs will apply to less than 7% of total US imports and, according
to calculations by Fitch, their impact on China’s economy will knock a mere 0.3% off China’s
GDP growth rate (China’s GDP growth target this year is 6.5%). 
An escalation into a trade war is thus a real danger and it could likely have significant negative
effects on global activity, raise price pressures given that trade wars are stagflationary (meaning
that they simultaneously damage growth and stimulate inflation) and could spill over into broader
 23 / 26
BIS central bankers' speeches
international tensions, and there is always danger of an intensification in trade frictions in the next
downturn (be it US or global). 
Both countries’ lists are, for now, just threats. Over the next two months, America’s list will be
open for public consultation (there is no deadline for the tariffs to come into force). China has
said that it will wait for America to move. China’s President Xi seems to have offered an olive
branch  to  the  US  President.  In  a  speech  at  a  high-profile  event  last  Tuesday  he  promised
increased imports, accelerated access to China’s insurance and other financial sectors, lower
tariffs  (e.g.  on  imported  cars)  and  greater  protection  for  intellectual  property,  which  is  the  hot
potato in the US-China trade fight. 
7.2 The reasons behind President Trump’s decisions and why he is wrong
President  Trump’s  decisions  confirm  his  long-standing  protectionist  ‘America  First’  agenda,
based on a desire to protect US workers and specific US industries. He also claims that the US
tariff  list  was  drawn  up  in  response  to  China’s  alleged  theft  of  American  firms’  intellectual
property from outsourcing the production of myriads of goods to China. Take for instance my
iPhone: it has been designed and developed by Apple in California, but its assembly takes place
in China. Now the Americans accuse China of stealing the design of their technology. But the
question is why do they outsource their production in the first place? Copying technology is not
new in world history. It is how Japan became a global force in car production, copying Mercedes
and  Ford  production  and  now  produces  better  cars  than  the  Germans  and  the  Americans
(Toyota). And that was an era when there was no outsourcing from either Germany or the US. 
So why is the Trump Administration really introducing such protectionist measures? Trump is the
first post-war US president to challenge the conventional wisdom that the global economy has
enjoyed unprecedented prosperity thanks to free trade and the free movement of capital. To be
more precise, President Trump is pursuing two irreconcilable objectives: on the one hand, he
wants to eliminate the US trade deficit in general and, in particular, its US$375 billion trade deficit
with China and, on the other hand, he is also pursuing an expansionary budget policy. President
Trump has introduced tax cuts that will increase the budget deficit by US$1.5 trillion over the next
decade and approved a congressional bill that will increase public spending by US$300 billion
over the next two years, according to the Congressional Budget Office (CBO). 
Trump seems to think that trade wars are easy to win, but the history of trade wars has shown
us  that  they  have  no  winners.  The  most  famous  example  of  the  self-defeating  effects  of
protectionism is the Tariff Act of 1930, which raised tariffs on over 20,000 goods [average tariffs
went  up  from  38%  to  45%,  and  the  effective  tariff  rate  rose  from  14%  to  20%].  It  was  first
conceived when the US economy was still growing and had full employment, but entered into
effect a year after the economic downturn had begun. The US’s trade partners were quick to
respond with their own tariffs and a global trade war broke out in 1931. World trade fell by a third,
with dire effects on the global economy. In the case of the US, American exports fell by 60% from
1929 to 1933 and this exacerbated the Great Depression. The tariffs were repealed in 1934. After
this catastrophic experience, the US became a strong supporter of free trade, helping to create
and strengthen the WTO rules-based system. 
Another analogy is when Germany and France imposed tariffs on US chicken imports in the early
1960s,  starting  what  became  known  as  the  ‘chicken  wars’.  The  United  States  retaliated  by
imposing  tariffs  on  an  array  of  goods,  including  French  brandy,  light  trucks  and  Volkswagen
buses. Despite pressures, the Europeans did not give in, and the US was thus considered the
loser of that war. 
A more recent tariff episode was under the Obama Administration. In 2009, President Obama
phased in increased tariffs on imports of Chinese car and light truck tires (35% in the first year,
30%  in  second,  25%  in  third).  China’s  WTO  complaint  against  them  was  rejected,  so  China
retaliated with tariffs on US chicken imports (ranging from 50–105%), which reduced US poultry
 24 / 26
BIS central bankers' speeches
exports by $1 billion (a 90% collapse). And as regards the argument on jobs and the domestic
industry, the winners from the 2009 tire safeguards were alternative foreign exporters (in Asia
and Mexico), while domestic US tire producers were secondary beneficiaries. 
That is why the liberal consensus is that trade wars are bad for everybody. Another reason why
Trump is wrong is his misleading focus on trade deficits; it overlooks the fact that the total trade
deficit reflects the shortfall in savings by households, businesses and the government, i.e. the
excess  of  their  combined  spending  over  their  income.  A  necessary  condition,  therefore,  for
narrowing the US trade deficit is to achieve a higher savings rate relative to the US investment
rate. At  a  time  when  the  level  of  savings  is  very  low,  the  prospective  deterioration  in  the  US
current account deficit of around US$150 billion a year (due to the spending bill signed into law
last month) will almost inevitably reduce the overall level of savings. This will also cause the trade
deficit to widen, bringing to mind the Reagan Administration, under which the US experienced
twin deficits, i.e. a fiscal and a current account deficit. 
If tariffs are imposed to a large extent and they are persistent, a trade war will break out, which
may  lead  to  competitive  devaluations  between  the  US  and  China.  We’ve  seen  all  this  before
through currency wars and beggar-thy-neighbour policies. 
In economic theory and history, rising twin deficits may only be resolved by a stronger currency,
as was the case of the stronger dollar in the 1980s under President Reagan and post-German
reunification with a stronger Deutschmark (see Figure 18). 
 Today, economic theory and investment portfolio developments point to a strong US dollar, but
measures  of  protectionism  (the  opposite  pole  to  globalisation)  focusing  on  the  domestic
economy  self-interest  and  not  taking  account  of  the  interconnections  in  a  global  economy,
negatively affect the US dollar exchange rate. 
The US current account deficit can be funded by countries with large current-account surpluses
coming from private sector investors in Japan and Europe, who have been pushed out of their
domestic markets as a result of extensive quantitative easing programmes by their respective
central banks. But, as central banks start tapering their asset purchases and wind down their
unconventional  easing  monetary  policies,  there  is  little  prospect  for  increased  demand. At  the
moment, markets seem to expect that the US President’s trade threats will be negotiated down
in  the  end.  But  if  the  situation  escalates  and  markets  start  to  believe  a  serious  trade  war  is
 25 / 26
BIS central bankers' speeches
imminent, US stock prices could fall further, hurting the US economy, even if President Trump
ultimately doesn’t follow through with his plans.
Conclusion
The US President’s decision to impose higher trade tariffs represents a significant change in US
trade strategy. It has caused widespread fears that a trade war might go unchecked, but markets
seem to hope that further escalation will be avoided. The heightened risk of a transatlantic trade
war, as a result of rising protectionism, is mainly US driven and it is up to President Trump to
show  his  willingness  to  compromise  and  up  to  China  to  keep  taking  actions  to  address  US
grievances. It would be a collective policy failure if the multilateral trade system were to collapse. 
As discussed earlier, this multilateral global order is already undergoing a major transition with
the emergence of strong regional poles. In light of the evidence provided above, I hope that my
maintained hypothesis has convinced you that we are not facing an end of globalisation, but a
new kind of globalisation with new regional poles or centres emerging already. In any event, the
rivalry  between  the  20th  century’s  superpower,  the  United  States,  and  the  21st  century’s
emerging superpower, China, both economically and politically, will shape the post-globalisation
era and decide the future of the entire world. 
Thank you very much for your attention! 
 
 26 / 26
BIS central bankers' speeches
