Joachim Wuermeling: Brexit means Brexit - but what does it mean
for Europe as a financial centre?
Speech  by  Prof  Joachim  Wuermeling,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche
Bundesbank, at the annual reception of the Association of Foreign Banks in Germany, Frankfurt
am Main, 20 June 2018.
 1 Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen
It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  be  able  to  speak  to  you  today  about  the  future  of  Europe  as  a
financial centre after Brexit. There are three aspects which I would particularly like to address.
The first of these is that banks looking to relocate their business to the EU or expand their
presence here after Brexit will be asked to satisfy the same minimum prudential standards
that foreign banks already operating within the Union and domestic institutions are expected
to  comply  with.  At  the  same  time,  we  will  need  to  find  solutions  that  prevent  any
unnecessary additional expense.
My  second  point  is  that  in  future,  institutions  that  conduct  cross-border  business  will  be
heavily dependent on how the respective supervisors oversee third-country institutions – as
they will then be – and how the authorities involved will cooperate internationally.
And third, when considering Brexit, we tend to dwell on the negative side of things and think
about how best to cushion the impact. As important and justified as these considerations
are,  we  nonetheless  need  to  continue  to  press  ahead  with  our  vision  of  a  harmonised
financial market in the EU – a digital financial centre of Europe which offers as yet untapped
potential.
2 Leaving the single market means separate supervisory regimes
Two  years  on  from  the  Brexit  vote,  we  can  only  assume  that  cross-border  economic
relationships look set to face noticeable headwinds going forward. For the financial markets, this
means one thing: the financial services passport is dead.
This immediately raises the question: could it be feasible to have something like a diet version of
the financial services passport, or to perhaps create a range of exceptions?
The clear answer to this is that there cannot be, nor will there be, any permanent exceptions.
Institutions that relocate operations to the EU or expand their presence here following Brexit will
have  to  comply  with  the  same  high  supervisory  standards  that  apply  to  the  institutions  that
already operate here.
This  answer  is  underpinned  by  the  fundamental  belief  that  supervisors  must  be  capable  of
intervening  in  the  business  activities  of  institutions  operating  within  their  own  jurisdiction  at  all
times. This is a sine qua non, and it should not be up for grabs.
At the same time, this credo should not prevent us from thinking about whether, and if so where,
we can cushion any additional operational outlay caused by time pressure.
A transitional period, at least as outlined in principle in March, could help with this. It would lower
the long-term costs of exit by allowing firms to reflect on their options and decide which markets
they want to operate in and which organisational structures would best allow them to strike the
right balance between compliance and profitability. However, we cannot count on there being a
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
transitional period right now, since negotiations could break down at any time.
3 Supervision of future third-country institutions: requirements and cooperation
But whether or not there is a transitional period, one thing is certain: what standards apply to the
future third-country institutions will ultimately boil down to how they are treated by the relevant
supervisor after Brexit and how the authorities will work together in this context. To shed light on
this issue, the SSM has already adopted a whole bundle of supervisory policy stances.
However, in the SSM, our baseline assumption is still the worst case, ie a no-deal scenario. And
judging by recent developments in the United Kingdom, this seems more than appropriate.
With the next meeting of EU heads of state or government fast approaching, it doesn’t look like
solutions to a number of quite fundamental issues concerning the future partnership will be found
any time soon. The border with Northern Ireland is just one of these sensitive topics. This means
that a huge package of agreements would have to be hammered out at the next summit but one
in October, which would then, in turn, have to be reviewed by the parliaments in the shortest of
timeframes. And even if this all went smoothly, it would be no more than a framework that would
have to be fleshed out in detail to forge a future treaty – which would itself take many years. And
because a breakdown in negotiations – and therefore a hard Brexit – remains possible at any
time throughout the entire process, enterprises should be prepared for this.
That is why we banking supervisors are so concerned that a number of banks are easing off in
their efforts to establish a licensed and operational entity in the EU or UK in good time ahead of
March 2019. Let me say in no uncertain terms that these institutions cannot rely on our leniency.
We expect all banks to make provisions for a hard Brexit. And that’s why I would strongly urge all
institutions to make the necessary preparations to keep their business operations running even if
there is a hard Brexit on 29 March 2019. Institutions that submit an application after the end of the
current quarter will find that the likelihood of their licensing procedure being concluded in time will
diminish considerably.
We also expect these applications to satisfy our supervisory policy stances. Let us take a brief
look at the key aspects.
First, there are the principles for authorisation and for governance, risk management and
outsourcing.  In  essence,  the  several  hundred  pages  of  requirements  boil  down  to  this:
“empty shells” will not be permitted. Banks in the euro area must be able to manage all their
material risks independently and locally. To achieve this, they need to have control over their
books and all their positions, and have locally independent governance and control functions
that report to the local board of management – particularly in the areas of risk management,
compliance and internal audit.
That  brings  us  to  the  question  of  booking  models.  Will  back-to-back  hedging  still  be
accepted? Here, the SSM expects banks in the euro area to have sufficient local capacity to
manage at least an evident portion of their euro-denominated business themselves and not
to fully outsource it to other entities within the group. The local entities have to be established
in  the  local  market,  to  ensure  that,  in  the  event  that  other  group  entities  fail,  they  can
participate in the market autonomously. However, we at the Bundesbank naturally see the
economic advantages of back-to-back hedging. To some extent, transactions such as these
serve as a pipeline to international capital resources at other locations.
Some parties are hoping for an overarching supervisory or legal solution to the issue of the
continuity of financial contracts. In response, I warn against relying on us for this, as it is not
so much a supervisory issue as a civil law problem.
One very important issue – and not just for foreign banks – is the supervision of future third-
country  CCPs  from  the  UK.  In  the  Bundesbank’s  view,  there  have  to  be  clear  rules  and
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
safeguards here ensuring that continental European authorities have both sufficient rights to
obtain information and robust powers of intervention in respect of UK CCPs – otherwise, it
seems a relocation to the EU would be all but unavoidable.
 The more we look at the whole issue, the more clearly we can see just how serious the
repercussions  will  be  when  CCPs  we  consider  to  be  systemically  important  leave  our
jurisdiction. Volker Brühl from the Center for Financial Studies gave a systematic summary
of many aspects in a recent study on the topic. He set out and simulated with painstaking
accuracy the implications of problems at a third-country CCP for:
monetary policy transmission in the euro area,
the functioning of our resolution regime,
having recourse to national central banks, especially the Bundesbank, as a lender of
last resort.
These scenarios, over which I would have no supervisory influence whatsoever, fill me with
increasing unease.
 And  if  my  colleague,  Brian  Bussey  from  US  Commodity  Futures  Trading  Commission
(CFTC), stresses that a lead supervisor is crucial, but says the US has more interest in LCH
than  anyone  else  in  the  world,  then  I  think  we  are  already  back  in  third  place.  Given  the
CCP’s systemic importance for the euro area, this would be unacceptable.
 The  ECON  Committee  of  the  European  Parliament  has  recently  taken  an  initial  stance
regarding migration – and here, too, the possibility of relocation continues to play a major
role.
 For us at the Bundesbank, this is not a matter of structural policy or trade issues. We are
competitively minded and neutral. Our mandate is to safeguard price and financial stability,
and these decisions affect this stability in a major way.
These  policy  stances  already  stake  out  a  clear,  transparent  framework  of  expectations  in  the
SSM.
4 The future of Europe as a financial centre
Ladies and gentlemen, as much as we greatly regret the United Kingdom’s decision to leave the
EU, we must nonetheless look forward and consider how financial services can be delivered in
the European Union in the future.
First, we need to observe the consequences of Brexit from the perspective of each individual
bank. Banks have so far avoided making any major changes, not least because they are also
busy coping with large-scale acute challenges and their financial implications. So it is easy to
lose sight of strategic issues. It’s not just Brexit that’s shifting the tectonic plates under banking –
digitalisation and regulation are two other key drivers of change. When traditional structures and
markets are broken up this way, the cake will be redivided – some will lose out, but some will get
a bigger slice. There is a real danger that adhering at all costs to traditional positions in London
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
risks missing out on new opportunities in the EU – though not by everybody: those who don’t will
be the winners. So I would urge you not to lose sight of medium and long-term strategic options.
Second, we also have to consider the repercussions of Brexit in terms of its impact on the EU
financial market as a whole. What we are looking at here is nothing less than the financing of the
European  economy,  especially  at  a  time  when  the  global  economic  and  financial  order  is
becoming  increasingly  shaky.  Earlier  EU  initiatives  –  the  single  financial  market,  the  banking
union, and the capital markets union – all had an inward focus. And with London, Europe had an
international financial centre. This will now change. Hence the question of whether we in the EU
27 should aspire to developing a globally competitive financial centre that is more than the sum of
its parts here in Frankfurt, Paris, Amsterdam or Dublin. François Villeroy de Galhau, the governor
of the Banque de France, recently spoke of an integrated network with centres specialised in
various activities – and I am thinking along the same lines, which include major efforts to harness
digital potential as well.
I would like to help kick off a broad, forward-looking debate surrounding the concept of a digital
financial centre of Europe.
It’s an idea based on three pillars.
First,  a  networking  pillar.  Today,  Europe’s  financial  services  potential  is  spread  over  various
locations. It does not have a cumulative effect. However, for a fully-fledged financial ecosystem to
truly  flourish,  there  needs  to  be  enough  providers  and  users  of  financial  services  in  the  local
market. At present, no European financial centre can tick this box. The continental venues could,
however, tap into an aggregate potential if they were to form a network in which any financial
product can be bought and sold in any quantity at any time, just as you would expect from a
globally competitive financial centre.
The  second  pillar  is  digitalisation.  Financial  centres  in  continental  Europe  need  robust  digital
market  infrastructure  that  leverages  all  the  state-of-the-art  digital  capabilities  –  of  which
distributed  ledger  technology  (DLT)  is  but  one.  Only  then  can  these  centres  overcome
fragmentation and replicate agglomeration effects of physical proximity. The Eurosystem will also
be  expected  to  contribute  here,  seeing  as  it  already  provides  a  key  piece  of  infrastructure  for
payments in the shape of the TARGET system.
These first two pillars create a digital network across European financial centres. But to make
the most of Europe’s potential as a “financial Amazon”, market-driven specialisation will also be
needed as a third pillar. Specialisation can help deliver economies of scale, increase the potential
for innovation, and achieve excellence. In an environment of “coopetition” – a neologism merging
the words cooperation and competition, European financial centres could cooperate, compete
and, at the same time, hone their own areas of expertise. But this is a vision for the future.
It’s a picture of the future that is also very much in our own inherent interest as a central bank,
because the more that financial flows end up where our system is in force, the more we are able
to promote financial and price stability as well as a strong currency.
5 Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen, “Brexit means Brexit” – but at the end of the day, what this means for the
financial centre of Europe is very much up to us.
This  goes  for  those  of  you  who  are  domestic  and  foreign  banks,  for  those  of  you  who  make
policy at the regional, national and European level, and for us as central banks and supervisors.
Now a change of perspective is in order: let’s see Brexit as an opportunity for us, not by naïvely
whitewashing  what  is  a  regrettable  development,  but  by  planning  a  sober  yet  forward-looking
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
model.
Thank you for your attention.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
