  ANNUAL DINNER OF THE CHARTERED INSTITUTE OF 
BANKERS (GHANA) 
ADDRESS BY 
DR. ERNEST ADDISON, 
GOVERNOR, BANK OF GHANA 
THE STATE BANQUET HALL, STATE HOUSE, ACCRA 
DECEMBER 02, 2017 
       The President of the Chartered Institute of Bankers, 
 Chief Executive Officer of the Institute of Bankers, 
Fellows of the Institute,  
Members of the Banking Fraternity, 
Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
 Introduction  
1. Good evening to you all. It is an honour and a great pleasure 
to be here tonight. Not to forget, it is also my first time in my 
role  as  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Ghana  to  address  this 
annual  event  which  brings  the  finest  banking  professionals 
and  other  stakeholders  in  the  financial  industry.  Certainly, 
this joyous occasion should provide us the opportunity to de-
stress from our very busy schedules and a rather challenging 
year for the banking industry.  
 2. We do have sumptuous meals to eat tonight, and while doing 
that, I will crave your indulgence over the next few minutes to 
discuss two key issues deemed critical for the central bank’s 
vision  of  building  stronger  and  resilient  banks  in  the 
economy. These are building a stronger economy for robust 
and 
resilient  banks  and  strenghtening 
the  corporate 
governance  structures  of  our  institutions  within  the  broader 
financial sector plan.  
 1 | P a g e  
  3. We have started seeing some recovery in the economy after 
a  period  of  slow  growth  attributed  to  challenging  domestic 
and  external  conditions,  with  a  sharply  deteriorated  fiscal 
position due to weak revenue mobilisation and unconstrained 
spending  in  the  round  up  to  the  elections.  The  large  fiscal 
imbalance impacted on the current account  balance leading 
to a significant deterioration.  
 4. By the end of 2016, the macroeconomic risks in the economy 
with  inadequate  international  reserves,  a  volatile  exchange 
rate, high inflation and rapid accumulation of public debt was 
a 
source  of 
concern.  These  developments  were 
compounded  by  the  energy  crisis  and  disruptions  in  oil 
production.  The  weak  economy  and  problem  in  the  energy 
sector affected the banking industry with high non performing 
loans.  The  environment  of  high 
inflation  and  high 
depreciation  eroded  the  capital  base  of  banks  in  real  terms 
and coupled with the impact of the required provisioning due 
to  non  performing  loans,  led  to  a  need  for  several  banks 
needing to rebuild their capital buffers. The decline in the real 
capital  base  of  banks  when  macroeconomic  environment  is 
weak  provides  ample  reason  why  macroeconomic  stability 
must  be  of  utmost  priority  for  building  a  strong  and 
sustainable banking sector.   
 2 | P a g e  
  5. Ladies  and  gentlemen,  this  is  exactly  what  the  first  order  of 
business  of 
the  new  government  sought 
to  do.  The 
macroeconomic 
framework  of 
the  2017  budget  was 
anchored  on  unwinding  the  large  economic  imbalances  to 
restore stability.  These included bold policy initiatives aimed 
at  fiscal  consolidation  focusing  on  tightening  expenditure 
controls  and  plugging  revenue  leakages  as  well  as  re-
profiling short-term debt into long-term instruments to create 
some  fiscal  space.  These  were  complemented  by  monetary 
policy  management  strategies  to  lower  inflation  and  ensure 
exchange rate stability.    
 6. The results are clear for all to see: In the year to date, these 
policies  have  started  gaining  roots—inflation  has  fallen  from 
15.4 percent at the end of 2016 to 11.6 in October 2017. As 
a result, the policy rate has been lowered by about 550 basis 
points with commercial bank lending rates also coming down 
by  some  150  basis,  although  banks  are  expected  to  do 
better.  In  addition,  there  has  been  relative  stability  on  the 
foreign  exchange  market  with  the  cedi  depreciating  against 
the US dollar by 4.6 percent since the beginning of the year 
compared  to  the  same  period  average  of  about  17  percent 
depreciation over the last three years. In addition, economic 
growth  is  gradually  rebounding  supported  by  significant 
3 | P a g e  
 improvements 
in  electricity  supply,  higher  crude  oil 
 production  and  some  government  initiatives  targeted  at 
boosting  agriculture  and  manufacturing  activities.  In  the 
second quarter of 2017, real GDP growth was estimated 9.0 
percent  as  compared  with  1.1  percent  same  period  of  2016 
and projected to reach 7.9 percent by end 2017. 
 7. There is no doubt that the current policy debate is about how 
to move from stability to accelerated growth and employment 
generation.  This is the new paradigm shift we are targeting.  
However, Madam President, there is no doubt about the fact 
that  macroeconomic  stability  must  remain  the  necessary 
condition to facilitate  the growth  and development objective. 
For 
instance, 
reduction 
in 
inflation  helps 
to 
reduce 
uncertainty,  and  helps  economic  agents 
to  extract 
information 
from  relative  prices.  This 
leads 
to  more 
investment  and  efficient  resource  allocation  and  higher 
growth.  
 8. Ladies and Gentlemen, strong financial institutions operating 
in  a  stable  macroeconomic  environment  are  the  bedrock  of 
financial  stability.  Such  financial  institutions  typically  have  a 
strong  capital  base  well  aligned  to  their  risk  profile;  with  a 
high  quality  portfolios  of  assets,  high  accounting  standards, 
and robust balance sheets; and they have a culture of timely 
 4 | P a g e  
disclosure  of  information  and  submit  to  the  discipline  of  the 
 market.  Such  institutions  are  less  vulnerable  to  external 
shocks  and  are  therefore  a  source  of  resilience  for  an 
economy.    
 9. Madam  President,  this  year  has  been  quite  challenging  and 
as  supervisors,  we  have  been  working  assiduously  to 
implement measures that would change the recent narrative 
associated  with  the  banking  sector  as  fragile  and  poorly 
supervised.  In  so  doing,  we  have  identified  weak  corporate 
governance practices as one of the underlying causes for the 
challenges facing the sector.  
 10.  Corporate  governance  plays  an 
important 
role 
in 
promoting 
a 
sound 
financial 
system—contributing 
significantly to improving overall performance, not only profits 
but more importantly reputation of banks and credibility of the 
entire 
financial  sector.  Good  corporate  governance 
mechanisms  revolve  around  the  basic  tenets  of  fairness, 
transparency  and  accountability.  Good 
corporate 
governance is critical to the proper functioning of the banking 
sector and the economy as a whole.  
 11.  Ladies and Gentlemen, banking is a business and a good 
business  at  that  but  one  that  demands  integrity  and 
 5 | P a g e  
unquestioned reputation. Let me repeat a story once shared 
 by  a  former  Governor  of  the  Bank  to  this  fraternity.  The 
Goldsmiths,  who  originated  banking,  saw  a  business 
opportunity  after  realizing  that  people  who  deposited  gold 
with  them  only  withdrew  a  fraction  at  a  time,  while  others 
placed  more  deposits.  They  then  deduced  the  possibility  of 
profit making by lending out a proportion of the gold deposits 
and  hoping  that  all  the  gold  would  not  be  recalled  at  the 
same time. 
 12.  But,  the  goldsmiths  were  not  experts  in  the  theory  of 
probability. Hence, their credbility and reputation became the 
most priced asset. They became acutely aware that if at any 
given  time  the  public  lost  confidence  in  their  ability  to 
safeguard  the  deposits,  a  run  on  them  would  bring  certain 
calamity.  Over  time  the  business  of  banking  has  grown  in 
complexity  but  the  basic  tenets  of  credibility  and  reputation 
has  fundamentally  remained  the  same.  Your  own  Institute, 
the  Chartered  Institute  of  Bankers  Ghana  has  as  its  motto, 
Honesty and Integrity.  
 13. 
 All  over  the  world,  the  history  of  banking  crisis  indicates 
that  without  the  public’s  assurance  of  well-capitalized,  liquid 
and  sound  banks,  the  intergrity  of  the  financial  system,  just 
like  the  Goldsmith,  would  be  at  risk.  The  system  would  be 
 6 | P a g e  
unstable,  prone  to  a  run,  resulting  in  closures  and  financial 
 distress  for  depositors.  This  will  spillover  to  economic 
challenges and weaken growth prospects in the long run. 
 14.  Globally, 
there  are  several  examples  of  corporate 
governance failures in the financial sector which had adverse 
economic consequences. Indeed, the global economy is still 
recovering  from  the  contagion  effects  of  the  US  financial 
crises, which occurred about a decade ago.  
 15. 
In  our  own  history,  the  banking  sector  has  witnessed  its 
fair  share  of  corporate  scandals  and  bank  failures.  Looking 
back to the 1980s, the Ghanaian economy experienced one 
of  its  worst  performances  which  spilled  over  to  the  banking 
sector.  Signs  of 
financial  distress  emerged  as  public 
confidence  in  the  financial  sector  waned,  aggravated  by  a 
demonetization  programme,  and  negative  real  interest  rates 
on bank deposits. The loan books of banks became severely 
impaired and eroding the capital base of the affected banks.  
 16.  Over  time,  the  economic  difficulties  coupled  with  poor 
corporate  governance  structures  resulted  in  the  eventual 
collapse  of  four  banks  and  restructuring  of  others.  These 
failures  prompted  the  need  for  extensive  policy  measures 
and 
reforms 
to  strengthen 
the 
legal  and 
regulatory 
 7 | P a g e  
frameworks.  Several 
laws  were  enacted 
to  enhance 
 business  practices  and  risk  management  systems  in  the 
banking  industry.  As  time  progressed,  other  pieces  of 
legislature  were  enacted  in  response  to  the  changing 
dynamics and in line with international standards.  
 17.  Ladies  and  gentlemen,  in  recounting  this  history,  I  am 
seeking  to  draw  attention  to  the  adage  that  ‘history  repeats 
itself’.  Despite  the  improved  regulatory  environment  and 
supervisory frameworks, we have witnessed the resolution of 
two  banks  this  year.  While  no  systemic  challenges  to  the 
financial  sector  arose  from  the  resolution,  it  is  useful  to 
understand  the  underlying  factors  and  reposition  the  sector 
to avoid the same mistakes in the years ahead.  
 18.  Let  me  be  upfront  and  say  that  though  the  failure  of  the 
two  banks  was  due  to  significant  capital  deficiencies,  the 
underlying reason was poor corporate governance practices 
within  these  institutions.  In  this  instance,  we  saw  the 
dominant  role  of  shareholders  who  exerted  undue  influence 
on  management  of  the  banks,  leading  to  poor  lending 
practices.  This  was  also 
reinforced  by  weak 
risk 
management  systems  and  poor  oversight  responsibility  by 
the  boards  of  directors.  Some  of 
the  examples  of 
recklessness that led to the failure of the two banks include: 
 8 | P a g e  
    Co-mingling of the banks’ activities with their related 
holding companies. For instance, one bank was paying 
royalties  for  the  brand  name,  even  at  the  a  that  the 
bank’s financial performance was abysmal and could not 
pay dividends. Interestingly, the royalties were approved 
by  four  (4)  out  of  seven  (7)  members  of  the  Board 
without  the  consent  of  the  other  significant  minority 
shareholders 
including  an 
International  Financial 
Institution. As a result, the international institution placed 
a  notice  on  its  website  abrogating  all  relationships  with 
the  Bank  and  this  led  to  most  of  the  foreign  lenders 
cutting off their credit lines to the Bank and recalling their 
credits  thereby  creating  serious  liquidity  squeeze  to  the 
bank. 
   Also,  very  high  executive  compensation  schemes 
were  being  operated  by  the  affected  banks  which  were 
not  commensurate  with  their  operations.  The  risk  and 
earnings  profile  of  the  banks  could  not  support  the 
compensation schemes. 
   Non-Executive Directors of the banks compromised their 
independence and fiduciary duties to serve as checks on 
Executive  Directors.  This  was  because  rewards  such  as 
 9 | P a g e  
business  class  air  tickets  were  being  granted  to  them 
 annually. 
   Interference  by  Non-Executive  Directors  in  the  day-to-
day  administration  of 
the  banks  weakened 
the 
management  oversight  function  of  executive  directors. 
Some  non-Executive  Directors  were  also  acting  as 
consultants  to  the  same  banks  with  no  clear  mandate, 
which gave rise to conflict of interest situations.   
   Non-adherence  to  credit  management  principles and 
procedures  as  the  banks  were  heavily  exposed  to 
insiders and related parties. There was also no evidence 
of 
interest  payments  on 
these 
investments.  The 
investments were therefore impaired, but some members 
of the Board at the time accepted the responsibility to pay 
off the said amount through a board resolution.  
   Diversion of funds to holding companies and their related 
parties  was  wide-spread.  In  the  case  of  one  Bank, 
placements  could  not  be  traced  to  the  bank’s  records 
though  some  customers  showed  proof  of 
their 
investments with the Bank.  
  10 | P a g e  
  Irregular  board  meeting  also  accounted 
for 
the 
 weaknesses in the board oversight. 
   In all of these cases, one thing was clear, and that is, the 
banks  could  not  delineate  themselves  from  their  past 
practices  as    finance  houses.  They  followed  the  same 
practice  of  borrowing  from  high  net  worth  persons  at  a 
very high costs without any plans to bring  themselves in 
line with the industry norm.  
 19.  Certainly, it is for these numerous reasons that the central 
bank  is  seeking,  among  others,  to  enhance  corporate 
governance practices as well as risk assessment frameworks 
across  all  banking 
institutions.  This  will  contribute 
significantly  to  improve  overall  performance  as  well  as  the 
reputation  of  banks  and  credibility  of  the  entire  financial 
sector.  
 20.  Some  may  ask,  what  were  the  Banks  supervisors  doing 
during all this time with such gross violations going on in the 
banking sector. 
 21.  Upholding 
the 
highest 
ethical 
standards 
and 
professionalism 
in 
the  performance  of  our  supervision 
function  cannot  escape  my  watch  going  forward,  and  I 
 11 | P a g e  
demand same from you all. We shall employ an appropriate 
 mix  of  both  on-site  supervision  and  off-site  surveillance  to 
implement  the  Risk  Based  Supervision  Framework.  The 
Bank’s  supervision  examiners  have  built  capacity  on  the 
subject and will assess banks’ risk management frameworks 
for  effectiveness,  responsiveness  and  timeliness  in  dealing 
with  risks,  deploying  resources  and  in  protecting  depositors’ 
funds.  
 22.  As  part  of  the  Bank  of  Ghana’s  regulatory  mandate,  we 
are  working  on  corporate  governance  directives  for  the 
banking sector. Among others, these directives will focus on 
oversight responsibilities of the Board of Directors and bank 
management,  prioritize  risk  management  systems,  and 
ensure independent audit roles, among others. In particular, 
the  guidelines  will  impose  the  tenure  of  Chief  Executive 
Officers  and  Non-Executive  Directors  of  banks,  the  size  of 
bank Boards, the retiring age for Directors and  disclosure of 
attendance  at  Board  meetings  by  Directors  in  annual 
accounts.   
 23.  These  initiatives  are  underscored  by  the  fact  that  banks 
need  sound  corporate  governance  practices  to  build 
public trust and confidence, as well as operational credibility. 
Without these, banks stand the chance of eroding public trust 
 12 | P a g e  
and  ultimately  jeopardizing  shareholders  investments  and 
 depositors’  funds  and  most  importantly  weakening  economy 
activity.     
 24.  Another  guideline  which  will  strengthen  corporate 
governance  structures  in  the  banking  sector  is  that  on  
financial  publications.  This  has  been  updated  to  include 
detailed corporate governance disclosures by banks and the 
inclusion  of  provisions  on  corporate  governance  under  the 
Banks  and  Specialized  Deposit  taking  Institutions  Act,  2016 
(Act  930).  The  guide  for  financial  publications  seeks  to 
ensure  that  International  Financial  Reporting  Standards 
(IFRS)  are  adopted  in  the  preparation  and  presentation  of 
financial  statements.  It  also  seeks  to  clarify  and  provide 
direction as well as bring uniformity in the financial reporting 
process across the industry.   
 25. 
In  addition,  the  Bank  has  issued  the  Basel  Capital 
Requirement  Directive  (CRD) 
for 
feedback 
from 
the 
banking 
industry  as  part  of  preparations 
towards 
the 
implementation of the Basel Capital Accord. All these seek to 
achieve fairness, transparency and accountability, which are 
core tenets of good corporate governance.  
  13 | P a g e  
26.  These notwithstanding, there is also a role for the financial 
 institutions  even  as  the  central  bank  updates  the  role 
corporate  governance  plays  in  its  approach  to  supervision. 
Financial  institutions  must  embrace  these  efforts  with  a 
strong  internal  governance  culture  committed  to  the  highest 
standards of integrity, transparency and proper controls.       
 2018 and beyond  
27.  Madam  President,  in  the  year  ahead,  our  banks  will  be 
Basel  II/III  compliant.  As  we  speak,  all  banks  have  the 
Capital  Requirement  Directive  and  I  implore  your  active 
participation in the implementation process.  
 28.  Following  the  passage  of  the  BSDI  Act,  2016  (Act  930), 
the  Bank  of  Ghana  has  reviewed  existing  directives  and 
regulations  to  align  with  the  Act.  This,  together  with  the 
Internal Capital Adequacy Assessment Process (ICAAP), 
will  strengthen  the  supervisory  review  process,  which  is  a 
requirement under Pillar II of the Basel accord.  
 29.  We  are  also  driving  the  disclosure  requirements  in 
conformity  with  Pillar  III  of  the  Basel  accord  to  enhance 
appropriate 
information 
flow 
to  market  participants. 
Consequently,  the  Bank  will  ensure  strict  adherence  to  the 
 14 | P a g e  
Guide for Financial Publication and the BSDI Act particularly 
 with  regard  to  publication  of  financial  statements  (both 
audited and unaudited), and other regulatory breaches.  
 30. 
In 2018, Banks will be required to strenghten their capital 
base  with 
the 
revision 
to 
the  minimum  capital 
requirement.  The  GH¢400.00  million  minimum  capital 
requirement is in line with the broader financial sector reform 
plan  which  seeks  to  develop  and  strengthen  the  banking 
sector to support the government’s transformational agenda. 
We  will  aggressively  ensure  that  banks  comply  with  this 
directive. 
 31. 
In  view  of  this,  we  shall  start  reviewing  banks’  capital 
build-up  plans  for  compliance  to  the  directive  and  assist 
banks  which  would  consider  the  option  of  mergers  and 
acquisitions.  We  would  also  engage  the  Ghana  Stock 
Exchange to facilitate processes for banks seeking long term 
equity financing to list on the exchange.  
 32.  The  key  risk  in  the  banking  industry  today,  is  the 
increasing  level  of  impaired  assets.  This  has  heightened 
bank’s  risk  aversion  to  credit  delivery.  Our  immediate 
response  is  to  reduce  some  of  the  structural  bottlenecks  in 
the credit process. Currently, we are reviewing the governing 
 15 | P a g e  
legislations  on  the  credit  reference  and  collateral  registry 
 systems.  These  are  to  ensure  that  banks  submit  both 
positive  and  adverse  findings  on  borrowers  to  the  bureaus 
and also address some thorny foreclosure issues.  
 
I  have  requested  in  my  last  quarterly  meeting  with  the 
33. 
Chief Executives of Banks, detailed plans on how each bank 
will resolve its non-performing loans on a loan by loan basis. 
We  shall  enforce  our  directive  on  loan  write-off  going 
forward,  and  require  appropriate  disclosure  of  written-off 
facilities  in  the  published  financial  statements  of  banks.  It  is 
our  expectation  that  the  national  identification  program 
coupled  with 
the 
improved  economic  prospects  would 
support  these  measures  and  help  in  reducing  the  incidence 
of loan defaults in the banking sector.  
 34. 
In 
the 
coming 
year,  Madam  President,  crisis 
management  would  be  a  more  concerning  issue,  more 
especially  the  crisis  response  capacity  of  banks.  This  is  a 
lesson I learnt the hard way when I assumed office earlier in 
April  this  year  dealing  with  2  banks  nearly  on  the  verge  of 
collapse  and  it  is  a  sure  way  for  enhancing  customer 
confidence in the system.  
  16 | P a g e  
35.  The deposit  protection  scheme is expected to come on 
 stream  next  year  in  line  with  the  BSDI  Act  and  the  Ghana 
Deposit  Protection  Act,  2016  (Act  931)  to  provide  a  safety 
net for vulnerable depositors in the event of a bank failure. I 
entreat  banks  to  study  the  Ghana  Deposit  Protection  Act  to 
know the requirements for enrollment on the scheme. 
 36.  The  management  of  potential  threats  to  financial  stability 
and the avoidance of systemic crisis would also preoccupy 
our  attention  in  the  coming  year.  To  ensure  the  safety  and 
soundness  of  individual  banks,  our  risk  focus  supervisory 
frameworks  will  gauge  cross  sectoral  interactions  among 
financial  players.  The  financial  boundaries  are  increasingly 
becoming  blurred,  hence  there  is  need  to  adopt  a  holistic 
macro-prudential  approach  and 
implement  consolidated 
supervision in line with the BSDI Act, 2016 (Act 930).  
 37.  To 
this  end,  we  shall  continue 
to  engage  other 
regulatory bodies, both domestic and external, and share 
information and experiences. In particular, we shall continue 
our  collaboration  with  the  Central  Bank  of  Nigeria  (CBN)  to 
conduct joint examination on banks with Nigerian parentage 
under  the  framework  of  the  College  of  Supervisors  of  the 
West African Monetary Zone (CSWAMZ).  
  17 | P a g e  
38. 
In recent times, there have been increased activities in the 
 payment  ecosystem  as  a  result  of  innovation  and  its  role  in 
promoting  financial  inclusion  which  is  a  global  goal.  The 
Bank  in  order  not  to  stifle  innovation  and  also  create  the 
enabling  environment  drafted  the  Payment  Systems  and 
Services  Bill  to  replace  the  existing  Payment  Systems  Act 
2003  (Act  662)  and  the  Guidelines  for  Electronic  Money 
Issuers  (2015).  The  Bill  is  expected  to  enhance  electronic 
banking,  agency  banking,  and  payments  and  also  provide 
support for a strong and resilient banking sector.  
 
I  have  noted  that  banks  have  formed  various  strategic 
39. 
alliances with Mobile Money Operators (MMOs) and financial 
technology  firms  to  transform  the  way  banking  products  are 
delivered. Through these partnerships the unbanked are able 
to  purchase  Government  debt  through  the  use  of  mobile 
phones, receive inward remittance on mobile device and link 
bank accounts to mobile money wallets for access to micro-
loans.  
 40.  Another  form  of  partnership  between  the  banks  and 
MMOs  is  the  holding  of  mobile  money  customers’  funds  by 
the  commercial  banks.  All  mobile  money  float  currently 
resides with commercial banks as MMOs are not authorized 
to  hold  funds.  The  top  5  banks  holding  these  float  as  at 
 18 | P a g e  
October  2017  included  Fidelity  Bank,  Ecobank,  CAL  Bank, 
 Stanbic  Bank  and  HFC  Bank.  We  encourage  all  banks  to 
take advantage of the telecos platforms to further support the 
financial inclusion efforts. 
 41.  The  Bank  of  Ghana  is  reviewing  its  licensing  procedures 
when  lower  tier  institutions  such  as  savings  and  loans 
companies  want  to  migrate  to  banking  institutions.  We  are 
also  reviewing  definitions  around  fit  and  proper  test  in 
approving Directors of financial institutions including possible 
annual  certifications  of  their  knowledge  of  key  banking  risk 
assessments.  We  may  impose  requirements  for  directors 
and  senior  management  of  banks  to  certify  related  party 
transactions.  We  will  impose  swift  sanctions  to  individuals 
and  institutions  that  infringe  or  breach  our  regulations.  We 
will  scrutinize  interbank  borrowing  and  placements  and 
review  the  manner  in  which  we  provide  emergency  liquidity 
support.  We  will  advocate  a  whistle  blower  provision  to 
protect individuals who raise alerts to the Bank of Ghana on 
malpractices by the banks. 
 42.  To  conclude  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  aim  of  the 
Institute of Bankers is to heighten professional excellence in 
the  Banking  Industry  in  Ghana.  Your  motto  of  Honesty  and 
Integrity  needs  to  be  jealously  guarded  to  positively  project 
 19 | P a g e  
the  profession  of  banking.  Despite  the  daunting  odds  facing 
 the profession, successive leaders of the institute have made 
significant  strides  to  make  the  institute  what  it  is  today.  I 
charge  the  Institute  and  current  executive  of  the  institute  to 
up  its  game  and  conduct  the  necessary  training  and 
awareness  programmes  required  to  ensure  high  ethical  and 
professional standards in the banking fraternity.  
 43.  Madam  President,  on  this  note  let  me  thank  you  for  the 
attention and wish you all compliments of the coming festive 
season. Thank You. 
 20 | P a g e  
