Jan Smets: The impact of monetary policy on the macroeconomy
and European banks
Speech by Mr Jan Smets, Governor of the National Bank of Belgium, at the EACB Regulatory
Debate, Brussels, 20 March 2018.
Accompanying slides of this speech.
Ladies and gentlemen,
 I  would  like  to  thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  participate  in  this  interesting  event.  My  talk  will
somewhat deviate from the main topic of regulation that you are debating today. Instead, I will
focus  on  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  and  its  impact  on  the  banking  sector  and  the
macroeconomy.
A recovery with low inflation
I am well aware that the last years have been challenging for the banking sector. Banks have
navigated the troubled waters of a financial and economic crisis. They have had to adapt to a
new  regulatory  and  supervisory  setting.  Believe  me,  also  for  central  banks  the  last  few  years
have not really been a walk in the park.
Over the past decade, the ECB, like other central banks, has taken unprecedented measures to
limit  the  impact  of  the  financial  crisis  on  the  economy  of  the  euro  area.  Supported  by  these
measures, economic conditions improved. Unemployment has gone down and confidence, up.
Economic indicators are solid and the most oft-used measures of slack are closing; and yet –
inflation has remained subdued.
Since 2014, euro area inflation has averaged 0.6% in annual terms. Currently, both headline and
underlying inflation remain well below 2%. Looking ahead, we expect a slow recovery of inflation
towards our inflation aim.
Why this disconnect between growth and inflation?
Despite stronger growth, slack might be larger than presumed
One important factor that may be weighing on inflation is the presence of idle resources in the
economy.  Indeed,  we  suspect  that,  despite  the  recovery,  there  remains  slack  on  the  labour
market, although its exact magnitude is uncertain.
For instance, it is useful to look at the ‘broad’ unemployment rate, which includes discouraged
work seekers, or employees working part-time but who would want to work full-time. During the
crisis, the rise in this measure was considerably stronger than that of the ‘normal’ unemployment
rate.  The  gap  between  the  two  remains  wider  than  before  the  crisis.  This  shows  that  the
untapped supply of labour remains more significant than suggested by the simple unemployment
rate.
The latest estimates for the equilibrium rate of unemployment also make us suspect that slack is
bigger than we thought. This measure is the unemployment rate which is consistent with stable
wage inflation, the NAWRU (non-accelerating wage rate of unemployment): if unemployment is
higher than this equilibrium rate, increases in wages will be slower; if lower, wages will go up
faster. Since 2014, the NAWRU –here I present European Commission estimates— has been
systematically revised downwards. This means that the economy could converge towards an
even lower level of unemployment without creating undue inflationary pressures.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Structural factors (for instance labour market reforms) may be boosting the economy’s potential.
This is good news, for it means that we have more margin to grow. However, in the short term it
implies a slower convergence of inflation towards our aim.
Furthermore, more flexible price and wage setting can imply that idle resources weigh more on
inflation.  Besides,  a  long  period  of  low  inflation  could  lead  firms  and  unions  to  become  more
backward-looking when setting prices and wages, making inflation more persistent.
If low inflation stems from such factors, one can be confident that it will recover, albeit perhaps
only  slowly.  To  support  it,  as  President  Draghi  stressed,  monetary  policy  needs  to  remain
patient, persistent and prudent.
The importance of getting inflation back towards 2%
Absent  such  support,  the  economy  would  be  prevented  from  tapping  its  full  potential.
Furthermore, the too long period of low inflation would lead economic agents to reassess their
long term inflation expectations. Were this to happen, the trend inflation rate could fall below pre-
crisis levels and hence below our price stability definition. Inflation would thus settle permanently
at a level below our inflation aim.
This  lower  trend  inflation,  through  its  impact  on  nominal  incomes,  would  complicate  the  still
necessary deleveraging efforts.  There is yet another, and perhaps even more worrying and long-
lasting, effect:  because inflation is a determinant of nominal interest rates, low trend inflation
implies low nominal interest rates in steady state. This means that, faced to negative shocks, the
central bank would have a smaller margin to reduce rates, so recessions might last longer and
inflation would recover more slowly.
Of course, faced with the lower bound, the central bank could use non-standard measures more
often.  Yet,  such  unconventional  measures  –  asset  purchases  and  negative  interest  rates,  for
instance – are typically seen to have more side effects, including on financial stability. In sum, I
believe such “low inflation-low interest rate” environment would not be a friendly one for banks –
either  because  it  means  less  macroeconomic  stabilisation  or  because  it  means  more  non-
standard measures.
You may think it paradoxical that a member of the ECB Governing Council – the first big central
bank to lower rates below zero – is warning you about the risks of low interest rates. And yet, this
is precisely what I want to address today, with an important nuance: these adverse effects are
larger the longer the period over which rates remain at such low levels. With our measures, we
intend to provide strong enough a stimulus to get inflation up again, creating the conditions that
allow us to again raise nominal interest rates. On the contrary, surrendering to the low inflation
would cause lower inflation expectations and an even longer period of low nominal interest rates.
The experience of the Fed, where the US macroeconomic situation has allowed it to raise rates,
is encouraging in that respect.
At  the  same  time,  I  acknowledge  that  our  current  measures  may  have  a  temporary  negative
impact on financial stability or bank profitability. This is particularly true of the negative rate policy,
particularly when combined with a flatter yield curve.
Monetary policy makers are not directly concerned about bank profitability. However, banks are
the main source of funding for the non-financial private sector in the euro area and, thus, the
main channel of transmission of our measures. If the adverse impact of our measures on bank
profitability becomes – or is expected to become – too large, banks’ capacity to lend may decline,
and we would not achieve the more favourable financial conditions we seek. Thus, a profitable
and well-functioning banking sector is essential to ensure a good transmission of our monetary
policy measures.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Negative rates affect bank profits in different ways
The  potentially  most  adverse  effect  of  negative  rates  on  banks’  profits  works  through  the  net
interest income. This is the essential source of revenue for the traditional banking model, based
on maturity transformation and financed by deposits. Thus, banks focused on retail business,
among  them  many  cooperative  banks,  could  be  especially  hurt  by  the  negative  interest  rate
policy.
How so? The crux of the matter lies in the coincidence of two circumstances: the reluctance of
households to pay to banks for depositing their money, and the importance of this type of funding
for banks.
Retail customers are strongly averse to negative nominal rates, even if negative real rates are
generally accepted. Because the cost of holding cash is relatively low when amounts are not too
large, withdrawing part of their negative-yielding deposits could even be a rational reaction for
many households.  
In the euro area, household deposits account for one fifth of banks’ liabilities on average. Thus, a
large withdrawal of retail deposits could be very problematic for banks, as they could become
underfunded and more dependent on less stable financing.
Hence,  banks  have  a  strong  interest  in  keeping  retail  deposit  rates  positive,  even  when  other
funding costs drop: in practice there is a zero lower bound for retail rates, so when policy rates
become negative, the cost of part of the bank’s funding does not go down. However, after the
drop  in  policy  rates,  interest  revenues  on  assets  do  decrease:  variable  rate  loans  adjust  to
market rates, and the maturing portfolio will be replaced with assets yielding less. Thus, banks’
net interest income starts to fall.
Of  course,  banks  can  try  to  limit  the  impact  on  profitability,  by  taking  on  more  risk,  or  getting
cheaper, but less stable, funding. However, this could make them more fragile.
To limit the fall in their interest income, banks could reduce lending rates to a lesser degree than
with a “normal” interest rate reduction. Of course, this would hamper the monetary transmission
to the real economy. That is the opposite of what we want.
Fortunately,  this  is  not  the  whole  story,  as  other  channels  can  offset  this  adverse  impact  of
negative rates.
When policy rates are lowered, fixed-rate marketable assets held by banks gain in value. This
boosts  banks’  economic  capital  at  the  moment  of  the  rate  cut.  Banks  also  benefit  from  the
improvement in the economy that follows the rate cut: the quality of the lending book improves,
borrower risk goes down, and the demand for loans increases. In addition, variable rate loans
become  more  affordable  after  a  rate  cut.  While  this  reduces  banks’  interest  income,  it  also
makes repayments cheaper and should lower default rates.
Banks’ characteristics matter
Thus,  the  ultimate  impact  of  negative  rates  on  bank  profits  and  credit  supply  is  difficult  to
estimate.
Not all banks would be affected to the same extent by the negative rates. The impact of negative
rates  on  banks’  profits  will  depend  on  the  composition  of  their  balance  sheets  and,  more
generally,  on  their  business  model.  The  channels  through  which  profitability  is  affected  –  the
share of retail deposits, scope for valuation gains and maturity of the loan book– can provide an
indication of the direction and the extent of the effect on each bank.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
The lower bound in the remuneration of retail deposits is the core factor behind the specialness
of negative policy rates for banks. Therefore, the share of retail deposits in a bank’s funding is the
first relevant variable to assess.
Indeed, some analyses show that, when rates are at zero or below, new rate cuts will weigh
more on banks’ stock prices[1] and on their lending volumes[2] if banks are more funded through
retail  deposits.  To  be  clear:  this  does  not  mean  that  our  negative  rate  has  had  a  general
tightening  effect.  Rather,  we  have  all  indication  of  the  opposite:  bank  lending  rates  have
decreased and lending has accelerated over the last three years. But it indicates that the rigidity
of the cost of deposits can make cuts in negative territory less expansionary than when rates
stay above zero.
On the asset side, interest risk exposure works in the opposite direction: the smaller or slower
the  adjustment  of  interest  income  to  the  new  rate  cut,  the  more  positive  the  impact  on  bank
profitability.  A  longer  average  maturity  of  marketable  assets  implies  bigger  capital  gains  for
banks. Long-term fixed-rate loans allow the bank to benefit from higher net interest income until
the  full  repayment,  although  loan  renegotiations  may  limit  the  additional  benefits.  In  contrast,
more variable-rate or short-term loans entail a faster fall in interest income.
Thus, the net impact of negative rates on profitability will be different for different banks. Those
most reliant on deposits, providing short-term lending and holding fewer marketable assets might
be the most affected. Many cooperative banks may fit in this description. Yet, the final impact on
aggregate credit supply will depend on still other characteristics: banks with higher initial capital
or margin to lower costs will be able to weather the temporary compression on profits and to
better transmit the easier financial conditions to the economy.
Other  measures  implemented  by  the  ECB  over  the  last  few  years  may  have  also  offset  the
potential  hampering  impact  of  negative  rates.  The  Targeted  LTROs,  for  instance,  have
contributed to lowering the cost of funding for banks. Our forward guidance on policy rates and
our  asset  purchase  programmes  have  increased  the  value  of  assets  held  by  banks  and  to
accelerate  the  recovery.  In  sum,  they  help  to  create  the  conditions  which  will  allow  us  to
normalise interest rates again.
[1] Ampudia and Van den Heuvel, 2017.
[2] Heider, Saidi and Schepens, 2017; de Sola Perea and Kasongo Kashama, 2017.
Final thoughts
I will briefly summarize. Low rates, and most particularly negative rates, can have an adverse
impact on bank profitability and, in consequence, on financial stability. Such an impact will be
stronger the longer the period of low or negative rates. However, today’s very low – even negative
–  rates  have  been  and  are  still  absolutely  necessary  to  avoid  that  inflation  settles  at  too  low
levels, which would mean permanently low rates and even larger challenges for the economy,
including the banking sector.
Let me share three final thoughts.
First, the experience of the past years highlights the importance of banks’ resilience, so they can
withstand  a  transitory  period  of  very  low  rates.  This  underlines  the  necessity  of  prudential  –
including macroprudential– policies to strengthen the banking sector. There has been progress
on this: the prudential framework has been revised and extended significantly since the crisis.
While  adapting  to  it  has  been  a  challenging  task  for  banks,  its  completion  should  kick-start  a
period of regulatory stability.
Second,  even  when  we  deliver  on  our  mandate  and  bring  inflation  back  towards  2%,  the  real
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
component  in  nominal  interest  rates  might  not  recover  to  pre-crisis  levels.  Beyond  cyclical
factors,  the  low  level  of  real  rates  is  also  due  to  structural  drivers,  such  as  demographic
developments or slower potential growth. These factors are beyond the reach of monetary policy.
That might mean that interest rates could settle at lower levels than before the crisis, and that
episodes of very low rates – for instance during recessions – may become more frequent. That
makes  my  previous  recommendation  even  more  important.  In  order  to  increase  real  returns
again, other policymakers should do their job by pursuing structural reforms to boost economic
growth.
Finally,  while  the  current  period  of  low  rates  can  put  pressure  on  banks’  profits,  other,  more
structural factors, may also play a role. Banks, especially in Europe, are still facing a number of
considerable challenges going forward, which will remain after the ‘normalisation’ of monetary
policy. These challenges include still elevated cost structures, the emergence and growing role
of Fintech competitors, IT and cybersecurity risks, and evidence of overcapacity in the European
banking  sector,  to  name  but  a  few  examples.  To  continue  playing  their  important  role  in  our
economy, banks must still continue to adapt to the new environment.
Thank you for your attention.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
