 NATIONAL BANK OF SERBIA  
Governor’s opening remarks at the presentation of 
the Inflation Report – August 2018 
Dr Jorgovanka Tabaković, Governor 
         Belgrade, 15 August 2018 
Ladies and gentlemen, esteemed members of the press, dear colleagues, 
Welcome to the presentation of the August Inflation Report. As always, we will give you an overview 
of  monetary  and  macroeconomic  trends  for  the  period  since  the  previous  Report  and  set  out  our 
expectations for the period ahead. Given that on 6 August I rounded off my first term of office as the 
governor, allow me, before I give the floor to my colleagues, to briefly dwell on some of the results 
achieved over the last six years, since results are the right and only measure of success.  
As you have witnessed yourself, in the past six years Serbia has been transformed into a stable and 
promising  economy  –  an  economy  with  low  and  predictable  inflation,  balanced  fiscal  account, 
reduced external imbalances, a downward trajectory of public and external debt, growing investment 
and recovered labour market. Today we live in a country with a significantly lower risk premium, an 
upgraded  credit  rating  and  a  better  position  on  the  international  competitiveness  lists.  Progress  is 
also  reflected  in  lower  interest  rates  and,  by  all  means,  in  the  preserved  value  of  the  dinar  and 
opened possibilities for raising our income, all of which boosts investment, exports and production.  
In such an ambience, Serbia’s gross domestic product has been on the rise for eleven quarters in a 
row and, according to our latest projections, this year its growth rate is going to measure 4%. This 
is by 0.5 percentage points more than what was envisaged by our May projection, owing to a faster 
than projected growth in construction and agriculture – on the production side, and a faster pick up 
in  investment  –  on  the  expenditure  side.  We  expect  such  movements  to  continue  in  the  period 
ahead, given that favourable conditions at home support growth in investment and exports and, by 
extension, higher employment and living standard of citizens. Most importantly, the results achieved 
are long-term and lasting.  
 
For five years in a row, inflation has been low, stable, predictable and comparable to that in 
European countries, and the NBS is trusted that inflation will remain low in the future as well.  
What we consider our most important result is that low inflation has become a normality in Serbia, 
which means that we have succeeded in achieving our primary objective, mandated by law. Not so 
long  ago,  in  the autumn of  2012,  year-on-year  inflation  measured  12.9%.  In  less  than one  year  we 
brought it down to 2.2% and  preserved it at an  average of 2.0% in the next five years. Since that 
time inflation in Serbia  hovered at a level  recorded in European countries, equalling 2.4% in July. 
The  intention  to  maintain,  in  the  period  to  come,  what  has  been  achieved  is  also  affirmed  by  our 
decision to lower the inflation target from 4±1.5% to 3±1.5% as of the beginning of 2017.  
Low  inflationary  pressures  reflected  primarily  adequate  monetary  policy  measures  that  were  fully 
coordinated with fiscal policy, and this was also at the core of anchoring inflation expectations. Today 
the  financial  and  corporate  sectors  expect  inflation  to  be  maintained  at  a  low  level,  as  they  have 
done for almost five years, since this brings certainty to their business and planning.      
 1 
Relative stability of the dinar exchange rate has been preserved and the country's foreign 
exchange reserves have increased. 
  In the last six years we have also maintained relative stability of the exchange rate – the dinar gained 
0.5% against the euro. It should be noted  that relative stability  has been preserved despite strong 
turbulences  in  the  international  environment  –  Brexit,  Fed’s  monetary  policy  normalisation,  trade 
and  geopolitical  tensions,  crisis  in  some  EU  countries,  Asian  stock  market  meltdown  in  early  2016, 
etc.). We have carefully assessed the intensity and type of pressures in the foreign exchange market 
and intervened impartially in both directions. Improvement in domestic macroeconomic indicators 
and  the  strengthening  of  the  resilience  of  the  domestic  economy  to  shocks  from  the  international 
environment  shifted  the  focus  toward  purchase  side  interventions,  especially  during  the  last  two 
years. As a result, the country’s foreign exchange reserves gained EUR 1.1 billion on this account, 
and now serve as a guarantee of future stability.   
  At  end-July  2018,  Serbia’s  net  foreign  exchange  reserves  reached  their  highest  level  since  2000  –
EUR 9.5 billion, gaining EUR 4 billion from end-July 2012. To buttress stability, we also increased the 
quantity  of  gold  in  foreign  exchange  reserves  –  to  19.9  tonnes,  which  is  5.1  tonnes  more  than  at 
end-July 2012. 
  2 
Interest rates fell to their lowest levels. 
Based on the analysis of inflation factors and risks in the domestic and international environment, in 
May  2013  we  embarked  on  a  cycle  of  monetary  policy  easing.  Since  then,  the  key  policy  rate  has 
been  reduced  by  8.75  percentage  points,  to  3.0%,  its  lowest  level  yet  in  the  inflation  targeting 
regime.  The  NBS  gave  an  additional  monetary  incentive  to  the  economy  by  gradually  lowering 
foreign  exchange  required  reserve  rates,  which  generated  around  EUR  1  billion  support  to  credit 
growth in 2015 and early 2016.  
  Monetary  policy  accommodation  fully  translated  into  reduced  costs  of  borrowing  of  corporates, 
households and the government.  
Since May 2013, interest rates on new and existing dinar household loans  have been halved, and 
those  in  the  corporate  segment  turned  even  three  times  lower,  which  gave  an  impetus  to 
disposable income, investment and economic activity.  
Today  interest  rates  on  dinar  government  securities  are  by  around  7  percentage  points  lower 
(depending on maturity) than in May 2013 when we embarked on monetary policy easing. The dinar 
yield curve was extended to 10 years, with the interest rate of 4.80%, while in October 2014, when 
the  ten-year  dinar  security  was  issued  for  the  first  time,  it  measured  13%.  Today,  this  maturity 
  3 
 accounts for around 15% of the total portfolio of dinar government securities. Apart from the decline 
in the risk premium and financing needs of the country, monetary policy easing also contributed to a 
sizeable reduction in interest expenses and thereby to a better fiscal result. The public debt–to-gross 
domestic product ratio declined to below 60%, and the dinar share of public debt rose to 25%. 
All  three  rating  agencies  monitoring  our  development  increased  Serbia’s  credit  rating  in  2017, 
assessing  that  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia  was  successful  in  preserving  price  stability  and  thereby 
rightfully  earned  higher  credibility.  The  country’s  risk  premium  dropped  significantly  in  2017,  with 
EMBI for Serbia moving below 100 basis points by the end of the year, only to drop to 85 basis points 
early this year. Serbia’s risk premium is today considerably below the global and European average, 
and by almost 300 basis points lower than at end-2012.   
Monetary policy supported lending, and by extension, economic activity.  
  In  conditions  of  accelerated  lending,  strongly  supported  by  monetary  policy  measures,  growth  in 
corporate investment lending is seen as another positive development. The approval of investment 
loans has stepped up since 2015 and represented one of the important sources of financing in the 
new investment cycle, contributing to faster economic growth. Their importance is best illustrated 
by the fact that in the last three years new investment loans almost equalled the inflow of foreign 
direct investment.   
We have reduced non-performing loans significantly and preserved financial stability.   
Another important result we have achieved is a considerable reduction in inherited non-performing 
loans  (NPLs).  Within  three  years  only,  the  level  of  NPLs  was  slashed  by  more  than  60%  and  their 
share in total loans by 14.6 percentage points – from 22.4% in July 2015 to 7.8% in June 2018. This 
is the lowest level of the NPL ratio since its monitoring began in late 2008. The structure of the NPL 
reduction  was  also  favourable,  because  the  greatest  decreases  were  recorded  in  sectors  most 
severely hit by the crisis (construction, manufacturing and trade).  
 4 
By reducing interest expenses and exchange rate losses we significantly contributed to 
profitability of the corporate sector.  
  Profitability of the Serbian corporate sector increased significantly in the last three years, thanks to 
its higher competitiveness, and also owing to the reduction of interest expenses and exchange rate 
losses. In 2017, corporate interest expenses were 37% lower than in 2014 (down by RSD 54 billion), 
in the face of the rising stock of corporate loans. Thanks to the relative stability of the exchange rate, 
corporate exchange rate losses went down by 60% (or by RSD 148 billion). The end-result is higher 
profit,  which  corporates  used  in  the  right  manner  –  to  increase  investment  and  expand  their 
business.  
A stable and predictable business ambience is conducive to strengthening investment, foreign 
trade and economic activity.  
Positive  effects  of  macroeconomic  stability  are  also  evidenced  by  the  increasing  exports  of  our 
products and services, which feeds back positively to the foreign exchange market and stabilises its 
movements, and by extension, inflation movements as well. Since 2016 we have exported more than 
half of our production, and in the second quarter this year goods and services exports reached 54.4% 
of gross domestic product (for the sake of comparison, in 2012 their share measured 36.2%). 
The effects of macroeconomic stability also lie at the core of investment growth, which additionally 
accelerated from the start of 2018 and, judging by all indicators, investment share in gross domestic 
product  is  likely  to  exceed  22%  in  the  year  as  a  whole.  Apart  from  increased  profitability  of 
corporates  and  previously  mentioned  investment  loans,  a  step-up  in  private  investment  growth  in 
recent  years  was  also  spurred  by  foreign  direct  investment.  All  of  this  confirms  that  we  are  an 
economy that now attracts an increasing number of non-resident investors with a long-term focus. 
The  rise  in  foreign  direct  investment  has  continued  and  this  year  we  expect  to  see  a  net  inflow  of 
around EUR 2.6 billion.   
 5 
  Thanks  above  all  to  sizeable  investment  growth,  we  revised  our  gross  domestic  product  growth 
projection for this year from 3.5% to around 4.0%. That Serbia’s economic growth stands out is also 
confirmed  by  the  assessment  of  the  European  Commission,  which  sees  Serbia  as  the  greatest 
contributor to the Western Balkan economic growth in 2018. Progress in the real sector spills over 
to  the  labour  market  as  well,  with  private  sector  employment  posting  a  constant  rise  and  the 
number of the unemployed plunging to its twenty-year low. 
Ladies and gentlemen, esteemed members of the press, dear colleagues, 
I would like to reiterate that these are only some of the key results we have achieved since 2012 to 
date.  However,  it  would  be  immodest  to  say  that  we  are  the  only  ones  to  be  credited  for  these 
results.  These  measures  yield  full  effects  only  in  coordination  with  other  government  policies,  and 
this has been achieved in Serbia. I believe that in the last six years we got to know each other very 
well, so you can rest assured that in the period ahead we will continue to work to the benefit of our 
citizens  and  the  economy,  primarily  by  ensuring  stability,  but  also  by  facilitating  everyday  life  of 
citizens and businesses – for example, by introducing the instant payment system, which is the most 
advanced payment system currently available.   
Thank you for your attention. I will now give the floor to my colleagues, after which we remain open 
for your questions.  
 6 
