The Governor’s
Concluding Remarks
The Governor’s 
Concluding Remarks
Annual Report
2017 - 124th Financial Year
Rome, 29 May 2018
Ladies and Gentlemen,
The  Italian  economy  is  gaining  strength,  employment  continues  to 
recover, and some of the sources of systemic risk in the banking system have 
been  eliminated.  To  consolidate  the  results  achieved,  accomplish  further 
progress, and remove structural fragilities, we must press on with the reform 
agenda.  
It is necessary to respond with determination to the changes brought 
about by globalization, technological innovation, and demographic trends. 
The  protection  of  savings,  necessary  to  support  economic  growth,  hinges 
upon orderly conditions in the financial markets. These, in turn, rely on the 
credibility of the policies to revamp the structure of the economy, enhance 
productivity and keep public debt in check. 
The risks connected with the weakening of international cooperation, 
which  are  both  geopolitical  and  related  to  the  economy  and  trade,  have 
been  compounded  by  the  current  hesitations  in  furthering  the  European 
project and by the tensions in our country. Italy’s must be a respected voice, 
including in the debate on redesigning the European Union’s regulatory and 
institutional set-up, a voice that is all the more important in this period of 
profound social, economic and financial transformation. 
These are the topics to which I will devote my attention today, which 
as always draw on the analyses included in the Annual Report and in our 
other publications on economic, financial, supervisory and regulatory issues, 
produced thanks to the professionalism and dedication of the Bank of Italy’s 
staff. To them I would like to express my gratitude, both personally and on 
behalf of the Governing Board and the Board of Directors.
For an overview of our annual accounts and an analysis of the Bank of Italy’s 
operations and activities, I refer you to our two dedicated publications. The 
first was released on 29 March on the occasion of the Meeting of Shareholders, 
while the second will be published today. A new volume describing the Bank’s 
functions has also been added to the range of publications we use to account 
for the work we do.
BANCA D’ITALIA
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2017
3
The international economic situation and monetary policy 
in the euro area 
In 2017 the world economy grew at a vigorous pace, at close to 4 per cent 
(Figure 1). This reflected a generalized acceleration in investment and world 
trade,  whose  growth  outpaced  that  of  GDP.  The  expansion  in  economic 
activity is widespread across all the major countries, and is expected to remain 
robust in the near future.
However, risks are in no short supply. The introduction of trade protection 
measures and possible retaliations would have serious repercussions for global 
production.  The  uncertainty  generated  by  statements  and  announcements 
foreshadowing  protectionist  drifts  is,  in  itself,  negatively  affecting  the 
investment plans of firms active in the international markets. This is in part 
due to the ongoing debate between those who want to see a trade system 
based on bilateral agreements and those who underscore the importance of 
preserving the international rules on trade that have underpinned economic 
integration and development for decades. 
Additional  risks  are  associated  with  the  high  level  of  global  debt,  in 
both private and public hands, which in the third quarter of 2017 reached 
245 per cent of GDP, 35 percentage points more than at the end of 2007. 
The  increase  was  especially  marked  in  the  emerging  economies  (up  from 
121 to 192 per cent of GDP), where a large portion of corporate debt is 
denominated in foreign currency. Unexpected hikes in bond yields in the 
United States, also in connection with the possible effects of an excessively 
expansionary fiscal policy, and sharp fluctuations in exchange rates, could 
generate turbulence in capital markets.
GDP growth in the euro area is proceeding at a good pace. In 2017 it was 
equal to 2.4 per cent, owing to the resilience of consumption and investment 
which,  as  exports  strengthened,  continued  to  benefit  from  the  increase  in 
employment and favourable borrowing conditions. Despite the indications 
of a slowdown that emerged in the early months of this year, the outlook 
remains favourable.  
Inflation is returning to levels consistent with the price stability objective, 
namely a rate of inflation below, but close to, 2 per cent over the medium 
term (Figure 2). Core inflation, which excludes food and energy products, 
remains  weak;  in  order  for  it  to  strengthen,  inflation  expectations  must 
recover fully and unemployment, which is still holding back wage growth in 
some countries, must be reabsorbed. 
The improved economic situation has strengthened the ECB Governing 
Council’s confidence in the convergence of inflation towards the objective 
4
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2017
and has created the conditions for a gradual recalibration of monetary policy 
measures. Uncertainty about the future performance of inflation means we 
must proceed with caution. So far, the recalibration of measures has occurred 
without  creating  the  tensions  on  financial  markets  or  surges  in  long-term 
yields feared by several observers. 
At its last monetary policy meeting the Governing Council reiterated the 
need to maintain a high degree of accommodation. For this purpose it can 
rely on several instruments: the Eurosystem’s sizeable stock of assets; the net 
purchases of securities that will continue at least until the end of September; 
the reinvestment of the principal payments from maturing securities; and the 
very low level of key interest rates and guidance on their future performance.
The normalization of monetary policy conditions in the euro area will 
reflect the gradual consolidation of economic activity and of the inflation 
outlook. This will make it easier to absorb future interest rate increases. The 
need for caution is also corroborated by the positive results on growth and 
inflation  achieved  by  the  Federal  Reserve  in  the  United  States,  where  an 
expansionary monetary policy is being followed by very gradual normalization 
(Figure 3).
The Italian economy today
The Italian economy is recovering. GDP growth gained strength last year, 
reaching 1.5 per cent and exceeding the expectations of the main forecasters. 
Macroeconomic policies were still the main driver but growth is increasingly 
self-sustained. 
Demand  reflected  the  positive  performance  of  consumption  and, 
especially, investment, which rose by 3.8 per cent, though it is still far from 
pre-crisis levels. Increased capital formation, which was lacking in the early 
years of the expansionary phase, is laying the groundwork for a continuation 
of growth. Investment in capital goods benefited from tax breaks, incentives 
for  technological  innovation,  favourable  borrowing  conditions,  and  the 
gradual increase in firms’ confidence in the outlook for demand. Growth in 
consumption was partly attributable to that in employment, which in turn 
was driven by the measures supporting labour demand. Despite the increase 
in  labour  market  participation  owing  to  brighter  employment  prospects, 
unemployment actually decreased from the peak of just under 13 per cent 
recorded in 2014 to about 11 per cent (Figure 4).
Exports continue to be a major driver of growth. In 2017 they expanded 
by 5.4 per cent, more than in the other major euro-area countries. The 
increase was consolidated in the second half of the year despite the strong 
BANCA D’ITALIA
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2017
5
appreciation in the exchange rate since the spring. This is a sign of our 
firms’  renewed  ability  to  compete  in  the  international  markets.  Mostly 
thanks to the current account surplus, Italy’s net foreign liabilities have 
continued to diminish, falling from 23 per cent of GDP in 2013 to less 
than 7 per cent. This compares with net foreign assets equal to 60 per cent 
of GDP for Germany and net foreign liabilities equal to 20 and 80 per 
cent of GDP for France and Spain respectively (Figure 5).
The expansion in production was widespread across almost all sectors: 
value added accelerated in manufacturing and services and posted its first 
significant  increase  in  construction  since  2006.  This  was  accompanied  by 
a recovery in the demand for loans, supported by low interest rates. Credit 
access conditions improved, though difficulties persist for small businesses 
and construction firms, which still present higher risk.
Overall, consumer price inflation returned to positive territory in 2017, 
reaching 1.3 per cent, but it weakened in the early months of 2018. The core 
component  has  remained  below  1  per  cent  since  last  autumn. Wages  and 
productivity both recorded modest growth. Italian firms have retained the 
competitiveness gains achieved in recent years. 
In the early months of 2018, in Italy too there were signs of a slowdown 
in manufacturing and of a slight decrease in business confidence indices. The 
prevailing view is that this is a temporary setback; industrial production appears 
to have recovered somewhat since March. A scenario of moderate growth and 
gradually rising inflation remains the most probable one. However, downward 
risks have increased, also in connection with international developments.
Preserving  the  confidence  of  households,  firms  and  investors  is  a 
necessary  condition  for  the  continuation  of  economic  growth.  The  effects 
of a less expansionary monetary policy would be moderate also thanks to 
the low indebtedness of households and to the reduction in that of firms, 
the limited exposure of financial intermediaries to the consequences of a rise 
in interest rates, and the high average residual maturity of the public debt, 
which currently stands at more than seven years. It is crucial that conditions 
in the financial markets remain favourable.
Our economy is in a different cyclical phase compared with the past. The 
crisis was much deeper and longer than any previous one, and the recovery 
slower than on other occasions. In five years output has recouped only half 
of  the  nine  percentage  points  lost  during  the  double-dip  recession.  There 
continue to be ample margins of idle production capacity and, in particular, 
of labour market slack.  
Italy’s economy is still expanding at below the average rates recorded in 
the other euro-area countries; last year the gap was one percentage point. 
6
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2017
Labour productivity growth is insufficient; in 2017 it was less than half that 
of the rest of the area. Demographic trends indicate that in the years to come 
there  will  be  a  reduction  in  the  active  population  and  higher  numbers  of 
older  people.  The  cyclical  recovery  aside,  Italy’s  growth  potential  must  be 
consolidated. 
Structural issues
Much  has  already  been  said  about  the  structural  problems  of  Italy’s 
economy.  Essentially,  growth  potential  is  being  impaired  by  the  tough 
conditions  in  which  firms  operate;  many  struggle  to  remain  on  the 
market, few expand. Noted problems include the inefficiencies and delays 
characterizing  general  government  and  civil  justice,  the  shortcomings  in 
regulating the entry and exit of firms from the market, the constraints on 
competition and phenomena of illegality, the high taxation of the factors of 
production and underinvestment in innovation, research and human capital. 
Important initiatives have been taken in recent years but improving the body 
of institutions, rules and practices on which economic activity is based and 
which influences the behaviour of workers and firms is a long-term endeavour. 
The reforms that pursue these goals have a significant impact on growth and 
employment though their effects are distributed over a longer time horizon. 
Lazy short-termism cannot be allowed to dictate the agenda. 
Italy’s  anaemic  growth  in  the  last  twenty  years  is  primarily  the  result 
of  stagnant  productivity,  in  itself  a  reflection  of  the  country’s  fragmented 
economic structure in which small firms, on average poorly capitalized and 
often little inclined to expand, tend to dominate. Small businesses, which far 
outnumber those in the other advanced countries, are less productive in Italy, 
not only than their larger counterparts but also with respect to foreign firms 
of comparable size. 
There  are,  however,  signs  of  improvement.  The  reorganization  of 
production, which had got under way even before the double-dip recession, 
has  intensified  in  the  wake  of  the  crisis.  The  capacity  of  our  economy 
to  put  resources  and  energy  into  more  productive  initiatives,  while  still 
low by international standards, is increasing. The exit of many firms from 
the market has been offset by the entry of new innovative businesses and 
the strengthening of those that succeeded in repositioning themselves on 
a path of growth. These developments have partly softened the negative 
impact on productivity of the fall in investment during the crisis. 
The  beneficial  effects  of  a  reallocation  of  activity  towards  the  most 
efficient firms have been apparent among exporters; along with the recovery 
BANCA D’ITALIA
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2017
7
of price competitiveness, the reforms have enabled firms to staunch the losses 
in Italy’s export market shares. Though still limited by international standards, 
innovative activities and the use of new technologies are on the rise. Spending 
on research and development, though still below that recorded in the other 
main economies, has risen by almost 20 per cent since 2015, reflecting strong 
growth in private investment. 
Improvements in the field of innovation also reflect measures affecting 
the entire production chain since 2012. Support for innovative start-ups and 
tax credits for research and development have proven especially important, 
as have the hyper-amortization of investment in new technologies and the 
introduction  of  tax  breaks  on  revenues  generated  from  patents  and  other 
innovations. The tax incentives designed to facilitate recourse to equity capital 
have helped firms to strengthen their capital bases, enhancing their ability to 
absorb losses, fund innovative projects, and develop their activities.  
Yet Italy’s firms continue to be penalized by burdensome administrative 
procedures  and  lengthy  civil  trials.  Productive  activity  also  suffers  from 
distortions of competition caused by tax evasion, corruption and organized 
crime. These phenomena feed into one another and, along with inadequate 
procedures for the planning and award of public works contracts and their 
execution, help explain the shortages in vital infrastructure that are hampering 
the economy’s growth potential. 
Low productivity and an insufficient ability to innovate also reflect gaps, 
by international standards, in the knowledge and skills of Italian students 
and adults, which act as both cause and effect. It is another vicious circle that 
contributes to keeping employment and labour force participation rates below 
the levels prevailing in the other European countries. The issue of human 
capital will become increasingly important as the use of new technologies 
increases and demand falls for workers who perform standardized and repetitive 
activities. Without sufficient public and private investment in training, there 
will be serious adverse effects on employment and income inequality will be 
aggravated. Addressing these risks requires decisive intervention: developing 
a collective appreciation of the importance of lifelong training beyond the 
years of formal education is a vital challenge for Italy. 
The labour market has seen sweeping changes. The reforms have had a 
positive  overall  effect  on  trends  in  employment.  Firms’  propensity  to  hire 
workers  on  open-ended  contracts  has  increased.  And  yet  unemployment 
remains  high,  especially  in  Italy’s  Mezzogiorno  and  among  young  people. 
New  social  safety  nets  have  increased  unemployment  benefits  without 
generating excessive disincentives for jobseekers. The effects of the new set 
of active policies, however, are barely perceptible; the share of those drawing 
unemployment benefits without actively seeking work has not fallen.  
8
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2017
The long crisis has increased social malaise. According to Istat data, in 
the last ten years the share of households in absolute poverty has practically 
doubled, climbing to almost 7 per cent. This share is higher in the Mezzogiorno 
and, above all, in households with foreign nationals; the position of young 
people has worsened with respect to older generations. 
The  resources  unlocked  by  the  introduction  of  a  minimum  income 
scheme  (reddito  di  inclusione)  cover  around  40  per  cent  of  households  in 
absolute  poverty.  In  any  decision  to  broaden  its  scope,  or  to  adopt  other 
measures, care must be taken not only to avoid discouraging beneficiaries 
from seeking regular work but also in relation to the effects on the public 
finances.   
The territorial disparities of Italy’s economy encapsulate and lay bare all 
the structural fragilities listed above: in the country’s capacity for economic 
growth, in the productivity of its firms, in the availability of work and the 
quality of public services. It is an age-old problem; after the progress recorded 
in  the  1960s,  the  gap  began  to  increase  again;  it  widened  further  during 
the  double-dip  recession.  Compared  with  2007,  GDP  is  lower  by  almost 
ten percentage points in the Mezzogiorno and by around four points in the 
Centre and North. The gap between the employment rates in the two areas, 
respectively 44 and 65.5 per cent, has widened by around three percentage 
points, reflecting the fall recorded in the Mezzogiorno. With the economic 
recovery under way, the government can more easily remove the obstacles to 
entrepreneurship and help close the gaps that have emerged in increasingly 
large swathes of the country.  
Public finances
Public policy operates on two complementary levels. The first concerns 
legislative and regulatory aspects, and how general government is organized 
and administered; the second has to do with the raising and deployment of 
resources  for  infrastructure,  public  services  and  redistributive  measures.  If 
these interventions are to contribute effectively to the country’s development 
and not end up endangering financial stability, they must be carried out in 
the full awareness of budgetary constraints.
At the end of last year, Italy’s public debt amounted to almost 132 per 
cent of GDP. This is a very high figure by past standards. It is more than 50 
percentage points above the average in the rest of the euro area and it is an 
element of constraint and the main source of vulnerability for the economy. 
It  discourages  investment  by  raising  the  cost  of  borrowing  and  fuelling 
uncertainty;  it  leads  to  greater  distortions  in  taxation,  impairing  Italy’s 
BANCA D’ITALIA
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2017
9
capacity to generate income, save, and invest. It reduces the scope for social 
and  macroeconomic  stabilization  policies.  It  exposes  the  country  to  crises 
of  confidence,  especially  dangerous  when,  in  addition  to  covering  annual 
borrowing requirements, very large volumes of securities nearing maturity 
must be refinanced (which together amount to €400 billion per year in Italy). 
Debt-to-GDP  dynamics  largely  depend  on  the  primary  fiscal  balance 
– in other words on the difference between public revenue and expenditure 
net of interest expense – and on the gap between average borrowing costs and 
the nominal growth rate of the economy. These variables influence each other; 
in particular, a worsening of the primary balance, even if only anticipated, 
can stoke fears about the solidity of the public accounts and raise government 
borrowing costs (Figure 6).  
Having widened considerably during the sovereign debt crisis, the spread 
between the average cost of the debt and GDP growth narrowed to around 
1 per cent. It could narrow further over the next few years so long as the 
economic  situation  remains  positive.  If  the  tensions  of  the  last  few  days 
subside, the cost of debt will also fall, if only slightly, when the securities 
that were placed at higher rates than newly issued ones come to maturity. 
This  could  be  achieved  even  with  the  gradual  normalization  of  monetary 
policy. To this end, it is essential to preserve the credibility of the process for 
consolidating the public finances. 
The debt-to-GDP ratio could return to below 100 per cent over the next 
ten years by gradually achieving a primary surplus of between 3 and 4 per cent 
of GDP, two percentage points above the current level and consistent with a 
broadly balanced budget net of cyclical effects (Figure 7). The fall could be 
more rapid if the improvement in the primary surplus and the consolidation 
and continuation of structural reforms encouraged growth and lowered the 
risk premium on Italian government securities. 
Reducing the debt ratio is indispensable. At a time of growth and with 
monetary policy still highly accommodative, increasing the deficit is not the 
answer. While there might well be a temporary positive impact on demand, 
though even this is rendered uncertain by possible financial tensions, it would 
have persistently negative repercussions on debt and on interest expense. The 
moderately restrictive effects of a rise in the primary surplus can be offset by 
a tax reform to make taxation less distortive and by a restructuring of public 
spending aimed at boosting production capacity. 
Spending  on  public  investment  has  been  falling  almost  without 
interruption  since  2010.  Aside  from  the  limited  availability  of  financial 
resources,  contributory  factors  include  inefficient  and  slow  processes  for 
selecting and completing public works. More recently, investment may have 
10
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2017
encountered difficulties in adapting to the new Public Contracts Code; the 
total amounts involved in tenders for public works nonetheless returned to 
growth last year. But there is still work to be done on reducing the length and 
complexity of the procedures.
In the long term, curbing the deficit and debt rests largely on the ability 
of the public finances to cope with the increase in social expenditure caused 
by  population  ageing,  particularly  on  social  security  and  healthcare.  The 
reforms introduced in the past have made spending on pensions manageable; 
they have responded to the need to take account of the increase in average 
life  expectancy  when  determining  the  relationship  between  contributions 
paid and the size and duration of pensions; they have also placed Italy in a 
favourable position by international standards. 
Any  turning  back  would  be  risky.  Targeted  interventions  to  reduce 
specific rigidities are possible, and some have already been made, but they 
must always be adequately offset so as to ensure the actuarial balance of the 
pension system. Great care must be taken in modifying the basic rules that 
shape  long-term  trends  in  public  spending.  The  sustainability  indicators, 
calculated at European level, have recently worsened for Italy owing to the 
fall in potential GDP growth forecast for the next few decades, which is in 
turn partly due to the decrease in the active population connected with the 
downturn in expected migration flows. 
The financial sector 
The international financial industry is undergoing momentous change. 
Since the end of the last decade the role of banks in funding the economy has 
gradually declined, and there has been an increase in the relative importance 
of the capital market and of non-bank operators that perform some functions 
typical of traditional credit intermediation. The volume of bonds placed on 
the international markets by non-financial groups has more than doubled 
over the last ten years, reaching $6.5 trillion in 2017. At the end of 2016 the 
assets of non-bank intermediaries amounted to $160 trillion, nearly half of 
those held by financial intermediaries as a whole.
The  rapid  developments  in  technology  are  opening  up  credit  and 
financial intermediation markets to competition from new operators, both 
in the advanced economies and in emerging countries. Several Fintech firms 
are already offering innovative, low-cost services in the electronic payments 
sector,  in  asset  management  and  in  brokerage.  The  biggest  international 
technology companies are also starting to operate in credit and finance. 
BANCA D’ITALIA
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2017
11
Experience teaches us that a diversified financial sector, with multiple 
funding channels and many different operators, can favour investment and 
growth and can bolster the resilience of the economy to adverse events. In 
the United States, firms have reacted to the restrictions on bank credit caused 
by the financial crisis by replacing it with bond issues, thereby mitigating the 
severity and duration of the recession.
However, the development of non-banking intermediation, if not properly 
supervised, can also be a source of risk. The strategies of large fund managers 
can  have  significant  effects  on  the  prices  and  liquidity  of  the  underlying 
instruments. The spread of high-frequency trading could give rise to sudden 
increases in price volatility, especially if several intermediaries were to react in 
a similar way to market movements. Indirect links between banks and other 
intermediaries are also potential risk factors. The Financial Stability Board 
is working on defining regulatory measures for non-banking intermediation 
with a view to limiting the risks associated with the opportunities opened up 
by the changing financial landscape. 
New  technologies  are  increasing  productivity  and  giving  users  greater 
choice,  but  due  care  must  be  taken  as  regards  the  potentially  negative 
consequences.  In  a  financial  system  by  now  steeped  in  digital  technology, 
the damage caused by cyberattacks can go beyond individual operators and 
become systemically important. The central banks and supervisory authorities 
are  committed,  together  with  the  other  authorities  and  intermediaries,  to 
safeguarding cyber security in the financial sector. The unregulated spread of 
crypto-assets could also put consumer protection at risk and encourage illegal 
activities; going forward, it could pose a threat to financial stability.
Italy’s financial market is also evolving. On the eve of the crisis, Italian 
firms had a high debt-to-equity ratio and made very limited recourse to bond 
issues, factors which helped lengthen and deepen recessions. Nowadays firms’ 
leverage (calculated as the ratio of financial debt to the sum of financial debt 
and net equity at market prices) is ten points below the peak of 50 per cent 
recorded in 2011. This decrease is attributable both to firms with high debt 
levels exiting the market and to the influx of new capital, partly as a result 
of tax incentives. The gap with respect to the euro-area average has narrowed 
markedly.
Of the more than 250 non-financial firms now on the stock exchange, 
around 80 were listed between 2013 and 2017. In many cases, using SPVs 
to  raise  the  capital  required  to  purchase  unlisted  companies  has  allowed 
firms, including small and medium-sized ones, to access the stock market 
more  quickly  compared  with  traditional  IPOs.  Nonetheless,  the  market 
capitalization  of  non-financial  companies  remains  well  below  that  of  the 
other main economies: in Italy it amounts to around 25 per cent of GDP, in 
12
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2017
Germany to just over 60 per cent, in France and in the United Kingdom it 
exceeds 70 per cent, in the United States, 125 per cent. In Italy the share of 
capital provided by intermediaries specializing in private equity is also limited. 
Growth in firms’ capitalization has gone hand in hand with a rebalancing 
in debt instruments. Between 2013 and 2017, gross bond issues rose to a 
yearly  average  of  €35  billion,  from  €25  billion  in  the  previous  five-year 
period. The introduction of tax incentives encouraged around 150 firms that 
had never previously made bond placements to issue mini-bonds. Overall, 
over the last ten years the ratio of bonds to total financial debt has risen from 
6 to 13 per cent, a slightly higher figure than that for Germany, but about 
9 points lower than in France and the United Kingdom and more than 25 
points lower than in the United States. 
Broader access to market funding is possible above all for the largest firms. 
Small and medium-sized firms may derive significant benefits from the growth 
of individual savings plans, which were introduced at the end of 2016 with 
the objective of promoting investment in the financial instruments issued by 
Italian firms through tax incentives. For smaller firms, however, bank credit 
is likely to remain the main source of funding. Also in light of the tightening 
of prudential measures on non-performing loans, these firms’ financial needs 
must be supported by banks with strict criteria to assess creditworthiness and 
by exploiting the opportunities provided by the new technologies. In order 
to facilitate access to credit for small and medium-sized firms, it is crucial to 
promote their capital strengthening.
Banks
Banks  hold  a  large  amount  of  information  on  firms,  which  they  can 
either use to raise barriers to competition from other operators – in a fruitless 
defence of their positions – or instead, with foresight, leverage it to offer new 
services, including to facilitate firms’ direct access to the market. Resolute 
strategies,  however,  are  needed  to  tackle  the  challenges  of  technological 
development,  competitive  pressures  and  the  new  approaches  to  banking 
regulation and supervision. As well as limiting administrative expenses and 
staff costs, banks must diversify their sources of revenue. They have already 
set out on this path and must proceed without hesitation.  
The  finalization  of  Basel  III  reforms  has  improved  the  quality  of 
the rules by ensuring that banks can no longer use their own internal 
models to excessively reduce their capital requirements, particularly in 
relation to trading. The new rules include a lowering of the requirements 
BANCA D’ITALIA
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2017
13
for loans to small and medium-sized businesses, on top of the existing 
provisions of European legislation.
Among the challenges facing banks are those of ensuring correct conduct 
vis-à-vis  customers  and  compliance  with  the  rule  of  law.  In  a  number  of 
instances, a lack of attention to transparency requirements and the sale of 
products unsuited to investors’ financial needs – already serious problems – 
have  amplified  the  effects  of  crises.  Banks  have  a  duty  to  preserve  their 
customers’ trust, which is also a means of improving competitiveness and is 
vital for the sustainability of their strategies in the new business and market 
environment.  The  banking  system  has  shown  a  growing  commitment  to 
preventing  money  laundering  and  combating  terrorist  financing;  it  must 
continue  in  this  direction  in  order  to  effectively  counter  the  risks  posed 
by  continuous  developments  in  financial  crime,  which  also  exploits  new 
technologies.
Italian banks strengthened capital in 2017. Common equity increased 
by €23 billion, of which €4 billion was provided by the Government for the 
recapitalization of Monte dei Paschi di Siena. The CET1 ratio rose by more 
than 2 percentage points on average, to 13.8 per cent, compared with 7.1 
per cent a decade ago. For the significant banking groups, the gap with the 
euro-area average has narrowed by 2 percentage points, to 1.3.
In recent years there has been a reduction in both banks’ exposure to the 
public sector and in the volume of non-performing loans. The former has 
decreased by more than a quarter from the peak recorded in early 2015 and 
now amounts to about €300 billion. NPLs, net of loan loss provisions, have 
diminished by about a third with respect to the end of 2015, to €135 billion. 
The coverage ratio, i.e. the ratio of the stock of loan loss provisions to gross 
NPLs, has reached 53 per cent, a much higher level than the average for the 
leading European banks.
According to data published by the ECB, at the end of 2017 the ratio 
of Italian significant banks’ gross NPLs to total lending, including interbank 
exposures and those to central banks, was 11.1 per cent, compared with an 
average of 4.1 per cent for other Eurozone significant banking groups; net of 
loan loss provisions the ratios were respectively 5.9 and 2.4 per cent. While 
still large, the gap has narrowed significantly in the last two years.
The decrease in the stock of NPLs is partly due to the sharp rise in sales 
on the secondary market, facilitated by the favourable economic situation 
(€35 billion in 2017 against a yearly average of €5 billion in the previous 
four years). This year sales are expected to reach €65 billion for the banking 
system as a whole. According to the plans submitted to the Single Supervisory 
Mechanism  in  March,  by  the  end  of  2020  the  NPLs  of  Italy’s  significant 
14
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2017
banking groups should be almost half the level recorded at the end of 2017; 
in relation to total lending, net of loan loss provisions, they should fall to 
about 4 per cent for significant groups, and to an estimated 5 per cent for the 
system as a whole (Figure 8). On more than one occasion we have stressed 
that it is risky to set too tight a deadline for reducing NPLs, particularly in 
countries such as Italy where recovery proceedings are lengthier and potential 
buyers have long been fewer. But the reduction in NPLs must forge ahead, 
benefiting from the steady growth of the secondary market as the reforms to 
the foreclosure process begin to bear fruit.
A small percentage of last year’s sales related to loans that were unlikely 
to be repaid, i.e. to exposures where there is a chance that the borrower will 
resume  repayments;  further  sales  are  envisaged  by  the  significant  banking 
groups. The disposal of such exposures could benefit from the contribution 
of corporate restructuring specialists, something that is still relatively rare in 
Italy. These turnaround funds can offer firms not only new finance but also 
the managerial skills needed to relaunch their business.
In January we issued a set of guidelines on NPL management addressed 
to the less significant institutions that we supervise directly. While upholding 
the  principle  of  proportionality,  the  guidelines  essentially  replicate  the 
recommendations  of  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  for  significant 
banks. By autumn those small banks will also have to draw up ambitious yet 
sustainable plans to substantially reduce their NPLs.
The  profitability  of  Italian  banks  improved  in  2017:  excluding 
extraordinary items, the return on equity was just over 4 per cent, against a 
negative result of -5.7 per cent in 2016. This trend continued throughout the 
first quarter of the current year among the leading banking groups, whose 
profits were generally satisfactory thanks to an increase in fee income and a 
reduction in costs.
Several  banks,  however,  still  have  an  inadequate  level  of  profitability. 
The ability of smaller banks to generate profits is hampered by difficulties in 
increasing revenue and by lower operational efficiency. Continued large loan 
losses are another factor: for banks other than mutual banks (BCCs), last year 
the cost of risk, as measured by the ratio of loan loss provisions to the average 
stock of loans, was close to 190 basis points, against around 100 points for 
the leading banks. For a quarter of these smaller banks the return on equity 
was negative.
Profitability  can  be  restored  in  part  by  outsourcing  some  functions, 
participating in consortiums to pool production processes and the procurement 
of goods and services, entering into agreements for the marketing of financial 
and insurance products, and carrying out mergers. Italy’s small popolari banks 
BANCA D’ITALIA
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2017
15
could  also  benefit,  as  they  do  in  other  countries,  from  the  creation  of  an 
institutional protection scheme based on agreements to provide reciprocal 
support if difficulties arise, with advantages in terms of capital requirements; 
this would be a step towards forms of closer integration.
For the mutual banking sector, pressing on with mergers has become 
a  matter  of  urgency.  In  the  last  ten  years,  the  capitalization  of  BCCs  has 
been  affected  by  low  self-financing  and  legal  constraints  on  access  to  the 
capital markets. Their solvency ratio has risen by just 2 percentage points, 
while that of the banking system as a whole has increased by about 7 points. 
This has likewise impaired their ability to react to the deterioration in loan 
quality: currently, BCCs have a higher than average ratio of non-performing 
exposures and a lower than average coverage ratio compared with the banking 
system as a whole.
The reform now being implemented will allow the BCCs to continue 
to support their local economies effectively, even under the new regulatory 
environment, while preserving their original mutualistic spirit. The joint and 
several guarantees incorporated in cohesion contracts and the capital which, 
thanks to the reform, new parent companies can raise on the market will 
make it possible to resolve any future difficulties in the most efficient way. 
Without these new groups, in fact, the law would require crises at individual 
BCCs to be resolved by liquidation. Improved efficiency and the removal of 
obstacles to raising equity on the market will also enable the banking groups 
being created to face the new challenges.
For  Italian  banks,  the  measures  to  reduce  non-performing  exposures, 
restore  profitability  and,  more  generally,  strengthen  balance  sheets  are 
particularly important given the transformation of the financial sector of which 
I spoke earlier. These measures are also necessary to adapt to the numerous 
regulatory and supervisory measures, approved and forthcoming. Complete 
compliance with the requirements on the amount of loss-absorbing liabilities 
in a crisis, the application of the new accounting standards, and the ongoing 
review of the internal models used to calculate capital requirements under the 
Single Supervisory Mechanism are some notable examples.
 When  we  look  at  the  future  of  the  world,  we  always  see  risks  and 
opportunities. One cannot predict with certainty if it will be the former or 
the latter that will prevail. We can construct scenarios that assume specific 
trends and political measures and also take into account the role of chance.
16
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2017
The  risks  posed  by  technological  change,  demographic  and  migratory 
trends, and potential trade wars are plain to see. Major opportunities also 
come  from  technology  and  its  role  in  stimulating  and  interacting  with 
entrepreneurship; seizing them requires suitable government policies that are 
also able to safeguard against risks.
In this context, Italy has some cards to play. We come from a quarter 
of a century in which we have lost ground to the other advanced countries, 
culminating in a double-dip recession that caused damage comparable to that 
of a war. Though not without great exertion, we are now emerging from the 
crisis. We are succeeding in chipping away at that structural roadblock that 
chokes and limits firms.
Today, the first results of this collective effort are visible. The productive 
structure  of  the  economy  is  slowly  changing,  employment  is  rising,  and 
investment has started to grow again; this points to increased confidence in 
the future. The external accounts are performing well and our net foreign 
liabilities  have  plummeted.  Banks  are  overcoming  the  serious  difficulties 
originating in the real economy.
Sounder  public  finances  have  made  it  possible  to  channel  financial 
resources to supporting the economy to the extent permitted by the continued 
need to keep debt, which is especially high in our country, under control. The 
exceptionally expansionary monetary policy stance, whose aim is to guarantee 
price stability in the euro area, is aiding the efforts of both the private and 
public sectors.
Public  finance  choices  centre  around  the  taxes  needed  to  finance 
expenditure and on how to employ the resources available to assist growth 
and protect the weak. On one level, the severe crisis that hit us accentuated 
the tax burden; on the other it stoked the fears of those who have a job and 
the anxieties of those seeking one.
The  ultimate  objective  of  economic  policy  can  only  be  to  increase 
everyone’s  income  and  welfare:  an  economy  that  gets  poorer  is  less  equal 
and  less  happy.  To  achieve  this  goal,  the  system’s  growth  potential,  and 
therefore productivity, must be raised. If the public sector limited itself to 
contracting  new  debt  without  reorienting  towards  economic  development 
the composition of its balance sheet and the rules and mechanisms governing 
the functioning of the economy, this would have grave consequences.
But  it  must  be  stressed  once  again  that  there  are  no  shortcuts  for 
cutting  debt.  A  large  portion  of  the  financial  savings  accumulated  by 
Italians  can  be  directly  or  indirectly  traced  backed  to  the  €2.3  trillion 
that  make  up  our  public  debt.  If  the  value  of  their  wealth  were  to  be 
imperilled, they would react by fleeing and seeking shelter elsewhere. And 
BANCA D’ITALIA
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2017
17
foreign investors would follow suit even more rapidly. The financial crisis 
that would ensue would put us back significantly. It would taint Italy’s 
reputation forever.
We are not constrained by the European rules but by economic logic. 
And closely linked to this is the obligation not to compromise the future of 
the next generations; increasing the debt means saddling them with what we 
are unwilling to pay today.
Reducing public debt and at the same time boosting economic activity is 
difficult but not impossible. The situation is not unfavourable. We are not too 
far from a balanced budget, which would enable us to create a virtuous circle 
of lower borrowing costs and higher growth, competitiveness is improving, 
and  financial  conditions  in  Europe  are  relaxed. We  can  gradually  channel 
resources  to  more  productive  uses  by  increasing  public  investment  and 
working towards completing adequate infrastructures. Balance and patience 
are required to identify the necessary means, by cutting needless expenses 
and rethinking and simplifying the tax system as a whole, without ruling out 
increasing less distortive taxes.
Efforts  in  this  direction  must  be  made  worldwide.  Some  phenomena 
inevitably require governance on an international scale: economic integration, 
technological progress, immigration and finance are all topics that cannot be 
managed within the narrow confines of national borders. Isolation is not the 
best seedbed for development. 
Italy’s destiny is that of Europe. We are part of a very large and deeply 
integrated economic area, whose development determines that of Italy and 
at the same time depends on it. It is important that Italy has an authoritative 
voice in forums where the future of the European Union is to be decided. All 
its member states must contribute to its progress. Some very important issues 
will be dealt with over the coming months: the governance of the EU, its 
multi-annual budget, and the revision of financial regulations.
Europe  needs  to  overhaul  its  existing  tools  and  to  create  new,  shared 
ones to tackle economic and financial shocks, given that national tools are 
either weak or unavailable. Following the reforms of recent years, any further 
progress appears to be on hold for now owing to concerns about the public 
and  private  financial  vulnerabilities  accumulated  during  the  crisis  and  by 
mutual  distrust.  The  situation  is  a  difficult  one  that  we  can  overcome  by 
creating the conditions that will enable us in the future to take the steps that 
today appear impossible. It is often recalled that the European Union and the 
euro area do not have a common government, yet it is precisely this major 
objective that has enlivened the history of modern Europe. There is still a 
long way to go, but this should not weaken our resolve to play a vigorous and 
18
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2017
leading role in the dialogue and deliberations upon which the prosperity of 
European citizens depends. 
The delicateness and exceptionality of these times is clear to everyone. 
While it is to be hoped that the goals and the projects of the various political 
groups  will  be  set  with  clarity  and  foresight,  together  with  the  plans  to 
achieve them, it would not be wise to ignore financial compatibilities. This, 
not because of European rigidities or the threat of speculation, but because 
our actions and our plans send out the signals that guide the allocation of 
resources at national and global level.
The rules of the game can be debated, even criticized; they can surely 
be improved. Yet we cannot disregard constitutional constraints: protecting 
savings,  balancing  the  accounts  and  respecting  the Treaties.  Above  all,  we 
must never forget the very serious risk of losing the irreplaceable asset of trust: 
trust in the strength of our country which, aside from petty and untenable 
judgments, is great, from both an economic and a civic perspective; trust in 
the soundness of our savings, founded on the capacity to overcome financial, 
economic and social imbalances; and trust in our future, which must not be 
frittered away in actions that will not affect growth potential and may even 
risk reducing it. 
If  we  all  persevere  in  the  endeavour  to  modernize  we  will  be  able  to 
contribute to the success of the fundamental values of the European projects, 
return  to  sustained  growth,  and  guarantee  peace  and  wellbeing  for  future 
generations. Never before have the words of the illustrious Governors who 
have gone before me been so relevant: ‘It’s up to us’.
BANCA D’ITALIA
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2017
19
FIGURES
GDP growth
Figure 1
World 
Euro area
Italy 
5
% 
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
Sources: Istat, Eurostat and IMF. Forecasts: Bank of Italy, ECB and IMF.
Inflation
5
% 
World 
Italy 
Euro area
4
3
2
1
0
-1
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
Sources: Eurostat and IMF. Forecasts: Bank of Italy, ECB and IMF.
5
% 
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
5
% 
4
3
2
1
0
-1
Figure 2
BANCA D’ITALIA
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2017
23
Eurosystem and Federal Reserve: total assets
(trillions of euros and dollars)
Figure 3
5
4
3
2
1
0
2006
Federal Reserve
Eurosystem
2008
2010
2012
2014
2016
2018
Sources: ECB and US Federal Reserve.
Unemployment rate
Euro area (excluding Italy) 
Italy 
13
% 
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
Source: Based on Eurostat data.
5
4
3
2
1
0
13
% 
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
Figure 4
24
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2017
Net foreign asset position
(per cent of GDP)
Figure 5
80
% 
60
40
20
0
-20
-40
-60
-80
-100
Germany 
France 
Italy 
Spain 
1999
2001
2003
2005
2007
2009
2011
2013
2015
2017
Sources: Bank of Italy, Eurostat and Istat.
80
% 
60
40
20
0
-20
-40
-60
-80
-100
Figure 6
Primary surplus and differential between the average cost of 
public debt and nominal GDP growth in Italy
(per cent of GDP and percentage points)
Avg. cost of the debt - GDP growth (r-g) 
Primary surplus
 Average (r-g) 
1998-2007 
Average (r-g) 
2008-2017 
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
2016
Sources: Based on Bank of Italy and Istat data.
BANCA D’ITALIA
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2017
25
Ratio of public debt to GDP in Italy: scenarios
Figure 7
% 
170
160
150
140
130
120
110
100
90
Primary surplus nil from 2019, (r-g) → 3 p.p. 
Primary surplus constant at 2017
levels (1,5%), (r-g) → 2 p.p.
Primary surplus at 3.5% of GDP from 2021, (r-g) → 1 p.p. 
2017
2019
2021
2023
2025
2027
2029
Sources: Based on Bank of Italy and Istat data.
Bank credit quality in Italy 
(per cent of total lending)
Total NPLs
Bad debts 
12
% 
10
8
6
4
2
0
  % 
170
160
150
140
130
120
110
100
90
12
% 
10
8
6
4
2
0
Figure 8
1992 1995 1998 2001 2004 2007 2010 2013 2016 2019
Sources:  Supervisory  reports  (consolidated  for  banking  groups  and  individual  for  stand-alone 
banks). Note: bad debts are a subset of total non-performing loans (NPLs). The ratios are calculated 
net of loan loss provisions. The projections for total NPLs are based on the reduction plans of the 
significant groups.
26
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2017
Printed by the 
Printing and Publishing Division 
of the Bank of Italy 
Rome, 29 May 2018
Printed on EU Ecolabel paper 
(registration number FR/011/003)
