Muhammad  bin  Ibrahim:  Bankers  as  guardians  of  the  financial
system
Remarks by Mr Muhammad bin Ibrahim, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia (Bank Negara
Malaysia),  at  the  AICB  Graduation  Ceremony  2018  "Bankers  as  Guardians  of  the  Financial
System", Kuala Lumpur, 12 May 2018.
 Thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  speak  at  this  commencement  ceremony.  I  hope  today  marks  a
meaningful milestone for you in your journey as a banker. For those who will receive an AICB
award today, congratulations! Do wear it with pride and keep up the good work. You make us
proud.
At last year’s ceremony, I pointed to the parallels between the conduct of the banking industry
and the Hippocratic Oath. Behind the oath, to do no harm, are three principles bankers can learn:
competence, character and the deep sense of calling.
I will aim higher this year and outline the case for bankers as guardians of the financial system.
As guardians, bankers are to exhibit professionalism, wisdom and agility.
Guardians of public trust, a responsibility to safeguard integrity of the system
Bankers have gained notoriety over the past few decades over their role in the Great Financial
Crisis. Derogatory terms were used to insinuate excessive wealth, power and undue influence of
bankers  over  the  economy.  This  reflects  everything  that  is  wrong  with  the  banking  system.
Reputation lost is not easy to regain. It is an uphill task to win back trust and confidence once it is
lost.
The spotlight on bankers is not entirely misguided. There is a strong case to place them to a
higher level of responsibility. This is understandable. Banking, or credit in particular, is deemed to
be the lifeblood of the economy. Through provision of credit to businesses and consumers, the
banking system spurs productive economic activities. Lack of trust and confidence in the banking
system  might 
in
unemployment and decline in wealth generation, just to name a few. The consequences are dire,
and the stakes are high.
to  disintermediation  and  cause  slower  economic  growth,  rise 
lead 
Since  the  financial  crisis,  more  than  USD$240  billion  have  been  levied  on  banks  for  various
cases of misconduct and breach of trust. As recent as three weeks ago, a major bank was fined
USD$1 billion. Both of these are astronomical amounts. In Malaysia, over the past three years,
Bank  Negara  Malaysia  has  imposed  close  to  RM110  million  in  penalties.  To  strengthen  the
system against these abuses and breaches of rules and regulations, a Code of Conduct and
Principles was issued last year by Bank Negara Malaysia.
In a more positive light, there is evidence that public trust in banks around the world is improving.
This  is  something  we  can  build  upon.  The  right  place  of  finance  is  to  be  the  catalyst  for  the
economy.
As guardians of public trust, bankers must protect the system against any threats. This means
protecting against abuse, misconduct and exploitation. No banker should tolerate misselling of
products to customers which are not suited to their needs. No banker should tolerate charging
excessive and hidden fees to unsuspecting customers and use these fees to excessively enrich
themselves. No banker should tolerate unethical and illegal behaviour of a fellow colleague. No
banker should tolerate any wrong doing or misconduct. The currency of bankers is not money
but trust. Loss of trust is calamitous for the profession.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
For us in Malaysia, our approach to ensure professionalism, trust and confidence rests upon a
two-pronged  strategy.  The  first  is  to  create  a  system  that  upholds  the  values  of  honesty  and
integrity. Professional organisations such as AICB play a crucial role in this, with the Chartered
Banker accreditation as a tool. The syllabus for this qualification places importance on ethics and
professional standards. The requirement for fresh graduates to undergo an induction course on
ethics is also a good starting point. There are other initiatives in store, we will step up efforts to
ensure that the roles, responsibilities and accountabilities of leaders of financial institutions are
clear and transparent. To this end, consultations with the industry will be conducted this year on
proposals to sharpen accountability of individuals holding senior roles.
The second complementary strategy is to create an enabling environment to empower financial
institutions  to  make  informed  and  sound  hiring  decisions.  Effective  1  July  2018,  it  will  be  a
requirement for financial institutions to screen all new hires, except those performing ancillary
functions. This includes their employment history and criminal records. Financial institutions will
be required to keep proper records related to employees and to provide the required information
when requested by another institution.
This will guard the system against disreputable staff and enact barriers against potential threats
to the integrity of the system.
As guardians of the system, bankers need to look at these requirements as useful enabling tools
or defenses that help with their mission to successfully protect the integrity of the system.
Guardians of knowledge and wisdom
The complexity scientist, Samuel Arbesman in his study of how knowledge develops, postulates
that  knowledge  behaves  like  radioactive  decay.  Every  fact  has  a  ‘half-life’  and  it  will  inevitably
decay. It means that the frontier of knowledge also changes constantly. What we know today
may be untrue tomorrow. This rings true for matters concerning banking.
The  immediate  manner  in  which  our  knowledge  becomes  obsolete  certainly  ties  in  with  our
experience in banking and society at large. For one, the complexity of economic, environmental
and  social  challenges  seems  to  increase  exponentially.  Furthermore,  much  of  the  knowledge
frontier remains unexplored. Consider this. We only utilise less than 0.5% of our existing data.
There is a long way to go. The potential is enormous.
In  all  likelihood,  what  we  know  today  will  be  vastly  different  in  two,  five  and  10  years  into  the
future. We see this happening already in the banking sector, with the greater use of technology
and in particular, more creative use of data analytics to better serve consumers and business
needs.
We are entering an age of new ways to harness knowledge. As knowledge is dynamic, not static,
our approach to learning also needs to be in sync. This calls for lifelong learning, interdisciplinary
thinking and the ability to convert knowledge into action. An innovative and effective banker would
need to constantly push the boundaries of knowledge. One cannot assume that the ‘facts’ that
we know today will remain true. Just as in science, we should not take anything for granted, and
remain open to insights from other fields of study. This is why the Bank has encouraged greater
professionalism  through  professional  qualifications  and  lifelong  learning. As  Benjamin  Franklin
famously said, “An investment in knowledge pays the best interest.”
It is from this perspective that we can look forward to the completion of the Financial Education
Hub  located  within  the  vicinity  of  Bank  Negara  Malaysia.  The  hub  is  envisioned  to  advance
education, research and nurture innovation in financial services. This will be achieved through its
state-of-the-art staff training facilities, a financial services library that will serve the entire financial
services community, innovation labs for information technology, a software development hub, a
cybersecurity centre and an integrated security command centre.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Future generations of financial services professionals will be nurtured and cultivated within this
space.  By  congregating  tens  of  thousands  of  finance  practitioners  within  close  proximity,  we
believe that great and exciting synergies will materialise to develop talent and raise professional
standards of the industry. This meeting of great minds will be the path towards building future
leaders and respected finance professionals. It will be a hub where the best minds in finance will
come together to contemplate, reflect and discuss on the frontiers of finance.
In the pipeline are also plans to develop a mentorship programme supported by financial industry
leaders,  including  bankers  for  fintech  startups.  This  will  expand  horizons  for  ideation,  enable
cross-fertilisation  of  knowledge  and  boost  startups  in  their  journey  to  be  successful  ventures.
This will be launched by the end of the year.
Guardians of the future
With the acceleration of technology, the financial sector of the future will be vastly different from
what  it  is  today.  Fintech  innovation,  regulatory  reforms,  deepening  integration  and  shifts  in
consumer  demographics  and  preferences  are  some  of  the  forces  that  will  drive  this  change.
Future bankers of the Malaysian financial sector will encounter opportunities and challenges not
seen before.
New jobs will be created and existing jobs will change or become extinct. Automation will change
the back and middle office functions. Artificial intelligence will change how banking services are
delivered  to  the  consumer.  Data  science  and  big  data  will  change  the  way  financial  and  data
analytics are conducted.
Yet,  the  fact  remains  that  we  cannot  predict  the  future  with  great  certainty.  In  one  of  my
speeches last year, I mentioned four possible scenarios on how the future of finance may unfold.
The possibilities are exciting and almost limitless. The central bank’s role is to create an enabling
environment for innovation to mushroom. In this environment, many will flourish but bankers who
will really thrive will be those who are agile, pragmatic and flexible.
I am optimistic, as bankers in Malaysia are well placed to do this. Most bankers are highly skilled.
As  at  end  of  2017,  high-skilled  workers  formed  around  75%  of  the  banking  workforce.  The
salaries  of  bankers  are  also  supported  by  relatively  high  levels  of  productivity.  If  there  is  any
profession that is able to quickly adapt for the future, I believe it is the banking sector.
This is proven by data. Over the last three years, the banking sector has created close to 20,000
jobs, reflecting its continued ability to anticipate and address shifts in the workforce needs. As job
functions evolve, some will be dislocated. In this respect, it is critical for the industry to have in
place  mechanisms  that  support  workforce  transition,  through  retraining,  reskilling  and
outplacement assistance.
To  facilitate  this,  in  collaboration  with  the  industry,  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  will  be  working  to
formulate an assessment of the current and future state of the banking workforce. A report is
expected  to  be  published  by  the  end  of  the  year.  The  assessment  will  include  identifying  the
quantum and nature of jobs that are potentially at risk of displacement in the coming years.
This should assist the industry in evolving complementary job roles, and formulating strategies to
facilitate staff transition to new roles. This is indeed an ambitious and complex project, and we
need your support and cooperation.
I am very optimistic on this venture as the collective body of professional bankers in this room
today  can  achieve  great  things  if  we  act  with  professionalism,  courage  and  vigour  in  our
respective roles. I believe that all of you here today, the brightest minds of the banking sector, will
rise confidently to the challenges and opportunities that lie ahead, armed with a strong foundation
in banking knowledge with a renewed commitment to the nobility of the banking profession.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Before I end, let me say a few words about the post-election environment that we are in. The
Monetary Policy Committee of Bank Negara Malaysia last Thursday, the 10th of May, and we
reaffirmed that the outlook of the Malaysian economy remains strong, healthy and robust.
Moving  ahead,  the  Bank  will  continue  to  ensure  orderly  conditions  in  the  onshore  financial
markets. Malaysia is no stranger to short term volatility given that we are an open economy that
is highly integrated with global markets. Our experience tells us that we must be careful not to
overreact  to  market  noises,  especially  when  it  is  caused  by  factors  which  are  temporary  in
nature. The negative but much reduced influence of the NDF market should not detract the ringgit
movements over the longer term.
In the medium and long term, the ringgit will reflect Malaysia’s strong economic fundamentals.
Our strength can be seen from the current account surplus, a strong reserves position, low level
of external indebtedness and strong capital buffers in the banking system.
We  expect  these  strong  conditions  to  persist. As  many  of  you  here  can  testify,  our  financial
system is resilient and robust. On numerous occasions over the past decade, we have been
able to manage market volatility in our stride. To a large extent, this was due to the continuous
measures taken over the years to develop our financial markets. Our market now is balanced,
deep and liquid to provide the structural support for orderly market conditions.
Conclusion
Let me conclude with the wisdom of the great philosopher Socrates. He viewed that any state
should  be  led  by  wise,  noble  and  exemplary  ‘guardians'.  These  guardians  will  “...unite
themselves in philosophy and spirit and swiftness and strength...and they ought to be wise and
efficient." 
As  bankers  and  guardians,  let  us  aspire  to  exemplify  these  traits;  to  pursue  professionalism,
agility and wisdom.
Thank you and congratulations again to all the graduates. A bright and exciting future awaits you.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
