 22.06.18 
 “The financial education challenge” 
Closing session of the seminar “La economía ante el blockchain. Lo que está 
por venir”, UIMP – APIE (Santander) 
Javier Alonso 
Deputy Governor 
 
  Good afternoon.  
It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  here  again  in  Santander  and  to  have  the  opportunity  to  close  this 
seminar,  successfully  organised  year  after  year  by  the  Menéndez  Pelayo  International 
University and the APIE (the Spanish Association of Economics Journalists). As always, I 
much appreciate their kind invitation to be a part of this traditional event on the calendar.  
Last year, the seminar turned on how the digital agenda affects the economy and industry. 
This  year,  it  is  structured  around  one  technological  development  in  particular,  the 
blockchain. The interest in new technologies is thus clearly apparent.  
Undoubtedly, new technologies are one of the challenges facing the economy in general, 
and the banking industry in particular. I have repeatedly addressed this challenge in recent 
interventions, in which I highlighted the fact, moreover, that at the Banco España we have 
recently  created  an  Associate  Directorate  General  for  Financial  Innovation  and  Market 
Infrastructures, with the aim of building up our knowledge on the challenges the provision 
of financial services is going to face in this setting of technological developments, and on 
the consequences for the financial system in general, and for banks in particular.  
Without losing sight of the interest this seminar has in the challenge the new technologies 
pose, I would like to focus today on another major challenge that is not exclusive to the 
banking industry but applicable to everybody: financial education.  
Allow me first to set out, non-exhaustively, some of the results drawn from the Survey of 
Financial Competences presented by the  Banco de España  and the CNMV  last month. I 
shall then refer to how important it is to continue dedicating efforts to financial education, 
especially in the current context of financial innovation.  
The Survey of Financial Competences  
The  Survey  of  Financial  Competences,  which  is  included  in  the  National  Statistics  Plan, 
adapts  for  Spain  a  questionnaire  devised  by  the  International  Network  for  Financial 
Education,  coordinated  by  the  OECD.  The  aim  is  to  measure,  in  an  internationally 
comparable way, the financial competences of the population aged 18 to 79.  
The  Survey  measures  these  competences  from  different  perspectives,  and  obtains 
information  on:  (i)  financial  literacy;  and  (ii)  knowledge,  holding,  acquisition  and  use  of 
financial products.  
To measure financial literacy, the Survey poses questions on three basic financial concepts: 
i) inflation; ii) compound interest rates; and iii) risk diversification. 
The aim is to assess whether the interviewee understands: (i) that money loses purchasing 
power when prices rise; (ii) that the changes in an amount saved in an account over five 
years depend not only on the annual interest rate applied to the amount saved the first year, 
but also on the interest accumulated thereafter; and iii) that the risk of investing in equities 
diminishes if a broad range of shares is acquired instead of only one type.  
The replies, obtained from a broad sample of randomly selected individuals representing 
Spanish territory as a whole and each of its regions, and provided by INE, reveal, inter alia, 
 3/7 
 the  following  results:  (i)  58%  of  interviewees  understand  what  inflation  is;  (ii)  46% 
understand  the  concept  of  compound  interest;  (iii)  49%  understand  the  concept  of  risk 
diversification; and (iv) the percentage of correct replies increases with educational level and 
household income level. 
Given that the Survey includes questions from an international project to measure financial 
competences, it is possible to compare these results with those obtained in other countries, 
in particular with OECD countries and EU countries that have information available in this 
connection. The comparison shows that the percentage of correct replies in Spain regarding 
the concepts of inflation and risk diversification is below the average, particularly in the case 
of risk diversification, in which the averages for the OECD and EU countries stand at 62% 
in both groups (compared with 49% in Spain). Regarding the concept of compound interest, 
however, the percentage is very close to the average observed in the OECD countries (46%) 
and in the EU members (44%). Nonetheless, this should serve as no consolation, since this 
average means that over half the interviewees do not understand a basic financial concept 
such as compound interest rates.  
The need to reinforce the general public’s financial literacy is also patent in some of the 
results on knowledge, holding, acquisition and use of financial products.  
Firstly, as far as knowledge of financial products is concerned, the Survey asks interviewees 
whether they have heard of the following products: (i) savings accounts, pension schemes, 
investment  funds,  shares  and  fixed  income  (all  savings  vehicles);  (ii)  life  insurance  and 
medical insurance; (iii) means of payment such as credit cards; and (iv) debt products such 
as mortgages and personal loans.  
It can be concluded from the results that there is less knowledge of savings products than 
of debt or insurance products. Shares and pension schemes are well known (around 90% 
have heard of them), but only 73% of interviewees have heard of savings accounts and term 
deposits and only 78% of fixed income, while the percentage of those who have heard of 
life and medical insurance, credit cards, mortgages and personal loans is, in all instances, 
higher than or equal to 95%.  
In the case of savings vehicles, moreover, significant differences are observed on the basis 
of  educational  level  (primary,  secondary  or  university)  and  the  level  of  income  which, 
generally, are less marked in the case of debt and insurance products.  
Secondly,  as  regards  whether  interviewees  have  or  have  recently  acquired  any  of  these 
financial products, a notable 97% have a current account, 43% have some type of savings 
vehicle and 41% have debt of some sort. The commonest saving product is the savings 
account, followed by pension schemes. Once again differences are observed on the basis 
of educational level and level of income, more markedly so in the case of savings vehicles 
than in that of debt products.  
Among the international patterns identified in respect of the holding of financial products, it 
is worth mentioning that while in Spain holding a current account is more generalised than 
in the OECD and EU countries, holding savings products stands slightly below the average 
for these countries. It should be borne in mind, however, that the results on the comparison 
of the holding of savings products should be viewed with caution since the list of products 
considered as savings vehicles may vary from country to country.  
4/7 
  As to the recent acquisition of financial products, the Survey shows that 38% have acquired 
some type of saving or insurance vehicle, a means of payment, or have incurred debt over 
the  past  two  years.  This  percentage  is  lower  than  the  average  observed  in  the  OECD 
countries (54%) and EU members (50%). The most frequently acquired product in Spain is 
the credit card, followed by personal loans.  
Here, too, there are significant differences in the acquisition of savings products based on 
educational level  and  on the  level of  income,  which  are  less  marked  in  the case  of  debt 
products. Thus, in the case of interviewees with a university education, 32% acquire savings 
products, while in the case of those with primary schooling, only 8% acquire them. By level 
of  income,  43%  of  those  who  live  in  a  household  with  income  of  over  €44,500  acquire 
savings vehicles while only 8% do so in households with income of up to €14,500. 
Finally, the Survey also enables information to be had on the use of financial products: in 
particular, on one hand, on whether interviewees have saved over the past 12 months and, 
if so, using which savings vehicle; and, on the other, whether the household’s spending has 
exceeded  its  income  over  this  period  and,  if  so,  how  they  financed  it  the  last  time  this 
happened.  
This information shows that, as regards saving, 61% of interviewees have been saving in 
the  past  12  months.  The  percentage  increases  in terms of  educational  level  and level of 
income. One noteworthy feature is that the second most common method of saving, behind 
the  current  account,  is  cash,  even  in  the  highest  educational  and  income  segments.  In 
particular,  38%  of  interviewees  who  save  do  so  in  cash.  Only  14%  do  so  via  a  savings 
account and 11% via a pension scheme.  
As  regards  expenditure,  28%  of  interviewees  live  in  households  whose  spending  has 
outpaced income over the past 12 months, a percentage that is in line with the average 
observed in OECD and EU countries. 51% financed this shortfall resorting to savings, and 
35% through informal credit (friends, employer, etc.). As in the foregoing cases, differences 
were observed in terms of educational level and level of income. As both levels increase, 
the percentage of instances in which spending has exceeded income diminishes and the 
percentage of cases where greater spending is financed with savings increases.  
Undoubtedly, financial behaviour does not depend solely on financial literacy, but is also 
influenced by other circumstances; but, in light of some of the above-mentioned results, I 
do believe there is clearly room for improvement in the field of financial education in Spain, 
and that we should continue to strive in this direction.  
Financial education in a context of technological innovation and developments  
Giving  priority  attention  to  financial  education  is,  moreover,  particularly  significant  in  the 
current context of financial innovation.  
Technological developments are changing the way in which customers relate to financial 
institutions  and  how  they  take  up  financial  products.  And  this,  though  it  has  attendant 
advantages, also entails risks. Greater financial culture, greater awareness of the new reality 
and a greater development of the general public’s digital competences can help mitigate 
these risks. 
 5/7 
 I would like to refer, in particular, to three examples of these risks.  
First, the increasingly frequent dissemination of relevant information, pre-contractual and 
contractual alike, via smart phones and tablets. Screen size, the apparent user-friendliness 
of applications and the immediacy of acceptance limit the customer’s ability to know what 
actually is being agreed to, and they are a hindrance to specific key aspects of acquiring 
financial  products,  such  as  the  reading  of  the  contractual  terms  and  conditions,  and 
interaction to resolve questions about them. 
In  acquiring  products  digitally,  customers  assume  greater  independence  in  terms  of 
information and decision-making, and they must ensure they fully understand the potential 
consequences of their choices. Additionally, just as they are aware – or should be – of the 
importance of the commitment acquired when they sign an agreement in their own hand, 
so too should they be aware of the commitment taken on when clicking on a touch screen 
where it says “I accept the terms and conditions of the agreement”.  
A second example of risks that are present in the current context of technological innovation 
and developments is the ease with which access may be had to complex financial assets 
and products that can hardly be understood without basic financial knowledge. A case in 
point here are what are popularly known as cryptoassets, whose development has much to 
do with the focus of this seminar, namely blockchain technology.   
Among cryptoassets are what are generally known as cryptocurrencies, conceived for use 
as  a  means  of  payment,  and  those  known  as  digital  tokens,  conceived  for  obtaining 
financing and which confer on the purchaser the right to receive remuneration, or to exercise 
certain rights.  
The Bitcoin is an example of the former. The so-called ICOs (Initial Coin Offerings) are an 
application of the latter.  
Both  have  been  the  subject  of  growing  interest,  and  there  are  at  present  numerous  and 
highly heterogeneous initiatives.  
While their impact so far on global financial stability is considered to be limited, they pose a 
series  of  risks,  in  areas  such  as  consumer  protection  and  the  prevention  of  money-
laundering and the financing of terrorism, which the authorities monitor closely and on which 
they have issued warnings and statements. In this connection, it should be stressed that 
these are assets of a marked speculative nature, without the backing of supervisors and 
susceptible  to  fraud  or  price  manipulation.  They  cannot  be  considered  as  money  or  as 
deposits, and they do not enjoy the protection of the regulations governing banking and 
investment products.  
It is worrying that, in a setting in which less than half the population understands the concept 
of  compound  interest  rates,  there  is  such  demand  for  complex  assets  with  these 
characteristics.  
Lastly, I wish to refer to the risk of authorising – owing to a lack of knowledge or of due care 
– access to personal information that would preferably have been kept private. The debate 
over the use of personal information in the area of payment services has heightened with 
6/7 
  the  new  Directive  known  as  PSD2,  which  institutionalises  the  so-called  TPP  (Third  Party 
Providers). 
TPP  encompass  “payment  initiation  service  providers”  and  “account  information  service 
providers”.  The  former  offer  an  alternative  to  the  use  of  cards  when  making  electronic 
purchase payments. The latter provide consolidated information on the status of the various 
accounts the customer has with entities, thereby facilitating financial planning. 
Payments  account  holders  are  entitled  to  authorise  these  third  party  providers  to  order 
payments  on  their  behalf  and/or  to  consult  information  associated  with  their  accounts. 
Against this background, and irrespective of the usefulness of these services, it is important 
that  customers  should  strive  to  understand  the  real  scope  of  the  authorisation  granted, 
which may entail access to their account by a third party on the same footing as if it were 
the customers themselves accessing the account. 
Faced with risks such as the foregoing, magnified by the development of new technologies, 
I believe that financial education has a role to play.  
It  may  help,  for  example,  make  people  aware  of  the  change  in  reality  that  the  digital 
arrangement  of  agreements  entails  or  increase  the  digital  competences  of  the  public  at 
large.  
The Financial Education Plan  
Mindful of the foregoing, the Banco de España and the CNMV continue working on their 
commitment to financial education through the Financial Education Plan.  
Over the past ten years, and using two courses of action, one covering the 2008-2012 period 
and the other the years 2013-2017, this Plan has enabled actions such as the following to 
be  carried  out:  the  Financial  Education  Programme  for  schools,  which  seeks  to  improve 
students’ financial literacy; the consolidation of an extensive network of public and private 
collaborators; the institution of a “Financial Education Day” on the first Monday of October 
each  year;  and  the  website  finanzasparatodos  (“finance  for  all”),  which  contains  basic 
material  on  household  finances,  such  as  how  to  get  to  the  end  of  the  month  or  how  to 
manage finances at different stages of life.  
Indeed, this week has seen the publication of a new plan of action for the 2018-2021 period. 
It  includes  objectives  additional  to  the  previous  ones,  including  most  notably  the 
identification of target segments of the population not sufficiently catered for, the use of 
digital tools for the development of financial education initiatives and the strengthening of 
the Plan’s network of collaborators, which provide a boost for and outreach to people in all 
social  circumstances  and  situations.  To  attain  these  objectives,  analysis  and  use  of  the 
results of the aforementioned Survey of Financial Competences will naturally be pivotal. 
I have no doubt that, thus conceived, the Financial Education Plan will play an important 
role in alleviating the risks arising from digitalisation in the provision of financial services.  
Thank you very much for your attention.  
  7/7 
