Sharon Donnery: The importance of diversity in central banks and
supervised entities
Speech by Ms Sharon Donnery, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, at the Central
Bank of Malta 50th Anniversary Conference, Valetta, 4 May 2018.
Introduction
 It is a great pleasure to be with you today and I would like to thank Governor Vella, for the kind
1
invitation.
The Central Bank of Ireland and the Central Bank of Malta have closer connections than may be
expected, separated by distance but brought closer through the European project. For example,
2018 is the tenth anniversary of our close co-operation in the management of our Eurosystem
reserves. In addition, I myself went on a number of technical assistance missions to the Central
Bank of Malta prior to accession to the European Union (EU), so in addition to our institutions’
connections, it’s a particular personal pleasure for me to return to Valletta today.
Governor Vella asked me to speak to you today specifically about gender diversity and central
banking. I know this is an issue particularly close to your heart Governor, and now – thankfully –
at the top of all our agendas.
In  post-crisis  supervision  of  firms,  despite  the  regulatory  and  institutional  overhaul,  we
sometimes  encounter  the  kind  of  problems  which  contributed  to  the  financial  crisis,  such  as
groupthink,  insufficient  challenge,  poorly  assessed  risk,  and  problems  with  culture.   As  I  will
argue  today,  gender  diversity  in  the  boards  and  management  of  supervised  firms  can  help
ameliorate some of these issues.
Of course, going beyond gender is vitally important, given diversity is not just about the ratio of
women  to  men  in  the  workplace.  It’s  about  age,  ethnicity,  sexual  orientation,  education,
nationality, disability, beliefs and more. I will touch upon these issues in my remarks. However, I
will focus, in the main, on gender diversity.
In my opinion, the ethical argument for gender diversity – while undeniable – may ultimately have
limitations. Instead, the evidence of what greater diversity can bring to the table – in the form of
clear benefits for organisations – may actually be a greater driver of change. But it will, of course,
take time for central banks and firms more broadly to become aware of this evidence, to accept
it, and to consciously and determinedly implement change.
So  in  the  meantime,  we  have  a  challenge  ahead  of  us  –  as  women,  as  men,  as  public
institutions,  as  managers,  as  leaders. And  it’s  a  challenge  that  does  and  will  require  specific
policies and tools – ranging from the publication of facts and figures, to direct intervention – until
the picture has changed for the better.
Diversity needs to start from the top
Diversity, in my view, needs to start from the top. If you indulge me for a moment, I will tell you a
little about my career and why I believe this to be so.
When I joined the Central Bank of Ireland in 1996, it had just under 600 full-time staff, 13 divisions
and a senior management team of just 8 people. If you saw the organisational chart, you would
see that there were no women on the senior management team and not even one woman at
head of division level. The ‘norm’ was that leaders in the Central Bank of Ireland were male. This
was due to a number of factors: history, culture in Ireland, culture in the discipline of economics,
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
and culture in the Central Bank itself.
The effects – although subtle – definitely affected me in that there were no female role models,
no one I could aspire to be like. All that changed, when in 2001, a woman was appointed as the
first female Head of Division in the Central Bank and we have had a number of senior female
appointments  since.  This  changed  my  point  of  reference,  and  I  know  the  reference  points  of
many other senior women in our organisation.
I have since been privileged to hold significant positions of public service at both national and
European level. Looking back, one influential aspect was having people at senior levels to whom I
could relate, and who I could see as role models. That made a difference in my career.
Therefore, in my opinion, it is important that we create an environment where diversity is valued
at all levels of the organisation – including at the very top.
What the Central Bank of Ireland is doing
Since the first woman in the Central Bank of Ireland was appointed Head of Division in 2001,
solid progress has been made in promoting diversity at the top of the Central Bank. Our own
diversity  policy  recognises  that  we  need  staff  with  diverse  experiences  and  from  diverse
backgrounds and who bring different styles of thinking.
The Commission (the governing board of the Central Bank of Ireland) has three females out of
ten members. We also have a much more diverse management mix within the Central Bank of
Ireland now – 39 per cent of directors are women, as are 49 per cent of our division heads. And
we have a range of policies which aim to sustain and increase the pace of this progress.
This week, we published our first gender pay gap analysis at the Central Bank of Ireland. Our
report shows that, with 50 per cent female and 50 per cent male staff, we have good gender
parity  across  the  organisation.  There  are  some  differences  in  gender  profiles  across  different
grades. Consequently, there is an overall difference of 2.7 per cent between the average pay for
males  and  females  across  the  Bank.  While  our  gap  is  less  than  other  organisations  there  is
room for continued improvement.
Within the Central Bank of Ireland, our focus is wider than on our employees alone. It’s on our
prospective employees – trying to ensure we attract candidates to our organisation from a highly
competitive pool of diverse talent. For me, a very important aspect of our diversity efforts is that
they do not rest with our Human Resources directorate alone. Diversity management starts from
the top down.
However,  given  the  importance  of  what  we  do,  diversity  for  diversity’s  sake  has  limitations.
Anybody who is promoted to a leadership position has got to be capable of leadership. It’s not yet
a decade since the global financial crisis. And across many Member States, the effects of it are
still being unwound. And so, to try to prevent a repeat, we need competent people leading central
banks and in the financial sector alike.
That raises an important issue, and key element of the debate – how important is diversity in
deciding who that competent person should be and, is there a stronger argument to make for
ensuring  gender  diversity  at  senior  management  levels?  I  take  a  firm  view  that  those  in
management  positions  should  first  and  foremost  be  there  because  of  merit,  ability  and  track
record. The institutions we work for, and indeed the public interest, demand no less.
Should regulation support gender diversity?
But is there evidence that policymakers should take action to support greater diversity at senior
management  levels.  Well,  Central  Banks  are  evidence-based  operators.  We  sift  the  available
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
evidence and make the most informed policy decisions possible, on that basis. In short, yes. And
it’s a body of evidence that’s growing.
3
2
For example, research shows gender diversity can affect the process and quality of decision-
making.   It  can  guard  against  groupthink  by  bringing  a  heterogeneity  of  values,  beliefs,  and
attitudes.  Other studies suggest that a higher female presence in top management could help
develop  better  types  of  leadership  behaviour  across  organisations  –  namely  –people
development,  setting  expectations  and  rewards,  providing  role  models,  and  participative
decision-making.   Furthermore,  reducing  gender  differences  between  management  and  staff,
can  enhance  worker  productivity.   More  broadly,  research  from  the  IMF  shows  a  positive
6
association between corporate return on assets and the share of women in senior positions.
4
5
So,  the  available  research  suggests  diversity  can  lead  to  improved  outcomes  in  terms  of
governance,  decision-making,  and  productivity.    These  are  all  compelling  reasons  why
organisations and businesses should themselves ensure greater gender diversity at senior level.
But  beyond 
reasons
why policymakers should intervene?
they  have  such  policies,  are 
just  ensuring 
there 
that 
While acknowledging the necessity for regulated firms to take risks – every loan or investment
decision has some risk attached – knowledge of risks taken by firms can improve when there is
gender diversity on the board. There is an important distinction here. The available research does
not suggest firms take any less risk if they have a more diverse board. It does, however, suggest
that those risks are more carefully examined, and weighed, because each decision is challenged
more.  So how can we get to a situation where there are more women both on boards and in
positions of senior management?
7
Fortunately, as Deputy Governor of a central bank which has both financial stability and financial
sector  supervision    as  part  of  its  mandate  (including  more  than  10,000  credit  institutions,
insurance firms, funds and investment firms), I am in position to influence this debate.
Personally, I think that diversity at senior management levels of regulated firms is a goal worth
pursuing.  And, at home in Ireland, diversity of regulated firms is something upon which we in the
Central Bank of Ireland have started to focus in a significant way.
For example, we have introduced requirements for regulated entities to have diversity policies.
However,  there’s  no  silver  bullet.  All  organisations  are  different  and  have  differing  priorities.
Rather,  it  is  something  that  organisations  have  to  work  at  steadily,  through  a  combination  of
policies and tools.
However, as I mentioned earlier, in firms, we sometimes encounter the kind of problems which
contributed  to  the  financial  crisis:  groupthink,  insufficient  challenge,  poorly  assessed  risk,  and
problems with culture.
These traits can be associated with a lack of diversity at senior levels.
Therefore, in 2017, the Central Bank of Ireland took another important step. We published data
on the level of gender diversity at senior levels of regulated entities and we have committed to
publishing this data on an annual basis.
This  included  analysis  of  nearly  18,000  applications  received  by  the  Central  Bank  for  pre-
approval for senior roles as part of our fitness and probity regime. This covers insurance, asset
management, securities and markets, banking, consumer and credit unions over the previous
8
five years.
The results are glaring but unfortunately, unsurprising.
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Male applicants made up 80 per cent of applications for senior roles since 2012, with a high of 84
per cent of male applicants in 2012 itself decreasing to 78 per cent of male applicants in 2017.
The 2017 data shows an increase in the proportion of female applicants at both board – from 16
per cent to 18 per cent – and senior management levels – from 28 per cent to 30 per cent –
when comparing 2017 with the period 2012–2016. But these figures are extremely low.
We have also carried out a review of the diversity policies of regulated firms and tried to nudge
behaviour towards a new, improved norm, by being very clear on what we would like to see in
diversity policies.
Furthermore, the Central Bank of Ireland is actively considering what other steps it should take in
this area, particularly if raising awareness has insufficient effect.
We  would  prefer  to  see  the  firms  we  supervise  taking  steps  to  increase  diversity  levels  on  a
voluntary  basis.  But  in  the  absence  of  improvements  in  diversity  at  senior  levels  in  regulated
firms, the Central Bank will have to consider whether it is necessary to put specific requirements
in place.
This issue is simply too important  to overlook. So regulatory tools clearly have their place.
So too do other tools.
2018 marks 100 years of women’s suffrage in Ireland, and we have indeed come far. This year,
we at the Central Bank of Ireland will recognise this great landmark with the launch of a 15 euro
commemorative coin. And although you could argue there has never been a better and safer
time to be born a woman, gender equality remains the unfinished business of the last century.
In Ireland it is a national issue. For example, our political system has set down legislative quotas
for general elections to the national parliament. Put simply, 30 per cent of a party’s candidates
must be women or their State funding will be cut. Partly, as a result, at the last general election in
2016, women’s representation in the lower house rose from 15 per cent to 22 per cent – still not
enough, but a significant leap in the space of just one election.
There was a time when I wouldn’t have believed in targets or quotas, but I now see them as a
necessary part of the picture. Now, that may seem inconsistent with my earlier view that merit
should be the primary factor. But in a sense, tools like targets or quotas are not about artificially
levelling the playing field – they are to ensure access to the field in the first place. We will not
achieve  gender  diversity  in  governments  without  greater  female  representation  in  national
parliaments to begin with. You won’t get diversity in firms unless you determinedly encourage or
implement change.
Incidentally,  last  year,  I  saw  the  Central  Bank  of  Malta  issued  a  silver  coin  to  mark  the  70th
anniversary of the enacting of the 1947 constitution, which enshrined the principle of universal
suffrage to all persons over 21 years of age. This was the first time that Maltese women were
given the right to vote and hold office. Of the two women candidates that ran for office – Agatha
Barbara (1923 – 2002) – was elected. She would successfully contest ten consecutive elections,
be  appointed  cabinet  minister  five  times,  and  would  be  the  first  Maltese  woman  to  become
president of the Republic in 1982. Clearly, the road to full and effective equality for women and
9
men in Malta did not stop with the achievement of 1947. It is still an ongoing process.
The European dimension
So, in the spirit of the theme of this conference, ‘what changed after the financial crisis’? Well,
from the data I have just presented, when we consider gender diversity, progress in the firms we
supervise is slow. But, we are placing a spotlight on this issue, and intend to keep it there. We
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
are doing so not from an ethical perspective, important though that is. We are doing it because
there is a sound business case for diversity – one which can contribute both to the bottom line
and  the  public  good. At  the  Central  Bank,  we  are  committed  to  diversity  to  ensure  our  own
organisation  reflects  the  public  we  are  here  to  serve.  In  our  supervisory  role,  firms  can  now
expect the Central Bank supervisors whom they deal with to challenge them when there is a lack
of diversity at board and management levels.   We want the firms we supervise to make good
decisions, take considered risks and not suffer from groupthink.
There is an important European dimension to this. Just last year, the European Union marked the
60th anniversary of the Treaty of Rome. That Treaty enshrined the principle that men and women
should  receive  equal  pay  for  equal  work.  Now,  while  pay  disparity  is  still  a  live  issue,  it  is
unquestionably the case that the situation would have been far worse without that principle being
enshrined in EU law. And that principle has supported many policies, decisions and actions taken
since then.
Likewise,  no  one  single  law,  policy  or  even  manager  will  ensure  diversity  in  the  workplace  or
equality of opportunity for leadership positions, let alone equality of outcome. It’s a combination of
factors, from studying the evidence, to recruitment policies to supporting the talent pipeline.
The motto of the European Union is “United in diversity”. The motto “signifies how Europeans
have come together, in the form of the European Union, to work for peace and prosperity, while
at  the  same  time  being  enriched  by  the  continent’s  many  different  cultures,  traditions  and
languages”.
10
Prior  to  the  crisis  European  authorities  had  a  range  of  supervisory  cultures,  practices  and
frameworks.  The  establishment  of  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  and  Single  Resolution
Mechanism are fundamental institutional changes since the financial crisis. The Economic and
Monetary Union, and the Banking Union represent far more than the institutions of which they are
comprised. In the Eurosystem and Banking Union more broadly, our diversity of experience, skills
and cultures, allow us to better face the challenges of an ever-changing financial system.
Thank you.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
 I would like to thank Mícheál O’Keeffe for his contributions to these remarks.
See  Hoogendoorn,  S.,  Oosterbeek,  H.  and  van  Praag,  M.  (2013),  The  impact  of  gender  diversity  on  the
performance of business teams: evidence from a field experiment. Management Science, 59, pp. 1514–1528.
See  Organization  for  Economic  Cooperation  and  Development  (2012),  ‘Closing  the  Gender  Gap: Act  Now.’
OECD, Paris. Also, see Daily, C.M., Dalton, D.R. and Cannella, A.A. (2003) ‘Corporate governance: Decades of
dialogue and data.’ Academy of management review, 28(3), pp.371–382. Also, see Robinson, G. and Dechant,
K. (1997) ‘Building a business case for diversity.’ Academy of Management Executive, 11, pp. 164–177.
See  McKinsey  &  Company  (2009) ‘Women  Matter  3:  Women  leaders,  a  competitive  edge  in  and  after  the
crisis,’ for results of a global survey of almost 800 business leaders conducted in September 2009.
See Giuliano, L., Levine, D. I, and Leonard, J. (2006). ‘Do Race, Age, and Gender Differences Affect Manager-
Employee Relations? An Analysis of Quits, Dismissals, and Promotions at a Large Retail Firm.’ UC Berkeley:
Institute for Research on Labor and Employment.
See Christiansen, H., Lin, H., Pereira J., Topalova, P. and Turk, R. (2016) ‘Gender Diversity in Senior Positions
and  Firm  Performance:  Evidence  from  Europe.’  IMF  Working  Paper,  WP/16/50.  For  other  analysis  see  The
Gadhia  Report  produced  for  the  UK  Treasury  entitled ‘Empowering  Productivity:  Harnessing  the  Talents  of
Women in Financial Services’, which notes that companies in the top quartile for gender diversity are 15 per cent
more likely to have financial returns above their respective national industry medians. The report also notes that
in the UK, for every 10 per cent increase in gender diversity, earnings before interest and tax (EBIT) rose by 3.5
per cent.
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
7
8
9
See Brown, D., Brown, D. and Anastasopoulos, V. (2002) ‘Women on boards: Not just the right thing . . . But the
“bright” thing.’ 70 Report, 341–02: The Conference Board of Canada, Ottawa.
See Central Bank of Ireland’s Demographic Analysis (2017).
See Central Bank of Malta.
10
See European Union.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
