Mario Draghi:  Introductory  statement to the plenary
debate of the European Parliament on the European Central Bank's
Annual Report 2016
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  to  the
plenary debate of the European Parliament on the European Central Bank's Annual Report 2016,
Strasbourg, 5 February 2017.
 Mr President of the European Parliament,
Mr Vice-President of the Commission,
Honourable Members of the European Parliament,
I am very pleased to be here to discuss with you the ECB’s activities and your draft resolution on
the ECB’s Annual Report 2016.
Today’s debate represents a good opportunity to take stock of progress made and discuss the
way forward.
A decade ago, the global financial crisis was starting. Today, while further efforts are needed to
overcome its legacy, the euro area economy is expanding and employment is rising.
Your  draft  resolution  points  out  that  monetary  policy  has  played  a  key  role  in  this  recovery
process. The ECB has indeed acted decisively, in line with its mandate. We have addressed
financial  fragmentation  and  supported  the  economy,  enabling  inflation  to  gradually  converge
towards our objective.
The draft resolution also notes that the independence of the ECB has allowed us to take resolute
action within our mandate. But independence is just one of the cornerstones of our institutional
framework. Accountability is its necessary counterpart. And you, as the representatives of the
people of the EU, are the heart of our accountability. Together, independence and accountability
underpin our effectiveness and our legitimacy.
In  my  remarks  today,  I  will  focus  on  two  particular  issues  that  have  been  raised  in  the  draft
resolution. First, I will elaborate on economic developments in the euro area and the role of the
ECB’s monetary policy. Second, I will discuss the state of the financial sector and the measures
needed to further strengthen its resilience.
Economic developments and the role of the ECB’s monetary policy
The  euro  area  economy  is  expanding  robustly,  with  stronger  growth  rates  than  previously
expected  and  significantly  above  potential. According  to  preliminary  data,  euro  area  real  GDP
increased by 2.5% in 2017, compared to the 1.7% that had been foreseen in our December 2016
staff projections for the same year.
The economic expansion is broad-based. The dispersion of growth rates across countries and
across sectors is at its lowest level for 20 years. Accordingly, we see positive growth in over
85%  of  the  sectors  in  the  euro  area  economy,  compared  with  an  historical  average  of  74%.
Employment growth has recently strengthened as well in all the main sectors, namely in industry,
construction  and  market  services.  These  developments  bode  well  for  economic  growth,  as
expansions tend to be stronger and more resilient when growth is broad-based.
The number of people employed in the euro area has also increased by around 7.5 million since
1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
hitting a low in mid-2013. Employment has now reached its highest level since the introduction of
the euro. The unemployment rate continues to decline and now stands at close to a nine-year
low of 8.7%, down by 3.3 percentage points from its highest level.
As  more  people  find  jobs,  household  incomes  rise.  This  has  helped  to  strengthen  private
consumption  growth,  which  in  turn  is  boosting  business  investment.  In  addition,  a  number  of
other  factors  have  supported  investment.  These  factors  include  higher  demand  for  euro  area
exports, rising corporate profitability and an increasing use of installed productive capacity.
These  positive  developments  have  been  fostered  and  reinforced  by  the  pass-through  of  the
ECB’s  monetary  policy  measures,  which  have  eased  funding  conditions  for  households  and
firms. Small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) in particular have benefited from our policy
measures. The growing inclusiveness of this economic expansion is partly due to the renewed
vigour of small businesses, which are a key engine of income creation in our economy.
While our confidence that inflation will converge towards our aim of below, but close to, 2% has
strengthened, we cannot yet declare victory on this front.
After  increasing  to  2%  in  early  2017  due  to  a  rise  in  energy  prices,  headline  inflation  has
fluctuated  since  May  2017  between  1.3%  and  1.5%.  Measures  of  underlying  inflation,  which
exclude the most volatile components, remained subdued and have yet to show convincing signs
of a sustained upward trend. Also, new headwinds have arisen from the recent volatility in the
exchange rate, whose implications for the medium-term outlook for price stability require close
monitoring.
On the back of improved economic conditions, the financial stability situation in the euro area has
also continued to evolve positively. As I will explain in more detail, for the time being we have little
indication that generalised imbalances are emerging.
Overall, while we can be more confident about the path of inflation, patience and persistence with
regard  to  monetary  policy  is  still  warranted  for  underlying  inflation  pressures  to  build  up  and
inflation to converge durably towards our objective. That is why – at our last meeting – we re-
affirmed the decisions taken at our October monetary policy meeting last year. Accordingly, our
net asset purchase programme, running at a monthly pace of €30 billion, will continue until the
end of September 2018, or beyond, if necessary, and in any case until the Governing Council
sees a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation consistent with its inflation aim. In parallel, we
will  reinvest  the  principal  payments  from  maturing  securities  purchased  under  the  expanded
asset purchase programme for an extended period of time after the end of those purchases, and
in any case for as long as necessary. We expect our key interest rates to remain at their present
levels for an extended period of time, and well past the horizon of our net asset purchases.
Looking forward, we remain fully committed to our price stability objective and – in line with our
monetary policy strategy – we aim to stabilise inflation around levels that are below, but close to,
2% within a meaningful medium-term horizon. As always, our monetary policy will continue to be
guided by our assessment of the progress made towards our objective. Our forward guidance
continues to provide a stable framework for our monetary policy stance and its outlook. In line
with  that  guidance,  monetary  policy  will  evolve  in  a  fully  data-dependent  and  time-consistent
manner.
Strengthening the resilience of the euro area financial sector
Your draft resolution also considers several aspects related to the euro area financial sector and
I would like to follow up on some of them.
Let me first of all emphasise that our monetary policy and a healthier financial sector are mutually
reinforcing.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
By supporting the economic recovery, our monetary policy measures have had a positive impact
on the credit quality of banks’ loans to businesses and households, and helped banks to further
reduce  their  provisioning  costs.  Moreover,  a  stronger  economy  generates  greater  volumes  of
sustainable bank lending. Both factors have therefore strengthened the solidity of the European
banking sector.
A  better  integrated  and  sounder  financial  sector  has  also  been  able  to  transmit  our  policy
impulses more evenly across the euro area. The improved health of the banking sector, coupled
with our credit easing measures, has brought about a marked improvement in the transmission
process,  as  shown  by  the  reduced  heterogeneity  of  bank  lending  rates  across  countries  and
1
improved borrowing conditions for SMEs.
The difference between interest rates for loans to non-financial corporations of above and below
€1 million also continued to decline, indicating easier access to finance for SMEs, in particular in
the countries that were most affected by the financial crisis.
A more robust financial sector has also allowed us to pursue an accommodative policy for as
long as necessary, without any build-up of significant financial stability risks.
The draft resolution points in particular to the risks stemming from possible asset bubbles. We
are closely monitoring developments in some market segments, such as prime commercial real
estate  and  housing  markets  in  some  countries,  and  corporate  bond  markets  for  lower-rated
2
issuers. As we explain in our Financial Stability Review,
accessible 
The 
www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/fsr/html/index.en.html
publication 
is 
on 
the 
ECB’s 
website 
at:
asset  price  increases  in  euro  area  markets  have  so  far  not  been  accompanied  by  excessive
credit  growth.  Although  credit  flows  have  been  recovering,  growth  rates  are  still  far  below
anything we saw before the crisis and on the low side of the range of growth rates historically
seen during recoveries. So there is no evidence of systemic credit-fuelled bubbles.
The efforts we have made in recent years to strengthen prudential regulation and supervision,
above all with the establishment of the banking union, have certainly played a role in protecting
financial stability.
In particular, the ECB Banking Supervision plays a key role in ensuring the safety and soundness
of  banks.  It  enhances  the  banks’  resilience  through  strengthened  prudential  regulation.  It  also
fosters  cross-border  financial  integration  and  provides  a  level  playing  field  by  harmonising
supervision across the euro area.
Also on the macroprudential side, we see national authorities in close cooperation with the ECB
being very active in further mitigating the emergence of possible systemic risks, especially with
respect to residential real estate developments.
Despite  the  improved  cyclical  environment,  improved  market  sentiment  and  the  substantial
strengthening of its shock absorption capacity, the European banking sector continues to face
structural challenges, as you also state in your resolution.
Indeed,  overcapacity  and  cost  inefficiencies  continue  to  weigh  on  bank  profitability  in  certain
banking markets.
Moreover, the high stock of non-performing loans (NPLs) needs to be further reduced and any
future build-up needs to be avoided. NPL levels have been declining for more than three years
and  good  progress  has  been  made  on  the  EU  Council Action  Plan,  although  there  is  still  a
considerable way to go. Additional efforts by banks, supervisors, regulators and legislators are
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
needed  to  create  an  environment  in  which  NPLs  can  be  effectively  managed  and  efficiently
disposed of.
Strengthening the resilience of the euro area financial sector also means adapting to a changing
operating environment.
The resolution mentions, for instance, the growing role of fintech companies. This means more
competition for banks, including in the field of lending and payment services. At the same time,
new  technology  presents  an  opportunity  for  banks  to  increase  the  value  added  and  the  cost-
efficiency of their services.
Another factor shaping the euro area financial sector is the United Kingdom’s decision to leave
the EU. At this stage, we do not have clarity regarding the shape of the UK’s future relationship
with  the  EU.  Well-managed  preparations  are  thus  essential  for  dealing  with  frictions  in  the
transition from the current situation to the eventual new equilibrium especially in the event that no
transitional agreement is reached between the EU and the UK.
Banks  and  financial  institutions  are  not  the  only  ones  that  have  to  prepare  for  an  operating
environment in a state of flux. Policymakers too, at national and European level, have to make
sure  that  the  regulatory  framework  is  fit  and  ready  to  safeguard  the  resilience  of  the  financial
sector in the face of the new challenges.
Let me mention two examples.
First, finalising the banking reform package is crucial. The package will strengthen the regulatory
architecture, reduce risks in the banking sector and increase financial stability. It will introduce
into  Union  law  new  internationally  agreed  standards,  such  as  the  leverage  ratio  requirement,
which will restrict the build-up of excessive leverage in the banking system, and the standard on
total  loss-absorbing  capacity  (TLAC),  which  will  strengthen  the  resolution  framework. As  co-
legislators, you play a vital role in this process. I would encourage you to aim for a consistent
implementation  of  the  internationally  agreed  standards,  so  as  to  ensure  a  level  playing  field
worldwide and to reduce options and national discretions as far as possible.
Second, it is important to complete the architecture of the banking union by putting in place the
agreed common backstop to the Single Resolution Fund and by establishing a European deposit
insurance scheme (EDIS). These are two fundamental pieces of the banking union project and
their implementation should not be postponed further. The backstop should ensure that sufficient
funding  is  available  at  all  times  to  guarantee  orderly  resolutions.  A  fully  fledged  EDIS  is  an
indispensable counterpart to the single currency as everyone in the euro area should be able to
have  confidence  that  the  money  in  their  bank  account  enjoys  the  same  level  of  protection,
regardless of where the account is held within the euro area.
Conclusion
Let me conclude. We pay close attention to the European Parliament’s resolution on our Annual
Report. And we will respond in detail to the issues you raise there when we publish our ECB
Annual Report for 2017.
The  strong  relationship  between  the  ECB  and  the  Parliament  not  only  demonstrates  the
importance of accountability, but it also bears possible lessons for the reflection on the future of
EMU whose strengthening should remain a priority.
A  well-designed  and  effective  policy  framework  requires  a  clear  institutional  architecture,
measurable objectives and the tools to achieve them. And it needs to be accompanied by strong
accountability. This is essential not only to ensure that policies are effective. It is also crucial if
the  public  is  to  understand  those  policies  and  play  an  active  role,  in  particular  via  their
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
representatives in Parliament.
Thank you for your attention. I am at your disposal for questions.
1
2
The difference between interest rates for loans to non-financial corporations of above and below €1 million also
continued to decline, indicating easier access to finance for SMEs, in particular in the countries that were most
affected by the financial crisis.
The publication is accessible on the ECB’s website at: www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/fsr/html/index.en.html
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
