Wolpertinger Conference
Banking Union: experience so far and  
future prospects
Remarks by the Senior Deputy Governor of the Bank of Italy
and President of the Institute for the Supervision of Insurance (IVASS)
Salvatore Rossi
Modena, 30 August 2018
1.  Rationale for the Banking Union
Banking Union (BU) in the euro area is the latest step in a long journey.1 
The project for an integrated and unified Europe was designed right after the 
Second World War and was ambitious but pragmatic: ambitious in the ultimate 
objective of ensuring peace and prosperity to the European people after centuries 
of bloodshed; pragmatic because an explicit choice was made to start the process 
with the economy, instead of the much more challenging political sphere. Still, 
the political value of the project was clear from the beginning. Monnet called it its 
‘sense of direction’.2 
The Treaty of Rome, of which we celebrated last year the 60th anniversary, 
was the first milestone. The project of monetary unification, revived in the 1990s 
after a first abortive attempt at the end of the 60s, was an even braver achievement. 
The euro was adopted on 1st January 1999 thanks to the efforts of statesmen and 
civil  servants  like  Ciampi,  Delors,  Kohl,  Mitterand  and  Padoa-Schioppa,  all 
belonging to a generation that had not forgotten the wars in Europe. The challenge 
was enormous: let’s not forget that many in the academic world, especially in the 
United States, thought the project was economically wrong and politically frail. 
However,  for  over  a  decade,  the  balance  between  costs  and  benefits  appeared 
positive. 
The real challenge for the European Monetary Union came with the sovereign 
debt crisis at the beginning of this decade. Prompted by the revelation of the true 
condition of Greece’s public finances, the crisis rapidly evolved into a basic mutual 
distrust  among  European  countries:  some  (public  opinion,  governments,  even 
national central banks) started to fear that, thanks to the common currency, other 
countries would finance their profligacy with the money of taxpayers in the first 
group of countries; the second group of countries began to blame the first group for 
1  Rossi (2017).
2  Monnet (1955).
3
imposing excessively ‘austere’ policies on everyone in the name of the common 
currency. 
The markets viewed those feuds as a sign that Europeans no longer considered 
the euro indestructible and that they could call into doubt the irreversibility of the 
common currency. The possibility of ‘redenomination’ of public debts into re-born 
national  currencies,  though  remote,  started  to  be  priced  in  and  spreads  soared, 
reflecting  expectations  of  devaluation/revaluation.  Banks  in  weak  countries, 
whose balance sheets were full of national public bonds, incurred heavy losses at 
market value. The prospect of a generalized bank bail out in those countries stoked 
expectations of an unsustainable evolution of public finance, in a vicious circle. 
It was a political crisis disguised as a financial one.
The Banking Union was initially meant to be a response to that situation.3 The 
idea was to establish the principle that European banks were first of all European. 
If one runs into trouble, it’s a European concern, not only a concern for the country 
where the bank is based.4 
The actual implementation of the project took a different direction. 
The  prerequisite  of  common  supervision  was  realized  first:  since  2014 
‘significant’ banks are supervised by a European authority (the Single Supervisory 
Mechanism, based in Frankfurt). 
Next came the core of the new regime: since 2016 a bank can no longer be 
bailed out with taxpayers’ money. In the event of serious trouble, it can be either 
bailed in – that is rescued, but with a big sacrifice being made by shareholders and 
private creditors – under the direction of another European authority (the Single 
Resolution Mechanism, based in Brussels), or liquidated. 
Finally, a European insurance deposit scheme, still to be created, will reimburse 
small  depositors  of  liquidated  banks,  with  money  coming  from  the  rest  of  the 
banking system, not from taxpayers. 
3  EU Commission (2015). 
4  Rossi (2016). 
4
The proposal for a public backstop for both the Single Resolution Fund and 
the Common Deposit Insurance Scheme has been de facto ruled out.
The legal framework consists of an intricate web of directives and regulations: 
on  the  supervision  side  are  the  Capital  Requirements  Directive  (CRD),  the 
Capital Requirements Regulation (CRR) and the SSM Regulation; on the crisis 
management side, the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD) and the 
SRM Regulation, together with the Communication of the EU Commission on the 
application of State-aid rules to banks (Banking Communication). In both areas, 
the European Banking Authority (EBA, an authority currently based in London but 
soon to move to Paris, in charge of prudential regulation) has issued a number of 
implementing guidelines and technical standards.
In  substance,  European  banks  have  become  European  only  in  one  sense: 
they are supervised and resolved at the European level. The vicious link between 
sovereigns and banks has not been severed, but a straitjacket has been imposed 
on banks to ensure that, should a sovereign experience a flight from its bonds, 
the country’s banks cannot be bailed out by taxpayers, either of that country or 
of any other countries. More specifically, a German taxpayer can never be asked 
to contribute financially to the rescue of an Italian bank whose balance sheet is 
sinking under the weight of Italian public bonds that are losing more and more 
market value. If that happens, the creditors of the bank, mostly Italians, must bear 
the brunt on their own. And there is no longer any question of euro irreversibility, 
because  the  case  of  Greece  has  shown  that  a  sovereign  state  can  even  default 
without leaving the euro.
2.  Experience so far, with the SSM...
Any assessment of the BU should take into account the historical trajectory 
towards the integration and unification of Europe, the external and the internal 
context, and the political motivations and constraints of the project. We should 
not overlook the fact that a strong anti-Europe mood has swept through some of 
our countries in recent years, combining criticism of the European construction, 
sometimes well-founded, with populistic cries. 
Bearing this in mind, the first pillar of the BU construction – the SSM – has 
undoubtedly been a political success so far. 
5
Within  a  couple  of  years  a  very  complex  institutional  and  regulatory 
architecture has been set up from scratch, mobilizing ideas and resources from 
national supervisors (National Competent Authorities, NCAs) and the European 
Central  Bank,  under  which  the  Mechanism  has  been  placed.  President  Draghi 
called the SSM ‘the greatest step towards economic integration since the creation 
of Economic and Monetary Union’.5
The SSM relies on more than 6,000 experts based both in Frankfurt and in all 
the euro-area capitals, working together. Off-site supervision of each significant 
bank uses a unique format, the Joint Supervisory Team (JST), which is composed 
of supervisors from both the ECB staff and that of various NCAs. Less significant 
banks  (20  per  cent  of  euro  banking  assets)  continue  to  be  directly  supervised 
by the NCAs, with the SSM (staff and Board) overseeing the process to ensure 
homogeneity across jurisdictions.
A fundamental tool for harmonizing concepts and practices in the area was 
published a few months ago, the SSM Supervisory Manual.6 But the methodological 
effort is never-ending: we are now working to improve the Supervisory Review 
and  Evaluation  Process  (SREP),  partly  in  order  to  promote  convergence  in  the 
prudential treatment of significant and less significant banks.7 
Further improvements are currently being discussed: how to streamline the 
decision-making process; how to enhance cross-fertilization in the on-site teams 
and their community spirit; and how to improve coordination between prudential 
supervision and anti-money-laundering oversight. 
The discussions within the SSM Board, the NCAs’ input gathered through 
written procedures and the contribution of technical working groups have helped 
to address all the relevant issues, even the most controversial ones. For instance, 
regarding Non-Performing Loans (NPLs), while everyone agreed on the need for 
the banks most affected by this problem to get rid of their NPLs, there was much 
discussion about how to proceed at the SSM level. The solution, which we are 
5  Draghi (2015).
6  ECB (2018a).
7  ECB (2018b).
6
now working on, is based on a bank-by-bank approach8 and seems to go in the 
right direction, without entailing any illegitimate foray into the regulatory field. 
We should take into full account the specific business models of banks and avoid 
unjustified differences of treatment.
3. 
... and with the SRM
The performance of the new crisis management framework is less easy to assess. 
According to the existing legal framework, if problems arise in a bank, first 
the  SSM  is  supposed  to  engineer  early  intervention  to  redress  the  situation.  If, 
in  the  end,  the  bank  is  labelled  ‘failing  or  likely  to  fail’,  the  SRM  comes  into 
play. The SRM is composed of the Single Resolution Board (SRB), acting as a 
central resolution authority, and the 19 National Resolution Authorities (NRAs); it 
has within its remit both significant and less significant banks, but the latter only 
if they have cross-border activities. The SRM decides first of all whether there 
exists a public interest to justify the rescue of a failing bank under the common 
‘resolution’ procedure. If not, the bank must be liquidated according to national 
rules. The European Commission ensures that the national government’s financial 
support, if any, complies with State-aid rules.
I do not want to recall here Italy’s painful experience with the four small-
to-medium  banks  put  under  ‘resolution’  in  2015,  because  the  story  is  common 
knowledge by now. The SRM was not yet operative and the procedure was left to 
the national resolution authority (the Bank of Italy) but the fundamental elements 
of the new legislative and regulatory framework were already in place, only with 
the lighter ‘burden sharing’ instead of the bail-in. 
In almost three years of actual operation, the SRM has stepped in only once, 
for an important Spanish bank. In four other cases of ‘failing or likely to fail’ banks 
it concluded that the public interest requirement was not met and diverted them to 
national insolvency rules, which are not harmonized. 
The mechanism has shown, in my view, elements of strength but also of weakness. 
8  ECB (2108c).
7
Among  the  strengths,  I  would  cite  the  strict  logic  of  the  construction.  If  I 
want to invest my money in a bank’s shares or bonds, or even to make a large 
deposit, I must know from the outset that I may lose everything and no public 
entity whatsoever will come to my rescue. Moral hazard is no longer allowed. 
Banks  need  much  more  capital  than  before,  but  shareholders  and  subordinated 
bondholders  must  consider  them  riskier  than  before  and  thus  request  a  higher 
return. Consequently, banks need to be much more profitable. 
Among the weaknesses I see a lack of clarity so far about the so-called MREL 
(Minimum Requirements for own funds and Eligible Liabilities to be requested of 
each bank) and, most important, an apparent divergence of views on the concept 
of systemic financial stability. I’ll touch upon both later.
4.  Challenges ahead
Let me talk briefly about some of the challenges we are facing, starting with 
the SSM.
As discussed above, the implementation of the SSM has been successful so far, 
thanks to the work of all the people involved in Frankfurt, Rome and elsewhere. But 
the style of supervision needs to be fine-tuned. This does not come as a surprise, 
since prudential supervision philosophies and practices are different in the various 
countries, not least because of their historical evolution. Still, it is a matter that 
needs careful consideration in the light of the final objectives.
Having  put  aside  the  original  goal  of  the  BU  –  cutting  the  perverse  link 
between  sovereigns  and  banks  –  the  aim  of  common  supervision  of  our  banks 
should be to keep them well-equipped to fulfil their fundamental task, that is to 
provide credit to the healthy part of the economy. A bank crisis, still possible for 
many reasons, should be addressed in a unified, European way, minimizing the 
financial involvement of taxpayers and thus moral hazard. 
What we should avoid as supervisors is losing sight of these final aims in order 
to pursue a sort of bureaucratic integrity. More capital and fewer NPLs is a prudent 
and sound policy for banks but if, absurdly, capital requirements were raised to 
100 per cent of total assets and NPLs reduced to zero, both stocks and new flows, 
supervisors would be 100 per cent safe, but the banking business would cease to 
8
exist, at least in the form we have known for centuries. Credit would disappear and 
banks would only invest in the equity of no-risk subjects, such as monopolies and 
rentiers. We all agree that capital markets should be more developed in continental 
Europe,  and  the  financing  of  our  economies  more  diversified,  but  bank  credit 
will  remain  important  for  many  years  to  come,  particularly  loans  to  small  and 
medium enterprises, and its regular flow should not be slowed without reason by 
the obsession of supervisors to avoid blame if one borrower is late with a payment. 
I come now to the crisis management framework and the SRM. 
As I said before, the MREL issue needs to be clarified. MREL sets the minimum 
level  of  bail-inable  items  on  the  liability  side  of  each  bank’s  balance-sheet. The 
owners of those items (shareholders and creditors), once identified, become hostages: 
if the bank falls into the clutches of the SRM, they will be the first to go. A careful 
and pragmatic calibration of the new requirement is essential. On top of that, banks 
should be given enough time to meet it without disrupting their business.
Then  there  is  the  issue  of  financial  stability  or,  more  generally,  of  macro-
prudential  supervision.  The  SRM  has  given  the  market  to  understand  that  the 
public interest test – set by European legislation to decide whether to proceed with 
the resolution or consign the failing bank to the national authorities for liquidation 
– can only be passed in the case of big banks, whose systemic relevance is beyond 
doubt. This conveys an idea of systemic risk based only on absolute dimensions. 
It rules out the possibility that smaller or even mid-size banks, if they fail, pose 
risks for financial stability, even though they contribute to funding the SRM and 
are subject to MREL. But, at least according to some views, financial stability can 
be national or even sub-national, and hence affected by the failure of a local bank.
We were talking about the alternative resolution-liquidation, but the criticism 
may be extended to the no-bail-out principle underlying both. The International 
Monetary  Fund  has  suggested  a  ‘financial  stability  exemption’,  whereby  it  is 
explicitly recognized that the SRM is meant to deal with idiosyncratic events and 
that the existing arrangements could not solve system-wide crises.9 
9 
IMF (2018).
9
Prudential supervision has been micro for decades, if not centuries. The 
macro-prudential perspective is relatively new and still little understood and 
not widely adopted around the world. We all know that there can be a trade-
off between micro and macro policy objectives in the financial system.10 For 
instance, if we want to protect macro financial stability, we may contemplate 
bailing out a bank with taxpayers’ money, but if we want to avoid any moral 
hazard at the micro level, we have to rule out as far as possible the involvement 
of  taxpayers  in  rescuing  banks.  A  balance  must  be  found  between  these 
conflicting objectives. 
5.  Conclusions
Let me conclude. In an incredibly short timeframe a comprehensive framework 
for banking supervision and crisis management in the euro area has been designed 
and put in place; thousands of experts are working together to achieve common 
goals; methodologies, tools and resources have been pooled in order to benefit 
from  the  best  national  practices;  cooperation  between  the  centralized  hubs  (in 
Frankfurt and Brussels) and the national authorities has been fruitful, even in the 
case of disagreement. Last but not least, banks in the euro area are now stronger 
than 10 years ago. 
This positive experience shows that the challenges ahead can be successfully 
addressed in a pragmatic way. 
Banking supervision needs to be constructive, not destructive. This is always 
true, but in the euro area today it needs to be constantly remembered. Prudential 
rules and practices should be strict but proportionate, and they should always keep 
the playing field level. We should also take into account the competitive conditions 
between our banks and banks outside the euro area.
We live in times of rapid change in the way financial business is conducted 
around  the  world.  The  application  of  technology  to  banks  and  other  financial 
companies is revolutionizing the market.11 Supervisors need to look forward as 
10  Visco (2018a).
11  CGFS (2018), Panetta (2018), Visco (2018b).
10
much as they can. European supervisors, and legislators behind them, need to be 
particularly forward-looking in their commitment to operate a brand new system 
of common banking supervision and crisis management. They have to adjust it as 
drawbacks and innovations emerge. 
11
References  
Committee  on  the  Global  Financial  System  (2018),  Structural  changes  in 
banking after the crisis, CGFS Papers No 60.
Draghi M. (2015), Foreword to the ECB’s 2014 Annual Report on Supervisory 
Activities.
European  Central  Bank  (2018a),  2017  ECB Annual  Report  on  supervisory 
activities.
European Central Bank (2018b), SSM LSI SREP Methodology.
European Central Bank (2018c), ECB announces further steps in supervisory 
approach to stock of NPLs, Press Release, 11 July.
European Commission (2015), https://ec.europa.eu/commission/publications/
five-presidents-report-completing-europes-economic-and-monetary-union_en.
International Monetary Fund (2018), Euro Area Policies - Financial System 
Stability Assessment. 
Monnet J. (1955), ‘Téléfoner Volf … mon cher ami’, Archive de le Fondation 
Jean Monnet, May.
Panetta  F. 
(2018), 
http://www.bancaditalia.it/pubblicazioni/interventi-
direttorio/int-dir-2018/panetta-120518.pdf.
Rossi S. (2016), http://www.bancaditalia.it/pubblicazioni/interventi-direttorio/
int-dir-2016/en-rossi-070416.pdf.
Rossi S. (2017), http://www.bancaditalia.it/pubblicazioni/interventi-direttorio/
int-dir-2017/en-rossi_14062017.pdf.
Visco  I.  (2018a),  www.bancaditalia.it/pubblicazioni/interventi-governatore/
integov2018/Visco_05042018.pdf.
Visco 
I. 
(2018b), 
http://www.bancaditalia.it/pubblicazioni/interventi-
governatore/integov2018/en-cf-2017.pdf.
Designed by the Printing and Publishing Division of the Bank of Italy
