   MONETARY POLICY REPORT 
PRESENTATION BEFORE THE FINANCE COMMISSION OF THE 
HONORABLE SENATE OF THE REPUBLIC
       Mario Marcel 
Governor 
Central Bank of Chile 
14 June 2018 
                                                             
The June 2018 Monetary Policy Report can be found at http://www.bcentral.cl.  
 Mr  President  of  the  Senate’s  Finance  Commission,  senator  Juan  Pablo  Letelier,  senators  members  of  this 
Commission, ladies, gentlemen,  
 
Thank you for your invitation to present the vision of the Board of the Central Bank of Chile (CBC) about the latest 
macroeconomic  developments,  prospects  and  implications  for  monetary  policy.  This  vision  is  detailed  in  our 
Monetary Policy Report (the Report) released this morning. The information therein provide the backdrop for the 
decision adopted by the Board at yesterday’s monetary policy meeting. 
 
In  this  Report  we  confirmed  that  the  evolution  of  the  macroeconomic  scenario  has  lowered  the  risks  for  the 
convergence of inflation to 3% within the policy horizon. This risk, that lingered for quarters, has faded in line with 
the gradual consolidation of the recovery it has shown since mid- last year and which has received an upward 
inflationary impulse coming from the increase in fuel prices in pesos. Accordingly, the lower bound defined for 
the  2018  growth  range  and  the  headline  inflation  forecast at December  have  been  revised  upward,  while  we 
reaffirm the trajectory of gradual convergence of core inflation to the 3% policy target over a two-year horizon. 
These  projections  are  consistent  with  the  two-year-ahead  inflation  expectations  that  have  remained  well 
anchored to the target. 
 
The scenario of gradual convergence of inflation to the policy target, despite improved prospects for activity and 
short-term prices, relies in the  fact  that there  are  still  important gaps in the economy. This is reflected in  the 
evolution of the labor market, capacity utilization indicators, and the evolution of those prices most sensitive to 
said gaps. It also assumes that the impulse the Chilean economy will receive from abroad will be a little milder 
than we estimated in the last Report, showing not-so-favorable financial conditions going forward and somewhat 
lower terms of trade because of the higher oil price.  
 
It is with this context in mind that at yesterday’s monetary policy meeting we held the policy rate at 2.5%, thus 
sustaining the significant monetary impulse that has been there for over a year. Our Report’s baseline scenario 
assumes that this impulse will still be necessary for a while longer and we will only begin to withdraw it insofar as 
macroeconomic conditions continue to drive the convergence of inflation to 3% within the policy horizon. Let me 
now share with you the details of our macroeconomic scenario and the main risks we observe. 
 
The macroeconomic scenario 
Recent data for the first four months of this year show activity outpacing our projections. In part, this responded 
to specific supply-side factors such as fishery and electricity, gas, and water, and part to investment in machinery 
and equipment, hired services, wholesale trade and some durables. 
 
Measured in terms of velocity, after significant acceleration in the third quarter of last year, activity has moderated 
growth this year so far (Figure 1). 
 
In our baseline scenario, we project that the rate of expansion of final domestic demand will moderate further in 
the remainder of 2018. This will occur once the effect of the higher growth of more volatile items that have less 
capacity to permeate the rest of the economy dissipates, like the ones just mentioned. On the consumption side, 
this opinion assumes that the slowdown of the wage bill—given the behavior of employment and wages—limits 
the increase in household spending. In response to the traditional lag with which the labor market operates in the 
cycle, we can expect that the recovery of growth will translate into an increase in employment and greater growth 
of wages in the coming quarters (Figure 2). 
 
1 
On  the  investment  side,  gross  fixed  capital  formation  grew  3.6%  annually  in  the  first  quarter,  thanks  to  the 
construction and other works component that resumed positive expansion rates after almost two years. Plus, that 
machinery and equipment continues to be the most dynamic component of investment, with imports of capital 
goods  that,  as  of  May,  excluding  non-regular  transportation,  continued  to  improve.  This,  in  a  context  where 
business expectations have returned to optimistic territory on aggregate (Figure 3).  
 
However, some numbers suggest that we cannot be sure yet that investment will be very dynamic, particularly 
because  there  we  still  see  no  significant  change  in  the  execution  of  large-scale  projects.  Several  construction 
indicators show some stagnation lately, such as sales and shipments of materials and sectoral employment. The 
last  survey  of  the  Capital  Goods  Corporation  revised  downward  the  expected  investment  in  construction  and 
engineering works for this year, as some plans have been postponed. About housing, updated figures from the 
Chilean  Chamber  of  Construction  show  that  housing  sales  have  remained  stable,  while  the  available  stock,  in 
general, is still high. Finally, our latest Business Perceptions Report, published in May, reports dissimilar views 
about companies’ investment plans, with significant idle capacity in some of them, especially in the north of the 
country and in some specific sectors. 
 
For this year, we estimate that GDP will grow in the range between 3.25% and 4%, which compares with the 3% 
to 4% expected in March. This combines the actual activity data known so far with annual rates of change for the 
second half of the year that are lower than those of the first half, reflecting a higher comparison base for the same 
period of 2017 and the aforementioned moderation in the pace of growth in final domestic demand. 
 
Beyond this year’s forecast, our view on the evolution of growth in the 2018-2020 period and our assessment of 
capacity gaps in the economy has not changed much. For 2019 and 2020, the projected ranges are unchanged. 
Thus, we continue to expect that in 2019 the economy will grow between 3.25% and 4.25%, and between 3% and 
4% in 2020 (Figure 4).  
 
We  continue  to  estimate  that  the  economic  recovery  is  grounded  on  a  favorable  external  scenario,  a  clearly 
expansionary  monetary  policy,  the  completion  of  the  adjustment  of  mining  and  housing  investment  and  the 
absence of important macroeconomic imbalances. As a working assumption, we assume that in 2018 the economy 
will  receive  a  fiscal  impulse  consistent  with  the  current  budget,  including  the  adjustments  announced  by  the 
Administration. Going forward, we assume that expenditure will follow the path of gradual fiscal consolidation 
defined in the fiscal policy decree just issued by the authority.  
 
With these figures, on average our economy will grow above potential in the period 2018-2020, closing the activity 
gap during the policy horizon, as we projected in the March Report. Also, our estimate for the economy’s potential 
growth  continues  to  lie  between  2.5%  and  3%  and  it  will  gradually approach  trend  growth—between  3%  and 
3.5%—to the extent that the rate of investment recovers, short-term constraints disappear, and resources are 
reallocated to more productive activities. Come September, as has been the case for some years, we will reassess 
these estimates. 
 
The projected evolution of activity considers an external impulse slightly lower than that estimated in March, due 
to less favorable financial conditions and lower terms of trade associated to the oil price hike.  
 
Activity and inflation data of recent months have consolidated the differences between the cyclical position of the 
United States and the other developed economies. Thus, while in the United States there seem to be no gaps and 
incoming data on prices and wages show more clear inflationary pressures, in the rest the gap is still to be closed 
and inflation seems bounded (Figure 5).  
 
2 
This has widened the differences regarding the expected evolution of monetary policy across economic blocs, 
triggering movements in interest rates and an appreciation of the dollar globally (Figure 6). This divergence was 
importantly confirmed at the Federal Reserve meeting yesterday, where along with the approval of the second 
increase in the federal funds rate for the year, it signaled it would speed up the normalization process foreseen 
for the next two years. 
 
One striking element in the way the external scenario has behaved in recent months is the stronger reaction to 
news of different sign. Part of it was observed in February, due to higher than expected figures for wage growth 
in  the  United  States.  A  similar  phenomenon  happened  more  recently  relating  to  the  configuration  of  the 
government in Italy. Although this is an important economy within the European Union, it had not been common 
for interest rates, exchange rates and risk premiums to react in such a degree to similar events. This makes us 
think that changes in the markets’ appetite for risk have made them more reactive to incoming news and the 
possibility of observing episodes of high volatility seems greater than in the past. 
 
In  this  context,  financial conditions  facing the emerging  world  have  taken  a  downward  turn.  In  recent weeks, 
currencies have depreciated against the dollar and capital flows have fallen. The Chilean peso has followed the 
global trend, posting a depreciation since the close of the March Report, which in the last few days has fluctuated 
around 630 pesos per dollar, which amounts to an increase of more than 4.5%. The multilateral exchange rate 
measures—where the evolution of the peso is compared to a broader set of currencies—show a more limited 
nominal depreciation. Compared with the currencies of other commodity exporters, the depreciation of the peso 
has been similar, while it has been in the lower side of the variations in Latin American economies (Figure 7).  
 
The fact that the peso depreciation responds to a global phenomenon also implies that the real exchange rate 
(RER) has increased moderately with respect to the level it has shown since the beginning of the year and with a 
real depreciation similar to those of other comparable economies, standing around 90 in the  1986=100 index 
towards the statistical closure of this Report. Our baseline scenario assumes that the RER will return to near its 
average of the last fifteen to twenty years over the course of the policy horizon (Figure 8). 
 
The greater speed of adjustment of financial conditions has not been reflected in a change in the outlook for global 
activity. Thus, the growth projections for 2018-2020 continue to indicate that, on average, the world economy will 
grow to outperform the last three years. Also, compared to the baseline scenarios of this Report and the previous 
one, the expected growth for most of the regions shows no major changes. In Europe and Japan, the medium-
term vision has not changed much. For China, a growth rate of 6.6% is projected for 2018, considering that in the 
first quarter the Chinese economy grew 6.8% annually and the most recent data continue to support a vision of 
gradual deceleration going forward. In the  rest of Asia, the projection remains at 4.3% for 2018, explained by 
improvements in industrial production and volume exports. In emerging Europe the market has also maintained 
its growth outlook. 
 
On the contrary, the growth projections for Latin America are reduced, partly because several economies continue 
to be subject to idiosyncratic risk factors and/or because they are more severely affected by the adjustment of 
external financial conditions. Such is the case of Argentina, where the fragility of its macroeconomic fundamentals 
has  become  evident.  The  country  reached  an  agreement  with  the  IMF  for  a  stabilization  loan  with  several 
conditions for its concretion, including advancing the reduction of inflation and the fiscal deficit, implementing 
the exchange rate float and giving autonomy to its Central Bank. In Brazil, the slowdown in activity in the first 
quarter was compounded by greater political uncertainty, the difficulty in implementing the fiscal adjustment and 
a  paralyzation  of  transport.  In  Peru,  the  expansion  of  annual  GDP  in  the  first  quarter  was  higher  than  in  the 
previous  year,  but  the  continued  decline  in  consumer  and  business  confidence  has  reduced  dynamism  going 
forward. Activity projections are maintained for the other countries (Figure 9). 
3 
 
On commodities, the increase in the oil price stands out—the Brent rose to 80 dollars a barrel at some points in 
the  second  quarter—driven  by  geopolitical  factors  and  changes  in  supply  and  inventory  levels.  The  baseline 
scenario, in line with the market futures in the ten days prior to the statistical closing, supposes that the price will 
decline slowly with respect to its current levels. Thus, Brent and WTI will average 70 dollars per barrel in 2018, 68 
dollars in 2019 and 64 dollars in 2020. This contrasts with prices of 63, 59 and 56 dollars that were considered for 
the same years last March.  
 
As for copper, the average price estimates for 2018, 2019 and 2020 are practically unchanged at 310, 295 and 285 
cents of dollar per pound, respectively. Towards the statistical closure, the price of the metal climbed to about 
330 cents per pound and, according to market reports, has been affected by the uncertainty surrounding possible 
labor-related downtime in some mines. In the baseline scenario, this increase is assumed to be temporary, so it 
does not modify the average price projections. Should a mine paralyze, it could be necessary to review both the 
projected copper price and other macroeconomic variables for Chile. 
 
The prices of oil and copper combined, plus those of other Chilean exports, determine a less favorable trajectory 
of the terms of trade in the policy horizon. Thus, between 2018 and 2020, the terms of trade will accumulate a 
decrease of the order of 3% compared to a fall of 2% estimated in March (Figure 10). 
 
On the side of inflation in Chile, the annual variation of the CPI and the CPI excluding food and energy (CPIEFE) 
levels remains around or slightly below 2%, without showing significant differences than expected in March. As 
has been the trend of recent quarters, CPIEFE inflation has been dominated by the evolution of the exchange rate, 
the persistent capacity gaps in the economy and the indexation of some prices to lower inflation rates (Figure 11).  
 
In  the  baseline  scenario,  we  continue  to  expect  CPIEFE  inflation  to  have  a  slow  convergence  to  3%–not  very 
different from what we expected in March–, while for headline inflation we foresee it reaching 3% sooner than 
we thought then. In the former case, this is consistent with an economy that, beyond recent data, will close its 
capacity gaps over the next two years, and with a real exchange rate that, as I said, will return to near its historical 
average during the policy horizon. For headline inflation, its faster achieveent of 3% is explained by the increase 
in fuel prices measured in pesos (Figure 12). 
 
Regarding monetary policy, the Board estimates that the monetary stimulus will remain as it is and will begin to 
be  reduced  as  macroeconomic  conditions  continue  to  drive  the  convergence  of  inflation  to  3%.  As  a  working 
assumption for the monetary policy rate, for the short term we assume a trajectory similar to that shown in the 
Financial  Brokers  Survey  available  at  the  close  of  this  Report.  For  the  medium  term,  the  Board  continues  to 
estimate  that  the  monetary  policy  rate  stand  around  its  neutral  level  towards  2020,  which  it  believes  to  be 
between 4% and 4.5% (Figure 13). 
 
As usual, there are internal and external elements that could modify these projections. The same as in March, 
from the point of view of its impact on domestic activity, the balance of risks in the external scenario is biased to 
the downside. The main risk on this front continues to be an abrupt deterioration of external financial conditions, 
especially in a context in which markets seem to be more reactive to negative news. Developments in the United 
States economy are important in this area, particularly because a more marked increase in inflationary pressures 
may require a faster rise in the federal funds rate. Nor is it possible to rule out that in an environment of lower 
appetite for risk, news of different signs may result in increased volatility.  
 
Risks also persist coming from trade policy measures promoted by the United States, considering the renewed 
tensions  with  its  main  trading  partners.  China  continues  to  be  a  source  of  risk,  since  it  still  has  to  resolve 
4 
imbalances in several of its markets. Added to this is the evolution of the oil price. If it increases or remains flat 
for longer than expected, it could have stronger effects on global growth and inflation. 
 
The  bias  and  probability  of  external  risk  scenarios  reinforces  the  need  to  maintain  solid  macroeconomic 
fundamentals, particularly for a small and open economy such as Chile’s. Actually, the recent events have had 
greater impacts in countries with greater indebtedness, fiscal deficit and / or current account deficits. 
 
At home, we estimate that the risks for activity are biased upwards. The data of the last few months have been 
higher than expected and we cannot rule out  a scenario in which this greater dynamism persists,  especially if 
investment improves above projections. This risk is partly moderated by the possibility that the labor market, and 
in particular private salaried employment, could take longer than expected to respond to the higher growth rates. 
 
On inflation, we estimate that risk balances are unbiased. The downward risks for its convergence to 3% have 
moderated. However, we forecast that CPIEFE inflation will remain below 2% for a while longer, considering that 
the determinants of inflation’s convergence to 3% in the medium term have not change significantly from March.  
 
Summing up, our assessment of the macroeconomic scenario, beyond the recent data and the adjustment in the 
GDP range and the inflation projection for 2018, is not very different when viewed from a longer perspective, that 
is, considering the period 2018/2020.  
 
For all the above we believe that our economy still needs a positive monetary impulse over the next two years. 
Certainly  this  impulse  will  be  withdrawn  as  the  gaps  close  and  inflation  converges  to  3%,  but  when  will  this 
withdrawal begin will depend on the evolution of our macroeconomy, which we do not see happening before the 
end of this year. 
 
It is important to bear in mind that although we see a balance of risks biased upwards on domestic activity, on the 
negative side the main risks come from abroad. The smaller slack for monetary policy making in the United States, 
the renewed divergence with other developed economies and its pressure on currencies; the political tensions in 
the  Eurozone;  the  oil  price  increase  and  associated  geopolitical  risks  configure  a  complex  scenario  for  the 
emerging  world.  This  is  especially  true  for  economies  that  are  seen  as  more  vulnerable,  either  because  their 
macroeconomic fundamentals are weak and/or because they do not possess the institutional characteristics that 
allow them to deal with external shocks and implement counter-cyclical policies.  
 
The link between institutional characteristics and macroeconomic fundamentals with the financial results when 
facing a stressful episode has been widely documented. A box in our Report makes a brief review of the factors 
that intervene in this relationship, showing that the transmission of global financial shocks to emerging economies 
is more intense when they have a fixed exchange rate regime. It has also been shown that, in the face of episodes 
of financial stress, the volatility of interest rates is higher in economies where the currency does not float freely. 
In fact, one characteristic of the developments of recent weeks has been that the increase in long-term interest 
rates in several emerging economies has occurred along with the depreciation of their currencies.  
 
About the fragility of the macroeconomic fundamentals, we can see that countries with high levels of inflation; 
high interest rates and bulging current account deficits are more likely to suffer significant adjustments in the 
prices  of  their  assets  when  external  conditions  tighten.  On  this  issue,  a  recent  study  published  by  the  Bank 
presents empirical evidence that a rise in the interest rate of the Federal Reserve affects more those countries 
that have a worse solvency situation—measured by their level of indebtedness—and liquidity,  measured through 
their external asset position. 
 
5 
How vulnerable does Chile look based on these criteria? Within the group of emerging economies, Chile stands 
out positively in institutional matters. In particular, it has an independent Central Bank, committed to a floating 
exchange rate regime; It also has an appropriate fiscal institutional framework, where the structural balance rule 
is worth noting. In part, this translates into well-anchored inflation expectations, which give monetary policy more 
room for maneuvering.  
 
On the other hand, Chile is committed to a free-float exchange rate that is more comparable to the situation of 
developed  economies  than  other  emerging  economies,  with  fairly  stable  long-term  rates  along  with  the 
aforementioned depreciation of the currency.  
 
Even so, exchange rate adjustments can have significant effects on the local economy in as much as economic 
agents  exhibit  significant  mismatches  in  their  balance  sheets.  In  the  same  way,  exposure  to  interest  rate  and 
refinancing risks can amplify the economic impact of even mild changes in lending standards. In other words, not 
only the level of indebtedness is important, but also its composition and its relationship with financial assets. This 
helps explain why a floating exchange rate regime is the more effective in cushioning external shocks the more 
developed the local financial system is. 
 
In this sense, the data available for Chile indicate that the main Chilean economic agents (i.e. companies, banks, 
households and government) have moderate levels of exposure to exchange rate and financial risks, as a result of 
either its regulations or the development of financial products.  
 
In the case of banks, the stress tests we perform regularly in the context of our Financial Stability Report show 
that market risk, which includes interest rate risk, is low compared to credit risk. Similar results are found for the 
corporate sector, where a shock to the interest rate has a low impact on performance. In addition, in the most 
recent  period,  corporate  indebtedness  has  decreased  after  being  driven  by  loans  related  to  foreign  direct 
investment. Likewise, currency mismatches have continued to decline. 
 
Among households, in Chile, consumer debt is made up of close to 75% of term bank loans, 18% credit cards and 
7% credit lines. Virtually all consumer loans bear a fixed interest rate, with an average maturity of between 4 and 
5 years. In turn, mortgage loans account for most of the increase in household debt in the last six years. As is well 
known, mortgages are issued almost entirely at fixed rates (adjusted for inflation), long maturities, and a prudent 
housing loan-to-value ratio. Together, these elements reduce the potential impact of an increase in interest rates 
on the financial burden of households.  
 Regarding  the  government  sector,  the  mitigation  of  interest  rate  risk  depends  also  on  the  behavior  of  the 
economy’s investor base. This makes the way in which the demand for and supply of bonds behave in stressful 
times particularly relevant. The importance of the participation of pension funds and mutual funds in sovereign 
bond holdings and the fact that in the face of external shocks, the less risky funds—and with a greater share of 
sovereign bonds—become more attractive, also offers a cushion to the effects international interest rate shocks. 
 
Even  so,  this  is  an  especially  important  moment  to  strengthen  potentially  vulnerable  flanks  in  emerging 
economies. As I have said before, it is important to restore the slack that has helped sustain Chile's macroeconomic 
policy framework. Especially important in this regard is to moderate and possibly reverse the course of public 
indebtedness,  adopt  a  framework  to  capitalize  the  banking  system  and  ensure  a  sustainable  evolution  of 
household borrowing.  
 
The signals of the government regarding the orientation of its fiscal policy, its backing of the new General Banking 
Act and the reactivation of its search for mechanisms to consolidate borrowers’ financial information are very 
6 
positive  in  this  regard.  Equally  valuable  in  dealing  with  future  turbulences  seems  to  be  to  strengthen  fiscal 
institutions by enhancing the status and autonomy of the Fiscal Advisory Council, as well as acknowledging the 
role of institutional investors in the Chilean economy in the face of future reforms. 
 
Dear senators, the Chilean economy is progressing in the recovery of growth and the closing of gaps. Rather than 
a  result, this  is  a  good start  for a more  favorable  stage  of the  business  cycle. Many  challenges  lie  ahead.  It  is 
important to deepen the recovery of investment, that the labor market be strengthened and that competitive 
advantages be exploited to make this recovery more self-sustained and shared. Greater long-term growth calls 
for more structural changes that will help raise productivity. 
 
The Central Bank will be there to ensure that imbalances or vulnerabilities do not incubate in the process, which 
later may require more costly adjustments. Together we also have the responsibility to strengthen those factors 
that allow us to better withstand external shocks that will sooner or later be felt. The analysis and projections in 
this Report contribute to the understanding of how the Central Bank exercises its responsibilities, as well as the 
opportunities and challenges that we face together. We remain at your disposal to deepen this discussion. 
 
Thank you. 
 
   7 
    8 
    9 
    10 
  11 
     12 
   13 
   14 
