Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Public policy perspective - some thoughts
and contemplations from a central banker
Remarks by Mr Muhammad bin Ibrahim, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia (Bank Negara
Malaysia), at the 40th Harvard Business School Alumni Club Malaysia Anniversary Dinner, Kuala
Lumpur, 9 February 2018.
 Thank you for the invitation to speak tonight, among such impressive luminaries. I would like to
take this opportunity to share, reflect and learn from past experiences. Since my line of work
relates to public policy, I would like to approach it from this perspective.
The remarkable paradox of public policy
Public policy has never been easy. It is deceivingly simple if we just think about the outcomes.
For example, the country needs more public healthcare; or prices of goods need to be lower; or
people should have more access to credit. In practice, the policymaker makes difficult decisions
involving complicated trade-offs, competing objectives and priorities. Resources are limited and
invariably, any allocation made will affect many persons in different ways. Public policy can never
ever meet the needs of everyone all at the same time.
Given these challenges, it stands to reason that there can be no set template or rules when it
comes to executing public policies. From this perspective, it is therefore a remarkable paradox
that policymaking at the international level is steeped in conventions, rules and norms that set out
expectations  on  how  policymakers  should  behave  and  conduct  policies.  These  hard  and  soft
rules, have at times, guided policymakers through some turbulent episodes. Of concern however
is when this set of prescriptions act like a straitjacket, constraining policymakers from making
bold and necessary policy decisions, just because it does not conform to ‘consensus thinking'.
This is in spite of universal acknowledgment that we are experiencing change that is unmatched,
both in pace and dimensions. Clearly this changes the rules of the game. Conformity could come
at a cost. And that cost can be significant if it is driven solely by ideology.
John F. Kennedy once said, “Conformity is the jailer of freedom and the enemy of growth". The
issue of conformity and how it affects social behavior has been the subject of study for decades.
It  was  in  1972  that  Irving  Janis,  a  psychologist  at  Yale  and  forerunner  in  the  field  of  social
dynamics, first coined the term “group-think".
Professor Janis described this collective behaviour as “a mode of thinking that people engage in
when  they  are  deeply  involved  in  a  cohesive  in-group…when  the  members’  strivings  for
unanimity override their motivation to realistically appraise alternative courses of action". In other
words,  group-think  occurs  when  there  is  pressure  to  conform  to  an  over-arching  view  or
strategy. As a result, members of the group often feel uncomfortable to deviate from the “norm",
leading  to  tunnel-vision  and  a  fear  to  voice  out  opinions  and  come  up  with  new  ideas.
Sometimes, it can provide dubious cover for doing less than what is appropriate, and what is
needed.
To put this into perspective, consider the case of a large US automobile manufacturer. Often
cited in the fields of organisational ethics and industrial psychology, this case was seen as a
prime  example  of  how  conformity  and  group-think  led  to  costly  outcomes.  In  2014,  the  motor
company was forced to recall nearly 30 million cars worldwide as faulty ignition switches were
found to have led to a loss of electrical power and sudden engine shutdown.
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
This  malfunction  also  caused  the  airbags,  power  steering  and  power  brakes  to  become
dysfunctional, risking the safety of drivers. As the scandal was uncovered, it was found to have
caused an estimated 124 deaths.
What  is  particularly  harrowing,  was  the  fact  that  this  faulty  ignition  switch  was  known  by  the
company’s  employees  for  at  least  a  decade  before  the  recall.  An  independent  probe
subsequently pointed to a corporate culture, which the then new CEO, described as “a pattern of
incompetence and neglect". Various case studies on the crisis highlighted that the tight financial
position in the early 2000s festered a corporate culture that was heavily focused on cost-cutting,
shaping employees’ mindsets, conduct and ultimately values. Internal email transcripts revealed
that  it  would  have  cost  an  extra  90  cents  per  unit  to  modify  the  ignition  switches. An  internal
probe reported that the problem was misdiagnosed and dismissed as a “customer-satisfaction”
issue, rather than a safety problem. The company then advised their customers to remove heavy
objects  attached  to  their  car  keys,  such  as  bulky  keychains,  rather  than  fixing  the  root  of  the
problem itself. This story is not strange. It happens elsewhere as well.
In the world of central banking, serious risks can similarly arise from groupthink. There are many
rules  governing  policymaking  that  policymakers  tend  to  follow  rigidly,  despite  its  waning
effectiveness.  This  increases  the  risks  of  being  blindsided  and  promotes  a  culture  that  is
resistant to change.
An example of this in central banking is the ‘inflation-targeting framework’ which was considered
the  international  best  practice  in  monetary  policy  framework  for  many  years  before  the  Great
Financial Crisis. My remarks are not a critique of the framework but rather, to highlight that there
are other approaches as well.
The premise behind the framework is very simple. It is also elegant. If the inflation trend deviates
beyond a central bank’s expected target, typically around 2%, the central bank should use its
policy tools, namely the interest rate, to bring inflation back to target. Inflation targeting enables
monetary  policy  to  focus  on  domestic  variables  and  respond  to  external  stimulus  that  impact
domestic price stability.
Since  it  was  first  adopted  in  1989,  it  was  seen  as  a  simpler  and  more  transparent  policy
framework  because  it  allowed  the  public  to  easily  understand  and  observe  the  central  bank’s
motive, which is ultimately low and stable inflation. Within a short span of time, the popularity of
this  new  framework  spread  widely  in  both  the  advanced  and  emerging  economies.  It  is  quite
understandable.  The  framework  is  theoretically  attractive,  easily  understood  and  simple  to
communicate.
Deviating from the norm: Malaysia’s approach
The theoretical elegance of inflation targeting appealed to many central banks to tread on the
same path. In Malaysia we had considered this approach but decided to forge our own route.
While the broad framework was appealing, we concluded that adopting an explicit inflation target
would  have  the  unintended  effect  of  ‘straitjacketing’  our  policy  flexibility.  We  believed  that  the
inflation  targeting  framework  was  not  ideal  for  an  open  and  small  economy  with  a  sizeable
financial market like Malaysia.
An economy such as ours is susceptible to real external shocks and could also face problems
such  as  large  and  volatile  capital  flows  and  exchange  rates.  Therefore,  we  did  not  adopt  the
inflation  targeting  framework.  We  adopted  what  we  characterised  as  ‘inflation  anchoring'.  The
policy  outcome  is  similar,  stable  inflation.  But  the  process  and  focus  are  different.  There  are
several reasons for this approach.
First, we did not believe in confining ourselves to a single overarching target for price stability,
especially not when the economy is complex and consists of many moving parts. We wanted to
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
avoid a situation where too much focus on achieving a single target could lead to potential blind
spots.  In  particular,  we  did  not  want  our  monetary  policy  to  be  driven  predominantly  by
movements in one single price indicator, to an extent that we ignore other important risks such
as asset price bubbles and the destabilising unwinding of these assets.
Second, our experience showed that Malaysia’s episodes of high inflation are typically externally
driven,  such  as  through  global  oil  prices.  In  fact,  inflationary  episodes  in  Malaysia  have  rarely
been a monetary phenomenon.
That being said, external shocks that drive inflation do not require a monetary policy response if it
does not affect domestic demand or cause undue wage pressures.
I recall in 2008, that when global oil prices surged to a height of around USD140 per barrel and
Malaysia  faced  strong  inflationary  pressures  that  breached  7%,  we  were  perceived  as  being
‘behind the curve’ for not raising interest rates. Under the inflation targeting framework, on the
other hand, logic dictates that in response to this period of supply-driven inflation, raising policy
rates by as much as 100 to 175 basis points in some countries were merited. The monetary
policy  response  is  premised  on  the  argument  that  anchoring  inflation  expectation  supplanted
every other consideration including the source of inflationary pressures.
Allow me to illustrate how inflation expectations work. If you do not believe that the central bank’s
monetary  policy  can  bring  inflation  back  down  in  say,  two  to  three  years’  time,  then  inflation
expectations are considered unanchored. What this means is that if members of the public do
not  believe  in  the  central  bank’s  ability  to  control  inflation,  a  rise  in  prices  could  trigger  public
expectations that prices will rise even more in the future.
Businesses  will  soon  raise  prices  of  goods,  and  workers,  in  facing  higher  prices,  will  in  turn
demand  for  higher  wages,  leading  to  a  vicious  inflationary  cycle.  Inflationary  expectations,  if
unhinged, would eventually become a self-fulfilling prophecy. As such, the interest rate increase
reflects the central bank’s strong commitment to control inflation. A central bank that is seen as
having a strong commitment and is credible in its actions to fighting inflation would therefore have
a higher probability of success in anchoring inflation expectations. This is essentially what we will
find  in  every  textbook  on  monetary  policy.  In  reality,  however,  there  is  more  to  inflation
expectations than meets the eye.
A case in point is Malaysia’s inflation experience in 2008. At that time, we had the firm conviction
that the spike in inflation and inflation expectations during the period would be temporary, as the
prospect of weakening demand would dampen price increases in the future. Most importantly,
we  also  saw  the  sharp  spike  in  commodity  prices  and  increasing  risks  from  the  US  financial
market which posed significant downside risk to future growth. As events began to unfold, this
conjecture turned out to be the baseline case.
When the Great Financial Crisis of 2007–08 erupted with both economic growth and financial
stability at stake, our decision not to raise interest rates was apt as it provided a much-needed
buffer.  We  moved  from  being  ‘behind  the  curve’  to  ‘ahead  of  the  curve’  when  other  countries
began reversing their policies by cutting interest rates.
Fast  forward  to  the  current  environment,  inflation  is  becoming  even  more  complex  with  the
influence  of  various  factors  such  as  globalisation,  demographics  and  technology  bearing  on
inflation outcomes in ways we do not yet fully understand. Because of these external factors,
central  banks  in  some  economies  have  frequently  missed  their  inflation  targets  over  the  past
decade. These central banks have had to work extra hard to anchor inflation expectations while
they  continue  to  miss  their  targets.  This  has  become  a  source  of  sizeable  uncertainty  and
volatility.
In  Malaysia’s  case,  keeping  a  broader  view  has  suited  our  needs  and  has  given  us  policy
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
flexibility to respond to economic and financial shocks, as we are not unduly straitjacketed into
meeting  this  explicit  inflation  target,  which,  under  many  circumstances,  can  prove  to  be  very
elusive.
Third, as an open economy with flexible exchange rates, Malaysia is prone to large and volatile
swings of capital flows which can lead to exchange rate overshooting. In fact, we just recovered
from what was one of the sharpest ringgit depreciation periods since the Asian Financial Crisis. I
am sure that this is still fresh in everyone’s mind.
We recognised much earlier on that the inflation targeting framework is not well-suited to our
domestic  conditions  as  it  can  compound  the  risks  of  unfettered  capital  flows.  Instead,  we
believed  that  destabilising  capital  flows  need  to  be  effectively  managed  to  ensure  orderly
domestic conditions. It did not help that some economies even hosted illegal NDF activities that
had grave spillover implications on neighbouring economies. The fact that multilateral institutions
are  oblivious  to  these  damaging  consequences  to  some  of  their  member  countries  is  very
disquieting.
A  further  point  is  the  dangers  that  can  arise  when  inflation  targeting  inappropriately  shifts  the
burden  onto  monetary  policy  to  solve  problems  that  in  reality,  require  much  broader  policy
responses  on  the  fiscal  side.  When  much  needed  actions  are  postponed,  it  has  important
consequences for our long term growth potential.
Inflation targeting framework falling under heavy scrutiny
As it turns out, our choice of not conforming to the norm was not in vain. Inflation targeting is now
under  scrutiny  as  its  merits  are  debated  widely.  Many  of  these  discussions  centered  on  the
waning effectiveness of the framework and the need for additional policy instruments to make the
framework effective.
The  sequence  of  events  leading  up  to  the  Great  Financial  Crisis  raised  the  argument  that  an
exclusive  focus  on  achieving  the  inflation  target  could  cause  policymakers  to  overlook  other
vulnerabilities, such as credit and asset price bubbles.
Delivering on inflation targets itself has also presented new challenges. Despite almost 10 years
of ultra-easy monetary policy, and despite stronger growth and better labour market conditions,
some countries are still devoid of inflation. This latest enigma of “missing inflation” has further
spurred  the  search  for  the  next  best  thing  after  inflation  targeting.  It  has  become  increasingly
clear that the nature of problems facing policymakers and the underlying heuristics are becoming
very complex. What we thought we knew about inflation dynamics has been inadequate and has
not  factored  in  many  other  relevant  factors.  Inflation  dynamics  have  evolved  with  structural
factors  such  as  the  global  value  chain,  demographics,  technological  advancements  and  the
digitalisation of the economy.
In such a dynamic environment, it is only logical to think that one must be pragmatic, flexible and
agile.  This  is  why  we  focused  on  inflation  anchoring  without  being  tied  to  a  single  numerical
target.  To  effectively  do  this,  our  monetary  policy  framework  will  take  into  account  a  broader
consideration of factors that could affect the domestic economy and financial system.
It also allowed us some flexibility to monitor how our monetary policy actions could interact with
key issues facing the public, such as distributional implications, cost of living, access to financing
and  financial  inclusion. As  we  understand  these  interactions  better,  our  responses,  including
monetary policy decisions, can be more nuanced and effective.
Malaysia’s policy approach has remained relevant
Inflation  anchoring  was  not  the  only  thing  we  did  differently.  In  fact,  Malaysia  has  never  shied
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
away from taking the path less travelled. This is not driven by any ideological design but we have
always been careful to ensure that policy prescriptions fit our economic, legal and operational
circumstances.  Some  of  the  policy  approaches  that  have  been  our  practice  are  only  recently
being seriously considered by the global community. A good example is capital controls or now
more  elegantly  known  as  capital  flow  management  measures.  Our  approaches,  while
sometimes can be considered as ‘different’ are premised on several considerations.
First, is that we considered financial stability risks in our monetary policy decisions. While moves
to formalise this as part or within the broader context of monetary policy frameworks have been a
more recent phenomenon in the aftermath of the recent crisis, Malaysia has always been vigilant
against the risks of financial imbalances. We have looked into this aspect for as long as I can
remember. In 1992, for instance, the Bank had already introduced administrative limits, or macro
and microprudential measures as it is known now, to address the risks of financial imbalances
arising from specific sectors of the economy.
Back then, limits on hire purchase loans and guidelines on credit card operations were put in
place as complementary measures to the tighter monetary policy stance of the Bank. Even since
then,  financial  stability  has  remained  an  important  mandate  of  the  Bank.  This  mandate  was
reinforced with the introduction of the Central Bank Act in 2009, which established Bank Negara
Malaysia as the financial stability authority for Malaysia.
Second,  we  have  always  kept  our  banking  system  supervisory  role  in-house,  even  when  the
notion of separating the monetary authority from financial supervisory authority was held up as a
more  effective  model  in  more  than  a  few  countries.  We  now  see  moves  to  recombine  these
functions under the central bank post-Great Financial Crisis. The UK, for instance, had restored
the supervisory role back to the central bank after a painful episode with the collapse of Northern
Rock in 2007. Authorities were widely blamed for inaction, poor coordination and constraints that
held back early interventions.
Third, is the fact that Malaysia has always relied on a broad policy toolkit, even during the early
1990s when we introduced measures to manage capital flows. It was only in 2012 that the IMF
updated their institutional view and began recognising the usefulness of capital flow management
measures.
More recently, at end-2016, we introduced bold ‘market-correcting’ and prudential measures to
ensure the orderly functioning of the domestic financial market. These measures were seen as
‘anti-market forces’ at its inception but they have been proven effective in reducing speculative
pressures on the ringgit and imbalances in the domestic foreign exchange market. It has in fact
further liberalised the market than the situation before the measures were implemented.
Learning from Malaysia’s policy experience
There are important lessons behind Malaysia’s approach which are relevant to our policymaking,
at  least  from  my  perspective.  These  lessons  cut  across  profession  and  industry.  It  is  not
exhaustive. But I would like to raise 5 points.
First, it is important for policymakers to remain agile in their approach to policies. We should not
be too rigid in our own ways that we neglect changes in the environment and fail to change with
the  times.  The  world  as  we  know  it  will  be  transformed  with  the  rapid  advancements  in
technology  and  communication,  big  data  and  the  list  goes  on.  If  we  remain  stagnant,  we  are
doomed to fail.
The  willingness  to  renew  and  redirect  policy  is  critical  to  successful  policymaking.  From  the
outside  looking  in,  the  redirection  of  policy  is  often  perceived  to  be  regressive.  In  reality,  they
reflect policies that aim to be more, rather than less, responsive to changing conditions. In the
same  way  that  businesses  expect  governments  to  relax  and  adapt  policy  to  capture  new
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
opportunities,  authorities  have  a  professional  duty  to  redirect  policy,  however  unpopular,  to
maintain stability and harness our collective growth potential when risks or unintended outcomes
become apparent. This requires much more confidence, boldness and courage.
Second, policymakers need to protect and value their autonomy in the conduct of policies and
not be constrained by prevailing rules and consensus thinking established by the international
community.  International  organisations  have  come  up  with  various  definitions  and  primers  on
how they feel an economy should be managed. Their need for standardisation is understandable
because of the need to dispense consistent policy advice across many countries. However, that
being said, the domestic policymaker understands best the context of the local situation that the
country is facing. There should be no doubt in this.
Third, policymakers must not be afraid of instituting bold policies if they are deemed necessary.
This  is  especially  important  during  times  of  stress  or  market  failures  that  risk  the  orderly
functioning of the economy and financial system. Intervention in markets should not be a knee
jerk reaction. As a matter of principle, public policies should always first strive to facilitate a self-
regulating  free  market  to  correct  itself.  However,  when  markets  fail,  it  is  incumbent  upon  the
regulator to correct market failures. This ought to be the cardinal rule, especially for small and
open economies with sizeable financial markets. More often than not, corrective public policy can
be unpopular among the masses, but it is important to not lose sight of the bigger picture, for the
greater good. Often times, short-term pain is necessary for longer-term gains.
Fourth,  clear  and  transparent  communication  is  crucial.  Policies  will  not  be  effective  if  the
motivations and understanding between policymakers and the public are not aligned. At the end
of  2016,  the  Bank  actively  sought  out  the  feedback  of  industries  and  market  participants  that
were affected by the financial market development measures we introduced in November 2016.
This  became  an  important  source  of  information  for  us  to  continuously  fine-tune  the
implementation of the measures to help those affected to better adapt to the new environment.
Being transparent also means that policy intents should be quantified, measured and disclosed.
Finally, policymakers must not formulate public policy in isolation. We must promulgate policy
with hard facts, backed by statistics and sound theoretical evidence. Foremost, we should not
forget about the lives of people we are trying to help. A strong GDP growth figure will be less
meaningful  if  they  do  not  create  good  quality  jobs,  better  distribution  of  incomes  and  higher
standard of living for the people. Formulation of public policies must continue to be based on
sound economics and have the ultimate goal of improving the welfare of society.
While we remain cognisant of the broader distributional implications of our policies, issues that
are more structural in nature such as low productivity, income inequality and quality jobs creation
would also require specific policies that lie beyond the capacity of the central bank alone.
It  requires  collaboration  across  many  domains,  with  other  policy  makers,  and  with  many
stakeholders for the betterment of the standard of living and welfare of the general public.
As we know it, the world is fast evolving and we must keep pace. The progress of information
and communication technology, has been astounding and its assimilation into our economic and
financial system structure will be the catalyst to propel finance as the great social equaliser. But
for us to optimise the benefits for all, we need to strike the right balance between regulation and
allowing technological innovations to take place in our financial system.
Ultimately,  regulations  exist  to  promote  a  safe,  efficient  and  sound  financial  system  that  is
competitive  and  where  consumers’  interest  are  protected.  Regulatory  regimes  promote  the
foundation of trust and confidence that is crucial in any financial system. If people do not trust the
system, financial intermediation cannot take place in any shape or form. As the modalities for
financial intermediation and payments are transformed by technology, regulation should play an
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
active role in creating a similar environment of trust to ensure overall financial stability.
The boundaries of regulation will evolve to provide the freedom for participants in the Malaysian
financial  system  to  innovate  and  adopt  technology  to  exploit  efficiencies  and  create  new  and
better solutions. Solutions that not only deliver better experience for consumers, but that better
align the responsibilities that we all carry as responsible citizens, to lift people out of poverty,
provide our fellow Malaysians a decent living standard, eliminate discrimination and protect our
environment.
Regulation is never intended to make market players ‘boring'. If they feel that way, it only tells us
one thing – that they have become too complacent in their comfort zone and should undertake a
reality check. Malaysia’s financial institutions especially must not lay idle as innovations will be
relentless in accessing and penetrating the traditional market long enjoyed by the banks. Using
the disguise of being tied by regulations is not a valid excuse. We have raised this many times,
that the central bank will not hinder innovations in the banking system including those by non-
banking institutions. So beware. Those bankers who are complacent and meek might experience
the rug being pulled from underneath them.
Conclusion
We  hail  from  different  backgrounds  and  experiences,  but  all  of  us  here  have  the  influence  to
impact the Malaysian economy, no matter how big or small. We are duty-bound to play our roles
effectively and hold a bigger responsibility to ensure that nobody under our care is left behind as
we continue to progress.
On that note, I wish everyone a productive and fulfilling journey in 2018. To those who will be
celebrating Chinese New Year, I would like to extend my best wishes. Let us look forward to a
better Malaysia.
Thank you.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
