   Remarks by Lynn Patterson 
Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada 
Investment Industry Association of Canada and 
Institute of International Finance 
Toronto, Ontario 
June 18, 2018 
  
Rebooting Reference Rates 
Introduction 
Thank you and good afternoon.  
My topic today is interest-rate benchmarks or reference rates and the work under 
way here in Canada and globally to strengthen them. 
Before I plunge in, let me take you back to the 1980s. Aside from the monstrous 
shoulder pads in my suit jackets, the decade gave us several important 
innovations. One of the most widely used was Windows. Not the kind you put in 
your house, but the operating system for your computer. Microsoft released 
Windows 1.0 in 1985. Most of us are now using Windows 10. Each new version 
improved functionality and reliability.  
The most widely used benchmark—the London Interbank Offered Rate 
(LIBOR)—was first published in 1986, a year after Microsoft released Windows. It 
has undergone only one material change in the past 30 years and was certainly 
never originally designed to support what has become a US$350 trillion market. 
Now, it is difficult to imagine modern financial markets without derivatives 
enabled by benchmarks.1 However, just as Windows 1.0 isn’t versatile enough to 
support new computer programs that have been introduced over the past 30 
years, many benchmarks are no longer suitable for the wide array of derivatives 
markets they support. In addition, the scandals and mistrust related to the 
 1 Originally developed to facilitate cross-border lending between banks, LIBOR and other 
benchmarks offer measures of prevailing interest rates on which standardized contracts can be 
based. For example, an individual or firm may borrow money today and pay the lender interest 
based on market interest rates, as measured by a financial benchmark, over the course of the 
loan.  
  I would like to thank Paul Chilcott, Harri Vikstedt, Scott Kinnear and Sheryl King 
 for their help in preparing this speech. 
 Not for publication before 18 June 2018 
12:45 Eastern Time 
    - 2 - 
manipulation of benchmark rates for the financial benefit of individuals and 
institutions have made their future use unpalatable. 
Not surprisingly, then, these problems with benchmarks have undermined 
confidence in their reliability and robustness. In response, global authorities are 
working closely with the private sector to address them. 
For many of you in this room, benchmark reform is probably a familiar topic, and 
you understand the significant role these rates play in the functioning of markets.   
But benchmarks, like Windows, are part of our day-to-day lives in one way or 
another. How they function and how they may change matters a great deal not 
just to your industry but also to most Canadians. Our financial wealth is 
connected to benchmarks. For example, exchange-traded funds and mutual 
funds may invest in products linked to benchmarks. And mortgage costs are 
based on bank funding costs, which, in turn, include inputs priced off derivatives 
contracts using benchmarks. 
So, reforming this foundational element of our financial infrastructure is critical to 
both the financial industry and the broader economy. Indeed, we’re long overdue 
for an upgrade. 
In my remarks today, I’m going to discuss the work afoot to either validate, 
enhance or transform various widely used benchmarks or create new ones. I’ll 
start with an overview of the work under way globally and then focus on what is 
being done in the United States and Canada.   
The current state of play  
Aside from our primary role in setting monetary policy to meet our inflation target, 
our mandate at the Bank of Canada includes fostering the stability and efficiency 
of the financial system.  
Benchmarks contribute to the efficient functioning of markets and the stability of 
the system. Getting them right matters. 
The Bank of Canada is playing a role in these changes through our active 
membership on the Financial Stability Board (FSB), which is leading the global 
effort to coordinate benchmark reform. Central banks are trusted by market 
participants and they keep a watchful eye on risks to financial stability, so it’s 
important that we be involved in this work.  
To be effective, a benchmark should be robust, reliable and resilient to any 
market stress. It also needs to be transparent and consistent with the principles 
for financial benchmarks set out by the International Organization of Securities 
Commissions (IOSCO).  
These principles cover governance, quality and accountability. They stress that 
the data used to construct benchmarks “should be based on prices, rates, indices 
or values that have been formed by the competitive forces of supply and demand 
and be anchored by observable transactions.”  
   - 3 - 
The major upgrades that have taken place since 2014 have been guided by the 
IOSCO principles as well as by improvements to LIBOR and other benchmarks 
recommended by the FSB. 
The FSB is also urging countries to develop new benchmarks based on short-
term, risk-free (or near risk-free) observable rates or, where they already exist, to 
promote more active use of them. Such benchmarks would be a better fit for 
many derivatives transactions.  
Market participants, together with central banks and other authorities, have been 
actively pursuing this “twin track” approach of strengthening existing benchmarks 
and developing alternatives. 
A risk-free rate would help accomplish two goals. First, it would reduce the 
dependence on any individual benchmark. Second, it would allow counterparties 
to select benchmarks that might more closely match the exposures they want, 
enabling them to better meet the needs of some derivatives markets. 
For example, LIBOR is meant to represent a bank’s cost of funding. It can vary 
according to a number of factors, such as an increase in underlying rates or a 
deterioration in the creditworthiness of banks—as we saw during the global 
financial crisis. Imagine a sovereign issuer wanting to take a fixed-rate bond and 
swap it to a floating-rate liability. Since such an issuer’s creditworthiness does 
not fluctuate with that of the banking system, using a benchmark with a short-
term rate that is not influenced by the creditworthiness of banks would be more 
appropriate. 
Some of the alternatives that have been identified are new, while others are 
existing rates that are being, or have been, enhanced. In all cases, they are 
overnight rates. Now, many jurisdictions are exploring whether they need to 
develop term risk-free benchmarks, say for one- or three-month maturities, for 
use in mortgages and cash markets and perhaps also for some derivatives.  This 
might help the transition from LIBOR-type benchmarks, where term rates are 
more widely used than overnight rates. For this to happen, such benchmarks 
would have to be consistent with the IOSCO standards. 
The pace of all this work accelerated last summer thanks to Andrew Bailey, Chief 
Executive of the United Kingdom’s Financial Conduct Authority (FCA), which 
regulates LIBOR. He announced that LIBOR might be sustainable only until the 
end of 2021. After that date, the FCA will not persuade or compel banks to 
submit LIBOR rates. This means markets need to be ready to transition to 
alternative benchmarks.  
This announcement came as a surprise to those who had not been closely 
following benchmark developments. Now, roughly a year later, there appears to 
   - 4 - 
be wider market acceptance of what needs to be done, and progress is 
continuing despite the significant complexities.2  
Progress in the United States 
I’ll focus on recent developments in the United States because the US-dollar 
LIBOR is one of the most widely used benchmarks, and Canadian investors and 
issuers have material exposure to it.  
Consider the sheer size of the market that references USD LIBOR. In 2016, 
notional contracts priced off USD LIBOR totalled nearly US$200 trillion. The 
lion’s share of that exposure—95 per cent—was in derivatives, primarily interest 
rate swaps. Another US$8 trillion in cash products was based on USD LIBOR—
everything from floating-rate notes to consumer loans.  
The work to develop an alternative to LIBOR in the United States is being led by 
the Alternative Reference Rate Committee (ARRC), which is composed of 
dealers, asset managers, issuers, exchanges, regulators and official institutions. 
In April, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York began publishing the Secured 
Overnight Financing Rate (SOFR), which it concluded is a reliable benchmark for 
new US-dollar derivatives.  
SOFR is an overnight rate based on the Treasury repo market. It covers multiple 
segments of this market, including tri-party, dealer-to-dealer and centrally cleared 
bilateral repos. Based on US$800 billion in daily transactions, SOFR adheres 
closely to the standards set out by IOSCO. 
To establish SOFR as a widely used benchmark, an entire ecosystem of 
products needs to be built around it to encourage trading and generate liquidity in 
SOFR-related products. This work has begun. Futures contracts for SOFR 
started trading in May, with all primary dealers pledging to support that market. 
Trading has been light so far but is expected to increase as more market 
participants revamp their systems. Some time this summer, overnight index 
swaps referencing SOFR will begin trading, and they will be accepted for clearing 
through central counterparties later this year. Of course, greater market adoption 
will require buy-side involvement—the engagement of asset managers and 
issuers is critical. The next step may be the identification of a term rate based on 
SOFR. It is possible that this could be developed through the futures market.  
Many trade groups are collaborating in this work, which goes beyond just 
selecting a new benchmark and developing markets that reference it. For 
example, fallback provisions are an important transition element. These 
provisions are a contingency written into financial contracts in case the current 
benchmark is no longer viable. Fallbacks, or contingency plans, are a feature of 
many things we consume in everyday life—everything from backup electrical 
generators in case the power goes out to a guaranteed rental from your 
 2 Industry groups in the United Kingdom, the United States, Switzerland, Japan and the euro area 
are leading the work.  
   - 5 - 
dealership if your new vehicle needs repairs. Given the uncertainty that LIBOR 
will continue to exist beyond 2021, it just makes sense to have appropriate 
fallback provisions written into financial market contracts to allow these products 
to transition smoothly to new benchmarks. 
The International Swaps and Derivatives Association is working on fallback 
language for derivatives contracts, while ARRC is helping to draft appropriate 
language for cash products.  
Although considerable progress has been made, reform still has a long way to 
go. And as William Dudley, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 
emphasized in a recent speech, we have a compressed time frame to get the 
work done, so “we need aggressive action to move to a more durable and 
resilient benchmark regime.” 
Canada’s benchmarks 
What about Canada’s benchmarks?  
In 2014 my colleague Timothy Lane gave a speech on benchmark reform that 
highlighted the work being done in Canada and the rationale for it proceeding at 
a different pace from that of our global peers. This is partially due to differences 
between our main benchmark, the Canadian Dollar Offered Rate (CDOR), and 
LIBOR.   
CDOR is used for derivatives, floating-rate notes and loans. At the end of 2017, it 
was referenced by more than $13 trillion in financial instruments.  
Like LIBOR, CDOR is based on submissions from a panel of banks, but there are 
major differences between the two.  
Just to remind you, LIBOR is a borrowing rate based on estimates of the cost of 
unsecured borrowing transactions between banks. The volume of this borrowing 
has been declining, which means that LIBOR has become more reliant on the 
judgment of experts rather than actual transactions.  
In contrast, CDOR is a bank lending rate and was originally developed by the 
banks themselves to facilitate the calculation of a benchmark rate for the 
Banker’s Acceptance (BA) market.  
CDOR is the rate at which submitters are willing to lend their balance sheet to 
corporate clients with existing BA lines of credit. These BA lines are being drawn 
down daily, and BA volumes have been continuously growing. 
BAs were first developed in 1962 as an alternative source of short-term funding 
for corporate borrowers. They are an unconditional order from a corporate client 
to draw funds against their established line of credit at a Canadian bank to be 
paid back in full at a fixed date in the future. Now, BAs make up the largest 
portion of money market instruments issued by non-government entities, 
accounting for around 25 per cent of the total money market. In 2017, an average 
of about $76 billion in BAs was outstanding.  
   - 6 - 
A paper we published today on our website reviews the evolution of the BA 
market. 
Since 2014, and in keeping with the IOSCO principles, CDOR has been 
strengthened in a number of ways. Thomson Reuters has been appointed the 
administrator and is responsible for the calculation and distribution of the rate. 
Thomson Reuters has also formed an oversight committee for CDOR to regularly 
review its definition, scope and methodology. And the Office of the 
Superintendent of Financial Institutions is now supervising the governance and 
risk controls surrounding the submission processes at the panel banks. 
Although CDOR does not have the same vulnerabilities as LIBOR, it is being 
used in derivatives markets where the notional value of contracts is a multiple of 
volumes in the underlying BA markets and where a risk-free rate may better suit 
the needs of many users.   
Fortunately, we already have a risk-free overnight rate. Let me introduce you to 
CORRA, the Canadian Overnight Repo Rate Average, which has been in place 
since 1997. It measures the average cost of overnight collateralized funding and 
is an important reference rate for overnight index swaps, which investors use if 
they want, for example, to hedge interest rate risk related to Bank of Canada rate 
decisions. 
CORRA is based on actual transactions and is calculated from on-screen trades 
through interdealer brokers. As with CDOR, CORRA is now administered by 
Thomson Reuters.  
So, in Canada, we have a different starting point and have made further 
enhancements to comply with the IOSCO principles.  
Canadian alternative 
Should we be satisfied that this is enough? We don’t know the answer to this 
question yet, but to help work through the issues we recently set up the 
Canadian Alternative Reference Rate Working Group (CARR).3 
We know a risk-free rate is a better fit for most derivative-related exposures. 
Recall the example I mentioned earlier of issuers who want to hedge their 
interest-rate liabilities from a fixed to a floating rate. If other currencies move 
primarily to using risk-free rates as their benchmark, specifically term risk-free 
rates, market participants may want to have the same option in Canadian dollars.  
CARR is co-chaired by the Bank and a private sector participant. The group will 
look at potential enhancements to CORRA, such as whether the rate could be 
calculated using a wider range of transactions, instead of just those occurring on 
interdealer broker screens. These enhancements might include dealer-to-client 
 3 This initiative came out of our work on the Canadian Fixed-Income Forum, an industry group 
that the Bank of Canada launched in 2015. 
    - 7 - 
trades. We expect that CARR will have a recommendation to bring forward on 
enhancements to CORRA by the end of the year.  
From the outset, we wanted a diverse group to participate in CARR, people 
active in the marketplace, with deep expertise. We now have 21 members, some 
of whom are from banks, pension funds and investment firms. Because of the 
importance of ancillary products and exchanges where transactions are cleared, 
the Canadian Derivatives Clearing Corporation, the London Clearing House4 and 
the Montréal Exchange are observers. We feel this provides a full perspective on 
the market. The working group is currently meeting monthly.  
In addition, we want and need feedback from a wide range of stakeholders, 
including various Canadian regulatory authorities. We will likely set up targeted 
round-table discussions and other subgroups to solicit broader input. We will be 
exploring a range of topics, from the type of products that use interest-rate 
benchmarks to the wording of the fallback provisions in Canadian cash products 
referencing CDOR. All of this will give us a greater appreciation of the impact 
these changes will have on multiple stakeholders. The demands will be high over 
the balance of this year and next as we assess appropriate options for Canada 
while keeping informed of international developments. We will share our findings 
widely.  
If a new risk-free term benchmark is developed, market adoption will be critical. 
For that to happen, we need pension funds, asset managers, banks and 
infrastructure providers to use it. Just as new functionality in each Windows 
upgrade prompts the development of new computer programs, a new benchmark 
will gain broader acceptance with the development of other ancillary products, 
such as futures. 
Challenges ahead 
Let me turn now to the challenges that lie ahead, some of which are related to 
the global interconnectedness of markets. 
Like our economy, where cross-border trade plays an important role, there is a 
large volume of cross-border financial flows, which are critical to our financial 
system. So we have to work in lockstep with authorities elsewhere. Many cross-
currency products reference benchmarks like LIBOR and CDOR. How quickly 
can markets for them adapt to using these new benchmarks or curves based on 
them? And if some benchmarks survive and others don’t, will there need to be 
common approaches governing the use of interest rate benchmarks in foreign 
exchange markets?  
There are also major issues around transition. Many contracts using benchmarks 
expire relatively quickly. But some have much longer maturities. For those, the 
 4 The London Clearing House (LCH) operates SwapClear, the dominant global system for 
centrally clearing over-the-counter interest rate swaps, including many Canadian-dollar interest 
rate swaps. 
   - 8 - 
transition could be much more complicated because the nature of their 
exposures might change.  
Then there are the challenges we all face within our organizations. Transitioning 
to new benchmarks means adapting our trading and risk systems and back-office 
processes. We all know how long systems changes can take. That means 
starting work relatively soon, or as soon as we know what reference rates we will 
be using in the future. As we begin to trade in these products, we will need to be 
patient—liquidity may take some time to build.   
Conclusion 
The work under way on benchmarks is complex and requires a great deal of 
coordination among countries, central banks and market participants. The Bank 
of Canada is committing significant resources to this effort, as are private-sector 
market participants. The stability of financial markets is an important part of our 
mandate, and benchmarks play a key role in the efficient functioning of markets.  
My goal today is to ensure we’re all on the same page in terms of the work on 
benchmarks here and globally. The Bank of Canada’s website has a page where 
you can follow our work as we post key findings and updates from our meetings. 
I hope that those of you who are not already involved will participate in some of 
our subgroups and comment on our work.  
You will also want to think about the readiness of your own organizations. The 
2021 LIBOR deadline isn’t that far away. I realize I am giving you more work to 
do, but it is important that you keep up with these developments and ensure you 
are operationally prepared.  
Reference rate reform is a necessary and huge global undertaking. Getting this 
right is critical for maintaining trust in the financial system. While we certainly 
don’t anticipate the need to reform benchmarks as frequently as Windows is 
updated, we are clearly in need of new versions. Ongoing monitoring by 
regulators, central banks and market participants alike will ensure that this 
cornerstone of our financial market infrastructure remains robust and resilient for 
years to come.   
  