Nestor  A  Espenilla,  Jr:  Collective  and  individual  competitive
advantages
Speech by Mr Nestor A Espenilla, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank of the Philippines), at the POWWOW 2017, Cebu City, 17 November 2017.
 PhilExport  Cebu  Chairman Apolinar  Suarez,  Jr.;  President  Mr.  Nelson  Bascones;  officers  and
members of PhilExport Cebu; special guests; ladies and gentlemen Maayong Gabii. I am grateful
for the invitation to speak about the BSP’s policies and thrusts, my first as BSP Governor, before
this distinguished group of business leaders and exporters.
A major industrial hub, Cebu plays a crucial role in Philippine economic development. With at
least 27 IT Parks and Centers; 7 manufacturing zones; 2 tourism economic zones; and 1 agro
industrial economic zone, Cebu is a dynamic economic hub.
This evening’s theme has three action verbs.  Individually, the words sound like commands. As a
unified phrase, it is a battlecry. “Create. Innovate. Compete.”
 Cebu is no stranger to the power of creativity and innovation. Because of efficiency and raw
talent, the level of craftsmanship and creativity of the Cebu furniture industry, for example, allows
it  to  produce  high  quality  and  unique  custom-built  pieces  that  cater  to  medium-  to  high-end
markets, selling twice or thrice more furniture than competitors from Vietnam and China.
To  outperform  others  —  businesses  must  be  creative  and  innovative.  But  creativity  and
innovation should not be pursued for their own sakes.  (This is a reminder I have relayed to the
BSP and the banking and financial sectors many times).
Efforts  should  be  focused  and  strategic.  In  the  context  of  business,  creation  and  innovation
should be concentrated on, and mindful of, competitive advantage. This brings about strategic
competitiveness.
The Philippines’ competitive sdvantage
Allow me to relay data on the Philippines’ positive economic position which enables it to compete
strategically in the global market. 
Philippine macroeconomic fundamentals are solid and robust. These support local exporters and
entrepreneurs. We have had uninterrupted GDP growth for 75 consecutive quarters (more than
18 ½ years). GDP expanded 6 percent annually during the past five years. 
Prospects are favorable and growth is predicted to be between 6.5 to 7.5 percent this year and
7.0 to 8.0 percent over the medium-term. We are well on track with the recently announced third
quarter GDP at 6.9 percent!
Since  the  BSP  adopted  the  inflation  targeting  framework  in  2002,  inflation  has  become  more
manageable,  with  latest  baseline  forecasts  showing  it  will  likely  settle  around  the  middle  of
government’s target range of 2 – 4 percent in 2017 to 2019.
 Further, Philippine banks continue to be sound, stable and more efficient. The non-performing
loan  (NPL)  and  non-performing  asset  (NPA)  ratios  of  universal  and  commercial  banks  have
significantly  declined  from  around  15  percent  in  2001  to  less  than  2  percent  in August  2017.
Meanwhile,  the  capital  adequacy  ratios  of  banks  are  well  above  the  BSP  minimum  as  well
international norm. Almost double, in fact.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
On the exchange rate, the peso is expected to be broadly stable and market-determined, backed
by strong underlying economic fundamentals, ready market access, sustained decline in external
debt  position,  and  robust  international  reserves.    At  the  current  range,  export  price
competitiveness has improved back to 2008 levels as measured by the real effective exchange
rate (REER) index. The recent controlled and moderate depreciation of the peso from last year is
good for the economy.
As of end-October 2017, our foreign exchange reserves stood at US$80.6 billion, equivalent to
8.4 months of import cover (around 4 times larger than our total external debt). The sustained
structural  inflows  from  overseas  Filipino  remittances,  business  process  outsourcing  sector,
foreign  investments,  tourism  receipts,  and  the  strong  recovery  in  exports,  insulate  us  from
foreign exchange crisis. 
Exports on the road to recovery
1
The past two years have been challenging for our exporters.  There was a decline in global trade
and  growth.  Our  goods  exports  contracted  by  5.3  percent  in  2015  and  2.4  percent  in
2016 . These difficulties were brought about by a range of factors such as: (1) fragile and uneven
economic growth among major advanced and emerging economies; (2) bouts of financial market
turbulence due to divergent monetary policies adopted by developed countries; and (3) cutbacks
in capital investments because of the plunge in international oil and commodity prices.
But data for the second half of 2016 to the present show increased trade momentum! Goods
exports  expanded  by  12.2  percent  during  the  first  nine  months  of  2017,  owing  to  improved
external  demand  from  major  trading  partners  such  as  the  United  States,  Hong  Kong,  China,
Thailand, South Korea and the European Union.
There is an 8.6 percent increase in outbound shipments of manufactured goods. These include
electronics; machinery; transport equipment; garments and others. Exports of mineral products
and agro-based products also recorded significant year-on-year rebounds of 74.1 percent and
19.9 percent respectively. This resurgence boosts prospects for the exports sector.
Vigilance and leveraging on competitive advantage
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Philippine economy is showing sustainable growth momentum.  It is
also  more  resilient,  benefitting  from  years  of  deliberate  structural  reforms.  But  this  does  not
warrant complacency. We must all stay focused and pursue bolder reforms if we hope to catch
up with our neighbors. 
A strategic approach is important given megatrends in the economic landscape. These trends
include  demographic  changes,  rapid  urbanization,  climate  shifts  and  the  rise  of  disruptive
technologies.  Our  increasing  population  of  tech-savvy  millennials  demands  innovation  as  they
expect faster and more streamlined products and services. 
The need for businesses and government to “up the ante” has never been more imperative.
As a country, we have unique natural endowments on which we can leverage: a young, skilled
and  mobile  workforce;  a  predominantly  English-speaking  population,  distinct  and  world-class
Filipino craftsmanship and ingenuity.  These will set our brand apart.  But we have to take action
to transform these to strategic competitive advantage. 
BSP’s continuity plus-plus achieving competitive advantage
As a central bank, our traditional focus is to maintain price and financial stability. When I was
appointed BSP Governor last July, I committed to the continuity of policies that brought about the
sound macroeconomic stability we now enjoy.  At the BSP, we vigilantly monitor vulnerabilities,
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
formulate  and  implement  monetary  and  financial  sector  policies  and  reforms  supportive  of
economic development.
Upon  my  appointment,  I  also  said  that  continuity  will  come  with  a  “plus  plus.”    This  thrust  is
premised on the same factors of rapid technological changes and shifts in the economic and
financial landscape that prompt innovation in the private sector.  These   “plus plus” initiatives
support national competitive advantage, encourage cost-effectiveness, differentiation and focus.  
As  part  of  the  “plus  plus”  agenda,  we  are  pursuing  more  ambitious  foreign  exchange  (FX)
reforms,  consistent  with  our  efforts  to  reduce  the  cost  of  doing  business  and  increase
efficiency. These include rationalizing and further liberalizing foreign exchange rules.  Currently,
we  are  drafting  a  set  of  circulars  that  will  remove  prior  BSP  approval  for  most  private  sector
transactions.  We  aim  to  simplify  registration  processes,  significantly  reduce  documentary
requirements, and enhance data capture for effective policy decision-making.
The  amendments  to  FX  regulations  is  just  part  of  a  broader  thrust  for  a  better  organized  FX
market. Over the medium term, we shall be rolling out a sequence of reforms that will increase
FX market transparency, improve price discovery, and enhance market conduct.
With  these  reforms,  we  hope  to  encourage  FX  flows  from  the  parallel  market  to  the  formal
market.  Even  as  we  strengthen  oversight  over  Money  Service  Businesses  (MSBs),  we  will
streamline FX requirements for the banking system to reduce market fragmentation and increase
FX  liquidity.  This  allows  individuals  and  businesses  greater  and  easier  access  to  foreign
exchange. 
Ultimately, a deeper FX market will enhance resilience of our domestic economy against external
shocks. The goal is to increase its ability to absorb large flows even as the BSP continues to
pursue a market-determined exchange rate and allow greater exchange rate flexibility.
We  believe  competitiveness  can  also  be  achieved  on  the  firm  and  country-level  through
development  of  alternative  sources  of  funding.  In  this  regard,  we  are  collaborating  with  other
government agencies and private stakeholders to take measures to deepen our domestic debt
market so that you, our esteemed businessmen and exporters can have a viable alternative to
bank borrowing, supportive of economic growth. 
Taken  together,  the  FX  and  domestic  debt  market  development  initiatives  are  game  changing
reforms  as  these  will  increase  availability  of  more  financial  products,  especially  hedging
instruments.    This  is  something  that  will  benefit  exporters,  since  hedging  products  can  help
protect  you  against  interest  rate  and  FX  volatility.  Hedging  allows  you  to  focus  on  your  core
business.
Another major reform we are pursuing is the digitization of the financial system. 
Last November 8, 2017, the Philippine Electronic Fund Transfer (EFT) System and Operations
network, also called PESONet, was launched at the BSP.  The PESONet is the first Automated
Clearing House (ACH) under the National Retail Payment System (NRPS). The NRPS lays down
the principles that guide BSP’s strategic initiatives to modernize our retail payment system and to
shift from a cash-heavy to cash-lite digital economy.
The PESONet will be the electronic alternative to the paper-based check system.  Businesses
will be able to conveniently transfer funds maintained with banks and other non-banks such as
electronic money issuers to any other account in our financial sytem.  Full inter-operability. Good
for payroll. Good for paying suppliers. Good for paying utilities and other services. In addition to
the convenience of inter-operability, PESONet allows funds to be made available within the same
banking  day.  This  provides  better  liquidity  management  opportunities  for  private  businesses. 
Moreover, payees receive the transferred funds in full and do not pay fees for electronic credit to
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
their accounts. Indeed, costs will go down as we move away from a cash-heavy economy.
We are also working on the launch of another priority ACH, the real-time low value push payment
scheme  called  InstaPay.  InstaPay  is  designed  to  facilitate  small  value  payments  and  enable
merchants  to  accept  digital  payments  from  customer  on  real-time  basis  using  cards  or  any
digital device, especially a mobile phone scanning a QR code.
 At the BSP, we have strategically opened up the banking system to competition.  For instance,
since the enactment of the Foreign Banks Liberalization Law in 2014, the Monetary Board has
approved 11 foreign bank applications.  Further, as early as 2004, we have adopted a “test and
learn”  approach,  now  called  regulatory  sandbox,  to  allow  fintech  innovations  into  our
system. This approach encourages competition coming from new players, whether from banks
or non-banks such as fintech companies.  
Why  is  competition  important?    Healthy  competition  can  make  services  more  affordable,  and
expand consumer choices. The bottom line is that competition motivates banks to work harder to
serve their customers. Banks are encouraged to go beyond just serving big blue-chip enterprises
and companies. With greater competition, banks are compelled to be creative, be innovative, and
go  deeper  into  the  market  to  work  harder  to  better  serve  the  public.  Ultimately,  increased
competition increases financial inclusion. MSMEs will be a big winner.
Concluding remarks
Last Wednesday marked the  conclusion  of  the  31st Association  of  South  East Asian  Nations
(ASEAN) Summit and the Special Celebration of ASEAN’s 50th anniversary.  All throughout the
year  during  various  ASEAN  related  meetings,  collective  calls  for  partnership  and  greater
economic integration were made. I came to Cebu directly from Singapore wher I signed a fintech
cooperation agreement with my counterpart.  Deepening our economic ties, as shown by rising
intra-regional investments and intra-regional trade in final goods within Asia, is critical not only to
cushion  the  potential  negative  impact  of  policy  uncertainties  from  the  global  market,  but  also
achieve and maintain our external competitiveness.
Here  at  home,  greater  collaboration  and  cooperation  among  ourselves  –  private  businesses,
firms and government agencies – will reinforce our competitive position. As you know, the BSP
actively  engages  exporters  through  the  regular  conduct  of  the  Conference  on  Gearing  Up  for
External  Competitiveness  (CGUEC)  and  the  annual  Exporters’  Forum.  We  also  conduct
consultative one-on-one meetings. These serve as venues for discussing prospects, as well as
plans and initiatives for the sector. In fact, we held one conference here in Cebu last May 2017. 
This was followed by a series of consultation meetings with some of Cebu’s top exporters of
furniture,  processed  fruits,  and  garments  in  June  2017.     We  hope  to  continue  this  active
partnership with you.  
2
On behalf of the Monetary Board and the BSP, I congratulate PhilExport for its 25 years of helping
exporters succeed in international trade, and taking the lead in building strong alliances among
export-related industries, government agencies, and non-governmental organizations. Daghang
Salamat at mabuhay tayong lahat!
1
2
Quoted actual exports numbers are latest available from the Philippine Statistics Authority.
Note:  The  Cebu-based  firms/associations  consulted  by  the  BSP  in  June  2017  were  the  Cebu  Furniture
Industries Foundation, Inc., 7D Foods International, and Metro Wear, Inc.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
