Panel Discussion: “The Real Effects of Disrupted Credit:
Evidence from the Global Financial Crisis”
Per Jacobsson Lecture by Ben S. Bernanke 
BIS, Sunday, 24 June 2018
Remarks by Ignazio Visco, Governor, Bank of Italy
I am very pleased to be here today to discuss the economic effects of credit 
crunches with such a distinguished group of colleagues and friends following Ben 
Bernanke’s insightful lecture.
The  time  is  ripe  to  draw  some  policy  lessons  about  the  exceptional  wave 
of  turbulence  that  has  hit  credit  markets  in  the  last  decade.  I  shall  do  so  from 
a European angle. The European banking system has endured two major crises 
in  the  past  decade:  the  Global  Financial  Crisis  (GFC)  and  the  Sovereign  Debt 
Crisis (SDC). The former was mostly imported from the United States and it hit 
European banks through their exposure to toxic assets and the freeze of wholesale 
funding markets. The latter originated within the euro area and was due to a loss 
of confidence in the sustainability of public debts and, ultimately, to the risk of a 
break-up of the monetary union.
In my remarks I will focus on the negative side of Ben’s financial accelerator, 
that is, on the fact that in stressed periods banks may not be able to supply loans 
to businesses and consumers and this may aggravate the economic fall-out from 
the crisis, triggering a downward negative spiral between credit availability and 
domestic demand.1 I would like to make six main points.
 I wish to thank Margherita Bottero, Lorenzo Burlon and Giuseppe Grande for their help in assembling the 
evidence discussed in this note.
1 
See Ben’s work on non-monetary effects in the propagation of the Great Depression (Bernanke, 1983).
1.  Credit crunches do matter and may arise in many contexts
The first lesson is that credit crunches do matter and that they may arise in 
many contexts.
Credit supply reacts negatively to adverse shocks generated in the real or the 
financial sector, amplifying the decrease in real activity; the ensuing contraction 
in credit demand and the deterioration in credit quality puts further pressure on 
banks’ balance sheets and reinforces financial strains, creating a vicious circle. 
The experience of the euro area since 2007 offers a painful vantage point from 
which to appreciate the extent of this downward loop, which partly explained the 
fall in GDP during both the GFC and the SDC.
The GFC spread over Europe in two forms: a real shock, due to the collapse of 
world trade and the surge in uncertainty, and a purely financial shock, via exposure 
to toxic assets and the freeze of wholesale bank funding markets. Both channels 
affected bank lending standards in the euro area (Figure 1). During the GFC most 
of  the  tightening  of  credit  conditions  was  connected  with  banks’  assessment  of 
borrowers’ credit risk, probably owing to the real shock. However, another factor 
was banks’ greater funding costs and other balance sheet constraints. The case of 
Italy  is  enlightening.  First,  since  the  worse  international  outlook  accounted  for 
roughly three quarters of Italy’s economic slump, the contraction in credit lines to 
firms came mainly from the deterioration in borrowers’ creditworthiness.2 Second, 
Italy’s  financial  institutions  were  not  exposed  to  toxic  assets,  so  balance  sheet 
constraints were less of an issue than in the rest of the euro area. Yet, financial 
shocks did matter, too: as bank surveys also signalled, the GFC caused a freeze in the 
interbank market that weakened banks’ funding conditions, leading to a contraction 
in credit lines to firms.3 The consequent worsening of firms’ financing opportunities 
discouraged their investment plans, thus affecting credit demand and activating the 
financial accelerator. The Bank of Italy’s estimates put the reduction in investment 
expenditure by firms in Italy due exclusively to this channel at over 20%.4
2 
For a quantitative assessment of the macroeconomic impact of the GFC on Italy, see Caivano, Rodano, 
Siviero (2010).
3  Gaiotti (2013).
4  Cingano, Manaresi, Sette (2016). 
2
Compared  with  the  GFC,  the  SDC  was  triggered  by  different  shocks.  
It stemmed from growing concerns about country-specific structural weaknesses, 
aggravated by the recent GFC, and became systemic because of growing concerns 
about the solidity of the monetary union, which led financial market participants to 
price in redenomination risk. The increase in sovereign spreads worsened funding 
conditions for all domestic borrowers, from banks to non-financial corporations and 
households. Following, moreover, the increase in uncertainty, the loss of confidence 
and  the  necessary  fiscal  consolidation  as  well,  consumption  and  investment 
diminished.5  This  re-activated  the  financial  accelerator.6  Unlike  the  GFC,  the 
tightening of banks’ lending standards was to a larger extent due to the deterioration 
in their funding conditions rather than to the rise in borrowers’ credit risk.
2.  The nexus between the solvency of banks and that of the domestic 
sovereign goes beyond banks’ mere holdings of government bonds 
This leads me to the second lesson, which concerns the sovereign-banks nexus. 
In a sovereign debt crisis the holdings of government bonds backfire directly onto 
banks’ valuations, but there are other indirect channels that characterize the two-way 
relationship between banks and State.
A cursory look at banks’ balance sheets reveals that up to the failure of Lehman 
Brothers  in  September  2008  euro-area  banks  had  been  steadily  reducing  their 
holdings of government bonds.7 That share then increased during the prolonged 
period of financial instability running from late 2008 to early 2013. Since then, 
in most euro-area countries banks’ government bond holdings have edged down 
again. Thus, the increase in banks’ holdings of government bonds during the crisis 
was mainly a consequence, rather than a cause, of the crisis (Figure 2).
The SDC worsened the general macroeconomic outlook and this put banks 
under severe strain. For this reason, as I have pointed out in the past, the nexus 
5 
For the impact of sovereign risk on banks’ funding conditions, see CGFS (2011). For the effects of the 
SDC on the Italian economy, see Busetti and Cova (2013).
6  Rodano, Siviero, Visco (2013).
7 
See, e.g., Angelini and Grande (2014).
3
between banks and sovereign goes beyond the direct holdings of sovereign bonds.8 
Accordingly, it has to be tackled by reinforcing investors’ confidence in the solidity 
of the public finances, the growth prospects of the country and the stability of the 
banking system.
As  an  aside,  I  would  say  that  the  increase  in  banks’  sovereign  exposure 
observed  during  the  crisis  should  not  necessarily  be  regarded  as  problematic.9  
In  the  face  of  greater  funding  risks,  banks  need  to  hold  more  liquid  assets. 
Moreover,  in  stressed  periods  banks  could  have  an  incentive  to  act  as  shock 
absorbers or contrarian investors on the domestic government bond market for a 
number of reasons. Specifically, they may want to dampen unwarranted changes in 
government bond prices, as the latter feed through to the prices of all other domestic 
assets.  Compared  with  foreign  players,  they  may  have  a  better  understanding 
of  political  and  economic  developments  in  their  own  country. They  know  that 
they are closely intertwined with their sovereign through funding conditions, the 
macroeconomic environment and other indirect channels, so that if their sovereign 
runs into trouble, they will probably run into trouble as well, no matter how many 
domestic government bonds they hold.
3.	 The	structure	of	the	financial	system	does	matter
My third point concerns the importance that firms rely upon a well-diversified 
system of funding sources. The two crises propagated differently across countries 
depending  not  only  on  macroeconomic  conditions  but  also  on  the  structure  of 
the financial system. There is evidence that, during recessions, economies with 
market-based financial systems recover more quickly than those that rely mainly 
on banks.10 This is especially true if the recession goes hand in hand with a financial 
crisis. More diversified financial systems also matter for growth, as they expand 
the financing tools available to borrowers and improve investors’ portfolio choices 
and risk management techniques.
8  Visco (2016).
9  Lanotte and Tommasino (2018).
10  See, e.g., Allard and Blavy (2011). 
4
Greater resilience is also likely to come with higher solvency. This suggests 
that not only does diversification insulate firms from credit crunches, it also benefits 
banks, to the extent that it leads to lower credit risk and lower non-performing 
loans (NPLs), and the whole system as well, as healthier banks are more likely to 
provide credit.
In general, market-based finance is more prominent in the United States than 
in Europe and, within Europe, in the UK and France (Figure 3). Over the last ten 
years, however, the funding structure of the non-financial corporate sector in the 
advanced economies has changed significantly. Partly as a result of the weakening 
of  bank  lending  observed  during  the  two  crises,  there  has  been  a  generalized 
increase both in equity as a share of total liabilities and in debt securities as a share 
of total debt. The greater role of equity and bond financing in Europe is a welcome 
development. Nevertheless, important differences continue to be observed across 
countries and across firms of different sizes, as small and medium-sized firms are 
still heavily dependent on bank credit. Improving access to capital markets for 
all firms, regardless of their size, is an objective to aim for in the near future with 
appropriate structural policies, including the capital markets union programme.
4.  There is no automatic connection between well-provisioned NPLs, 
the supply of credit and resource misallocation
My fourth point is about the relationship between ailing firms, non-performing 
loans and credit supply.
Two deep recessions in the space of a few years have naturally increased the 
number of ailing firms, bringing about a sharp rise in the share of non-performing 
loans. Italy’s experience is fairly instructive in this respect: the ratio of new bad 
debts to outstanding loans to non-financial firms almost tripled during the GFC and 
then continued to grow, peaking during the SDC. 
Against this background, a first concern is that of credit misallocation, which 
arises if banks continue to lend to weak firms in order to delay recognizing losses 
on  their  credit  portfolios.  Studies  carried  out  for  Italy  have  shown  that  some 
misallocation did take place during the crises, but it involved predominantly small 
5
and less capitalized banks and it had negligible effects on the growth of healthier 
firms and total factor productivity dispersion.11 
A second concern is that high NPLs hamper banks’ ability to supply credit 
to the economy (Figure 4). Certainly, the emergence of new NPLs has negative 
effects on banks’ ability to lend, but these are mostly indirect, via a higher cost 
of funding, lower profitability and eroded capital.12 However, this does not imply 
that stocks also play a role. There is no clear empirical evidence – or theoretical 
support – that a high stock of NPLs per se directly reduces banks’ ability to lend. 
Furthermore, a fair share of NPLs granted to ailing (but not yet bankrupt) firms 
return to performing status after a while.13
Thus, while the negative effects of NPLs on capital and profitability justify the 
current policy action in favour of NPL reduction, forcing banks to dispose quickly 
of such positions could be counterproductive. Large disposals of NPLs at market 
prices that are much lower than book values would generate losses sizeable enough 
to offset the benefits to the bank in terms of improved asset quality. Ultimately, 
blanket disposals could hamper banks’ ability to lend, with negative spill-overs on 
the overall economy.
5.  Financial integration is a key aspect of functioning credit markets 
The fifth lesson is about the importance of fostering economic and financial 
integration.
Another particular feature of the bank lending crunch in the euro area was the 
considerable increase in financial fragmentation across countries (Figure 5), which 
contributed to the reduction in economic activity and posed a substantial challenge 
to the correct transmission of the monetary stimulus. The institutional set-up of the 
monetary union was caught off guard and fell short of the needs generated by the 
two financial crises, compounding the centrifugal forces arising from deteriorating 
11  See Albertazzi and Marchetti (2010) and Schivardi, Sette, Tabellini (2017).
12  See Accornero, Alessandri, Carpinelli, Sorrentino (2017) and Angelini (2018).
13  See Ciocchetta, Conti, De Luca, Guida, Rendina, Santini (2017).
6
economic fundamentals. It is thus of key importance that we continue boldly to 
support and reinforce the process of financial integration.
On a brighter note, the experience of the SDC has proved that global financial 
integration can be an effective shock absorber. It has now been documented that 
foreign banks can act as stabilizers in credit markets that are under stress.14 In 
a way, foreign intermediation can be viewed as a global insurance scheme that 
swiftly takes liquidity where it is most needed. Naturally, we have to ensure that 
these  dynamics  do  not  bring  instability,  which  we  can  and  should  do  through 
regulation. Yet, when integration is properly regulated, its benefits largely exceed 
its costs. 
6.  Central banks have used many tools to support credit supply, 
including credit easing
The sixth and last lesson that I draw is that we now have a better understanding 
of how to avert or mitigate credit crunches.
The response of the ECB was swift, and it extended well beyond the trough of 
the crises to accompany the recovery and accomplish its price stability mandate. A 
number of extraordinary measures were put in place almost simultaneously: two 
waves of TLTROs were implemented, key interest rates were taken into negative 
territory and steered ahead through forward guidance, and the APP was launched 
(Figure 6).
The TLTROs were designed to provide banks with funds “targeted” to expand 
credit to firms and consumers.15 With about €760 billion allocated, the initiative, 
which  ended  in  March  2017,  witnessed  ample  participation  and  was  pretty 
successful: the rates on loans to non-financial corporations declined markedly and 
stayed low; in addition, a positive impact can be detected on volumes of business 
14  See De Haas and van Horen (2013) and, for Italian banks during the sovereign debt crisis, Bofondi, 
Carpinelli, Sette (2018).
15  The funds are “targeted” as the amount that banks can borrow and, for the TLTRO II, the interest rate 
to be applied are linked to their loans to non-financial corporations and households (except loans to 
households for house purchases).
7
as well.16 Evidence drawn from the euro-area Bank Lending Survey confirms these 
conclusions, which are also corroborated by a recent empirical study carried out 
at the Bank of Italy, documenting that banks participating in TLTROs apply an 
interest rate to the same firm 20 basis points lower than non-participating Italian 
banks.17
Research on the other measures is still ongoing, but the available evidence 
suggests that their effects have been largely positive.18
All in all, today we can say that the ECB’s intervention has also been effective. 
This  has  also  been  acknowledged  by  euro-area  financial  intermediaries, which, 
in their answers to the euro-area Bank Lending Survey, reported a direct positive 
impact of these measures on both volumes of business and the costs applied to 
borrowers.
 Summing up, my main focus has been the real effects of the disruption of 
credit markets in the euro area and related policy lessons. 
The overall impact of credit disruption on the real economy is the result of a 
hardly discernible ex ante, yet vicious ex post, loop between bank lending and the 
real sector in difficult times. In fact, a contraction in credit supply can leave the 
real sector in a state of vulnerability that may in turn have adverse effects on the 
financial sector. This harmful negative feedback takes place in a variety of forms, in 
terms of weakness of borrowers’ demand for credit, circumspection of investment 
plans and the general uncertainty that keeps all economic actors, including banks, 
from “acting normally”. This situation, especially if prolonged, weakens banks’ 
balance sheets and reduces their resilience to unexpected events, which may result 
in a second round of credit restrictions.
16  ECB (2017).
17  See Benetton and Fantino (2018).
18  For the case of negative interest rates, see Bottero, Minoiu, Peydró, Polo, Presbitero, Sette (2018). For 
the impact of the asset purchase programme, see, e.g., Altavilla, Canova, Ciccarelli (2016) and Burlon, 
Gerali, Notarpietro, Pisani (2017).
8
Looking at the experience of the euro area, both the GFC and the SDC have 
demonstrated the importance of these feedback effects from the real economy to 
the  financial  system:  the  last  decade  has  arguably  seen  these  feedbacks  turned 
into a “fact” to be confronted rather than a “possibility”, and hence into a key 
challenge for policy action. It is of vital importance that the strengthening of the 
financial sector does not create negative spin-offs for growth: if it does, it risks 
taking both the financial and the real economy farther from, rather than closer to, 
a full recovery.
On  a  brighter  note,  we  have  learnt  a  lesson  during  these  years,  and  today 
we  stand  better  prepared  to  withstand  future,  unavoidable  turbulences.  The 
unconventional policy measures that we have deployed in this decade are now part 
of the central banks’ “emergency” toolkit. Some of them, such as the TLTROs, are 
there to be re-activated in times of need while others, such as forward guidance, 
will accompany us in our daily conduct of monetary policy.
9
References
Accornero,  M.,  P.  Alessandri,  L.  Carpinelli,  A.  M.  Sorrentino 
(2017)  
“Non-performing  loans  and  the  supply  of  bank  credit:  evidence  from  Italy”, 
Bank of Italy Occasional Papers, No. 374.
Albertazzi, U., D. J. Marchetti (2010) “Credit supply, flight to quality and evergreening: 
an analysis of bank-firm relationships after Lehman”, Bank of Italy Working Papers, No. 756.
Allard,  J.,  R.  Blavy  (2011)  “Market  phoenixes  and  banking  ducks:  are 
in  market-based  financial  systems?”,  IMF  Working  Papers,  
recoveries  faster 
No. 11/213.
Altavilla, C., F. Canova, M. Ciccarelli (2016) “Mending the broken link: heterogeneous 
bank lending and monetary policy pass-through”, ECB Working Paper Series, No. 1978.
Angelini, P., G. Grande (2014) “How to loosen the banks-sovereign nexus”, VOX - 
CEPR Policy Portal, 8 April 2014.
Angelini, P. (2018) “Do high levels of NPLs impair banks’ credit allocation?”, Bank 
of Italy, Notes on Financial Stability and Supervision, No. 11.
Benetton, M., D. Fantino (2018) “Competition and the pass-through of unconventional 
monetary policy: evidence from TLTROs”, mimeo.
Bernanke, B. S. (1983) “Nonmonetary effects of the financial crisis in the propagation 
of the Great Depression”, American Economic Review, 73, 3, pp. 257-276.
Bofondi, M., L. Carpinelli, E. Sette (2018) “Credit supply during a sovereign debt 
crisis”, Journal of the European Economic Association, 16, 3, pp. 696–729.
Bottero,  M.,  C.  Minoiu,  J.  L.  Peydró, A.  Polo, A.  F.  Presbitero,  E.  Sette  (2018) 
“Negative policy rates and bank asset allocation: evidence from the Italian credit and 
security registers”, mimeo.
Burlon, L., A. Gerali, A. Notarpietro, M. Pisani (2017) “Macroeconomic effectiveness 
of non-standard monetary policy and early exit. A model-based evaluation”, International 
Finance, 20, pp. 155-173.
Busetti, F., P. Cova (2013) “The macroeconomic impact of the sovereign debt crisis: a 
counterfactual analysis for the Italian economy”, Bank of Italy Occasional Papers, No. 201.
Caivano, M., L. Rodano, S. Siviero (2010) “The transmission of the global financial 
crisis  to  the  Italian  economy.  A  counterfactual  analysis,  2008-2010”,  Bank  of  Italy 
Occasional Papers, No. 64.
CGFS, Committee on the Global Financial System (2011) “The impact of sovereign 
credit risk on bank funding conditions”, CGFS Papers No. 43.
10
Cingano, F., F. Manaresi, E. Sette (2016) “Does credit crunch investment down? 
New evidence on the real effects of the bank-lending channel”, The Review of Financial 
Studies, 29, 10, pp. 2737-2773.
Ciocchetta, F., F. M. Conti, R. De Luca, I. Guida, A. Rendina, G. Santini (2017) “Bad 
loan recovery rates”, Bank of Italy, Notes on Financial Stability and Supervision, No. 7.
De Haas, R., N. van Horen (2013) “Running for the exit? International bank lending 
during a financial crisis”, Review of Financial Studies, 26, 1, pp- 244-285.
ECB (2017) “The targeted longer-term refinancing operations: an overview of the 
take-up  and  their  impact  on  bank  intermediation”,  ECB  Economic  Bulletin,  Issue  3  / 
2017, Box 5.
Gaiotti,  E.  (2013)  “Credit  availability  and  investment:  lessons  from  the  ‘great 
recession’”, European Economic Review, 59, pp. 212-227.
Lanotte, M., P. Tommasino (2018) “Recent developments in the regulatory treatment 
of sovereign exposures”, VOX - CEPR Policy Portal, 5 February.
Rodano,  L.,  S.  Siviero,  and  I.  Visco  (2013)  “Inversioni  cicliche  e  previsioni 
macroeconomiche:  racconto  di  due  recessioni”,  in  Bardazzi,  R.  (ed.),  Economic 
multisectoral modelling between past and future: a tribute to Maurizio Grassini and a 
selection of his writings, pp. 229-247, Firenze University Press, 2013.
Schivardi, F., E. Sette, G. Tabellini (2017) “Credit misallocation during the European 
financial crisis”, CEPR Discussion Paper, No. 11901.
Visco,  I.  (2016)  “Banks’  Sovereign  Exposures  and  the  Feedback  Loop  Between 
Banks and Their Sovereigns”, speech at the “Euro50 Group - the Future of European 
Government Bonds Markets” conference, 2 May.
11
FIGURES
Changes in credit standards to firms: contributing factors
(diffusion index; tightening(+)/easing(-))
Figure 1
Source: ECB (Bank Lending Survey) and Bank of Italy calculations.
Banks’ holdings of domestic government bonds in the euro area
(as a percentage of total assets; monthly data)
Figure 2
Source: based on Eurosystem data.
12
Diversification of corporate funding sources
Figure 3
(a) Non-financial corporations: equity  
as a share of total liabilities 
(per cent)
(b) Non-financial corporations: debt securities  
as a share of total financial debt 
(per cent)
Source: Eurostat and Federal Reserve System data and Bank of Italy calculations.
Non-performing loans and bank lending in Italy
Figure 4
(a) NPL flows and difficulty of accessing credit  
by non-financial firms (1) (2) 
(per cent; diffusion index)
(b) Share of NPLs over outstanding loans and  
growth rate of bank lending (1) 
(per cent)
Source: Angelini (2018)
(1) Data for 2017 are provisional. – (2) The indicator of difficulty of accessing bank credit is taken from ISTAT.
13
Cross-country dispersion of the cost of loans to non-financial 
corporations in the euro area
(diffusion index; tightening(+)/easing(-))
Figure 5
Source: ECB. The cost of loans is the ECB composite cost-of-borrowing indicators, based on MFI interest 
rate statistics. Dispersion is computed as the standard deviation of the average interest rates for 12 euro-area 
countries.
Euro-area banks’ perceived impact of ECB measures on bank lending
(diffusion index; tightening(+)/easing(-))
(a) TLTRO: impact on terms and conditions
(b) APP: impact on terms and conditions
Figure 6
Source:  ECB  (Bank  Lending  Survey)  and  Bank  of  Italy  calculations.  Credit  terms  and  conditions  refer  to 
the conditions of a loan that a bank is willing to grant. They generally consist of the agreed spread over the 
relevant reference rate, the size of the loan, the access conditions and other terms and conditions in the 
form of non-interest rate charges (i.e. fees), collateral or guarantees which the respective borrower needs to 
provide (including compensating balances), loan covenants and the agreed loan maturity.
14
Designed by the Printing and Publishing Division of the Bank of Italy
