    10 years on – What have we learned? 
Remarks by Sharon Donnery, Deputy Governor of the 
Central Bank of Ireland 
Dublin Economics Workshop, Wexford 
14 September 2018 
Introduction  
It is a great pleasure to be with you today, and I would like to 
thank the organisers for arranging the event and inviting me 
to participate on this panel.i  
The Dublin Economics Workshop has always been a key policy 
forum and September 2018 – ten years on – gives us a timely 
opportunity to look back and consider not only what we have 
learned - the Central Bank included – but also, what has been 
achieved, and critically, what must yet be addressed.  
The  crisis  affected  every  aspect  of  Irish  society,  of  the  Irish 
economy,  of  the  Irish  banking  system.  A  decade  later, 
significant  numbers  of  people  across  the  country  are  still 
dealing with its legacies. Whilst it may be tempting to look at 
the  uniqueness  of  the  Irish  experience,  taking  a  wider 
perspective shows that “the last 400 years has been replete 
with  financial  crises,  which  often  followed  increases  in 
supplies of credit, greater investor optimism, and more rapid 
economic growth.”ii This is not to minimise the Irish crisis and 
its effects, merely to stress that history shows us that we must 
always be on guard against the next potential crisis. 
 1 
 The story of the causes of the Irish crisis has been well told, so 
I will not repeat it here. iii The herding behaviour, groupthink, 
speculative  mania,  and  information  gaps,  have  all  been  well 
documented.iv  Today,  I  would  like  to  highlight  what  I  see  as 
five  key  lessons.  Whilst  not  unique  to  the  Irish  experience, 
some are lessons which we in Ireland learned, to devastating 
effect, the ‘hard way’.  
for 
sector, 
responsibility 
the  primary 
What I will say is that the overall governance, regulatory and 
supervisory system is designed with lines of responsibility to 
manage  and  mitigate  risk  effectively.  In  the  banking  and 
financial 
risk 
management in individual financial institutions lies with their 
executive  management  and  boards  of  directors.  This  is 
supported by internal audit and compliance functions within 
the  banks,  and  external  auditors.  Legislators  set  rules, 
regulators  define  and  implement  the  regulatory  framework, 
and  supervisors  oversee  firms’  behaviour,  enforce  this 
framework  and  enforce  sanctions 
in  the  case  of  non-
compliance.v    Each  plays  a  role  in  the  system  with  its  own 
responsibilities.   
“Systemic financial crises – both in Ireland and elsewhere – are 
uncommon  because  they  require  such  a  large  number  of 
simultaneous institutional and judgmental failures.”vi 
For central banks and regulatory authorities, and particularly 
the Central Bank of Ireland, the crisis transformed everything 
we  do:  our  mandate,  our  organisation,  our  frameworks  for 
assessment, our policy instruments, our culture.  
So whilst I will not try and be exhaustive today, as I said, I will 
focus on five key lessons from both a domestic and European 
perspective.  
 2 
  Lesson 1: we must act to mitigate the build-up of systemic 
risk  
Before  the  crisis,  Irish  banks  built  up  a  heavy  reliance  on 
funding  from  wholesale  markets  and  hence  were  more 
vulnerable to a sudden stop. The crisis also laid bare the lack 
of  analytical  frameworks  to  assess  financial  imbalances  and 
the lack of policy tools to mitigate them.vii Therefore, following 
the crisis, the argument for new policy instruments to mitigate 
risks  to  financial  stability  became  compelling,  and  the 
development  of  macroprudential  policies  and  instruments 
followed.viii 
The ultimate objective of macroprudential policy is to mitigate 
systemic  risk,  as  major  disturbances  to  the  financial  system 
can disrupt the provision of financial services, which can have 
serious negative consequences for the real economy.ix    
In  Ireland,  the  Central  Bank  was  designated  the  National 
Macroprudential  Authority  in  2014  and  the  introduction  of 
macroprudential policies by the Central Bank has been a key 
step  for  promoting  financial  stability.x  These  tools  aid  the 
Central  Bank  in  building  resilience  for  households  and  the 
banking system, such that they can better withstand economic 
shocks or adverse movements in credit or property prices.  
The  mortgage  rules  are  now  an  established  element  of  the 
macro-financial  landscape  and  have  an  important  structural 
dimension, with the aim of permanently dampening the pro-
cyclicality  of  credit  and  house  prices  (relative  to  the 
experience prior to the rules being in place).  
The  widespread  public  understanding  for  the  Central  Bank’s 
mortgage measures is positive. We are very conscious that the 
 3 
 deposit  requirements  are  a  heavy  burden  on  many  people 
trying  to  build  for  their  future.  However,  there  is  I  think,  a 
public understanding that as hard as that is, these measures 
are necessary and better than the alternative. Ultimately, they 
are  just  as  much  about  protecting  households,  as  they  are 
about promoting stability.  
From a broad cyclical perspective, ensuring resilience is built 
early in the cycle is most effective – and this has informed the 
timing  and  calibration  of  the  mortgage  measures  and  the 
counter  cyclical  capital  buffer  (CCyB).  This  so-called  CCyB  is 
another  example  of  a  tool  that  can  build  resilience  in  the 
banking  system  to  withstand  future  shocks.    We  recently 
announced  an  increase  in  the  CCyB  to  1  per  cent,  which 
becomes  effective  in  July  2019.xi  Structural  systemic  risk, 
related to the “too-big” or “too complex” to fail phenomenon, 
is mitigated by the Other Systemically Important Institutions 
(O-SII) buffer, which has been set at rates up to 1.5 per cent 
for the relevant institutions, with a phase-in period from 1 July 
2019 to 1 July 2021.xii 
One key point to note when looking back at the crisis is that 
while the use of macroprudential tools may not have averted 
the crisis a decade ago, the scale of the downturn in Ireland 
could have been limited and the high cost to citizens reduced. 
We  must  therefore  continue  to  guard  against  complacency 
and build up resilience across the system.  
of 
So  in  short,  a  key  lesson  from  the  crisis  therefore  was  the 
importance 
counter-cyclical 
macroprudential  policy  and  strengthening  micro-prudential 
policy to mitigate systemic risk. This is what the Central Bank 
has been doing for the last decade.  
developing 
credible 
 4 
  Lesson 2: all actors in the economy need to build resilience  
influenced  by  external  events. 
As  a  small,  particularly  open  economy,  Ireland  can  be 
significantly 
Ireland  has 
benefitted  greatly  from  our  openness.  However,  the  other 
side  of  this  coin  is  our  vulnerability  to  external  shocks,  over 
which we may have little control. We do not have to look far 
for  evidence  of  this.  Over  the  past  twenty-five  years  or  so 
growth  in  employment,  incomes,  consumption,  domestic 
investment,  real  estate  prices  and  credit  have  been  more 
volatile in Ireland than in the euro area, the United Kingdom, 
Sweden  or  Denmark.xiii  The  key  to  dealing  with  this 
vulnerability is not to retreat from the global marketplace, but 
to  recognise  that  we  need  to  be  prepared  for  inevitable 
downturns.  In  this  context,  building  resilience,  whether  in 
banks,  at  the  individual,  household,  corporate,  or  national 
level is key.  
All stakeholders have their part to play in this process.  
We  have  seen  progress,  for  example,  in  household  debt 
statistics – Irish household debt as a proportion of disposable 
income fell by 49.8 percentage points between Q1 2014 and 
Q1  2018.  However,  despite  this  progress  the  legacy  of  the 
crisis is still apparent, as Irish households continue to be the 
fourth most indebted in the EU.xiv 
From  a  national  perspective,  fiscal  policy  is  one  of  the  most 
important  policy  levers  available.  One  of  the  trade-offs  of 
joining  a  monetary  union  is  the  loss  of  an  independent 
monetary  policy.  This  trade-off 
increases  the  relative 
importance  of  fiscal  policy,  in  addition  to  macroprudential 
policy, as a lever that can be used to mitigate country specific 
 5 
 shocks in the way that a broad, union wide, monetary policy 
cannot. 
The  fiscal  position  in  Ireland  in  the  years  after  joining  the 
economic  and  monetary  union  (EMU)  appeared  favourable. 
The debt to GDP ratio continued to trend downward and the 
budget  showed  a  surplus.  However,  these  headline  figures 
obscured  a  significant  shift  in  the  structure  of  tax  revenues. 
The share of revenue collected by income taxes fell, while the 
share for property related taxes such as stamp duty and capital 
gains tax increased.xv  
Debt  to  GNI*  -  a  measure  which  avoids  the  distortions 
encountered when using GDP - stood at 28 per cent in 2007 
and peaked at 158 per cent in 2012.xvi In 2017, debt to GNI* 
stood at 111 per cent.  
The adverse effects this tax structure had in the crisis years, 
highlights  the  need  for  a  broad-based  and  stable  tax  base, 
rather  than  one  dependent  on  windfall  revenues.  It  also 
exposed  that  using  potentially  transitory  revenue  items  to 
fund regular expenditure can exacerbate deteriorations in the 
fiscal position during a downturn.  
The recovery in the public finances has been dramatic relative 
to the situation faced during the early crisis years. Significant 
fiscal consolidation played a large part, as did some favourable 
external factors, including unexpectedly positive growth and 
low interest costs.xvii  
These  factors  illustrate  the  need  to  strike  a  cyclically-
appropriate  fiscal balance  to strengthen  resilience  and build 
buffers to counteract future shocks.  
The characteristics of Ireland, as an extremely open economy 
with  significant  trade  and  financial  linkages  to  the  broader 
 6 
 international  economy,  as  well  as  downside  risks  to  the 
economy, such as Brexit, add to this need.  
So, the second key lesson is all actors in the economy need to 
build resilience, be they  individuals, households, corporates, 
banks or indeed governments. 
 Lesson  3:  in  addition  to  the  level  of  regulatory  capital,  the 
type and quality matter 
Turning  specifically  to  the  banking  sector,  whilst  in  Ireland, 
aggregate  capital  resources  of  banks  grew  from  2000-2007, 
and  banks  maintained  their  regulatory  requirements,  the 
composition of capital changed materially.  The proportion of 
shareholder  equity  in  the  covered  banks’  capital  decreased 
significantly, with the balance being made up by subordinated 
loan capital.xviii  
Ordinary  shares,  however,  were  found  to  be  the  main 
effective loss-absorbing instrument on a going concern basis. 
In response to the crisis, European legislation was agreed to 
create  a  safer  financial  sector.  A  key  aspect 
is  the 
establishment  of  a  more  robust  framework  for  setting 
minimum  capital  requirements.  The  Capital  Requirements 
Regulation (CRR) and Capital Requirements Directive (CRD IV) 
were agreed in 2013 and revised the capital requirements for 
banks.  
The  framework  provides  for  a  Pillar  I  Requirement,  which  is 
the  regulatory  minimum  amount  of  capital  that  banks  must 
hold. This is a minimum total Capital Ratio of 8% of their Risk 
Weighted Assets (RWA). As part of those revisions, the highest 
quality capital, Common Equity Tier 1 (CET1), typical items of 
 7 
 which  include  ordinary  shares  and  reserves,  must  now, 
following various deductions and adjustments, correspond to 
4.5% of RWA. Pillar II is an additional capital requirement that 
may be applied to institutions by supervisors and is based on 
the  Supervisory  Review  and  Evaluation  Process  (SREP).  The 
institution  specific  nature  of  Pillar  II  ensures  that  a  bank’s 
capital is tailored to their individual business models and risk 
profiles.  In  addition  to  the  Pillar  II  capital  requirement, 
competent authorities may also set non-binding Pillar II capital 
guidance that relevant banks will be expected to hold.  
The Combined Buffer Requirement is the collective term for 
the four capital buffers provided for in CRDIV. This includes the 
aforementioned CCyB and O-SII buffer, as well as the Capital 
Conservation Buffer and Systemic Risk buffer.  
The  Combined  Buffers  act  firstly  as  a  mechanism  for  pro-
cyclical accumulation of capital, so that institutions can build a 
store of supplementary own funds in ‘good times’ in order to 
protect  their  regulatory  minimum  during  periods  of  adverse 
conditions. 
If  a  bank  breaches  the  buffer,  automatic 
safeguards apply to limit the amount of dividends and bonus 
payments it can make.  
The key point here, however, is buffers must be made of CET1, 
the highest quality capital.  
And much progress has been made, since the end of 2014, the 
fully loaded CET1 ratio of Significant Institutions in Ireland has 
increased from 9.4 per cent to 17.7 per cent at end-2017.  
So  in  short,  the  third  key  lesson  from  the  crisis  I  want  to 
mention today was that, in addition to the level, the type and 
quality  of  capital  matter.  Progress  has  been  made  in  many 
other  areas  too.  My  colleague  Ed  Sibley,  Deputy  Governor, 
 8 
 Prudential  Regulation  outlined  in  more  detail  the  specific 
regulatory and supervisory response, earlier this week.xix 
 Lesson 4: some banks will inevitably fail - we just have to be 
better prepared 
The level of public support to the banking system during the 
crisis  in  the  EU  was  staggering.  In  2009,  Member  States 
provided the equivalent of 7.3% of EU GDP, or EUR 906 billion 
in  liquidity  support  and  guarantees  to  the  financial  sector. 
Ireland stands out beyond any other Member State in terms 
of the relative support it provided following the far-reaching 
2008 decision to guarantee all liabilities and deposits. Beyond 
liquidity  and  support,  Member  State  governments  provided 
capital support amounting to 4.5% of EU GDP between 2008 
and 2012. Ireland, for example spent the equivalent of 37.3% 
of GDP recapitalising its banks over the period.xx 
This  motivated  a  fundamental  change  in  how  banks  and 
authorities prepare for and manage bank failure. In Ireland, as 
a  direct  response  to  the  crisis,  we  introduced  the  Credit 
Institutions Resolution Act in 2011. In a European context, the 
Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD) now provides 
authorities with common European rules for the recovery and 
resolution  of  failing  banks.  When  banks  get  into  difficult 
financial situations, the supervisor now has a number of early 
intervention  powers  at  its  disposal.  The  BRRD  also  requires 
each bank to prepare a recovery plan which outlines what it 
will do if it gets into difficulty. The Central Bank of Ireland was 
designated as the Irish National Resolution Authority in 2015. 
In this context, the Bank is also part of the Single Resolution 
 9 
 Mechanism and we draw up firm-specific resolution plans with 
the aim of enhancing the resolvability of the firms.  
liabilities.  This 
Central to the BRRD is that the authorities have a variety of 
powers to try and  minimise the cost to taxpayers of a bank 
failure. Critically, the new framework introduces bail-in tools 
and also aims to ensure that banks have a sufficient stock of 
bail-inable 
is  known  as  the  minimum 
requirement  for  own  funds  and  eligible  liabilities  (MREL).  In 
short, the objective of this is to ensure that shareholders and 
creditors bear the brunt of losses in bank failures, thus moving 
from  bail-out  to  bail-in.  Ensuring  banks  have  sufficient  and 
high  quality MREL goes a  long way to  increasing their gone-
concern loss absorbing capacity. 
So  in  short,  the  fourth  key  lesson  is  that  some  banks  will 
inevitably fail, to protect taxpayers we must actively prepare 
for their failure and ensure that impediments to resolvability 
are removed.   
Major  legislative  and  institutional  changes  took  place  to 
ensure authorities are equipped with the tools that enhance 
both the resilience and the resolvability of  institutions, which 
will be better prepared to deal with, and recover from, a crisis 
situation.  But  ensuring  the  effectiveness  of  the  framework 
remains a challenge for the years to come. 
 Lesson 5: the need for cross-border authorities 
The final lesson I wish to discuss today is the need for cross-
border authorities.  
The  crisis  exposed  the  weaknesses  and  heterogeneity  in 
banking  supervision  across  Member  States.    Of  course,  the 
 10 
 in 
in  banking  supervision 
failures 
Ireland  have  been 
comprehensively examined and well documented, particularly 
in the (2010) Honohan Report.xxi Some of the conclusions of 
the  report  showed  that  the  then  ‘Financial  Regulator’  relied 
“excessively on a regulatory philosophy emphasising process 
over outcomes,” that “a greater degree of intrusiveness and 
assertiveness” was required on the part of the regulator and 
there  was  a  need  for  “additional  staff  resources  and 
training.”xxii  
The crisis also exposed the weaknesses in the framework for 
resolution  –  as  I  just  discussed,  but  also  the  fundamental 
mismatch between cross-border banking and domestic crisis 
management,  in  addition  to  the  lack  of  adequate,  and 
harmonised powers authorities had to deal with crises.  
for  crisis  management  and 
Prior to the crisis, the authorities, legal powers, objectives and 
tools 
resolution  varied 
considerably  across  the  EU.  For  example,  in  some  cases  the 
relevant  powers  were  derived  from  specific  resolution  or 
insolvency  frameworks  for  banks,  while  in  others  only  the 
general insolvency proceedings were available. In some cases, 
Member State authorities had the power to transfer assets to 
a third party purchaser by executive order, in others by judicial 
proceedings, for example.xxiii These differences, coupled with 
the  lack  of  a  harmonised  approach  to  burden-sharing  and  a 
weak  framework  for  cooperation  (in  the  form  of  voluntary 
cross-border colleges/stability groups) made effective, rapid, 
coordinated cross-border intervention very challenging.  
In a monetary union, where subsidiaries were the main form 
of cross-border banking holding almost EUR 4 trillion of assets 
by  2006,  the  lack  of  incentives  to  cooperate  and  coordinate 
 11 
 compounded the lack of trust across the system.xxiv The well 
documented collapse in the inter-bank market led to the need 
for central banks to aggressively step in to provide liquidity in 
order to prevent the collapse of the financial system.  
The  response  to  the  crisis  was  a  wholesale  change  in  the 
legislative  framework,  policy  tools  and  the 
institutional 
architecture  for  banking  supervision  and  resolution.  This 
culminated most visibly with the establishment of the Single 
Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) with the ECB in Frankfurt at its 
centre, and the Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM) with the 
Brussels based Single Resolution Board (SRB) at its centre.  
So in short, the final lesson that became abundantly clear was 
the  need  for  cross-border  authorities.  A  major  institutional 
overhaul of the architecture of Economic and Monetary Union 
ensued  to  complement  Banking  Union.  Key  elements  have 
been addressed but the work is not yet complete.  
If “stability” is the short-hand we use to describe the objective 
of  these  changes,  it  is  important  to  stress  that  we  seek  to 
safeguard  stability  precisely  because  of  its  importance  for 
citizens.  Building  on  this,  the  changes  I  outlined  above  have 
been  accompanied  by  a  parallel,  and  interrelated,  series  of 
changes to strengthen the consumer protection framework.  
European  legislation  improved  protection  for  consumers  in 
areas  such  as  mortgage  credit,  payment  services,  insurance 
distribution  and 
investments.  The  Central  Bank  both 
contributed  to  this  work  and  strengthened  the  domestic 
framework. This included the enhancement of the Consumer 
Protection Code, the introduction of the Code of Conduct on 
Mortgage  Arrears,  the  SME  Lending  Code  and  subsequent 
SME Lending Regulations, and more.  
 12 
 Conclusion 
 So, is it all sorted then? Clearly no, much remains to be done.  
institutional  side,  the  review  of  the  European 
On  the 
Supervisory  Authorities  (ESAs)  and  ongoing  debate  on  the 
need  for  a  European  Deposit  Insurance  Scheme  and  a  pan-
European  Anti  Money  Laundering  (AML)  authority  show  the 
institutional architecture necessary to sustain Banking Union 
is not yet complete and further work must be undertaken.  
Enhancing  the  MREL  targets  based  on  the  outcome  of 
resolvability assessments and developing a policy for transfer 
strategies  all  remain  ongoing  initiatives.xxv  Moreover,  the 
backstop  to  the  Single  Resolution  Fund  needs  to  be  quickly 
operationalised. Now that important steps have been taken to 
address  bank  failure,  the  authorities  will  need  to  turn  their 
attention  to  other  significant  players  in  the  financial  sector 
such as financial market infrastructure and insurance firms. 
Turning to resilience, debt to GNI* in Ireland is still elevated 
and remains above 100 per cent. As outlined by the Governor 
of the Central Bank in a recent speech, given the particularly 
favourable economic growth in recent years, the projection of 
a general government deficit in 2019 does not appear to be a 
sufficiently ambitious fiscal policy.xxvi  
On  the  macroprudential  side,  building  resilience  most 
effectively  requires  balancing  timing,  policy-mix  and  policy 
calibration, depending on the nature of the systemic risk being 
addressed.  Technical  work  is  ongoing  to  assess  whether  we 
can strengthen the framework further.xxvii   
However, much progress has been made.  
 13 
 And  ten  years  on, 
acknowledge this. 
it 
is 
important  to  take  stock  and 
Banks are now jointly supervised and resolved by cross-border 
institutions.  Banks  and  authorities  are  better  prepared  for 
bank failures, which should reduce the cost to taxpayers in the 
future.  The  level,  type  and  quality  of  regulatory  capital  has 
increased  and  the  loss-absorbing  capacity  of  banks  has 
improved. We now actively intervene to address systemic risk 
and pro-cyclicality in the system. Also, there is a cognisance to 
Ireland’s vulnerability as a small open economy and the need 
for all sectors to build resilience.  
in  our  work, 
We should keep the lessons from the crisis to the forefront of 
our  mind, 
in  our 
communications. Then, our combined efforts to highlight and 
address  risks  and  build  resilience  will  make  the  financial 
system stronger and safer, thereby safeguarding stability and 
protecting consumers. 
in  our  thinking,  and 
Thank you 
 
                                                           
i I would like to thank Mícheál O’Keeffe and Paul Reddan for their contributions to my remarks.  
ii See Aliber, R.Z. and Kindleberger, C.P., 2015. Manias, panics and crashes. Hoboken, pp. 340. 
iii See Lane, P.R., 2011. The Irish Crisis. CEPR Discussion Paper No. 8287.  
Also see Fitzgerald, J., 2014. Ireland’s recovery from crisis. CESifo Forum (Vol. 15, No. 2, pp. 8-13). 
Also see Whelan, K., 2014. Ireland’s economic crisis: The good, the bad and the ugly. Journal of 
Macroeconomics, 39, pp.424-440.  
iv See Nyberg, P., 2011. Misjudging risk: Causes of the systemic banking crisis in Ireland. Ministry of Finance, 
Dublin, March. 
v For an overview, see Lastra, R., 2003. The Governance Structure for Financial Supervision and Regulation in 
Europe. Columbia Journal of European Law, 10(1), pp.49-68. 
vi See footnote (iv), pp 5. 
vii See ‘Lessons from the past, safeguarding stability for the future,’ address by Sharon Donnery, at the CEPR 
Economic History Symposium 9 June 2016. Available here. 
viii See ‘Macro-prudential policy: action in the face of uncertainty,’ address by Sharon Donnery, at the Dublin 
Economic Workshop Annual Economic Policy Conference 24 Sep 2016. Available here. 
ix See footnote (viii). 
x See A Macro-Prudential Framework for Ireland 2014. 
xi See Central Bank of Ireland Countercyclical capital buffer rate announcement, 5 July 2018. 
xii See Central Bank of Ireland Identification of Systemically Important Irish Institutions and 
 14 
                                                                                                                                                                                      
Announcement of Buffer Rates, 8 December 2015. 
xiii See Central Bank of Ireland table for Standard Deviation of Annual Growth Rates (%): 1991-2017. 
xiv See Central Bank of Ireland Quarterly Financial Accounts – Q1 2018. 
xv See Lane, P., 2010. A new fiscal framework for Ireland. Journal of the Statistical and Social Inquiry Society of 
Ireland, 39, pp.144-165. 
xvi Modified GNI is an indicator that was recommended by the Economic Statistics Review Group and is 
designed to exclude globalisation effects that are disproportionally impacting the measurement of the size of 
the Irish economy. 
xvii See Smyth, D., 2017. The Recovery in the Public Finances in Ireland following the Financial Crisis. Journal of 
the Statistical and Social Inquiry Society of Ireland, 46, pp.149-174. 
xviii See footnote (iv), pp 41. 
xix See ‘The Banking Crisis – A Decade On,’ address by Ed Sibley, at the Trinity College Dublin “Behind the 
Headline” Series 12 Sep 2018. Available here. 
xx See European Commission State Aid Scorecard.  
xxi See Honohan, P., Donovan, D., Gorecki, P. and Mottiar, R., 2010. The Irish banking crisis: Regulatory and 
financial stability policy 2003-2008, Report to the Minister for Finance. 
xxii In 2003, the Irish Financial Services Regulatory Authority (the ‘Financial Regulator’) was established within 
the overall new structure of the Central Bank and Financial Services Authority of Ireland.  
xxiii See European Commission 2009. 
xxiv See EU Banking Structures October 2007. The subsidiary number reflects the EU rather than the euro area 
specifically. 
xxv See Minimum Requirements for Own Funds and Eligible Liabilities (MREL). 
xxvi See ‘Macro-Financial Policies for the Short Term and the Long Term,’ address by Governor Philip R. Lane, at 
the MacGill Summer School 27 July 2018. Available here. 
xxvii A Systemic Risk Buffer is one potential instrument allowed under CRR/CRD to mitigate non-cyclical systemic 
risks, such as those related to exposure concentration.  
 15 
