Ed Sibley: Prudential regulation, the international financial services
sector, and priorities in Ireland for 2018
Remarks  by  Mr  Ed  Sibley,  Deputy  Governor  (Prudential  Regulation)  of  the  Central  Bank  of
Ireland, at the FSI Financial Services Forum, Dublin, 8 December 2017.
 In my remarks today, I will cover three broad areas relevant to internationally focused financial
services  firms.  Firstly,  I  will  describe  our  objectives  and  approach  to  prudential  regulation,
secondly, I will consider some of the key challenges the international financial services sector
faces, and thirdly, I will outline some of our priorities for 2018.
Within these broad areas, you will hear:
the  Central  Bank’s  prudential  regulation  priorities  for  delivering  on  its  mandate  of
safeguarding stability and protecting consumers;
that while much progress has been made in improving the safety of the financial system,
more work is required to address issues that still remain; and
that even as we are still dealing with legacy issues from the last financial crisis, significant
headwinds and risks are on the horizon. 
Regulatory and supervisory approach
The  core  work  of  the  Central  Bank  is  focussed  on  delivering  a  financial  system  that  is  well-
managed, well-regulated, and sustainably serves the needs of the economy and consumers over
the long term. Given the international nature of much of the Irish financial services system, this
objective includes consideration of our responsibilities regarding European financial stability. 
Indeed, in comparable ways to your firms, the Central Bank is also part of the complex European
financial services ecosystem – playing an active role in the European framework of regulation
and  supervision .  Within  that  framework,  the  Central  Bank  operates  a  robust  and  effective
approach to supervision that underpins our aim of enhancing the standing and reputation of the
Central Bank (such that it is trusted by the public and respected by our peers), and the wider
reputation and long-term attractiveness of Ireland as a financial services centre.
1
Delivery  of  our  overarching  vision  for  the  financial  services  system  requires  that  we  deliver
effective,  intrusive,  analytical  and  outcomes-focused  supervision.  This  is  risk-based  and
anchored by our PRISM supervisory methodology. Our supervisory effort involves our day to day
supervisory team engagement with regulated firms; in-depth and intensive inspections; and high
quality analysis designed to support and challenge the supervisory work.
We undertake this work with the aim of ensuring that regulated firms:
have sufficient financial resources, including under a plausible but severe stress;
have sustainable, capitally accretive business models, over the long-term;
are well governed, have an appropriate culture, with effective risk management and control
arrangements in place, which are commensurate with their nature, scale and complexity;
and
can recover if they get into difficulty, and if they cannot, are resolvable in an orderly manner
without significant externalities or taxpayer costs.
Distilling our supervisory approach and objectives into a few lines is relatively straightforward.
Delivery of the approach, and for regulated firms to be operating in line with our objectives is less
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
so,  particularly  in  the  context  of  the  continued  developments  and  changes  to  regulatory
frameworks, which I will come onto in one moment. Nonetheless, it is what I expect of my teams,
and it is what I expect of the firms that we supervise, whether they are focused on the domestic
economy or internationally focused.
In the 10 years since the onset of the financial crisis, multiple reforms have sought to address
the  root  causes  of  the  crisis  and  other  issues.  Indeed,  there  continues  to  be  reforms  of  the
reforms, and regulatory reform packages have started to sound like extended movie franchises. 
While not yet reaching the number of iterations as the Fast & the Furious franchise, we are still
embedding  recent  changes  such  as  Solvency  II,  and  implementing  further  changes,  notably
MiFID II  and PSD 2 . We are close to agreement on Basel III. In parallel, accounting standards
continue to be updated, with a 1 January 2018 effective date for IFRS9  and IFRS17  coming into
force from 1 January 2021 for Insurance firms. 
2
3
4
5
Further change is on the way with Capital Markets Union (CMU) , an important response to the
challenge  of  achieving  more  diversified  sources  of  funding  of  the  European  economy,  wider
opportunities for investors, and broader risk sharing. The objective to diversify the funding mix,
reducing reliance on traditional funding models, is a valuable one. 
6
The  recently  proposed  revision  of  the  ESA’s  framework  is  also  relevant .  Negotiations  are
continuing  under  the  Estonian  Presidency  on  the  European  Commission’s  Risk  Reduction
Measures  package.  This  package  constitutes  the  EU’s  completion  of  the  Basel  III  and  FSB
8
reform agenda and revises parts of the CRD / CRR and BRRD frameworks . 
7
It is both clear and unsurprising that there is some regulatory change fatigue in the system. So it
is  important  to  consider  why  these  changes  have  been  needed  –  indeed,  why  regulation  is
needed  at  all.  Ultimately,  this  comes  down  to  a  question  of  trust. And  without  regulation  and
effective  supervision,  financial  services  firms  cannot  be  trusted  to  deliver  what  is  required  of
them in the way the economy needs and society expects. This is the lesson of the most recent
crisis and all crises before that. It is the lesson from the multitude of conduct failures. Regulatory
change has, among other things, been required to address gaps or weaknesses in the system
that were being exploited or at risk of being so. 
We all have a job of work to do to try and restore trust in the system.
Current challenges
With one very notable exception, the internationally focused financial services firms operating in
Ireland have not experienced the same levels of failures and losses as the domestically focused
sector.  This  is  obviously  welcome,  but  should  not  be  a  cause  of  complacency.  There  are
significant risks and challenges that need to be addressed, including: 
(i) Macro risks
The  macro  economic  environment  has  improved  considerably,  both  domestically  and
internationally.  Growth  has  returned  in  the  Eurozone  and  is  now  well  established  in  Ireland.
However, significant risks are evident. 
Our latest Macro Financial Review will be released next week. I urge you to read it, as it covers in
some detail the progress and vulnerabilities in the Irish economy and the financial system. For
example:
Valuations for many asset classes have been increasing for a long period – from government
bonds through to bitcoin, from stock markets to real estate. Market volatility is very low. This bull
run can not last forever. Quantitative easing will end. Interest rates will rise. Asset valuations will
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
fall. Hopefully, this will all be orderly, but history would warn against any complacency in judging
that this time is different.
Geo political risks are also elevated. Most notably, we may all hope for an orderly Brexit, a topic I
will return to, but there is no certainty that this will be the case. Whatever the outcome, it is likely
to  be  negative  for  the  Irish  economy  and  the  financial  services  system  here  and  potentially
across the EU. 
At the risk of generalisation, as CEO’s and senior managers in international financial services
firms, the majority of you are likely to be more optimistic than your prudential regulator. In fact, in
the  same  way  as  I  am  paid  to  consider  downside  risk,  you  are  incentivised  to  consider  the
upside. Nonetheless, we all need to be prepared for the plausible worse case. 
After a storm it is important that roofs are fixed, leaky pipes mended and so on. While there is a
natural tendency for a ‘risk on’ mentality to dominate in the current environment, repair is still
needed, and lessons of the past cannot be forgotten. Even as we are still dealing with legacy
issues from the last financial crisis, significant headwinds and risks are on the horizon. 
To deliver a resilient financial system, firms need to prepare for challenging times ahead. Today,
economic conditions are more positive than in recent times. During such times it is critical for
firms to prepare for the potential downside risks and plausible shocks that include Brexit, tighter
economic conditions and on-going disruption of business models. 
(ii) Pace of change
There  are  considerable  opportunities  and  risks  for  the  financial  services  industry  arising  from
technology changes. History is replete with examples of industries being transformed, created
and disrupted by technology changes. This dates back centuries, but the pace of this change
and the risks associated with it are increasing, in what seems like an exponential way.
It  is  beyond  doubt  that  banking,  insurance,  asset  management,  payments,  and  other  financial
services sectors will be disrupted by technology change. Are you ready, or is your firm or your
sector more like Kodak or Nokia?
Fintech is changing barriers to entry and blurring the boundaries between technology firms and
financial  services  firms.  New  business  models,  products  and  services  are  emerging,  and
changing  the  way  users  interact  with  the  system.  Value  chains  are  being  disrupted. Available
data  is  growing  exponentially.  The  sophistication  and  reliance  on  artificial  intelligence  and
machine based learning is increasing. Opportunities for innovation through digital technology are
abundant as financial services is focused on recording, analyzing, and interpreting transactions
and managing associated information flows. 
So there are threats and opportunities for all of your firms. Smaller, niche players, can be more
nimble, can target specific higher margin business – cherry picking from the bigger players, but
new  entrants  might  also  arrive  –  including  from  the  technology  sector.  Alternatively,  bigger
players with larger wallets can buy technology firms, achieve economies of scale, and so on, and
can compete easily on a cross border basis. 
However it arrives, there will, undoubtedly be disruption to the system and your firms. I expect
that  you  will  be  actively  thinking  about  these  issues,  how  they  will  affect  your  business,  your
capabilities  to  deliver  change  and  the  services  you  want  to  provide,  and  ultimately  what  a
sustainable proposition is.
(iii) Operational risk & resilience
We are all operating in an increasingly complex environment, with a greater and greater degree
of  reliance  on  technology,  an  exponential  growth  in  data,  continuous  change,  increasingly
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
organisation complexity – including through outsourcing. All of these factors increase operational
risk, and the need for greater resilience in our processes, people and systems. 
System  resilience  and  cyber  security  threats  are  acute.  Risks  can  crystallize  instantly  and
catastrophically. The evidence from our onsite IT risk inspections is that much more needs to be
done to manage this risk. For all of you, it is a question of when, not if, so you need to not only
reduce  the  risk  of  occurrence  but  have  advanced  plans  for  how  you  will  deal  with  the  risk
crystallising. 
To  take  outsourcing  as  another  example,  while  there  are  strong  business  benefits  from
successful  outsourcing,  it  does  bring  additional  complexity  into  the  system.  It  may  be  more
difficult to get a co-ordinated response when issues arise and to get separate firms, perhaps un-
regulated,  to  operate  in  a  co-ordinated  manner  during  a  time  of  stress.  The  firms  may  have
conflicting responsibilities between their own stakeholders. You need to be satisfied, and to be
able to demonstrate, that this additional complexity is being managed and mitigated. 
(iv) Governance & risk management
As  I  have  already  alluded  to,  we  are  living  in  an  increasingly  complex,  fast  moving  and
challenging  world.  Successfully  meeting  these  challenges  requires  effective  leadership,
governance and risk management. It is therefore of serious concern that, in too many cases, the
implementation  and  embedding  of  effective  governance  arrangements  and  risk  management
frameworks in Irish financial services firms is not sufficiently robust. More than one third of the
largest  firms  (PRISM  impact  High  or  Medium  High)  have  significant  issues,  which  require
remediation in order to bring governance arrangements within our supervisory risk appetite. This
needs to change. 
As does the culture in many firms – not just the retail banks. We expect institutions to critically
evaluate  their  culture,  considering  what  type  of  culture  they  want  to  develop,  how  staff  are
incentivised  to  behave,  and  to  be  held  to  account  as  to  whether  the  culture  they  want  is  the
culture they have and how would they know if it is not.
We will also be stepping up our work from a diversity and inclusion perspective – linked to our
work  on  culture.  It  will  increasingly  feature  in  our  ongoing  supervision  and  inspection  work,
supported  by  analytics.  We  expect  regulated  firms  to  meaningfully  address  diversity  and
inclusion  in  the  boardroom,  at  the  executive  level  and  the  pipeline  of  talent  needed  to  run  the
organisation in the long-term.
Supervisory priorities for 2018 
Turning now to the final part of my remarks – our supervisory priorities for next year. There are
some differences across sectors, such as:
for Banking: continued drive to reduce NPLs, supporting our Financial Conduct colleagues
on the tracker mortgage examination, implementation of PSII, the implementation of IFRS9,
and the EBA stress test;
for insurance: focus on risk transfer, cross border insurance and completing further work on
internal models;
for Asset Management and Investment Firms: the implementation of MiFID II; and
for  Credit  Unions:  further  enhancements  of  the  regulatory  framework,  addressing  viability
issues, restructuring and responding to the bifurcation of the sector, and credit risk. 
But  there  are  also  many  common  priorities  and  there  is  absolute  consistency  in  our  desired
outcomes – that of delivering on our mandate of safeguarding stability and protecting consumers
and  our  vision  of  a  well-managed,  well-regulated  financial  services  system  that  sustainably
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
serves the needs of the economy and consumers over the long term.
Common key areas of focus in 2018 will include: 
(i) Core supervisory activity: 
My number one priority is to ensure that my teams deliver an effective, intrusive, analytical and
outcomes-focused approach to supervision. We will relentlessly pursue improvements in those
areas  necessary  to  bring  financial  service  firms  within  our  supervisory  risk  appetite.  This  will
include  significant  work  on  the  areas  I  have  raised  earlier  –  governance,  culture,  IT  risk,  and
outsourcing. 
(ii) Brexit: 
As I have touched on earlier, Brexit will have a direct and negative impact on the Irish economy.
This impact will have knock on effects on the Irish financial services system. Even in a best-case
scenario,  new  frictions  and  duplications,  with  associated  costs,  will  emerge  in  the  European
financial  services  system.  The  loss  of  the  UK  voice  from  the  European  system  of  financial
regulation is also negative for Ireland.
There is considerable uncertainty and complexity for firms in dealing with Brexit, regarding, for
example  contract  continuity,  risk  transfer,  appropriate  governance  structures  and  regulatory
treatment of third country branches by both the home and host state. 
While some firms have robust plans that deal with a range of scenarios, other firms’ plans are
not  as  advanced  as  they  need  to  be.  Some  firms  have  not  considered  a  scenario  of  a  ‘hard’
Brexit with no transition period. More work is required to be prepared for this plausible scenario.
With  regard  to  Brexit  related  authorisations  and  approvals,  we  will  continue  to  prioritise  our
authorisation activity and continue to deliver on our commitment of being transparent, predictable
and consistent in our approach to authorisations and material business changes. Where Brexit
has  a  material  impact  on  business  strategy  and  business  models,  we  will  challenge  firms  to
ensure they appropriately address associated risks.
We  will  continue  to  both  operate  to  and  influence  European  norms  of  supervision.  We  have
engaged effectively within the SSM and with the ESAs and have been influential in the decisions
being taken on supervisory stances for the many thorny issues that Brexit is causing.
We will continue to dedicate our most senior and experienced supervisory and regulatory experts
to work on Brexit – as befits one of our highest priorities. We have approved an expansion in the
regulatory  staff  in  the  Central  Bank  to  ensure  we  have  the  resources  to  both  authorise  and
supervise new entrants or changes to existing firms.
We  have  put  in  processes  that  are  transparent,  predictable  and  consistent.  Firms  that  are
engaging with us will find us open, engaged and pragmatic. But they will not find that we are
willing  to  compromise  on  the  need  for  governance  and  control  arrangements  to  be
commensurate with the size, scale and complexity of operations.
(iii) Meaningful progress in the recoverability and resolvability of firms
There has been significant progress in recovery and resolution planning in the last two to three
years. However, more needs to be done by regulated firms to develop credible and executable
recovery plans, and to address impediments to resolution – including the raising of MREL for
banks, and addressing operational continuity issues. The absence of a resolution framework for
insurance firms is a concern, and will be a focus of our engagement in European forums. 
(iv) Continuing to enhance our supervisory approach 
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
I expect all of you to be seeking to both continuously improve your firms as well as responding
and anticipating the changing environment we operate in. I expect the same in the Central Bank.
We will continue to enhance our supervisory approach, including the use of the data and analysis
(reflecting the huge growth in regulatory and non-regulatory information that we need to consider
as part of our supervision).
(v) Resourcing
And finally, resourcing will remain our number one internal priority, recognising that we can only
deliver through the quality, expertise and commitment of our staff.  
Conclusion
I will conclude here. The Central bank’s core work is focused on delivering the financial system
the economy needs and consumers deserve. The work of regulation and supervision and your
efforts have helped deliver a safer system. But significant issues remain that need attention to
achieve our desired outcomes of regulated financial services firms:
having sufficient financial resources, including under a plausible but severe stress;
having sustainable, capitally accretive business models, over the long-term;
being  well  governed,  with  an  appropriate  culture,  effective  risk  management  and  control
arrangements in place, which are commensurate with their nature, scale and complexity;
and
being  able  to  recover  if  they  get  into  difficulty,  and  if  they  cannot,  being  resolvable  in  an
orderly manner without significant externalities or taxpayer costs.
This is the time to fix what needs to be fixed, to refocus on consumers and to build resilience
within your firms. This will result in financial services firms who are in a stronger place to serve
the needs of the economy and consumers through an economic cycle.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Sibley, Ed, Innovation and insurance in Ireland: a supervisory perspective 2017. 
MiFID II contains new EU-wide rules governing investment firms, credit institutions, trading venues and market
structures, as well as third-country firms providing investment services or activities in the EU. It significantly
broadens the scope of MiFID by bringing new activities and firms into scope, removing or narrowing exemptions
and covering new financial instruments and products. 
The Payments  Services  Directive  2  (PSD2)  will  come  into  force  in  the  EU  in  January  2018.  Banks  will  be
obligated to share their customer information with third parties; such as payments firms. 
IFRS 9 is a new accounting standard that will be effective from 1 January 2018. It introduces an expected credit
losses model (ECL) which may lead to higher impairment provisions and more volatile impairment charges
with a consequent impact on capital ratios.
IFRS 17 relates to the principles for the recognition, measurement, presentation and disclosure of insurance
contracts within the scope of the standard.
See recent  update  from  European  Commission -  Reinforcing  integrated  supervision  to  strengthen  Capital
Markets Union and financial integration in a changing environment. Available here.
Cross, Gerry. The Evolving Regulatory Architecture: A Supervisory Perspective. 2017
The Capital Requirements Regulation (EU) No. 575/2013 (CRR) and Directive 2013/36/EU (CRD IV) came into
effect  on  1  January  2014.  The  CRR  is  directly  applicable  to  all  Member  States  while  CRD  IV  has  been
transposed into Irish national law via Statutory Instruments 158/2014 & 159/2014 [European Union (Capital
Requirements)  (No.2)  Regulations  2014]. Further information.  The  Bank  Recovery  and  Resolution  Directive
(BRRD) provides national resolution authorities with comprehensive and effective powers for dealing with failing
banks.  This  framework  and  related  legislation  enhances  both  the  resilience  and  the  resolvability  of  EU
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
institutions and in-scope investment firms, which will be better prepared to deal with, and recover from, a crisis
situation. Moreover, in the event that an institution does fail, the impact associated with that failure should be
minimised. Available here.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
