BOTSWANA INSTITUTE OF BANKERS’ 2017 GRADUATION 
AND AWARDS CEREMONY 
  Keynote Address 
 
by 
       Moses D Pelaelo 
Governor, Bank of Botswana 
 November 22, 2017 
 I am most delighted and wish to thank  the Chairman of Council 
of  the  Botswana  Institute  of  Bankers  and,  through  you  Mr  Jaco 
Viljoen,  the  Managing  Director  of  Capital  Bank,  and  your  fellow 
Council Members, for the invitation to be the Keynote Speaker at 
this  2017  Graduation  and  Awards  Ceremony.  At  the  onset,  I 
congratulate  the  2017  Graduants  and  Award  Winners  for  this 
important  milestone  and  achievement.  I  can  imagine  that  there 
were  many  challenges  on  the  way,  including  juggling  one’s 
studies  with  other  social  obligations,  such  as  family  and  job 
obligations.    As  one  motivational  speaker  said,  “it  is  not  your 
aptitude,  but  your  attitude  that  determines  your  altitude”.  
Congratulations to you all, Class of 2017! 
 Distinguished  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  banking  is  an  evolving 
industry,  which  provides  opportunities 
for  personal  and 
professional  growth,  while  its  services  and  products  have 
important and increasing linkages with other areas of economic 
activity.  Most  significantly,  in  the  context  of  today’s  ceremony, 
professional  bankers  are  a  key  input  to  economic  development 
and  wealth  creation  in  terms  of  providing  resources  and 
informed  advice  and  guidance  with  respect  to  investment 
channels  and  options.  Membership  of  this  esteemed  profession 
by  knowledgeable,  skilled  and  passionate  individuals  also 
enables them to contribute to its growth. In this regard, therefore, 
let  me  commend  many  Batswana,  including  these  Graduants, 
who  continue  to  invest  their  time  and  resources  on  self-
development,  and,  ultimately,  rise 
to  positions  of  higher 
responsibility,  in  both  the  banking  and  the  broader  financial 
sector in Botswana. To a great extent, this ascendency to senior 
management  positions  is  a  vote  of  confidence  on  the  domestic 
banking sector and its ability to produce quality leaders. 
 To  you  Class  of  2017,  I  have  no  doubt  that  you  too  aspire  to 
assume key roles in the financial sector in order to better serve 
your  institutions  at  higher  levels  and,  ultimately,  serve  the 
country. The journey has just begun.  However, this is a journey 
to be continued, both in terms of continuing engagement in self-
development and, of course, career progression. Along this path, 
we  should  always  remember  that  banking  and,  more  broadly, 
finance is a business of trust. The bankers, in particular, have a 
fiduciary  responsibility  and  duty  to  protect  the  integrity  and 
reputation of the banking system, to underwrite continuing public 
trust and confidence in the financial system.     
 2 
 Distinguished  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  Bank  of  Botswana  is 
proud  to  be  associated  with  the  Botswana  Institute  of  Bankers, 
as  its  founding  member.  You  will  recall  that  the  Institute  was 
established  in  1991  as  a  not-for-profit  organisation,  with  a 
mandate  to  promote  banking  as  a  career  and  an  accredited 
profession in Botswana, through provision of quality and relevant 
knowledge  and  skills  in  banking  and  finance  and,  I  should  add, 
fostering ethical conduct of banking business.  
 
Today  marks  the  23rd  Graduation  and  Awards  ceremony  for 
Associate  Diploma  II  graduates.    I  am  advised  that  since 
inception,  the  Institute  has  awarded  842  Certificates  and  535 
Associate  Diplomas.    This  evening,  there  will  be  awards  of  18 
Associate  Banking  Diplomas  and,  in  total  30  outstanding 
individuals  recognised.    This  serves  as  a  testimony  to  the  fact 
that the Institute continues to be relevant in enhancing the level 
of skills and excellence, as well as promoting professionalism in 
the  banking  sector.  The  contribution  of 
the 
Institute 
to 
development  of  human  resources  for  the  banking  industry 
indeed deserves commendation and recognition.  
 It is nevertheless important to implore the Institute to continue to 
transform  and  align  its  mandate  to  the  needs  of  the  industry  in 
order  to  better  meet  the  expectations  of  the  more  discerning 
customer  and  market  place.    For  that  to  happen,  the  Institute 
 3 
needs  to  be  dynamic  and  innovative,  interact  meaningfully  with 
similar  institutions  for  benchmarking,  and  explore  opportunities 
for  collaboration  and  strategic  partnerships  with  other 
professional  organisations,  academic  institutions  and  industry 
leaders.    In  as  much  as  I  recognise  this  progress,  Botswana 
cannot afford to continue to have banking practices and products 
that  are  “behind  the  curve”  compared  to  regional  and  global 
developments.    The  industry  will  need  to  invest  in  people, 
systems 
and 
processes, 
including 
risk  management 
infrastructure to meet today’s challenges. 
 Distinguished  Ladies  and  Gentlemen, 
this 
is  particularly 
important  in  the  context  of  dynamic  changes  in  demography, 
technology,  competitive  landscape  and  prolonged  low  global 
interest rate environment, all which have had a profound impact 
on business models for banking.   As an example, technology is 
the  future  of  banking,  and  the  industry  needs  highly  skilled  and 
innovative  staff  to  keep  pace  with  financial  technology,  such  as 
Fintech,  blockchain  and  cryptocurrencies.  In  the  circumstances, 
the  need  for  an  institution,  such  as  the  Botswana  Institute  of 
Bankers,  is  all  the  more  important.    Evidently,  banking  has 
already  come  a  long  way,  and  we  should  all  prepare  for  the 
future  armed  with  knowledge,  relevant  skills  and  appropriate 
behaviours. 
  4 
It  should  also  be  a  motivation  that  the  current  and  prospective 
banking  environment  is  leveraged  on  interestingly  challenging, 
complex  and  digital  banking  systems.  Concomitant  with  these 
developments, both globally and here at home, digitalisation and 
financial  integration  require  that  we  all  exercise  increased 
diligence,  prudence  and  ethical  conduct.  This  is  because, 
desirable as technological innovation is, it also encapsulates risk 
and possibilities to contaminate the industry and profession with 
bad behaviour and harmful activities. There was a time when the 
main  threats  to  banks  were  robberies  and  insider  collusion 
relating  to  stealing  of  the  physical  cash.    These  days,  harmful 
activities,  fraud  and  theft  are  perpetrated  through  cyber-crime, 
infiltration  of  systems  and  unauthorised  access  to  information 
and  identity  records.    The  “thieves”  are  likely  to  be  behind  the 
counter, and through the mobile phones and computer systems.  
Therefore,  the  modern  banker  has  to  be  alive  to  these 
possibilities  and  also  able  to  harness  the  necessary  resources 
and  mitigation  strategies  to  forestall  such  harmful  activities.    In 
addition,  bankers  need  to  be  able  to  respond  meaningfully  and 
offer  timely  redress  in  the  event  of  customers’  accounts  and 
information being compromised through no fault of their own. 
 Ineptitude  and  failure  to  handle  such  operational  risk  issues 
diligently could weaken public confidence in the banking system 
and  undermine  the  financial  inclusion  agenda  and  the  very 
essence  of  banking,  which  is  to  facilitate  intermediation  for 
 5 
productive  use  of  financial  resources,  as  well  as  certainty  of 
payments.    Furthermore,  the  adverse  effects  of  such  illegal 
activities could impose a heavy financial burden on the public as 
banks  commit  resources  to  preventive  measures;  and  often  the 
costs of such are passed on to customers.   
 Distinguished Guests, the Bank of Botswana will continue to play 
its  role  in  encouraging  and  promoting  professionalism,  honesty, 
integrity  and  ethics  in  banking.    The  fabric  and  foundation  of 
banking  is  trust  and  trustworthy  bankers.    This  is  important  as 
good  governance 
is  a  key  pillar 
for 
the  promotion  and 
maintenance  of  a  safe  and  sound  financial  system;  one  that  is 
run  by  fit  and  proper  and  competent  leadership,  management 
and  staff.  At  the  same  time,  there  is  need  to  enhance 
transparency  in  banking  to  instil  confidence  in  the  financial 
system.    In  this  context,  the  Financial  Stability  Board  Working 
Group  on  governance  frameworks  is  working  on  proposals  to 
strengthen  governance  frameworks  to  mitigate  what  is  called 
“misconduct 
risk”,  addressing 
information  gaps  and  due 
diligence 
in  employment  of 
individuals  with  a  history  of 
misconduct; and mapping responsibilities to senior personnel to 
strengthen  governance  of  misconduct 
risk 
in 
financial 
institutions;  as  well  as  to  address  cultural  risks  that  drive 
misconduct.    Once  concluded,  the  tendency  of  “rolling  bad 
apples”  in  the  financial  sector  will  be  stopped  and  there  will  be 
no place to hide for dishonest and unethical people. 
 6 
 Let  me  underscore  that  the  success  of  a  well-diversified 
economy depends on an inclusive, well managed, prudently run 
and efficient financial sector.  To this end, the Bank of Botswana 
continues  to  foster  the  development  of  policies  designed  to 
enhance and align skills to the needs of the domestic market.  It 
is vital that banks, which are the bedrock of the financial sector, 
fully  commit  to  the  effective  implementation  of  the  human 
development  strategies  aimed  at  increasing  the  supply  of 
professional  bankers.    The  existing  and  continually  evolving 
training  opportunities  should  be  geared  towards  enhancing 
efficiencies in the banking sector. Needless to say, effectiveness 
and  development  of  the  Institute  is  significant  both  in  content 
and  technicality,  to  adequately  equip  bank  employees  and 
ground  them  in  the  pre-requisites  of  what  is  required  to  be  an 
effective and professional banker. 
 Distinguished,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  I  would  like  to  take  this 
opportunity  to  remind  all  of  us  here,  once  again,  of  the 
importance of adhering to codes of ethics and professionalism in 
the delivery of banking services.  This is important as banks are 
invariably the principal pillars for commerce, savings mobilisation 
and  payments  infrastructure  and,  in  general,  socio-economic 
development.   
  7 
In  concluding,  Council  Chairman,  Council  members,  Executive 
Director,  and  Distinguished  Guests  once  again,  congratulations 
to  the  Graduants  and  Award  Winners  on  their  achievement.    It 
takes  determination  to  start,  and  commitment  to  finish.  This 
evening represents a mark of personal growth and I have every 
confidence  that  the  success  in  your  Botswana  Institute  of 
Bankers  studies  offers  an  opportunity  for  your  professional 
growth in the banking industry.  
 I thank you for your kind attention. 
 8 
