BANK OF UGANDA 
   Remarks by 
 Louis Kasekende (PhD.) 
Deputy Governor, Bank of Uganda 
  At the Occasion of Celebrating Ten (10) Years of KCB Bank 
(Uganda) Limited’s Banking Operations in Uganda  
    November 03, 2017 
    Your Excellencies, the Ambassadors and High Commissioners,  
Members of the Diplomatic Corps, 
KCB Group Chairman, Mr. Ngenny Biwott, 
The KCB Group CEO and MD, Mr. Joshua Oigara, 
Executive Director Supervision, Bank of Uganda 
The Board of Directors of KCB Bank (Uganda) Limited, 
The CEO, Management and Staff of KCB Bank (Uganda) Limited, 
Invited Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 I  bring  warm  greetings  from  the  Governor,  Prof.  Emmanuel  Tumusiime-
Mutebile, who is unable to join us this evening. None-the-less, I am greatly 
honoured this evening to preside over this function, at which KCB Uganda 
is celebrating ten years of successful operations in Uganda.  Let me start by 
congratulating the Shareholders, the Board of Directors, Management and 
Staff of KCB for all their achievements over the last ten years.  KCB Uganda 
is  a  subsidiary  of  the  KCB  group  which  has  assets  of  nearly  US$  6  billion 
and operates in seven different countries.  
 I listened to the remarks by the leadership of the KCB Group, and I would 
like to emphasize two issues. First; is the fact that contrary to the narrative 
by some Ugandan media commentators, the government of Kenya is only a 
minority shareholder in the KCB Group, holding about 18 percent of shares 
as  at  August  2016.  Second,  is  a  lesson  for  our  business  community  in 
Uganda to strive to emulate our Kenyan counterparts in terms of foresight 
and discipline in managing our businesses so that we too can have Ugandan 
businesses successfully establishing base across the borders. 
Mission: To foster price stability and a sound financial system     Vision:  To be a centre of excellence in upholding 
Macroeconomic stability   
 
Page 2 
 My  brief  remarks  will  concentrate  on  examining  developments  in  the 
financial sector in two parts. The first part will look at the last ten years of 
KCB  Bank  Uganda  in  our  market;  while  the  second  will  examine  the  next 
decade  and  what  I  envisage  to  be  the  key  challenges  to  banks  especially 
with  regard  to  the  rapid  developments  in  financial  technology  (FinTec)  as 
well as implications for regulation and supervision.  
 KCB opened its doors to the Ugandan public in November 2007. This was 
after the lifting of the moratorium on licensing of new Commercial Banks in 
2004.  
The  licensing  ban had  been put  in place  following  several  bank  failures  in 
the  late  1990s.  You  may  recall  that  these  bank  failures  resulted  in  the 
enactment of the Financial Institutions Act, (FIA) 2004 with more stringent 
regulatory  standards  that  required  new  entrants  to  undergo  rigorous  due 
diligence and meet higher minimum capital requirements.     
 KCB  Uganda  has  expanded  to  a  bank  with  a  branch  network  of  sixteen 
branches  across  the  country  and  has  registered  significant  growth  in  its 
balance sheet and Shareholder Capital over the years.     
 Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  these  are  no  mean  achievements  given  the 
increasing competition in the  banking sector. Financial services’ providers 
need  to  innovate  continuously  to  remain  competitive.    In  this  regard,  the 
bank has positioned itself as one of the leading providers of digital banking 
solutions  in  the  market.  It  recently  upgraded  its  Core  Banking  System  to 
support the bank’s digitalization.  
Mission: To foster price stability and a sound financial system     Vision:  To be a centre of excellence in upholding 
Macroeconomic stability   
 
Page 3 
 The  next  decade  promises  to  be  even  more  exciting  and  challenging  for 
banks in Uganda. It will be characterized by accelerated dynamism in form 
of  adoption  of  new  technologies  and  service  models  that  offer  advantages 
but  also  pose  new  risks.  It  is  a  period  in  which  FinTech  can  be  applied  to 
spur  efficiency  gains  in  the  financial  sector,  offer  more  specialized,  better 
and more targeted products and services, and deepen financial inclusion.  
 It  is  still  too  early  to  gauge  the  full  impact  of  the  current  technological 
progress  on  the  banking  sector.  However,  it  is  not  untenable  to  say  that 
there  is  potential  for  many of  the services  and products currently  on  offer 
by banks and other financial market players to be rendered obsolete by new 
tech-savvy entrants or more competitive processes. With the increased use 
of  technology  in  our  daily  lives,  Banks  will  be  required  to  adopt  more 
efficient mechanisms of leveraging the vast quantities of consumer and firm 
data.  
The advent of new FinTech has implications for financial stability and the 
attendant regulation and supervision frameworks. First, a number of these 
financial  services  and  products  stretch  beyond  the  realm  of  the  existing 
supervisory  and  regulatory  framework.  Second;  the  near  universal  use  of 
technological solutions  could entail increased vulnerability to cyberattacks 
and  inadequacies  with  respect  to  compliance  with  Anti-money  laundering 
and anti-terrorism financing regulations.  
 To  respond  to  these  new  risks  and  vulnerabilities,  our  regulatory 
framework  will  also  have  to  change  fundamentally  from  the  present  focus 
on  intermediaries  or  “entity-based”  to  more  “activity-based”  regulation  in 
Mission: To foster price stability and a sound financial system     Vision:  To be a centre of excellence in upholding 
Macroeconomic stability   
 
Page 4 
light  of  the  complex  network  of  transactions  and  players  in  financial 
services.  In  addition,  our  licensing  regime  will  also  need  to  be  continually 
redesigned  to  bring  new  types  of  service  providers  within  the  regulatory 
ambit.  
 The good news is that some of the emerging technologies may contribute to 
better  regulation,  because  they  could  facilitate  regulatory  compliance  and 
reduce compliance costs. The Bank of Uganda will be studying how some of 
these  new  technologies  could  be  employed  to  enhance  security,  identify 
suspicious transactions and facilitate regulator-bank interactions.  
 The  key  message  to  KCB  Uganda  and  all  the  other  Supervised  Financial 
Institutions  in  Uganda  is  that  the  next  decade  is  going  to  be  a  very 
challenging one.  
 Technological advancement is going to present a lot of exciting benefits, but 
there  will  also  be  attendant  risks.  To  survive  and  thrive,  the  banks  must 
continuously  institute  robust  risk  management  frameworks  which  are 
capable  of  prudently  mitigating  these  risks  in  order  to  protect  depositors’ 
funds and ensure the soundness of the banks.   
 With  these  remarks,  I  once  again  extend  my  heartfelt  congratulations  to 
KCB Uganda on this milestone of marking ten years of banking services in 
Uganda and I wish you many more fruitful years to come. 
 I thank you. 
Mission: To foster price stability and a sound financial system     Vision:  To be a centre of excellence in upholding 
Macroeconomic stability   
 
Page 5 
