    
 
The history and future of QE 
 
Speech given by 
Ben Broadbent, Deputy Governor Monetary Policy 
   Society of Professional Economists, London  
23 July 2018 
  I have benefitted from helpful comments from my colleagues at the Bank of England.  I would 
particularly like to thank Mette E. Nielsen for valuable research assistance.  The views expressed are 
my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Bank of England or other members of the Monetary 
Policy Committee. 
 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
1 
   Hello, and thank you for inviting me today.   
 
In 2002, the University of Chicago held a 90th birthday party for the great American economist  
Milton Friedman.  One important guest was Anna Schwartz, who four decades earlier had co-written with 
Friedman the landmark book A Monetary History of the United States.   
 It’s possible that, even among those of you prepared to give up a pleasant July evening to come to a talk by 
a central bank official, an 800-page tome entitled “A monetary history of [anywhere]” won’t have found its 
way to the very top of your holiday reading list.   
 But it’s actually a gripping read, especially the chapter about the Great Depression.  It also has a claim as 
the most influential piece of economic history ever written.  The book pioneered a new “narrative” approach 
to identifying independent changes in monetary policy – the idea being that, to separate these from the more 
automatic (“endogenous”) reactions of policymakers to the economy you needed to scour the historic record 
and understand how their decisions were actually taken.1 
 It changed economists’ perceptions of the role of monetary forces, including monetary policy, in economic 
fluctuations.  For example, it helped to establish the view that the effects of monetary policy on real variables 
– real national income or its distribution, for example – are in the long run negligibly small.  You cannot 
permanently enrich a country, or raise real wages, simply by easing monetary policy and engineering some 
inflation. 
 Equally, the book argued that policy can have very powerful effects at shorter, cyclical horizons.  In 
particular, it claimed that the Great Depression could have been averted had the US Federal Reserve not 
over-tightened policy in the late 1920s and if had it acted more precipitously to loosen it once the downturn 
began.  The appropriate measures would have included an earlier abandonment of the gold standard.  They 
would also have involved “large-scale open-market purchases”, designed to contain the rise in private-sector 
bond yields and supply reserves to the banking system.  We have a new name for this – we now call it 
“Quantitative Easing” – but the policy itself is not new.   
 The book therefore had a profound influence on monetary policy makers everywhere, but especially those in 
the United States.  One other guest at Friedman’s birthday party, himself an expert on the Great Depression, 
was the then Fed Governor Ben Bernanke.  Paying tribute, he said this2:  “I first read A Monetary History of 
the United States early in my graduate school years at M.I.T.  I was hooked, and I have been a student of 
monetary economics and economic history ever since… I would like to say to Milton and Anna:  Regarding 
the Great Depression.  You’re right, we did it.  We’re very sorry.  But thanks to you, we won’t do it again”.   
                                                       
1 See also Romer and Romer (1989). 
2 Bernanke (2002).   
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
2 
 
2 
  Only a few years later, as Fed Chair, he was compelled to put his words into action.  Nor was it just the Fed 
who responded in this way.  One after the other, in the aftermath of the financial crisis, central banks in 
developed countries slashed interest rates, extended collateralised loans to banks and purchased significant 
quantities of government bonds, expanding their balance sheets many times over.   
 Today I want to take a brief look at what QE has done.  I also want to add some colour to what the MPC has 
recently said about its approach to unwinding the policy, drawing in part on the experience of the US Fed.   
 What did QE do?  
 Despite the title of the book, Friedman and Schwartz didn’t document 100 years of the past for the sake of 
historical interest alone.  They wanted to understand the effects of monetary policy.   
 Getting at these is harder than you might think, because empirical economists can’t do experiments.  In a 
laboratory, a scientist interested in the effects of one thing on another – call them X and Y – can usually do 
two important things.  He or she can “control” for – in other words hold constant – everything else that might 
also affect Y.  This allows one to isolate the study purely to what X does.  It’s also possible3 to move the 
“independent variable” X around at will, observing directly what it does to the “dependent variable” Y.   
 Empirical economists can’t do either of these things.  Changes in policy are one of only many influences on 
the economy and it’s not as if we can just switch these other things off.  The best we can do is use large 
samples of data, coupled with various statistical methods, in an effort to even them out.  And even if we 
could somehow freeze the rest of the world it would never be possible (or morally justifiable) then to 
experiment on it by arbitrarily putting up interest rates.  The economy isn’t a lab rat.  What instead tends to 
happen, in the real world, is that policy reacts to events at least as much as it causes them.  And it’s this 
relationship – from the economy to policy, rather than the other way around – that dominates the data.4 
Friedman and Schwartz’s study – the “narrative” method – was an effort to identify the rare occasions when 
this was not the case.  They were trying to uncover natural experiments.5     
                                                      
3 Scientists don’t always have this luxury.  In drug trials, for example, doctors cannot control for every other influence on health.  In 
judging the impact of lifestyle choices, doctors are in the same position as econometricians:  they can’t control for other influences, nor 
can they independently change the “X” variable (which is why care is needed in interpreting such studies – see e.g. Ioannidis (2013)).    
4 For example, interest rates tend to go up when the economy is strong, and inflationary pressure is growing, and down when it’s weak.  
But one shouldn’t conclude from this correlation that low interest rates cause weak growth.  In fact, the effects run the other way:  it’s 
precisely when the economy is weak that you need the support of easier monetary policy (as my colleague Jan Vlieghe put it more 
succinctly, “umbrellas don’t cause rain” (Vlieghe (2016a)). 
5 In the particular case of the Great Depression, the “natural experiment” was the conflict between the New York Fed, which argued 
continually for easier policy, and other banks in the Federal Reserve System, including the Board in Washington, that were opposed to 
it.  It was the others – the reserve banks of the “interior” – that won.  The British economist Roy Harrod, in his review of A Monetary 
History in 1964, relayed an anecdote that shed some light on those arguments.  It also made plain that QE was under active 
consideration at the time, at least by some:  “The authors hold that, if the New York Bank could have retained the position of leadership 
that it had in the preceding period, all might have been managed much better, and special praise is given to its two experts, Carl Snyder 
and Randolph Burgess.  Perhaps this reviewer may be forgiven for yielding to the strong temptation to introduce a personal note at this 
point.  I had luncheon with Mr Snyder and Mr Burgess in the Federal Reserve Bank of New York in the late summer of 1930.  I came 
briefed with statistics and arguments…  With the utmost of my youthful powers I pleaded with them that they should purchase $1 billion 
worth of US government securities right away.  I argued that, if they did not do this, the US economy would infallibly sink down to lower 
levels, and that the great slump, which was then proceeding throughout the world, would assume unmanageable dimensions and cause 
wide-spread havoc and political disturbance.  I do not recall if those two experts accepted my figure of $1 billion…  But on the general 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
3 
 
3 
  If these challenges exist for conventional monetary policy they surely apply at least as much to QE.  Our 
experience is more limited, the data sample therefore smaller.  And the policy was very clearly a response to 
other events, in this case the powerful contractionary forces unleashed by the banking crisis.  This has hardly 
been a randomised trial.   
 So you cannot conclude from the fact of the recession of 2008-09, or the weak growth that followed, that QE 
was of no help.  Alarmingly, things might have been that much worse without it.  They certainly were in the 
Great Depression.  Within three years of the Wall Street crash, the yield on US corporate bonds had risen to 
over 11%, even as the economy was collapsing;  thousands of US banks failed, taking a third of deposits 
with them;  industrial production halved and unemployment rose by over 20% points (Charts 1a-d compare 
these things with the UK’s experience in the last crisis, with the dashed vertical line drawn at the date of the 
inception of QE).   
 
Equally, there were many other differences between the last financial crisis and the Great Depression, so we 
can’t on the face of it give QE all the credit for having avoided that fate.  There was no deposit insurance 
during the early 1930s, something that surely contributed to the widespread runs on banks and their 
subsequent failure.  In 2008-09, as well as conducting QE, central banks cut interest rates close to zero and 
engaged in direct collateralised lending to the banking system.  Governments also provided support to the 
banking system, via equity bailouts and lending schemes of their own.  They also eased fiscal policy more 
aggressively and managed to avoid the protectionist measures that had exacerbated the Great Depression.  
To a greater or lesser extent all these things must have helped.    
 So what can we say about the specific contribution of QE?  We may not be able to employ their “narrative” 
method, nor is our experience of QE as extensive as for more conventional monetary policy.  But we do have 
some advantages over Friedman and Schwartz.  We have more data than they did, including a lot of  
high-frequency information on the behaviour of financial markets.  This allows us to see the reaction of asset 
prices to QE announcements over short periods of time, cutting down on extraneous influences.  We also 
have more advanced statistical techniques, helping to refine the estimates of the effects on economic 
activity. 
 I won’t go into all this work in any great detail.  (For that you can read a very good and comprehensive 
survey by Andy Haldane and other Bank economists,6 and the references therein.)  Let me just try and 
summarise what it says:  
   
Charts 1a-d: Things might have been worse  
                                                                                                                                                                                
issue I found that they were in complete agreement with me.  They spoke very frankly about the shift of power within the System.  They 
earnestly wanted to pursue a policy of this kind, but could not do so without persuading the Banks of the “interior” and they had so far 
been unable to persuade them.“ (Harrod (1964)).   
6 Haldane et al (2016).   
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
4 
 
4 
   
Chart 1.a:  Corporate bond yields 
 
Chart 1.b:  Deposits 
Chart 1.c:  Industrial production 
  
Chart 1.d:  Unemployment 
 
Sources:  Bank of England;  ICE BoAML;  National Bureau of Economic Research and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System, retrieved from FRED, Federal Reserve Bank of St Louis;  ONS;  and Bank calculations.   
Stalks indicate March 2009.  For Chart 1b, US data on deposits are seasonally adjusted while UK data are not.   
 
 
First, and all else equal, asset purchases do seem to have had a significant impact on economic activity.  
    Some studies get at that effect using existing estimates of the sensitivity of GDP to bond yields and 
combining those with the impact of QE announcements on those yields.  Others estimate the impact on bond 
markets and activity jointly.   
 There is some suggestion in Haldane et al (2016) that the early phases of asset purchases had more 
powerful effects, and it’s clear that the biggest daily moves in bond yields occurred after the very first QE 
announcements in early 2009 (Chart 27).  But on average, and whichever method one uses, there does 
                                                      
7 The impact of subsequent rounds was bound to be smaller on the day because markets had come to expect them in advance.  Even 
allowing for that however – Chart 2 plots moves in gilt yields against the surprise in asset purchases, derived from survey measures at 
the time – the early-2009 moves still look a bit larger than the others.  Note that the impact of the asset purchases in August 2016 
(“QE4”) is drawn as a spread rather than a dot.  That’s because the MPC purchased corporate as well as government debt.  If you view 
the two as reasonably close substitutes, you should count the combined purchases as the size of the decision, not just those of gilts 
(£70bn versus £60bn).  The same issue arises later when considering the impact of QE in the United States.   
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
5 
 
5 
  seem to have been a significant effect on demand.  The central estimate in Weale and Wieladek (2016), for 
example, is that purchases worth 1% of GDP boost UK GDP by around 0.25%.    
 Second, if the effect on long-term bond yields is clear, the impact on share prices is harder to detect.  On 
some days after QE announcements equity prices went up – the largest rise happened to be after the 
extension of asset purchases in October 2011, when gilt yields actually went up – but on others they fell.  
That doesn’t prove there was no impact.  By their nature, prices of risky assets are more volatile.  Such was 
the flow of negative news about the economy and corporate profits in 2009, even from day to day, that equity 
markets often weakened even as bond markets strengthened.   
 Chart 2:  QE1 had the largest impact on yields 
 
Chart 3:  The impact on share prices is harder to 
detect 
Sources:  Bloomberg Finance L.P., Tradeweb, Reuters Poll, and 
Bank calculations.  The reaction is for 5-25 year gilts.  The chart is 
based on figure 10 in Haldane et al (2016).   
 
 Sources:  Thomson Reuters Datastream, Reuters Poll, and Bank 
calculations.  The share price reaction is for UK-focused equities.   
 But it should be borne in mind when reading – as one often does – that QE has done little except boosted 
prices of assets like shares and houses, or even led to a “boom” or “bubble” in those markets.  It’s also worth 
looking at Charts 4 and 5.  Chart 4 plots average annual growth of UK house prices over rolling 10-year 
periods.  The latest figure is 2%.  That’s less than household income growth over the past decade.  It’s also 
close to lowest rate of growth over any ten-year period since the period following the Second World War. The 
peak rate of 18% a year was during the 1970s.   
 The general level of inflation was also very high at that time:  every price was going up rapidly.  It’s therefore 
more informative to look at asset prices in real terms (i.e. relative to consumer prices).  The level of real 
house prices is plotted in blue in Chart 5.  As you can see, they went up extremely rapidly between 1996 and 
2004.  But the latest figure is barely any higher than it was in the middle of the last decade.  As for shares, 
real equity prices of UK-facing companies (in red) are still 30% lower than immediately before the financial 
crisis (and almost as far below the earlier peak in the late 1990s).   
   
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
6 
 
6 
  Chart 4:  House prices haven’t risen much over 
the past 10 years 
Chart 5:  Real equity prices well below pre-crisis 
levels 
Sources:  Nationwide and Bank calculations.   
 Sources: Nationwide, ONS, Thomson Reuters Datastream, and 
Bank calculations.   
 Chart 6:  Real equity prices and de-trended GDP 
  As I say, we can’t conclude from all this that QE 
had no impact at all on these prices, even at the 
margin.  Given its effects on longer-term interest 
rates, and on economic activity, it probably did.  
But their apparent lack of response does at least 
demonstrate that the policy had quite a bit to fight 
against.  To the extent there was such an effect, it 
would be more accurate to say QE helped to 
prevent these prices from falling further, rather 
than that it fuelled any sort of “boom”.   
  Sources:  ONS, Thomson Reuters Datastream, and Bank 
calculations.  Output de-trended using a HP filter.    
 
You can tell the same story about QE and the 
wider economy.  All else equal, the policy 
supported demand, activity and employment.  But that support was being provided in the face of significant 
contractionary forces, arising from both the first phase of the financial crisis and then its unwelcome 
offspring, the euro area crisis of 2010-12.  You can see from Chart 6 that it wasn’t until confidence in the 
single currency was restored in mid-20128, and a more sustained economic recovery began in the UK (the 
green line is de-trended GDP9), that these asset prices also recovered.10   
                                                      
8 I’ve argued before that one of the critical precursors to that recovery was Mario Draghi’s pledge in the summer of 2012, supported 
soon after by political leaders in the euro area, to “do whatever it takes” to preserve the integrity of the single currency.  In conjunction 
with our own Funding for Lending Scheme, this led to a sharp fall in funding costs, particularly for banks, and soon after a resumption in 
the supply of credit to the domestic economy (Broadbent (2014)).   
9 The green line is purely a statistical construct (HP-filtered GDP) and, because potential output growth is also stochastic, it won’t 
necessarily be the same as the “output gap”.  In particular, the decline in the past few years is likely to reflect slower growth of supply 
rather than a rise in the degree of spare capacity.   
10 A related criticism of QE is that, because it pushed up prices of assets, it also increased inequality.  But real asset prices haven’t gone 
up over the past decade, as we’ve seen, nor has inequality, either of wealth or of income.  Furthermore, even though QE probably 
raised asset prices at the margin (all else equal), the effect on inequality was offset by the support to real activity and employment.  
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
7 
 
7 
  Why the impact of QE might be changeable 
 Estimates of how QE has affected the economy often assume the effect is invariant:  so many pounds of QE 
means such-and-such an impact on GDP, no matter what else is going on.  Yet our experience so far 
suggests the effect may not be fixed.  In particular, it seems to have been larger when QE was first launched 
than in subsequent rounds.  If that can only be a tentative conclusion from the UK experience what’s 
happened more recently in the US is surely more striking.   
 As you know, the Fed has now started 
to reduce its asset holdings:  it has 
embarked on what you might call “QT” 
(T for tightening).   
 Given the sizeable impact of QE1, 
including in the US, you might have 
expected this to result in a material rise 
in bond yields, especially at a time 
when the US government is also 
starting to sell more debt.  The first 
column in Chart 7 gives you some idea 
of the predicted effect on this basis.  It 
takes the median projection for the 
Chart 7:  US QT has done little to US bond yields 
Sources:  Bloomberg Finance L.P, BEA, Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
(2017), academic studies and Bank calculations.  See footnotes 11 and 12 for 
further details.   
 decline in the size of its balance sheet over the next three years (as calculated by the New York Fed).  It then 
multiplies that by the estimated response of Treasury yields, per dollar of purchases, in the first phase of 
QE.11 
In the event, things have turned out rather differently.  Despite the various QT announcements in the first 
nine months of last year (and despite rising short rates and easier fiscal policy) yields actually fell over that 
period (the right-hand bar).  That, of course, might be due to any number of other influences.  But even if you 
focus on the particular points at which the policy was communicated12 (the middle bar) there was essentially 
no reaction in the government bond market.   
                                                                                                                                                                                
That’s because cyclical rises in unemployment, which would have been much larger in the absence of QE, are larger at the lower end of 
the wage distribution.  Taking both into account, the central estimates in a recent study by Bank economists are that QE itself actually 
had essentially zero (actually marginally negative) net impacts on the inequality of wealth and income (Bunn, Pugh and Yeates (2018)).  
I include some exhibits illustrating these points at the back of this talk.  See also Broadbent (2016) and Carney (2016).  Economists at 
the ECB and Princeton University recently reached a similar conclusion (Ampudia et al (2018)).   
11 The balance sheet projections are from the New York Fed (see Federal Reserve Bank of New York (2017)).  The estimated QE 
multipliers are an average based on the following studies:  Gagnon et al (2011), Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2011), D’Amico 
and King (2013), D’Amico et al (2012), Christensen and Rudebusch (2012), Bauer and Rudebusch (2014), Neely (2015) and Chadha, 
Turner and Zampolli (2013).  In the chart there’s a wide range for the estimated impact.  That’s because the Fed bought (government 
guaranteed) mortgage securities as well as government bonds and the per-$ impact depends on whether or not you count both.  If you 
view those asset classes as perfect substitutes, the quantum of QE1 would be larger and the per-$ estimated impact on bond yields 
would be smaller.  If you thought Treasury yields had been affected only by purchases of those specific securities the estimated per-$ 
impact would be larger, as would the predicted effect of QT.  We know the two aren’t perfect substitutes because they have different 
yields, but they’re probably close substitutes.  The true estimate must lie somewhere in the middle of the range (and therefore within the 
lighter-shaded part of the bar).   
12 The impact was estimated using 30-minute decompositions around FOMC balance sheet communications.   
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
8 
 
8 
   Why might this be?  
 One thing that might have amplified QE’s impact when it was first used was its sheer novelty value.  Once 
markets discover the policy is feasible, perhaps the premium required for holding longer-term bonds is 
permanently lowered, if only to a small extent.13   
 But there are potentially more important reasons why the later rounds of QE – and in particular the early 
stages of QT – have had smaller effects.  These are connected with the various ways in which QE actually 
works.  To understand why, it’s worth stepping back and reminding ourselves what the mechanics of the 
policy actually are.   
 QE is sometimes described as “printing money”.  That can be a helpful piece of shorthand.  It can also be a 
misleading one.  It risks giving the impression that the central bank simply hands out wads of cash, getting 
nothing in return.14  I’ve often heard, in particular, that QE involves “giving” money to the banks. 
 What actually happens is this (there’s a stylised depiction at the back of this speech):  the central bank buys 
government bonds, mainly from non-banks, on the open market.  Imagine we pay for them with a cheque.  
The seller of the gilt lodges the cheque at its own commercial bank, increasing the size of its deposit 
holdings;  that commercial bank, in its turn, sends the cheque back to us, increasing its deposits at the 
central bank (so-called “reserves”).  And there’s no direct effect on anyone’s net financial position.  The seller 
of the gilt ends up with more money in its bank account but no change in its total assets.  The two banks, of 
the commercial and central variety, end up with larger balance sheets but the rises in assets and liabilities 
are of equal size.   
 So perhaps a more accurate description of the process is that it replaces one liability of the consolidated 
public sector (longer-term government bonds) with another (deposits at the central bank).  The effect is to 
depress the average maturity of those consolidated liabilities.  And you might wonder, especially since both 
bonds and reserves pay interest, why this should do anything at all.  Indeed, there’s a famous neutrality 
result in finance, originally applied to corporate balance sheets, that says exactly this.  Under certain 
conditions, when financial markets are functioning smoothly, pure financial transactions of this sort do 
nothing.  At least in this idealised theoretical setting, it makes no difference to its overall cost of capital if a 
firm issues interest-bearing debt and buys back its own shares.  The maturity profile of government debt 
wouldn’t matter for bond yields.  And, viewing central bank money simply as the shortest-maturity liability that 
the public sector can issue, nor would those yields respond to open-market operations by the central bank 
                                                      
13 Roughly speaking, the current price of an asset should correspond to what markets expect it to be in the future (appropriately 
discounted).  That expectation of future prices will take into account all possible states of the world, including those in which the term 
and liquidity premia suddenly go up.  If those are also circumstances in which the central bank might choose to buy the assets, then the 
realisation this is possible could permanently raise their value, however unlikely those circumstances.  They might now include a QE 
“option value”, if only a small one.   
14 The phrase “printing money” is closer to Friedman’s “helicopter drop”, a thought experiment designed to illustrate the implications of a 
pure increase in the supply of money.   
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
9 
 
9 
  (QE).15  This is what Ben Bernanke was getting at when he quipped that QE is something that “works in 
practice but doesn’t work in theory”.   
 So why does it work in practice – why has it had noticeable effects on bond yields (albeit to varying 
degrees)?  I’m not to go into any great detail here.  There’s masses of stuff you can read – if you wish to – 
about the various mechanisms involved.16  Economists have generally focussed on three.  The “bank 
lending” channel emphasises the importance of banks’ liquid assets, and the potential constraints that a lack 
of reserves can impose on their behaviour, including their appetite to lend.  The “portfolio balance” channel, 
generally reckoned to be more important after the 2008-09 financial crisis,17 stresses the direct price effects 
on the assets purchased by the central bank, and sets out what’s necessary for these to exist.  (What’s 
usually required, in one form or another, is that holders of long-dated assets have “preferred habitats”, and 
can be persuaded to move out of them – to sell those assets – only by a rise in prices.)  The third – the 
potential “signalling” effect – says what matters is what QE says about the central bank’s intentions regarding 
future policy, and in particular the likely path of official interest rates.   
 The point I want to make here is that all three can change.  One might even say this is intrinsic to the effects 
involved.   
 The first two – the “bank lending” and “portfolio balance” channels – rely, in their different ways, on markets 
being sufficiently imperfect that the neutrality result no longer applies.  But markets are more impaired at 
some times than others.  Before the crisis, many financial assets were considered liquid.  They could be 
easily traded, prices were readily quoted and investors would happily switch between them, even in 
response to relatively small changes in their relative price.  The demand for central bank money was lower – 
why would you need it if liquidity was easily available elsewhere? – and “preferred habitats” weaker.  In that 
environment, shifts in the central bank’s balance sheet may not have had much effect.  It was when things 
started to seize up, and markets became more dysfunctional, that these transactions really mattered.  With 
fewer assets considered liquid, the demand for central bank money went up.  With preferred habitats more 
entrenched, the effect of asset purchases on prices were larger.  You might therefore have expected QE, at 
least through these channels, to have become more important.  Conversely, you might also expect their 
                                                      
15 The original result is Modigliani and Miller (1958).  The result is generalised in Stiglitz (1969).  Wallace (1981) applies it to open 
market operations by the central bank.   
16 See, for example, Benford et al (2009), Joyce, Tong and Woods (2011), Haldane et al (2016), Bhattarai and Neely (2016), and 
Bernanke (2017).   
17 If banks are constrained by a lack of liquid assets, then raising their deposits at the central bank can relax these constraints and 
encourage an expansion of their balance sheets, including greater lending.  Though Friedman and Schwartz were more concerned 
about the behaviour of deposits, rather than lending, this is more or less the mechanism emphasised in A Monetary History and it does 
seem likely that these constraints were very real at the time of the Great Depression.  With no insurance of their deposit liabilities, and a 
much greater potential for “runs”, banks felt obliged to hold much higher levels of reserves.  In monetarist language, the demand for 
money – in particular the demand for the most secure and liquid assets of all, physical cash and central bank deposits – rose very 
significantly.  It was the failure to meet this demand, Friedman and Schwartz argued, that so amplified the downturn.  Circumstances in 
the recent financial crisis were rather different and it’s unlikely the “bank lending channel” was ever going to be as important as in the 
1930s.  Statutory reserve requirements are now lower or non-existent and deposits are insured.  In 2008-09 banks were therefore 
constrained not so much by a lack of “liquidity” as by a lack of equity:  the fear was that, after significant losses, too many of them had 
insufficient assets, whatever their composition, to cover their interest-bearing liabilities.  That’s not to say the extra reserves supplied by 
QE (and by direct lending to the banking system) were unimportant.  No central bank would ever have taken the risk of failing to supply 
them, by whatever means.  But I don’t think this is how they expected the policy to work, nor does the evidence ex post show it to have 
been that important (Butt et al (2014)).   
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
10 
 
10 
  impact to diminish once more normal market conditions are restored.  While he was on the MPC my former 
colleague David Miles gave a very clear and more detailed explanation of this point (Miles (2014)).18   
 As for the third, it surely makes sense that the strength of the “signalling effect” – what markets infer from QE 
decisions about future interest rates, and the central bank’s intentions regarding its overall policy stance – 
depends on what it communicates alongside its decision.   
 In the early phases of QE the policy was seen as an aggressive attempt to ease monetary conditions for an 
extended period.  Whatever else it might have done to depress the “term premium” – the extra yield required 
by long-maturity bondholders, even above their expectations of future short-term interest rates – it also 
lowered those rate expectations.  QE and forward interest rates were effectively used in a complementary 
fashion, pushing in the same direction.   
 Something similar occurred, albeit in the opposite direction, when the Fed suggested in 2013 that it might 
reduce the pace of its asset purchases (the so-called “taper tantrum”).  This wasn’t yet QT – nor, in the 
Congressional testimony that triggered the reaction, did Fed Chair Ben Bernanke refer directly to future 
interest rates (“If we see continued improvement [in the economy] and we have confidence that that is going 
to be sustained then we could, in the next few meetings, take a step down in our pace of [asset] 
purchases”).19  But it was taken as a sign of a more hawkish stance overall:  because the Fed was getting 
more optimistic about the economy, QE would be tapered and, the markets judged, official interest rates 
would also begin to rise earlier than previously expected.  As a result, and although the move was reversed 
within a few months, US bond yields also rose significantly.   
 The communication around the Fed’s “QT” policy was rather different.  When in the early part of last year it 
first signalled its intention to start shrinking the balance sheet later in 2017, the FOMC went out of its way to 
say that, to the extent the policy tightened monetary conditions, official interest rates would be that much 
lower than they otherwise would have been.  This is how Janet Yellen put it in a speech in January 2017:  
“The downward pressure on longer-term interest rates that the Fed’s asset holdings exert is expected to 
diminish over time -- a development that amounts to a “passive” removal of monetary policy accommodation.  
Other things being equal, this argues for a more gradual approach to raising short-term rates”.   
 In other words, rate rises and any tightening effect of shrinking the balance sheet should be seen as 
substitutes.  More of the latter would mean less of the former, and the overall stance of policy – the balance 
sheet and official interest rates taken together – would be whatever it needed to be to meet the Fed’s remit, 
given the economic conditions prevailing at the time.  Compared with the “taper tantrum” episode this sent a 
                                                      
18 Vlieghe (2016b) provides evidence that, at least under more normal market conditions, the “signalling channel” is the most important 
mechanism.   
19 The point was emphasised again in the minutes of the FOMC’s April 30 – May 1 meeting released later that day:  “a number of 
[FOMC] participants expressed willingness to adjust the flow of purchases downward as early as the June meeting”.   
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
11 
 
11 
  different message about the overall stance of policy and I suspect that played a part in dampening the 
impact of QT announcements on longer-term bond yields. 
 The MPC’s approach to unwinding QE  
 In time the QE will also start to be unwound in the UK. The MPC set out its basic framework for this process 
some time ago, in the November 2015 Inflation Report.  We said then that we would begin to start reducing 
the stock of QE only once the official Bank Rate had risen some way.  This was partly because conventional 
policy is more flexible, better suited to responding to shorter-term economic fluctuations.  It was also a 
response to the relatively higher degree of uncertainty about the effect of changes in the stock of QE.20   
 I’ve discussed this at some length today.  The smaller sample means estimates of the impact of 
unconventional policy are bound to be less precise.  If that’s the case when the impact is unchangeable it 
can only be truer still if it varies according to economic conditions.  But even in 2015, the MPC felt sufficiently 
confident in its assessment of what changes in interest rates do – more so, in particular, than in the 
estimated impact of changes in QE – that it said would prefer to use Bank Rate as the “marginal” or “primary” 
instrument of policy.  That means getting Bank Rate to a level from which it could be cut (“materially”) as well 
as raised.  The US Fed subsequently adopted a similar approach, saying that rises in official interest rates 
should be “well under way” before the unwind process began.   
 At the time of that initial guidance our version of “well underway” was judged to mean a Bank Rate of “around 
2%”.  Since then we have also reduced our estimate of the effective lower bound for interest rates (thanks in 
part to the effectiveness of the Term Funding Scheme, part of the package of measures put in place in 
August 2016, we now think we can safely cut Bank Rate close to zero, if necessary).  So when we updated 
the guidance this summer, in the June Monetary Policy Summary, we lowered the estimated threshold to 
“around 1.5%”.  We don’t know exactly when that will be.  But the framework is designed to ensure that, 
should inflationary pressures weaken after that date, the first response would be to cut interest rates. 
 In principle, those disinflationary influences might include the process of QE unwind itself.  To that extent, 
Bank Rate would be lower than it otherwise would have been.  That’s why we took care to add another 
sentence to last month’s MPS:  “Decisions on Bank Rate will take into account any impact of changes in the 
stock of purchased assets on overall monetary conditions, in order to achieve the inflation target”. 
 In some ways this is no more than the phrase “primary instrument of policy” implies.  As long as they’re free 
to do so, interest rates will always move around to offset things that affect inflation – in both directions, and 
                                                      
20 There’s an important distinction here between the effects of existing stock, such as they are, and those of future changes in the APF.  
If the there’s material uncertainty about the impact of the existing stock, even many years after it was purchased, there’s an argument 
for beginning the unwind that much earlier (i.e. for having a lower interest-rate threshold).  If, on the other hand, the more significant 
uncertainty involves the potential impact of future changes, that argues for a higher threshold.  My own sense is that, because most of 
the APF was accumulated several years ago, the second is more likely.  We have a good sense of what those earlier purchases did to 
financial asset prices, and it’s likely that any subsequent impact on demand has also passed its peak.   
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
12 
 
12 
  wherever those influences come from.  But we were also aware of the US experience and the Fed’s careful 
communication around QT.      
 Summary  
 QE has often been described as a “new-fangled” policy, something that involves “printing money” and has 
served only to engineer large rises in the prices of financial and other assets, benefiting only the better off.   
 Broadly speaking I don’t think any of these things is true.  It’s not new;  it’s not exactly printing money;  equity 
and house prices are in real terms still comfortably below their pre-crisis levels;  inequality hasn’t risen – nor, 
according to the most detailed analysis available, did easier monetary policy have any net impact on it.21  
 To be sure, asset prices would probably have fallen further had QE and other measures not been put in 
place in 2009.  The same goes for the economy itself.  As far as we can tell, asset purchases provided 
significant support to aggregate demand, even if it wasn’t enough to offset fully the extended contractionary 
effects of the crisis.  Perhaps Friedman and Schwartz over-emphasised the failures of the US Fed as a 
cause of the Great Depression.  But I don’t think anyone can reasonably argue it was worth risking those 
same mistakes a second time.   
 Later rounds of QE may have been less effective than the first.  In the US, where the Fed has begun to 
shrink its balance sheet, its “QT” announcements appear to have had very little impact.  At least in part, 
that’s likely to be by design.  The pace of unwind is very gradual.  And the FOMC emphasised that, to the 
extent a shrinking balance sheet tightened monetary conditions the official interest rate would be 
commensurately lower (than it would otherwise have been).  The overall stance of policy would be set to 
ensure the central bank meets its objectives.  
 The same is true here.  Our task remains to hit the inflation target and we will always seek to ensure that the 
combined effects of the APF and of more conventional changes in Bank Rate are set to that end.   
 Thank you. 
                                                       
21 I haven’t spent any time on this question today only because quite a bit has been said already.  See footnote 10, the references 
therein, and the charts at the back of the speech.   
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
13 
 
13 
  References 
 Ampudia, M., Georgarakos, D., Slacalek, J., Tristiani, O., Vermeulen, P., Violante, G. L.  2018.  
“Monetary policy and household inequality”.  European Central Bank Working Paper No. 2170.   
 Bauer, M. D. and Rudebusch, G. D.  2014.  “The signalling channel for Federal Reserve bond purchases”.  
International Journal of Central Banking, Vol. 10, pp. 233-289.   
 Benford, J., Berry, S., Nikolov, K., Young, C. and Robson, M.  2009.  “Quantitative easing”.  Bank of 
England Quarterly Bulletin, Q2.   
 Bernanke, B. S.  2002.  “Remarks by Governor Ben S.  Bernanke at the conference to honor Milton 
Friedman”.  Available at https://www.federalreserve.gov/BOARDDOCS/SPEECHES/2002/20021108/.   
 Bernanke, B. S.  2017.  “Monetary policy in a new era”.  Presented at the conference on Rethinking 
Macroeconomic Policy at the Peterson Institute, available at https://www.brookings.edu/research/monetary-
policy-in-a-new-era/.   
 Bhattarai, S. and Neely, C.  2016.  “A survey of the empirical literature on U.S.  unconventional monetary 
policy”.  Federal Reserve Bank of St.  Louis, Research Division, Working Paper 2016-021A.   
 Broadbent, B.  2014.  “The UK economy and the world economy”.  Speech given at the Institute of 
Economic Affairs State of the Economy Conference, available at 
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/speech/2014/the-uk-economy-and-the-world-economy.   
 Broadbent, B.  2016.  “The distributional implications of low structural interest rates and some remarks 
about monetary policy trade-offs”.  Speech given at the Society of Business Economists Annual Conference, 
available at https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/speech/2016/the-distributional-implications-of-low-structural-
interest-rates-and-some-remarks-about-monetary.   
 Bunn, P., Pugh, A. and Yeates, C.  2018.  “The distributional impact of monetary policy easing in the UK 
between 2008 and 2014”.  Bank of England Staff Working Paper No.  720, available at 
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/working-paper/2018/the-distributional-impact-of-
monetary-policy-easing-in-the-uk-between-2008-and-2014.pdf.   
 Butt, N., Churm, R., McMahon M., Morotz, A. and Schanz, J.  2014.  “QE and the bank lending channel in 
the United Kingdom”.  Bank of England Staff Working Paper No. 511.  Available at 
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/working-paper/2014/qe-and-the-bank-lending-channel-in-the-uk.   
   
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
14 
 
14 
  Carney, M.  2016.  “The spectre of monetarism”.  Speech given at Roscoe Lecture, Liverpool John Moores 
University, available at https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/speech/2016/the-spectre-of-monetarism.   
 Chadha, J. S., Turner, P. and Zampolli, F.  2013.  “The ties that bind: Monetary policy and government 
debt management”.  Oxford Review of Economic Policy, Vol. 29, pp. 548–81. 
 Christensen, J. H. E. and Rudebusch, G. D. 2012.  “The response of interest rates to US and UK 
quantitative easing”.  The Economic Journal, Vol. 122, pp. F385-F414.   
 D’Amico, S., English, W., López‐Salido, D., and Nelson, E.  2012.  “The Federal Reserve’s large-scale 
asset purchase programmes: Rationale and effects”.  The Economic Journal, Vol. 122, pp. F415-F446.  .   
 D’Amico, S.  and King, T. B. 2013.  “Flow and stock effects of large-scale treasury purchases: Evidence on 
the importance of local supply”.  Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 108, pp. 425-448.   
 Federal Reserve Bank of New York.  2017.  “Projections for the SOMA portfolio and net income:  An 
update to projections presented in the “Report on domestic open market operations during 2016””.  Available 
at 
https://www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/media/markets/omo/SOMAPortfolioandIncomeProjections_July201
7Update.pdf.   
 Friedman, M. and Schwartz, A.  1963.  “A monetary history of the United States, 1867-1960”.  Princeton 
University Press.   
 Gagnon, J., Rasking, M., Remanche, J., and Sack, B.  2011.  “The financial market effects of the Federal 
Reserve’s large-scale asset purchases”.  International Journal of Central Banking, Vol. 7, pp. 3-43.   
 Haldane, A.  G., Roberts-Sklar, M., Wieladek, T.  and Young, C.  2016.  “QE: The story so far”.  Bank of 
England Staff Working Paper No. 624, available at https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/working-paper/2016/qe-
the-story-so-far.   
 Harrod, R. F.  1964.  “Review of A Monetary History of the United States 1867-1960 by Milton Friedman, 
Anna Jacobsen Schwartz”.  University of Chicago Law Review, Vol. 32, pp. 188-196.   
 Hearing before the Joint Economic Committee Congress of the United States.  2013.  First session, 22 
May.  U.S. Government Printing Office.  Available at https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/CHRG-
113shrg81472/pdf/CHRG-113shrg81472.pdf.   
 Ioannidis, J. P. A.  2013.  “Implausible results in human nutrition research”.  BMJ 347.   
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
15 
 
15 
  Joyce, M., Tong, M. and Woods, R.  2011.  “The United Kingdom’s quantitative easing policy:  design, 
operation and impact”.  Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Q3.   
 Krishnamurthy, A. and Vissing-Jorgensen, A.  2011.  “The effects of quantitative easing on interest rates:  
Channels and implications for policy”.  NBER working paper No.17555, National Bureau of Economic 
Research, Inc.   
 Miles, D.  2014.  “The transition to a new normal for monetary policy”.  Speech given at Mile End Group, 
Queen Mary College, available at https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/speech/2014/the-transition-to-a-new-
normal-for-monetary-policy.   
 Modigliani, F. and Miller, M. H.  1958.  “The cost of capital, corporation finance and theory of investment”.  
The American Economic Review, Vol. 48, pp. 261-297.   
 Neely, C. J.  2015.  “Unconventional monetary policy had large international effects”.  Journal of Banking 
and Finance, Vol. 52, pp. 101-111.   
 Romer, C. D.  and Romer, D. H.  1989.  “Does monetary policy matter?  A new test in the spirit of Friedman 
and Schwartz”.  NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1989, Vol. 4.   
 Stiglitz, J. 1969.  “A re-examination of the Modigliani-Miller Theorem”.  The American Economic Review, 
Vol. 59, pp. 784-93.   
 Vlieghe, G.  2016a.  “Umbrellas don’t cause rain”.  Speech given at Sheffield University, available at 
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/speech/2016/umbrellas-dont-cause-rain.   
 Vlieghe, G.  2016b.  “Monetary policy expectations and long term interest rates”.  Speech given at the 
London Business School, available at https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/speech/2016/monetary-policy-
expectations-and-long-term-interest-rates.   
 Wallace, N.  1981.  “A Modigiliani-Miller Theorem for open-market operations”.  The American Economic 
Review, Vol. 71, pp. 267-274.   
 Weale, M. and Wieladek, T.  2016.  “What are the macroeconomic effects of asset purchases?”  Journal of 
Monetary Economics, Vol. 79, pp. 81-93. 
 Yellen, J.  2017.  “The economic outlook and the conduct of monetary policy”.  Speech given at the Stanford 
Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford University, available at 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/yellen20170119a.htm.   
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
  16 
 
16 
 Annex 1:  Stylised depiction of the effect of QE on balance sheets 
Before QE 
    After QE 
   Assets 
   Liabilities 
   Assets 
   Liabilities 
             Gilts 
   Reserves 
Safe assets 
   Reserves 
   Other safe 
          Banknotes 
      Reserves 
   Deposits 
Loans 
        Equity 
        assets 
          Banknotes 
       Reserves 
   Deposits 
      Loans 
          Equity 
    Gilts 
   Liabilities 
   Deposits 
   Liabilities 
Deposits 
                            Central bank 
     Commercial bank 
    Gilt holder 
         
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
17 
 
17 
  Annex 2:  Inequality 
Chart A1:  Income inequality 
Chart A2:  Wealth inequality 
  
Sources:  British Household Panel Survey (BHPS), Wealth and 
Assets Survey (WAS), and calculations in Bunn, Pugh and Yeates 
(2018), updated to include 2014-16.   
 
   
Sources:  Family Resources Survey (FRS) and IFS.   
The chart updates Chart 5 in Bunn, Pugh and Yeates (2018) to 
include the 2016-17 financial year.  Income is before housing 
costs, net of direct taxes and inclusive of state benefits and tax 
credits.  Data are for calendar years up to and including 1992 and 
for financial years from 1993-94 onwards.    
 
 
 
Table A1:  The impact of monetary policy 
changes since 2007 on inequality 
  2012-14 data 
Counterfactual: no change 
in policy 
Monetary policy impact 
Income 
Gini 
0.360 
0.362 
Net 
wealth 
Gini 
0.612 
0.630 
-0.001 
-0.017 
Source:  Bunn, Pugh and Yeates (2018).   
     
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
18 
 
18 
 