    
 
The Future of Work 
 
Speech given by 
Mark Carney,  
Governor of the Bank of England 
   2018 Whitaker Lecture, Central Bank of Ireland 
14 September 2018 
  I am grateful to Clare Macallan and Jennifer Nemeth for their assistance in preparing these remarks.  
I would also like to thank Will Abel, Andy Haldane, Carsten Jung, Rana Sajedi and Greg Thwaites for 
the background research and analysis they conducted. 
 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
1 
    
 
It is a pleasure to deliver this lecture in honour of TK Whitaker.   
Whitaker’s career in public policy spanned a period of profound structural change in the Irish economy.  In 
1956, when he became Secretary of the Department for Finance, the Irish economy was isolated and 
uncompetitive.  Growth in output per capita was lagging the rest of Europe and the steady tide of emigration 
was gradually shrinking the population.  By the time Whitaker’s career drew to a close, the Celtic Tiger was 
roaring: Ireland had caught up with even the most prosperous nations in the EU, GDP growth was averaging 
over 5%, and the population had increased by two-thirds as emigration switched to immigration. 
The catalyst for this transformation was opening up to foreign trade and investment.  Beginning with the 1958 
report Economic Development, Whitaker strongly advocated replacing the old strategy of self-sufficiency with 
a new one of export-led growth, which led in time to Ireland joining the EU.  For many, this is the greatest 
long-term consequence of his work.   
But as students of economic history know (and policymakers learn at their cost), without the right institutions, 
structural changes – whether large changes to trading relationships or technological revolutions – can be 
painful.   
Whitaker recognised that “Readiness to adapt to changing conditions is a sine qua non for economic 
success”1 and that adaptability required a series of changes to Ireland’s institutions.  Major reforms to 
education were essential to match the skills of the Irish workforce to the potential jobs that increased inward 
investment could bring.  A 1964 report on Manpower Policy, which Whitaker oversaw as chair, advocated 
greater investment in the STEM subjects, readying a generation for the IT revolution.2  More broadly, Ireland 
repeatedly increased standards of education, beginning with the introduction of universal secondary 
schooling in 1967, resulting in levels of educational attainment today that exceed the OECD average.3   
Whitaker also advocated reforms of labour market institutions – to tackle restrictive work practices and 
ensure pay was more closely linked to productivity.4   
Emphasis was also placed on a competitive environment for business to help attract foreign capital, in part 
through the overhaul of the corporate tax regime.  And improvements were made to infrastructure, such as 
power supplies and transport services. 
                                                                 
1 Taken from “Economic Development”, a report on the Irish Economy overseen by Whitaker and published in 1958. 
2 Whitaker played a central role in improving education in the public sector.  His concern “that the variety and difficulty of administrative 
problems have so increased, and the tools and techniques for solving them have so developed, as to render administration more than 
ever a science” resulted in the creation of the Institute of Public Administration in 1957.  To this day, the Institute continues to provide 
education, training and research to the public sector, enabling better policy making through a better understanding of the Irish economy.  
In addition, Whitaker was instrumental in setting up the Economic and Social Research Institute – the first institution to provide 
independent research and analysis of the Irish economy. 
3 For example, nine Regional Technical Colleges were established during the 1970s to provide vocational tertiary level training.  The 
Industrial Development Authority ensured that government funding of higher education adapted to meet businesses’ increasing 
demands for skilled labour in areas such as engineering and computer sciences, helping to ensure people could develop the skills 
necessary to work in the expanding sectors. 
4 Whitaker, TK (1955/1956) 'Capital formation, saving and economic progress', Dublin: Journal of the Statistical and Social Inquiry 
Society of Ireland, Vol. XVIX, pp. 184-209. 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
2 
 
2 
   
 
The Irish experience over the past half century reinforces the lessons learnt in the UK from the three 
profound technological revolutions – institutions are essential to smooth the major transitions and to ensure 
their promise is realised by as many as possible. 
Getting institutions right is critical not just for core economic outcomes but for broader well-being. 
The fundamental challenge is that alongside the great benefits they ultimately bring, every technological 
revolution mercilessly destroys jobs and livelihoods – and therefore identities – well before the new ones 
emerge.  
This was true of the eclipse of agriculture and cottage industry by the industrial revolution, the development 
of the production line, the displacement of manufacturing by the service economy.5   
We are on the cusp of a Fourth Industrial Revolution, which has the potential to transform fundamentally the 
nature of both work and commerce through advances in AI, automation and interconnectedness.    
Our economies are reorganising into a series of distributed peer-to-peer connections across powerful 
networks – revolutionising how people consume, work and communicate.  The nature of commerce is 
changing.  Sales are increasingly taking place online and over platforms, rather than on the high street.  
Intangible capital is now more important than physical capital.6  We are entering an age when anyone will be 
able to produce anything anywhere through 3-D printing, where anyone can broadcast their performance 
globally via YouTube or sell to China whatever the size of their business via Tmall. 
Today, I want to discuss how we can apply the lessons from the history of the first three industrial revolutions 
to the fourth to secure a future that benefits all.   
Crisis?  What Crisis? 
Some economists wonder what all the fuss is about.  They argue that there has been little evidence, over the 
long term, of technological unemployment.  After all, average employment and unemployment rates today 
are similar to those in the 18th century.   
                                                                 
5 The First Industrial Revolution (1760 – 1840) saw the mechanisation of (mainly the textile) industry with the introduction of steam 
power, moving people from home-based to factory-based production in urban areas.  The Second Industrial Revolution (1860 – 1914) 
was driven by the introduction of electricity to manufacturing, extending mechanised, assembly-line mass production to broader 
industries.  The Third Industrial Revolution (1970 – 2000) was defined by the move from mechanical/analogue to digital, with wide-
spread adoption of electronics from both the home and work environment.  The Fourth Industrial Revolution (2000 – current) anticipates 
the dawn of true Artificial Intelligence in light of advances in robotics, nanotechnology and quantum computing. 
6 In the UK, intangible investment rose above tangible investment in the early 2000s, and stood at 11% as a share of output in 2014 
compared with 10% for tangible investment. Investment in intangibles also exceeded that in tangibles in the US, Sweden and Finland 
[on average over 1999-2003], but not in other European countries including German, Italy and Spain. See Haskel, J and Westlake, W 
(2017), ‘Capitalism Without Capital: The Rise of the Intangible Economy’, Princeton University Press; and Goodridge, P R, Haskel, J 
and Wallis, G (2016), ‘Accounting for the UK Productivity Puzzle: A Decomposition and Predictions’, Economica, Vol. 85, Issue 339. 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
3 
 
3 
   
 
But such big transitions take time.  Workers generally cannot move seamlessly to new jobs in which they can 
be productive.  The benefits of the First Industrial Revolution, which began in the latter half of the 18th 
century, were not felt fully in productivity and wages until the second half of the 19th.7   
Indeed, at the start of the 19th century in the UK, despite a sharp pickup in productivity, wage growth stalled 
and the labour share fell – a period dubbed “Engels’ pause”. 
A Framework for Examining Technical Change and the Labour Market 
To understand such dynamics it helps to have a common conceptual framework.8  The impact of 
technological change on employment and wages can be depicted as the sum of three major effects: 
destruction, productivity and creation. 
The destruction effect is the focus of most alarmist accounts: the replacement of labour by technology, with 
an associated reduction in labour demand, wages and employment.  
Less commonly acknowledged are the positive effects on aggregate demand of new technologies, what can 
be termed the productivity effect.  
This effect is analogous to the classic Say’s law in which supply creates its own demand.  Technology makes 
those in work more productive, in time boosting wages and increasing the returns to those who own capital.  
This greater income boosts aggregate demand and leans against the destruction effect.   
When technological change is disruptive and widespread, the productivity effect is generally insufficient to 
counteract completely the destruction effect, partly because of the time it takes for the full potential of new 
technologies to be realised, and partly because of the phenomenon of greater job polarisation – to which I 
will turn to in a moment. 
As a consequence, over the medium term, technological change tends to reduce labour’s share of income.   
Historically, however, technological progress has not led to permanent declines in the labour share because 
of a third effect – the creation of new tasks for labour.9  When combined with the productivity effect, this 
ultimately has counterbalanced the displacement effects of technology, boosting productivity and wages 
while leaving employment unaffected. 
                                                                   
7 Partly there is a lag in reorganising enough of the economy to the advantage of the new general purpose technology for aggregate 
productivity growth to increase. 
8 The following is based on Acemoglu, D and Restrepo, P (2018), ‘Artificial Intelligence, Automation and Work’, NBER Working Paper 
No. 24196. 
9 This creation effect need not be fully exogenous to the technological change, for example because the new technologies allow new 
jobs to emerge that wouldn’t otherwise be possible – though of course factors like education and skills are important in determining how 
quickly and smoothly these gains come about. 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
4 
 
4 
   
 
Could this time be different? 
The Fourth Industrial Revolution could differ from its three predecessors in terms of scope, scale and speed. 
Scope 
Thus far, each wave of technological change has increased the importance of cognitive tasks relative to non-
cognitive ones.  In other words, machines have largely substituted for human hands not heads.  Workers 
have been able to improve their skills and take on newly created sets of cognitive, higher value tasks – tasks 
beyond the cognitive limits of machines.   
Rapid improvements in computing power, the increased availability of big data and advances in artificial 
intelligence and machine learning mean smarter machines are already replacing a broader range of human 
activities than before, reaching well into the range of “heads”.  New technologies may increasingly provide 
intelligence, sensory perception, and reasoning which previously only labour could provide.  Technological 
optimists10 believe future automation will move beyond substituting for the ‘routine-manual’ human tasks 
technology performed in the late 20th century to almost the entire spectrum of work.11   
It may be left to people to provide “hearts” – that is, tasks that require emotional intelligence, originality or 
social skills such as persuasion or caring for others.  And if new forms of bespoke mass creativity are made 
possible by the new global economy, human “hands” may once again take over (a form of cottage industry 
going full circle).12  One thing that could be different is the effects of demographics.  An ageing population 
will lead to greater demand for care and a straight decrease in labour supply.13 
Scale 
The greater scope of the Fourth Industrial Revolution could mean its scale is larger too.  Unlike in previous 
episodes, the jobs most at risk of automation are likely to lie across the entire spectrum of wages.14 
At one extreme, Frey and Osborne (2017)15 estimate that around half of US employment is at ‘high risk’16 of 
automation, over an unspecified period of time.  
                                                                 
10 For example, Brynjolfsson, E and McAfee, A (2014), ‘The Second Machine Age: Work, Progress, and Prosperity in a Time of Brilliant 
Technologies’.  The most extreme view of this is put forward by Daniel Susskind, who highlights the possibility that in the future 
machines can perform all tasks leading to technological unemployment (Susskind, D (2017), ‘A model of technological unemployment’, 
University of Oxford, Department of Economics Series Working Papers, No. 819). 
11 The question at the heart of this debate is whether we can overcome ‘Polanyi’s Paradox’ - that “we can know more than we can tell” 
(Polanyi 1966).  Our inability to detail these tasks (such as social interactions) in a formulaic manner currently makes them difficult to 
encode and automate. 
12 McKinsey (2017) also suggest demand for creative and social skills will increase. 
13 I am grateful to my colleague Silvana Tenreyro for suggesting this point. 
14 Brynjolfsson, E, Mitchell, T and Rock,D (2018), ‘What Can Machines Learn and What Does It Mean for Occupations and the 
Economy’, AEA Papers and Proceedings, Vol. 108, pp. 43-47. 
15 Frey, C B and Osborne, M (2017), ‘The future of employment: How susceptible are jobs to computerisation?’, Technological 
Forecasting and Social Change, Vol. 114, pp. 254-280. 
16 Defined as roles with over 70% chance of automation. 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
5 
 
5 
   
 
However, this estimate does not take into account the heterogeneity of tasks within jobs, focusing instead on 
just the key tasks within each occupation.  Each job usually has some components which cannot be 
automated, even if many of its central components can be.  
Indeed, evidence increasingly suggests that while large parts of many jobs will be subject to automation, 
relatively few jobs will be completely automated.17  Felten, Raj and Seamans (2017)18 show that recent 
advances in technology can be used to predict future changes in the task structure of occupations, lending 
further support to the argument that technological advancement will likely change the nature of many jobs 
rather than eliminate them completely. 
The more extreme estimates are often based purely on technical feasibility of automation with limited 
consideration of economic feasibility.  For example, it may be possible to automate the pouring of drinks in 
bars, but doing so may not present a cost saving over hiring bar staff to do the job let alone the ancillary 
benefit of being able to tell them your troubles. 
Taking these additional considerations into account reduces the share of jobs at high risk of automation to 
some 10% in the UK and 15% in Ireland.19  That appears comparable with the three previous episodes of 
technological revolution, which saw the share of aggregate employment accounted for by the most exposed 
industries fall by between 10 to 20% over long periods. 
Some argue that the greater scope and scale of tasks (as opposed to jobs) at risk of replacement by 
technology means that new job creation might no longer increase overall employment.  That is, the 
destruction effect may outweigh the combined impact of the productivity and creation effects.   
At the same time, the range of tasks at risk could substantially increase the impact on inequality for several 
reasons.  Most fundamentally, the more new technology substitutes for labour rather than complements it, 
the more the gains would accrue to capital rather than labour.  An unequal distribution of capital means that 
increasing automation will push up inequality by construction.  In the transition, what economists 
euphemistically call frictions can lead to depressed local or national labour markets, boosting inequality.20 
And if education is unable to keep pace with the changing demand for skills, those who already have the 
skills to use new technologies will earn even higher premiums.21  Job polarisation will increase the supply of 
labour competing for lower skilled jobs.22  Greater global interconnectedness will reinforce these dynamics.   
                                                                 
17 For example, McKinsey Global Institute (2017), ‘A Future that Works:  Automation, Employment and Productivity’ suggest that 60% of 
occupations could see over 30% of their tasks replaced by technology, based on O*NET analysis. 
18 Felten, E W, Raj, M and Seamans, R (2018), ‘A Method to Link Advances in Artificial Intelligence to Occupational Abilities, AEA 
Papers and Proceedings, Vol. 108, pp. 54-57. 
19 Nedelkoska, L and Quintini, G (2018), ‘Automation, skills use and training’, OECD Social, Employment and Migration Working Papers 
No. 202.  Similarly, McKinsey argue that across advanced economies 15% of the workforce in total will need to shift occupational 
categories because of digitisation, automation, and AI. 
20 This process has been well documented for the China Shock in the US (Autor, Dorn and Hanson 2015) and the collapse of local 
housing markets (Mian and Sufi 2015). 
21 If those who understand technology less well are less willing to trust it and work with it, this could further increase its polarising effects. 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
6 
 
6 
   
 
Speed 
Could the Fourth Industrial Revolution happen faster?  Certainly, the time taken for new technologies to be 
adopted has shortened dramatically since the dawn of the First Industrial Revolution. 
The Story Thus Far 
Current empirical work suggests on balance that, thus far, increased automation has been positive for 
employment in aggregate even though it has led to substantial compositional changes.  Importantly, while 
technology has reduced middle-skilled employment, its effects on aggregate employment appear to have 
been more than offset by increased product demand and local demand spillovers.  After all, the employment 
share in the UK is near all-time highs.  
There are, however, signs that recent technological advances have increased inequality.  Globally, labour 
has seen its share of income fall over the past twenty years and the IMF (2017) finds that technological 
progress during the 3rd Industrial Revolution has been the biggest contributor to this decline.  The UK and 
Ireland23 are outliers:  in both countries, the labour share has been flat, and income inequality stable – if high 
– since the late 1980s.24 
Moreover, there is strong evidence that advanced economy labour markets have been polarising since the 
1980s – a structural shift that have generally been attributed to technological displacement of mid-skilled jobs 
resulting from the early stages of automation and digitisation of tasks.  Employment growth has been 
strongest at the high and low skilled ends of the jobs spectrum, resulting in a hollowing out of mid-skilled 
employment.  The polarisation of the labour market has also been evident in the returns to skilled labour, 
with earnings growth for those with higher levels of education far outstripping those with less schooling.   
So in summary thus far, if the Fourth Industrial Revolution is similar to past technological revolutions, the 
overall effect will eventually be labour augmenting – boosting productivity and wages, while creating new 
jobs to maintain or even increase overall employment.   
But that is in the long run.  In the interim, if it is similar to previous industrial revolutions, it seems likely there 
will be a period of technological unemployment, dislocation and rising inequality.  
Given that it could happen more rapidly, the challenge of workforce adjustment could be more difficult.  The 
shifts required in employment from jobs involving heads to those with hearts and hands could be far greater 
each year than seen in previous episodes.  Moreover, unlike in the previous industrial revolutions, the more 
rapid pace of adjustment and longer working lives means workers may not have the option of retiring.  This 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
22 Analysis by the IMF indicates that the extent of job polarisation depends far more on the ease of substitution between labour and 
technology than it does on the relative price of technology.  
23 Calculating the labour share using gross national income and removing distortions that stem from how multinational corporations 
account for their global operations by excluding retained earnings of firms that have re-domiciled to Ireland, the depreciation of foreign-
owned intellectual property assets located in Ireland, and the depreciation of aircraft owned by aircraft-leasing companies. 
24 The low level of automation in the UK – which Hal Varian has suggested could be linked to the size of the automobile and electronics 
sectors – may be one reason why the UK labour share has remained resilient.   
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
7 
 
7 
   
 
raises risks of substantial skills mismatch, leading to increased structural unemployment and adverse 
macroeconomic outcomes. 
What could we do to shorten the lags?  What does history teach us about building Whitaker’s adaptability 
today? 
Institutions to Cushion the Blow and Speed the Transformation 
In past industrial revolutions, the actions of public, private and third party institutions have helped shrink the 
duration, impact and cost of the transition.  It is worth reflecting on these interventions as we think about how 
to manage the transition to the Fourth Industrial Revolution.25 
The skills bases of workers were fundamentally transformed by a series of reforms to enabling institutions 
including primary, secondary and tertiary education.26  New insurance institutions were created to support 
those left behind in the transition, including unemployment insurance and universal health care.27  And 
labour market institutions – cooperatives, trades unions, and the introduction of a minimum wage and private 
company pensions – plugged gaps in provisions.28,29 
Throughout these periods, many employers helped create an environment in which employees could thrive.  
From charitable support in the First Industrial Revolution; to the Ford era of self-interested paternalism in 
between, and the GooglePlex, self-contained communities of today, business has shaped the welfare of 
many.   
                                                                   
25 My colleague Andy Haldane has also discussed these issues.  See ‘Ideas and Institutions – A Growth Story’, speech given at The 
Guild Society, Oxford, 23 May 2018. 
26 In the UK in the late 18th and early 19th century, a mix of public, private and religious institutions – largely driven by charitable motives 
– brought education to children working in mills.  In the second and third revolutions, the state established formal primary, secondary 
and tertiary education. 
27 For example, in the First Industrial Revolution, with no welfare state and only the (dire) prospect of a Victorian workhouse, employees 
set up Friendly Societies and Co-operatives to support colleagues falling on hard times.  With trade unions outlawed until the end of the 
period, it fell to the will of charitable industrialists, the likes of Robert Owen and Sir Titus Salt to improve conditions inside mills.   
By the end of the Second Industrial Revolution, spurred by a more organised labour force, the Government provided welfare for its 
population through workplace injury compensations, basic pensions and unemployment provisions.  The interwar years ushered in 
universal healthcare, unemployment insurance and pensions.  
By the dawn of the 3rd Revolution, individual enterprise and privatisation were ascendant.  Reform of social services – to help create a 
society of equal opportunity – followed, supported by increased public spending for maternity and child benefits, early years education, 
and provisions for pensioners. 
28 The number of Friendly Societies rose to 27,000 by the end of the 1800s and Trade Union membership quadrupled from 2 million in 
1889 to 8.3 million by 1920.  Spurred by industrial unrest, the state introduced the precursor to the minimum wage in the first decade of 
the 1900s.  Unionism has been in decline since the 1970s, with membership dipping below six million in 2012 for the first time since the 
1940s. 
29 Recent work indicates that trade unions in the US played an important role in supporting the wages of lower-skilled workers during the 
years of the 3rd Industrial Revolution, thereby helping to limit increases in inequality over this period.  See Farber, H S , Herbst, D, 
Kuziemko, I and Naidu, S (2018), ‘Unions and Inequality over the Twentieth Century: New Evidence from Survey Data’, NBER Working 
Paper No. 24587. 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
8 
 
8 
   
 
So building on the past, what could be done this time?   
First, everyone can contribute to a better understanding of the new skills that will be required.  That includes 
granular reviews by firms of the mismatches between their current talent pool and future needs;  estimates 
by the creators of general purpose technologies of the breadth of their potential applications;  and reporting 
by public institutions on the aggregate pace of automation and trends in the labour market.   
The rate-limiting factor of technology adoption is often the skill-set of existing employees. For that reason 
alone, business has an enormous interest in effective workforce training.  And the providers of general-
purpose technologies have a responsibility to explore how they can develop their products in ways that 
maximise job-creation or broader social benefits.  For example, DeepMind established an Ethics and Society 
Research Unit to help technologists put ethics into practice, and to help society anticipate and direct the 
impact of AI so that it works for the many. 
New labour market institutions will need to balance facilitating labour mobility and encouraging appropriate 
protections of workers in non-standard forms of employment that emerge in industries, as considered in the 
UK by the Taylor review of modern working practices.30 
Other issues range from technology solutions to improve matching to news frameworks data portability 
(including reputational histories). 
Each industrial revolution has eventually been accompanied by major innovations in enabling or educational 
institutions.  
The biggest issue may be how to institutionalise re-training in mid-career and to integrate it with the social 
welfare system.   
The time for a quaternary system of education, founded on the same principle of universality as primary, 
secondary and tertiary education may eventually arrive.   
There are also roles for retraining schemes, such as the UK’s Flexible Learning Fund31 and the Singapore 
SkillsFuture programme, which offers all its citizens aged 25 and over £250 credit to pay for approved work-
skills related courses. Generous subsidies, of up to 90% for Singaporeans aged 40 and over, are available 
on top of this credit. According to SkillsFuture’s Chief Executive, the returns on that spending matter less 
than changing the mindset around continuous reskilling.  
An often overlooked but nonetheless critical element of the ecosystem is to build a financial sector consistent 
with the new economy. 
                                                                 
30 Available at https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/good-work-the-taylor-review-of-modern-working-practices. 
31 The Government has allocated £40m through the FLF in Spring2017 budget to run pilot projects. 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
9 
 
9 
   
 
Innovations in retail payments can transform checkout and ecommerce platforms  can open new financing to 
SMEs.  Innovation in, and greater connectivity across, wholesale payment systems have the potential to cut 
the costs of doing business across borders and unlock new trading opportunities.  Intelligent use of big 
financial datasets could transform credit markets, closing the gap between financing opportunities available 
to small companies and those enjoyed by their larger competitors. 
Given their position at the heart of the financial system, central banks have a crucial role to play in supporting 
the development of this new finance, not least through creating the new infrastructure that it will require. 32 
Monetary Policy’s Role in Managing the Transition  
As a former central banker, Whitaker would have recognised the importance of maintaining price stability 
during periods of large structural change.   
The appropriate setting of monetary policy will be influenced by the structural changes wrought by the Fourth 
Industrial Revolution, including in the labour market, by its impact on price dynamics and on the equilibrium 
rate of interest. 
To be clear, as these structural changes are real in nature, monetary policy cannot prevent them, and it 
would be unwise to attempt to accelerate them.  For example, running the economy hotter is unlikely to be 
effective at increasing the rate at which workers displaced by technology can find new roles because it does 
not address the underlying frictions, particularly the lack of suitable skills. 
However, as the structural changes take effect, they are likely to affect the balance between supply and 
demand, and monetary policy will need to respond accordingly. 
In the long run, the Fourth Industrial Revolution should substantially boost productivity and supply.  Based on 
past experience, the productivity of roles experiencing high levels of automation could expand at rates in 
excess of 5% per year, and aggregate productivity growth could increase by as much as ½ to 1½ percentage 
points per year.33 
The increases in supply from automation and the Fourth Industrial Revolution should, in time, lead to higher 
demand as they flow through into higher incomes.  With job destruction running ahead of the productivity and 
creation effects in the shorter term, however, demand is likely to be weaker for a period. 
                                                                   
32 For more details, see ‘New Economy, New Finance, New Bank’, speech by Mark Carney at the Mansion House, June 2018. 
33 The lower estimate is based on the productivity gains realised from the introduction of steam power, while the upper estimate is based 
on the improvements harnessed from the ICT revolution.  See Crafts, N (2015), ‘Economic Growth: Onwards and Upwards?’, Oxford 
Review of Economic Policy, Vol. 31, pp. 217-241 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
10 
 
10 
   
 
As Chair Powell recently reminded us, the challenge for monetary policy during periods of structural change 
is to take into account its potential impact on the underlying dynamics of the economy.  That is why, in the 
UK, the Monetary Policy Committee periodically takes stock of developments and updates its estimates of 
key variables such as the equilibrium rates of interest and unemployment.34 
The MPC provided our assessment of the equilibrium rate of interest – the interest rate that sustains inflation 
at target and output at potential – in its August Inflation Report.  The equilibrium interest rate provides a way 
to think about the forces acting on the economy, and whether policy is stimulative or contractionary.  It is 
affected by shorter-term influences, such as headwinds to demand, and by slow-moving structural factors 
that affect the balance between the demand for capital and the stock of wealth available to finance it.  For 
open economies like the UK and Ireland, those factors will be heavily influenced by global developments. 
As the MPC noted at the time, increased automation could push the equilibrium interest rate up or down.  On 
the one hand, the increases in productivity that result could increase businesses’ demand for capital, 
pushing up the equilibrium interest rate for a period – and permanently if automation raises productivity 
growth.35  On the other hand, however, increases in inequality would likely shift income to those with lower 
propensities to consume,36 increasing the stock saving and pushing the equilibrium rate down.37   
Monetary policy makers must also take into account how potential structural changes in the labour market 
and pricing dynamics that result from the Fourth Industrial Revolution might affect the evolution of inflationary 
pressures.  These considerations can be illustrated using the Phillips Curve diagram. 
Until the productivity and creativity effects catch up with the displacement effect, increased automation will 
impart disinflationary pressures through a reduction in businesses’ demand for labour relative to supply.  
Even if the transition happens relatively quickly and smoothly by historic standards – taking 30 years and 
with a relatively quick rate of new job finding among those displaced by technology – total hours worked 
could be 2 per cent lower throughout, equivalent to a 2 percentage point increase in the unemployment rate 
or a 5 percentage point rise in the underemployment rate.38   
                                                                 
34 The Fourth Industrial Revolution could also affect the transmission of monetary policy through its effects on the financial sector.  For 
example, advances in technology and data availability could lead to greater competition in the financial sector, potentially strengthening 
the pass-through of changes in monetary policy into the interest rates faced by households and companies. 
35 If automation increases the level, but not the growth rate, of productivity, it will only raise capital relative to output temporarily.  This 
effect will be reinforced by an increase in the capital-output ratio during the job destruction phase, as labour is displaced by automation.  
However, the upward pressure on the equilibrium interest rate will lessen as the creation effect takes hold. 
36 The experience of past episodes suggests that, in the first instance, the returns from the Fourth Industrial Revolution are likely to flow 
more to the owners of the new capital than to the workers who use it – leading to Engels’ pause in real wages.  Owners of capital tend 
to be wealthier to begin with and evidence suggests that those with higher wealth have a higher propensity to save increases in income 
(this idea goes back to Kalecki (1954) and Marx before him).  Increases in job polarisation and skills premia, which also shift income 
towards the top of the distribution, are likely to add to this effect.  Globally, inequality could also increase as a result of the Fourth 
Industrial Revolution, which would further lower the equilibrium rate in open economies like the UK and Ireland. 
37 Summers (2016) has argued that rising market concentration may also have been an important cause for the fall in the equilibrium 
interest rate over recent decades.  See http://larrysummers.com/2016/03/30/corporate-profits-are-near-record-highs-heres-why-thats-a-
problem/.  
38 Measured as the proportion of people working part-time would who prefer a full-time job. 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
11 
 
11 
   
 
This excess supply of labour available to work on non-automated tasks represents a shift along the Phillips 
Curve, imparting modest disinflationary pressures.  For the UK, each additional percentage point of labour 
market slack is estimated to reduce annual wage growth by one third of a percentage point. 
However, mismatches between the skills of the current workforce and those required by the new 
technologies or other substantial frictions to workers changing role could cause the equilibrium 
unemployment rate to rise alongside any increase in unemployment – particularly if the speed of adoption of 
new technologies is faster than in the past.  That would shift the Phillips Curve up, reducing the 
disinflationary effects of automation.   
At present, there is little evidence to go on to judge the likely size and persistence of any increasing in 
structural unemployment.  Monetary policy makers will need to remain alert to this possibility, updating their 
assessment as the transition occurs.  The experience of the 1970s shows that mistakenly ascribing a 
structural pickup in unemployment to cyclical factors can lead to the wrong macroeconomic policy setting, 
with long-lasting adverse effects.   
A more automated world could also affect inflationary pressures through flattening the Phillips curve.  The 
threat of robot substitutes could weaken workers’ bargaining power.  And advances in artificial intelligence 
and similar technologies could increase companies’ ability to learn about their competitors’ marginal costs 
and leading to greater synchronisation of price changes across companies.  Already, there is evidence that 
online retailers adjust prices more frequently than those on the high street, while being less likely to vary 
prices by location.39 
Conclusion 
While the Fourth Industrial Revolution has the potential to transform the economy, the challenges it presents 
for monetary policy makers are in many ways not new.   
In recent years, the MPC has increasingly focused on structural changes in the economy, including by 
instituting regular reviews and publishing our assessment of the most important variables, such as the 
equilibrium unemployment rate.   
Over this period, as unemployment has fallen towards its estimated equilibrium rate and companies have 
found it harder to recruit and retain staff, pay growth has picked up.  Across the economy as a whole, growth 
in average wages excluding bonuses has risen from around 1¾% a year during 2010-15 to around 2½% in 
2016, and wage growth is expected to have picked up a little further to around 2¾% around the middle of 
this year.  The most recent outturns support that judgement, with whole economy total pay increasing by 
2.9% in the three months to July and private sector regular pay up 3% over the same period, and 
domestically generated inflation at rates consistent with the 2% inflation target.   
                                                                 
39 Cavallo, A (2018), ‘More Amazon Effects:  Online Competition and Pricing Behaviors’, paper prepared for the 2018 Jackson Hole 
Symposium. 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
12 
 
12 
   
 
This brings me to a larger point.  Although current rates of pay growth in the UK are below pre-crisis 
averages, this largely reflects continued weakness in productivity growth.  While that weakness may reflect 
the early consequences of the Fourth Industrial Revolution, other factors seem more likely to be at play.  In 
the years following the global financial crisis, the aftereffects of that shock and the subsequent euro-area 
crisis exerted a drag on business investment.  More recently, uncertainty around Brexit has had an additional 
dampening effect. 
As has been the case for some time, developments regarding the United Kingdom’s withdrawal from the 
European Union are the most significant influences on the economic outlook.  And while the impact of the 
Fourth Industrial Revolution may be felt over the coming decades, some of the Brexit effects on supply may 
be much more immediate. 
The Bank of England is well-prepared for whatever path the economy takes, including a wide range of 
potential Brexit outcomes.  We have used our stress test to ensure that the largest UK banks can continue to 
meet the needs of UK households and businesses even through a disorderly Brexit, however unlikely that 
may be.  Our job, after all, is not to hope for the best but to plan for the worst.  The MPC will respond to any 
persistent change in the outlook to bring inflation sustainably back to 2% target while doing what it can to 
support jobs and activity.  The appropriate policy response is not automatic and will depend on the balance 
of the effects on demand, supply, and the exchange rate. 
Whitaker’s life work reminds us that achieving lasting economic prosperity requires us to be bold and to 
adapt.  To do so, we need to have the right institutions in place, so that everyone can share in the gains.  
Such adaptability will be particularly important as both our economies embark on a new era of technological 
change and new degrees of openness. 
   
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
13 
 
13 
 