Yi Gang: Welcome address - Tenth Lujiazui Forum
Welcome address by Mr Yi Gang, Governor of the People's Bank of China, at the Tenth Lujiazui
Forum, Shanghai, 14 June 2018.
 Secretary Li Qiang,
Vice Chairman Zhou Xiaochuan,
Distinguished guests,
Ladies and gentlemen,
 
Good morning!
It is a great pleasure to join friends both old and new at the 10th Lujiazui Forum, which is jointly
organized  by  the  People’s  Bank  of  China  (PBC),  China  Banking  and  Insurance  Regulatory
Commission  (CBIRC),  China  Securities  Regulatory  Commission  (CSRC)  and  Shanghai
Municipal  People’s  Government.  On  behalf  of  the  organizers,  I  would  like  to  extend  a  warm
welcome to you all!
This  year  marks  the  40th  anniversary  of  China’s  reform  and  opening-up.  The  development  of
socialism with Chinese characteristics has entered a new era, and China’s economy has been
transitioning  from  a  phase  of  rapid  growth  to  a  stage  of  high-quality  development.  The  city  of
Shanghai is an international financial center with a rich history of financial sector development
and a full-fledged, sound financial market system, and has been a pioneer in China’s financial
reform and opening-up. The development as international financial center is an important mission
that the Party Central Committee and State Council has entrusted to Shanghai, based on the
overall  arrangements  of  China’s  reform,  opening-up  and  modernization.  In  recent  years,
Shanghai has made steady progress in a series of financial pilot programs including the reform
measures adopted in the pilot free trade zone, cross-border use of RMB, Shanghai-Hong Kong
Stock Connect, Bond Connect, and crude oil futures, and has, in these valuable experiments,
accumulated replicable and expandable experiences for financial reform and opening-up in the
country. Therefore, the theme of this forum as “Shanghai’s Development towards an International
Financial Center in the New Era” is of great significance.
On April 10 this year, Secretary-General Xi Jinping pointed out at the Boao Forum for Asia that
China will continue its fundamental national policy of opening-up, and that the door of opening-up
will never shut and will only open wider. Meanwhile, he also stated that China will significantly
broaden its market access, including in the financial sector. The PBC has attached importance
to  and  supported  the  development  of  Shanghai  as  an  international  financial  center.  Going
forward, the PBC will implement the decisions and arrangements of the CPC Central Committee
and  State  Council,  take  effective  measures  to  further  support  the  pilot  programs  of  financial
reform  and  opening-up  in  Shanghai.  First,  to  facilitate  the  RMB  internationalization,  we
will  support  Shanghai  in  innovating  and  carrying  out  pilot  programs  in  cross-border  RMB
business and products following the market-driven principle. We will give full play to the RMB in
pricing  and  settlement  of  commodities.  Besides,  Shanghai  can  tap  its  advantages  as  an
international financial center to provide financing support for the Belt and Road Initiative. Second,
in the context of promoting RMB capital account convertibility, we will support Shanghai in the
pilot reforms of foreign exchange management, increasing the functions of free trade accounts in
the Shanghai Pilot Free Trade Zone, and promoting convenience in capital account management
and convertibility of capital account. Third, we will support Shanghai’s efforts to further improve
the  financial  market  and  financial  services. As  an  international  financial  center,  Shanghai  has
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
been playing an important role in various financial markets, including the stock, bond, money and
foreign exchange markets. We will make more efforts in infrastructure development to expand
the scope and depth of market, make trading more convenient and efficient, improve the legal
framework, market environment, custody and settlement of transactions, in an effort to increase
the  appeal  of  the  financial  markets  in  Shanghai  and  promote  its  status  as  an  international
financial  center  and  a  hub  of  financial  markets.  Moreover,  Shanghai  has  huge  potential  in
development of financial services, given its advantage as a talent pool, its appeals to foreign-
funded  institutions  in  payment  and  settlement  businesses  including  third-party  payment,  bank
card services and rating businesses, and vast space for business development. Fourth, going
forward, the financial sector opening will follow the principle of national treatment to gradually lift
caps on foreign ownership and limits on business licenses. Given Shanghai’s unique competitive
advantages, many foreign banks, securities companies, insurance companies, and investment
banks have chosen Shanghai as a focal point in their plans for global business development.
Therefore,  Shanghai  will  be  the  highlight  of  both  China  and  the  world  in  the  development  of
financial institutions. The fifth is that Shanghai also has considerable potential and advantages in
leading the development of financial technologies. Financial institutions and relevant companies
in Shanghai are forerunners in the country in R&D and innovation of financial technologies and
we expect they will continue to do so in the future.
Shanghai’s  development  as  an  international  financial  center  calls  for  concerted  efforts  of  all
parties. The PBC will continue to support Shanghai to focus on institutional innovation, to open up
its financial sector, to build an internationally competitive financial market, and to bring the open
economy to a higher level, all for the purpose of providing better services to the real sector and
promoting trade and investment facilitation.
To conclude, I wish the forum a crowning success!
Thank you!
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
