Jacqueline  Loh:  Unlocking  insurance  linked  securities  growth
through Asia
Opening speech by Ms Jacqueline Loh, Deputy Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of
Singapore, at the Artemis ILS Asia 2018 Conference, Singapore, 12 July 2018.
 Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, a very good morning to all of you.
2 I am very pleased to be here today at the Artemis ILS Asia 2018 conference. The third time that
it  is  held  in  Singapore,  the  conference  is  a  good  market  barometer  that  Insurance-linked
securities (ILS) are becoming more prominent in Asia, and prospects are bright for the coming
years.
Alternative Capital becomes Mainstream
3 We are gathering here at an exciting time for the global Insurance-linked securities industry,
with alternative capital being an increasingly important part of an insurer’s risk transfer toolkit.
Born from a need to bring additional loss absorbing capacity following the devastating disasters
in  the  mid-1990s  –  Hurricane  Andrew  and  the  Northridge  earthquake  in  California  –  the
development of the ILS market has been a remarkable story of innovation.
4 Twenty years later, the global ILS market continues to thrive. Emerging from the HIM (Harvey,
Irma and Maria) hurricane losses, earthquakes in Mexico and wildfires in California, 2017 has
been widely billed as the Global Financial Crisis equivalent for the ILS market, as it registered the
largest losses in more than a decade. Yet, the ILS market has remained largely resilient. Growth
remains strong in 2018, with issuance of catastrophe bonds the most prevalent type of ILS, more
than doubling compared to the same period last year. ILS rates have stabilised after having risen
post  these  disasters,  and  subsequently  dipping  with  the  influx  of  capital.  Catastrophe  bond
managers have continued to launch new ILS funds in response to strong demand from investors.
Today, the ILS market has grown to the point where it now provides 15% of global catastrophe
reinsurance capacity.
5 Let me highlight 2 key reasons why ILS has been growing over the years:
a.  First,  it  offers  sponsors  a  viable  alternative  to  enhance  risk  transfer  programs.  ILS
provides  diversification  of  the  source  of  risk  capital,  multi-year  coverage,  and  also
competitive rates compared to traditional reinsurance.
b.  Second,  there  is  strong  demand  from  investors  given  ILS’  low  correlation  with  other
asset classes, and low volatility. To illustrate, the Swiss Re Global Cat Bond Index has an
annual volatility under 3% , much below the 15% and 5% for equities and corporate bonds
respectively.  In  addition,  catastrophe  bonds  also  offer  ILS  investors  a  liquid  investment
option as they can be traded on the secondary markets.
1
6 The ILS market has continued to innovate in response to the growing and changing needs of
sponsors and investors. This innovation is happening along different dimensions, namely in risk
types, geography, and structures.
a. On risk types and geography.
i. ILS has now expanded its scope to cover other lines of business like operational
risks and mortgage risks. Once the preserve of large and complex risks such as
property catastrophe and mortality risks with a long history of well modelled losses, it
is now considered for lines previously deemed uninsurable, such as cyber.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
ii. Second, the catastrophe ILS market is no longer dominated by wind exposure in
the  United  States,  and  spreads  over  perils  like  earthquakes  and  floods  in  other
regions such as Japan, Europe and recently Latin America.
b.  On  ILS  structures,  the  market  is  moving  beyond  ILS  bonds  and  increasingly  issuing
collaterised reinsurance, sidecars, an d industry loss warranties.
Asia is the next frontier for ILS growth
7 As ILS funds continue to seek diversification opportunities for their investment portfolios, Asia is
poised to be the next frontier for ILS growth. At first glance, the economics of ILS in Asia appear
to  be  challenging. Asia  is  still  a  developing  market  with  low  insurance  penetration.  Traditional
reinsurance coverage is still competitive in the region. Apart from more mature markets such as
Japan  and Australia,  a  large  part  of Asia  has  yet  to  tap  the  capital  markets  for  their  growing
insurance needs.
8 Yet, it is likely that ILS will achieve a breakthrough in the coming years, as the protection gap in
Asia widens. Over the last 20 years, Asia has accounted for almost half of the world’s economic
losses from natural disasters, amounting to more than US$900 billion. Economic losses in Asia
Pacific is projected to exceed US$160 billion annually by 2030 . The protection gap in Asia is set
to widen for the following three reasons:
2
a. First, the frequency and severity of natural catastrophes is increasing. According to UN
data,  the  number  of  natural  disasters  in  the Asia-Pacific  has  increased  from  an  annual
average of 44 disasters in the 1970s to 146 in the 2000s.
b. Second, the wealth and value of assets at risk have also increased. Strong economic
growth  in  Asia  and  growing  urbanisation  has  led  to  the  rise  of  small  highly-populated
megacities, many of which lie along areas that are exposed to natural perils.
c.  Third,  insurance  penetration  is  still  low  in Asia.  Just  over  8%   of  natural  catastrophe
losses are insured in Asia as compared to 40% in developed regions.
3
9  ILS,  together  with  other  risk  management  solutions  including  reinsurance  and  government
pools,  have  significant  scope  to  play  a  larger  role  in  reducing  the  financial  impact  of  natural
disasters.  Globally,  UK,  Spain  and  France  have  already  established  natural  catastrophe
schemes that tap on a combination of traditional and alternative capital.
10  There  are  positive  signs  of  change,  with  ASEAN  making  a  push  to  address  its  rising
exposures to natural catastrophe. Let me provide some examples of recent developments:
a. ASEAN has commenced a holistic approach to disaster risk management through the
ASEAN Disaster Risk Financing and Insurance (ADRFI) Programme. The Programme will
strengthen ASEAN’s disaster risk management capabilities through:
i.  Improving  data  required  for  assessing  disaster  risk  exposure  and  financing
solutions.
ii. Enhancing knowledge on disaster financing solutions through capacity building.
iii.  Harnessing  risk  advisory  expertise  to  provide  advice  and  design  risk  financing
solutions. These building blocks will enable ASEAN members to better understand
their  needs  and  design  appropriate  disaster  risk  financing  programs  including
through transferring risk to capital markets.
b.  Governments  are  increasingly  using  alternative  risk  transfer  mechanisms  such  as
government pools, like the Philippines parametric disaster insurance pilot, the Thai crop
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
insurance  scheme  and  the  Vietnam  pilot  agriculture  programme.  In  May  this  year,  the
establishment  of  the  Southeast  Asia  Disaster  Risk  Insurance  Facility  (SEADRIF)  in
Singapore  was  officially  announced. As ASEAN’s  first  regional  catastrophe  risk  facility,
SEADRIF will start by establishing a regional catastrophe pool to insure the flood risks of
Lao  and  Myanmar.  SEADRIF  will  also  seek  to  sponsor  different  risk  management
strategies, including issuance of catastrophe bonds, or to act as a reinsurer to national
catastrophe pools, to further strengthen the region’s financial resilience to disaster risks.
Supporting ILS growth in Asia through Singapore
11 The presence of a full-fledged ILS market and ecosystem in the region will encourage the
development of this risk financing instrument. However, there is currently no established market
in Asia for ILS.
12 As the leading financial centre in Asia, Singapore is well positioned to fill this need:
a. We are a well-established regional insurance hub that offers a comprehensive spectrum
of re/insurance activities through a vibrant ecosystem of re/insurance players and service
providers. There is also a strong catastrophe risk ecosystem to support ILS issuances,
with the leading catastrophe modelling firms with ILS expertise present in Singapore, and
research  institutes  such  as  the  Earth  Observatory  of  Singapore  and  the  Institute  of
Catastrophe Risk Management, to support data and modelling needs. Singapore also aims
to serve as the Asian knowledge centre for new and emerging risks.
b. Singapore is well recognised as a premier asset management centre in Asia, with deep
capabilities  across  both  traditional  and  alternative  asset  classes.  As  the  gateway  to
alternative  capital  providers  such  as  pension  funds,  family  offices,  and  hedge  funds  in
Asia, ILS fund managers are increasingly assessing Asian investors through Singapore.
c.  Singapore  has  a  deep  debt  capital  market,  with  a  broad  range  of  bond  offerings  to
provide  collateral  for  and  to  support  innovative  ILS  products  and  structures.  SGX,  a
dynamic stock exchange, can facilitate bond trading.
13  Second,  Singapore  has  ready  corporate,  regulatory  and  tax  frameworks  to  facilitate  ILS
issuances:
a.  ILS  instruments  can  be  issued  and  regulated  in  Singapore  via  the  Special  Purpose
Reinsurance  Vehicle  (“SPRV”)  regulations,  which  allows  sponsors  to  readily  securitise
insurance risks in Singapore.
b.  To  provide  tax  neutrality  for  ILS  vehicles,  Singapore  offers  the  Approved  Special
Purpose Vehicle (“ASPV”) scheme.
14 Third, MAS has taken steps nurture the growth of the ILS market in the region.
a.  MAS  launched  the  ILS  grant  scheme  in  Jan  this  year,  which  will  fund  100%  upfront
issuance  costs  of  catastrophe  bonds  in  Singapore,  up  to  S$2  million.  The  aim  of  the
scheme is to defray the frictional costs of catastrophe bonds issuances. 
We have received keen interest from the region, with a healthy pipeline of issuers keen to
tap  on  the  grant  scheme  to  issue  a  catastrophe  bond  here.  Leading  insurance  brokers
have  expressed  support  for  Singapore  as  a  domicile  and  are  working  with  their Asian
clients for   potential issuances here.
b.  We  have  also  formed  an  industry-led Alternative  Risk  Transfer  work-group  to  advise
MAS  on  initiatives  to  support  the  development  of  Singapore  as  an  ILS  domicile.  The
workgroup  will  continue  to  provide  feedback  on  the  current  ILS  regime  including  on
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
regulations, tax and structures.
15 Fourth, our proximity to Asian markets allows for a deep understanding of underlying risks and
needs of the sponsors. We have grown as a traditional re/insurance market due to this and it will
likewise be an important consideration for Asian ILS issuers looking to tap capital markets in the
region, and for capital providers that are underwriting the risks.
16 Despite this promising outlook, we recognise that ILS expertise is still nascent in Asia, and
there  is  much  scope  for  Singapore  to  learn  from  international  best  practices.  We  hope  to
strengthen Singapore’s proposition as a ILS domicile in 4 ways:
a. First, we seek to explore the introduction of bespoke corporate structures for the ILS
market,  like  the  Protected  Cell  Company  (PCC)  structure,  to  provide  more  structuring
options  to  potential  issuers. A  PCC  structure  would  facilitate  multiple  issuances  in  one
vehicle with its segregation of assets and liabilities, and is sometimes preferred by issuers
for its efficiency in cost and operations.
b. Second, we understand speed to market is a crucial factor for issuers as it provides
certainty for their reinsurance structure. We will work closely with issuers to explore the
potential of further streamlining the licensing requirements and process in Singapore.
c.  Third,  we  recognise  that  structuring  ILS  requires  specialised  roles  beyond  the
conventional  pool  of  debt  capital  market  teams,  such  as  loss  reserve  specialists  and
capital  market  advisory  teams.  MAS  will  explore  support  for  the  setting  up  of  specialist
teams  in  Singapore,  to  facilitate  knowledge  transfer  to  the  local  market.  To  raise  the
industry’s  skills  in  this  area,  there  are  plans  to  incorporate  catastrophe  modelling  for
catastrophe bonds in existing training programs.
d. Fourth, the need for quality data. Data is key for catastrophe risk quantification and the
design of risk transfer tools like ILS. We know that there is room to improve data quality in
this region and have embarked on the Natural Catastrophe Data Analytics Exchange since
April  2017  to  bridge  the  data  gap.  High  resolution  data,  obtained  through  innovative
technology and new methodologies, can complement other traditional sources of industry
data, and support the underwriting of traditional insurance products and structuring of ILS.
Conclusion
17 Asia holds promise for the next phase of growth for ILS given the region’s growing needs, and
Singapore  can  play  an  important  role  to  facilitate  this  growth  as  an  ILS  domicile.  Today’s
conference will provide an important platform for the industry to discuss such developments in
the ILS market, and explore the key to harnessing the potential in Asia.
 1
2
3
Schroders: Spotlight on catastrophe bonds
Disasters could cost Asia-Pacific region $160 billion per year by 2030, UN warns, UNESCAP, 2018
High CAT risks, low penetration in Asia – only two ways out, AIR, 2017
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
