Richard  Dzina:  Luncheon  remarks  at  the  Community  Bankers
Conference
Remarks by Mr Richard Dzina, Executive Vice President of the Financial Services Group of the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, at the Community Bankers Conference, Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, New York City, 18 April 2018.
 Good afternoon.  I am conscious that I am the concluding speaker for today’s conference, a line
usually followed by “and the only thing that separates you from the bar.”  In this case, I’m the only
thing that separates you from the gold vault, which may be even more compelling, so I’ll keep
things brief, but hopefully meaningful.
Allow me to share two preliminary comments as prelude to formal remarks:
First,  convening  this  conference  underscores  for  me  and  my  colleagues  that  fulfillment  of
Federal  Reserve  mandates  in  monetary  policy,  supervision,  and  financial  services  does  not
constitute an end to itself, but a means to an end.   The end is to foster conditions and to provide
services that support robust and sustainable economic activity on which our nation depends and
in which community banks play an integral, indeed indispensable, role. 
May those of us who have the privilege of serving this great institution, and working within these
walls, never forget the ultimate object of our mandate, at which you sit at the center.
Second, my perspective in addressing you today is not as overseer, or as policy maker, but as
head of Financial Services at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.  In other words, perhaps
uniquely in the constellation of the Federal Reserve System, my colleagues and I work for you. 
My  standing  before  you  represents  a  visceral  reminder  of  our  accountability  to  depository
institutions, independent of size, which rely upon our services to send and receive time critical
payments; to maintain and permit the transfer of Fedwire eligible securities; and to provide cash
services to support the needs of consumers and commercial establishments.   
It is with this orientation that I offer these remarks today, which reflect my own views and do not
necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve
System. 
The  theme  of  today’s  conference,  appropriately,  has  been  “Navigating  Future  Risks  for
Community Banks”.  Allow me to elaborate upon the single risk that dominates from my vantage,
regrettably not a “future risk” but an all too present one, and to highlight some of the measures
that we are taking in response.  The risk to which I refer is not a function of regulatory pressure,
or capital demands, or an evolving economy, or compliance challenges, or the proliferation of
new  technologies,  or  an  unprecedented  season  of  payments  innovation,  or  the  challenging
competitive landscape.  All of these may represent very real risks, and no doubt occupy your
consciousness, to borrow the lyrics of a prior generation, “eight days a week”. 
Rather, building upon the theme of your prior panel discussion, the risk that dominates from my
parochial view is the escalating and evolving cyber threat to our financial and payment systems,
representing the challenge of our generation.  The orientation that I want to pursue, reflecting this
audience,  is  not  what  we  are  doing  within  the  Federal  Reserve  to  harden  our  critical
infrastructure.  While that is a manic and consuming preoccupation it is not my focus today. 
Instead,  I  want  to  concentrate  on  endpoint  security  vulnerabilities  to  the  payments  system,  in
which  partnership  with  the  institutions  in  this  room  represents  an  indispensable  element  of
success.  
Historically, market infrastructures have operated on the presumption that endpoint security is
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
principally  the  responsibility  of  the  endpoint,  and  infrastructure  security  is  principally  the
responsibility  of  the  operator.    In  the  United  States,  the  legal  framework  for  wholesale  funds
transfers  codifies  that  presumption,  with  each  actor  assigned  responsibility  for  that  part  of
security most within its control.  Yet, in the present environment endpoint security breaches can
have serious implications for public confidence in the integrity of the network as a whole, even in
circumstances when the operator’s infrastructure, applications, and security perimeter have not
been compromised.  A series of recent high profile events have underscored dramatically this
endpoint security risk, a theme that has also captured the attention of global policy makers. 
As  operator  of  a  payment  system  in  which  a  Fedwire  Funds  transfer  is  immediate,  final,  and
irrevocable, and for which a single transfer can be affected for a penny shy of $10 billion, the
Federal  Reserve  Banks  recognize  that  the  stakes  for  public  confidence  are  incomprehensibly
large;  as  users  of  said  payment  system,  you  realize  the  stakes  for  endpoints  in  terms  of
reputational  risk  and  financial  viability  are  equally  profound.    Our  fates  in  this  domain  are
inextricably linked. 
Work  to  mitigate  endpoint  security  risks  in  support  of  our  collective  interest  proceeds  across
multiple  fronts,  including  efforts  to  enhance  end-to-end  understanding  of  the  security
relationships  within  a  network;  initiatives  to  enhance  assurance  that  external  endpoints  are
operating  in  adherence  with  an  operator’s  security  requirements;  and  the  development  of
application tools to enhance a participant’s management of fraud risk.  I want to elaborate upon
three recent actions we have taken to enhance endpoint security, and to provide a preview of
additional measures in train.  Each of these actions, I will suggest, has particular relevance for
community banks:
Last Fall the Reserve Banks implemented functionality that enhances the tools available to
Fedwire participants to manage the messages they send to the Fedwire services.  These
enhanced  control  features  allow  customers  accessing  Fedwire  services  through  the
FedLine Advantage channel to restrict the creation of transfers outside of specified hours, or
to  banks  outside  of  the  United  States,  or  in  dollar  amounts  that  exceed  designated
thresholds,  among  other  parameters.    The  additional  features  also  trigger  out-of-band
notification  when  changes  occur  to  a  participant’s  processing  options.    For  example,  a
customer might assign a senior manager without operational responsibilities to be notified at
an  out-of-band  email  address  when  designated  processing  options  are  changed  or
thresholds exceeded.  We believe that these enhancements have resulted in meaningful risk
reduction for individual customers and the payments system at large, and have generated
renewed awareness of the critical importance of strong endpoint security controls.
Also last Fall, the Reserve Banks offered additional protection to depository institutions with
assets under a designated size against uncapped losses due to fraudulent payment activity
through  an  expansion  of  our  real  time  monitoring  capabilities.    The  program,  which
depository  institutions  were  strongly  encouraged  to  adopt,  helps  to  limit  losses  from
unauthorized  Fedwire  Funds  transfers  by  rejecting  those  that  would  exceed  a  depository
institution’s net debit cap.  The rejection of a Fedwire Funds transaction provides another
opportunity  for  the  institution  to  verify  authorization  for,  and  fund,  the  transaction,  thereby
reducing the financial risk to the institution and its account holding Reserve Bank.
In June 2016 the Reserve Banks amended Operating Circular 5, which governs electronic
access  of  depository  institutions  to  Federal  Reserve  Financial  Services,  by  adding  an
information  security  appendix.    Of  particular  note,  the  appendix  sets  out  requirements  for
customer information security programs designed to protect the environment and systems
used to access Reserve Bank services and applications.  Adherence to the terms set forth
in  the  operating  circular  represents  an  indispensable  element  of  a  depository  institution’s
endpoint security program, designed to protect both the individual institution and the network
at  large.   Attention  to  these  security  responsibilities  regrettably  is  no  longer  the  exclusive
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
purview of technologists and auditors, but compels awareness and direct engagement of
executive management and directors.    
Collectively,  these  measures  represent  material  enhancements  in  endpoint  security  controls
supporting the payment system.  At the same time, given an escalating threat environment that is
not  static,  we  cannot  stand  still.    Therefore,  looking  forward,  we  are  presently  considering
another wave of application level enhancements to give depository institutions greater control of
their  payment  activity,  such  as  an  exploration  of  tools  that  will  identify  anomalous  payments
relative to historical patterns; contemplating a further expansion of real-time monitoring to include
all  depository  institutions;  and  considering  adoption  of  an  assurance  program  to  enhance
confidence that external endpoints are operating in adherence with security requirements.  We
recognize,  especially  in  the  resiliency  and  security  domains,  that  either  intentionally  we  are
progressing or inevitably we are regressing; given the technological sophistication and guile of
our adversaries, there is no idleness.
Conclusion
Let’s pivot in conclusion from the age of electronic payments to the payment form of antiquity. 
Many of you will shortly tour the gold vault, the largest such repository in the world, representing
approximately  one  third  of  the  world’s  known  supply.    You  will  immediately  discern  upon
descending to the bedrock of Manhattan, marveling at the massive vault door, appreciating the
multi-faceted control environment, that payments security is a timeless preoccupation.
Hardly any of the gold in the vaults of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York is the property of
the United States, whose reserves you know from 007 lore reside in Ft. Knox.  Instead, it is gold
held  on  behalf  of  foreign  and  international  monetary  authorities.    Indulge  me,  if  you  will,  in  a
fascinating  historical  anecdote  in  the  annals  of  official  reserve  custody,  which  I  will  endeavor,
perhaps feebly, to tie to today’s theme.
The Spanish Civil War was a brutal conflict that pitted Nationalist rebel forces, allied with Fascist
Italy and Nazi Germany, against the Republican government supported by the Soviet Union.  In
1938,  with  their  government  on  the  cusp  of  implosion  and  before  fleeing  into  exile,  the
Republicans hastily sent their gold stock to their trusted ally, the Soviet Union, for safekeeping. 
This episode is recounted in a history of the Spanish Civil War by Hugh Thomas, who writes the
following:
According to Orlov (now I confess to not reading the whole book, so I do not actually
know  who  Orlov  is;  nevertheless,  according  to  no  less  an  authority  than  Orlov!),
Stalin  celebrated  the  arrival  of  the  [Spanish]  gold  with  a  banquet  at  which  he
[toasted],  “The  Spaniards  will  never  see  their  gold  again,  just  as  one  cannot  see
one’s own ears.”
Sometimes  there  is  illustrative  power  in  a  negative  example,  even  from  one  whose
transgressions  went  exceedingly  beyond  being  an  untrustworthy  custodian.    The  antithesis  of
what this Bank stands for could not be expressed with more force or greater clarity.
The ultimate foundation of this institution, you see, far beyond its technical capacities in monetary
policy execution, or its supervision of financial institutions, or its provision of financial services, is
trust.    
This  trust  must  be  earned,  every  day,  across  every  mandate,  especially  in  an  era  in  which
confidence in public institutions has waned.  The nature of this trust is fickle: it accrues slowly,
and can evaporate instantly.  It is a charge we take very seriously, especially when it comes to
the resiliency and security of the foundational elements of our nation’s payment system.  
Thank you for your generous attention today.  I’d be pleased to respond to a few questions.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
