  19.07.2018 
 Address on taking up office as a member of the Council of State 
 
Pablo Hernández de Cos 
Governor 
 
  Madame Chair of the Council, Council Members, Lawyers, ladies and gentlemen,  
 
First I would like to thank Mr. Alberto Aza and Mr. Juan Velarde for having agreed to be my 
sponsors in the ceremony today. It is a real honour for me to take up office as an ex officio 
member of the Council of State, the highest-ranking advisory body of the Government and 
a time-honoured institution in Spain.  
 
According to the Spanish Royal Academy dictionary, an “adviser” is someone who gives 
an opinion on what they consider beneficial or necessary for the advisee. It is indeed an 
important aspect of the functions of the Banco de España, in accordance with its law 
on autonomy, to advise the Government on economic and financial matters.  
 
From this dual status as a member of the Council of State and as governor of the Banco 
de España, allow me to take the opportunity here to briefly reflect on what are the main 
challenges facing the Spanish economy.  
 
In the past five years our economy has seen sharp growth in activity and a marked reduction 
in the unemployment rate, enabling a gradual correction of the imbalances built up before 
and during the economic crisis.  
 
Availing myself of my recent council member status, I would say that the guiding principle 
should be to avoid becoming complacent and, on the contrary, to harness the economic 
expansion so as to adopt the measures that may provide for sustainable growth, a greater 
degree of stability and more extensive room for manoeuvre in the face of potential future 
crises.   
 
This advice stems from a diagnosis that is worth emphasising: the Spanish economy still 
has significant factors of vulnerability. These include most notably high external debt, a level 
of public debt close to its historical high, an unemployment rate double that of our European 
partners and a financial system facing considerable challenges; and this in a scenario where 
the  economy  must  face  the  impact  of  the  phenomenon  of  population  ageing  and  the 
structural problem of low productivity.  
 
It  is  further  worth  recalling  that,  although  the  recovery  has  rested  on  a  diverse  set  of 
measures,  in  Spain  and  in  Europe  alike,  it  has  also  been  underpinned  by  the  support 
afforded  by  the  European  Central  Bank’s  extraordinarily  expansionary  monetary  policy. 
Additionally, this expansion has been accompanied by a significant fiscal impulse in recent 
years. However, the effect of these monetary and fiscal impulses will tend gradually to fade 
in the coming years.  
 
Against this background it is necessary, firstly, to deepen the fiscal consolidation process. 
The high level of public debt is harmful to the economy’s financing conditions, it restricts 
the  countercyclical  leeway  of  budgetary  policy  and  it  means  a  high  volume  of  resources 
must be set aside to pay the interest burden.  
 
There  is  room,  moreover,  for  the  fiscal  consolidation  process  to  be  compatible  with  a 
revision  of  the  structure  of  public  revenue  and  spending,  making  it  more  efficient  and 
 3/5 
 enhancing its contribution to growth. And, at the same time, a greater degree of fiscal co-
responsibility should be promoted across the different tiers of general government.  
 
It  is  likewise  a  priority  to  pursue  further  reductions  in  unemployment  and  its  persistence 
among specific groups, especially the lesser-skilled. The high level of joblessness is also 
closely  related  to  the  notable  increase  in  inequality  that  came  about  during  the  crisis. 
Achieving this will require not only labour market measures but also, more broadly, actions 
targeting  employee  skills  and  training,  to  encourage  their  greater  adaptability  to  a  new 
environment  marked  by  technological  progress,  the  automation  of  productive  processes 
and the knowledge economy.  
 
In parallel, despite the significant progress in recent years, the financial sector continues to 
face  deep-seated  challenges.  These  include  the  need  to  tackle  the  effects  of  the  far-
reaching  changes  in  regulation,  technology  and  competition,  to  improve  low  profitability 
levels and to complete the ongoing reduction of problem assets.  
 
Looking  ahead  to  the  medium  and  long  term,  population  ageing  is  probably  the  main 
challenge the developed societies face. According to projections by the National Statistics 
Institute, in the next 50 years the over-65 population, which currently accounts for less than 
one-fifth  of  the  total  population,  will  grow  to  represent  more  than  one-third.  This 
phenomenon  will  exert  –  and  is  already  doing  so  –  an  adverse  effect  on  the  economy’s 
participation  rate,  employment  and  productivity,  and  most  singularly  on  public  finances, 
raising spending on pensions, health and long-term care.  
 
The  scale  of  this  challenge  means  a  broader  and  longer-term  strategy  must  be  defined 
where, along with revising the arrangements for our welfare state and its financing, in order 
to ensure its sustainability, it will also be particularly important to have policies encouraging 
worker participation in the labour market, to align migratory policy with labour market needs 
and to pursue policies promoting the birth rate so as to draw it closer to the rates in other 
European countries.  
 
The Spanish economy also evidences very poor figures in terms of productivity. Reversing 
this  dynamic  will  require  measures  in  various  areas  including,  among  other  aspects, 
improvements in education, the quality of institutions, competition in product and service 
markets and investment in research, innovation and development, along with a reduction in 
temporary employment in the labour market.  
 
I  would  like  to  conclude  by  stressing  the  importance  of  making  Europe’s  challenges  our 
own.  In  short,  on  the  economic  front,  this  currently  involves  two  goals:  completing  the 
Banking Union and shoring up the fiscal stabilisation capacity of the euro area countries.  
 
With the supervisory pillar in place, completing the Banking Union still calls – as the euro 
area Heads of State and of Government recently concluded – for a common backstop for 
the Single Resolution Fund. And, above all, the creation of a European Deposit Guarantee 
Scheme.  
 
4/5 
  In the fiscal policy arena, fiscal stabilisation capacity in the euro area needs to be completed 
through two channels: improving the member countries’ fiscal headroom and developing 
supranational cyclical insurance instruments. 
 
To conclude, I turn once more to the Spanish Royal Academy, which defines “challenge” as 
an aim it is difficult to achieve and which is thereby an incentive and a test for whosoever 
faces  it.  Economic  policy-making  requires  constantly  facing  the  challenges  our  society 
throws  up.  To  quote  Jean  Monnet,  “Nothing  would  be  more  dangerous  than  to  regard 
difficulties as failures”.1 
 
Thank you. 
 
                                                                                                
1 Jean Monnet, Memoirs, William Collins Sons & Co. Ltd., Great Britain, 1978. 
 5/5 
