Sabine Lautenschläger: Basel III – sense and sensitivity
Speech by Ms Sabine Lautenschläger, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central
Bank and Vice-Chair of the Supervisory Board of the European Central Bank, at the Institute for
Law and Finance Conference on Basel III, Frankfurt am Main, 29 January 2018.
It is done: Basel III has been finalised.
 I admit that it was a long journey, but in my view, it was worth the wait: Basel III will help to make
banking safer. It is crucial, though, that Basel III is properly implemented – in Europe and around
the world. It must not be watered down.
Basel III marks the end of the post-crisis reforms; regulatory certainty has been restored. The
banks know what awaits them; they can be confident about the regulatory framework, and can
plan ahead and support the real economy.
But does Basel III deliver what was promised? Does it, on the one hand, create rules which are
sufficiently risk-sensitive to set the right incentives for banks? And does it, on the other hand,
create rules which are simple enough to decrease model risk?
Banks are not enchanted by Basel III. Many of them claim that it throws risk sensitivity overboard
and penalises low risk exposures. Are these claims justified?
Well, we have not thrown risk sensitivity overboard. And why would we? Risk sensitivity helps
align capital requirements with actual levels of risk and supports an efficient capital allocation. It
prevents arbitrage and risk shifting. And risk-sensitive rules promote sound risk management.
But we all know how challenging it is to measure and model risks. Much depends on the quality
of the models; much depends on the data and the assumptions that feed into those models; and
much depends on supervisors’ capacity to act. If there are errors along the way, banks might end
up undercapitalised and vulnerable. This, in turn, might lead markets to question the reliability of
risk-based  capital  requirements  in  general,  which  would  undermine  trust  in  banks  more
generally.
Therefore we need to balance risk sensitivity with some safeguards. And this is exactly what we
aim  to  do  with  Basel  III.  It  preserves  risk  sensitivity.  It  retains  internal  models  for  most  asset
classes. And it enhances the risk sensitivity of the standardised approaches. But at the same
time, Basel III adds a few safeguards.
First, I think we can all agree that it makes no sense to allow for more complex risk-sensitive
capital  requirements  if  risks  cannot  be  measured  and  modelled.  Basel  III  therefore  aligns  the
degree of risk sensitivity with the extent to which it is possible to measure and model risks.
Second, there are some more conservative haircuts on collateral and some input floors. These
input floors lie beneath the parameters for “probability of default” and “loss given default”. And
there  will  be  floors  beneath  the  “exposure  at  default”  calculation  as  well.  These  floors  work
bottom-up; they will keep banks from feeding their internal models with excessively low inputs.
This serves as a safeguard as it prevents capital requirements from being set too low.
And, yes, these input floors make the rules a bit less risk-sensitive. But we need to look at this in
absolute terms – for residential mortgages, the input floor increases from three basis points to
five basis points. Five basis points correspond to a once-in-2,000 years default rate! Is such a
floor really too conservative? At global level, the bottom-up reforms see small increases in capital
for exposures to other banks, large corporates and equity investments. This is somewhat offset
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
by a reduction in risk weights for loans to small and medium-sized enterprises.
Third, there is the hotly debated output floor. It ensures that risk-weighted assets calculated with
internal models do not fall too far below those calculated with standardised approaches. “Too far
below” means they must reach at least 72.5%. Does that kill risk sensitivity? No, it does not.
Obviously, there is still room for banks to apply individual risk weights and to benefit from lower
capital requirements for classic, low-risk banking business.
And more than that: the effective floor might even be lower than 72.5%. This is due to the fact
that many banks apply the standardised approaches to at least some exposures. This implies
that, depending on the share of assets still under the standardised approach, the effective floor
for them could be lower than 72.5%.
At the same time, Basel III makes the standardised approaches themselves more risk-sensitive.
Let  me  give  you  just  one  example:  residential  mortgages.  Under  Basel  II,  the  standardised
approach assigned the same risk weight to almost all such mortgages. But in Basel III, the risk
weights of residential mortgages depend on the loan-to-value ratios. The output floor is thus set
in relation to a benchmark, which itself has become more risk-sensitive. And let us not forget
that, in some cases, the standardised approaches have become less costly in terms of capital.
At global level, the capital requirements from standardised approaches have been reduced by
about  2%  on  average.  Mortgages  and  corporate  lending  make  up  the  majority  of  these
reductions.
So, Basel III does keep risk sensitivity on board. It acknowledges, though, that there are limits to
internal models. It provides safeguards to restore trust in risk-based capital requirements.
Does  this  mean  that  Basel  III  is  the  perfect  standard  –  the  philosopher’s  stone  of  banking
regulation?
Well, Basel III is a global standard, and across the world, financial sectors differ greatly. Just
think of real estate financing and how differently it is treated in Europe compared with the United
States. Thus, a global standard cannot suit everyone perfectly. The key is to find an acceptable
compromise; the alternative would be to have no global standard, and that would definitely be
worse. The output floor in particular is one such compromise.
What impact will the final Basel III package have on banks – and on their business models and
their capital?
The rules are not neutral. The bottom-up safeguards in Basel III, including the input floors, will
impact  on  risk  weights  in  some  business  areas.  Certain  retail  credit  card  exposures  are  one
example. The top-down output floor affects overall capital requirements, depending on the overall
portfolio composition of a bank. For example, our analysis suggests that the difference between
internal  ratings-based  and  standardised  risk  weights  tends  to  be  relatively  large  in  certain
segments of real-estate markets where historical loss rates are exceptionally low. The output
floor tends to be more binding for banks which are heavily engaged in these markets.
Overall,  it  is  hard  to  predict  how  business  models  will  evolve.  This  depends  not  only  on
regulation,  but  also  on  many  other  factors,  including  the  future  path  of  profitability  in  different
business areas, the pricing power of banks and, eventually, how banks will adapt their business
models.
Now what about additional capital requirements? What about the banks’ claim that the burden
might be too heavy for them?
Well, there are two things to bear in mind.
First, there will be a long transition period. This is at the heart of the overall compromise which
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
paved the way for finalising Basel III. This transition period runs right through to 2027. It gives
banks and legislators time to implement all the changes introduced by Basel III.
Second, the European Banking Authority estimates that, for EU banks, the final Basel III package
will lead to an aggregate Tier 1 capital shortfall of €34.4 billion. Is that a lot? In 2016, the largest
banks in the euro area earned €50 billion – net, after taxes, and in a difficult environment. Also,
the  capital  shortfall  refers  to  the  end  of  the  transition  period,  which  is  nine  years  away.  Most
banks should be able to earn their way out of potential shortfalls.
To sum up, Basel III preserves risk sensitivity in a sensible way. At the same time, banks will be
able to handle its impact and, in the long run, they too will benefit from a more stable banking
system.
Thank you for your attention.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
