Urjit R  Patel:  Banking  regulatory  powers  should  be  ownership
neutral
Inaugural Lecture by Dr Urjit R Patel, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Centre for
Law  &  Economics,  Centre  for  Banking  &  Financial  Laws  Gujarat  National  Law  University,
Gandhinagar, 14 March 2018.
 I  speak  today  to  highlight  some  fundamental  fissures  that  exist  in  the  regulation  of  banks,  in
particular, public sector banks (PSBs). It has been slightly over a month since the latest fraud in
the Indian banking sector broke news.
Success  has  many  fathers;  failures  none.  Hence,  there  has  been  the  usual  blame  game,
passing  the  buck,  and  a  tonne  of  honking,  mostly  short-term  and  knee-jerk  reactions.  These
appear  to  have  prevented  the  participants  in  this  cacophony  from  deep  reflection  and  soul
searching that can help solve fundamental issues that are the root cause of such frauds and
related irregularities in the banking sector, which as I will explain are in fact far too regular.
Let me start with what has been at the heart of some of the immediate reactions – the Reserve
Bank’s supervision of banks.
IMF/World Bank FSAP Assessment
In its 2017 Financial Sector Assessment Programme (FSAP) of India, conducted, completed and
released prior to this episode, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank (WB),
made the following observations:
the 
introduction 
in  2013  of  risk-based  supervision 
1. In the publicly released FSSA (Financial System Stability Assessment) report, Para 35, page
17: The  RBI  has  made  substantial  progress  in  strengthening  banking  supervision: A  key
achievement  was 
through  a
comprehensive  and  forward-looking  Supervisory  Program  for  Assessment  of  Risk  and
Capital  (SPARC).  The  Basel  III  framework  and  other  international  guidance  were
implemented  or  are  being  phased  in,  including  stricter  regulations  on  large  exposures.
Domestic  and  cross-border  cooperation  arrangements  are  now  firmly  in  place.  The AQR
[Asset  Quality  Review]  and  the  strengthening  of  regulations  in  2015  have  improved
distressed  asset  recognition.  In  April  2017,  the  RBI  established  a  new  Enforcement
Department and revised its prompt corrective action framework to incorporate more prudent
risk-tolerance thresholds.
2. Further, in its specific comments on Other Regulation, Accounting, and Disclosure (Core
Principles or CPs 20, 26–29: Para 60, page 21): The internal control regulations issued by
the  RBI  are  adequate  and  are  supported  by  the  requirements  of  the  SPARC  risk-based
supervision system. This system provides extensive guidelines for inspection of the internal
control and audit function, and prescribes that a bank’s internal controls allow identification
and  controlling  of  risks.  The  Internal  Audit  Departments  in  banks  are  required  to  have
appropriate resources and staff with the requisite skills. Tasks can be outsourced, allowing
additional expertise to be brought in. The auditors reported that overall experience with the
quality of internal audit of banks was satisfactory.
However, the FSAP for India laments at several points the fact that the Reserve Bank’s
regulatory powers over banks are not neutral to bank ownership:
1. In  the  Detailed  Assessment  Report  (DAR)  on  the  Basel  Core  Principles  (BCP)  on  the
Effective  Banking  Supervision,  Para  6,  Page  7:Some  previously  observed  weaknesses
concerning  the  independence  of  the  RBI  and  the  inherent  conflict  of  interest  when
1 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
supervising  public  sector  banks  (PSBs)  remain.  The  RBI  enjoys  a  large  degree  of
operational autonomy, but amendments to several legal provisions, and formal grounding of
RBI  independence  in  the  RBI Act,  would  provide  greater  legal  certainty. The  RBI’s  legal
powers to supervise and regulate PSBs are also constrained– it cannot remove PSB
directors or management, who are appointed by the government of India (GoI), nor
can it force a merger or trigger the liquidation of a PSB; it[RBI] has also limited legal
authority to hold PSB Boards accountable regarding strategic direction, risk profiles,
assessment  of  management,  and  compensation.  Legal  reforms  are  thus  highly
desirable to empower the RBI to fully exercise the same responsibilities for PSBs as
now  apply  to  private  banks,  and  to  ensure  a  level  playing  field  in  supervisory
enforcement.
2.  Specifically, on Corporate Governance (CP 14, Para 50, page 18): The appropriate rules on
fitness and propriety, and banks’ internal governance structures, are in place with respect to
private  and  foreign  banks.  Nevertheless,  the  influence  the  RBI  may  exercise  on  banks’
governance  through  section  21  BR  Act,  placement  of  RBI  representatives  on  banks’
Boards, and the RBI’s very limited authority under the Banking Acts, as well as the custom
to  hold  the  PSB  Boards  accountable  has  become  problematic. Under  the  law  and
according  to  custom,  the  RBI  cannot  hold  PSB  Boards  accountable  for  assessing
and– when necessary– replacing weak and nonperforming senior management and
1
government-appointed Board members.
Let me elaborate.
Banking regulatory powers in India are NOT ownership neutral
All commercial banks in India are regulated by the RBI under the Banking Regulation (BR) Act of
1949. Additionally, all public sector banks are regulated by the Government of India (GoI) under
the  Banking  Companies  (Acquisition  and  Transfer  of  Undertakings)  Act,  1970;  the  Bank
Nationalisation Act, 1980; and the State Bank of India Act, 1955. Section 51 of the amended BR
Act  explicitly  states  which  portions  of  the  BR Act  apply  to  the  PSBs,  most  common  thread
across  the  omissions  being  complete  removal  or  emaciation  of  RBI  powers  on  corporate
governance at PSBs:
1.  RBI cannot remove directors and management at PSBs as Section 36AA(1) of the BR Act is
not applicable to the PSBs.
2.  Section 36ACA(1) of the BR Act that provides for supersession of a Bank Board is also not
applicable in the case of PSBs (and regional rural banks or RRBs) as they are not banking
companies registered under the Companies Act.
3.  Section  10B(6)  of  the  BR Act  that  provides  for  removal  of  the  Chairman  and  Managing
2
Director (MD) of a banking company is also not applicable in the case of PSBs.
4.  RBI cannot force a merger in the case of PSBs as per Section 45 of the BR Act.
5.  PSB’s banking activity does not require license from RBI under Section 21 of the BR Act;
hence, RBI cannot revoke a license under Section 22(4) of the BR Act as it can in the case
of private sector banks.
6.  RBI cannot trigger liquidation of PSBs as per Section 39 of the BR Act.
7.  Furthermore, in a remarkable exception of sorts, in some cases there is duality of Managing
Director and the Chairman – they are the same – implying the MD is primarily answerable
only to himself or herself.
This legislative reality has in effect led to a deep fissure in the landscape of banking regulatory
 2 / 8
3
BIS central bankers' speeches
terrain: a system of dual regulation, by the Finance Ministry in addition to RBI.  I will now take a
few minutes to explain why this fissure or the fault line is bound to lead to tremors such as the
most recent fraud.
3
Temptation to engage in fraud at the level of employee or employees is always present, in banks
(or in corporations), be it in public sector or private sector. The question then is whether there is
adequate  deterrence  faced  by  employees  from  undertaking  frauds  and  enough  incentives  for
management  to  put  in  place  preventive  measures  to  preempt  frauds.  In  case  of  banks,  three
potentially powerful mechanisms could induce discipline against frauds:
1. Investigative/vigilance/legal deterrence: Criminal investigation of frauds and
attached penalties can serve as an effective deterrence if reporting and investigation
are  expedient  and  penalties  are  adequately  severe  relative  to  the  gains  from
fraudulent activity.
2. Market discipline: Fraudulent activity can be a net loss to the bottom-line; in this
case, bank investors would impose deterrence, e.g., uninsured creditors might “run”
on  the  bank  inducing  liquidity  problems,  or  shareholders  might  “exit”,  effectively
raising the cost of capital and inducing solvency questions. In anticipation of such
disruptive  outcomes  that  might  cause  loss  of  control,  management  and  board
members  may  put  in  place  governance  mechanisms  to  prevent  or  reduce  the
incidence of fraud and/or hold larger buffers in the capital structure to bear losses
when fraud materialises.
3.  Regulatory  discipline:  Banks  in  most  parts  of  the  world,  however,  have  a
significant portion of deposit funding that is insured, and since banks serve critical
payments and settlements function, they are often too big to fail or too many to fail.
Hence,  a  part  of  the  market  discipline  is  weakened  as  a  tradeoff  with  financial
stability and is substituted by delegation of supervisory and regulatory powers to a
banking  regulator.  Detection  and  punishment  by  the  regulator  then  need  to  be
effective to discipline fraud.
How do these mechanisms work in case of private and public sector banks in India?
Investigative and formal enforcement process takes in our country, perhaps for the right reasons,
a fair bit of time. Indeed, RBI data on banking frauds suggests that only a handful of cases over
the past five years have had closure, and cases of substantive economic significance remain
open. As a result, the overall enforcement mechanism – at least until now – is not perceived to
be a major deterrent to frauds relative to economic gains from fraud.
It is fair to say that in case of private sector banks, the real deterrence arises from market and
regulatory  discipline,  and  their  confluence. A  private  bank  CEO’s  primary  concern  is  whether
s/he will be able to raise capital when the need arises or even whether s/he will still be running
the bank the next day. The point is that they could be readily cautioned through their Boards and
even  replaced  by  the  RBI  in  case  of  large  or  persistent  irregularities.  Further,  a  private  bank
failing to meet bank solvency standards and under RBI’s “prompt corrective action” (PCA) would
find it hard to raise capital, whereby it would need to put the house in order at swift notice so it
can raise funding from markets and get back to growth path. In turn, there are incentives to invest
in governance, so as to limit frauds and regulatory violations, and to respond with alacrity when
incidents do arise.
In  contrast,  the  market  discipline  mechanism  for  public  sector  banks  is  appreciably
weakercompared  to  that  at  private  banks.  There  is  implicitly  a  stronger  perceived  sovereign
guarantee for all creditors of PSBs, and the principal shareholder – the government – has not so
far  been  interested  in  fundamentally  modifying  the  ownership  structure.  From  an  economic
 3 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
standpoint,  this  weakened  market  discipline  should  imply  that  the  government  would
prefer strongerregulatory discipline of these banks, not weaker. However, as I explained above at
length, and perhaps since the original idea behind bank nationalisation was complete government
control over credit allocation to the economy, the situation in India is exactly the reverse: RBI’s
regulatory powers over PSBs are weaker than those over the private sector banks.
The BR Act exemptions for PSBs mean that the one agency – the regulatory – that can respond
relatively quickly against banking frauds or irregularities cannot take effective action. Hence, for
example, MDs at PSBs find it comfortable to tell media that business will be as usual for them
under  RBI’s  Prompt  Corrective Action  framework  as  even  if  they  do  not  meet  the  stipulated
restrictions of the framework, the ultimate authority over their tenure is with the government and
not with the RBI.
It is not entirely surprising that there has been a recurring theme in report after report on financial
sector  reforms  in  the  country  that  has  suggested  strengthening  of  PSB  governance  through
improvement in top management and Board member appointments; or, ownership neutrality in
banking  regulatory  powers;  or  improving  market  discipline  by  considering  a  variety  of  diverse
ownership structures.
Will we let another opportunity to catalyse fundamental reform at PSBs pass by?
It is fully transparent what needs to be done. From the RBI’s standpoint, legislative changes to
the BR Act that make our banking regulatory powers fully ownership neutral – not piecemeal,
4
but fully – is a minimum requirement. It might also be the most readily feasible of these options.
No banking regulator can catch or prevent all frauds
Another point is in order before I move to the broader issue of bank stressed assets and their
resolution. There has been a tendency in the pronouncements post revelation of the fraud that
RBI  supervision  team  should  have  caught  it.  While  that  can  always  be  said  ex  post  with  any
fraud, it is simply infeasible for a banking regulator to be in every nook and corner of banking
activity to rule out frauds by “being there”. If a regulator could achieve such perfect outcomes, it
would effectively imply that the regulator can do anything that banks can do, and by implication,
can simply perform the entire banking intermediation activity itself. What is needed is that various
mechanisms  to  deter  frauds  and  other  irregularities  are  in  place  and  have  bite  so  that  fraud
incidence is low and magnitudes contained. Indeed, frauds have happened at banks in regimes
with varied levels of banking regulatory quality and in both public and private banks.
In  the  specific  case  at  hand,  the  Reserve  Bank  had  identified,  based  on  cyber  risk
considerations, the exact source of operational hazard –through which we understand now the
fraud  had  been  perpetrated.  In  particular,  the  RBI  had  issued  precise  instructions  via  three
circulars in 2016 to enable banks to eliminate the hazard. It turns out ex post the bank had simply
not done so. Clearly, the internal processes at the bank failed in allowing the operational hazard
to remain in place in spite of clear instructions to close it. As we have stated in RBI’s only press
statement on this case to date, this was essentially an operational failure at our second largest
public sector bank. The RBI will undertake actions against the bank that it is empowered to but
this set is limited under its BR Act powers over PSBs.
Indeed, in a recent interview to the Press Trust of India, March 11 2018, the IMF Deputy Managing
Director Tao Zhang has reinforced this point along with others I alluded to above:
“[W]e think the PSB recapitalisation should be part of a broader package of financial reforms to
speed up the resolution of NPAs, improve PSB governance, reduce the role of the public sector
in  the  financial  system,  and  enhance  bank  lending  capacity  and  practices…  The  experts
recommended legal changes to enable the RBI to extend all the powers currently exercised over
private sector banks to public sector ones; in particular, regarding Board member dismissals,
 4 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
mergers, and license revocation… Having said that, banks’ operational risk management, risk
culture, internal control frameworks and external audit function should typically play a central role
in preventing fraud.”
Need to refocus on the bigger issue of stressed assets resolution
Let me now turn to an issue of greater magnitude and more significance than the most recent
banking fraud. Its magnitude is larger than 8 1/2 lakh crores of stressed assets on bank balance-
sheets and its significance stems from several practices in promoter-bank credit relationship that
need immediate attention. The RBI’s Financial Stability Report of June 2017 (Section VII. Frauds,
Para 3.36) clarifies that there is a link between bank frauds and this stressed assets problem:
“One of the emerging risk to the financial sector is increasing trends in frauds in commercial
banks  and  financial  institutions.  During  the  last  five  financial  years,  frauds  have  increased
substantially both in volume and value terms. During this period, while the volume of frauds has
increased by 19.6 per cent from 4235 to 5064, the value (loss incurred) has increased by 72 per
cent from Rs. 97.5 billion (Rs. 9,750 crores) to Rs.167.7 billion (Rs. 16,770 crores). Share of
frauds  in  [loan]  advances  portfolio  continued  to  be  high  at  86  per  cent  of  the  frauds
reported  during  2016–17  (in  terms  of  amount  involved)…In  a  number  of  large  value
frauds,  serious  gaps  in  credit  underwriting  standards  were  evident.  Some  of  the  often
seen  gaps  are  liberal  cash  flow  projection  at  the  proposal  stage,  lack  of  continuous
monitoring of cash flows and cash profits (EBITDA), lack of security perfection and over
valuation, gold plating of projects, diversion of funds, double financing and general credit
governance  issues  in  banks.  Moreover,  almost  all  corporate  loan  related  fraud  cases  get
seasoned for 2 to 3 years as NPAs before they are reported as fraud.”
The broad conclusion that has been universally reached is that enterprises in India have over and
over again received excessive credit during loan growth cycles, which is followed soon after with
repayment  problems.  Rather  than  resolving  stressed  credit  problems  swiftly,  banks–either
through loan-level “fudges” or refusal to recognise the true asset quality of the credits – have
allowed  promoters  in  charge  of  enterprises  to  have  a  soft  landing.  This  soft  landing  has
comprised of even more bank lending so as to keep the accounts artificially in full repayment on
past dues, protracted control for promoters over failed assets, and effectively granting them the
ability to divert cash and assets, often outside of our jurisdictional reach.
The RBI has been clamping down on the failure to recognise asset quality as non-performing as
per  its  norms  by  requiring  that  banks,  whose  “divergence”  exceeds  by  15%  of  the  true  non-
performing assets as per the norms, disclose the divergence. This should restore some market
discipline  against  such  practices,  especially  in  the  case  of  private  sector  banks.  However,
ultimately there also needs to be a framework in place for time-bound resolution of the underlying
stress in assets that limits the discretion of banks to delay the recognition of stress, ever-green
“zombie” or living-dead borrowers, and poorly allocate credit.
To this end, I wish to present and clarify the rationale behind RBI’s revised framework for prompt
recognition  and  resolution  of  stressed  assets.  The  framework  that  was  released  last  month
remains somewhat under-appreciated in terms of its importance. So let me lay it out.
Prompt recognition and resolution of stressed assets – revised framework
1.  The Banking Regulation (Amendment) Act, 2017, and the subsequent authorisation given by
the Government of India therein, has empowered the Reserve Bank to issue directions to the
banks  for  resolution  of  stressed  assets,  including  referring  assets  to  the  Insolvency  and
Bankruptcy Code 2016 (IBC). The Reserve Bank has taken steps over the last year in this
direction,  with  a  focus  on  reference  to  the  IBC  of  certain  large  value  stressed  accounts,
covering approximately 40% of banking sector’s overall exposure to the stressed assets.
 5 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
2.  The revised framework for resolution of stressed assets released by the Reserve Bank on
February 12, 2018 is a step towards taking these initial steps to their natural conclusion and
laying down a steady-state approach. The steady-state approach is aimed at ensuring early
resolution  of  stressed  assets  in  a  transparent  and  time-bound  manner  so  that  maximum
value could be realised by the lenders while also recognising the potential ongoing concern
value  of  stressed  assets.  As  explained  below,  this  approach  is  a  positive  step  towards
strengthening the credit culture in the economy, at both borrowers and banks.
3.  Various special schemes for resolution, which were introduced by the RBI in the pre-IBC
context,  had  made  the  resolution  process  driven  by  asset-classification  consideration  of
lenders. In particular, the forbearance that was embedded in the schemes to make it easier
for banks to resolve assets became an end in itself with little resolution achieved through
deployment of the schemes.
4.  The  revised  framework  substitutes  for  these  pre-IBC  schemes  and  does  away  with
forbearance  since  it  delayed  resolution.  The  framework  relies  instead  on  the  biggest
structural reform in the credit system in the country in several decades, viz., the IBC, as an
important part of resolution. By employing the IBC as its lynchpin, the framework is intended
rightly  to  ensure  that  the  resolution  plan  for  stressed  assets  is  dictated  also,  and  in  fact,
primarily, by asset viability considerations.
5.  It must be stressed that the revised framework would allow lenders absolute flexibility to put
in  place  any  credible  resolution  plan,  as  under  the  pre-IBC  schemes,  subject  to  meeting
certain  implementation  conditions  (the  conditions  being  necessary  to  alleviate  concerns
relating to ever-greening of unviable assets).
6.  In particular, in respect of accounts with aggregate exposure greater than Rs. 2,000 crores,
the resolution plan would be required to be implemented within 180 days from the date of
default, failing which these would be referred under the IBC. This threshold would be brought
down only gradually over a period of two years to enable the IBC infrastructure to install in
parallel the required capacity to handle more cases. It must be emphasised that IBC itself is
a resolution framework, whereby such accounts will have sufficient time (180 days from the
date of default plus up to 270 days under the IBC) for effective resolution.
7.  It must also be underscored that under the revised framework:
Change of ownership is being favoured even prior to the IBC reference as it leads to
asset being classified as standard (as under the earlier schemes). The defaulting
promoters  also  risk  losing  control  of  the  firm  under  the  IBC  bidding.  Hence,  the
revised  framework  will  engender  incentives  for  borrowers  to  not  over-borrow  and
instead to manage better the various business risks that might lead to default.
There will also be greater incentive for lenders to implement an efficient turnaround
plan  to  get  a  quicker  upgrade  in  case  of  restructuring.  Further  since  there  is  no
forbearance for assets classified as NPAs, the revised framework will encourage
banks to reduce slippages to NPAs through early recognition of stress and timely
action, possibly even before a borrower gets into financial difficulty.
In other words, the IBC along with RBI’s revised framework will help break the promoter-
bank  nexus  which  has  led  to  crony  capitalism  and  attendant  NPA/credit  misallocation
problem  as  ever-greening  suited  some  borrowers  and  some  lenders  under  the  earlier
framework. In turn, this will prevent the erosion of growth from the emergence of zombie
firms and secto
1.  Finally,  the  revised  framework  specifically  excludes  the  revival  and  rehabilitation  of  Micro,
Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) with exposures of up to Rs. 25 crore, which shall
continue to be covered under the earlier norms.
We  believe  this  is  precisely  the  fundamental  reform  needed  in  order  to  strengthen  the  credit
 6 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
culture  at  origination,  default,  asset  quality  recognition  and  resolution  stages.  By  so  doing,  it
should weaken in the first place opportunities for engaging in frauds relating to loan advances.
Let me now make some Concluding remarks.
I have chosen to speak today to convey that we at the Reserve Bank of India also feel the anger,
hurt  and  pain  at  the  banking  sector  frauds  and  irregularities.  In  plain  simple  English,  these
practices  amount  to  a  looting  of  our  country’s  future  by  some  in  the  business  community,  in
cahoots with some lenders. As safeguards of your deposits at banks, and starting with the Asset
Quality Review of banks announced by the Reserve Bank in 2015 – since ably conducted by our
supervisory teams and as acknowledged objectively by experts of reputed multilateral agencies,
we are doing all we can to break this unholy nexus.
I see what we have undertaken for cleaning up the credit culture of the country – in particular, the
comprehensive  regulatory  overhaul  announced  by  the  Reserve  Bank  on  February  12th  for
prompt recognition and resolution of NPAs at banks – as the Mandara mount or the churning rod
in  the Amrit Manthan  or  the Samudra Manthan  of  the  modern  day  Indian  economy.  Until  the
churn is complete and the nectar of stability safely secured for the country’s future, someone
must consume the poison that emanates along the way. If we need to face the brickbats and be
the Neelakantha  consuming  this  poison,  we  will  do  so  as  our  duty;  we  will  persist  with  our
endeavours and get better with each trial and tribulation along the way.
I do wish more promoters and banks, individually – or collectively through their industry bodies,
would reconsider being on the side of Devas rather than Asuras in this Amrit Manthan.
The owner of our public sector banks – the government –which has provided the IBC, the related
ordinances and the bank recapitalisation package to get the churn going, might consider making
further, equally important contributions by:
1.  Making banking regulatory powers neutral to bank ownership and leveling the playing field
between public sector and private sector banks; and,
2.  Informing itself about what do with the public sector banking system going forward as part of
optimising over the best use of scarce national fiscal resources.
It  is  an  open  issue  whether  centralised  government  control  alone  can  be  effective  enough  at
designing  and  implementing  governance  of  banking  franchise  comprising  over  2/3rds  of  the
sector’s  deposits  and  assets.  It  would  be  better  instead  to  restore  regulatory  and  market
discipline.
These, and other structural reforms to the banking sector, would enable India to grow sustainably
at respectable rates. Thank you.
1
2
3
It is to be noted here that the FSAP also mentions in Other Regulation, Accounting, and Disclosure (CPs 20, 26–
29, Para 62, page 21): Currently, the external auditor is not obliged to report immediately to the RBI regulator
any issues encountered in the audited bank that are of material interest to the supervisor. This is only permitted
after publication of the annual statements. Moreover, regulators need powers to access the auditor’s working
papers when needed. This is currently not envisaged. The laws and/or regulations should explicitly authorise the
external auditor to inform the RBI of any concerns at any time; also, before the annual statements have been
finalised and published. The RBI should be given the explicit authority to obtain information at any time from the
external auditor. This point, however, applies both for public and private sector banks.
The exception to this is IDBI Bank Ltd., for which the Articles of Association (Clause 120) grant the RBI the
requisite authority.
Of  course,  there  are  several  other  (well  documented)  implications  of  being  public  sector  banks:  board
constitution,  wherein  it  is  difficult  to  categorise  any  director  as  independent;  significant  and  widening
 7 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
compensation differences with private sector banks, leading to the erosion of specialist skills; external vigilance
enforcement though the Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) and Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI); and
limited applicability of the Right To Information (RTI) Act.
4
The duality of banking regulatory powers exists even in the case of co-operative banks where the RBI has to
contend with several powers being vested away from it in hands of state governments. Co-operative banks are
typically small and their failures are dealt adequately with through liquidation by the Deposit Insurance and
Credit Guarantee Corporation (DICGC) which insures some of their depositors. This duality also needs to be
addressed  as  part  of  the  broader  banking  sector  reforms  to  improve  credit  culture  and  reduce  fraudulent
lending.
 8 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
