Nestor A  Espenilla,  Jr:  Continuity  plus-plus,  staying  ahead  of  the
curves
Speech by Mr Nestor A Espenilla, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank of the Philippines), at the Annual Reception for the Banking Community, Manila, 19 January
2018.
 Good evening.  It is my honor and pleasure to welcome you to the BSP’s Annual Reception for
the Banking Community.   This is the first reception I am hosting as Governor of the Bangko
Sentral ng Pilipinas.  On behalf of my co-hosts, Monetary Board members, Finance Secretary
Sonny Dominguez, Phillip Medalla,  Jun de Zuniga, Val Araneta, Peter Favila and Tony Abacan, I
thank  you sincerely for accepting our invitation, and your presence tonight at our historic Fort
San Antonio Abad.
In the last six (6) months, I have spoken at various venues.  Perhaps most of you have already
heard or read about a phrase I coined when I became BSP Governor in July 2017.  I am referring
to “Continuity Plus Plus,” a catchphrase for our  strategic direction.
“Continuity Plus Plus” first appreciates that there is an already strong foundation to support a
fast-growing economy and the opportunities it presents.  Buffers are in place to better prepare us
for external risks.  In this regard, stability demands continued dedication to the maintenance and
strengthening of this foundation and buffers. “Continuity Plus Plus” then also recognizes the need
for additional  strategic  financial  sector  reforms  to  strengthen  these  economic  buffers  and
pursue broad-based growth.
Review  of  2017.  2017  was  another  year  in  the  country’s  positive  economic  narrative.  The
country’s strong fundamentals, founded on the pursuit of broad-based reforms, provided ample
support for sustained expansion. 
 
In the third quarter of 2017, the economy grew by 6.9 percent, representing 75 quarters -- the
platinum equivalent -- of  uninterrupted  growth!      Inflation  averaged  3.2  percent,  well-within  the
target range of 2-4 percent. Our external position is strong. The peso’s movements remained
broadly in line with those in the region. International reserves stood at US$81.5 billion, covering
more than 8 months’ worth of imports of goods and payment of services.
The  Philippine  banking  system  is  safe  and  sound,  with  robust  expansion  in  credit  and
demonstrating capital adequacy, asset quality, liquidity, and profitability.  
Outlook  and  Assurance  of  Continuity.    2017  ended  on  a  solid  footing  for  the  Philippine
economy and we kicked-off 2018 in high gear.  As we move forward, the BSP remains optimistic
and vigilant.
Our  primary  challenge  concerns  risks  to  the  inflation  outlook  given  external  headwinds.  The
unwinding  of  accommodative  policies  in  advanced  economies  could  have  knock-on  effects,
contributing  to  potential  capital  outflows  from  emerging  economies  like  the  Philippines. 
Nevertheless, despite some uncertainty in oil market prices, production outages and geopolitical
concerns, we expect commodity prices to remain broadly stable in the coming months.
Our  inflation  forecasts  are  being  updated  to  consider  the  recent  increase  in  crude  oil  prices,
implementation of the tax reform program and peso movement.  We remain vigilant and ready to
timely respond to second-round effects and possible shifts in inflationary expectations.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
The BSP also endeavors to maintain a sound and stable financial system, monitoring for signs of
excessive credit and leverage.  We are building on existing frameworks for market surveillance to
take appropriate action. 
We will continue to pursue proactive prudential reforms.  Earlier this month, the Monetary Board
approved the adoption of minimum leverage ratio requirements. These will take effect on July 1,
2018.
We will complete roll-out of the liquidity management framework, including amendments to the
Basel III liquidity coverage ratio (LCR) standard; issuance of complementary minimum liquidity
ratio and net stable funding ratio standards; and intraday liquidity reporting guidelines.   
Financial Market Efficiency in a Growing Economy.  One theme that you should expect to
see from our reform agenda is market efficiency.  It is important that markets discover prices on
their own and for self-correcting mechanisms to be encouraged.  We are confident that this will
increase financial markets’ abilities to absorb shocks… so that the BSP can focus on its core
mandates.
Notably, banks have provided resilience and support for economic growth throughout the years.
But we also believe in developing a deeper domestic debt market to support long-term funding
needs of the economy and diversify risks within the financial system. 
This  year,  in  coordination  with  other  government  agencies,  industry  associations,  and  market
participants,  we  are  rolling  out  remaining  initiatives  under  the  Philippine  local  currency  debt
market development roadmap. 
Relatedly, we are closely tying-in the reform of reserve requirements with broader debt market
reform  to  allow  efficient  absorption  of  liquidity  and  their  mobilization  to  support  long-term
investments.
We would also want to see a deeper and more liquid foreign exchange (FX) market that supports
a  flexible  and  market-determined  exchange  rate.    This  will  further  fortify  our  defenses  against
external  shocks.    Ambitious  FX  reforms  towards  a  better  organized  FX  market  are  being
undertaken.
Leveraging  on  the  Technological  Exponential  Curve.  Alongside  these  reforms,  we  will
continue to leverage on digital innovations to expand reach.  The challenge to us all is how we
can  innovate  and  leverage  on  this  rapid  transformation  and  use  it  in  the  efficient  delivery  of
financial services and products.
In the BSP, efforts in this area are exemplified in the National Retail Payment System (NRPS)
initiative.  Two years since its launch, the project has reached critical milestones.  An industry-
driven self-governing body was established to drive the responsible development and operations
of the retail payment system.  Recently, the BSP adopted the NRPS framework through Circular
No. 980 to achieve a truly interoperable payments system.  These milestones are the result of
tremendous efforts among market participants and the BSP, a demonstration of cooperation in
order to achieve a truly interoperable payments system.
Last  January  12,  2018,  a  memorandum  of  agreement  with  the  Philippine  Payments
Management, Inc. (PPMI) was signed.  Another automated clearing house (ACH) – aside from
PESONet  –  will  also  be  launched  this  year.  “InstaPay”  will  enable  24/7,  real-time  low-value
electronic fund transfers that will support e-commerce.   
Pursuing Exponential Financial Inclusion.  The wonderful thing about financial inclusion is that
once one person is enabled and encouraged by the transformative value of such empowerment,
he or she is most likely to share ideas and the experience with others.. Certainly the exponential
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
curve of financial inclusion is one we pursue and celebrate.
We see technology as a tool to achieve this goal of accelerated financial inclusion.  The BSP will
continue  to  promote  digital  innovation  and  an  enabling  regulatory  environment  to  reach  the
financially  unserved  and  underserved.    We  support  the  inter-agency  initiative  to  establish  a
biometric  National  Identification  system  to  improve  accessibility  to,  and  delivery  of,  financial
services.
We  introduced  the  framework  for  basic  deposit  accounts  featuring  liberalized  onboarding,
minimal  opening  amounts,  zero  percent  reserve  requirements,  and  the  waiver  of  maintaining
balance and dormancy charges. We have adopted the “branch-lite” concept to enable banks to
further expand their networks.
Closing Thoughts
While  our  mandates  in  the  BSP  remain  the  same,  our  operating  environment  is  constantly
changing.  There is a need to adapt and to stay ahead of developments…  The BSP will continue
to provide an enabling environment for sustainable and broad-based economic growth, deploy
timely  measures  to  ward  off  any  potential  threat  to  financial  stability,  strengthen  domestic
sources  of  resilience,  and  leverage  on  technology  and  digitization  to  pursue  more  inclusive
growth.
Let us now offer a toast  (May I request the members of the Monetary Board to please join me on
stage)…    Dear  friends  from  the  banking  and  financial  industries,    industry  associations,
colleagues from government, the private sector, media and the academe,  let us raise a glass to
our  continued  partnership…    May  we  multiply  our  efforts  through  greater  collaboration  and
cooperation  so  we  could  stay  ahead  of  all  curves  and  bring  about  exponential  returns  for  our
beloved Philippines and our fellow Filipinos.  Cheers!
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
