Philip R Lane: The macroeconomics of price and wage-setting
Panel remarks by Mr Philip R Lane, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, at the ECB Forum
on Central Banking, Sintra, 19 June 2018.
 In  my  remarks,  I  will  focus  on  three  questions:  (i)  how  should  central  banks  respond  to  low
inflation?;  (ii)  how  should  central  banks  react  to  headwind  shocks  to  inflation;  and  (iii)  how
effective  have  been  unconventional  monetary  policy  measures  in  lifting  inflation  towards  the
target level?
I will discuss these questions in the context of the euro area and the monetary strategy of the
ECB that has included non-standard elements (negative interest rate, forward guidance, asset
purchase  programme,  targeted  long-term  liquidity  refinancing  operations)  since  the  middle  of
2014.
The policy package that was initially launched in Summer 2014 was a response to the below-
target outlook for the inflation rate and the subdued level of aggregate demand in the euro area. If
the ECB had not taken decisive action, it is possible to entertain alternative scenarios in which
expectations  of  ultra-low  inflation  or  even  deflation  took  hold.  An  excessively-tight  monetary
stance  could  also  have  contributed  to  further  recessionary  impulses,  especially  given  the
vulnerability of highly-indebted groups to adverse feedback dynamics between high lending rates,
low aggregate demand and high bank funding conditions in some member countries.
Accordingly, the experience of the last several years is that a phase of persistently-low inflation
requires a vigorous central bank response. Praet (2018) estimates that the ECB’s package of
unconventional measures will add a cumulative 1.9 percentage points to both inflation and output
over  2016–2020,  which  has  been  achieved  through  an  easing  of  financial  conditions  and  the
anchoring of inflation expectations. Furthermore, the probability distribution of inflation has shifted
to the right, with very little weight now attached to deflation scenarios. In the absence of these
non-standard measures, the inflation and output outlook for the euro area would be substantially
worse.
Let me emphasise that such measures take time to operate, such that the gap between current
inflation and the inflation target can only be closed gradually. During an extended period in which
inflation  is  below  its  target,  it  is  vital  that  a  central  bank  is  energetic  and  consistent  in
communicating  its  commitment  to  meeting  its  medium-term  inflation  target,  while  also  being
transparent  about  the  need  for  patience  during  the  convergence  process.  A  successful
communications strategy also involves publishing as much as possible in terms of the central
bank’s  analysis  of  the  impact  of  non-standard  measures,  especially  in  view  of  the  limited
historical track record for such policies.
In addition to the role played by the considerable economic slack that remained after the 2008–
2012 crisis years, temporary factors such as a phase of declining oil prices during 2014–2016
and  some  sectoral 
the  price  of
telecommunications bundles) have also contributed to below-target inflation. Considerable effort
is  devoted  to  unpicking  pricing  dynamics  between  less-volatile  and  more-volatile  components
and between more-cyclical and less-cyclical sectors, even while the target rate is appropriately
measured  in  relation  to  headline  inflation.  As  temporary  and  one-off  factors  fade  away,  the
headline path should align with the underlying persistent component of inflation.
relative  price  movements 
(such  as  declines 
in 
At  one  level,  the  distinction  between  the  current  headline  inflation  rate  (affected  by  one-off
factors) and the target medium-term inflation rate is well understood, since the practical reality of
transmission lags means that central banks must necessarily set policy in relation to the medium
term. However, if headline inflation is persistently below the target rate, this runs the risk of de-
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
anchoring inflation expectations and can also lead to slower adjustment towards the target to the
extent that there are backward-looking elements in price- and wage-setting. This reinforces the
essential role played by a clear and consistent communication strategy that the central bank is
intent  on  achieving  its  inflation  target  in  the  medium  term  and  is  acting  through  its  full  set  of
monetary policy instruments to ensure that inflation is on a path that will sustainably converge
towards the target.
Returning  to  the  2014  debate  on  whether  unconventional  monetary  instruments  would  prove
helpful in tackling low inflation in the euro area, the accumulated evidence since then has proven
the value of these measures. In a situation in which there was room for an easing in financial
conditions  and  there  was  considerable  economic  slack,  the  combined  impact  of  the  different
measures delivered a level shift downwards in the yield curve and a considerable reduction in
lending rates. In turn, the easing in financial conditions and the commitment to the inflation target
have facilitated a positive but measured pace of credit growth in recent years and a broad-based
recovery in domestic activity levels across the euro area, together with a positive contribution
from  external  demand  that  was  especially  important  during  2014–2015. As  noted  earlier,  the
probability distribution for inflation has shifted rightwards and projections for inflation and output
are more positive than would have been the case in the absence of these measures.
At the same time, inflation remains below target: as re-confirmed by the Governing Council at
last  week’s  meeting,  an  accommodative  monetary  strategy  will  remain  in  place  in  order  to
underpin the ongoing adjustment path for inflation towards its medium-term target.
 Acknowledgements: I thank Robert Goodhead and Shayan Zakipour-Saber for their assistance in
preparing these remarks.
Reference:  Peter  Praet  (2018),  “Assessment  of  Quantitative  Easing  and  Challenges  of  Policy
Normalisation,” Speech at The ECB and Its Watchers XIX Conference, Frankfurt, 14th March.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
