  Inflation targeting in New Zealand:  
an experience in evolution 
A speech delivered to the Reserve Bank of Australia  
conference on central bank frameworks, in Sydney 
On 12 April 2018 
By Dr John McDermott, Assistant Governor 
and Rebecca Williams, Economics Advisor 
     
2 The Terrace, PO Box 2498, Wellington 6140, New Zealand 
Telephone 64 4 472 2029 Online at www.rbnz.govt.nz  
     2 
 Introduction 
It is a pleasure to discuss an issue that is especially pertinent for the Reserve Bank of New 
Zealand  at  present  –  the  evolution  of  central  bank  frameworks.  As  many  of  you  will  be 
aware,  the  New  Zealand  Government  is  in  the  process  of  changing  our  monetary  policy 
framework,  to  add  employment  to  our  existing  mandate  of  price  stability  and  formalise  a 
decision-making structure based on a committee. This would bring us closer to a framework 
like the one here in Australia, and in the United States of America. 
 
This paper is in a section titled Twenty Years of Inflation Targeting, but in New Zealand it 
has  actually  been  much  closer  to  thirty.  The  RBNZ  Act  came  into  effect  February  1990, 
making New Zealand the first country to formally adopt inflation targeting as we now know it.  
 
New Zealand’s experience has been one of evolution. As the Bank established its credibility 
– by which I mean it became clear that we could and would meet our price stability objective 
– we were able to develop a more flexible approach to inflation targeting, consistent with the 
literature and with developments in other inflation-targeting countries.  
 
We are about to enter the next stage of that evolution. I believe this next step is indeed an 
evolution, which builds on the flexible approach we have been taking for some time, rather 
than a revolution. That said, it is still too early to determine precisely what effect the new 
framework will have on the implementation of monetary policy. The New Zealand framework 
has  changed  significantly  over  thirty  years,  reflecting  lessons  learned  and  the  changing 
economic and political environment. And it is likely to  continue to evolve as we are faced 
with new developments.  
 
You may be very familiar with our pioneer’s tale, and want me to cut to the chase – our move 
towards  a  dual  mandate  and  formalised  committee.  But  before  I  touch  on  where  we  are 
going,  I  want  to  provide  you  with  some  context  –  where  we  started,  and  where  we  have 
been.  
 
The origins of inflation targeting: a need for credibility 
As  I  have  noted,  inflation  targeting  as  we  now  know  it  was  pioneered  in  New  Zealand.1,2 
Other countries had been pursuing disinflationary monetary policy since the late 1970s, and 
by the early 1980s most OECD countries were announcing some form of money or credit 
target in an attempt to convince public and markets that they were taking the challenge of 
controlling  inflation  seriously  (Reddell,  1999).  But  the  focus  internationally  was  on  these 
‘intermediate’ targets – the quantity of money or credit – rather than targeting inflation itself. 
Intermediate  targets  were  thought  to  be  informative  for  monetary  policy  as  they  were 
 1 Bernanke et al. (1999) provide a widely-cited definition of inflation targeting.  
2 Italy, Greece and Portugal all published single year targets for inflation at times during the early 1980s, 
and Sweden briefly operated a form of price level targeting in the 1930s. However, none of these 
provided a complete, sustained structure for inflation targeting of the kind now understood by the term. 
In the 1970s and 1980s, West Germany conducted monetary policy in a framework that closely 
resembled inflation targeting, although it was officially designated as money targeting (Bernanke and 
Mihov, 1996). In addition, in 1995 the Bundesbank itself drew a distinction between its approach and 
inflation-targeting, arguing at the time that inflation-targeting was the inferior approach.    
Ref #7482042 v2.2 
   3 
 susceptible to a degree of central bank control. However, the extent to which intermediate 
targets were connected to the objective of price stability was subject to debate.3  
 
In the 1970s and 1980s, New Zealand had a very poor track record of price stability. Annual 
inflation  had  been  around  10  to  15  percent  since  the  early  1970s  (figure  1),  and  was 
considerably higher than inflation in our main trading partners. A key driver of high inflation in 
New Zealand over this period was government spending, accommodated by generally loose 
monetary policy (Grimes, 1996). There had been episodes of tight monetary policy over this 
period.  But  successive  governments  had  been  unwilling  to  face  the  short-term  costs  to 
output and employment that disinflation brought with it, and had loosened policy again.    
 
Figure 1: Annual CPI inflation (target range shaded) 
 Source: Statistics New Zealand. 
 
Bringing high inflation under control was a key priority for the Labour Government that came 
into  power  in  New  Zealand  in  July  1984.4  In  1986,  the  then  Minister  of  Finance  Roger 
Douglas  invited  officials  to  explore  options  for  reforming  the  monetary  policy  framework, 
aiming  to  reduce  the  scope  for  political  influence  that  had  seen  past  attempts  to  control 
inflation fail so badly.  
 
The framework that evolved over the next four years was the culmination of various strands 
of  economic  thought  and  the  principles  that  were  underpinning  the  wider  reform  of  New 
Zealand’s public sector at the time.5,6 At its core, the framework that emerged provided the 
Bank  with  a  means  to  establish  credibility  that  we  would  bring  inflation  down  and  keep  it 
there.  
 
                                                
3 See for example Friedman (1984) and Friedman (1990). 
4 Then Reserve Bank Governor Spencer Russell (1984) discussed the new Government’s commitment to 
bring inflation under control: “We have had periods of tight monetary policy in the past. But by backing 
off at the eleventh hour, money and credit growth rates have been allowed to expand excessively again 
and the benefits from the temporary period of tightness have been lost. The Government has made it clear 
this will not be the case again”.  
5 Reddell (1999) contains a detailed discussion of the origins and early development of the inflation 
target; Grimes (1996) also provides a comprehensive summary of monetary policy developments within 
the wider reform environment. 
6 Don Brash, who was the first Governor of the inflation-targeting era, once said of the origins of inflation 
targeting in New Zealand “I will simply note that history can be surprisingly confusing, even for those 
who were there” (Brash, 1998). 
Ref #7482042 v2.2 
   4 
 And why does credibility matter? If policymakers are able to convince firms and workers that 
they  will  set  policy  to  achieve  the  inflation  target,  this  anchoring  of  inflation  expectations 
makes it more likely that prices and wages will be set in a manner consistent with the target, 
even in the face of shocks to the economy. This naturally makes the target itself easier to 
achieve.  
 
Picture the New Zealand inflation-targeting framework as a newly-planted tree. In the 1970s 
and  1980s,  several  seedlings  of  low  inflation  had  been  planted,  but  none  took  hold.  The 
ground conditions – a highly regulated financial market and economy – were not conducive 
to growth, and the winds of politics kept blowing the seeds of low-inflation away before they 
had a chance to flourish.  
 
By the mid-1980s, ground conditions were much improved. New Zealand had gone through 
a  dramatic  period  of  financial  market  reform  in  the  nine  months  between  July  1984  and 
March 1985. The float of the New Zealand dollar and the commitment of the government to 
fund the fiscal deficit via issuance of public debt to the private sector freed up the Bank to 
pursue  domestic  monetary  policy  (Kamber  et  al.,  2015).  To  ensure  that  inflation-targeting 
could establish credibility and take hold, four highly-related aspects of the framework were 
provided  as  stakes  in  the  ground  to  support  the  new  sapling.7  These  stakes  were: 
operational  independence;  transparency;  the  single  objective  of  price  stability;  and  the 
Governor as sole decision maker, which I will now discuss in turn. 
 
(i) 
Operational independence (RBNZ Act Section 13) 
Firstly, operational independence. The Reserve Bank Act (1989) provided the Bank with its 
operational  independence  and  its  monetary  policy  objective.8  It  was  heavily  influenced  by 
the  literature  on  the  time  inconsistency  of  monetary  policy  and  the  experience  during  the 
1970s and 1980s, in which successive governments had been unwilling to endure the short-
term effects of disinflation for the longer-term gains of price stability.9 The specific monetary 
policy target of the 1989 Act was to be publicly agreed in a Policy Targets Agreement (PTA) 
between the Minister of Finance and the Governor of the Reserve Bank. Prior to the late-
1980s,  Reserve  Bank  independence  had  been  non-existent:  the  1973  Amendment  to  the 
RBNZ  Act  had  stated  that  the  Bank  was  to  “give  effect  to  the  monetary  policy  of  the 
 7 It is worth noting that the Act does not specify that there must be targets for inflation itself. The Act 
specifies only “policy targets for the carrying out by the Bank of its [price stability objective]”, which 
leaves open the possibility of specifying targets such as nominal GDP consistent with medium-term price 
stability.  
8 Except as otherwise provided for in the Act: Section 12 allows for the Bank to be directed by the 
Governor-General to implement policy for a different economic objective than the one in Section 8, by 
Order in Council on the advice of the Minister. This Section was included primarily for use in times of 
emergency (such as wartime) and has never been used. Any temporary redirection of policy would be 
well publicised since Orders in Council must be published in the New Zealand Gazette. The Reserve Bank 
Act (1989) can be accessed at 
http://www.legislation.govt.nz/act/public/1989/0157/latest/DLM199364.html. 
9 The time inconsistency problem is that authorities have an incentive to promise low inflation in the 
future, but then renege in order to boost activity (in order to obtain more votes, for example). As firms 
and households begin to anticipate this behaviour, their expectations of inflation increase and so they set 
prices and demand wages accordingly. The economy then ends up in a worse position with higher 
inflation and (potentially) higher unemployment (see, for example, Barro and Gordon, 1983). 
Ref #7482042 v2.2 
   5 
 Government”.10  The  RBNZ  Act  (1989)  provided  the  Bank  with  credibility  in  meeting  its 
objective by no longer being subject to concerns or incentives regarding the electoral cycle.  
 
(ii) 
Transparency (RBNZ Act Section 15) 
Monetary  policy  operates  with  significant  lags  and  in  an  inherently  uncertain  environment, 
and  therefore  naturally  requires  a  great  deal  of  judgement  and  discretion.  To  ensure  that 
operational independence was used appropriately, the Act also specified a high degree of 
transparency  in  how  the  Bank  formulated  policy.  The  Act  requires  the  Bank  to  publish 
regular  statements  on  its  monetary  policy  decisions  and  for  these  to  be  laid  before 
Parliament.  The  Governor’s  deliberations  were  also  to  be  monitored  and  assessed  by  a 
Board consisting of members appointed by the Minister of Finance. 
 
(iii) 
Single objective (RBNZ Act Section 8) 
Providing the Bank with one objective, rather than a list of objectives – production, trade, full 
employment and price stability – as had been the case previously, made it more credible that 
the  Bank  could  actually  achieve  its  mandate.  The  Act  states  “The  primary  function  of  the 
Bank is to formulate and implement monetary policy directed to the economic objective of 
achieving and maintaining stability in the general level of prices.” It acknowledged that price 
stability  was  the  greatest  contribution  monetary  policy  could  make  to  New  Zealand’s 
economic wellbeing. It recognised the limitations of monetary policy over the medium term, 
and provided the Bank, financial markets and wider public with a clear objective for policy. 
Moreover, the initial PTA clearly defined price stability with a numerical target band of 0 to 2 
percent. This clear numerical target provided a nominal anchor against which the Governor’s 
performance could be assessed and around which inflation expectations could converge. 
 
(iv) 
Single decision maker (RBNZ Act Section 9)  
The  final  stake  in  the  ground  was  the  assignment  of  authority  and  responsibility  to  an 
individual – the Governor. This ‘single decision-maker’ model was highly influenced by the 
principles  underpinning  the  reform  of  the  wider  public  sector  at  the  time,  which  gave 
individual  public  sector  managers  the  authority  to  manage  but  made  them  directly 
accountable  for  outputs  (Reddell,  1999  and  Sherwin,  1999).  The  employment  contract 
between  the  Minister  of  Finance  and  the  Governor  evolved  into  the  PTA.  The  legislation 
made  it  clear  that  the  Governor  could  lose  his  or  her job for  “inadequate  performance”  in 
meeting these objectives.11  
 
In  summary,  the  inflation-targeting  framework  established  in  the  late  1980s  was  planted 
under  conditions  that  increased  its  likelihood  of  success.  The  four  stakes  of  operational 
independence, transparency, the single objective of price stability, and the single decision-
maker model provided essential support to a new framework, and encouraged it to take root 
and establish its credibility. And why have I taken you on this history lesson? To provide you 
with some context on the New Zealand framework, and to introduce some aspects of the 
framework that remain as critical today as they were in 1989, and some that are about to 
change. But I will come back to that shortly.  
                                                
10 Graham and Smith (2012) provide a history of Reserve Bank of New Zealand independence. 
11 Donald Brash (2002) recalls the response of the Minister responsible for the Reserve Bank legislation 
to his initial surprise that the PTA would be between the Government and Governor, rather than the 
Government and the Bank “We can’t fire the whole Bank. Realistically, we can’t even fire the whole Board. 
But we sure as hell can fire you!” 
Ref #7482042 v2.2 
   6 
 The evolution of inflation targeting: increasingly flexible 
Since being planted in the late-1980s, New Zealand’s framework has evolved significantly. 
As pioneers, it was always unlikely that we could introduce a framework that got everything 
‘right’ from the start, especially given that the environment in which policy operates has itself 
developed a lot over the years (Sherwin, 2000).  
 
The evolution of the inflation-targeting framework in New Zealand can be characterised as 
one of increasing flexibility, consistent with the academic literature and with developments in 
other advanced economies. As our tree grew taller and its roots grew deeper – as we gained 
credibility by actually meeting our target, and anchored inflation expectations – we could be 
more confident that our tree could bend in the wind, without being uprooted.  
 
What exactly do I mean by flexibility? Over the past three decades, monetary policymakers 
and academics have learned that there is a trade-off, not between inflation and output, but 
between the volatility of inflation and output. Monetary policy that is set to offset short-term 
movements in inflation away from target – referred to as ‘strict’ inflation targeting – will result 
in  more  volatility  in  output  and  other  economic  variables  such  as  employment  and  the 
exchange rate.12 As the Bank established its credibility in achieving its inflation target, we 
could allow some volatility in realised inflation in order to offset some volatility elsewhere in 
the economy. In practice, this means that interest rates have generally been adjusted more 
slowly.  And  in  this  sense,  the  Bank  has  increasingly  paid  regard  to  the  wider  economy 
despite  having  a  consistent  overall  objective  of  price  stability  specified  in  the  Act.  This 
increasingly  flexible  approach  has,  however,  been  reflected  in  the  evolving  content  of 
successive PTAs over the past thirty years. 
 
The PTA – which you will remember provides the Bank with its specific target in meeting its 
overall objective – must be renegotiated with the Minister of Finance each time a Governor is 
appointed  or  reappointed,  and  has  also  tended  to  be  updated  on  the  formation  of  a  new 
government. This process naturally lends itself to incremental adjustments, influenced by the 
economic and political environment at the time. Since 1990, there have been 13 PTAs, with 
some alterations more significant than others. The Reserve Bank of New Zealand has seen 
more changes to its target than most other inflation-targeting central banks, and the process 
of renegotiation also provides more opportunity for government direction than is the case in 
some other countries (Wadsworth, 2017).  
 
In some ways, the number of changes has been less than ideal, as it has the potential to 
undermine the public’s faith in the policy target. But since these changes have formalised 
things that we have learned in the process of operating policy, and reflected the underlying 
goals of the public via the political process, they have been entirely appropriate. 
 
There  are  several  highly-related  dimensions  of  flexibility,  and  I  will  now  take  you  through 
some  key  developments  in  New  Zealand’s  inflation-targeting  framework  along  these 
dimensions, which are summarised in table 1 below.  
 
 
  12 See for example Svensson (1997). 
Ref #7482042 v2.2 
   7 
 Table 1: Evolution of flexible inflation targeting in New Zealand 1990-2017  
 Early to mid-1990s 
Late 1990s & 2000s 
    
2010s 
Initially, target to be 
achieved by a set date 
 
Dec 1990: Annual 
inflation to remain inside 
the target band, and the 
Bank to calculate and 
explain deviations due to 
shocks outside the 
Bank’s control (explicit 
‘caveats’)  
 Time to target implicitly 
lengthened; Bank to 
respond to general 
inflationary pressure 
 
List of shocks that could 
result in deviation from 
target became illustrative, 
rather than exhaustive 
 
2002: medium-term focus 
made explicit 
 1999: Bank shall seek to 
avoid unnecessary 
instability in output, 
interest rates and the 
exchange rate 
Time to target 
Secondary 
considerations 
Explicit medium-term 
focus has remained 
 2012: Bank to have 
regard to the efficiency 
and soundness of the 
financial system; Bank to 
monitor asset prices 
 
Other secondary 
considerations (stability 
of output, interest rates 
and the exchange rate) 
have remained 
    Target 
definition 
Initially, 0-2 percent 
 
1996: 0-3 percent 
2002: 1-3 percent 
2012: 1-3 percent, with a 
focus on the 2 percent 
target midpoint 
  
Early to mid-1990s 
The initial inflation target of 0-2 percent originated primarily as a communications device – a 
way  for  Minister  Roger  Douglas  to  refocus  expectations  and  convince  the  public  that  the 
anti-inflation drive would continue (Reddell, 1999).13 Inflation was within the target by 1991, 
and stayed there until June 1995 when adverse weather pushed up the prices of fruit and 
vegetables and saw inflation increase to 2.2 percent.  
                                                
13 During a televised interview broadcast on 1 April 1988, Roger Douglas said that policy was to be 
directed to reducing inflation to “around zero to one percent” over the following couple of years. By the 
June 1988 RBNZ Bulletin the Bank felt confident enough to describe the ultimate goal as being “price 
stability by the 1990s” and that “in terms of the CPI, this objective is likely to be consistent with a small 
positive measured inflation rate, in the order of 0-2 percent, as a result of several problems in the 
construction of the index.” (Reddell, 1988).  
Ref #7482042 v2.2 
   8 
 Over  the  next  few  years,  inflation  remained  at  the  top  of  or  marginally  above  the  target 
range.  
With hindsight, the Bank was slow to recognise the pace of acceleration of the economy in 
1992/93, and relied on the transmission of policy via the exchange rate to a greater extent 
than was ideal given the structural changes we later learned were underway (RBNZ, 2000a). 
The  Bank  learned  that  keeping  inflation  within  such  a  narrow  range  could  likely  only  be 
achieved  at  the  cost  of  undesirably  high  volatility  in  the  real  economy,  and  began  talking 
about the target as something that we would constantly aim for rather than something we 
could – or should – deliver every quarter (Brash, 2002).  
 
Since December 1990, PTAs had contained some allowance for actual inflation to deviate 
from target. These were in the form of explicit ‘caveats’ or ‘principal shocks’ recognised as 
being outside the Bank’s control. We were required to calculate and publish the direct effect 
these had on inflation outcomes. In practice, we found it increasingly difficult to determine 
which  items  to  include  or  exclude,  and  were  exposed  to  (although  never  received  much) 
criticism that we could manipulate the calculation in order to meet our objective. 
 
In  1996,  the target  was  widened  to  0-3  percent,  reflecting  the  new  National/New  Zealand 
First  Coalition Government’s  preferences  (RBNZ,  2000b). The  Bank  was  comfortable  with 
this  widening  as  we  felt  it  was  unlikely  to  materially  affect  monetary  policy  credibility  or 
adversely  affect  inflation  expectations.14  By  allowing  slightly  more  inflation  variability  it 
enabled policy to offset volatility in the real economy to a greater extent. The 1996 PTA also 
modified the explanation of the Bank’s overall objective to be more explicit that price stability 
was  the  best  contribution  that  monetary  policy  could  make  to  economic  growth  and 
employment, rather than simply being an end in and of itself (RBNZ, 2000b).  
 
Late 1990s and 2000s 
As the Bank learned more about the transmission of monetary policy in the New Zealand 
economy during the 1990s, we put increasing weight on real economy channels and less on 
direct exchange rate effects (Brash, 1998). Specifically, we found that the pass-through of 
nominal exchange rate changes into local prices had become more muted over the 1990s. 
This meant that the slower part of the monetary policy transmission mechanism  – via the 
real  economy  –  was  given  even  greater  prominence  in  meeting  our  objective  (RBNZ, 
2000a). This change in emphasis effectively lengthened the horizon over which policy was 
formulated, which in itself encouraged less variability in interest rates, the exchange rate and 
output.  
 
In 1999, the incoming Labour/Alliance Coalition Government initiated the modification of the 
PTA  to  state  that  “In  pursuing  its  price  stability  objective,  the  Bank…  shall  seek  to  avoid 
unnecessary  instability  in  output,  interest  rates  and  the  exchange  rate”.  The  Bank  viewed 
these changes as largely confirming the flexible approach we had been taking for most of 
the inflation-targeting period (RBNZ, 2000b). It reflected that several policy paths could be 
chosen  in  order  to  meet  our  inflation  target,  and  the  effect  of  these  paths  on  the  real 
 14 Recent research by the Bank has found that the widening of the target did result in an increase in long-
term inflation expectations, but that this increase was not statistically significant (Lewis and McDermott, 
2016). 
Ref #7482042 v2.2 
   9 
 economy  and  other  variables  was  influential  in  determining  which  path  was  ultimately 
selected (RBNZ, 2000c).  
 
The  changes  were  also  a  reflection  of  economic  developments.  The  Bank  initially 
underestimated  the  combined  effect  of  the  Asian  financial  crisis  and  the  droughts  that 
affected rural New Zealand in the summers of 1997/98 and 1998/99, which led to recession 
in New Zealand. We operate in an uncertain world, and monetary policy would never have 
been  able  to  completely  offset  the  effect  of  these  shocks.  Yet  the  way  we  implemented 
monetary  policy  over  this  period  –  via  the  Monetary  Conditions  Index  (MCI),15  which  was 
introduced in mid-1997 – shaped the response in a way that probably contributed to the fall 
in  output  and  added  unnecessary  interest  rate  volatility  (RBNZ,  2000a).  The  Bank 
recognised  this,  and  we  replaced  the  MCI  with  the  Official  Cash  Rate  (OCR)  as  the 
instrument of monetary policy in March 1999. The MCI was a branch that we lopped off fairly 
quickly.    
 
In  May  2000,  the  Minister  of  Finance  invited  Professor  Lars  Svensson  to  review  the 
operation  of  monetary  policy  in  New  Zealand.  He  found  the  framework  to  be  “entirely 
consistent with the best international practice of flexible inflation targeting, with a medium-
term  inflation  target  that  avoids  unnecessary  variability  in  output,  interest  rates  and  the 
exchange  rate”  (Svensson,  2000).  He  did  recommend  a  move  from  the  single-decision 
maker to committee model, but the Government chose not to support this recommendation 
at this time (see Government’s response to Monetary Policy Review, 2001). 
 
But  during  the  early  2000s,  concern  continued  to  grow  among  politicians,  industry 
representatives,  commentators  and  the  wider  public  that  the  economy’s  trend growth  rate 
had been unnecessarily constrained by the performance of monetary policy (RBNZ, 2002). 
Those expressing concern suggested that this constraint resulted from a target that was too 
low  and  policy  that  was  too  aggressive.  It  was  argued  that  these  factors  had  resulted  in 
interest  rates that  were too  high  on  average,  and  in  interest  rates  and  the  exchange  rate 
being too volatile. 
 
The  Bank  noted the  long-held  and  internationally-accepted  view  that monetary  policy  was 
unlikely  to  have  a  large  influence  on  the  long-run  performance  of  the  economy,  and  that 
there was no evidence that policy in New Zealand was more aggressive than elsewhere. But 
we  also  had  not found any  clear  evidence that trend  inflation  of 2  percent  would  produce 
better or worse outcomes for trend growth than trend inflation of 1.5 percent. In the end, the 
target (and therefore midpoint) was changed to 1-3 percent in the 2002 PTA. Recent Bank 
research has found that this change was accompanied by an immediate increase in long-run 
inflation expectations (Lewis and McDermott, 2016).  
 
The  2002  PTA  also  made  the  medium-term  focus  of  monetary  policy  explicit,  and  firmly 
embedded the flexible approach (see, for example, Hunt, 2004). It changed the target from 
“12-monthly  increases”  to  “future  CPI  inflation  outcomes…  on  average  over  the  medium 
term”. This medium-term focus has been an enduring feature of PTAs to this day. The Bank 
                                                
15 The MCI was a weighted summation of the exchange rate and short-term interest rate, with weights 
reflecting each variable’s medium-term effect on aggregate demand and thus inflation. The MCI was used 
to identify the overall stance of monetary policy and to communicate the likely direction and extent of 
change in stance going forward.   
Ref #7482042 v2.2 
   10 
 has interpreted this target to mean that it should set policy in order for inflation to remain or 
settle comfortably within the target band in the latter half of a three-year horizon (Bollard and 
Ng, 2008). 
 
During the mid-2000s, economic developments reignited concern about the monetary policy 
framework.  Although  New  Zealand  had  been  one  of  the faster-growing  OECD  economies 
since  the  early  1990s,  this  growth  had  been  accompanied  by  the  emergence  of 
macroeconomic  imbalances:  a  relatively  large  current  account  deficit,  high  house  price 
inflation  and  household  indebtedness,  and  a  real  exchange  rate  that  had  risen  to  levels 
sometimes regarded as unjustified by medium-term fundamentals (RBNZ, 2007b). In early 
2007, the Government requested another inquiry into the monetary policy framework.  
 
The Bank reiterated that there was no compelling evidence to suggest that these features 
had arisen from the design of the monetary policy framework. We recognised that with the 
benefit  of  hindsight,  we  had  been  slow  to  fully  recognise  the  strength  of  demand  and 
housing market pressure on inflation over the cycle. However, this was a feature of having to 
operate policy under uncertainty (RBNZ, 2007a and Chetwin and Reddell, 2012). We noted 
that solutions to New Zealand’s imbalances were likely to lie in other policy domains, and 
suggested  several  ‘supplementary  stabilisation  instruments’.16  Following  the  review,  the 
Government decided not to make any changes to the RBNZ Act or the PTA,17 nor introduce 
any of the suggested instruments (see FEC, 2008 for the full report).  
 
Monetary  policy  during  the  global  financial  crisis  (GFC)  of  2008/09  demonstrated  the 
flexibility of the inflation targeting framework. Despite CPI inflation being driven well above 
the  target  band  by  higher  oil  prices  over  2008,  the  Bank  reduced  the  Official  Cash  Rate 
(OCR)  by  575  basis  points  between  June  2008  and  June  2009. Our tree  remained firmly 
planted, anchored by its roots of credibility, despite the largest global storm since the Great 
Depression.  Longer-term  inflation  expectations  remained  within  the  target  range,  and  the 
reduction in the OCR helped support the New Zealand economy at a time of global distress 
(see, for example, Chetwin, 2012). 
 
2010s 
The  GFC  led  many  central  banks  to  focus  more  heavily  on  how  financial  system 
developments should be treated by monetary policy. The Bank had always monitored asset 
prices  and  taken  them  into  account  in  both  monetary  and  prudential  policy  (see  Bollard, 
2004), and the Reserve Bank Act had long contained a requirement for the Bank to have 
regard for financial stability when setting monetary policy. However, the 2012 PTA made this 
explicit  by  adding  asset  prices  to the  list  of  prices  the  Bank  was  directed  to  monitor,  and 
including the requirement that the Bank “have regard to the efficiency and soundness of the 
financial system” (see Kendall and Ng, 2013).  
 
 16 These included cyclical variations in migrant approvals, increasing the responsiveness of housing 
supply, measures to limit procyclicality in fiscal policy, and consideration of various aspects of the tax 
regime (RBNZ, 2007a and RBNZ, 2007b).  
17 The FEC (2008, p.16) report stated that “Continuity is an important part of this framework, providing 
the public with confidence in the framework’s commitment to low and stable inflation. In view of the 
broad success of the framework, we do not recommend any change to the framework.” 
Ref #7482042 v2.2 
   11 
 The Reserve Bank of New Zealand is unusual internationally, although not unique, in having 
both monetary policy and prudential responsibilities. In October 2013, the Bank introduced 
restrictions  on  high-LVR  mortgage  lending.18  While  these  macroprudential  tools  were 
introduced for financial stability purposes, they clearly interact with monetary policy’s goal of 
price stability – particularly given the strong relationship between house prices and domestic 
demand  we  have  observed  in  previous  economic  cycles  in  New  Zealand.  Although  they 
have  different  objectives,  our  macroprudential  policies  were  complementary  to  monetary 
policy  when  first  introduced;  the  LVR  restrictions  were  acting  to  reduce  growth  in  house 
prices  at  a  time  when  the  Bank  expected  inflationary  pressures  to  build  (see  Williams, 
2017a).  But  as  the  outlook  for  inflation  weakened,  the  policies  began  to  have  opposing 
implications for the business cycle. The PTA is clear that monetary policy must have regard 
to financial stability but it does not – and probably cannot – specify exactly what trade-offs 
should be entertained. The optimal balance between price and financial stability remains an 
area of ongoing research in New Zealand and abroad.19 
 
An explicit reference to the target midpoint was also incorporated into the 2012 PTA, so that 
it  now  read  “keep  future  CPI  inflation  outcomes  between  1  per  cent  and  3  per  cent  on 
average over the medium term, with a focus on keeping future average inflation near the 2 
per cent target midpoint”. This was motivated by the desire to anchor inflation expectations 
more firmly to 2 per cent, as they had been close to the upper end of the target band for 
most of the inflation targeting period (Kendall and Ng, 2013). 
 
In recent  years,  inflation  in  New  Zealand  has  been  persistently  low,  as  in many  countries 
around the world. We have undertaken a great deal of research to better understand why 
this  has  been  the  case,  and  what  characteristics  of  this  expansion  have  differed  from 
expansions before it (see Williams, 2017b, for a summary of this work). Some features have 
simply been revealed with the passage of time, and some reflect our evolving understanding 
of  how  the  economy  operates.  But  we  have  not  found  any  features  that  imply  that  the 
framework  itself  should  be  revolutionised  –  that  the  Bank  has  been  confronted  with  new 
developments is an unavoidable fact of life, not just monetary policy.20   
 
Where to from here? The next stage in our evolution 
Our  increasingly  flexible  approach  to  inflation  targeting  outlined  above  has  been  made 
possible by the achievement and maintenance of credibility regarding our framework. There 
are two key aspects of the framework – two of our stakes in the ground – that remain as 
important  today  as  they  were  in  1989.  These  are  operational  independence  and 
transparency.21  
 
Changes to the PTA have tended to reflect actual Bank practice at the time, but have also 
often been initiated by the government of the day. The Bank has seen several government 
reviews  of  its  framework,  often  in  response  to  macroeconomic  developments.  And  this  is 
                                                
18 See for example Rogers (2013) and Dunstan (2014). 
19 Kamber et al. (2015) note that while the importance of coordination depends on the magnitude of the 
externalities that each policy has on the other, how large these effects are is currently not well 
understood. Since the Bank is jointly responsible for both policies, these trade-offs should necessarily 
influence the settings of both monetary and macroprudential policies.  
20 See a speech I gave in 2017, on “The value of forecasting in an uncertain world” (McDermott, 2017). 
21 See Blinder (1998) for an excellent discussion of central bank independence and transparency. 
Ref #7482042 v2.2 
   12 
 how  it  should  be  –  while  operational  independence  within  the  framework  is  critical  for 
credibility  (and  therefore  effectiveness),  the  framework  itself  should  be  designed  by  the 
government to maximise the wellbeing of New Zealanders. Over the course of thirty years 
we believe the framework has served New Zealanders well – most of the graduates we have 
hired in recent years have never known anything other than low and stable inflation. 
 
Transparency also remains a critical aspect of the framework. Being transparent about our 
assessment  of  the  economy  and  our  plan  to  meet  our  objective  has  an  influence  on 
expectations,  and  helps  us  achieve  our objective. The  Reserve  Bank  was the first  central 
bank to publish its interest rate forecast, starting in 1997.22 And crucially, transparency aids 
in the assessment of our actions, and allows us to be held to account.23  
 
But what of the other supports, the single decision-maker and single objective? 
 
As  I  noted  at  the  very  start,  these  are  the  two  aspects  of  the  framework  that  the  New 
Zealand Government is in the process of changing, to formalise a committee structure and 
add  employment  to  our  mandate.  We  agree  that  the  single-decision  maker  model  has 
become less relevant over time. In reality, Reserve Bank Governors have a long history of 
utilising  advisory  committees  (Bollard  et  al.,  2006).  And  in  2013,  we  established  the 
Governing  Committee  that  at  the  time  consisted  of  the  Governor  (as  Chair),  two  Deputy 
Governors and myself (as Assistant Governor). While the Governor retains the right of veto 
on  decisions,  and  continues  to  have  statutory  responsibility  for  policy,  the  Committee 
members  work  together  to  test  ideas  and  build  consensus  around  the  monetary  policy 
decision (Wheeler, 2013 and Richardson, 2016). The flexibility of our approach to inflation 
targeting  requires  a  great  deal  of  judgement,  and  the  use  of  a  committee  maximises  the 
knowledge and experience of members individually and as a collective. 
 
The  Government  will  formalise  a  monetary  policy  committee  (MPC)  in  the  Act,  and  add 
members from outside the Bank, ‘externals’, onto the committee. The Act will allow the MPC 
to  have  between  five  and  seven  members,  but  there  will  be  seven  initially,  and  there  will 
always  be  more  internal  than  external  members.  All  members  will  be  nominated  by  the 
Reserve Bank Board, and appointed by the Minister of Finance. There will also be a non-
voting  observer  from  the  New  Zealand  Treasury.  Figure  2  illustrates  the  structure  of  the 
committee to be established in the Act.  
 
 
  22 Dincer and Eichengreen (2014) found that New Zealand was one of the most transparent central banks 
in the world (third behind Sweden and the Czech Republic in 2014), although by their estimates we rank 
much lower on central bank independence. The authors base the transparency indices on public reports 
and communications by each central bank, and the independence indices on central bank law in each 
country. 
23 See Ford, Kendall and Richardson (2015) for more on the evaluation of monetary policy. 
Ref #7482042 v2.2 
   13 
 Figure  2:  Monetary  Policy  Committee  to  be  established  in  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New 
Zealand Act 
 
 Source:https://beehive.govt.nz/release/new-pta-requires-reserve-bank-consider-employment-
alongside-price-stability-mandate  
 
The MPC and Minister of Finance will agree a Charter setting out the approach to issues 
defined in the Act, including the approach to communications. Details of the first Charter are 
yet  to  be  determined,  but  the  Minister  intends  for  the  MPC  to  aim  to  reach  decisions  by 
consensus, and for non-attributed votes to be published where there is not consensus. The 
Minister also intends for non-attributed records of meetings to be published that reflect any 
differences of view among the MPC. We will no doubt explain these and other changes – 
and  their  potential  implications  for  the  setting  and  communicating  of  policy  –  as  they  are 
finalised. 
 
Of  course,  the  creation  of  a  formal  (or  indeed  informal)  committee  does  not  guarantee 
superior  outcomes.  How  the  MPC  will  operate  in  practice  is  also  extremely  important. 
Committees are more successful when they have processes in place that aim to minimise 
various human biases, such as the pressure to conform, confirmation bias, and a tendency 
to rely on the most recent events to a greater extent than is sometimes warranted.24 The 
Bank  will  continue  to  ensure  our  internal  processes  aim  to  maximise  the  benefits  that 
committees can provide. 
 
And  what  of  the  move  to  a  ‘dual  mandate’?  The  Bank  has  always  had  regard  to 
developments  in  the  labour  market,  and  this  has  been  encouraged  by  our  increasingly 
flexible  approach.  We  have  a  long  history  of  meeting  with  businesses  and  organisations 
                                                
24 The movie 12 Angry Men (1957, MGM) provides an excellent demonstration of how ‘committees’ (a jury 
in this case) should not behave, for example publicly revealing individual priors at the start of the 
meeting. 
Ref #7482042 v2.2 
   14 
 across  the  country,  and  we  regularly  assess  the  available  labour  market  data  and  are 
committed to discussing labour market developments. So my current sense is that, to a large 
extent, the changes are a way of ensuring that the flexibility in our approach endures.  
 
The  exact  wording  of  the  full  employment  objective  in  the  Act  is  yet  to  be  determined. 
However,  the  PTA  that  Adrian  Orr  signed  a  few  weeks  ago  on  March  26th  reflected  the 
upcoming changes to the Act, and does not provide the Bank with a numerical target for full 
employment  as  it  has  with  price  stability.  This  is  helpful,  as  ‘maximum  sustainable 
employment’ cannot be fully captured by a single indicator.  
 
Focusing too narrowly on one indicator, such as the unemployment rate, can be misleading. 
For example, a fall in the unemployment rate could be the result of an increased demand for 
labour – typically reflecting a strong economy – or the result of people dropping out of the 
labour force altogether because they are unable to find a job and have become discouraged. 
These different causes have very different implications for how the labour market is evolving 
and  would  therefore  have  very  different  implications  for  monetary  policy.  Specifying  a 
numerical target for inflation but leaving the employment target as a qualitative objective is 
consistent  with  the  practice  here  in  Australia,  and  in  the  United  States too. The  Bank  will 
continue  to  consider  a  wide  range  of  labour  market  indicators  when  formulating  policy, 
although we will communicate our assessment of and outlook for the labour market in more 
detail than we have in the past. And just as with inflation, our understanding of the labour 
market can always be improved as we are faced with new data, new developments, and as 
new research methods become available.  
 
That said, there are widely-recognised limits to what monetary policy can do over the long 
run. We have some influence over the degree to which the unemployment rate, as just one 
example,  deviates  from  its  underlying  trend.  But  ultimately  that  underlying  trend  is 
determined by factors outside of our ability to influence, that rely instead upon the age and 
skills of the population, the efficiency with which jobs are matched to available workers, and 
the nature of employment regulation.   
 
Conclusion  
I would like to conclude by reiterating that New Zealand’s experience with inflation targeting 
has been one of evolution. The Reserve Bank Act (1989) provided the supports that enabled 
us to establish credibility in our intent to meet our objective of price stability. As we lowered 
inflation,  and  anchored  expectations  within  the  target  range,  we  could  implement  an 
increasingly  flexible  approach  to  monetary  policy  that  has  been  reflected  in  successive 
PTAs.  This  flexible  approach  means  that  we  have  long  had  regard  to  the  real  economy, 
including employment. 
 
That the Bank has operational independence and is transparent in meeting our objective is 
as  important  for  credibility  today  as  it  was  in  1989.  But  the  framework  and  the  specific 
targets  that  we  operate  within  and  towards  are  for  the  public,  via  the  political  process,  to 
determine. The Government is currently in the process of changing the framework, to assign 
monetary policy responsibility to a committee with external members and add employment to 
the Bank’s current mandate of price stability.  
 
Ref #7482042 v2.2 
   15 
 I see the inclusion of (maximum sustainable) employment into our mandate as reinforcing 
the flexibility of inflation targeting. That said, it is still too early to determine what effect these 
changes will have on the conduct and communication of monetary policy. I expect that in five 
or ten years’ time someone from the Reserve Bank of New Zealand will be back at a similar 
conference, to explain how it all went.  
 
 
 
 
 Ref #7482042 v2.2 
   16 
 at 
References 
Barro,  Robert  and  David  Gordon  (1983),  “Rules,  Discretion  and  Reputation  in  a  Model  of 
Monetary Policy”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 12(1), pp.101-121. 
 
Bernanke,  Ben  and  Ilian  Mihov  (1997),  “What  does  the  Bundesbank  target?”,  European 
Economic Review, 41(1997), pp. 1025-1053. 
 
Bernanke,  Ben,  Thomas  Laubach,  Frederic  Mishkin  and  Adam  Posen  (1999),  Inflation 
Targeting: Lessons from the International Experience, Princeton University Press, Princeton, 
New Jersey.  
 
Blinder, Alan (1998), Central Banking in Theory and Practice, The MIT Press, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts.   
 
Bollard,  Alan  (2004),  “Asset  prices  and  monetary  policy”,  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand 
Bulletin, 67(1), pp. 27-34. 
 
Bollard, Alan and Özer Karagedliki (2006), “Inflation targeting: The New Zealand experience 
and some lessons”, paper prepared for the Inflation Targeting Performance and Challenges 
Conference by the Central Bank of Republic of Turkey, held in Istanbul 19-20 January 2005, 
accessed 
https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/research-and-
publications/speeches/2006/speech2006-01-18.  
 
Bollard,  Alan  and  Tim  Ng  (2008),  “Flexibility  and  the  limits  to  inflation  targeting”,  Reserve 
Bank of New Zealand Bulletin, 71(3), pp. 5-13. 
 
Brash,  Donald  (1998),  “Inflation  targeting  in  New  Zealand:  experience  and  practice”, 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand Bulletin, 61(3), pp. 221-227. 
 
Brash, Donald (2002), “Inflation Targeting 14 years on”, a speech delivered at the American 
Economics  Association  conference 
in  Atlanta  5  January  2002,  accessed  at 
https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/research-and-publications/speeches/2002/speech2002-01-05.  
 
Chetwin, Willy (2012), “Business cycle review, 1998-2011”, Reserve Bank of New Zealand 
Bulletin, 75(1), pp. 14-27. 
 
Chetwin, Willy and Michael Reddell (2012), “Monetary policy in the last business cycle: some 
perspectives”, Reserve Bank of New Zealand Bulletin, 75(2), pp. 3-14. 
 
Dincer,  N.  Nergiz  and  Barry  Eichengreen  (2014),  “Central  Bank  Transparency  and 
Independence:  Updates  and  New  Measures”,  International  Journal  of  Central  Banking, 
10(1), 
at 
https://eml.berkeley.edu/~eichengr/data.shtml.  
 
Dunstan,  Ashley  (2014),  “Interactions  between  monetary  and  macro-prudential  policies”, 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand Bulletin, 77(2), pp. 15-25. 
 
estimates 
189-259. 
Updated 
found 
can 
pp. 
be 
Ref #7482042 v2.2 
   17 
 2008, 
accessed 
September 
Committee, 
FEC (2008), “Inquiry into the future monetary policy framework”, Report of the Finance and 
Expenditure 
at 
https://www.parliament.nz/en/pb/sc/reports/document/48DBSCH_SCR4210_1/inquiry-into-
the-future-monetary-policy-framework-i3n.   
 
Ford, Dean, Elizabeth Kendall and Adam Richardson (2015), “Evaluating monetary policy”, 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand Bulletin, 78(7), pp. 1-21. 
 
Friedman,  Benjamin  (1984),  “The  value  of  intermediate  targets  in  implementing  monetary 
policy”, NBER Working Paper, No. 1487, November 1984.  
 
Friedman,  Benjamin  (1990),  “Targets  and  instruments  of  monetary  policy”,  in  Friedman, 
Benjamin and Frank Hahn, Handbook of Monetary Economics, Volume II, Elsevier Science 
B.V., Amsterdam.   
 
Government’s  Response  to  Monetary  Policy  Review  (2001),  released  30  May  2001, 
accessed  at  https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/monetary-policy/about-monetary-policy/independent-
review-of-the-operation-of-monetary-policy-2.  
 
Graham, James and Christie Smith (2012), “A brief history of monetary policy objectives and 
independence in New Zealand”, Reserve Bank of New Zealand Bulletin, 75(1), pp. 28-37. 
 
Grimes, Arthur (1996), “Chapter 8: Monetary Policy”, in Silverstone, Brian, Alan Bollard and 
Ralph Lattimore, A Study of Economic Reform: The Case of New Zealand, Elsevier Science 
B.V., Amsterdam.   
 
Hunt,  Chris  (2004),  “Interpreting  clause  4(b)  of  the  Policy  Targets  Agreement:  avoiding 
unnecessary  instability  in  output,  interest  rates  and  the  exchange  rate”.  Reserve  Bank  of 
New Zealand Bulletin, 67(2), pp.5-20. 
 
Kamber, Güneş, Özer Karagedliki and Christie Smith, “Applying an Inflation Targeting Lens 
to Macroprudential Policy ‘Institutions’”, International Journal of Central Banking, 11(S1), pp. 
395-429. 
 
Kendall,  Ross  and  Tim  Ng  (2013),  “The  2012  Policy  Targets  Agreement:  an  evolution  in 
flexible inflation targeting in New Zealand”, Reserve Bank of New Zealand  Bulletin, 76(4), 
pp. 3-12. 
 
Lewis, Michelle and C. John McDermott (2016), “New Zealand’s experience with changing 
its inflation target and the impact on inflation expectations”, New Zealand Economic Papers, 
50(3), pp. 343-361. 
 
McDermott, John (2017), ‘The value of forecasting in an uncertain world”, a speech delivered 
to the New Zealand Manufacturers and Exporters Association (NZMEA) in Christchurch 15 
May 
https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/research-and-
publications/speeches/2017/speech-2017-05-15.  
 
accessed 
2017, 
at 
Ref #7482042 v2.2 
   18 
 of 
of 
of 
the 
Policy 
Future 
(2002), 
Monetary 
accessed 
accessed 
accessed 
Framework”, 
the  Operation 
the  Operation 
the  Operation 
of  Monetary  Policy, 
of  Monetary  Policy, 
of  Monetary  Policy, 
“The  Policy  Targets  Agreement:  a  briefing  note”,  accessed  at 
RBNZ  (2000a),  “Submission  by  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand”,  response  to  the 
Independent  Review 
at 
https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/monetary-policy/about-monetary-policy/independent-review-of-the-
operation-of-monetary-policy-2.  
 
RBNZ  (2000b),  “The  evolution  of  Policy  Targets  Agreements”,  supporting  paper  to  the 
Independent  Review 
at 
https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/monetary-policy/about-monetary-policy/independent-review-of-the-
operation-of-monetary-policy-2.  
 
RBNZ  (2000c),  “Inflation  targeting  in  principle  and  in  practice”,  supporting  paper  to  the 
Independent  Review 
at 
https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/monetary-policy/about-monetary-policy/independent-review-of-the-
operation-of-monetary-policy-2/inflation-targeting-in-principle-and-in-practice.  
 
RBNZ 
https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/monetary-policy/policy-targets-agreements/pta2002/briefing-note-
and-related-papers-2002.  
 
RBNZ (2007a), “Main submission to the Finance and Expenditure Select Committee Inquiry 
into 
at 
https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/monetary-policy/about-monetary-policy/finance-and-expenditure-
select-committee-inquiry-into-the-future-monetary-policy-framework.  
 
RBNZ (2007b), “Supporting Paper A6: Supplementary Stabilisation Instruments Project and 
the Macroeconomic Policy Forum”, supporting paper to the Finance and Expenditure Select 
Committee 
the  Future  Monetary  Policy  Framework,  accessed  at 
https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/monetary-policy/about-monetary-policy/finance-and-expenditure-
select-committee-inquiry-into-the-future-monetary-policy-framework.  
 
Reddell, Michael (1988), “Inflation and the monetary policy strategy”, Reserve Bank of New 
Zealand Bulletin, 51(2), pp. 81-84. 
 
Reddell,  Michael  (1999),  “Origins  and  early  development  of  the  inflation  target”,  Reserve 
Bank of New Zealand Bulletin, 62(3), pp. 63-71. 
 
Richardson,  Adam  (2016),  “Behind  the  scenes  of  an  OCR  decision  in  New  Zealand”, 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand Bulletin, 79(11), pp. 1-15. 
 
Rogers,  Lamorna  (2013),  “A  new  approach  to  macro-prudential  policy  for  New  Zealand”, 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand Bulletin, 76(3), pp. 12-22. 
 
Russell, Spencer (1984), “Monetary policy since the change in government”, Reserve Bank 
of New Zealand Bulletin, 47(9), pp. 467-468. 
 
Sherwin,  Murray  (1999),  “Inflation  targeting:  10  years  on”,  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand 
Bulletin, 62(3), pp. 72-80. 
 
accessed 
Inquiry 
into 
Ref #7482042 v2.2 
   19 
 Svensson,  Lars  (1997),  “Inflation  targeting  in  an  open  economy:  Strict  or  flexible  inflation 
targeting?”, Reserve Bank of New Zealand Discussion Paper, G97/8. 
 
Svensson,  Lars (2000), “Independent  Review  of  the Operation  of  Monetary  Policy  in  New 
Zealand: Report to the Minister of Finance”, accessed at https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/monetary-
policy/about-monetary-policy/independent-review-of-the-operation-of-monetary-policy-2.  
 
Wadsworth, Amber (2017), “An international comparison of inflation-targeting frameworks”, 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand Bulletin, 80(8), pp. 1-34. 
 
Wheeler, Graeme (2013), “Decision making in the Reserve Bank of New Zealand”, a speech 
delivered  to  the  University  of  Auckland  Business  School  in  Auckland  7  March  2013, 
accessed 
https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/research-and-
publications/speeches/2013/speech2013-03-07. 
  
Williams, Rebecca (2017a), “Business cycle review: 2008 to present day”, Reserve Bank of 
New Zealand Bulletin, 80(2), pp.1-22. 
 
Williams,  Rebecca  (2017b),  “Characterising  the  current  economic  expansion:  2009  to 
present day”, Reserve Bank of New Zealand Bulletin, 80(3), pp.1-22. 
at 
Ref #7482042 v2.2 
  