Nestor A Espenilla, Jr: The BSP and some ABCs
Speech by Mr Nestor A Espenilla, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  19th  Inter-Collegiate  Finance  Competition  (ICFC)  Finals  jointly
organized  by  the  Financial  Executives  Institute  of  the  Philippines,  through  its  Junior  FINEX
Committee, and JP Morgan Chase & Co., Manila, 28 November 2017.
 FINEX  President  Benedicta  Du-Baladad,  Junior  FINEX  Chairman  Lofreda  M.  Del  Carmen  and
Junior  FINEX  Committee  Liaison  Officer  Benito  Soliven  III,  Members  of  the  Board  of  Judges
headed by Mr. Edwin Fernandez, ICFC auditors from Isla Lipana & Company (Pricewaterhouse
Coopers), ladies and gentlemen, a pleasant afternoon to everyone.  It is my pleasure to welcome
all of you to the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP). 
The  Financial  Executives  Institute  of  the  Philippines  (FINEX),  through  the  Junior  FINEX
Committee  (in  cooperation  with  JP  Morgan  Chase  &  Company),  has  been  successfully
organizing and holding this inter-collegiate finance competition (ICFC) for the past nineteen (19)
years. 
We in the BSP support this endeavour. Like you, we firmly believe in the importance of promoting
financial  learning  and  literacy.    We  also  recognize  the  transformative  power  of  engaging  the
youth.  his is why we have been a major sponsor of this ICFC event since 2007. 
I understand that we have here today (advancing to the finals) no less than twenty (20) schools
representing Cagayan de Oro, Central Luzon, Central Visayas, Davao, North Luzon, Western
Visayas,  and  the  National  Capital  Region.  Some  of  you  have  travelled  far  to  compete  and
represent your schools!
I am also very impressed to note that ICFC has gone global!  There are two (2) teams from the
University of Guam participating in these year’s finals.
By besting more than eighty (80) other participating schools, all of you here already deserve to be
commended!    You  have  displayed  tenacity  and  strength!    In  millennial  speak  –  you  are  all
#LODIs.  (which I understand means “IDOL.”)  Congratulations to all of you. 
Competitions like these serve as a valuable training ground to foster greater understanding of the
various  aspects  of  finance.    It  is  important  to  create  a  deeper  awareness  of  why  finance
professionals are valuable given our rapidly changing and technology-enabled financial services
industry.  The  current  global  financial  landscape  is  being  shaped  by  digital  transformation,
evolving  regulatory  standards,  and  changing  demands  from  our  growing  population  of  young,
technology-savvy and upwardly mobile financial consumers (our very participants at the ICFC
today make up this dynamic market!). 
The  BSP,  for  its  part,  has  embarked  on  a  comprehensive  financial  sector  reform  agenda  to
proactively respond to this changing market landscape and conditions, while at the same time
remaining committed to promoting the stability and soundness of the domestic financial system.
The contestants here are young. You have so much potential. There was a time when I too was
your age, an economics major at the University of the Philippines in Diliman. I joined the Central
Bank  in  1981,  right  after  graduating.  I  believed  that  it  was  through  the  practice  of  economics,
through  the  disciplines  and  sciences  of  banking  and  finance  that  I  would  be  able  to  make  a
difference for our country.  Now, 36 years later, I am Governor of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas,
heading an institution responsible for shaping monetary, banking and financial policies. 
Perhaps there will be those among you who will one day join our ranks here at the BSP.  I realize
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
that this is not a career fair. But since it is quite refreshing and exciting to be in a room full of so
many  young  people  who  have  shown  passion  for  the  financial  profession,  I  will  take  this
opportunity to speak about how fulfilling it is to be part of team BSP. Maybe I can influence you in
your future choice of career.
In  the  BSP,  we  engage  in  nation  building  through  the  formulation  of  monetary  policy,  banking
supervision  and  the  functioning  of  an  efficient  and  reliable  payments  settlements  system.  We
work so that there would be an enabling regulatory environment for businesses, commerce and
industry to flourish and so that our citizens and firms could enjoy price stability as a foundation
for making sound investment, consumption and savings decisions.
Through the BSP’s pursuit of deep and meaningful financial and structural reforms through the
years, along with policies and actions of National Government agencies and the indispensable
cooperation of the private sector, the Philippines currently enjoys macroeconomic stability.
We are currently one of the fastest growing investment-grade rated economies in the region with
a better-than-market forecast GDP growth of 6.9 percent in the third quarter of 2017.  This is our
75th consecutive quarter of economic growth since the Asian financial crisis! 
Amid this rapid growth, inflation remains within target, with estimates showing it will settle at 3.2
percent this year, 3.4 percent in 2018, and 3.2 percent in 2019, versus the official target band of
2.0 to 4.0 percent.  We have maintained price stability through the BSP’s adoption of the Inflation
Targeting framework in 2002. 
Our banking system is also strong and stable, with banks lending more to productive sectors. 
The BSP’s risk-based approach (which requires banks to put up more buffers when taking on
more  risks),  regulations  on  risk  management,  macro-prudential  measures,  alignment  of
regulations with international standards while observing peculiarities of the domestic economy,
all  ensure  that  banks  perform  in  a  safe  and  sound  manner  and  that  the  economy  is  guarded
against shocks that may affect financial sector stability.
 
It is indeed fulfilling (and a source of great pride) to work for an institution that is part of (and that
influences) this narrative. 
Looking back on my journey and how I began like most of you here … full of ideas and brimming
with passion, allow me to further share some ABCs which brought me to where I am today:
1. Aspire to achieve. Always have a deep-seated desire to achieve a certain goal. To do this, you
need preparation and discipline. I am sure this resonates with all of you here as these are already
the finals.  All of you are here because of rigorous preparation.  Apply the same tenacity, win or
lose, as you leave the BSP Assembly Hall today. 
2.  Build  character  –  have  grit.  Angela  Duckworth,  a  University  of  Pennsylvania  professor
authored a bestselling book titled, Grit: The Power of Passion and Perseverance. She said grit,
rather than talent or luck, predicts a high level of achievement.  Grit is a combination of passion
and perseverance;
Finally 
3. Chill. It is important to maintain a cool disposition and possess a calm confidence. Otherwise,
it  is  so  easy  to  be  distracted,  weakening  earlier  preparation  and  even  knowledge.  Sayang
naman. Do not let this happen.
With the background information I have shared with you on the BSP, and my ABC-tips – Aim to
Achieve,  Build  Character  (have  grit)  and  stay  Chill,  I  hope  I  have  inspired  you…  not  just  for
today’s competition, but even as you complete your studies and as you contemplate on how best
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
to use your training in economics, banking and finance.
Thank you and congratulations in advance to the winners who will later emerge.  Again, just by
making it this far… you are all #LODIs.  A pleasant day and to everyone! 
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
