Mojmír Hampl: Outlook for global interest rates
Speech by Mr Mojmír Hampl, Vice Governor of the Czech National Bank, at the Official Monetary
and Financial Institutions Forum (OMFIF) Roundtable for Public Sector Asset Managers, London,
30 January 2018.
 My contribution to today’s discussion on global interest rates will focus on the equilibrium real
rate of interest. The equilibrium rate, which determines the development of interest rates in the
long  run,  has  decreased  around  the  world  by  about  4  percentage  points  since  the  1980s,  as
documented, among others, by the influential studies of Holston, Laubach, and Williams (2017)
and Rachel and Smith (2017).
Very recently, it seems to me, the process has started to reverse, but any progress toward a
higher  rate  is  likely  to  be  slow.  Equilibrium  values  do  not  change  abruptly.  Seven  principal
reasons have been identified for the decrease in this parameter observed in the past:
The first is a decrease in growth expectations caused primarily by the Great Recession and the
ensuing  process  of  de-leveraging.  Gloomy  prospects  depress  demand  for  capital  and,  in
consequence, also the equilibrium interest rate. Currently, however, notions of secular stagnation
are losing steam, and growth expectations have slowly been recovering to pre-crisis levels. It is
perhaps useful to remind ourselves that secular stagnation has been declared many times in the
past  –  by  Malthus,  after  the  Great  Depression,  and  during  the  1970s  and  1980s  –  only  to  be
refuted by continued growth.
Second, we have seen a steady decrease in dependency ratios, which has stimulated excess
savings  and  therefore  lowered  the  equilibrium  rate.  This  trend,  too,  will  reverse  soon,  as  the
increase  in  the  share  of  the  elderly  population  will  outpace  all  other  population  groups.
Dependency ratios around the world will rise, which will buoy the equilibrium rate.
Third, inequality has risen in past decades, again adding to the increase in the mean savings
rate.  But  note  that  we  are  now  observing  a  decrease  in  (at  least)  wage  inequality  in  many
countries,  including  the  Czech  Republic.  Inequality,  broadly  defined,  has  decreased  in  most
countries around the world since the crisis (World Bank, 2016). I believe that the discussion on
inequality tends to be overly pessimistic.
Fourth,  more  and  more  developing  countries  have  been  getting  fully  integrated  into  the  world
economy, releasing their supply of savings into global markets and giving rise to the notion of a
“savings glut”. I see no reversal here, which means that this factor will continue to depress the
equilibrium real rate of interest.
Fifth,  the  relative  price  of  capital  goods  has  been  decreasing.  In  consequence,  capital  has
become cheaper relative to labor. This is reducing the total demand for capital (when counted in
nominal terms) and thus lowering the equilibrium rate. Again, this trend is likely to continue.
Sixth, we have witnessed a preference shift away from infrastructure projects, which is again
reducing  the  demand  for  capital.  In  many  countries,  environmental  regulations  have  made  it
difficult to invest in infrastructure. As with the previous two factors I see no signs of a reversal in
this trend.
Seventh, recent decades have produced a rising spread between the return on capital and the
risk-free rate, which is depressing the risk-free rate even further. Obviously, this phenomenon is
connected to risk aversion and can be expected to reverse, at least partially, in response to the
current wave of strong confidence in global growth prospects.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
In summary, I see reasons for modest optimism concerning growth in the equilibrium rate. The
factors contributing to this new trend will include an increase in growth expectations, a rise in
dependency  rates,  a  halt  to  the  increase  in  inequality,  and  a  decrease  in  risk  aversion.  The
equilibrium rate will be kept from rising swiftly, however, by a continuing savings glut, a decrease
in the relative price of capital, and muted investment in infrastructure projects.
These prospects also hold more specifically for the Czech economy, for which we at the Czech
National Bank currently forecast the equilibrium real 3-month interest rate to stand at around 1%.
Adding the 2% inflation target, this translates to a nominal interest rate of 3% in normal times.
Given that the Czech economy is currently doing much better than in normal times, we have
room to increase our short-term rate even without a substantial rise in the underlying equilibrium
rate.
References
Holston, Kathryn & Laubach, Thomas & Williams, John C., 2017. “Measuring the Natural Rate of
Interest:  International  Trends  and  Determinants,”  Journal  of  International  Economics,  vol.
108(S1), pages 59–75.
Rachel,  Lukasz  &  Smith,  Thomas  D.,  2017.  “Are  Low  Real  Interest  Rates  Here  to  Stay?”
International Journal of Central Banking, vol. 13(3), pages 1-42.
World  Bank,  2016.  “Poverty  and  Shared  Prosperity  2016:  Taking  on  Inequality”.  World  Bank
Group report.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
