Vítor Constâncio: Interview with Bloomberg TV
Interview with Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, and Bloomberg
TV, conducted by Mr Paul Gordon on 17 May 2018.
 I’m here with Vítor Constâncio, a man who has been at the heart of ECB policymaking
basically since the birth of the euro almost two decades ago. For the last eight years he’s
been Vice-President. His term expires this month, but over that period, dating back to
the  all-too-brief  period  of  calm  between  two  recessions,  he’s  been  through  the
unfortunate  rate  hikes  of  2011,  quantitative  easing,  negative  interest  rates  and  the
rescue  of  the  euro  area  from  deflation  –  or  the  threat  of  deflation  at  the  very  least.
Today, when the Governing Council is almost, but not quite, ready to talk about exiting
stimulus, Vice-President Vítor Constâncio is with me today. It’s been quite an eight years,
and  here  we  are:  you’re  about  to  go  at  a  critical  moment,  because  the  economy  is
slowing. How worried are you?
Just a slight slowdown so far – which, by the way, was expected. You may recall that the staff
projections that were published, after the high growth of last year, already pointed to a certain
deceleration. So, what is happening is still within the bounds of the staff projections for the whole
year, which nevertheless forecast growth above 2%.
The Deputy Governor of the Finnish central bank, Olli Rehn, who is tipped to, is likely to
join the ECB, has been nominated to do so, he says the medium-term outlook is tilted
towards the downside. That’s not quite the same as the ECB says.
I have not read what he said, but let me remind you: the projections that have been published,
they foresee a growth rate for next year around 2% and then 1.7% for 2020. Indeed, on a path of
deceleration, because for demographic reasons and other reasons, potential growth is not very
high  in  Europe  –  by  the  way,  not  also  in  other  advanced  economies.  We  have  been  growing
above potential, especially last year, this year also. Of course, as the output gap closes, we are
reverting to potential growth.
Are you still comfortable with market expectations, which are roughly for an end to QE –
to net asset purchases – this year, then a rate hike the middle of 2019. Does that sound
reasonable?
I won’t comment on that. It’s difficult of course to anticipate what may happen. All central banks
are to a degree data-dependent, so we monitor of course what is happening. But what I can tell
you is that we generally consider that markets have been reading our reaction function quite well.
It’s also, I presume – or at least, being biased, I will say it – that it’s also because of the way we
have communicated. Indeed, that understanding of our reaction function has improved over the
years and has been quite good recently.
One  of  the  risks  the  ECB  has  always  been  citing  is  unwarranted  market  tightening.
There’s a couple of risks out there; one at the moment is Italy, of course. We’ve seen
bond spreads expand. Some of the wilder ideas, such as asking the ECB to write off €250
billion of debt, have been dropped. There is still this issue about how you measure debt-
to-GDP  ratios.  But  the  problem  is,  bond  yields,  bond  prices  have  been  falling,  the
spreads have been widening. Does that worry you?
We  have  to  monitor  that  situation,  of  course.  It’s  a  change  from  what  has  been  happening
recently. The problems of Italy are the same, as known by everyone, particularly in the market, of
course. The yields and the spreads had been contained until recently. There is this spike. We
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
have to see how it will develop. It depends, of course – as always – very much on the policies
that will be actually implemented in Italy, as in other member countries.
You’re also watching the euro […] as another issue? The euro’s softened quite a bit in
recent  weeks.  In  fact,  you  do  get  the  sense  from  comments  from  policymakers  that
there’s not a great deal of concern at the moment about the strength of the euro – which
wasn’t true a few months ago – or the direction, I should say, of the euro. Is that true?
We  were  concerned  always  with  excessive  volatility  in  exchange  rates,  but  we  don’t  have  a
target for the exchange rate, as you know. The volatility in foreign exchange markets, particularly
among the advanced economies, has been attributable more to what has happened to the dollar
than events linked with other parts of the world. So, that is still the story, and what has happened
is  that,  indeed,  we  have  seen  different  movements  now  in  the  dollar,  appreciating  also  for
reasons.  Because  it’s  always,  markets  are  very  good  at  doing  that,  or  market  analysts,  at
rationalising what markets are doing. There are, of course, very good narratives explaining why
the dollar has been going down and up and now is going up.
So you’re reasonably comfortable with where the euro is at the moment?
Yes.
Another risk out there is Iran. This is a slightly tricky one, of course, because Europe
now  has  to  deal  with  the  prospect  of  sanctions  on  companies  that  deal  with  Iran  via
payments. If it’s involving payments, it’s going to involve the ECB one way or another.
Presumably the ECB takes a view on this situation?
As you know, there have been sanctions already before. They were lifted after the agreement,
and  we’ve  gone  through  that  period  without  major  consequences,  particularly  for  the  central
banks. I am not really expecting that whatever happens in that sphere will have a very meaningful
impact on what we will do.
There is a big summit next month, of course, of leaders. It’s an important one because
there’s  a  new  European  Parliament  next  year.  What’s  not  agreed  at  this  summit  next
month might not be agreed for quite some time to come, depending on how Parliament
changes. You put out some pretty bold proposals for the way the Monetary Union needs
to  move  in  a  speech  today.  How  confident  are  you  that  any  of  this  is  really  going  to
happen?
That was not the perspective of my speech. As I explained, I talked as a technocratic adviser,
saying what technically would be necessary to really move towards a very solid Monetary Union,
working smoothly, and reducing doubts about the solidity of the whole project. I put forward some
technical proposals, but I didn’t discuss on purpose the political economy feasibility of what I was
saying from a technocratic perspective. It’s for governments to make their choices, of course. I
do  think  that  the  vested  interest  of  all  countries  is  to  move  forward,  deepening  the  Monetary
Union, but it’s in the hands of the governments.
Yes, somebody else’s job, because you’re going to move on. Now, eight years in – and
just  briefly,  if  you  can  –  if  you  had  to  change  one  thing,  if  you’d  done  one  thing
differently, or the ECB had done one thing differently, in those eight years, what would it
be?
Nothing really very meaningful in the end. I made a speech at the beginning of the month where I
talked  about  the  past  and  future  of  ECB  monetary  policy.  I  went  through  some  episodes  that
were controversial in some of our decisions in the past. With hindsight, I admit that indeed the
decisions were not always perfect and I explained why. I also explained that in both the cases I
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
highlighted in that speech, we very quickly corrected those decisions by changing interest rates
in  the  opposite  direction.  So,  the  overall  effect  of  these  incidents  was  in  the  end  not  very
significant.
Vice-President Constâncio, good luck for whatever comes next. Thank you very much
indeed for your time today.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
