François Villeroy de Galhau: Ethics and trust in finance
Speech by Mr François Villeroy de Galhau, Governor of the Bank of France, at the 6th "Ethics
and Trust in Finance" Global Prize ceremony, Paris, 15 January 2018.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
 It is with great pleasure that I welcome you all to the auditorium of the Banque de France for the
6th "Ethics and Trust in Finance" Global Prize ceremony. I would particularly like to welcome
Angel Gurria, Secretary-General of the OECD, and Professor Paul Dembinski, the Co-chair of
the prize.
The  venue  that  you  have  been  invited  to  today  sends  a  message  in  itself:  as  the Autorité  de
contrôle  prudentiel  et  de  résolution  is  backed  by  the  Banque  de  France,  some  might  have  a
tendency to think that the bank and insurance supervisor, as the "guardian of the temple", would
only be concerned with compliance with prudential rules, which are collective and compulsory.
They might also think that the supervisor would consider that an ethical approach is too poorly
defined to be inspected, as each financial institution – and even each professional – has their
own perspective on it, and would also consider that an ethical approach leaves them free to look
after the interests of their clients.
The philosophers among you will have recognised in this divergence between rules and ethics
the classic contrast between Kant's "categorical imperative" and Aristotle's "practical wisdom".
But I am thoroughly convinced that in practice, in the financial sector and in society in general, we
must respect the rules and behave ethically – even when we are respecting the rules. A number
of cases that have recently made the headlines have also shown that citizens and customers
alike are becoming increasingly demanding in this regard. Adopting the same reasoning, Paul
Dembinski likes to quote Ricoeur's broader definition of ethics as "a wish for a fulfilled life – with
and for others – in just institutions".
1. From this perspective, what is at stake is more than a simple contrast, but the
sound  balance  and  dynamic  tension  between  compulsory  rules  and  enduring,
freely adopted ethics.
There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  financial  sector  needs  rules.  This  is  not  just  a
question  of  an  activity  that  involves  intermediation  between  different  parties  –  each  of
which  must  be  convinced  that  the  rules  are  being  properly  applied  –  but  it  is  also  a
question of managing risks, while protecting the interests of customers and policyholders.
Financial  instability  also  has  substantial  externalities  on  the  economy,  and  on  social
cohesion through unemployment. The recent financial crises have brought the failings of
the financial system into focus, not forgetting the impact of new technologies, such as high
frequency trading, FinTechs, or crypto-assets.
But rules have their limitations. An ethical approach is needed if we are to respect
the spirit of the rules – and not just the letter of the law – and if we are to make informed
decisions when clear rules are not available. In addition to financial institutions' in-house
ethical practices, the financial sector must now also consider how society – NGOs, the
media, fellow citizens included – perceive its activities from an ethical standpoint.
Clearly, the 2007–09 crisis was partly created by an imbalance: too much trust had
been placed in ethics, while the rules were insufficient. The weaknesses in the corporate
culture of financial institutions were thrust into the spotlight; incentives to take risks were
too powerful and governance was inappropriate.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Certain Anglo-Saxon expressions perfectly illustrate the period: "too big to fail" created a
widespread  moral  hazard,  "tick  the  box"  encouraged  overly  lax  self-regulation  through  a
purely formal compliance with the rules... and in so doing, the "light touch" of the British
FSA at the time clearly showed its limitations.
Since then, I am happy to say that we have significantly tightened up the rules. With
the CRD IV Capital Requirements Directive and Basel III for banks and, at least in Europe,
Solvency II for insurers, quantitative requirements have been reinforced to ensure greater
resilience,  governance  of  financial  institutions  has  been  improved  and  compensation
policies for bankers have been reined in a little.
International regulation is our common good. It strengthens a sound financial system. But
as we strengthen international regulation, we must not lower our guard in terms of ethics.
Ten years later, this would generate the opposite imbalance to that of 2007–08. In other
words, there's a risk that the pendulum could swing back the other way.
2.  Ethics  must  permeate  the  day-to-day  practices  and  culture  of  financial
institutions.  Over  and  above  the  good  intentions,  declarations  and  codes  of  conduct,
which did nothing to prevent the excesses that caused the 2008 crisis, the challenge now
is  for  all  actors  from  the  bottom  to  the  top  of  these  organisations  to  adopt  an  ethical
approach.
As the "Banking Conduct and Culture" report of the Group of Thirty, which brought together
private  and  central  bankers  and  academics,  asserted, the  "tone  from  the  top"  must
have  an  "echo  from  the  bottom".  This  begins  with  the  Boards  of  Directors  and  the
management teams, who must always be exemplary, and who need to realise that their
behaviour is scrutinised at all times for indications of what is acceptable and what is not,
irrespective of their declarations of intent. Actions speak louder than words.
1
It then requires employees to be trained and informed on ethical standards on a regular
basis and not only on their first day on the job. Situations change; new developments can
be an opportunity to reconsider existing practices; stakeholder expectations evolve. Ethics
–  just  like  technical  issues  –  must  be  subject  to  constant  communication  and  ongoing
training. And this is no easy task. As ORSE's report on corporate ethics, responsibility and
strategy   quite  rightly  reminds  us,  "Corporate  ethics  is  not  built  on  obedience,  but  on
engagement and discernment". Employees must be able to identify ethical "grey areas"
even when their manager or clear rules are not available.
If ethics are to permeate corporate practices, they must form an integral part of HR
policies  and  structures.  For  example,  during  selection  procedures  for  external
recruitment  or  internal  promotion,  particularly  for  management  positions,  the  integrity  of
candidates during their career should be seriously assessed and taken into account.
Ethics  in  themselves  have  value.  Good  performances  can  neither  excuse  nor
compensate for questionable ethical behaviour. Results obtained at the expense of ethical
standards should not be rewarded. On the contrary, they should be penalised in order to
send the right message with regards to expected behaviour, including from the managers
of the employees concerned.
Diversity  within  teams,  and  particularly  management  teams,  should  be  encouraged.
Experience  shows  that  diversity  –  in  terms  of  gender,  social  background,  education,
thinking – is a factor in risk prevention. An overly homogeneous group does not debate,
loses critical thinking and as a result takes more risky decisions.
At  a  time  when  technical  processes  and  compliance  procedures  are  becoming
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
increasingly  complex  and  favour  dialogue  between  human  and  machine,  direct  human
contact should once more be given the importance it deserves. Employees must be able
to approach managers with their questions on ethics in just the same way as they
can  ask  technical  questions;  with  the  same  ease,  the  same  freedom,  the  same
legitimacy. No-one should be afraid of raising ethical questions, being concerned about
certain  practices,  or  raising  ethical  concerns,  which  is  now  protected  by  law  since  the
introduction in France of the Sapin II Act.
Alongside  the  approach  offered  by  human  resources,  the  permeation  of  ethics  into
corporate  practices  and  cultures  is  achieved  through  their integration  into  business
strategy, and their monitoring and supervision by the three lines of defence – first,
management;  second,  ethics  and  compliance  officers;  and  third,  audit.  Financial
institutions  must  consider  corporate  culture  as  a  key  strategic  element  rather  than  a
specific field only intended to provide a short-term response to regulatory requirements.
Personally, I am also convinced that in the long term, ethics pays, even if it does not
always  immediately  pay  in  "cold,  hard  cash",  as  the  Anglo-Saxons  say.  It  is  only  by
promoting  ethics  as  a  desirable  value  in  themselves  that  we  will  obtain  the  right  mix
between ethical standards and the regulations necessary for a sound financial system.
And that is why the Prize being awarded today is no stranger to the Banque de France and
the ACPR. I hope you all enjoy the ceremony.
1
"Éthique, responsabilité et stratégie d’entreprise", Observatoire de la responsabilité sociétale des entreprises,
September 2017.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
