Philip  R  Lane:  Update  on  the  progress  of  the  Central  Bank  of
Ireland’s Tracker Mortgage Examination
Introductory statement by Mr Philip R Lane, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, at the Joint
Committee  on  Finance,  Public  Expenditure  and  Reform,  and  Taoiseach,  Dublin,  18  January
2018.
 I welcome the opportunity to appear before the Committee today to update you on the progress
of the Central Bank of Ireland’s Tracker Mortgage Examination.
I  am  joined  by  Derville  Rowland,  Director  General,  Financial  Conduct;  Ed  Sibley,  Deputy
Governor, Prudential Regulation; and Helena Mitchell, Head of Consumer Protection Supervision
Division.
A mortgage is the most significant financial commitment for most people. They have a right to
expect their lenders to treat them fairly and honour contractual commitments. The Central Bank’s
role is to ensure that the best interests of consumers are protected in their dealings with financial
firms.  That  is  why,  after  pursuing  tracker  issues  with  a  number  of  individual  lenders  through
extensive  supervisory  and  enforcement  work  prior  to  2015,  the  Central  Bank  launched  the
1
industry-wide Tracker Mortgage Examination .
We did so because the more we learned in our pursuit of those individual issues, and the more
concerns were voiced by customers, consumer advocates and public representatives such as
yourselves, the more certain we became that an investigation across every lender was required.
As the largest, most complex and most significant consumer protection review undertaken by the
Central  Bank  to  date,  the  Examination  has  exposed  unacceptable  failings  by  lenders  on  an
industry-wide basis and the lack of a consumer-centred culture in lenders. These failings have
had  a  detrimental  and,  in  some  cases,  devastating  impact  on  many  tracker  mortgage
customers, up to and including the loss of homes and investment properties. It is clear that all
lenders did not sufficiently recognise or address the scale of those failings until intervention by
the Central Bank. We are using all appropriate powers to force banks to undo the harm caused
by their unacceptable failings.
Progress To Date
Unusually for live supervisory work, we have published regular updates on the Examination since
its launch in 2015.
When we appeared before the Committee last October, we reported that the Examination had at
that  point  ensured 
that  approximately  13,000  customers  would  receive  redress  and
compensation as a result of lender failings, together with the 7,100 cases resolved through our
work prior to the Examination. We also made clear that more would follow as we challenged
lenders to include all customers harmed by mis-handling of tracker mortgages. Last month, we
published a progress report provided to the Minister for Finance. Today, we can provide a further
update to the Committee based on end-December information.
The end-2017 figures show that lenders have been forced to pay €316 million in redress and
compensation.  More  will  follow,  as  the  remainder  of  the  33,700  customers  that  were  denied
tracker products or charged the wrong rates receive redress and compensation and as claims
2
submitted to the independent appeals processes are adjudicated .
When we last appeared before you, we outlined the phased structure of the Examination and that
lenders had submitted their Phase 2 reports. We made clear we regarded certain reports to be
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
deficient. In particular, we said that certain lenders had left out groups of customers whom, in our
view,  had  been  affected  by  their  failures  and  were  therefore  entitled  to  redress  and
compensation.  We  emphasised  that  we  would  robustly  challenge  any  such  deficiency  as  we
moved through our assurance work.
In that work, we scrutinised lenders’ reports, undertook on-site inspections, hauled in lenders’
senior management and impressed on them the need to take a consumer-focused approach in
complying with the Examination.
The result of this intensive engagement is that the issues around the inclusion of disputed groups
of customers identified to that point have now been resolved to the satisfaction of the Central
Bank.
As  a  result  of  our  challenge,  there  has  been  a  large  increase  in  the  numbers  of  customers
between October last and today who will be included in redress and compensation schemes – a
further 13,600 customers.
In short, the Examination is delivering for consumers.
I  wish  to  acknowledge  the  work  of  this  Committee  and  the  Minister  of  Finance  &  Public
Expenditure  and  Reform  in  shining  the  public  spotlight  on  those  lenders  involved  in  the
Examination, adding to the sustained pressure we have exerted on the lenders since the outset.
Like any regulator, the Central Bank is limited by law in the amount of information we can publicly
disclose about any regulated financial institution. Much of the pressure we exert on lenders in
order  to  protect  consumers  must  necessarily  be  done  in  private  until  outcomes  are  final  and
announced.
Of the initial group of 13,000 customers accepted by lenders up to end-September last, 74%
have now received their redress and compensation. The majority of the outstanding customers
will receive theirs between now and end-March, with the remainder receiving payment by end-
June. €181 million has been paid out to date to these customers, with more to follow.
Of the 13,600 additional customers accepted since October, 29% have received redress and
compensation of €87.9m. We expect the remainder to receive their redress and compensation
between now and end-June.
Lenders are counting the cost of this scandal. In addition to the redress and compensation we
require them to pay, these institutions are bearing significant administrative costs to conduct the
Examination in line with our requirements. This can be seen in their provisioning statements and
their staffing levels. By way of example, the main lenders have now made combined provisions
of circa €900 million in respect of the Examination, broken down as approximately €600m for
redress and compensation and €300m for costs, while one lender recently disclosed that it had
up to 500 people working on its redress scheme. These institutions also must repair damaged
reputations, not only as a result of the original mis-handling of tracker mortgages but also due to
the partial and delayed engagement of some lenders with the requirements of this Examination.
While the Central Bank’s view is that the vast majority of customers have now been identified, we
will continue to review, challenge and verify the work undertaken by the lenders and complete our
intrusive on-site inspection programme, which is probing lender compliance with all aspects of
the Examination framework and gathering evidence to support our enforcement activity. 
I acknowledge that this work has taken time to complete and I am conscious of the devastating
impact that lenders’ failures have had on customers, up to and including the loss of their homes
and investment properties.
I acknowledge also that no amount of money will ever fully compensate a person or family for the
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
trauma involved in losing their home.
The Central Bank has heard many distressing personal testimonies from customers who have
contacted us. Our awareness of the harm caused to so many families has underpinned our drive
to  ensure  all  affected  customers  receive  the  appropriate  financial  redress  and  compensation,
and that we leave no stone unturned in seeking evidence to support enforcement actions.
The scale, range and complexity of the Examination, in addition to the material deficiencies in
certain lenders’ responses, has required robust and sustained Central Bank intervention. This
has resulted in many more customers being included, and lenders significantly improving both
their  redress  and  compensation  proposals  and  their  independent  appeals  processes,  to  the
benefit  of  those  affected.  While  this  has  meant  that  the  Examination  has  taken  longer  than
expected, the results are now becoming evident in terms of the numbers of people identified as
affected and the scale of redress and compensation being paid.
In tandem with our supervisory work, enforcement work is ongoing.
Enforcement
Four  enforcement  investigations  are  currently  under  way,  and  we  expect  that  all  of  the  main
lenders will face enforcement investigations.
Enforcement  investigations  are  detailed  and  forensic,  and  routinely  involve  the  scrutiny  of
thousands of documents and the conduct of interviews as part of the investigative process, to
establish the exact circumstances of matters under investigation.
In our enforcement investigations, the Central Bank will consider all possible angles, including
potential individual culpability.
While we are investigating, it is also important to remember that the board members and senior
personnel of lenders have significant legal obligations to report potential regulatory breaches to
the Central Bank and to report certain potential criminal offences to An Garda Siochána under the
Criminal Justice Act 2011.
In  that  context,  we  are  writing  to  the  board  members  and  senior  personnel  requiring  signed
confirmation from them that they are aware of their legal obligations.
Culture Within Lenders
The Central Bank’s Consumer Protection Code requires that lenders act in the best interests of
their customers. While many lenders publicly state that they put customers first, evidence from
the Examination firmly suggests otherwise.
The Examination has exposed the manner in which certain lenders have treated their customers
and the degree of regulatory force required to make them rectify such behaviour.
It is clear that significant behavioural and cultural issues and challenges in some of the lenders
still exist and that customer interests have not been sufficiently protected or prioritised.
The Minister for Finance has mandated the Central Bank to report on the issue of behaviour and
culture within lenders later this year.
We  are  currently  completing  our  scoping  work  and  the  next  step  is  to  commence  on-site
assessments, which will include engagement within each of the lenders at senior management,
middle management and staff levels to probe behaviour and cultural issues within lenders.
It is important to note that culture is about more than behaviour. A partial list includes prioritising
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
the  best  interests  of  customers,  offering  responsible  products,  reviewing  board  effectiveness,
committing  to  diversity  and  inclusion  and  having  robust  internal  audit  and  risk  management
procedures. A defining cultural test is how a firm deals with adverse situations: does it make sure
that the best interests of customers are protected, even if this damages short-term profitability?
The review will be underpinned by our enhanced Consumer Protection Risk Assessment model,
which  facilitates  us  in  determining  how  financial  firms  identify  and  manage  consumer  risks,
including the risk that a firm’s culture does not promote and support the protection of consumers.
The  behaviour  we  witnessed  in  lenders  as  part  of  the  Examination  very  much  informed  the
development of this new model. We are working with the Dutch Central Bank (De Nederlandsche
Bank– ‘DNB’), recognised leaders in the supervision of behavior and culture, who will participate
with us in on-site inspections at lenders.
The  culture  of  a  firm  is  the  responsibility  of  that  firm.  In  particular,  the  members  of  its  board
should constantly be asking questions of themselves and their firm. Such as: what counts for
promotions  –  high  sales  figures  or  high-quality  interactions  with  customers?  Are  the  right
products being sold to the right people?  How do staff incentives and rewards influence product
sales  and  consumer  outcomes?  Are  the  interests  of  customers  taken  into  account  when
decisions are made in the boardroom? Is the tone from the top signalling the right values to staff?
These are critical issues which lenders must prioritise and get right if they are to truly reflect a
consumer-focused culture.
The  Central  Bank  is  effectively  using  the  full  range  of  our  powers  to  deliver  for  affected
customers in relation to the Tracker Examination. We keep under constant review the question of
whether  additional  powers  would  enable  us  to  deliver  more  effectively  our  mission  of
safeguarding stability and protecting consumers.
In that context, our report into behaviour and culture at lenders will help identify any regulatory
enhancements that are required and whether any additional legislative changes are needed.
Another example of how we keep our powers under constant review is our response this month
to  the  Law  Reform  Commission  issues  paper  on regulatory  enforcement  and  corporate
offences. 
Payments
Finally, I wish to stress an important message for affected customers receiving their redress and
compensation.
The  Examination  Framework  has  been  designed  to  ensure  affected  customers  have  further
options if they believe the redress and compensation offered by their lender is insufficient.
Customers can accept the redress and compensation offered and still make an appeal – they
can  “cash  the  cheque”  safe  in  the  knowledge  that  what  they  have,  they  hold.  Redress  and
compensation offers cannot be reduced in the event of a customer making an appeal.
Lenders have been required to establish independent appeals panels, specifically to deal with
customers who are not satisfied with any aspect of the redress and compensation offers that
they receive from lenders.
Together with redress and compensation, affected customers will receive a separate payment
which they can use to pay for independent advice regarding the adequacy of their lender’s offer.
In  line  with  the  State  consumer  protection  framework,  all  other  recourse  options  are  open  to
customers, such as the Financial Services Ombudsman, who will deal independently with their
concerns, or the courts.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Conclusion
The tracker mortgage scandal is unprecedented in its scale and has required an unprecedented
regulatory  response.  Our  pursuit  of  lenders  continues  to  ensure  that  they  include  all  affected
customers and discharge their responsibilities under the Framework. This will continue to involve
intrusive supervisory scrutiny, which means we will continue to review, challenge and verify the
work undertaken by the lenders and complete our own multi-faceted inspection programme. In
parallel, our enforcement investigations will continue.
ENDS
Appendix  –  Outline  of  the  Central  Bank’s  policy  and  supervisory  interventions  and
enforcement  activity  in  relation  to  tracker  mortgage-related  issues  in  the  pre-
Examination period
The Central Bank, as a regulator and supervisor, has a key role in ensuring that there is a strong
consumer protection framework in place for consumers and in supervising firms’ conduct, under
that framework, on a risk- and evidence-basis.
During the period pre-commencement of the Examination, the Central Bank intervened with a
number of individual lenders where it was concerned that tracker mortgage customers were not
being treated fairly. The Central Bank also kept the regulatory framework, as it relates to tracker
mortgage customers, under constant review, leading to much enhanced statutory protections for
customers, including those who are in arrears and pre-arrears.
For example, in late 2008 – precisely at the time that trackers were becoming loss-making for
lenders – the Central Bank issued a public warning to lenders in respect of their duty to act in the
best interests of their customers when recommending a switch from tracker to fixed or variable
rate mortgages.
During the period 2010 to 2013, we strengthened the Consumer Protection Code (the “Code”)
and  the  Code  of  Conduct  on  Mortgage Arrears  (the  “CCMA”).    Specifically,  the  CCMA  was
updated and provides that a lender must only require a borrower who is in arrears or pre-arrears
to change from an existing tracker mortgage to another rate as a last resort, and where all other
options have been considered to be unsustainable.
Prior  to  2015,  we  pursued  tracker  mortgage  issues  with  a  number  of  individual  lenders  and
ensured 7,100 cases were resolved in favour of affected customers.
We  also  took  enforcement  action  against  Springboard  Mortgages  Limited,  resulting  in  a
reprimand and monetary penalty of €4.5 million, the highest penalty ever collected by the Central
Bank further to an enforcement investigation.
A  full  history  of  these  interventions  can  be  found  in  Part  II  of  our  March  2017  update  on  the
Tracker  Mortgage  Examination,  which  is  available  together  with  all  previous  updates  on  the
Examination here: www.centralbank.ie/consumer-hub/tracker-mortgage-examination
 1
2
An  outline  of  the  Central  Bank’s  policy  and  supervisory  interventions  and  enforcement  activity  in  relation  to
tracker mortgage-related issues in the pre-Examination period is contained in the annex to this statement.
26,600 affected customers identified through the Examination and 7,100 cases remedied following Central
Bank intervention outside of the Examination
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
