Monetary Policy in Trinidad and Tobago: How it Stacks up to Other Central Banks 
Address by Dr. Alvin Hilaire, Governor of the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago 
Launch of Monetary Policy Report, November 23, 2017 
1. 
Central  banks  worldwide  are  making  increasing  efforts  to  lift the  veil of  mystery  that 
has traditionally enveloped the world of monetary policy. Apart from making transactions with 
notes and coins, the general public often has very little notion of what goes on at a central bank. 
For  most  people—apart  from  perhaps  academics  and  those  involved  directly  in  finance—their 
eyes glaze over when seemingly esoteric concepts involving monetary aggregates, transmission 
mechanisms  and  global  interest  parity  conditions  are  used  to  explain  what  the  institution  does. 
What they do relate to, however, is how much their notes and coins can purchase over time! This 
simple  consideration—the  changing  value  of  money  as  represented  by  the  inflation  rate—is 
really  at  the  core  of  monetary  policy.  Of  course,  in  a  world  with  24/7  financial  transactions, 
goods and services changing hands by the second, and instantaneous cross-border capital flows, 
keeping inflation in check requires some deft maneuvering by a central bank.  
2. 
In  the  early  days  of  central  banking,  it  was  seen  as  a  virtue  for  Governors  to 
communicate very little on what they were doing for fear that misinterpretation by the public 
would destabilize financial markets. Even when they communicated, efforts would be made to 
be as vague as possible: consider for example the statement of Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the 
US  Federal  Reserve  between  1987  and  2006  to  Congress  in  1987:  “If  I  turn  out  to  be 
particularly  clear,  you’ve  probably  misunderstood  what  I  said.”    But  things  have  evolved 
meaningfully  over  time,  and  nowadays,  most  central  banks  have  substantially  stepped  up 
communication  of  their  policies,  realizing  that  this  could  help  to  build  confidence  and 
understanding and actually facilitate policy effectiveness. Apart from the US Fed, the European 
Central Bank, Norges Bank and Sveriges Riksbank are among those that have taken meaningful 
strides  in  boosting  communication.  At  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and  Tobago,  enhanced 
communication  is  one  of  the  key  objectives  of  our  current  Strategic  Plan  (available  at 
www.central-bank.org.tt)  and  this  presentation  today  is  an  effort  to  set  the  stage  in  explaining 
how  monetary  policy  is  being  conducted  (we’ll  treat  with  the  financial  stability  objective 
involving supervision of financial institutions at another time).  
 1 
3. 
While  inflation  control  is  a  well-established  objective,  in  law  and  often  in  practice 
monetary  policy  is  often  tasked  with  other  goals.  The  roles  of  central  banks  have  changed 
throughout  history.  A  paper  commissioned  by  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  (BIS) 
makes a useful distinction of 3 epochs: (i) the Victorian era (1840s to 1914); (ii) the decades of 
government  control  (1930s  to  1960s);  and  (iii)  the  triumph  of  the  markets  (1980s  to  2007)1. 
Central  banks  were  put  into  the  spotlight  in  the  wake  of  the  global  financial  crisis  of  2008/09, 
prompting greater public demand for transparency in their operations.  The historical,  economic 
and  geographical  contexts shape the  expectations for  central  banks outside of the basic  goal  of 
maintaining  the  value  of  domestic  currencies.  While  in  some  jurisdictions,  the  establishing 
mandate requires a square focus on inflation, elsewhere other goals are formally set out. The US 
Federal Reserve Act stipulates these as maximum employment, stable prices and moderate long-
term interest rates. Economic development objectives are also sometimes explicitly stated, or at 
times  a  more  general  formulation  is  provided;  sometimes,  potentially  conflicting  objectives 
appear side by side2. Over the past few years, in an attempt to sharpen their focus some Central 
Banks  (for  example  Brazil,  Colombia,  and  New  Zealand)  have  become  explicit  “inflation 
targeters”: in this regime, they establish concrete inflation targets and commit to  a certain rigid 
framework of  announcing how they are performing3. Trinidad and Tobago’s Central  Bank was 
established  in  1964  and  its  governing  legislation  specifies  a  range  of  objectives  including  to 
“maintain monetary stability, control and protect the external value of the monetary unit…[and] 
encourage expansion in the general level of production, trade and employment”. 
4. 
Monetary action in Trinidad and Tobago has had to respond to the economy’s energy-
exporting  nature  and  associated  growth/inflation  cycles.  Apart  from  direct  local  spending  by 
energy  companies,  the  main  channel  through  which  the  energy  sector  affects  the  Trinidad  and 
Tobago economy is via government taxes. This has interesting implications for monetary policy 
since, even in the absence of an overall fiscal deficit, government spending in excess of what it 
receives from domestic taxes could add to inflationary pressures. The Central Bank therefore has 
                                                           
1 Charles Goodhart, “The Changing Roles of Central Banks”, BIS Working Papers 326, November 2010.  
 
2 For a survey on Central Bank legislation, see Central Bank Governance Group, “Issues in the Governance of 
Central Banks”, BIS, May 2009 
 
3 Carare, Alina and Mark Stone, “Inflation Targeting Regimes”, International Monetary Fund Working Paper 
WP/03/9, January 2003. 
2 
 to  pay  close  attention  to  the  financial  activities  of  the  Government  to  avoid  the  possibility  of 
overheating  of  the  economy.  This  is  further  complicated  by  the  fact  that  international  energy 
prices are unpredictable, and the economy has been subject to the boom-bust cycles over the last 
half  century  associated  with  external  price  movements.  For  the  most  part  spikes  in  energy 
prices—as  from  1973  to  1982  and  1995  to  2013—have  been  accompanied  by  episodes  of 
relatively high growth in Trinidad and Tobago and moderate to high inflation. On the flip side, 
depressed  prices  led  to  economic  contraction  and  slower  inflation.  Another  important 
consideration is the exchange rate regime. The country switched from a fixed exchange rate with 
controls to a flexible regime with no controls on current or capital account transactions in 1993. 
The absence of capital  controls  meant  that monetary policy now had to  more directly take into 
account  its  impact  on  capital  movements.  In  simple  language,  attempts  by  the  Central  Bank  to 
conduct monetary policy could be offset by people moving their money in or out of the country, 
especially if the exchange rate is managed4.  
5. 
In  adapting  over  time,  the  Central  Bank  has  moved  progressively  towards  more 
market-determined policy instruments. For the first four decades or so, the Bank relied on more 
‘direct’  tools  to  conduct  policy.  The  typical  example  was  altering  the  amount  of  money  that 
financial  institutions  were  required  to  keep  at  the  Central  Bank,  i.e.  the  so-called  ‘reserve 
requirement’  whereby  institutions  were  mandated  to  put  a  certain  proportion  of  their  deposit 
liabilities in non-interest bearing accounts at the Bank. When the Central Bank wanted to tighten 
monetary  policy,  it  increased  the  reserve  requirement  and  when  it  wanted  to  loosen  policy  the 
requirements  were  lowered5.  Another  direct  instrument  was  selective  credit  controls,  by  which 
the Central  Bank would  dictate to financial institutions the proportion of credit that must go to 
various activities. There was a shift in focus towards less direct instruments by the early 2000s, 
in  tandem  with  the  more  developed  nature  of  local  financial  markets  and  international  moves 
towards  more  market-based  central  bank  policies.  In  this  new  framework,  the  Central  Bank 
would buy and sell financial instruments in a way that would affect interest rates and the amount 
of  liquidity  in  the  financial  system.  This  would  be  bolstered  by  the  Bank’s  adjustments  to  its 
                                                           
4 In the economic literature this is sometimes referred to as the ‘impossible trinity’—having an independent 
monetary policy with a managed exchange rate and capital controls. 
 
5 See Monetary and Financial Management in Trinidad and Tobago: A Chronology, 1964-2004, Central Bank of 
Trinidad and Tobago, 2004 for a review of the evolution of the monetary policy instruments. 
3 
 “repo  rate”,  which  broadly  represents  the  interest  charge  on  banks  needing  to  borrow  from  the 
Central  Bank;  movements in  the repo rate would not  only affect  the potential cost  of funds for 
the  banks  but  would  serve  as  a  wider  signal  on  the  Central  Bank’s  intentions  for  the  path  of 
interest rates in the economy.  
6. 
But this requires constant adaptation to market behaviors, and could over time be even 
more  complicated  with  the  advent  of  digital  currencies.  The  use  of  indirect  instruments  has 
considerable merit by allowing market  forces to  operate; in  this way a small  change in  interest 
rates for  example could  ripple through the financial system, with  institutions reacting based on 
their  particular  circumstances  and  needs.  In  contrast,  the  blunt  direct  tools  would  largely  be 
unable  to  discriminate  among  financial  institutions,  notwithstanding  their  differing  situations. 
Indirect paths however do require a deep understanding of how the Central Bank’s tools would 
work  their  way  through  the  financial  system—in  economic  parlance,  the  ‘transmission 
mechanism’  of  monetary  policy.  This  world  is  inhabited  by  moving  parts  such  as  behavioral 
functions,  reaction  functions,  anticipations  and  expectations  that  are  not  always  stable  and  that 
often operate with varying lags. To take a practical example, the Central Bank may wish to raise 
interest  rates  in  the  economy  by  selling  securities  (open  market  operations);  the  idea  is  that  as 
financial institutions invest in these securities this would push up interest rates. Alternatively, the 
Bank may opt to increase the repo rate on the expectation that other interest rates would rise as 
the  cost  of  potential  commercial  bank  funding  from  the  Central  Bank  goes  up.  But  in  both 
circumstances,  if  financial  institutions  have  a  lot  of  excess  funds  on  their  hands,  then  interest 
rates may not rise at all! The point is that the Central Bank has to be consistently monitoring the 
markets and gauging reactions for indirect instruments to be successful. At times, moral suasion 
has to be employed—telling financial institutions how they are expected to behave—to reinforce 
the  signaling  effect  of  an  action.  Looking  ahead,  with  digital  currencies  likely  on  the  near 
horizon, the very definitions and measurement of money and credit are up for  grabs  and could 
further complicate how monetary policies operate.  
7. 
Trinidad  and  Tobago  currently  remains  in  what  may  still  be  the  early  stages  of 
adjustment to a potentially permanent shift in the terms of trade. The declines in the prices of 
petroleum  and  natural  gas  since  2014,  coupled  with  domestic  production  shortfalls,  have  had 
well-recognized  impacts  on  the  Government’s  finances  and  the  balance  of  payments.  The 
 4 
economy contracted by 6 per cent in real terms in 2016 and a small contraction is anticipated in 
the current  year. The positive news on the growth front is that energy production has started to 
recover in  the second half of 2017 and could  be  further boosted by some major projects  in  the 
pipeline.  The  Government’s  finances  have  however  taken  a  major  hit  and  fiscal  consolidation 
efforts  are  underway;  in  the  short  run,  this  can  be  expected  to  constrain  growth  if  capital 
spending is significantly rolled back. Turning to the local price front, headline inflation has been 
very low, hovering around 2.0 per cent for the large part of this year, with core inflation at just 
about 1.9 per cent. In this context, international reserves declined from about the equivalent of a 
year’s worth of imports in 2014 to just over 9 months of import cover.  
8. 
Meanwhile, the short term global prospects, particularly for non-energy exporters, are 
looking  very  good.  The  IMF’s  main  message  in  its  October  2017  economic  outlook  is  that 
recovery in the global economy is strengthening.  Other things being  equal, this augurs well for 
export  demand  for  Trinidad  and  Tobago  products.  There  has  also  been  some  recent  firming  in 
international  energy  prices—at  around  US$56  per  barrel  of  oil  and  US$3.05  per  mmbtu  of 
natural  gas.  Nonetheless,  the  medium  and  long  term  prospects  for  prices  of  fossil  fuels  are 
daunting in light of rising shale oil/gas output and the drive in many parts of the world towards 
alternative  energy  sources.  Financial  markets  are  also  now  firmly  of  the  view  that  the  US  Fed 
will maintain its upward trajectory for interest rates in 2018, perhaps with a rate hike as early as 
next month.  
9. 
In  this  context  monetary  policy  is  simultaneously  aiming  to  keep  inflation  low  while 
facilitating an economic recovery and maintaining external balance—a delicate act at the best 
of  times!  The  backdrop  painted  above  shows  that,  taken  separately,  there  are  convincing 
arguments  for  both  loosening  as  well  as  for  tightening  monetary  policy.  On  the  one  hand,  the 
GDP statistics provide a case for monetary support, especially since inflation is so low. Lowering 
interest rates could potentially help to stimulate credit growth, notably for businesses, and aid in 
a recovery. At the same time, the external setting shows that the rise in foreign interest rates has 
not  been  matched  by  a  similar  move  in  domestic  rates,  so  that  the  domestic  vs  foreign  interest 
differential  has narrowed over the past  year. A further lowering of  local  rates could  exacerbate 
the situation, especially given the clear and present prospects of rate rises in the US. This could 
then  lead  to  a  disincentive  to  portfolio  capital  directed  toward  Trinidad  and  Tobago;  a  similar 
 5 
consideration  is  currently  preoccupying  authorities  in  many  emerging  and  developing  market 
countries.  The  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and  Tobago  has  navigated  this  dilemma  over  the  past 
year or so by keeping a neutral policy stance and the repo rate stable. 
10. 
Central banks in other countries are also responsive to their specific circumstances. It 
is fair to say that there is generally little harmony or indeed coordination among central banks as 
to  their  monetary  policy  stances.  Of  course,  one  clear  exception  was  the  consensus  among 
developed nations that monetary stimulus was necessary to deal with the recent global financial 
crisis.  But  for  the  most  part,  despite  sharing  similar  philosophies  on  monetary  action,  specific 
country conditions dictate the monetary priorities of the day.  At present, the US Fed is well on 
the road to raising interest rates and rolling back its significant monetary accommodation of the 
last few years, incentivized by the positive news on employment and growth. In light of a more 
mixed picture in  its member countries, the European Central  Bank is  hedging by keeping  rates 
steady  and  adopting  a  wait-and-see  attitude  to  monetary  stimulus  next  year.    Closer  to  home, 
both  the  Central  Banks  of  Colombia  and  Brazil  have  recently  lowered  their  interest  rates, 
sensitive  to  the  sluggish  domestic  economic  conditions.  Meanwhile  the  Banco  de  Mexico  had 
been  on  a  tightening  cycle  but  levelled  off  in  recent  months,  given  the  rate  movements  in  its 
northern neighbor alongside concerns about the impact of earthquakes on growth. Nonetheless, 
there remains a strong consensus of views among central bankers on three important issues: 
11. 
A  clear  lesson  from  global  experience  is  that  for  successful  macroeconomic 
adjustment,  there  must  be  effective  coordination  among  fiscal,  structural  and  monetary 
policies.  It  is  well known that the success  of any action can be frustrated by some other  action 
that  works  in  another  direction.  Let’s  take  a  practical  example  that  many  persons  can  relate  to 
(especially as New Year resolutions are formulated and Carnival is fast approaching): trying to 
lose weight by adopting a rigorous exercise regime can very easily fail if there’s an increase in 
intake of desserts and high-calorie food! The lesson is that to manage weight, diet and exercise 
should go hand in hand. It is remarkably similar when we move to the macroeconomic front. As 
we  discussed  earlier,  monetary  policy  has  an  important  role,  among  other  things,  in  guiding 
financial markets and facilitating the conditions for internal and external balance.  But attempts, 
say, to reduce interest rates to stimulate economic growth won’t succeed if for example, heavy 
public  sector  borrowing  puts  upward  pressure  on  interest  rates  (the  fiscal  side)  or  if  private 
 6 
businesses are unwilling to take up credit as they are discouraged from pursuing export or other 
opportunities by too much red tape (the structural side). In essence, in an economy dominated by 
energy as Trinidad and Tobago, fiscal policy leads the way. But structural policy is arguably no 
less  important.  Consider  the  case  of  large  exchange  rate  adjustments  in  Latin  America  versus 
East Asia. Experience over the past few years suggests that in several Latin American countries a 
large  devaluation  (accompanied  by  complementary  fiscal  actions)  did  help  to  bring  about 
external  balance6.  But  most  of  this  came  about  because  of  a  huge  compression  in  imports—as 
opposed to a meaningful rise in exports—because it was very difficult for businesses to quickly 
shift production to take advantage of the lower prices of their exports in international markets. In 
contrast, in Asian territories like Japan and South Korea, production is generally ramped up quite 
rapidly once any price advantage appears! The upshot is that structural reforms, geared to make 
an  economy  much  more  dynamic,  efficient  and  responsive,  can  pay  rich  dividends.  There  are 
certainly many areas in  Trinidad and  Tobago that can benefit from such reforms, via concerted 
action  towards  changes  in  legislation,  institutions,  attitudes,  technology,  modernization  of 
standards and strengthened accountability.  
12. 
At  the  same  time,  constant  attention  must  be  paid  to  avoiding  excessive  central  bank 
financing  of  governments,  given  the  implications  for  inflation.  One  of  the  functions  of  many 
central  banks (including in  Trinidad and Tobago) is  to act  as banker to  governments. One may 
ask then, shouldn’t a banker provide credit facilities to  its client? When the banker is  a  central 
bank, it is vital to keep in mind that, unlike other banks, this institution has the power to ‘create’ 
money (including most noticeably, cash); a huge amount of money created by the  central  bank 
can  then  lead  to  high  inflation.  The  capacity  to  create  money  then  is  why  central  bankers  are 
concerned about  excessive financing of government deficits7. A BIS survey of central banks in 
1999 found that the majority were not required, and often not  allowed, to lend to governments, 
either  by  legislation  or  written  agreements  with  their  government.  Particularly  strong 
prohibitions  exist  in  Brazil,  Chile,  Peru  and  Poland,  where  lending  to  the  government  is 
precluded by the constitution. In other countries a limit may be specified in law. In Trinidad and 
                                                           
6 See Chapter 3, “External Adjustments to Terms of Trade Shifts” in Regional Economic Outlook, International 
Monetary Fund Western Hemisphere Department, April 2017. 
 
7 Among the vast literature on the subject see for example Hilbers, Paul, “Interaction of Monetary and Fiscal 
Policies: Why Central Bankers Worry about Government Budgets”, presented at an IMF Seminar on Current 
Developments in Monetary and Financial Law, Washington, D.C., May 24-June 4, 2004 
7 
 Tobago, the legal  limit  is 15 per cent  of projected Government  revenue,  with  a stipulation  that 
the borrowing be repaid “as soon as possible.”   
13. 
Finally, in terms of timing, it is better for macroeconomic adjustments to be made from 
a  position  of  strength.  Determining  the  pace  of  adjustment  to  a  large  terms  of  trade  shock  as 
Trinidad and Tobago is facing is not a simple choice between shock therapy and gradualism. Key 
considerations include assessments of whether the shock is temporary or permanent, what is the 
menu of appropriate policies, how financial markets and the public would react, and what is the 
room  available  for  maneuver.  Focusing  on  the  latter,  it  is  evident  that,  unlike  some  earlier 
periods of energy price declines, Trinidad and Tobago entered this latest episode a few years ago 
with  substantial  buffers:  these  included  high  international  reserves  by  any  standard,  substantial 
deposits  in  a  sovereign  wealth  fund  (Heritage  and  Stabilization  Fund)  and  meaningful  fiscal 
space  due  to  a  relatively  low  level  of  debt.  These  cushions  have  allowed  the  adjustment  to 
proceed  at  a  somewhat  measured  pace.  Of  course,  it  also  means  that  the  degrees  of  freedom 
would  become  progressively  smaller  over  time  and  this  would  likely  affect  the  perspective  of 
financial  markets.  Taking  everything  into  account,  compared  to  many  other  energy  exporters, 
Trinidad  and  Tobago  is  still  in  a  relatively  strong  position,  but  attention  must  be  taken  to 
engender  the  necessary  reforms  in  a  context  of  fiscal,  structural  and  monetary  policy 
coordination as early as possible.  
14. 
Looking  forward,  monetary  policy  in  Trinidad  and  Tobago  will  need  to  maintain  its 
dynamism to deal with current as well as future domestic and external financial challenges. In 
summary, the Central  Bank of Trinidad and Tobago joins the fraternity  of central banks across 
the  world  in  pursuing  a  monetary  policy  appropriate  to  country-specific  circumstances,  while 
advocating  for  close  coordination  with  other  macroeconomic  policies  sooner-rather-than-later, 
and  avoiding  excessive  money  creation.  The  Bank  is  also  aiming  to  simplify  and  strengthen 
public communication on our operations as well as on financial literacy more generally—at this 
stage however I must admit that we are still working through the arguments on providing explicit 
forward guidance on the stance of monetary policy. We anticipate that, despite some bright spots 
on the horizon, 2018 will present further challenges for macroeconomic management, including 
monetary policies.  
 8 
