Vítor Constâncio: Why EMU requires more financial integration
Keynote speech by Mr  Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the
joint conference of the European Commission and European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 3
May 2018.
 I am pleased to host you today in Frankfurt at the Financial Integration Conference. The 2018
Financial Integration Report is the last issue published under my tenure as ECB Vice-President. I
wish  therefore  to  take  this  opportunity  to  reflect  on  the  relevance  of  financial  integration  to
Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) and provide some suggestions for future directions.
Already at the very early stages of the project, it was clear that financial integration was needed
to  make  the  Monetary  Union  sustainable.  The  1970  Werner  Report  mentioned  the  complete
liberalisation of capital transactions and the full integration of financial markets as one of three
necessary  conditions  for  a  monetary  union. Along  with  this,  it  was  understood  that  the  single
currency would secure the full benefits of a single market for capital.
During the run-up to the Maastricht Treaty and in the context of the Delors report discussions it
became clear that the dictum “one money one market” also implied addressing possible new
concerns about financial stability in Economic and Monetary Union. In some cases this translated
into prescient calls – like that from Alexandre Lamfalussy – for assigning the European Central
Bank a role in banking supervision. Eventually however the institutional set-up of Monetary Union
left financial stability considerations largely unaddressed.
This approach clearly showed its limits during the financial crisis. The financial fragmentation of
EMU  during  the  financial  crisis  was  partly  a  result  of  the  initial  choices  concerning  EMU’s
institutional architecture – to be precise, its minimalist design which left economic and financial
policies mostly at national level. This was maybe due to an overriding faith in the efficiency of
financial markets that – even though not shared by all of EMU’s founding fathers – prevailed in
Maastricht.
It has to be acknowledged, however, that over the following years, financial market integration in
EMU and at global level, accelerated at a speed that was hard to grasp in those early days after
the creation of Monetary Union.
The introduction of the single currency gave a major impetus to financial integration in the euro
area.  Financial  integration  was  impressive  in  terms  of  quantitative  indicators  but  it  was  not
sustainable  –  it  proved  to  be  shallow  and  reversible.  In  fact,  it  even  contributed  to  the  rapid
contagion  in  the  early  days  of  the  crisis.   We  learned  the  hard  way  that  a  single  currency
requires a financial system that is sustainably integrated and, indeed, as single as possible.
1
Much has been done to correct the initial design failures of EMU. Along with the introduction of
the euro, the EU’s Financial Services Action Plan was launched to provide an overall framework
for the integration of financial services in Europe. With the surge of the financial crisis, it also
became very clear that macroprudential policy needed to complement both monetary policy and
microprudential  supervision.  The  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB)  and  the  European
Supervisory Authorities were then established at the beginning of this decade.
However,  these  reforms  quickly  proved  to  be  insufficient  to  keep  pace  with  adverse  financial
sector  developments  –  especially  concerning  the  role  of  the  banking  sector  in  the  Monetary
Union. In response, the banking union project was launched in the depths of the financial crisis in
2012.  But  convergence  in  regulatory  and  supervisory  standards  is  not  enough  to  spur  the
development and integration of capital markets that is needed for growth and private-risk sharing.
Therefore, efforts in this direction were also undertaken, with the launch of the capital markets
 1 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
union (CMU) initiative.
In short, the history of EMU is marked by an evolving search for the right institutional embedding
of  financial  markets.  And  in  that  search,  Europe  has  to  be  agile  to  react  to  changing
circumstances. In doing so it has to find a balance: between markets and regulation, between
liability and control, and between the European and national level. However, the crucial question
is whether we will achieve a sustainable financial integration that is commensurate with a single
currency.
Why financial integration is currently insufficient for EMU
The  crisis  made  it  clear  that  deep  financial  integration  is  essential  to  prevent  EMU  going  into
reverse. Financial integration in Europe and in the euro area had been growing steadily before the
financial  and  sovereign  debt  crisis.  However,  the  system  was  not  structurally  integrated  and
when the crisis financial erupted integration quickly reversed, exactly when it was most needed.
In response to global and local shocks almost all financial markets became highly fragmented
and retrenched inside domestic borders. These developments represented an existential threat
to the Monetary Union and the single currency.
That fragmentation has reversed along several dimensions in the last few years. But significant
room for further improvements in financial integration remains, for example in the integration of
retail banking services and in the financing of the corporate sector.
Financial integration provides risk sharing mechanisms which can reduce the impact of country-
specific shocks and contributes to macroeconomic stability. Internationally diversified portfolios –
cross-regional  and  cross-border  asset  holdings,  including  firm  ownership  claims  –  are  more
resilient to global and local shocks and can mitigate the impact of such adverse scenarios. This
is particularly true when integration occurs also in the equity markets as opposed to the current
bias towards debt finance intermediated by banks.  For countries in a monetary union, this risk
sharing  mechanism  is  particularly  important  because  the  single  monetary  policy  is  unable  to
address  asymmetric  shocks,  since  other  important  adjustment  mechanisms,  for  example
related  to  fiscal  policy  and  exchange  rates,  are  limited.  Therefore  more  private  financial  risk
sharing can significantly improve the macroeconomic stabilisation of the euro area and thereby
the functioning of EMU.  However, bear in mind that in recessionary periods, the power of this
risk sharing mechanism is significantly reduced, in particular via the powerful credit channel. Let
me point out that this channel accounts for about one-quarter in the United States and around
12% in the euro area, of the overall income smoothing that is achieved in both jurisdictions in
4
normal times.
2
3
Perhaps even more important, financial integration is also essential to foster economic growth.
Integrated  capital  markets  provide  a  wider  source  of  financing  and  lower  funding  costs  for
households and firms and ultimately support innovation and the efficient allocation of capital. A
financial  system  which  allocates  resources  efficiently  and  is  resilient  to  shocks  ultimately
supports the transmission of monetary policy and its effect on price stability.
The banking union and the CMU affect different parts of the financial system at different stages of
development, but follow similar objectives to achieve a more efficient and stable financial system.
They are also complementary projects: work on them should run in parallel and require a solid
monetary union.
Completing banking union
The first task ahead is to complete the banking union. Each of its three pillars, notably the Single
Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM),  the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  (SRM)  and  the  planned
European Deposit Insurance Scheme (EDIS) address the risk of fragmentation. They are also all
 2 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
necessary to ensure a proper balance between markets and regulations, and liability and control
at European and national level.
The SSM ensures that banks are subject to the same set of rules and supervised on the basis of
common standards. This reduces the risks of spillovers from bank failures to sovereigns and
provides  a  common  framework  conducive  to  further  integration  in  the  banking  markets,  a
process which has been lagging.
Since bank failures cannot always be avoided – and indeed this may not be desirable either, as it
may undermine market discipline – we need a credible and well-functioning crisis management
and resolution mechanism.
This is ensured by the second pillar of the banking union. With the setting-up of the BRRD , the
Single Resolution Mechanism and the Single Resolution Fund (SRF), we have made a quantum
leap in the institutional organisation of the EMU. However, the framework is still incomplete. Most
notably,  it  requires  a  common  public  backstop  to  the  SRF,  which  is  essential  to  inspire  full
confidence  in  the  resolution  regime.  In  addition,  it  would  be  desirable  to  eliminate  national
divergences in the insolvency and liquidation of credit institutions, and in the implementation of
the  BRRD  through  national  resolution  laws.  Allowing  these  divergences  to  persist  ultimately
implies  that  the  geographical  location  of  a  failing  bank  may  still  influence  the  outcome  of  the
resolution, which is inconsistent with the idea at the heart of a banking union.
5
Finally, in order to complete the banking union, we need a single, fully-fledged EDIS. The EDIS
would strengthen depositors’ confidence through an equal level of depositor protection across
Member States and therefore promote financial integration. Ultimately, a fully-fledged EDIS would
be  strengthened  by  the  pooling  of  resources,  thus  building  confidence  in  the  single  currency,
throughout the Monetary Union. The finalisation of the banking union through its third pillar would
require an adequately sized fund, built and financed by banks by raising ex-ante contributions,
accompanied  by  a  public  backstop  as  recommended  by  the  ECB  opinion  on  EDIS.   The
calibration  of  these  contributions  should  help  to  minimise  the  risk  of  some  banking  systems
subsidising other banking systems in the event of a crisis. A recently published ECB Occasional
Paper   simulating  severe  banking  crises,  demonstrates  precisely  that,  with  proper  bank  risk-
based contributions, an almost negligible cross-border subsidisation occurs. For this reason, a
crucial element of a fully-fledged EDIS would consist of risk-adjusted contributions to the fund
based on bank-specific strengths and weaknesses benchmarked at the banking union level.
6
7
8
Progress  is  also  needed  in  the  framework  for  macroprudential  regulation.  I  regard  this  as  a
precondition for safeguarding financial stability in an integrated market and therefore protecting
the Single Market. The CRR/CRD IV , the ESRB and the SSM Regulations already define the key
elements  of  the  macroprudential  framework,  but  as  the  framework  is  tested  and  more
experience is gained the rules will need to be steadily revised. Authorities with a mandate in this
area  must  have  well-defined  roles  and  responsibilities,  including  a  distinct  set  of  instruments.
Current  overlaps  between  instruments  should  be  eliminated,  and  more  flexibility  in  the
macroprudential policy framework should be maintained, so that authorities can implement those
measures in a consistent and timely manner, which would require significant changes to Article
458 of the CRR.
A  more  integrated  financial  market  will  support  the  emergence  of  new  types  of  risk  and  also
require  extending  the  toolkit  with  new  instruments.  For  the  banking  sector,  this  includes
complementing the toolkit with borrower-based instruments (such as limits on loan-to-value, or
loan-to-income ratios) as well as sectoral buffers and a time-varying leverage ratio add-on so
that all aspects of systemic risks can be addressed in the banking union. Finally, the mandatory
reciprocity framework needs to be expanded so as to ensure the effective mitigation of cross-
border spillover effects and regulatory arbitrage across jurisdictions in the EU.
 3 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
The significant progress we have made with our banking union needs to be recognised also from
the  international  regulatory  framework  perspective. A  case  in  point  is  the  G-SIB   framework,
which  currently  penalises  cross-border  transactions  within  the  banking  union  by  attaching  a
higher systemic risk score to banks with more transactions of that kind. This goes against the
very rationale of the banking union, as it reduces the incentives for cross-border transactions and
risk diversification, thus making banks more vulnerable to local shocks.
9
At the same time, we also need to remove the remaining obstacles to further integration within
our banking union. Such obstacles are often due to regulatory fragmentation and ring-fencing of
national markets. For example, a number of national options and discretions, such as diverging
large exposure rules, are hindering the free flow of liquidity and capital in the banking union and
should be harmonised further.
Turning to other parts of the financial system, we can expect that the CMU will provide further
impetus  to  the  growth  of  market-based  finance  and  may  present  new  challenges  to  financial
stability.
Additional steps should be taken to strengthen the ability of European regulators and supervisors
to address systemic risks stemming from the non-banking part of the financial sector. This could
be achieved by expanding the mandate of relevant authorities and, in the medium run, by creating
a single supervisor for the capital markets.
Adequate  macroprudential  instruments  need  to  be  envisaged  as  well,  including  instruments
targeted  at  market-based  finance.  Macroprudential  tools  for  this  area  either  still  need  to  be
provided to authorities or need to be further clarified in respect of their application. For Securities
Financing  Transactions  (SFT)  and  derivative  markets,  macroprudential  margins  and  haircuts
have been identified as potentially powerful tools for reducing the excessive build-up of leverage
and  procyclicality 
the  existing
macroprudential  leverage  limit  needs  to  be  operationalised.  The  forthcoming  review  of  the
Alternative Investment Fund Managers Directive provides an opportunity to resolve any issues
that may hinder the future implementation of this leverage limit.
  For  alternative 
these  markets.
investment 
funds, 
in 
10
Moreover,  as  the  ESRB  recently  recommended,  for  the  investment  fund  sector,  the  role  of
authorities when using their powers to suspend redemptions needs to be further specified in law.
In addition, European Securities and Markets Authority should have a general facilitation, advisory
and  coordination  role  in  relation  to  the  National  Competent  Authorities’  powers  to  suspend
redemptions in situations where there are cross-border financial stability implications.
The need for a European safe asset
The stability and integration of financial markets in the Monetary Union is also closely related to
the creation of a euro area-wide safe asset, for a number of reasons. First, it could help reduce
the excessive home bias in banks’ sovereign exposures, which exacerbates the feedback loop
between banks and sovereigns. Reforms to the resolution regime (i.e. BRRD) have tackled the
issue from one direction, from banks to the sovereign. However, at present, there is no clear
solution for tackling it in the other direction, from the sovereign to the banks. The creation of a
euro area-wide safe asset, composed of a pool of sovereign bonds, would lead to a reduction in
the home bias of banks’ portfolios by facilitating de-risking and diversification.
Second,  a  euro  area  safe  asset  would  be  crucial  for  the  financial  integration  and  the  capital
markets union. In fact, it is necessary for the creation of an integrated, deep and liquid European
bond market as a central piece of CMU. A single term structure of risk-free interest rates could
serve as a euro area pricing benchmark for the valuation of bonds, equities and other assets.
The  safe  asset  could  also  be  used  as  collateral,  for  example  for  repo  and  derivatives
transactions across the euro area.
 4 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
In  principle,  several  options  are  available  for  creating  a  safe  asset.  Some  options  are  not
politically viable, while others may not be economically sound.
I am not referring to the type of eurobonds that would replace national sovereign debt as a joint
liability of Member States, as these would require a deep political union. Various proposals have
been  put  forward,  but  I  will  concentrate  on  just  two:  a  variant  of  the  European  safe  bonds
(ESBies) or sovereign bond-backed securities (SBBS)
  and  the  e-bonds  as  proposed  in  the
Monti Report.
11
12
The  current  proposal  of  the  SBBSs  refers  to  a  tranched,  synthetic  bond  backed  by  national
sovereign bonds. The senior tranche would have very low risk levels, presumably below German
debt, as a result of the diversification gains based on historical correlations and of the protection
granted by lower-grade tranches. Market practitioners and rating agencies have been skeptical
about the instrument. Their main concern is a perceived lack of diversification to ensure that the
senior tranche can be indeed as safe as claimed because correlations among several countries’
debt could increase in a stressful situation (as occurred during the financial crisis). Also, it may
be  difficult  to  sell  the  junior  tranche  at  coupons  that  do  not  fatally  compromise  the  overall
economics of the synthetic security issuance. Indeed, if the junior tranche had to be placed at a
relatively high coupon, then the senior tranche would need to offer a lower coupon than Bunds, a
doubtful selling prospect. This would likely render the economics of the SBBS as unviable, which
would be very unfortunate.
These obstacles could be overcome if, for instance, a small first loss tranche were to be covered
by public guarantee, jointly provided by member states. Such contingent liability could be limited
to  a  reasonable  level.  The  success  of  the  synthetic  European  Bonds  would  have  significant
benefits for financial integration and for the banking and capital markets unions.
Alternatively, a European entity could issue e-bonds as a pure securitisation of sizable amounts
of national sovereign bonds but with a preferred creditor status over national sovereign bonds.
Such  a  structure  would  be  less  efficient  and  could  increase  the  cost  of  issuing  the  non-
preferential  part  of  national  debt  that  is  not  included  in  the  securitisation.  However,  this  could
even act as a disciplining device and would not necessarily imply an increase in the costs of the
total debt issuance. The amounts achieved could nevertheless be considerable. For instance,
according to a recent working paper of the Peterson Institute, in order to have an expected five-
year loss rate of 0.5% or lower, the European entity could securitise 50% of a country’s debt or
25% of its GDP.
Capital Markets Union, financial integration and economic growth
13
A  European  safe  asset  is  crucial  for  the  CMU  project  which  in  turn  important  for  economic
growth. A big and liquid market, both of debt and equity, would spur innovation and enable the
development of an efficient venture capital market. This relates to the importance of boosting the
euro area’s capacity to engage in activities conducive to innovation and productivity growth. In the
years since the Great Recession, the pace of productivity growth in Europe has been persistently
slow.  In  fact,  European  productivity  growth  had  already  started  to  stagnate  during  the  mid-
1990s.
 While some economists have argued that this is all part of a global secular decline in
growth,  driven  by  factors  such  as  an  ageing  population  and  growth  convergence  across
emerging markets,
 others believe that scientific progress will keep pushing the technological
16
frontier forward.
14
15
In any case, it is vital that we have financing mechanisms in place in Europe that can support
science and technology’s contribution to economic growth. One powerful way in which policy can
assist  this  process  is  by  stimulating  the  emergence  of  deep  and  integrated  European  capital
markets.  Capital  markets,  after  all,  play  an  important  role  in  sharing  economic  risks  and  in
smoothing consumption.
  But  even  more  fundamentally,  they  contribute  greatly  to  innovation
17
 5 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
18
and growth. Evidence increasingly suggests that while both banks and markets are important for
the financing of economic growth, non-bank financial intermediation provides a relatively more
powerful contribution to innovation and productivity-enhancing activities in modern sophisticated
economies,
  Importantly,  complementarities  between  banks  and
markets  increase,  as  the  economy  develops,
  and  so  deep  capital  markets  will  end  up
complementing banks as sources of financing. While the European Commission’s current CMU
initiative is an important step in the right direction, a much more ambitious agenda for bolstering
capital markets in Europe is needed in the future.
  also  in  the  euro  area.
19
20
Developing  well-functioning  capital  markets  which  support  economic  growth  across  Europe
requires a comprehensive approach. To that end, Europe needs to boost the supply of equity
finance. Policies which stimulate individual ownership of traded shares, such as reducing the tax
advantage of debt over equity or enhancing financial literacy, can have a material effect on public
equity markets in Europe. At the same time, because stock markets often penalise companies
which undertake radical, but uncertain, innovative activities, the contribution of private equity –
particularly  in  the  form  of  early-stage  venture  capital  finance  –  is  indispensable,  as  a  critical
mass  of  angel  investors  who  can  provide  financing  for  medium-size  projects  is  also  needed.
Only with a deep, liquid market is it possible to launch IPOs of successful projects that can offset
the losses with projects that fail.
Harmonising  insolvency  rules  across  jurisdictions  would  be  a  major  step  towards  supporting
capital markets. This is critical for mobilising finance through capital markets, as it would create
incentives and favourable conditions for institutional investors to overcome the home bias in their
investment strategies. This is especially true for pension investment, as large private pension
funds tend to be a complement to deep capital markets. We need to establish a harmonised
regulatory  environment  for  new  types  of  finance,  such  as  crowd  funding.  The  emergence  of
increasingly  complex  financial  products  needs  to  be  accompanied  by  adequate  consumer
protection  of  financial  investment,  in  order  to  safeguard  financial  stability  and  ensure  the
protection of individual investors.
The  second  component  of  a  comprehensive  approach  entails  policies  that  will  stimulate
entrepreneurship. High-tech entrepreneurial firms that aspire to go public should be supported
and  facilitated  by  stock  exchanges  specialising  in  IPOs  for  young  innovative  companies.  A
reduction in the wedge between corporate income taxes and personal income taxes has already
been  shown  to  have  a  strong  positive  effect  on  high-tech  investment  in  a  European
context.
 Last but not least, the efficient application of R&D tax incentives and increased public
funding of private research universities, whose labs often make key scientific and technological
breakthroughs, are other important avenues for stimulating innovation and the commercialisation
of science.
Conclusion
21
Let me conclude. So far, measures adopted in the context of the CMU initiative, albeit positive
and helpful, are not yet commensurate with the ambition of the project. With CMU, we should aim
to  reach  a  situation  where  both  issuers  and  investors  enjoy  the  same  basic  legal  rights
concerning capital markets activity regardless of the EU country where they are located.
The CMU project involves all EU member states but it is particularly important for the euro area
member countries. It is a big waste to have taken the huge step to adopt a single currency and
continue to forgo the benefits that could be reaped by creating a true banking and capital markets
union. I believe that euro area countries should forge ahead in enhanced co-operation in order to
achieve CMU more rapidly.
We should however, be well aware that CMU requires a European safe asset, the harmonisation
of  taxes  on  financial  products,  a  convergence  of  company  law,  including  on  bankruptcy,  the
 6 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
creation of a single rule book of regulation for markets activity and ultimately a European Single
Securities  Market  Supervisor.  The  other  big  condition  is  a  rock  solid  monetary  union  so  that
assets’ risks and returns are not significantly influenced by redenomination risk but exclusively by
their idiosyncratic features. A heavy toll, I know, but I will believe that the CMU project is possible
when I see authorities start making inroads in some of those difficult issues.
Thank you for your attention.
REFERENCES
Asdrubali, P., B. Sorensen and O. Yosha (1996), “Channels of Interstate Risk Sharing: United
States 1963–1990”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 111(4): 1081–1110.
Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive, 2014/59/EU of 15 May 2014 establishing a framework
for the recovery and resolution of credit institutions and investment firms and amending Council
Directive  82/891/EEC,  and  Directives  2001/24/EC,  2002/47/EC,  2004/25/EC,  2005/56/EC,
2007/36/EC, 2011/35/EU, 2012/30/EU and 2013/36/EU, and Regulations (EU) No 1093/2010 and
(EU) No 648/2012, of the European Parliament and of the Council.
Beck, R., L. Dedola, A. Giovannini and A. Popov (2016), “Financial integration and risk sharing in
a monetary union”, ECB Report Financial Integration in Europe, Special Feature A.
Brunnermeier, M., L. Garicano, M. Pagano, R. Reis, T. Santos, D. Thesmar, S. Nieuwerburg and
D. Vayanos (2011), “European Safe Bonds”, The Euronomics Group.
Capital  Requirements  Regulation  and  Directive  IV  includes:  Capital  Requirements  Directive
(2013/36/EU)  (CRD),  which  must  be 
law,  and  Capital
Requirements Regulation (575/2013) (CRR), which applies to firms across the EU.
through  national 
implemented 
Carmassi, J., S. Dobkowitz, J. Evrard, L. Parisi, A. Silva and M. Wedow (2018), “Completing the
Banking  Union  with  a  European  Deposit  Insurance  Scheme:  who  is  afraid  of  cross-
subsidisation?”, ECB Occasional Paper 208, April 2018.
Claessens, S. (2016), “Regulation and Structural Change in Financial Systems”, in The Future of
the  International  Monetary  and  Financial  Architecture,  ECB  Forum  on  Central  Banking
Conference Proceedings, 188–222.
Constâncio, V. (2016), “Margins and haircuts as a macroprudential tool”, remarks at the ESRB
international conference on the macroprudential use of margins and haircuts, Frankfurt am Main,
6 June 2016;
Constâncio,  V.  (2017),  “The  future  of  finance  and  the  outlook  for  regulation”,  remarks  at  the
Financial Regulatory Outlook Conference, Rome 9 November 2017.
Da  Rin,  M.,  G.  Nicodano  and A.  Sembenelli  (2006),  “Public  Policy  and  the  Creation  of Active
Venture Capital Markets”, Journal of Public Economics 90:1699–1723.
ECB Opinion on 20 April 2016 on a proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of
the Council amending Regulation (EU) No 806/2014 in order to establish a European Deposit
Insurance Scheme (CON/2016/26).
European Commission Report (2015), “Completing Europe’s economic and monetary union”, by
Jean-Claude Juncker in close collaboration with Donald Tusk, Jeroen Dijsselbloem, Mario Draghi
and Martin Schulz (the Five Presidents’ Report).
European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB)  (2017),  “Sovereign  bond-backed  securities”,  ESRB
High-Level Task Force on Safe Assets.
 7 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Fernald,  J.  (2015),  “Productivity  and  Potential  Output  Before,  During,  and  After  the  Great
Recession”, NBER Macroeconomics Annual 29:1–51.
Furceri, D. and A. Zdzienicka (2015),“The euro area crisis: need of a supranational fiscal risk
sharing mechanism”, Open Economies Review 26(4):683–710; previously published in 2013 as
IMF Working Paper 13/198.
Hsu,  P.,  X.  Tian  and  Y.  Xu,  (2014),  “Financial  Development  and  Innovation:  Cross-Country
Evidence”, Journal of Financial Economics 112: 116–135.
Kremer,  M.  and  A.  Popov,  (2018),  “Financial  Development,  Financial  Structure,  and  Growth:
Evidence from Europe”, Special Feature A, ECB Report on Financial Integration in Europe.
Leandro A. and J. Zettelmeyer (2018), “The search for a Euro area safe asset”, Peterson Institute
for International Economics Working Paper 18–3.
Mokyr, J. (2014), “Secular Stagnation? Not in Your Life”, Geneva Report on the World Economy,
pp. 83–89.
Monti, M. (2010), “A New Strategy for the Single Market”, report to the President of the European
Commission, José Manuel Barroso, May 2010.
Tumpel-Gugerell, G. (2009), “The road less travelled – exploring the nexus of macro-prudential
and  monetary  policy”,  speech  at  the  conference  Learning  from  the  financial  crisis:  financial
stability, macroeconomic policy and international institutions, Rome, 12 November 2009.
van Ark, B., M. O’Mahoney and M. Timmer, (2008), “The Productivity Gap between Europe and
the United States: Trends and Causes”, Journal of Economic Perspectives 22:25–44.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Tumpel-Gugerell, G. (2009), “The road less travelled – exploring the nexus of macro-prudential and monetary
policy”, speech at the conference “Learning from the financial crisis: financial stability, macroeconomic policy
and international institutions”, Rome, 12 November 2009.
Beck, R., L. Dedola, A. Giovannini and A. Popov (2016), “Financial integration and risk sharing in a monetary
union”, ECB Report Financial Integration in Europe, Special Feature A; see also Asdrubali, P., B. Sorensen and
O. Yosha (1996), “Channels of Interstate Risk Sharing: United States 1963–1990”, The Quarterly  Journal  of
Economics 111(4): 1081–1110.
European Commission Report (2015), “Completing Europe’s economic and monetary union”, by Jean-Claude
Juncker in close collaboration with Donald Tusk, Jeroen Dijsselbloem, Mario Draghi and Martin Schulz (the Five
Presidents’ Report).
Furceri,  D.  and  A.  Zdzienicka  (2015),“The  euro  area  crisis:  need  of  a  supranational  fiscal  risk  sharing
mechanism”, Open Economies Review 26(4): 683–710; previously published in 2013 as IMF Working Paper
13/198; Asdrubali et al. (1996), “Channels of Interstate Risk Sharing: United States 1963–1990”, The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 111(4): 1081–1110.
Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive, 2014/59/EU of 15 May 2014 establishing a framework for the recovery
and resolution of credit institutions and investment firms and amending Council Directive 82/891/EEC, and
Directives  2001/24/EC,  2002/47/EC,  2004/25/EC,  2005/56/EC,  2007/36/EC,  2011/35/EU,  2012/30/EU  and
2013/36/EU, and Regulations (EU) No 1093/2010 and (EU) No 648/2012, of the European Parliament and of the
Council.
ECB Opinion on 20 April 2016 on a proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council
amending  Regulation  (EU)  No  806/2014  in  order  to  establish  a  European  Deposit  Insurance  Scheme
(CON/2016/26).
Carmassi, J., S. Dobkowitz, J. Evrard, L. Parisi, A. Silva and M. Wedow (2018), “Completing the Banking Union
with a European Deposit Insurance Scheme: who is afraid of cross-subsidisation?”, ECB Occasional Paper
208, April 2018.
 8 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
CRD IV includes: Capital Requirements Directive (2013/36/EU) (CRD), which must be implemented through
national law, and Capital Requirements Regulation (575/2013) (CRR), which applies to firms across the EU.
Global systemically important banks.
Constâncio, V. (2016), “Margins and haircuts as a macroprudential tool”, remarks at the “ESRB international
conference on the macroprudential use of margins and haircuts”, Frankfurt am Main, 6 June 2016; Constâncio,
V. (2017), “The future of finance and the outlook for regulation”, remarks at the “Financial Regulatory Outlook
Conference”, Rome 9 November 2017.
ESRB (2017), “Sovereign bond-backed securities”, ESRB High-Level Task Force on Safe Assets; for the original
proposal referring to ESBies see Brunnermeier, M., L. Garicano, M. Pagano, R. Reis, T. Santos, D. Thesmar, S.
Nieuwerburg and D. Vayanos (2011), “European Safe Bonds”, The Euronomics Group.
Monti, M. (2010), “A New Strategy for the Single Market”, report to the President of the European Commission,
José Manuel Barroso, May 2010.
For a good analysis of these and other proposals see Leandro A. and J. Zettelmeyer (2018), “The search for a
Euro area safe asset”, Peterson Institute for International Economics Working Paper 18–3.
van Ark, B., M. O’Mahoney and M. Timmer, (2008), “The Productivity Gap between Europe and the United States:
Trends and Causes”, Journal of Economic Perspectives 22:25–44.
Fernald,  J.  (2015),  “Productivity  and  Potential  Output  Before,  During,  and After  the  Great  Recession”, NBER
Macroeconomics Annual 29:1–51.
Mokyr, J. (2014), “Secular Stagnation? Not in Your Life”, Geneva Report on the World Economy, pp. 83–89.
Asdrubali, P., B. Sorensen and O. Yosha (1996), “Channels of Interstate Risk Sharing: United States 1963–
1990”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(4): 1081–1110.
Hsu, P., X. Tian and Y. Xu, (2014), “Financial Development and Innovation: Cross-Country Evidence”,  Journal of
Financial Economics 112: 116–135.
Kremer,  M.  and A.  Popov,  (2018),  “Financial  Development,  Financial  Structure,  and  Growth:  Evidence  from
Europe”, Special Feature A, ECB Report on Financial Integration in Europe.
Claessens,  S.  (2016),  “Regulation  and  Structural  Change  in  Financial  Systems”,  in  The  Future  of  the
International Monetary and Financial Architecture, ECB Forum on Central Banking Conference Proceedings,
188–222.
Da Rin, M., G. Nicodano and A. Sembenelli (2006), “Public Policy and the Creation of Active Venture Capital
Markets”, Journal of Public Economics 90:1699–1723.
 9 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
