Benoît Cœuré: Interview with CNBC
Interview with Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank,
and CNBC, conducted by Mr Steve Sedgwick on 6 April 2018.
 You've been talking about trade and that is the key topic here in Cernobbio and indeed
globally at the moment as well. What's your contribution this morning on this topic?
The point I was making this morning at the conference is that first we're not sure yet that we're in
a trade war. As much as possible, if we could avoid the bellicose semantics and come back to a
reasonable discussion, that would help for economic confidence. That also means that if this
would  morph  into  a  full-fledged  trade  war,  this  has  the  potential  to  have  quite  damaging
consequences for growth and jobs globally, including in the US.
Is it already having ramifications in global financial markets? We've seen the volatility
and equity markets. We've seen higher borrowing costs as well. It looks like it's already
having the effects of a trade war without being a trade war yet.
To some extent, yes, we've seen that. We've seen obviously stock prices going down, some risk
premia are going up, so some tightening of financial conditions globally starting with the US. But it
all depends on how the situation will evolve. Certainly what we don't want to see is a general
tightening of financial conditions.
In terms of the effect it's going to have on rate raising on both sides of the Atlantic, what
do you see as the ramifications for interest rate policy first perhaps for Federal Reserve
and then for the ECB?
For the Federal Reserve I wouldn't dare comment. I don't think they would like it too much and it's
not my job. As far as the eurozone is concerned, so far I would say we can look through. It all
comes against a backdrop of a very strong growth momentum, very broad. This recovery, this
expansion is the strongest we had for at least 10 years. In terms of its breadth across the board,
across sectors, across economies, that's the broadest we had for the last 20 years, I would say.
The starting point is a very good one and the economy is quite resilient.
There are two reasons why bonds go up, why yields go up or the rates on those bonds
go up and yields go up and interest rates go up; One, the economy is going very, very
well – or sometimes the economy is going very, very badly. Then the ECB perhaps has to
step in again. Do you fear the ECB has to take more action to offset the negative effects
of a potential trade war?
That's not a discussion we're having today. The discussion we're having today is on how the mix
of our instruments will have to change in the future. I think there is very broad agreement in the
Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  that  a  high  degree  of  monetary  accommodation  will  remain
needed and that's irrespective of the trade war or anything we've seen recently. That's because
the economy and in particular the inflation in the eurozone is not yet where we want to see it.
Monetary  accommodation  will  remain  needed  but  we'll  see  a  change  in  the  mix  of  our
instruments.  In  particular  as  we  come  closer  to  the  point  where  our  medium-term  inflation
objective is met, I would expect the role of rate guidance to be strengthened. We've been clear
on that.
In terms of the models which you must be running that a trade war could affect as well
and could affect Europe as well, those models would've been run at the ECB, I'm sure.
What are they saying?
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
They clearly say that a trade war would have a damaging impact on the global economy, more
so in the US and more so in economies which are either very closely related to the US or are
deeply integrated in global value chains. The impact on the eurozone would be less and it all
depends on how this conversation on trade will evolve and we don't know yet. That's why I'm
saying we should look through it.
Does the ECB have the tools, though, to negate the effects of a trade war if indeed the
worst ramifications do happen?
We  are  very  much  data  driven;  we  are  driven  by  facts.  We'll  look  at  how  all  kinds  of
circumstances, including trade but also the global economy generally and the momentum we
have in Europe, feeds into eurozone inflation and that will be the basis for our decisions. So far
we are coming from a starting point which is strong and where we have increasing confidence
that our inflation objective will be met.
When I look at some of the wage deals going around at the moment in Germany and
beyond,  I  see  very  healthy  wage  growth  of  some  of  those  deals  as  well.  When's  that
going to start feeding through into broader inflation, the kind of figures you want to see
to be able to feel more comfortable about raising rates to a normalised level?
We've seen some uptick in inflation even in the most recent numbers. It is slow, because we are
starting from a point where unemployment at eurozone level was high and broad. We know that it
takes time for it to translate into wage pressures. We have to be patient, but there is no reason to
think that this will not translate into higher price and wage pressures. We've started to see it.
In terms of the cover you've given countries like Italy and others as well, do you feel
they've squandered that cover that the ECB has given and the support the ECB has
given them through a lower yield and lower borrowing cost? We still seem to be going
through the same arguments, the same structural issues. In fact if anything a potential
new government in Italy could scrap some of the reforms that the ECB so applauded.
Certainly the advice we are giving to governments, insofar we can give advice to governments,
because they are independent from us as much as we are independent from them. The only
advice we can give is to use that environment of strong growth, of lower rates to build the buffers
in  the  economy.  That  includes  building  fiscal  buffers  but  that  also  includes  doing  structural
reforms so that the economy can become stronger.
Listening to some of the more recent speeches from Mr Draghi and hearing comments
from  yourself  and  others,  I  don't  get  the  impression  that  the  ECB  feels  that  their
opportunity has been taken. Am I wrong?
There  has  been  some  disappointment  on  the  fiscal  side  where  we  believe  that  governments
generally could have made better use of the windfall of lower rates to reduce their deficits, to
consolidate their finances in a more permanent way, in a more structural way. That's true. Now,
when it comes to reforms in the real economy we've seen a lot going on. Look at how much
Spain has reformed its labour market. That's now yielding very positive results in terms of job
creation. Look at what France is doing, which really goes in the right direction, so reforms are
being done.
Are they being done in Italy?
I cannot really comment on Italy at that current stage where we are in a political flux and that's
clearly not our role to step into that.
Apart from trade and your desire to see greater productivity reform, structural reforms,
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
fiscal buffers as well, what are the other issues that you have greatest concern about at
the moment in global markets, global economy?
Trade – as we just discussed – is clearly top of the agenda. That's the biggest concern we have
today.
And Brexit?
Brexit  is  a  concern  but  there  is  a  political  negotiation  and  the  ECB  is  not  part  of  this  political
negotiation. We very much hope that this can be settled in a way that makes it smooth, that does
not harm confidence. But we also trust that it can be settled in a way that preserves the integrity
of the European project in terms of the four freedoms, in terms of the single market, in terms of
having effective ways to regulate our financial industry and to supervise our financial industry to
achieve stability in Europe.
A huge part of the EU financial industry is based in the United Kingdom, the fundraising
for the broader EU is based in many ways in the United Kingdom. The clearing, the forex,
the bond trading as well. If that is taken away or the access for those markets is taken
away, that leaves a huge black hole for countries like Germany, for Ireland, for countries
that actually feel that they could fill that gap. They can't necessarily, can they?
Any such movement has to be decided by the industry. It has to be led by the market. What we
want to see as a central bank, what we want to see as overseer, as supervisor is that effective
supervision continues to be delivered wherever the financial industry is located. Location choices
should be for the industry to make themselves.
You have no doubt, regardless of the final status of the relationship between the United
Kingdom and Europe, that your relationship with the regulators, with Mr Carney and what
have you, will be exactly the same as it is now?
What I can say at the current juncture is that our relationship with the Bank of England is one of
the main assets we have. We have a trust relationship with the Bank of England and that will be
a very strong asset for the future.
 
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
