Speech at the Press Conference:  
Collaboration on Adopting Standardized QR Code for e-Payment 
Dr. Veerathai Santiprabhob, Governor 
Wednesday 30 August 2017 
Bank of Thailand 
  
Executives from American Express, JCB International, Mastercard, VISA and UnionPay 
International  
President of Thai Bankers' Association 
President of Government Financial Institutions Council 
President of Association of International Banks 
President of Thailand Electronic Payment Trade Association 
President of the Telecommunications Association of Thailand under the Royal Patronage 
Press members and distinguished guests, 
 
I  am  very  pleased  that  all  payment  service  providers  in  Thailand  are  here  to 
announce  their  collaboration  on  adopting  QR  Code  standard  for  payments.  This  is 
considered  an  important  milestone  for  which  the  standardized  QR  Code  has  been 
implemented in Thailand. It is also the first time that five international payment card 
network  providers  and  Thai  financial  service  providers  have  mutually  agreed  to 
adopt the same QR Code standard in providing payment services in Thailand. 
 
It is recognized that electronic payment (e-Payment) is a crucial component in 
driving a digital economy, where technologies have been utilized to deliver better services 
for consumers and businesses, to increase financial inclusion, to raise efficiency and to 
reduce  costs;  thus,  enhancing  the  country’s  competitiveness  and  supporting  ‘ease  of 
doing business’ principle. 
 
During the past several years, Bank of Thailand (BOT) has been working on many 
important projects to encourage the development of e-Payment systems and innovations 
including: 
 
- Driving National e-Payment Master Plan: The two main projects, PromptPay 
service and the expansion of card acceptance devices (EDCs) throughout the country, have 
been developed and promoted and have got continually good responses. For PromptPay 
2 
 
service,  the  registration  has  reached  32  million  identification  numbers  with  an 
accumulated fund transfers over 100 billion Baht.  
- Migrating ATM and debit cards to chip cards: By the end of 2019, ATM and 
 
debit cards must be changed to chip cards in order to enhance security of card payment. 
This policy coincides with the growth of debit card transactions used by Thai people. 
 
- Elevating security protection in mobile payment transactions: The BOT has 
cooperated  with  the  Office  of  The  National  Broadcasting  and  Telecommunications 
Commission  and  The  Telecommunications  Association  of  Thailand  under  the  Royal 
Patronage to strengthen mobile payment security. From the increasing trend of mobile 
payment volume which has heightened by 100% from the previous year, we recognize 
that  mobile  will  be  a  major  payment  channel  in  the  near  future;  therefore,  mobile 
payment security is a vital issue. 
- Introducing Regulatory Sandbox principle: This principle will facilitate financial 
 
innovations and open up opportunities for financial institutions, financial service providers, 
and technology firms to propose and test their innovation projects in a limited scope and 
area, in concurrent with regulatory assessment. The process allows new products to be 
developed with a careful risk management which will improve customer satisfaction and 
reduce regulatory burden. At the moment, many new technology projects have been 
tested in the regulatory sandbox including blockchain, biometric and QR Code payment.  
 
- Enacting Payment Systems Act for governing payment businesses: The law is 
initiated by BOT and Ministry of Finance with the objective to effectively oversee the fast-
changing payment systems in this advanced digital technology period. The BOT oversight 
function will be more flexible and modern, support innovations, in line with international 
standard as well as promote security and customer protection. The law has been recently 
approved by the National Legislative Assembly, and is in a process to enforce. 
  
The  above  projects will  support  financial  inclusion of  all sectors and  enhance 
Thailand’s  financial  infrastructure  to  be  more  efficient  and  safe,  reduce  costs  of 
stakeholders, and support further innovations. 
Today, I would like to talk about the development and implementation of the 
 
QR Code standard, which is an important collaboration between Thai and foreign service 
providers that can assist the previous developments. The QR Code standard has four major 
principles and benefits. 
 
The first one is being consistent with international standards. This is the first 
time that five global payment card network providers and Thai payment service providers 
have worked together to use standardized QR Code. The single standard will not only 
reduce  system  development  costs  of  all  participants  but  also  allow  for  connectivity 
among  various  service  providers,  promoting  the  principles  of  open  infrastructure  and 
3 
 
interoperability. Specifically, each service provider does not need to develop their own 
QR  Code  format.  In  addition,  merchants  will  be  able  to  receive  both  domestic  and 
international  payment  transactions,  and  they  can  accept  funds  from  various  sources 
including credit card, debit card, e-Wallet account and bank account. 
 
The second is introducing cost-efficient payment channel. QR Code payment 
is perfectly fit to new lifestyle of customers who usually have mobile phone with them 
and willing to use mobile payment. These customers can conveniently use their mobile 
application to read merchants’ QR Code to pay for their purchases. 
 
Merchants, especially SMEs, will be able to accept e-Payment with lower costs. 
They can have their QR Code and present to customers for scanning right away. One QR 
Code  can  be  used  to  accept  customer’s  payments  from  various  channels.  Moreover, 
merchants can directly have  payments deposited into their bank account or e-Wallet 
account  that  is  linked  with  PromptPay  service.  With  QR  Code  payment,  cash  flow 
management, bookkeeping, and reconciliation processes are much easier than those of 
cash transactions. This effectively eases operational burdens and reduces business costs. 
 
The  third  is  enhancing  payment  security.  Scanning  QR  Code  via  mobile 
application  will  increase  security  of  payment  card  usage  because  customers  are  not 
required  to  provide  their  card  or  card  information  to  merchants  and  thus  have  less 
concerns over frauds. Furthermore, a QR Code payment system is safe and reliable since 
it  was  developed  on  existing  payment  infrastructures  of  banks  and  payment  service 
providers such as PromptPay or credit and debit card infrastructures, which are highly 
secure, compliant with international standard and subject to regular examination.  
 
The forth is facilitating further innovations. This open infrastructure will lead to 
further development of various financial innovations in the future. E-Payment will not only 
facilitate  payment  flows  but  also  provide  solid  foundation  for  SME’s  financial  data 
collection. Data from retail electronic payments can be effectively used to support credit 
granting, which will provides more alternatives for SME financing. Financial Institutions in 
many countries have started to provide information based lending instead of traditional 
collateral based lending.  
 
These four important criteria of QR Code will lead to an expansion of QR 
Code payment services to all merchants in our daily life such as department stores, 
fresh  markets,  coffee  shops,  and  convenient  stores.  QR  Code  payment  services  are 
accessible for all type of merchants, including brick and mortar stores and e-Commerce. 
Moreover, it can easily be rolled out to various locations such as business districts, tourist 
destinations, or rural areas. 
 
To promote standardized QR Code payment, BOT has allowed banks and payment 
service  providers  to  propose  their  projects  for  consideration  in  the  central  bank’s 
4 
 
Regulatory Sandbox. In the sandbox, QR Code payment services and supporting systems 
will be tested to ensure the accuracy of transactions, the stability and security of systems, 
and the provisioning of consumer protection since these are new services which require 
interoperability between banks and non-banks. At the moment, two banks are testing their 
services and six banks are applying to participate in the sandbox. The QR Code payment 
services will be gradually launched by service providers based on their readiness,  it is 
expected to be available to the country wide within the 4th quarter of 2017. 
 
In this occasion, I would like to express my appreciation to all related parties for 
their contribution to e-Payment developments in Thailand and for the collaboration to 
promote  standardized  QR  Code  payment  which  will  make  e-Payment  to  be  more 
accessible,  convenient  and  cheaper.  The  event  today  is  a  great  milestone  for  the 
cooperation of all stakeholders to build sound financial environment and infrastructure 
that enhance country’s competitiveness and sustainable development. 
 
  
Thank you. 
