   Banque de France conference  
Paris, 25 May 2018 
 Speech by François Villeroy de Galhau, 
Governor of the Banque de France 
"Financial markets: what innovations for the Paris financial centre?" 
            Press contact: Mark Deen (mark.deen@banque-france.fr).
Page 1 of 6 
 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Welcome  to the  Banque  de  France. Talking  about  innovation  in  the markets  at the  Banque 
de France may seem surprising given the Bank's 218 years of history. However, even if the 
Banque  de  France's  tasks  adhere  to  a  long  tradition,  the  current  financial  environment 
compels us to speed up financial innovation. We don't very often speak about these topics as 
they  are  technical  and  sometimes  deemed  austere,  but  they  are  essential  to  the  smooth 
financing  of  the  economy  and  also  to  the  Paris  financial  centre.  And  so  it  is  what  we,  with 
Nathalie  Aufauvre,  Alain  Duchateau  and  the  teams  at  the  DGSO,  wish  to  discuss  at  this 
morning's symposium. I would like to open with some thoughts on why we should speed up 
financial innovation and how the Banque de France is contributing.  
I – Why we should speed up financial innovation 
 Three  major forces  are at  work  in  Europe  to  enhance  the  capital  markets'  ability  to finance 
innovation: 
 1/ The needs of businesses 
The  Capital  Markets  Union  proposed  by  the  European  Commission  should  channel  the 
savings  surplus  available  in  Europe  towards  equity  financing,  which  is  more  favourable  to 
innovation than debt financing. The euro area has an advantage: a EUR 400 billion savings 
surplus.  But  it  also  faces  a  challenge:  equity  financing  in  France  only  represents  74%  of 
GDP, against 125% in the United States. 
 2/ Brexit 
Capital  market  integration  in  Europe  is  even  more  essential  given  the  prospect  of  Brexit. 
Brexit is, and remains, bad news not only for the United Kingdom, but for Europe as well. It 
does, however, represent an opportunity to restructure the European financial system. There 
will not be a single City for the continent, but instead an integrated polycentric network, with 
specialisations based on area of expertise. 
In this respect, the Paris financial centre has numerous advantages to become a major hub 
for  innovation  financing  in  Europe.  We  have  seen  lots  of  positive  signs  with  regard  to  the 
future hosting of major global banks' market activities. France is already the leading investor 
in  private-equity  funds  in  continental  Europe.  France  has  four  of  the  euro  area's  eight 
systemic  banks.  France's  asset  management  sector,  with  EUR 4,000 billion  under 
management in the country, comprises 11,000 investment funds and 630 asset management 
 
firms, including Europe's leading asset manager. As for post-trade services, a vital cog in the 
financial industry, France is also one of the market leaders: one-third of the 55,000 European 
funds are controlled by French depositaries, three of which feature among the world's top 10 
Page 2 of 6 
depositary service providers. 
 3/  Technological  developments,  with  big  data  today,  and  artificial  intelligence  and 
blockchain to come 
We  are  witnessing  an  unprecedented  acceleration  in  technological  innovation  with  the 
capacity  to  process  substantial  volumes  of  data.  These  developments  have  a  particular 
impact  on  the  financial  industry,  which  has  always  been  a  pioneer  in  the  use  of  new 
technologies.  Obviously,  this  is  not  without  risk:  cybersecurity,  ethics  and  financial  stability 
are all concerns. And we remain attentive to these risks, but we also need to be watchful that 
they never prevent us from striving to progress. 
 Why  is  the  Banque  de  France  involved  in  financial  innovation?  Because  we  are  at  the 
crossroads of a European choice and a national ambition. The European choice is that of a 
federal  Eurosystem,  with  a  single  monetary  policy  that  is  naturally  decided  centrally  but 
whose  implementation  is  decentralised  at  the  level  of  each  national  central  bank.  The 
national  ambition  is  to  be  the  central  bank  for  markets  within  the  Eurosystem.  For  the 
Banque de France, this is a tradition recognised over the 20 years of the euro, backed by its 
high-quality teams, and is the first of our Ambitions 2020 strategic plan commitments. This is 
a win-win situation: for the Eurosystem – which will benefit from many of these innovations – 
but also for the French economy and the Paris financial centre. 
II – How the Banque de France contributes to innovation 
 I  would  like  to  illustrate  our  commitment  with  five  examples  of  this  "central  bank  for  the 
markets"  that  we  take  pride  in,  which  you  will  come  back  to  further  as  the  morning 
progresses. 
 1/ First, the reform of short-term securities in June 2016 gave rise to the market for NEU 
CP (Negotiable EUropean Commercial Paper) – formerly referred to as certificats de dépôts 
–  and  NEU  MTN  (Negotiable  EUropean  Medium  Term  Note)  – the  old  billets  de  trésorerie. 
This  market  is  important  to  economic  players  as  it  gives  them  access  to  liquidity  in  euro  in 
the  euro  area.  Two  years  after  the  reform,  we  can  safely  say  that  it  has  been  a  genuine 
collective success: with the entry of new issuers, outstandings increased by almost 16% from 
Page 3 of 6 
 
around EUR 291 billion in June 2016 to EUR 338 billion at the end of April 2018. The reform 
acted as a catalyst for other important innovations.   
The NEU CP market has robust infrastructures, a diverse range of players and a high level of 
transparency.  It  should  continue  to  be  modernised  to  reduce  costs  and  improve  services. 
Therefore,  the  Banque  de  France  has  undertaken  a  major  project  to  digitalise  the  service 
offered  for  access  to  the  market  –  the  NEUSGATE  project  –,  which  will  be  carried  out  in 
partnership with the Paris financial centre. And the innovations do not end there: in particular, 
platforms  are  being  introduced  to  smooth  the  exchanges  between  intermediaries,  issuers 
and investors.  
 2/  For  the  Banque  de  France,  being  the  central  bank  for  the  markets  also  means 
supporting initiatives to develop a single market for collateral in the euro area  
Today, cash can virtually be transferred instantly from Dublin to Rome, but not securities. We 
need to work within the Eurosystem to speed up collateral circulation in the euro area and to 
bring together a larger number of players; in particular, further opening the collateral market 
to asset management players comes to mind. 
 We  also  need  to  see  the  development  of  an  electronic  trading  tool  with  advanced 
functionalities;  for  example  to  facilitate  the  exchange  of  individual  securities  against 
standardised  collateral  baskets,  or  even  liquidity  in  dollars  against  standardised  baskets  of 
euro-denominated securities. Furthermore, we have to be able to execute these exchanges 
in a fully automated manner, either applying a tri-party approach, under the legal framework 
of the repurchase agreement as is the case at the moment, or directly in a "security against 
security lending" mode  as employed in bilateral transactions. In order to ensure the security 
of transactions, a clearing solution will have to be made available to those participants who 
require it.  
Such a tool is no longer simply in the project phase but is now a reality. The Elixium platform 
launched  its  operations  in  the  Paris financial  centre  on  14  May  2018  with  an  initial trade of 
EUR 750 million to which the Banque de France was a counterparty.  
With the current support of banks and Euroclear, and the future participation of LCH SA and 
asset  managers,  we  are  forging  ahead  with  the  development  of  a  new  collateral 
management  ecosystem  in  Paris,  which,  with  EuroGC+,  has  already  had  a  tri-party  repo 
clearing solution in place since 2015. 
  
3/  The  central  bank  for  the  markets,  also  in  terms  of  the  implementation  of  asset 
purchase  programmes (more than EUR 2,400 billion of public and private assets acquired 
Page 4 of 6 
by the Eurosystem) 
The  Banque  de  France  is  innovating  in  this  respect  by  regularly  carrying  out  reverse 
auctions  for  the  purchase  of  securities  issued  by  supranational  bodies  and  French  public 
agencies. Thanks to this mechanism, the execution of purchases complies with the principle 
of  "market  neutrality":  these  auctions  have  allowed  us  to  meet  our  purchase  targets  while 
respecting  the  liquidity  of  each  market  segment.  The  Bundesbank  has  since  used  this 
reverse auction mechanism to acquire securities issued by German public agencies. 
With regard to the repo market, the Banque de France was also the first to put in place, as of 
July  2017,  a  unique  daily  auction  system  to  lend  French  government  bonds  to  its  market 
counterparties  against  cash  collateral.  This  scheme  has  done  much  to  help  improve  the 
functioning of the securities lending and borrowing market, particularly at quarter-ends when 
the system is particularly called upon. These auctions have just been successfully expanded 
to securities lending transactions and we intend to unfurl lending by auction to the entirety of 
our portfolio acquired within the framework of the PSPP in the very near future. 
 4/ A more directly technical type of innovation: IT infrastructures 
The  Eurosystem  has  developed  its  Vision  2020  programme,  comprising  instant  payments 
(TIPS  –  TARGET  Instant  Payment  Settlement),  the  T2-T2S  consolidation,  and  the  ECMS 
(Eurosystem Collateral Management System). 
The  Banque  de  France,  alongside  the German, Italian  and  Spanish  central  banks  ("4 CB"), 
plays  a  key  role  in  the  development  and  operational  management  of  these  Eurosystem 
platforms. Here too innovation is thriving. 
The  implementation  of  the  instant  payment  settlement  service  is  planned  for  November 
2018.  It  aims to  harmonise the  different  national systems  already  in  operation  and facilitate 
communication between them. 
The  T2-T2S  consolidation  should  optimise  and  enhance  liquidity  management  and  cash 
and securities settlement services, using – for securities settlement – technology developed 
by the Banque de France, which allows a maximum number of transactions to be settled with 
a minimum amount of securities and liquidity resources.  
The ECMS (European Collateral Management System) project will provide a unified platform 
developed  by  the  Banque  de  France  and  the  Banco  d'España  for  the  management  of 
standard  monetary  policy  operations  and  the  associated  collateral.  It  will  contribute 
 
significantly to the unification of capital markets within the euro area and the harmonisation of 
market  practices,  over  and  above  monetary  policy  activities  alone  (tri-party  collateral 
management, securities transaction management, etc.) and drives a process of simplification 
for monetary policy counterparties with its identical access conditions and streamlined cross-
Page 5 of 6 
border collateral management. 
 5/ From IT to new technologies 
In  the  field  of  blockchain  technology,  the  Banque  de  France  launched  an  experiment 
involving  the  example  of  a  relatively  simple  reference,  the  SEPA  Creditor  Identifier  (SCI). 
After  testing  a  prototype,  we  approached  the  French  Banking  Federation  in  July  2016  and 
proposed that it work on the project and involve other institutions on a voluntary basis. 
The  Banque  de  France was  the first  to go  into  production  on  15  December  2017,  and  was 
joined in April 2018 by two institutions belonging to the Crédit Mutuel group. Other banks will 
join this blockchain in 2018, representing in total more than 60% of identifier requests. 
Thanks to this technology, identifiers are attributed immediately, online, whereas in the past, 
institutions  had  to  wait  up  to  two  weeks  to  receive  them,  Above  all,  though,  the  project 
allowed participating banks to better appropriate blockchain technology. 
For the Banque de France, this represents a profound shift in its data management methods: 
from  being  the  "owner"  of  the  identifier  reference,  we  have  evolved  towards  a  governance 
model of "co-ownership" with the institutions participating in this interbank blockchain. 
As far  as I  am  aware,  this  project  is  also the first  blockchain to  be  put  into  production  by  a 
central  bank  and  we  are  now  investigating  which  other  services  could  be  shared  with  the 
participating banks. Expanding the pilot project is more straightforward.  
This  morning,  you  will  also  discuss  the  technological  revolution  in  the  foreign  exchange 
market.  Ten  days  ago,  on  Monday,  14  May  2018,  the  Banque  de  France  published  its 
statement of commitment to the Foreign Exchange Global Code of Conduct  and invites the 
participants in this market to do the same.  
  I would like to conclude by drawing your attention to a coincidence of timing: on Tuesday, the 
Banque  de  France  inaugurated  its  new  Lab,  which  aims  to  combine  central  bank  activities 
with  new  technologies  and  experiment  with  new  solutions.  So  welcome  to  the  central  bank 
for  markets  to  all  of  you  –  all  stakeholders  in  financial  innovation.  We  will  continue  to 
 
supervise  you  and  monitor  you  –  it's  our  duty  – but  equally,  we  are  and will  continue  to  be 
your  partner,  and  even  more  than  that,  one  of  your  strengths.  I  wish  you  an  excellent 
morning and thank you for your attention. 
Page 6 of 6 
  