Yves Mersch: Strengthening the European financial industry amid
disruptive global challenges
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the European Institute of Financial Regulation (EIFR), Paris, 3 September 2018.
 Europe’s financial industry still faces a number of challenges. Its continued weak performance,
with low price-to-book ratios and meagre profitability, is ample proof of that.
Some of those challenges – such as high levels of legacy assets, the need for deleveraging and
the burden of stricter regulation – are a result of the financial crisis. But even before the financial
crisis, the industry was facing pressure on various fronts, and those challenges are still there. In
particular, fundamental technological change continues to call established business models into
question.
Today, I will focus on disruptive challenges that are arising in a particular area of business: digital
technology.  Such  technology  is  becoming  ever  more  important  in  banking  and  is  opening  the
door  to  competition  from  non-banks  in  core  areas  such  as  payments.  Cascades  of
complementary  innovations  have  already  fundamentally  altered  the  payment  landscape,  and
European banks need to act now if they want to avoid losing out to bigger international players.
The euro area has been very successful in providing a top-tier foundation for innovative payment
services. However, this foundation has not yet been fully utilised by European players to provide
true  state of-the-art  pan-European  services.  There  is  currently  a  window  of  opportunity  for
Europe’s financial industry to make use of this top-tier infrastructure and the changing patterns in
retail payments. But in order to seize these opportunities, it needs to avoid the mistakes of the
past.
Laying the foundations
The euro was introduced in 1999, with physical banknotes and coins following in 2002. However,
that success was not matched by integration in the market for electronic retail payments in euro,
with national solutions remaining disparate and lacking interoperability. While the establishment
of  TARGET,  the  real-time  gross  settlement  system  for  the  euro,  resulted  in  a  fully  integrated
money market and wholesale payment market, cross-border retail payments in euro remained
expensive, slow and inefficient, with no standardised way of making electronic payments across
the euro area. For far too long, huge economies of scale remained unexploited.
The  ECB  played  a  key  role  in  laying  the  foundations  for  such  standardised  cross-border
payments through the establishment of the Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA) – an endeavour
that required substantial efforts by all stakeholders. That initiative consisted of two key stages.
First of all, a harmonised legal framework was needed for payment services in the EU. Thus, the
Payment Services Directive (PSD) was adopted in 2007 and entered into force in 2009.
Second,  it  was  important  to  ensure  that  consumers  and  businesses  in  the  EU  could  send
payments to each other quickly and easily across borders, with no differences between domestic
and non-domestic payments. The SEPA credit transfer and SEPA direct debit schemes replaced
all domestic payment schemes in the euro area, using fully interoperable global standards.
Catering for innovation
In the current age of rapid technological progress, it is vital to ensure that innovation delivered by
banks and non-banks reaches all European citizens. Innovative bespoke national solutions using
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
national  –  or,  more  frequently,  non-European  –  technology  could  threaten  the  integration
achieved by the various SEPA schemes.
Innovation may start at domestic level, but it should not face barriers preventing pan-European
expansion. Thus, national solutions should provide for pan-European reach in their initial design.
As these solutions tend to be provided by non-banks or disseminated by local banks on behalf of
non-European entities, third-party providers need regulated access to payment accounts. The
revised  Payment  Services  Directive  (PSD2),  which  is  currently  in  the  process  of  being
implemented,  will  provide  secure  and  interoperable  payment  account  access  and  will  allow
innovative new payment services to be provided in the EU. What we don’t need is integration with
non-European countries that runs counter to European standards.
While legislation is indispensable for an integrated market and to promote innovation, it is not the
only precondition. Cooperation between stakeholders is also essential in order to ensure smooth
and harmonised processes throughout the EU.
The ECB has brought the market together, initially via the SEPA Council and then via the Euro
Retail Payments Board (ERPB). The ERPB was instrumental in the development of the SEPA
instant credit transfer scheme, which is now live, with over 1,000 providers participating. Those
instant  payments  have  been  achieved  without  legislation,  with  the  ECB  instead  facilitating
dialogue and consensus between market actors.
Moreover, that scheme will soon be complemented by the ECB’s new Target Instant Payment
Settlement service, which is set to go live this November, providing a real-time, high-end platform
for payment service innovation.
The challenge for Europe
Progress towards an integrated market for payments has not been without its problems. Europe
still does not have an integrated, standardised card payment network, with the vision of being
able to use any card at any payment terminal in Europe having yet to be realised.
Europe’s  largest  card  payment  networks  are  still  not  interoperable.  For  example,  Germany’s
Girocard and France’s Cartes Bancaires account for a substantial number of card payments in
the  euro  area’s  two  largest  economies.  However,  owing  to  significant  technical  differences,  a
supposed lack of a business case and an absence of political will, these two networks remain
separate – as do most other national card schemes. As a consequence, it is more convenient to
use non-European cards when travelling across Europe.
Although some standardisation work has been carried out via the European Cards Stakeholders
Group, Europe still does not have its own Europe-wide card scheme, so we remain fully reliant
on non-European schemes when making cross-border card payments. Although they provide a
valued  service,  those  schemes  raise  certain  questions  from  a  governance  perspective.
European banks have relinquished their influence in this area, possibly because of short-term
profit considerations.
Indeed, large non-European companies now play a significant role in the provision of payment
services in Europe, while European banks are focused solely on serving their national markets.
Let’s face it: the foundations laid by European institutions have not been leveraged by European
providers in order to offer pan European services. Instead, those foundations are often exploited
by multinationals from outside Europe offering innovative, consumer-friendly  solutions.  Indeed,
European banks seem to have surrendered much of the pan European payment business.
PayPal now dominates the market for online payments in Europe, using the pan-European SEPA
credit  transfer  and  SEPA  direct  debit  schemes  to  provide  harmonised  services.  Meanwhile,
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Google, Apple,  Facebook  and Amazon  –  often  referred  to  collectively  as  “GAFA”  –  are  also
offering  significant  payment  services  with  pan-European  reach,  some  of  which  involve  joint
ventures with individual banks at national level. At the same time, Chinese giants like Alibaba and
Tencent are advancing. While these companies are to be admired for their ability to expand and
provide  innovative  services  that  consumers  want,  I  would  ask  why  there  are  no  European
companies competing in that arena.
There  is  a  risk  that  our  dependence  on  foreign  providers  will  increase  further  as  regards  the
development of innovative payment services, since banks are resisting the objectives of PSD2
on this front. They have been defensive when it comes to granting technical access to new and
innovative  payment  service  providers,  which  will  limit  European  fintech  companies’  ability  to
provide competitive solutions. Indeed, I fear that global giants from outside Europe will use their
network power to increase their presence further.
In  other  sectors,  European  companies  have  succeeded  in  achieving  global  reach.  In  the  car
industry, for example, European vehicles set the standard when it comes to quality and reliability.
There is no reason why this success cannot be replicated in the area of payment services – or
financial services in general.
The way we pay in Europe is changing. Significant numbers of consumers are moving to online
payment channels, with retail payments increasingly being carried out via mobile phones. At the
same time, virtual currencies have long been a topic of debate – and not only among experts,
either.
European  citizens  demand  pan-European  services  that  are  safe  and  efficient.  Consequently,
there is a need to look carefully at the governance and regulation of payment solutions. Many
payment channels are provided by non-European companies. Although those companies comply
with our legislation and use our payment infrastructure, they are, for the most part, not domiciled
in Europe. This increases our dependence on third countries. In particular, we have to be mindful
of the fact that extraterritorial jurisdiction could, in a worst case scenario, affect the operation of
those  companies  and  disrupt  payments  between  European  counterparties.  In  the  current
geopolitical  environment,  such  risks  are,  unfortunately,  not  as  remote  as  they  once  were  and
need to be taken seriously by European policymakers.
Conclusions
We  have  laid  the  groundwork  by  providing  safe  and  efficient  market  infrastructure,  and  this
should be used as a basis for innovative, user-friendly solutions. The way to protect the integrity
of European payment services is not by closing them off to the world, but by making them global
players. Building on local or national solutions is anachronistic and will not meet the needs of the
market.
If we are to succeed at a global level, the issue of domestic governance needs to be addressed.
Our reliance on non-European card schemes for domestic payments in Europe is suboptimal.
European  card  schemes  should  make  interoperability  and  full  pan-European  reach  their  main
priorities,  enabling  any  card  to  be  used  at  any  terminal.  At  the  same  time,  governance
arrangements need to cater for European needs, given that cards are the single most important
electronic payment instrument in Europe.
However,  protectionism  should  not  be  used  to  artificially  promote  European  innovation  in
payment  services.  We  should  remain  open  to  global  players,  but  should  focus  more  on
addressing the reasons for the lack of major European providers in the payment market.
It is important that European payment service providers are active at a global level. Rather than
establishing national solutions, we should seek to develop global solutions based on European
open governance that use European infrastructure.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Europe  boasts  state-of-the-art  payment  systems.  They  should  be  used  by  pan-European
providers  to  offer  innovative,  safe  and  user-friendly  solutions  for  the  benefit  of  people  across
Europe and all over the world.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
