Vítor Constâncio: Interview in the Financial Times
Interview with Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, in the Financial
Times, conducted by Ms Claire Jones on 11 May and published on 16 May 2018.
 People have become concerned about a slowdown in growth, and we’ve recently seen a
poor print for core inflation, which is now just 0.7%. What can the ECB do if growth and
inflation  continue  to  disappoint?  And  is  there  a  risk  that  you  don’t  have  enough
ammunition  left  for  the  next  downturn  if  the  journey  to  the  exit  of  the  non-standard
measures is slower than you currently anticipate?
First, let me say that I don’t consider that the slowdown is such an unexpected or serious matter.
We knew there would be a deceleration of growth from 2018 onwards. Perhaps some indicators
in the first month have been more disappointing than expected, but very slightly so.
I still believe that we will have the kind of growth that is forecast in our staff projections, so I am
not  worried  too  much  about  that  as  long  as  there  is  no  extraordinary  international  event  that
derails world growth. So it’s not an immediate question what the ECB could do next. But it is, of
course, to be expected that some time down the road there will be another recession.
There is this concern that perhaps, then, monetary policy, with its standard measures, would not
have enough policy space to respond to that. It depends on the timing of such an episode. By
then, I hope that fiscal policy can become more active in reacting to such a development. It will
be very important to have more fiscal space, and to use it. And that’s related to some of the
reforms that are needed for monetary union to work better.
Presumably, interest rates by then would not be sufficiently high for a reduction in rates to be a
sufficient  response.  Other  monetary  policy  tools,  then,  would  have  to  be  used.  I  think  one
possibility would be to go into yield curve control, meaning targeting specifically some interest
rates for longer term maturities. That would require lower amounts of purchases to be achieved
than we have at the moment under our asset purchase programme. It would work because it
could  lower  medium  to  long-term  interest  rates,  which  are  the  relevant  ones  for  expenditure
decisions.
Yield curve control is being used already in Japan – and it works. It has not distorted markets.
[Former Chair of the US Federal Reserve Ben] Bernanke has a good answer to this issue of
distorting  the  markets,  which  is  to  say  that  purchases  by  the  central  bank  of  government
securities with different maturities have exactly the same impact as a change in maturities done
by the Treasury itself.
The public sector always impacts the yield curve, one way or the other. The idea is that if the
central bank uses an active policy to do so, then it’s to correct distortions that exist in financial
markets and ensure that lending rates to businesses and households in the economy as a whole
are at the right level to get to the level of activity that would be desirable. If there are rigidities and
distortions in the private sector that do not engineer the smooth functioning of the economy, then
public intervention is fully justified. It does not add up to manipulation because the reality is not
perfect to start with.
I’m just now thinking in very abstract terms; this was never discussed at the ECB’s Governing
Council. This is my personal take on possibilities; it is not more than that. We didn’t start any
discussion  about  the  medium-term  future  of  monetary  policy,  it’s  too  soon  in  Europe  to  start
thinking about that.
But I’ll just say it’s a possibility and it can work. We could buy more bonds to enforce it – the 33%
 1 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
limit [that the ECB has on buying all of the outstanding stock of a country’s government bonds] is
a  self-binding  decision  by  the  Governing  Council.  That  decision  could  be  slightly  changed,
theoretically, of course.
What about the use of the other non-standard measures? There is a view that some of
the tools, such as the Outright Monetary Transactions (OMT) programme, are closely
linked with the current ECB leadership and not as much with the ECB itself.
It’s important to underline that the unconventional measures that we used – all of them are now
part of the ECB toolkit.
So in the future, if ever we face again stressful situations in the euro area, the ECB would have
no excuse not to use such instruments to stabilise the situation.
That I wanted to repeat: it would be virtually impossible, if such a stressful situation occurred
again, for the ECB to ignore that these instruments are effective, legal and part of the toolkit.
People are important of course, but this transcends people.
What are you going to be watching in the coming months, from outside the ECB, in terms
of trying to judge the health of the eurozone economy?
The  real  activity  indicators  [such  as  purchasing  managers’  indices]  are  very  important,  but  in
view of our ultimate objective the way inflation will continue to react will be also very important.
Our staff projections indicate that inflation could be subdued in the first part of the year and could
increase a bit in the second half of the year. So we hope that this will materialise, in order to
ensure that what we forecast in the projections for the years to come will really happen.
What are your expectations for the June European Council meeting?
I  hope  I  am  wrong,  but  unfortunately  I  am  not  expecting  much  from  the  next  summit.  The
European economy is going through a good patch of growth. That, of course, always reduces
government’s motivations to take bold decisions. As Jean Monnet said, humans take important
decisions only in a state of need. Which means in a state of crisis.
I expect, nevertheless, that the fiscal backstop for the Single Resolution Fund will be decided,
and  that  there  will  be  some  kind  of  long-term  promises  about  a  European  Deposit  Insurance
Scheme.
There is also an absence of a macroeconomic tool to automatically stabilise the economy. On
fiscal policy, we need two things to address this gap.
First,  we  need  coordination  of  national  fiscal  policies  to  become  stricter  and  discussed  more
from the perspective of the euro area as a whole. This is a very important thing that should have
already happened. The second thing is a type of macro stabilisation fund, along the lines of a
rainy-day fund, like the IMF has proposed.
Let’s  see  what  happens.  France  has  proposed  something  along  these  lines.  There  are  also
proposals on the table from others. That would be one of my priorities for reform.
What  about  the  other  side  of  the  coin?  Germany  and  others  are  calling  for  risk
reduction?
First,  I  would  say  there  has  been  a  huge  amount  of  risk  reduction  already.  The  periphery
countries have undertaken huge adjustments; they’ve gone from big deficits, both in the budget
and the external current account, to complying with EU rules.
 2 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
All the countries that experienced an acute crisis – Greece, Ireland, Portugal and Spain – now
have  budgets  with  deficits  below  3%  of  GDP  and  a  positive  primary  balance  in  their  current
account, with the exception of Spain. Last year, Spain still had a primary deficit of 0.5%, but this
year it is very likely that they will also make a surplus. In some cases, this adjustment in the
primary balance was in the double-digits, which is huge.
Our analysis, and the IMF’s, shows that the positive current accounts that all of these peripheral
countries have built are the result of a structural adjustment. This is not about lower imports and
weaker  demand;  it  is  about  the  improved  performance  of  exports  and  structural  adjustments.
And that’s very important.
Second, in terms of the banking sector, the capital level of banks everywhere has increased and
the average common equity ratio of banks here is 14.3%. There is no bank below 11% in the
euro area. That also represents a huge reduction of risk.
Then,  third,  there  is  the  BRRD  [Bank  Recovery  and  Resolution  Directive],  which  rules  that  if
there will be any collapse of banks, then no bailouts by the public sector can be engineered – at
least before there is a private bail-in of 8% of the total assets of the bank. So that’s a big risk
reduction for national government budgets and for taxpayers. Banks are also building up their
bail-in-able  securities. And  the  fact  that  the  BRRD  has  to  be  applied  before  any  loan  by  the
European Stability Mechanism is made to a bank means that, very likely, there will not be any
direct recapitalisation on a European level.
So there is a long list of things, not to mention the reduction in non-performing loans. NPLs have
been subject to intense action by supervisors. The average amount of NPLs compared with the
total amount of credit came down to 4.8% last year, from slightly above 8% in 2013. Of course,
there are around 30 banks that still have higher – in some cases, much higher – NPL ratios, but
the targets are there. And the banks beat their targets to reduce their bad loans last year. So it’s
working, it’s going in the right direction.
In  a  nutshell,  enough  risk  reduction  has  been  achieved  to  justify  introducing  elements  of  risk-
sharing in the banking union project.
And that would be a European Deposit Insurance Scheme?
That would be EDIS and the backstop for the Single Resolution Fund, which, in practice, is not
so important.
How do you think this taking on of responsibility for banking supervision is working?
There  are  risks  in  everything,  of  course,  but  I  have  always  been  in  favour  of  having  banking
supervision with the central bank. That has been the tradition in my country, and there are many
good arguments for that.
Back  in  2001  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB,  on  the  basis  of  a  proposal  coming  from
Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa, issued a short paper lining up the arguments for having supervision
in a central bank. And if you read that paper, you will see that the set of arguments is heavily tilted
1
towards favouring giving supervision to central banks. So it’s a long-standing position.
There are many advantages, including one that is not mentioned in the paper: supervision is not
just  about  micro-supervision  these  days;  it  now  has  a  macro-financial  perspective,  for  which
central  banks  are  much  better  prepared  than  any  other  institution  to  handle.  Central  banks
monitor developments in all segments of the financial system.
From reading your most recent speech, I had the impression that you thought austerity
went much too far and the effects have been too drastic. Is that right?
 3 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
Yes. And  the  main  example  of  that  is  of  course  the  case  of  Greece.  No  institution,  not  the
Commission, not the ECB, not the IMF, ever thought possible – let alone planned for – a 25%
drop  in  GDP  in  Greece.  The  first  and  second  programmes  for  Greece  were  designed  with  a
much more optimistic view on the cost of the adjustment.
So  the  adjustment  programme  was  indeed  too  harsh.  And  also  perhaps  too  mechanical,
because what the programme didn’t foresee was the total collapse of hope and expectations.
Then, at the same time, all countries in the euro area were reducing deficits, consolidating. That
is, as I quote in my speech, the cause of the double-dip that we had in 2012, 2013, which should
not have happened. And was the result of fiscal policy, not monetary policy.
So why are you so optimistic that next time it will be better, that fiscal policy can step into
the breach during the next downturn?
In the first place, I don’t anticipate that we will have the sort of imbalances that we had at that
time. Everyone has learned lessons and it’s very unlikely that Member States’ economies will
become as imbalanced again.
The  adjustment  that  the  more  stressed  countries  went  through  shows  that  those  Members
States are now able to work effectively in the framework of the Monetary Union. Both in terms of
the fiscal rules and in terms of the sort of level of structural change that we have seen in the past
few years.
Do you think it was a mistake for the ECB to become involved in the Troika?
It  was  in  a  way  unavoidable  in  view  of  the  acuteness  of  the  crisis  we  had,  and  good  that  it
happened. Everyone wanted us to be there and we could not of course refuse what was then the
expectation of everyone that we would help out with our expertise.
To what degree do you think austerity and the crisis have influenced the current political
mood?
I  think  it  plays  a  big  role.  I  was  just  reading  a  paper  written  by  three  German  economists  on
extreme  politics,  in  a  very  good  economic  journal,  about  the  political  consequences  of  big
2
recessions in 20 countries from 1870 to the present day.
And  indeed  they  show  a  correlation  between  extreme  severe  downturns  and  the  political
polarisation. Only in the case of financial crises during the ensuing five years, far-right parties
increased  on  average  their  voting  share  by  30%.  Far-left  parties  never  benefited  much  from
financial crises.
And  so  I’m  not  saying  that  the  increase  in  populism,  liberal  democracy  is  some  authoritarian
drive, it’s only the result of the economic crisis; there are other factors, but it’s certainly a big one.
Let’s talk more about the crisis. Can you remember the first moment when you became
concerned?
I  became  concerned  at  the  beginning  of  2010,  when,  back  in  February,  the  budget  deficits  of
several countries for 2009 were known and were higher than anyone expected. Particularly, of
course in Greece, which recorded a deficit of 15% instead of an expected 5.6%, but also other
countries. We started to feel the pressure in the bond market after that, so those were the first
signs of something really becoming serious.
Then it intensified. We had a meeting of the Governing Council in Lisbon on 5 May, just a few
weeks before I came here to the ECB. That was the day of the flash crash in Wall Street, with
 4 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
huge repercussions in bond markets everywhere.
Shortly  afterwards,  we  decided  to  create  the  Securities  Markets  Programme  (SMP)  to  start
purchasing  government  bonds  of  several  countries.  That  was  an  important  moment. And,  of
course, at the same time, there was then the big loan to Greece, the creation of the European
Financial Stability Fund, so those months of May, June 2010 were crucial. We were very active
and it was the first big manifestation of the crisis.
The peak of concern was more in the second half of 2011, first half of 2012, because that was
when the markets, without any change in economic fundamentals, started to attack heavily the
government debt of Spain and Italy. There was contagion and, at the end of 2011, I spoke about
the ECB’s analysis of this, which showed it was already influencing, for instance, the price of
French debt. So indeed, it was a development that was quite dangerous.
We decided on a second round of the SMP, ended up with the OMT decision and injecting a big
supply of liquidity, €1 trillion. It wasn’t particularly the French contagion that forced it, more the
continuation of the pressure in the bond markets throughout the first months of 2012. We had to
do something more significant than just a second round of the SMP. It clearly seemed that was
not enough.
These  decisions,  plus  the  decisions  of  the  European  summit  of  June  2012,  ended  the  acute
phase of the euro area’s existential crisis.
How have you seen the relationship with markets and with banks change during your 34
years in central banking?
Back when I began, the European financial system was much more bank-based than it is now.
That  was  true  everywhere,  but  it  was  particularly  true  in  Europe.  Monetary  policy  was  totally
directed towards bank’s behaviour.
In 1973 in the United Kingdom, you had limits to deposits, which was a new attempt to put some
limit on banks’ ability to expand their balance sheets. Many other European had credit ceilings.
Italy, France, Portugal, Spain all had ceilings, some up to the end of the 1980s.
It was only after that that more market-based monetary policy instruments started to become
more significant. The growing importance of markets and the liberalisation of the controls exerted
by central banks on the activity of banks started to change monetary policy in Europe completely,
especially since the 1990s.
We’ve ended up with the present inflation targeting regimes, using interest rates as the main tool
to control the spectrum of market interest rates.
The importance of banks in financing the economy has continued to decline and this requires a
change in approach in the future. All these new fields beyond banking require some degree of
regulation that is still not there, and this in my view will become more and more clear as market-
based finance continues to grow to a huge size. The approach will need to become much more
intrusive, and will be a return to the past in that respect.
What will that entail?
Controlling the excesses of finance cannot be achieved only with monetary policy interest rates.
We  need  to  expand  the  concept  of  leverage  to  other  segments  of  the  financial  system,
particularly synthetic leverage. I mean leverage which is not easily seen in the balance sheet,
because  it’s  built  up  with  derivatives.  It’s  not  seen  but  it’s  very  relevant  for  banks  and  for  the
economy, as we saw during the crisis.
 5 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  obstacles  to  regulating  markets,  and  not  just  banks,  are  not  so  much  technical;  the
obstacles are more political or ideological. It requires more regulation and supervision by not only
central banks, but also in some cases governments. It is politicians that often need to enforce
macroprudential measures, and in some countries some governments do not want to use them.
Another aspect that is different now is that we have in our economies too much finance. There is
a  strand  of  literature  showing  that  after  certain  limits  there  are  diminishing  returns  in  the
expansion  of  finance.  And  to  tame  these  imbalances  we  will  also  need  macroprudential
measures.
You have talked about the need to reform economics too. What do you have in mind?
Big changes are happening, we are going in the right direction, but in my view we are not there
yet.
The joke in the American camp at the beginning of the 1980s was that macro is just bad micro,
meaning that the models had become dominated by the idea that agents make optimal economic
decisions  over  infinite  horizons  into  the  future  and  that  markets  therefore  tend  to  be  self-
equilibrating towards a single steady state.
Central banks’ standard models – DGSE [Dynamic General Stochastic Equilibrium] models –
have been transformed in many ways, but the 1980s view has still not fully disappeared.
This  has  to  change.  Economic  agents  clearly  have  finite  horizons,  which  impact  on  their
consumption decisions. People do not optimise and plan their lives up to their death. Nor does
the financial sector play as important a part in models as it should. The possibility of multiple
equilibria  has  also  to  be  introduced;  there  are  fallacies  of  composition,  there  are  coordination
failures.
All these elements have to become part and parcel of macroeconomics; macroeconomics is not
just  the  aggregation  of  individual  decisions  by  optimising  agents,  we  should  not  just  assume
everything moves towards a general equilibrium of competitive markets.
The  absolute  minimum  that  has  to  happen  is  to  rid  macroeconomics  of  the  imperialism  of  a
certain  type  of  microeconomic  foundations;  a  new  core  model  for  macroeconomics  has  to
emerge.
If agents act in different ways, we also have to address the question of income distribution. And
fortunately  there  are  already  models,  so-called  HANK  models,  Heterogeneous  Agents  New
Keynesian models, that consider this. There is a very nice paper in the latest NBER issue which
is called “When Inequality Matters to Macro and Macro Matters for Inequality”. So indeed, that
places within macro the question of inequality – inequality which has been increasing too much in
the past few decades.
Changes are being discussed and are taking place I just hope that progress could be quicker.
How does that impact central banking? We thought we could just target inflation, now
you are saying the next generation has to consider all of these different preferences of
agents, multiple equilibria, inequality...
Well first of all, central banks will always focus mostly on control of inflation, or more broadly
macroeconomic  stabilisation.  The  regime  of  flexible  inflation  targeting  will  not  change  in  the
visible horizon, and that is because it allows central banks to take a medium-term perspective
towards hitting the inflation target. The advantage of adopting this gradualist approach to reaching
the target, is – as [leading monetary economist and former Riksbank official] Lars Svensson has
demonstrated very convincingly – that you can allow for some consideration of stabilisation of the
 6 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
economy in trying to move gradually towards the inflation target.
What will change are the models used to analyse the consequences of policy – and the set of
instruments  that  will  have  to  be  used.  Central  banks  in  the  future  will  have  to  respond  in  a
different  way  if  they  want  to  achieve  the  overall  objective  of  reasonable  inflation  and
macroeconomic stabilisation.
The  growing  complexity  of  market-based  finance  and  the  change  in  the  financial  system  will
make  it  difficult  for  central  banks  to  go  back  completely  to  the  old,  comfortable,  traditional
approach of having very lean balance sheets and just targeting the overnight money market rate.
The  set  of  instruments  will  have  to  be  broadened.  Several  have  been  used  during  the  crisis,
some of them just for very stressful periods of course, but they are now part of the toolkit.
Do you think what you’re saying is shared by other people on the Governing Council?
I  wouldn’t  speculate  on  that.  This  view  is  developing  in  academia  everywhere  and  has  been
discussed  extensively  in  [the  Kansas  City  Federal  Reserve’s  flagship  conference  in]  Jackson
Hole  in  2016,  for  instance.  So  it’s  part  of  the  ongoing  discussion  at  the  interface  between
academia and central banking.
Do you think the ECB has done enough to justify the impact of its policies on inequality?
If  we  were  to  do  quantitative  easing  (QE)  again,  would  helicopter  money  be  a  better
option?
Helicopter money has never been a policy option. We are attentive to the question of inequality. I
spoke in August last year to the European Economic Association about inequality and monetary
policy, and since then further work has been done in the ECB to expand on what I said.
First, if we take into account the effects of QE and non-conventional monetary policy combined,
we  have  shown  that  those  effects  on  income  as  a  result  of  lower  unemployment  are  more
significant than the effects of high prices for financial assets.
Turning to wealth distribution, what extraordinary monetary policy clearly does is to increase the
price of assets, particularly of course risky assets. But people are too fixated on the increase in
the price of stocks; one has to look to the overall impact on other asset prices.
If  we  look  at  the  increases  in  bond  prices  or  in  equities,  which  are  indeed  owned  mainly  by
wealthy people, they are totally overwhelmed by the increase in housing prices. The rise in house
prices make up the bulk of the wealth effect, and the wealth tied in houses is held by the middle
income segments of the population.
In terms of the overall wealth distribution, the situation has improved rather than becoming more
unequal as a result of our extraordinary policies.
Over the course of your career what are you most proud of?
I’m proud of many things I’ve done in my 34 years in central banking. I am proud that I eliminated
credit ceilings in my country when I was Governor and introduced a market-based system of
monetary  policy  with  the  creation  of  auctions  for  treasury  bills.  I  also  ended  the  fixation  that
Portugal  had  on  its  exchange  rate,  which  involved  daily  auctions  with  market  players.  We
modernised the bank and the financial system during the 1980s, so that is one thing.
Here  at  the  ECB,  I’ve  overseen  the  creation  of  a  macroprudential  policy  and  financial  stability
department, which is state of the art. And I am proud of course of having participated actively in
all of the policy decisions that happened since I came here in 2010, especially those that put a
 7 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
stop to the existential crisis over the future of the euro.
Is there any decision that the ECB took that in hindsight you regret?
The rate hike in 2008 was an overreaction. There seemed to be some justification at the time for
the increase in rates in 2011, though in hindsight it was clearly premature. That’s it, I already said
it in the speech.
Will you stay in Germany or are you going to go back to Portugal?
I’m going back to Portugal. In June, I will be at the ECB conference in Sintra. Normally we invite
former members of the Executive Board, so I hope they will continue to invite me. Particularly as I
don’t  intend  to  go  and  work  for  any  private  financial  institution.  I  will  do  some  postgraduate
teaching in Madrid.
I always hoped I would have the opportunity to be a free intellectual. In my career I never had that
luxury.
I always thought and dreamed about it, and I hope to have a sufficient number of years to satisfy
that ambition. I am going to have a blog. It’s usual in the United States; in other places, not so
usual. 
future,  about  Europe,  about
macroeconomics.
What will your first post be about?
I  will  comment  on  general  questions  about 
the 
I am still hesitating. It could be about the future of monetary policy and the points I left out in my
recent speech, from neutral interest rates to yield curve control.
Are there any rules that bind you in terms of what you can write about?
Beyond the ECB rules what will bind me is European decorum.
1
2
The role of central banks in prudential supervision
See Funke, M. Schularik, M. and Trebesch, C. (2016) “Going to extremes: politics after financial crises, 1870-
2014” in European Economic Review, 88, 227-260.
 8 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
