Jessica  Chew  Cheng  Lian:  Remittance  flows  –  benefitting  lives  in
Malaysia and abroad
Remarks by Ms Jessica Chew Cheng Lian, Assistant Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia
(Bank Negara Malaysia), at the Closing and Handover Ceremony of Project Greenback 2.0, Johor
Bahru, 30 November 2017.
 Two  years  ago,  on  this  very  same  stage,  Governor  Muhammad  Ibrahim  set  out  two  specific
outcomes for Project Greenback 2.0 here in this beautiful city of Johor Bahru. First, to further
improve on the costs of remittance transactions for individuals and businesses, and second, to
help consumers make better and more informed decisions.
Today, the results speak for themselves.
The average cost of remitting funds* in Johor Bahru is now around 2%, compared to above
3% before we started the Project.
The  use  of  authorised  money  services  business  providers  to  conduct  remittance
transactions has increased by 21% in value terms on an annual basis for the period January
to  October  2017  against  the  corresponding  period  in  2015,  offering  better  protection  to
customers while safeguarding the integrity of our financial system. Of this, remittances by
SMEs using more cost-efficient formal MSB channels has more than doubled. This increase
has  also  outstripped  the  growth  in  remittances  for  the  industry  as  a  whole  as  a  result  of
initiatives under the Greenback project.
Over 35,000 migrant workers and 3,700 SMEs were engaged to increase awareness and
promote  the  use  of  formal  remittance  services  through  more  than  40  education  and
outreach programmes organised over the last two years.
This is an impressive outcome, made possible only by commitment, enthusiasm and exceptional
cooperation that has been shown by the project team and all our partners who are here today
throughout these last two years. I am well aware of the numerous logistical and communication
challenges that had to be overcome by the team and the industry, and the persistence that it took
to break long-held perceptions before we were able to build momentum in our outreach efforts to
deliver these results. 
So let me on behalf of Bank Negara Malaysia, join Faris in extending my congratulations to all
who  contributed  to  this  important  initiative.  We  are  especially  grateful  to  the  World  Bank  for
working with us to bring the Greenback Project to Johor Bahru – the first champion city in Asia,
and for providing technical support in the project’s design and implementation strategies.
It goes without saying that we could not have done this without the exceptional support of Yang
Berhormat  Datuk  Bandar  and  your  team  at  Majlis  Bandaraya  Johor  Bahru.  The  city  of  Johor
Bahru has been an exemplary host for the first Greenback Project in Malaysia. Johor Bahru can
be proud of serving as a role model for promoting transparent, efficient and affordable remittance
services  that  are  contributing  to  more  inclusive  financial  services  for  all  individuals  and
businesses.
We also extend our deepest gratitude to all our project partners – the industry, associations and
chambers of business, government agencies and embassies – for the critical role that you have
played in advancing the goals of this project.
Although  we  are  here  to  mark  the  closing  ceremony  for  Greenback  Johor  Bahru  and  its
handover, our journey in Johor Bahru is in fact just beginning. 
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
We have created momentum. We have tested and refined solutions that are impactful and that
work. And  we  have  brought  the  community  together  and  forged  important  networks  around  a
common goal.
We must now not let this dissipate, but build on it to sustain progress. There are many more
migrant workers and SME businesses to be reached. The industry must continue to innovate to
continuously  expand  and  improve  their  services  and  accessibility.  And  collectively,  we  must
continue to be relentless in identify barriers to the use of formal remittance services and find new
ways to reduce them.
As we prepare to take the Greenback Project to yet another city in Malaysia, allow me to briefly
reflect on some of the lessons we have gathered from our experience in Johor Bahru. 
First, developing  a  solid  understanding  of  the  needs,  preferences  and  behaviours  of
target communities is absolutely critical.
Our work in Johor Bahru revealed that barriers to the use of formal remittance channels were not
predominantly an access issue alone, or even one of cost. For small businesses, a key barrier
was  a  lack  of  trust  in  non-bank  channels.  For  migrant  workers,  going  to  a  formal  business
premise and submitting to a customer due diligence process was intimidating and discouraged
some workers from approaching formal remittance channels.
This insight allowed us to focus on new ways of allowing workers to conduct remittance without
physically visiting an office, such as through mobile channels. Another solution that proved to be
very effective was bringing MSB services to the workplace. As a group and in their own familiar
surroundings,  we  found  that  workers  were  more  comfortable  in  dealing  with  formal  MSB
companies face-to-face.
I am also pleased to inform that as previously announced, the Bank has finalised guidance that
will allow money service business companies to conduct e-KYC for on boarding customers. This
in  turn  will  facilitate  an  end-to-end  electronic  process  for  performing  remittance  transactions
below specified limits without a customer having to physically visit an MSB office.
For small businesses, our outreach programs were opportunities we could use to explain the
regulatory  framework  for  MSB  companies  and  avenues  for  redress,  thereby  increasing
confidence in the use of formal channels. 
Had we focused only increasing or providing information on access points, we would not have
achieved the results that we did.
Second, small ideas can make a big difference. 
As  I  alluded  to  earlier,  language  barriers  presented  considerable  challenges  in  getting  our
messages across to migrant communities. To overcome this, the industry identified Greenback
“ambassadors”,  who  were  individuals  from  countries  of  the  migrant  communities.  We  trained
them to deliver talks to the migrants in their native language on various aspects of using formal
remittance  channels.  This  helped  not  only  to  address  communication  barriers,  but  also
encouraged  confidence  as  the  migrant  workers  could  better  connect  and  identify  with  the
ambassadors.
In our education efforts, bringing our programs to the locations where the migrant community
live,  work  and  congregate  also  had  a  significantly  positive  impact  on  narrowing  a  perceived
power distance between formal MSB providers and workers. It also had the effect of creating a
positive impression on the quality of services offered by MSB providers. This was also true for
SMEs,  with  a  positive  effect  observed  between  higher  levels  of  proactive  engagements  with
SMEs and businesses’ perception of MSBs.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
In short, there are many factors that influence an individual or business decision to use MSB
services, beyond cost and access considerations. The combined impact of even simple actions
taken to address all factors is significantly amplified. 
Third,  while  greater  transparency  and  competition  have  played  a  key  role  in  driving  down
remittance costs, an excessive focus on price competition on the part of MSB companies
would be misplaced. 
Our work under this project, including field studies that were conducted, affirmed that users of
remittance  services  basically  want  safe,  easy  and  fast,  and  affordable  services.  For  some
customers, safety, speed and convenience are often as, if not more, important than cost, with
customers willing to pay a reasonable price for these benefits. I would add that an excessive
focus on price competition also inherently increases the risk profile of MSB companies which
companies  must  carefully  consider.  It  can  lead  to  a  loss  of  focus  on  longer  term  competitive
positioning  which  remains  key  to  any  successful  business,  compromise  service  quality
standards and heighten compliance risks.
The insights gained from a deeper understanding of customer needs and priorities should serve
to focus competitive strategies on how to improve the customer experience. We firmly believe
this needs to be an important part of the conversation in pursuing the goals of more inclusive and
efficient remittance solutions.
We  are  encouraged  by  the  efforts  of  some  MSB  companies  that  have  responded  to  greater
competition through a focus on innovation and investing in building a trusted company brand that
consumers can be confident in. 
As  an  example,  today,  there  are  17  remittance  service  providers  that  have  introduced  digital
remittance services, almost double the number only 2 years ago. The requirement for employers
to pay foreign workers’ salaries through their local bank accounts starting next year will provide
further  impetus  for  the  digitalisation  of  remittance  services.  With  a  high  level  of  smartphone
penetration  among  migrants  in  Johor  Bahru  at  74%  and  internet  access  at  90%,  significant
opportunities exist to promote e-remittances. Currently, outward remittances conducted through
mobile phones or the internet represents less than 10% of total outward remittances recorded by
MSB companies. Increasing this share can lower costs associated with cash handling for both
businesses and the economy, creating a virtuous cycle for affordable remittance services. 
Project Greenback Kota Kinabalu
As one chapter comes to an end, another begins.
In  continuation  of  our  efforts  to  encourage  ongoing  positive  developments  in  the  remittance
market, Bank Negara Malaysia and the World Bank are pleased to take the Project Greenback
partnership to Malaysia’s second remittance champion city – the city of Kota Kinabalu. On behalf
of Bank Negara Malaysia let me thank Y Bhg. Datuk Juanis Solidau for his presence here today
to mark the handover, and to Dewan Bandaraya Kota Kinabalu for agreeing to host the project. 
We are very excited about the prospect of bringing the project to Kota Kinabalu, which will offer
the  opportunity  to  apply  successful  lessons  from  Johor  Bahru,  and  also  new  and  different
experiences to build on. This will include a focus on supporting e-remittances given the large
number of migrant workers staying in remote areas. 
Conclusion
As the Chinese philosopher Lao Tzu famously said “A journey of a thousand miles begins with a
single step.” We are extremely grateful to the city of Johor Bahru for enabling us to take the first
step in this Greenback experience. We now look forward to the next step on this journey which
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
will take us to Kota Kinabalu. With the experience gained together, we can deliver positive and
significant changes that will improve the welfare of individuals and businesses, not just in these
two cities but across Malaysia and in countries that are dependent on remittance flows.
Thank you.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
