Nestor  A  Espenilla,  Jr:  Remarks  at  the  Gala  Dinner  of  EMEAP
Governors' Meeting
Remarks by Mr Nestor A Espenilla, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank of the Philippines), at the Gala Dinner on the occasion of EMEAP Governors’ Meeting and
Informal Meeting of EMEAP Governors and Heads of Supervisory Authorities, Manila, 4 August
2018.
 Good evening. After a productive day of deep and meaningful discussions on various financial
and  economic  issues,  it  is  wonderful  to  be  able  to  sit  back,  enjoy  dinner  and  world-class
entertainment  —  showcasing  traditional  and  modern  Philippine  music,  dances  and  other
performances — here in the beautiful and historic Ayuntamiento de Manila.
From the time it was built during the Spanish colonial period in 1607, the Ayuntamiento, has seen
many  transformations.    It  possesses  a  rich  and  interesting  history.  On  this  very  site  was  the
Session  Hall  of  the  First  Philippine  Congress.    The  Building  also  served  as  Manila’s  first  City
Hall.  It has been, as it still is now, the venue of several historic events and has served as offices
of various government agencies.  Today, it houses the offices of the Bureau of the Treasury.
This Ayuntamiento, the walled inner city of Intramuros and surrounding districts are testaments
of the trade linkages between our neighbors in Asia and the other side of the Pacific.  This linkage
was  primarily  represented  by  the  round  trip  voyages  that  the  Galleon  ships  made  between
Acapulco, Mexico and Manila’s ports, just about a kilometer away from where we stand right now.
This  so-called  Galleon  trade  (from  1565  and  on  for  the  next  250  years  consisted  of  exports
coming from other Asian countries like China and Indonesia) showed not only exchange of goods
between countries.  It also created a means for cultural exchanges, cross-country cooperation,
and dialogue, similar to what we do today among ourselves and with the rest of the world.
Like  most  buildings  here  in  the  walled  City  of  Intramuros,  the  original  Ayuntamiento  was
destroyed  in  1945  during  the  second  World  War.    It  has  gone  through  a  number  of
reconstructions after damages brought by fires and earthquakes.  Its rehabilitation began in 2009
and was completed in 2013.  A long and tedious process.
Like Ayuntamiento,  our  financial  markets  have  seen  numerous  transformations  through  time. 
We  have  seen  economies  go  through  booms  and  busts.    We  have  experienced  financial
markets go through peaks and troughs. 
And like this Marble Hall – renovated, rehabilitated, now strong, beautiful and iconic...  It is our
taking action, our adoption of decisive policies and our welcoming of reforms through the years
—  that has helped strengthen our economies.  Our actions, our reforms, our regulations and our
staunch  commitment  as  policymakers,  monetary  authorities,  central  banks,  regulators,  public
servants, have made them resilient.
The Ayuntamiento gives us a glimpse of the past.  It also reminds us to continue to fortify our
pillars and to build on the economic, financial and institutional reforms we initiated.  It is when we
gather together periodically and openly share our ideas, insights and experiences that we add to
the strength and resilience we have.
This is what today was about.  Our discussions will continue tomorrow.  Tonight, this dinner is
about celebrating that collaboration. It is about fellowship.
As your hosts, we are also proud to share our culture with you – to showcase our talents and
also our cuisine which we arranged for you to enjoy tonight.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
Thank you very much and have a good evening.  Bon apetit.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
