Jens Weidmann: Prospects for Europe and the euro area
Speech by Dr Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  and  Chairman  of  the
Board of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, at the Centre for European Policy,
Freiburg im Breisgau, 20 September 2018.
 1 Welcome
Professor Gerken,
Ladies and gentlemen,
I would like to thank you very much for inviting me to Freiburg.
Two-and-a-half  weeks  ago  I  was  a  guest  at  the Konzerthaus just a few hundred metres from
here. There, I delivered a speech at the annual meeting of the German Economic Association
(Verein  für  Socialpolitik)  on  the  challenges  posed  by  digitalisation.  Today  I  have  returned  to
continue this series of talks on Europe.
Freiburg is an ideal location for this topic. Here, on the doorsteps of France and Switzerland, we
find ourselves at the heart of Europe in more than just a geographical sense, as evidenced by the
city’s history.
Some 650 years ago the city’s citizens rid themselves of the unpopular Counts of Freiburg and
submitted to the Habsburgs for protection instead. Freiburg thus became part of an empire that,
over time, became a European multinational state.
Time and again, parallels are drawn between the Habsburg Monarchy and the EU. For example,
historian Harold James wrote, "The EU looks more like the Habsburg Empire, a complex vessel
of nationalities where satirists joked that the situation was desperate but not serious.  When the
empire fell 100 years later, it had lost the support of its people.
1
Napoleon brought the Habsburgs’ rule in Freiburg to an end way back in 1805. But this era has
left its mark on parts of the city to this day. Take a look, for instance, at the university or the
address of the Centre for European Policy (cep): Kaiser-Joseph-Strasse 266.
With an unquestionably pro-European stance and by employing its governance principles, cep is
able to constructively and critically analyse institutions and processes in Europe.
This is an approach that I can identify well with, namely because it’s not enough for Europe to be
dear  to  your  heart.  Only  a  Europe  that  also  works  will  appeal  to  its  citizens  in  the  long  term.
That’s  why  I  think  it  is  important  for  attention  to  be  paid  to  the  core  principles  of
Ordnungsökonomik or the "economics of order", such as the principle of liability and the primacy
of foreign exchange policy.
Otmar  Issing  made  it  clear  in  an  interview:  "Whoever  voices  concerns  about  the  spread  of
2
centralism and interventionism is branded a bad European. But the reverse is true."
Economic prosperity and a stable currency are key to ensuring backing for the European project.
And a Europe that can find the answers to the burning questions of the hour – a Europe that can
add real value to the lives of its citizens – will also find backing and support.
I  would  like  to  go  into  a  little  more  detail  about  this  outlook  with  you  today.  In  particular,  I  will
highlight globalisation and technological progress, international trade policy and competition with
China as current challenges before moving on to discuss the role of the EU and reform steps for
 1 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
the euro area. But I’d like to start by taking a brief look back.
 
2 Ten years after the financial crisis
Over the past few days and weeks, a slew of media reports have reminded us of the events of
ten years ago, when the financial crisis came to a tumultuous head with the collapse of Lehman
Brothers.
Many observers regard this as the climax of the crisis, which was followed by a global recession
in 2009. In terms of severity, there was no precedent for such a downturn in post-war history.
In the euro area, the financial crisis later coalesced with the sovereign debt crisis. What’s more,
the unemployment rate peaked at 12% in mid-2013. The rate has since fallen to 8.2% – but this
is not a value that we can content ourselves with.
The member states hit especially hard by the crisis have made huge strides: they have reduced
new  government  borrowing,  cut  their  current  account  deficits,  improved  their  competitiveness
and implemented structural reforms.
Take  Greece,  which,  in  2008-09,  had  a  vast  current  account  deficit  and  a  gaping  hole  in  its
general  government  budget  –  both  of  which  reached  15%  of  GDP.  Last  year,  however,  the
current  account  was  broadly  balanced  and  a  surplus  was  even  recorded  in  the  general
government budget.
All  in  all,  five  countries  received  financial  support  via  assistance  programmes  with  conditions
attached. A month ago today, Greece was also the last of these five countries to cast off the
status of "programme country".
Greece’s exit from the adjustment programme marks an important milestone. But it would be
premature to think of the crisis as over and done with. As I recently said in Athens, there is still
work to be done.
Continued structural reforms are needed to accelerate growth, create more jobs, and boost both
productivity and wages – not just in Greece but in other euro area countries, too. By the way, we
in Germany should not be content to merely ride the wave of the successful labour market and
social reforms implemented in the 2000s.
The institutional foundations of monetary union require further reform if the euro area is to be
made permanently crisis-proof. Because there’s one thing we can probably all agree on: none of
us want a repeat of the last ten years of crisis.
The  extensive  rescue  packages  put  together  in  recent  years  have  triggered  debates  in  the
countries providing assistance on the mutualisation of liability and intergovernmental transfers. In
the  countries  receiving  assistance,  the  conditions  attached  to  the  programmes  were  seen  as
very severe in some cases and as outside interference in national decision-making.
 
3 A strong Europe: more important than ever
The crisis in the euro area and the way in which it was resolved have also stirred up animosity
and  resentment  and  given  a  boost  to  anti-European  movements.  Decidedly  euro-critical  and
populist parties have enjoyed electoral success in many member states. But this development
cannot be put down to rescue measures alone, as populist movements are flourishing outside
the euro area, too.
 2 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
Looking at the economic setting, this discontent may come as a surprise, what with the global
economy experiencing a robust upswing. In the United States, the United Kingdom, Germany and
elsewhere, unemployment has fallen to its lowest level in decades.
But it would seem that economic effects aren't the only significant factors at play here. Digital
change and globalisation, for example, are transforming the way we live and work.
Populist movements play on the fact that people perceive these profound changes as a threat.
And I can understand that many people feel uneasy and cheated, and why they fear that they
have lost control. "Take back control" – that was the motto of Brexit supporters.
Walter  Eucken  once  remarked,  "People’s  opinions,  their  mental  attitudes,  are  often  more
3
important as regards the direction of economic policy than economic facts themselves."
 
3.1 Globalisation and technological progress
From  an  economic  perspective,  it  is  clear  that  technological  progress  and  free  trade  boost
general prosperity in the long term. However, looking at the bigger picture obscures the fact that
employment prospects and relative wages are shifting. Change brings with it winners and losers.
Economists  are  now  investigating  the  distributional  effects  of  globalisation  in  greater  detail.
Studies  show  that  China’s  integration  into  the  global  economy  played  a  particular  role  in
subsequent massive manufacturing job losses in the United States.
Now, these job losses may well have been more than offset by job creation in other sectors, but
these new jobs were often created in other places. Local labour markets have been seemingly
4
slow to adapt, and the lifetime income of affected workers has been markedly reduced.
Looking at Germany, on the contrary, Wolfgang Dauth and his colleagues found that globalisation
has opened up important opportunities to export to eastern europe and China and thus helped
preserve manufacturing jobs.  But this, too, is an overall view of the situation.
5
It is the job of politicians to create the conditions needed for new, future-proof jobs. People have
to be given the ability to meet today’s job requirements so that they, too, can reap the benefits of
globalisation and digitalisation.
Education will play a key role here, particularly since this issue affects employment prospects for
lower-skilled  workers.  And  wherever  social  hardship  arises,  a  target-driven  tax  and  transfer
system should step in and act as a cushion.
 
3.2 Protectionism
By contrast, protectionism and isolationism are no way to create "prosperity for all".
We are currently seeing international trade escalate to a new level. More than a year ago, the
Bundesbank was already drawing attention to the economic disadvantages and risks associated
6
with a trade dispute in an edition of its Monthly Report.
Simulations exercises conducted as part of a global economic model show that, by introducing
new  tariffs,  the  United  States  runs  the  risk  of  damaging  not  least  its  own  economy.  That’s
because  higher  prices  would  largely  stifle  the  purchasing  power  of  American  consumers.
Retaliatory tariffs introduced by trading partners would probably then make the deterioration in
global economic activity and trade worse still. There are only losers in trade wars.
 3 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
Some  politicians  believe  that  higher  tariffs  will  reduce  current  account  deficits.  However,  the
model  calculations  show  that  this,  too,  could  turn  out  to  be  fantasy.  While  new  import  tariffs
would indeed reduce imports, foreign demand for exports would probably fall at the same time.
And  it  is  precisely  a  debtor  country  such  as  the  United  States  that  would  probably  feel  the
additional strain of higher interest rates in the wake of upward price pressures.
You'll no doubt know the song by Janis Joplin that goes as follows: "Oh Lord, won’t you buy me a
Mercedes Benz? My friends all drive Porsches, I must make amends."
The song probably doesn’t feature on Donald Trump’s playlist. After all, the fact that Americans
like to drive German cars while Germans are not so impressed by American ones is a thorn in
his side.
But  as  long  as  it  is  an  expression  of  consumer  preference,  it  does  not  constitute  market  or
competition distortion. At the end of the day, there are also American products and services that
are in very high demand in Germany – in the IT and mobile sectors, for instance, or the internet
search engine industry, to name just a few.
It  is  also  difficult  to  pin  market  distortions  on  trade  or  current  account  balances. All  in  all,  the
current account balance reflects the countless saving and investment decisions made within an
economy.
In addition to the decisions made by enterprises and households, fiscal policy plays a role here.
Simulation exercises conducted by the Bundesbank reveal that the tax cuts passed in the United
States will probably push up debt and current account deficit levels considerably.  This will do
nothing to reduce global imbalances.
7
Furthermore, given the diversity of economic relationships and level of interconnectedness with
third countries, looking at  the  goods  traded  between  two  countries  alone  is  insufficient.  Trade
expert  Gabriel  Felbermayr  pointed  out  that,  overall,  the  United  States  actually  has  a  current
account surplus with the EU: income from services and primary income more than compensate
8
for its trade in goods deficit.
Felbermayr also wrote, "The EU is in no way a paradise for advocates of free trade, especially
when compared to the United States."  For 48% of all products, the EU imposes a higher tariff
than the United States, while the reverse is true for 30% of products.
9
It  is  a  welcome  development  that  the  two  sides  are  now  discussing  how  to  dismantle  trade
barriers. Lowering tariffs would boost welfare and benefit consumers, in particular.
For  example,  a  study  carried  out  by  the  European  Commission  shows  that  consumers  have
saved €60 billion a year since the 1990s as a result of tariff reductions. Nowadays, thanks to the
conclusion  of  a  free  trade  agreement,  purchasing  a  car  from  Korea  with  an  import  value  of
€13,300 is tariff-free, but a 10% import tariff that was previously in place would have resulted in
additional costs amounting to €1,300.
10
Germany  is  quite  rightly  determined  in  calling  for  free  trade  in  goods.  With  that  in  mind,
restrictions on capital flows are something that is difficult to reconcile with this.
 
3.3 Competition with China
And yet we are currently seeing a debate in Germany over the extent to which takeovers from
abroad  need  to  be  regulated  more  tightly.  Takeovers  by  Chinese  investors  are  viewed  with
particular concern, for fear of a state-orchestrated transfer of expertise and technology to China.
 4 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
Then  again,  German  foreign  direct  investment  in  China  is  still  16  times  higher  than  in  the
opposite direction, so that ought to ease some of the fears that a "wave of takeovers" by Chinese
investors is washing over Germany. If you ask me, we ought to take a measured approach here
and be wary of "investment protectionism".
Dieter  Kempf,  President  of  the  Federation  of  German  Industries  (BDI),  has  warned  that
government intervention to prevent investment from abroad will always pose a challenge to our
governance principles, which we have to thank for prosperity and a highly innovative and globally
competitive national economy.
11
Rather than adopting special measures to fend off Chinese investors, I think it would be better to
work towards developing suitable multilateral rules and a level playing field in matters of market
access.
Another  important  measure  would  be  to  press  for  compliance  with  the  existing  rules.  Unfair
trading  practices  such  as  dumping  cannot  be  tolerated.  In  the  steel  sector,  especially,  that
appears to be a problem in connection with overcapacities in China.
At a fundamental level, China's economic ascendency is, for some, shaking our firmly held belief
that the liberal trinity – democracy, the rule of law, and the market economy – is not just more
humane, but also more successful, economically, than any other system. Clemens Fuest has
spoken of a "third competition among systems"
 emerging between the Western democracies
and China’s authoritarian state capitalism.
12
In the meantime, the breath-taking pace with which China has made up ground has slowed down
significantly. Economic growth there has halved from 14% in 2007 to just under 7% last year.
One major reason for this is that the export-oriented growth model has reached its limits. On the
demand side, the absorptive capacity of the global market is acting as a constraint.
Ultimately, China’s economy is quite simply too big to continue growing at a perceptible pace on
the back of exports to the rest of the world.
13
The  country  is  now  experiencing  an  altogether  difficult  process  of  transformation  into  a  more
balanced demand-based economy in which private consumption plays a greater role.
The Bundesbank looked in greater detail at this process and the problems it involved in the July
2018  edition  of  its  Monthly  Report.
  Over  the  past  years,  China’s  extremely  expansionary
monetary policy has fuelled a veritable credit boom. Credit was channelled in particular to state-
owned  enterprises  whose  investments  have  never  really  been  all  that  productive.  Significant
overcapacities built up in certain industrial sectors, such as steel manufacturing.
14
One could argue that the state capitalism characteristic of the Chinese system, especially, is
more of a weakness than a strength. That’s a point confirmed by Mr von Hayek, who said the
following  at  his  inaugural  lecture  here  at  the  University  of  Freiburg.  The  fact  that  far  more
knowledge about facts is fed into a market economy system than any one person or even any
one organisation can know is the crucial reason why the market economy does more than any
other economic system.
15
That is one reason why I firmly believe that we are still on the right path with our social market
economy, our open democracy, and our liberal rule of law.
China has ambitious international plans, not least with its Belt and Road Initiative. At the same
time, the United States is forging links between national security interests and international trade
policy.
In this difficult situation, what we need here in Europe is a strong EU – not only to stand up for our
 5 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
own interests at the negotiating table, but also to preserve and refine the multilateral rules-based
trade order.
Tuesday saw the European Commission present a concept paper for reforming the World Trade
Organization (WTO). One point this paper makes is that the WTO should do more to address
forced technology transfer and market-distorting government support channelled through state-
owned enterprises. And last week Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker used a speech
before  the  European  Parliament  to  say  that  it  was  time  for  Europe  to  develop  what  he  called
Weltpolitikfähigkeit – a term he defined as "the capacity to play a role, as a Union, in shaping
global affairs". In his words, "United, as a Union, Europe is a force to be reckoned with."
16
 
4 Focus of the European Union
Ladies and gentlemen,
Brexit does indeed represent a step backwards on the European path.
For the EU, the United Kingdom’s exit – whether it is a hard or a soft one – will be a painful loss.
Germany, especially, shares many of the same beliefs as the UK, such as the merits of market
economy incentives and open markets.
But we also need to see Brexit as a wake-up call. For one thing, the public at large need to be
given a clearer vision of what benefits European solutions can deliver. For another, there is also
the underlying question of the right division of responsibilities between the European and national
levels.
Both of these aspects suggest to me that the EU needs to be geared more than ever to reaping
the rewards of acting as one. That is why I welcome the European Commission’s plans to focus
on areas in which the EU can add real value.
There are many tasks that can be performed better at the European level than the national. From
an economic vantage point, efforts should concentrate on Europe-wide public goods and policy
areas with cross-border externalities.
Nearly  a  year  ago  to  this  day,  French  President  Emmanuel  Macron  used  his  speech  at  the
Sorbonne  to  single  out  defence,  border  security,  migration  policy,  climate  protection,  and  the
expansion of digital networks as areas where he could clearly see Europe adding value.
A common asylum policy would also help ease the pressure on individual countries which are
particularly exposed on account of their locations. Helping people in need is a task that can done
better by pulling together, so that the burden does not become too much for any one country.
Note, though, that providing European public goods generally comes with a price tag attached.
So  once  the  European  to-do  list  has  been  drawn  up,  the  question  of  how  the  items  will  be
financed needs to be addressed. Germany – unlike other net contributors – has already declared
its willingness to put more towards the EU budget.
That said, what counts here is that Europe’s general public does not get saddled with even more
taxes and public levies than hitherto. And we should continue to steer clear of giving the EU the
right  to  raise  debt.  With  member  states  already  labouring  under  high  levels  of  general
government  debt,  it  would  be  wrong  for  the  public  sector  to  create  even  more  borrowing
opportunities.
Let’s not forget that the crisis that engulfed the euro area was a sovereign debt crisis. And that
brings me to the final part of my speech here today, in which I will turn my attention to the euro
 6 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
area.
 
5 Reforming the euro area
To prevent the sovereign debt crisis from escalating, financially distressed member states were
granted assistance loans in the shape of the euro rescue package. But the crisis also forced the
Eurosystem to adopt stabilising measures that caused monetary policy to test the very limits of
its mandate. 
You could say the central banks became the crisis response team tackling the blaze. But in the
interests of monetary stability, that’s something that should not become a habit. Hence the huge
importance of forging a crisis-proof regulatory framework in the euro area for the Eurosystem.
Then the central bank would be able to credibly focus on its mandate rather than having to put
out the fire on behalf of all those that claim that their hands are tied.
Now,  there  have  been  a  number  of  improvements  at  the  institutional  level  since  the  crisis
erupted. The ESM can grant conditional financial aid to member states in the event of a crisis
and thus prevent a national crisis from jeopardising the stability of the entire euro area financial
system.
Another step forward was the creation of the banking union. Thus far, it is composed of a single
supervisory  mechanism,  a  single  resolution  mechanism,  and  harmonised  national  deposit
guarantee schemes.
These reforms remedied weaknesses in the architecture of the euro area that had either been
ignored or overlooked when the euro was founded.
These measures restored stability in the euro area – there's no doubt about that. But they haven't
made it crisis-proof once and for all. And that is why no one doubts that further reform steps are
in order. Whatever shape these steps take, the regulatory framework of monetary union needs to
be designed in such a way that actions and liability for their consequences are aligned.
Originally,  there  was  a  clearly  defined  allocation  of  responsibilities,  with  the  Maastricht  Treaty
stating that fiscal policy was a matter of national ownership. And the no-bail-out clause (which is
today Article  125  of  the  Treaty  on  the  Functioning  of  the  European  Union)  went  as  far  as  to
explicitly  prevent  member  states  from  assuming  liability  for  each  other’s  debts.  Action  and
liability, then, were located at the national level.
As a measure of last resort, the no-bail-out clause states that it must be possible to impose a
haircut. That’s something that creditors need to be aware of.
I imagine the architects of monetary union will have thought this an unlikely scenario. They did,
after all, assume that financial markets and the rules on debt would exert enough of a disciplinary
influence.
But the onset of the sovereign debt crisis put paid to that notion. The no-bail-out clause lacks
credibility.  Even  highly  indebted  member  states  did  not  have  to  pay  much  in  the  way  of  risk
premiums in the years leading up to the crisis. And the rules on debt were too tame, not least
because Germany, together with France, took the sting out of the Stability Pact early on.
The first step towards a functioning Maastricht framework is to restore the credibility of the no-
bail-out rule. It must be possible to reschedule or restructure sovereign debt without crippling the
financial system.
Real  progress  could  be  made  on  this  front  by  automatically  extending  government  bond
 7 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
maturities in conjunction with an orderly restructuring regime, and by abolishing the preferential
regulatory treatment afforded to government bonds.
The  idea  of  automatically  extending  bond  maturities  when  assistance  is  requested  under  the
ESM rescue programme is to keep private investors on the hook when a member state receives
assistance  loans.  Clemens  Fuest  has  stressed  that  this  might  prevent  private  creditors  from
making a quick getaway at the taxpayer’s expense if a crisis strikes.
17
A more appropriate regulatory regime for sovereign risk would encourage banks to stop holding
as much government debt – particularly paper issued by their home countries – and to set aside
more capital to cushion losses. That would make a sovereign debt restructuring episode more
manageable for the banking system.
Furthermore, two measures need to be taken to make the rules on debt more binding.
First, it would be helpful for the rules of the Stability Pact to be simplified. One expert in public
finances, Friedrich Heinemann, has remarked that the official manual illustrating the rules of the
pact is more than 200 pages long, and that the various sorts of escape clauses offer a wealth of
arguments for justifying high levels of debt.
18
So the proposals to simplify the fiscal rules, as recently tabled by Germany’s Council of Experts
and its French counterpart, are a welcome sign. What matters at the end of the day is that these
kinds of rules are complied with and that they help swiftly reduce the high debt-to-GDP ratios. 
As  for  the  second  measure,  a  more  rigorous  interpretation  of  the  rules  could  be  achieved  by
giving  responsibility  for  fiscal  surveillance  to  an  independent  authority  instead  of  to  the
Commission.  An  institution  equipped  with  a  clear  mandate  to  guarantee  sustainable  public
finances would not be torn between that mission and the need to achieve other policy goals at
the same time.
Ladies and gentlemen,
I must admit that the current reform debate isn’t exactly being driven by the idea of strengthening
national ownership.
Quite the opposite: there is another idea which is constantly coming to the fore – risk sharing. Be
it a European deposit insurance scheme, a facility to cushion asymmetric shocks, or the idea of
converting  the  ESM  into  a  European  Monetary  Fund,  all  these  proposals  are  based  on  the
underlying assumption that the euro area would be more stable if its members agreed to share
risk.
But the same goes for these proposals, too: they will only deliver stability if actions and liability for
their consequences are in alignment. After all, responsible decisions are only likely to be made if
the economic consequences are borne by the decision-makers themselves, and by no one else.
Joint liability, then, can only work if decision-making powers are surrendered and legacy assets
are scaled back.
Viewed purely in isolation, the existence of a single supervisory mechanism would support the
idea of creating a European deposit insurance arrangement. This would help make the financial
system more stable since it would reduce the likelihood of bank runs.
On the other hand, the national level is still home to key policy areas which have a bearing on the
risks  carried  on  bank  balance  sheets,  such  as  insolvency  regimes.  Moreover,  bank  balance
sheets are still riddled with exposures that arose under national ownership. I’m referring here to
the  very  high  stocks  of  non-performing  loans  in  some  quarters.  But  the  large  holdings  of
 8 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
government bonds on bank balance sheets are also problematic.
Risks  that  arose  under  national  responsibility  should  not  be  communitised.  After  all,  as  an
individual you can't usually take out insurance for damage that has already occurred.
That’s why, before a deposit insurance scheme can be created, sovereign default risks on bank
balance  sheets  would  need  to  be  reduced  on  a  lasting  basis,  as  would  the  stocks  of  non-
performing  loans. And  looking  to  the  future,  it  would  be  important  to  prevent  new  risks  from
building up in the first place. Staying with the insurance analogy I just mentioned, and given that
member  states  will  still  have  a  bearing  on  the  health  of  bank  balance  sheets  in  future,  the
concept of a long-term national risk retention requirement also seems worth considering.
But leaving aside the banking union, there would appear to be no great interest among member
states  of  the  euro  area  to  surrender  substantial  sovereignty  rights  to  Brussels,  such  as  the
power to intervene in national fiscal autonomy. That's why this is another area where it would be
premature to communitise liability and share risk.
 
6 Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen,
A century ago, Oswald Spengler prophesised the "Decline of the West". That decline has failed
to materialise, just like the collapse of capitalism that Karl Marx had once predicted, or the "End
of History" thesis posited by Francis Fukuyama.
Events these days revolve around China, trade disputes, geopolitical conflicts, the refugee crisis,
Brexit,  populism,  globalisation,  digitalisation  and  demographic  change.  Some  may  see  the
challenges facing Europe and our open society and paint a bleak future that they are powerless
to change.
But Karl Popper’s words show us a different path: "The future depends on ourselves, and we do
not depend on any historical necessity."
19
I am certain that we Europeans together have the strength to overcome the challenges of our
time. We need to remedy the flaws that have come to light in the euro area and take Brexit as a
cue to strengthen and focus the European Union.
Thank you for your attention. I look forward to the discussion.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
H. James, Viel zu komplex, Handelsblatt, 5 September 2018, p. 48.
O. Issing, Saat für zukünftige Konflikte, interview with the Wirtschaftswoche, 16 Februar 2018, p. 23.
W. Eucken (1952), Grundsätze der Wirtschaftspolitik, Chapter XII.
See D. H. Autor, D. Dorn and G. H. Hanson (2016), The China Shock: Learning from Labour-Market Adjustment
to Large Changes in Trade, Annual Review of Economics, Vol. 8, pp. 205–240.
See W. Dauth, S. Findeisen and J. Südekum (2017), Trade and Manufacturing Jobs in Germany, American
Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 2017, Vol. 107, pp. 337–342.
See  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  The  danger  posed  to  the  global  economy  by  protectionist  tendencies,  Monthly
Report, July 2017, pp. 77–91.
See Deutsche Bundesbank, The potential macroeconomic impact of US tax reform, Monthly Report, February
2018, pp. 14–16.
 9 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
See G. Felbermayr (2018), Beobachtungen zur US-Leistungsbilanz, ifo Schnelldienst 9/2018.
G. Felbermayr (2018), Zölle im transatlantischen Handel: Worauf, wie viel und wie gerecht?, ifo Schnelldienst
6/2018, p. 8.
See L. Cernat, D. Gerard, O. Guinea and L. Isella (2018), Consumer benefits from EU trade liberalisation: How
much did we save since the Uruguay Round?, European Commission, DG Trade, Chief Economist Note, No 1.
in 
Quoted 
www.welt.de/wirtschaft/article181410812/BDI-kritisiert-Regierung-Protektionismus-und-Abschottung-haben-
keine-Zukunft.html, 4 September 2018.
“Protektionismus 
Abschottung 
haben 
keine 
Doll, 
und 
N. 
Zukunft",
C. Fuest (2018), Der dritte Systemwettbewerb, Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, 27 July 2018, p. 18.
See Deutsche Bundesbank, On the weakness of global trade, Monthly Report, March 2016, pp. 13–35.
See  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  The  realignment  of  the  Chinese  economy  and  its  global  implications,  Monthly
Report, July 2018, pp. 39–56.
F. A. von Hayek, inaugural lecture on 18 June 1962 at the University of Freiburg.
J.-C. Juncker, State of the Union 2018 – The Hour of European Sovereignty, speech given on 12 September
2018.
C. Fuest, Ein Europäischer Währungsfonds muss die Steuerzahler schützen, Wirtschaftswoche, 15 December
2017, p. 68.
See F. Heinemann (2018), How could the Stability and Growth Pact be simplified?, European Parliament, In-
depth Analysis, Euro Area Scrutiny.
K. R. Popper, The Open Society and Its Enemies, Vol. I, Introduction, 1st ed. 1957, Francke Verlag, Berne
 10 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
