J u l y   4 ,   2 0 1 8 
B a n k   o f   J a p a n 
Economic Activity, Prices, 
and Monetary Policy in Japan 
 Speech at a Meeting with Business Leaders in Ishikawa 
Yutaka Harada 
Member of the Policy Board 
(English translation based on the Japanese original) 
 Introduction 
Thank you for giving me this opportunity to exchange views with you and for having taken 
the time to be here despite your busy schedules. It is indeed a great honor to be here today. 
Please  allow  me  to  express  my  gratitude  for  your  great  cooperation  with  the  business 
operations of the Bank of Japan, particularly of the Kanazawa Branch. 
 The Bank introduced quantitative and qualitative monetary easing -- or QQE for short -- in 
April  2013  with  the aim of  achieving  the  inflation  target  of  2  percent,  and  since  then,  has 
strengthened the QQE framework. 
 As a result of the Bank's efforts, most economic indicators  -- such as those of production, 
employment, investment, exports, and fiscal conditions -- have improved. 
 Today,  I  would  like  to  provide  my  views  on  the  achievements  thus  far  of  the  Bank's 
monetary  policy  measures  as  well  as  on  some  critical  opinions  regarding  QQE,  and  then 
explain  recent  economic  and  financial  developments  as  well  as  the  path  toward  achieving 
the price stability target of 2 percent. 
 I. The Achievements of Five Years of the Bank's Monetary Easing Policy 
April 2018 marked five full years since the Bank introduced bold monetary easing with its 
policy  of  QQE.  For  this  reason,  monetary  policy  over  the  past  five  years  has  been  the 
subject  of  a  large  number  of  articles  in  newspapers  and  magazines  assessing  QQE  from  a 
variety  of  perspectives.1  Many  of  the  assessments  pointed  out  that  the  2  percent  price 
stability target had not been achieved and argued that the dangers associated with monetary 
easing had not been addressed. 
 However,  as  I  have  highlighted  repeatedly,  monetary  easing  has  led  to  a  continued 
improvement  in  employment,  to  an  increase  in  both  real  GDP  growth  and  nominal  GDP 
growth, and to a rise in the year-on-year inflation rate from negative into positive territory 
                                                 
1  For  example,  such  assessments  were  found  in  Fujita  Tomoya,  "Daikibo  kanwa  gonen,  fukuramu 
'fukusayō'," the Asahi Shimbun, April 4, 2018; and the 3-day series, Sakai Takayuki et al., "Shiren 
no  saishidō,"  The  Mainichi,  February  17,  18,  and  20,  2018  and  the  series  focusing  on  monetary 
policy under the same title on April 10, 11, and 12, 2018. 
 1 
 although the rate has not yet reached 2 percent. In my speech today, I would like to focus on 
how  monetary  easing  has  lifted  productivity  and,  in  a  broader  sense,  has  brought  out 
people's potential in Japan. 
 Improvement in Productivity 
Since the bold monetary easing policy was launched, productivity has been improving. This 
seems  to  conflict  with  standard  textbook  economic  theory,  which  suggests  that  while 
monetary policy can influence real variables such as real GDP, production, and employment 
in the short run, in the long run it can only affect nominal variables such as nominal GDP, 
prices, and the exchange rate.2 
 So, why did Japan's productivity rise as a result of monetary policy even though this seems 
to run counter to economic theory? The reason generally given is that what economic theory 
actually  focuses  on  is  differences  in  productivity  levels  arising  due  to  differences  in 
productivity growth rates over the super long term. Looking at real purchasing power parity 
GDP  per  capita,  which  provides  a  broad  indicator  of  differences  in  productivity  across 
countries, the level between the poorest and richest countries may differ by a factor of more 
than 100. Of course, such a gap is not due to differences in monetary policy. Returning to 
the situation in Japan, however, if monetary policy had been well implemented, productivity 
might have grown, over a period of a decade or more, at 2 percent rather than 1 percent. 
 Therefore,  I  would  say  one  reason,  first  of  all,  is  that  in  the  short  run  capacity  utilization 
rises.  In  times  of  recession,  orders  fall  and  factories  will  decrease  output.  However,  since 
labor cannot simply be laid off, labor productivity will decline. The opposite occurs during 
an economic expansion. 
                                                  
2  For  details,  see  Nicholas  G.  Mankiw,  Mankyū  keizaigaku  II  makuro-hen,  3rd  ed.,  trans.  Adachi 
Hideyuki,  Ishikawa  Jota,  Ogawa  Eiji,  Jinushi  Toshiki,  Chuma  Hiroyuki,  and  Yanagawa  Takashi 
(Tokyo: Toyo Keizai Inc., 2014), 374, 397. Originally published as Principles of Economics, 6th ed. 
(Mason,  Ohio:  South-Western  Cengage  Learning,  2012),  650,  665.  According  to  Mankiw,  in  the 
long run, changes in the amount of money have important effects on nominal variables such as price 
levels,  but  only  negligible  effects  on  real  variables  such  as  real  GDP.  He  adds  that,  although 
monetary  policy  is  neutral  in  the  long  run  (i.e.  it  does  not  have  an  effect  on  real  variables),  it  has 
profound effects on real variables in the short run. 
 2 
 Another reason is a reduction in low-productivity work in an economic environment where 
monetary policy is producing its intended effects. In times of recession, sales fall, and stores 
will  try  to  increase  demand,  even  if  only  a  little,  by  extending  their  business  hours.  The 
opposite  occurs  during  an  economic  upturn.  If  there  are  labor  shortages,  restaurants  that 
used  to  stay  open  until  midnight,  for  example,  will  start  to  close  early.  If  they  open  only 
during the busiest times during the day and in the evening, labor productivity will increase. 
 Furthermore,  over  the  long  term,  there  is  the  issue  of  hysteresis  effects.3  In  a  recession, 
firms reduce their investment, including that in employment and research and development 
(R&D).  The  unemployed  do  not  have  the  chance  to  accumulate  work  experience.  For 
example,  many  young  people  of  the  generation  that  entered  the  labor  market  during  the 
so-called "employment ice age" were unable to gain work experience. When the economy is 
in recession, firms also reduce investment in training and human resource development. The 
reduction  of  investment,  especially  in  R&D,  results  in  a  decline  in  productivity  for  a 
prolonged  period.  Reversing  these  developments  takes  quite  a  while.  In  fact,  it  may  be 
difficult  to  ever  make  up  lost  ground.  Young  people  who  were  caught  up  in  the 
"employment ice age" and lost out in on-the-job training opportunities, especially from the 
mid-1990s to the mid-2000s and following the global financial crisis in 2008, may struggle 
to  make  up  ground.  Moreover,  many  of  these  people  receiving  low  incomes  have  been 
unable  to  pay  sufficient  taxes  and  social  security  contributions,  possibly  contributing  to  a 
deterioration  in  fiscal  conditions  both  at  present  and  in  the  future.  This  impact  is  long 
lasting. While  it  is  difficult  to  estimate  exactly  how  large  the  impact  is,  it  is certain  to  be 
considerable,  judging  by  the  increase  in  the  share  of  non-regular  employment  during  this 
period  and  the  wage  difference  between  regular  and  non-regular  employees.  All  of  this 
means that as the economy expands due to monetary  easing policy, the negative hysteresis 
effects of the past should be mitigated and productivity should rise. 
                                                  
3  Nakano  Akihiro  and  Kato  Ryo,  "'Chōki  teitai'  ron  o  meguru  saikin  no  giron:  'Rireki  kōka'  o 
chūshin  ni,"  Bank  of  Japan  Review,  no.  17-J-2,  March  2017,  https://www.boj.or.jp/research 
/wps_rev/rev_2017/data/rev17j02.pdf. 
 3 
 Chart 1 and the accompanying table provide a comparison of estimates by the Organisation 
for  Economic  Co-operation  and  Development  (OECD)  for  labor  productivity  and  real 
purchasing power parity GDP per hour worked for the Group of Seven (G-7) countries. 
  The chart and table show that from 2012 to 2017, Japan, together with Canada, registered 
average annual productivity growth of 1.0 percent, the highest among the G-7 countries and 
hence higher even than the United States. Moreover, from a long-term perspective, Japan's 
average labor productivity growth rate since 2012 is even slightly higher than the average of 
0.9 percent in the preceding decade from 2002 to 2012. Thus, while some might argue that 
Japan's  productivity  growth  following  the  introduction  of  QQE  has  been  modest,  it  has 
actually been high considering how low it had been by international comparison. Therefore, 
 4 
 while  Japan  also  faced  the  global  financial  crisis  in  2008,  which  pushed  down  its 
productivity  growth,  I  think  it  would  be  fair  to  say  that  productivity  growth  in  Japan  has 
been relatively high by international comparison. 
 However,  using  labor  productivity  for  comparison  may  be  misleading.  The  reason  is  that 
firms  tend to  hire  the  most  productive  people  first.  Therefore,  one  would  expect  countries 
with  a  high  unemployment  rate  to  enjoy  higher  productivity,  and  this  pattern  tends  to  be 
borne out in practice. Productivity in both Italy and France is higher than in Japan, but the 
unemployment  rate  in  those  two  countries  is  11.3  percent  and  9.4  percent,  respectively.4 
However, when the unemployment rate is high, there are people who cannot work although 
they  want  to,  which  is  unfortunate.  Obviously,  a  better  situation  is  one  where  the 
unemployment  rate  is  low  and  all  the  people  who  want  to  work  can  work.  Therefore,  I 
thought  it  would  be  useful  to  look  at  real  purchasing  power  parity  GDP  per  working-age 
person.  This  should  reduce  the  distortion  introduced  by  focusing  on  labor  productivity, 
since this indicator is higher when those who want to work do work, and lower when they 
do not work.   
 In this context, it is worth quoting  Dr. Osamu Shimomura, who was the brains behind the 
period  of  high  economic  growth  achieved  under  Prime  Minister  Hayato  Ikeda.  In  1968, 
exactly  50  years  ago,  he  said:  "Why  are  we  making  such  effort  and  putting  up  with  such 
hardship  to  pursue  economic  growth?  More  than  anything,  we  want  to  derive  satisfaction 
from life and work. And isn't the greatest satisfaction in life being able to fully demonstrate 
one's abilities? We should pursue a society that provides such opportunities to all citizens. If 
we compare society today and society a hundred years ago, isn't the fundamental difference 
that,  today,  finally,  a  large  number  of  citizens  are  gradually  being  provided  with  the 
opportunity to take advantage of their talents in one way or another?"5  I am not saying that 
simply raising the employment rate is the same as the ideals expressed by  Dr. Shimomura. 
                                                 
4  The  figures are for 2017 and are taken from the World Economic Outlook Database April 2018, 
available  on  the  website  of  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF):  https://www.imf.org/external 
/pubs/ft/weo/2018/01/weodata/index.aspx. 
5  Kamikubo  Satoshi,  Hyōden,  Nihon  no  keizai  shisō,  Shimomura  Osamu,  'Nihon  keizaigaku'  no 
jissensha (Tokyo: Nihon Keizai Hyouronsha Ltd., 2008), 227. 
 5 
 However, I believe that providing people with the opportunity to work is the starting point 
for people to be able to fully demonstrate their abilities. 
 This  can  also  be  said,  for  example,  with  regard  to  women's  entry  into  the  labor  market. 
According to statistics released by the OECD, the labor force participation rate of women 
aged between 25 and 54 in Japan was 75.3 percent in 2017; this figure is higher than that for 
the United States -- which is 72.1 percent -- and the average of the G-7 countries -- which is 
73.5  percent,  with  France  at  75.2  percent,  Germany  at  80.0  percent,  and  the  United 
Kingdom at 78.1 percent. 
 Currently,  the  issue  surrounding  working  women  in  Japan  is  not  the  labor  force 
participation rate itself, but the scarcity of opportunities for women to develop their career 
at work, given that many women work as part-timers or non-regular employees. However, 
without entry  into  the labor  market in  the  first  place,  women cannot create career  plans.  I 
believe that, as the number of working women increases, more women will become regular 
employees,  enabling  them  to  develop  their  career;  in  fact,  in  2016,  the  ratio  of  women  in 
managerial  positions  in  establishments  with  30  employees  or  more  in  Japan  increased, 
according to the fiscal 2016 Basic Survey of Gender Equality in Employment Management 
(available  only  in  Japanese)  released  on  July  28,  2017  by  the  Ministry  of  Health,  Labour 
and Welfare. 
 Chart 2 shows real purchasing power parity GDP per working-age person. As can be seen in 
the  chart  and  the  accompanying  table,  since  the  introduction  of  QQE,  Japan's  growth  rate 
has been the highest among the G-7 countries, and has also been notably higher than during 
the  preceding  decade  from  2002  to  2012.  This  means  that  those  who  want  to  work  are 
increasingly able to work. 
  6 
  Of course, there are people who say this level of productivity growth in Japan is not ideal 
and  that  productivity  should  be  raised  further  by  pushing  ahead  with  the  growth  strategy 
and  structural  reforms.  However,  people  saying  this  do  not  seem  to  clearly  explain  what 
kind  of  policy  measures  will  produce  how  much  productivity  growth.  To  avoid  any 
misunderstandings, let me state that I strongly agree with structural reforms. All I am saying 
is that it is good to conduct both monetary easing policy and structural reforms. 
 In addition to productivity, improvements can also be seen in many other indicators such as 
production,  employment,  the  unemployment  rate,  investment,  exports,  and  the  fiscal 
 7 
 situation;  moreover,  perceptions  that  the  economy  is  recovering,  the  income  distribution, 
and women's entry into the labor market provide further indications of improvement.6 
 II. Some Counterarguments to Critical Opinions on the Bank's Monetary Policy 
As  mentioned  above,  monetary  policy  has  been  clearly  having  an  effect,  but  for  some 
reason, objections to the Bank's current policy persist. 
 Among  the  critics  are  some  who  argue  that  QQE  is  like  the  Battle  of  Imphal  during  the 
Second World War and we should withdraw immediately.7  The Battle of Imphal took place 
from March 1944 to early July and involved the Japanese army advancing from Burma with 
the aim of capturing the city of Imphal in northeast India. The battle was an abject failure 
entailing  enormous  sacrifice  and  is  often  cited  as  synonymous  with  a  reckless  strategy. 
There  was  no  food  along  the  way,  resulting  in  many  deaths  from  starvation,  there  were 
attacks  by  enemy  fighter  aircraft,  and  many  soldiers  contracted  malaria,  so  that  of  the 
100,000 Japanese troops, 30,000 died in battle, while 20,000 were sent back due to injury or 
disease.  Of  the  remaining  50,000  troops,  more  than  half  fell  ill,  and  the  Japanese  army 
suffered  a  devastating  defeat.8  In  contrast  with  such  disastrous  consequences,  QQE  is 
clearly  having  a  positive  impact,  with  most  economic  indicators  improving.  Therefore,  I 
think  this  analogy  between  QQE  and  the  Japanese  army's  Battle  of  Imphal  is  simply 
inaccurate. 
 What is Dialogue with the Market? 
In this context, it is often said that dialogue with the market is important for the conduct of 
monetary  policy.  We  must  also  engage  with  people  who  are  critical  of  QQE.  I  suppose 
dialogue normally helps to seek out the truth or discover what the vital interests of the other 
                                                 
6  Regarding improvements in these indicators, also see Yutaka Harada, "Economic Activity, Prices, 
and Monetary Policy in Japan: Speech at a Meeting with Business Leaders in Fukushima," Bank of 
Japan, November 2017. 
7  See,  for  example,  Kato  Izuru,  "Sensō  makki  to  kasanaru  Nichigin  tettei  kōsen,  Kuroda  sōsai  ga 
nerau  wa  'ichigeki  kōwa'  ka,"  Diamond  online,  March  4,  2016,  https://diamond.jp/articles/-/87079. 
Kumano  Hideo,  "Deguchi  no  meiro,  kin'yū  seisaku  o  tou  6,  Inpāru  sakusen  kara  hayaku  tettai  o," 
Shūkan Ekonomisuto, November 14, 2017, https://www.weekly-economist.com/20171114bojexit6. 
8   Tobe  Ryoichi  et  al.,  Shippai  no  honshitsu,  Nihongun  no  soshikiron-teki  kenkyū  (Tokyo: 
Chuokoron-shinsha, 1991), 141-177. 
 8 
 party are and to what extent one is able to make compromises oneself. However, dialogue 
with the market is different from regular dialogue. 
 There is no such thing as an abstract market; rather, the market consists of  a collection of 
different  stakeholders,  who,  moreover,  do  not  necessarily  seek  the  truth.  In  addition, 
because the market comprises a variety of stakeholders with different interests, it would be 
misleading to say that something is or is not in the interest of the market as a whole. If the 
Bank were to implement policy measures without listening to the views of stakeholders, it 
could become complacent and create unnecessary confusion; at the same time, this does not 
mean that the Bank will or should do everything stakeholders say. 
 For instance, sometimes it is said that the market is calling for an early rise in interest rates. 
However,  if  the  Bank  were  to  indeed  raise  interest  rates,  bond  and  stock  prices  would 
decline and the yen would appreciate, leading to a deterioration in firms' profits, credit costs 
would increase, and financial institutions would suffer substantial damage. Moreover, even 
if  short-term  interest  rates  were  raised,  long-term interest  rates  would  not  necessarily  rise, 
so  that  the  spread  between  short-term  and  long-term  interest  rates  might  actually  decline. 
This is currently happening in the United States and has happened in Japan since 2006.9 
 The reason many market participants think that the yield curve will steepen and hence the 
term spread will increase when the Bank raises interest rates is probably that they expect the 
opposite to happen of the flattening of the yield curve seen at the time the Bank introduced 
the negative interest rate policy on January 29, 2016. However, looking at the facts, we find 
that the yield curve often tends to flatten when monetary policy is tightened. Chart 3 shows 
the uncollateralized overnight call rate and long-term interest rates -- represented by 10-year 
Japanese  government  bond  yields  --  from  2000 to  the  present. The chart  shows  that  when 
policy  was  tightened  on  August  11,  2000  (termination  of  the  zero  interest  rate  policy; 
                                                 
9  For instance, Reuters reported that the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis President James Bullard 
said:  "We  are  at  some  risk  of  a  yield  curve  inversion,  later  this  year,  early  2019."  See  Gertrude 
Chavez-Dreyfuss, "Fed's Bullard says U.S. yield curve might invert by early 2019," Reuters, May 15, 
2018, 
https://www.reuters.com/article/usa-fed-bullard-yieldcurve/update-1-feds-bullard-says-us 
-yield-curve-might-invert-by-early-2019-idUSL2N1SL10U. This, naturally, is not certain to happen, 
but has happened before. 
 9 
 overnight call rate of around 0.25 percent set as the guideline for money market operations), 
on  July  14,  2006  (termination  of  zero  interest  rates;  policy  rate  hike  from  0  percent  to 
around 0.25 percent), and on February 21, 2007 (policy rate hike from around 0.25 percent 
to  around  0.5  percent),  the  yield  curve  flattened,  that  is,  the  term  spread  declined.  The 
exception  is  the  period  around  the  time  when  the  Bank  reverted  from  its  policy  of 
quantitative  easing  to  conventional  interest  rate  policy  on  March  9,  2006,  shifting  its 
operating  target  of  money  market  operations  from  the  outstanding  balance  of  current 
accounts at the Bank at around 30-35 trillion yen to the uncollateralized overnight call rate 
to remain at effectively 0 percent; following the policy change, the term spread increased.   
  On  the  other  hand,  when  monetary  policy  was  eased,  the  yield  curve  sometimes  flattened 
and  sometimes  steepened;  specifically,  when  the  main  operating  target  for  money  market 
operations was changed on March 19, 2001 from an uncollateralized overnight call rate of 
around 0.15 percent to the outstanding balance of the current accounts at the Bank at around 
5 trillion yen; when the outstanding balance of the current accounts at the Bank was raised 
on  December  19,  2001  from  above  6  trillion  yen  to  around  10-15  trillion  yen;  when  the 
upper limit of the target balance of the Bank's current accounts was raised on October 10, 
2003  so  that  the  target  balance  would  change  from  around  27-30  trillion  yen  to  around 
27-32  trillion  yen;  when  the  Bank's  target  for  the  uncollateralized  overnight  call  rate  was 
 10 
 lowered on October 31, 2008 from around 0.5 percent to around 0.3 percent; and when the 
Bank's  target  for  the  uncollateralized  overnight  call  rate  was  lowered  on  October  5,  2010 
from around 0.1 percent to around 0-0.1 percent. In particular, when QQE was introduced 
on  April  4,  2013  --  when  the  Bank's  main  operating  target  for  money  market  operations 
changed  from  the  uncollateralized  overnight  call  rate  of  around  0-0.1percent  to  the 
monetary base so that the monetary base would increase at an annual pace of about 60-70 
trillion yen -- the yield curve steepened as a result of monetary easing. The reason probably 
is that monetary easing was recognized as having a positive effect on inflation expectations 
and economic activity. Thus, whether the yield curve flattens or steepens when short-term 
interest rates are raised depends on the  economic situation as well as the market's view of 
monetary policy at the time. It is therefore wrong to think that if short-term interest rates are 
raised, the yield curve will steepen. 
 I think that what market participants would like from dialogue with  the central bank is for 
the  central  bank  to  provide  a  clear  outlook  for  the  future  course  of  monetary  policy. 
However, since the central bank conducts policy referring to price and economic indicators, 
that  is,  based  on  data,  it  is  generally  not  possible  to  chart  the  future  course  of  monetary 
policy by announcing in advance that it will raise interest rates at certain points in time in 
steps  of,  say,  25  basis  points  regardless  of  economic  conditions.10  That  said,  if  future 
economic indicators could be predicted with some certainty, it might be possible to outline 
future policy accordingly. I think the Federal Reserve believes that the U.S. economy is in 
such a situation. In the United States, where inflation expectations are anchored at 2 percent, 
it is possible to predict future price developments more reliably, so that the Federal Reserve 
can chart the course of future policy. Yet, even in the United States, there has been criticism 
that the projections of monetary policy presented in so-called "dot plots" often turn out to be 
                                                 
10  In  "Central  Banking  and  the  Global  Economy"  (a  speech  given  at  an  international  symposium 
entitled  "Central  Banking  &  Monetary  Policy:  The  Global  Economy  &  Japan"  hosted  by  the 
Hitotsubashi  Graduate  School  of  Commerce  and  Management  at  Hitotsubashi  Hall  on  May  12, 
2017), the former governor of the Bank of Israel, Mr. Jacob Frenkel, emphasized that central bank 
operations must be conducted based on data, not on a certain timeframe. 
 11 
 inaccurate,  causing  unnecessary  confusion.11  In  Japan's  current  situation,  where  inflation 
expectations  are  not anchored  at  2  percent, it  would  likely  be  even  more  difficult  to  chart 
future policy in advance. 
 In sum, while the central bank should communicate with the market, its focus should be on 
conducting  policies  aimed  at  maintaining  price  stability,  the  sound  development  of  the 
national economy, and the stability of the financial system. 
 The Bank's Monetary Easing Policy and the Profitability of Private Banks 
One subgroup of market participants is bank managers, and many of them have argued that 
the low interest rates brought about by QQE have depressed banks' profits, and that this is a 
side effect of QQE. They say that QQE undermines their business model, which is based on 
the  premise  that  interest  rates  are  positive  and  consists  of  profiting  from  the  difference 
between high long-term interest rates and low short-term interest rates. This is equivalent to 
saying  that  unless  purchasing  and  selling  prices  are  somehow  preordained,  you  cannot 
conduct business. However, every business derives its profits from the difference between 
ever-changing costs and sales proceeds. 
 The  reason  why  conditions  for  private  banks  are  difficult  is  that  there  are  few  borrowers. 
From  a  macroeconomic  perspective,  Japanese  firms  have  sufficient  cash  and  deposits  at 
private  banks,  so  they  do  not  need  to  borrow  funds  from  them.  According  to  the  Bank's 
Flow  of  Funds  Accounts,  as  of  end-March  2018,  firms  in  Japan  had  cash  and  deposits  of 
261 trillion yen. Relative to the demand for funds, there is a glut of supply. 
                                                 
11  Bloomberg reported that Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis President James Bullard in relation to 
the  dot plots  observed  that "[t]he  whole  idea  that  you're  naming  the number  of  rate  hikes  way  out 
into the future when you don't know what the data are going to be is something we should get out of 
the  business  of  doing."  See  Christopher  Condon  and  Brendan  Murray,  "Bullard  Laments  Fed  Dot 
Plot,  Yearns  for  Greenspan's  Opacity,"  Bloomberg,  May  17,  2018,  https://www.bloomberg.com 
/news/articles/2018-05-16/bullard-laments-fed-dot-plot-and-yearns-for-greenspan-s-opacity. 
Then 
Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  San  Francisco  President,  now  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York 
President John Williams, commented that "the time is approaching to phase out" forward guidance, 
which  communicates  the  intended  future  path  of  the  federal  funds  rate.  See  Jeanna  Smialek, 
"Williams Says Fed's Era of Market Hand-Holding Is Nearing an End," Bloomberg, May 17, 2018,   
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2018-05-16/williams-says-fed-s-era-of-market-hand 
-holding-nearing-an-end?in_source=video_page. 
 12 
 In addition, as mentioned earlier, if the Bank were to indeed raise interest rates, bond and 
stock prices would decline and the yen would appreciate, leading to a deterioration in firms' 
profits,  and  credit  costs  would  increase,  so  that  private  banks  would  suffer  substantial 
damage. Also, we do not know whether the yield curve would steepen if short-term interest 
rates were raised. 
 Meanwhile,  another  argument  is  that  if  monetary  easing  continues,  not  only  the  financial 
situation  of  private  banks  but  also  that  of  the  Bank  of  Japan  would  deteriorate,  leading  to 
serious problems. However, this is not the case. Because I have already talked about this on 
another occasion, I will not discuss it here today.12 
                                                                    
12  Yutaka Harada, "Economic Activity, Prices, and Monetary Policy in Japan: Speech at a Meeting 
with Business Leaders in Fukushima," Bank of Japan, November 2017. 
 13 
 III. Recent Economic Developments and Outlook for Prices 
So far, I have talked about the long-term economic situation. I would now like to turn to the 
more short-term situation. 
 Charts  4  and  5  present  key  economic  indicators.  Almost  all  the  indicators  --  production, 
investment,  exports,  employment,  wages,  and  employee  income,  which  is  obtained  by 
multiplying wages by employment -- have improved over the years. Some of the indicators 
were sluggish following the consumption tax hike in April 2014 and thereafter, particularly 
the period from the second half of 2014 to the first half of 2016, when global trade volume 
was sluggish. Some of the indicators temporarily contracted at the turn of this year, but the 
overall upward trend has continued. 
      14 
  Further,  Chart  5  looks  at  employment,  wages,  employee  income,  and  consumption.  The 
reason why real wages has not increased is that the number of non-regular workers working 
short  hours  has  increased.  In  terms  of  employment  and  real  employee  income,  the 
consumption  tax  hike  only  had  an  impact  in  fiscal 2014.  Apart  from  that, these  indicators 
have  grown  more  or  less  steadily  except  for  the  temporary  slowdown  seen  at  the  turn  of 
2018.  The  unemployment  rate has also  steadily  declined.  Among  these  indicators, the  one 
showing  the  weakest  improvement  is  real  consumption.  Consumption  as  measured  by  the 
consumption  activity  index  has  not  yet  returned  to  the  peak  registered  before  the  spike  in 
demand due to the frontloading of purchases prior to the consumption tax hike. The average 
 15 
 of  the  most  recent  three  months,  the  February-April  period  of  2018,  is  still  below  the 
average  of  the  October-December  quarter  of  2013,  the  quarter  before  the  demand  spike 
prior to the consumption tax hike. This is a bit strange given that real employee income, on 
which consumption expenditure rests, has steadily increased, except for the fall at the start 
of  2018.  Although  the  ratio  of  real  consumption  to  real  employee  income  has  been  on  a 
declining  trend,  it  is  difficult  to  imagine  that  this  ratio  will  continue  to  decline,  so  that 
consumption can be expected to recover in the future. 
 Another  debate  has  focused  on  concerns  about  financial  imbalances.  Certainly,  as  seen  in 
Chart 6, asset prices have been rising, albeit with some fluctuations, amid economic growth. 
While people who are worried about the side effects of monetary easing seem to regard this 
as an indication of financial imbalances, I think these increases in asset prices can hardly be 
called a bubble. 
  The chart shows both stock prices and price-earnings ratios in Japan, the United States, and 
the  euro  area.  The  rise  in  stock  prices  in  Japan  is  nowhere  near  as  pronounced  as  in  the 
United  States,  and  the  price-earnings  ratio  has  not  increased  much,  hovering  at  about  14. 
 16 
 Moreover,  taking  into  account  the  Bank's  April  2018  Financial  System  Report,  it  can  be 
judged that no major imbalances have built up in asset markets as a whole, although some 
indicators such as stock prices, the real estate loans to GDP ratio, and the diffusion index of 
lending attitudes of financial institutions have recently been close to the upper threshold of 
their trend ranges reflecting the rapid pace of increase in these indicators.13  Needless to say, 
it  is  essential  that  the  Bank  continues  to  constantly  monitor  for  signs  of  financial 
imbalances. 
 Path toward Achieving the Price Stability Target of 2 Percent 
I mentioned earlier that consumption has been weak, and I would now like to turn to prices, 
which have also been weak. However, if the economic recovery continues and employment 
tightens, prices should rise eventually. 
 In  this  context,  one  often  hears  the  question  why  prices  are  not  rising  even  though  the 
unemployment  rate  has  fallen  to  around  2.5  percent,  well  below  3.5  percent,  which  until 
recently  was  widely  regarded  as  the  structural  unemployment  rate.  My  answer  to  this 
question is simple: the decline in the unemployment rate is insufficient. Moreover, it would 
be  completely  wrong  to  think  that  the  structural  unemployment  rate  is  still  the  previously 
estimated 3.5 percent.14 
 Chart  7  shows  the  Phillips  curve  for  Japan,  which  depicts  the  relationship  between  the 
inflation rate and the unemployment rate. The regression lines represent this relationship for 
each of the following periods: from January 1983 through March 2013, from January 1983 
through  December  1995,  and  from  January  1996  through  March  2013.  All  of  these 
regression lines show that, unless the unemployment rate falls below 2.5 percent or so, the 
                                                 
13  Bank  of  Japan,  Financial  System  Report,  April  2018:  30-32,  https://www.boj.or.jp/en/research 
/brp/fsr/data/fsr180419a.pdf. 
14  See  footnote  19  in  Yutaka  Harada,  "Economic  Activity,  Prices,  and  Monetary  Policy  in  Japan: 
Speech at a Meeting with Business Leaders in Fukushima," Bank of Japan, November 2017. Another 
issue is output gap estimates. While estimates by the Bank's Research and Statistics Department and 
the Cabinet Office each suggest that Japan's output gap is positive, the IMF's estimates for Japan are 
negative, even for 2017, according to the World Economic Outlook Database April 2018, available 
on the IMF website: https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2018/01/weodata/index.aspx. 
 17 
  inflation rate will not reach 2 percent. For instance, looking at the period from January 1983 
through  December  1995,  the  inflation  rate  in  terms  of  the  consumer  price  index  (CPI) 
during that period was 1.6 percent, and the regression line for that period indicates that for 
 18 
 inflation  to  rise  to  2  percent,  the  unemployment  rate  would  need  to  fall  to  around  2.5 
percent. Thus, as the regression line B in chart 7 suggests, if inflation rates rise continuously 
at  about  1.5  percent  and  the  unemployment  rate  is  at  2.5  percent,  then  2  percent  inflation 
will  be  achieved.  In  order  to  achieve  2  percent  inflation,  the  inflation  rate, which  was  0.3 
percent for May 2018, would have to rise to around 1.6 percent,  while the unemployment 
rate,  which  was  2.2  percent  for  May  2018,  would  have  to  be  maintained  at  around  2.5 
percent. 
 Another issue is that the unemployment rate necessary to push up inflation has become even 
lower, since there is room for a further increase in the employment rate. According to the 
May  2018  Labour  Force  Survey  released  by  the  Ministry  of  Internal  Affairs  and 
Communications,  the  number  of  employees  increased  by  as  many  as  1.51  million  from  a 
year  earlier,  although  the  number  of  the  unemployed  was  only  1.58  million.  Moreover,  I 
hear  that,  due  to  continued  labor  shortages,  labor  in  low-productivity  sectors  and  excess 
labor  at  firms  seems  to  be  shifting  to  other  industries  or  firms.  This  shift  pushes  up  labor 
supply in real terms. Thus, if productivity rises, an increase in inflation is delayed.15 
 Disregarding  these  factors  and  assuming  that  there  is  no  labor  slack  by  simply  using  the 
employment  rate and  the labor  force  participation  rate  of  men  aged  between 25  and  54 in 
1992  --  when  the  employment  rate  among  this  group  was  at  a  historical  high  --  the 
unemployment rate for 2017 is estimated to be 2.3 percent. 
 The  unemployment  rate  in  1992  stood  at  2.2  percent,  but  the  proportion  of  young  people 
was  higher  at  that  time.  Given  that  the  unemployment  rate  among  the  young  is  usually 
higher, and that among the middle-aged is usually lower, the estimated unemployment rate 
for 1992 is 1.9 percent if it is adjusted based on the demographic structure in 2017. 
 The  calculations  imply  that  in  order  to  achieve  the  level  of  inflation  seen  in  1992,  which 
was  2.2  percent  in  terms  of  the  CPI  for  all  items  less  fresh  food  and  energy,  the 
                                                 
15  The  same  idea  is  also  provided  in  "II.  Price  Developments  and  their  Outlook,"  Section  II  in 
Hiroshi  Nakaso,  "Japan's  Economy  and  Monetary  Policy:  Speech  at  a  Meeting  with  Business 
Leaders in Hiroshima," Bank of Japan, July 2017. 
 19 
 unemployment  rate  has  to  remain  at  its  May  2018  level  of  2.2  percent.  While  I  am  not 
saying  that  I  believe  that  these  estimates  are  fully  accurate,  I  do  think  that  the  current 
unemployment  rate  needs  to  fall  further  in  order  to  achieve  the  price  stability  target  of  2 
percent. 
 Just  to  be  sure,  I  would  like  to  add  that  I  am  not  saying  that  monetary  easing  should 
continue until the unemployment rate has fallen to 2 percent. In conducting monetary policy, 
the Bank should pay close attention to price developments, and past observations on the link 
between  prices  and  the  unemployment  rate  should  be  regarded  merely  as  supplementary 
information to help with making appropriate monetary policy decisions. 
 Since there is room for further increases in employment and production, the Bank needs to 
continue  with  the  current  monetary  policy  measures  in  order  to  achieve  the  price  stability 
target  of  2  percent.  Needless  to  say,  it  is  essential  that  the  Bank  continues  to  constantly 
monitor for signs of financial imbalances, but for now, the likelihood of such imbalances is 
small. 
 Now,  I  would  like  to  briefly  talk  about  the  deletion  of  the  description  regarding  when  2 
percent  inflation  would  be  achieved  in  the  Bank's  April  2018  Outlook  for  Economic 
Developments and Prices (Outlook Report), since the deletion became the subject of debate 
among  market  participants.  Specifically,  the  deleted  description  was  that  the  timing  "will 
likely  be  around  fiscal  2019."  However,  the  timing  mentioned  in  the  Outlook  Report  was 
merely a projection, and any changes in the projected timing were not automatically linked 
to any changes in policy, nor was its deletion. In my view, prices are influenced by a variety 
of  factors;  what  is  important  is  that  the  mechanism  through  which  prices  rise  works  well, 
and policy decisions should be made in line with developments in this mechanism. In other 
words,  additional  monetary  easing  might  be  necessary  if  inflation  loses  momentum,  but 
otherwise the current policy should be maintained. 
 Cognitive Dissonance with Respect to QQE 
I sometimes feel that the attitude of those who are opposed to QQE shows signs of what can 
be  called  "cognitive  dissonance."  Cognitive  dissonance  is,  of  course,  a  term  from 
 20 
 psychology that is also used in marketing and refers to the mental discomfort experienced 
by  a  person  when  new  information  contradicts  their  personal  beliefs.  In  that  case,  many 
people attempt to reduce the discomfort by denying the new information. 
 When  confronted  with  information  that  the  economy  is  actually  improving  despite  their 
strong belief that QQE will not help the economy grow, these critics will try to reduce such 
dissonance  by  denying  this  information  or  by  arguing  that  even  though  economic 
developments are favorable at the moment, they will definitely deteriorate in the future. For 
example, the argument that any future exit from monetary easing will cause major problems 
also  tries  to  reduce  discomfort  by  referring  to  future  possibilities.  Since  such  arguments 
focus  not  on  the  present  but  on  the  future,  they  allow  these  opponents  of  QQE  to  avoid 
facing such dissonance for the time being. 
 Another confused psychological mindset is to cast doubt on the monetary easing measures 
themselves. In this mindset, bold monetary easing is risky, and such measures should not be 
taken.  However,  it  seems  to  me  that  human  beings  may  have  had  this  kind  of  risk-averse 
mindset  since  ancient  times.  Mythological  stories  around  the  world,  from  every  culture, 
describe the tragedy that befalls anyone who has the hubris to challenge the gods. You see 
this for example in the stories of the Tower of Babel, of Daedalus and Icarus, and of golems. 
Perhaps those critics who are most vocal in their critical opinions on QQE are afraid that the 
economic gods will vent their anger over QQE. 
 And  if  it  is  not  against  the  laws  of  the  gods,  perhaps  opponents  of  QQE  believe  it  is 
somehow going against the laws of nature. This reminds me of a famous play in  kabuki -- 
traditional Japanese theatre  -- called Narukami Fudō Kitayama Zakura. One of the themes 
of this story is that the laws of nature should not be broken. In order to  prevent evil Prince 
Hayakumo from succeeding to the throne,  the Imperial Court in ancient Japan  asked Saint 
Narukami  to  perform  an  occult  rite  so  that  the  girl  that  the  empress  was  pregnant  with 
would be born as a boy.  In exchange for his services,  the court initially  promised to build 
Narukami a temple, but the promise was suddenly withdrawn because of his violation of the 
laws of nature. However, is QQE a policy that violates the laws of nature? 
  21 
 Perhaps the unshakeable critics of QQE believe that monetary policy does not belong within 
the human realm, but under the purview of a single omnipotent force.  Asked whether it is 
right to pay the imperial tax to Caesar, Jesus once asked for confirmation that the coin used 
for  paying  the  tax  bore  the  image  of  Caesar  and  said:  "So  give  back  to  Caesar  what  is 
Caesar's, and to God what is God's." Monetary policy without doubt falls within the human 
realm.  And  if  it  falls  within  the  realm  of  humans,  it  should  be  discussed  based  on  theory, 
facts, and evidence. 
 Concluding Remarks 
As  stated  so  far,  the  Bank's  bold  monetary  easing  measures  have  been  producing  their 
intended  effects,  leading  to  an  improvement  in  production,  employment,  productivity,  the 
unemployment  rate,  investment,  exports,  and  fiscal  conditions.  Further  indicators  are 
perceptions  that  the  economy  is  recovering,  improvements  in  income  distribution,  and 
women's entry into the labor market. 
 Although some people are critical of the Bank's monetary easing measures, their arguments 
are not supported by empirical evidence. If the Bank were to conduct monetary policy in the 
way  they  say  it  should,  economic  activity  would  deteriorate  and  markets  would  fall  into 
turmoil. In its assessment of recent economic developments and monetary policy, the Bank 
concluded that it should continue with the current monetary easing with a view to achieving 
the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent,  given  that,  for  now,  there  is  still  room  for  an 
expansion in employment and that there are few signs of financial imbalances. 
 Thank you for your attention. 
 22 
