Muhammad  bin  Ibrahim:  The  resurgence  of  payments  in  a  digital
world
Keynote address by Mr Muhammad bin Ibrahim, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia (Bank
Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  Malaysian  E-Payments  Excellence  Awards  (MEEA)  2018  "The
resurgence of payments in a digital world", Kuala Lumpur, 11 April 2018.
 Thank you for inviting me to speak today. Ten years ago, the word “payments” was only heard in
small and exclusive circles. Those in banking understand the importance and criticality of the
payment  system.  Huge  resources  are  devoted  to  this  function.  Understandably  so.  Payment
services are the bread and butter of banking and the lubricant for the economy. It is at the heart
of  all  economic  activities.  Its  services  are  indispensable.  Yet,  only  a  few  took  an  interest  in
payments, except maybe those in the financial services community.
Today,  this  situation  has  reversed.  Payments  is  now  at  the  top  of  everyone’s  minds.
Globalisation  of  the  financial  markets  and  the  consequent  flows  of  funds  across  borders
necessitates  modernisation  and  strengthening  of  the  financial  system.  Huge  investments  are
being put in place. Technological advancements accelerate this process.
Out  of  the  $27.4  billion  raised  globally  for  fintech  funding  in  2017,  30%  of  the  funds  went  to
payment companies. In the third and fourth quarter of last year, 4 out of the top 10 global fintech
deals were for payment services.
A  few  factors  have  driven  changes  in  the  payments  sphere;  digitisation,  competition  and
innovation. In Malaysia, the payment system has significantly transformed over the last 25 years. 
The journey started many years ago in 1997, major changes to the payment landscape occurred
with  the  consolidation  of  the  three  ATM  networks  in  the  country  into  MEPS.  This  initiative
removed duplication and enhanced the network multiplier effects. In fact, Malaysia was among
the first in the world to complete the migration to the more secure chip-based payment cards in
2005. To provide a roadmap for the development, in 2011, Bank Negara Malaysia developed a
10-year Financial Sector Blueprint which amongst others, outlined the initiative to displace paper-
based payment instruments, namely cheques and cash, in favour of the more convenient and
cost effective e-payment methods.
We now have PayNet, the domestic shared infrastructure at the heart of the country’s payment
systems. We envision PayNet to be a catalyst, one that challenges the status quo to drive its
diverse  members  to  foster  competition  and  innovation,  develop  cost  effective  solutions  and
advance financial inclusion through digital payments. We should expect PayNet to ensure that
the payment infrastructure of this country will always be at the cutting edge of technology. This
will enable the economy to innovate, be competitive and productive.
The  results  speak  for  themselves;  we  have  made  great  strides.  Payment  card  spending  has
increased by more than threefold since 2006 to RM176.9 billion in 2017. From 2011 to 2017, e-
payments per capita have more than doubled to 111 transactions. In the same period, we have
reduced cheque usage by more than 40% to 119 million cheques. We have almost doubled the
number of point-of-sale (POS) terminals to over 407,000 units. Debit card transactions have also
increased by more than six times to 162 million transactions in 2017. All these are achievements
that we should be proud of as a collective industry.
The progress that we have achieved so far is only possible with the collective contribution of all in
the  industry.  This  annual  award  ceremony  recognises  the  achievements  of  those  who  have
contributed to the progress, modernisation and enhancement of our payment systems.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
While  we  celebrate  our  achievements,  we  need  to  forge  ahead  with  greater  vigour  and
perseverance, especially to displace cash. Cash remains prevalent in most retail transactions in
Malaysia. Managing cash is expensive. This is most evident among lower tier merchants, who
continue to prefer transacting in cash. It is more costly to use cash, as you know, and much
cheaper,  efficient  and  secure  to  adopt  e-payments.  It  is  a  cost  effective  solution  that  makes
business  sense.  Based  on  a  study  by  the  Royal  Bank  of  Scotland  and  Natwest  in  2014,  a
customer who uses mobile and online banking instead of going to a physical bank branch stands
to enjoy about 24 hours of time saved and about 10 kilometers of travelling distance saved per
year.  Most  likely,  if  a  similar  study  is  conducted  in  Malaysia,  the  results  would  show  bigger
savings here, given the greater digital connectivity we have today.
Our efforts over the years have shown some encouraging developments. The aggregate data
points that we are on the right track. The growth rate of cash in circulation (or better known as
CIC) in Malaysia has been slowing down for three years in a row since 2015. Measured against
GDP, CIC decreased albeit marginally for the first time last year since 2014.
With high penetration of debit cards and mobile devices, Malaysia is well-positioned to transition
into  a  cashless  society  in  the  medium  term.  To  continue  our  collective  effort  to  ensure
widespread  adoption  of  e-payments  becomes  a  reality,  my  remarks  today  will  touch  on  the
following  perspectives;  future  proofing  the  Malaysian  payment  infrastructure,  embracing  digital
disruption that will redefine the payment mechanism as we know it, and some thoughts on public
engagement and consumer protection.
Future-proofing Malaysia’s payments infrastructure
The use of big data will provide a competitive edge among payment service providers. Payment
flows used to be an operational matter, but now have immense strategic value. It has to do with
the enormous amount of data and information that the system collects on the payment habits of
the public.
With data analytics, these data can provide deep insights on consumer and merchant behaviour,
and  even  the  economy  at  large.  With  this  information  in  hand,  there  is  also  the  enormous
responsibility to ensure that it is not being abused and mishandled. The issue of data security,
integrity  and  privacy  relates  to  the  issue  of  trust,  which  is  crucial  for  the  functioning  of  any
financial  system.  Data  security  and  confidentiality  should  be  a  priority  for  financial  institutions.
Continuous investments in people, system and process will assure customers that their financial
affairs are kept secure and private.
New payment providers are also emerging. In the age of mobile apps, platform-based companies
can overlay existing commercial networks with payment services. In China for instance, this has
fuelled the meteoric rise of mobile payments.
Customer  expectations  are  also  changing.  Whether  hailing  a  taxi  or  having  lunch,  today’s
consumers  want  things  almost  instantaneously.    They  want  it  now  and  the  same  is  being
expected from the payment system.
The  payments  infrastructure  must  therefore  keep  pace  with  these  developments  and
expectations. It needs to meet the customer’s expectations and offer value-added services that
enhances the customer’s experience. In this regard, the merger between MyClear and MEPS to
form PayNet last year is an important milestone. By realising the natural synergies and aligning
industry resources, PayNet is well-positioned to drive the Malaysia’s payment infrastructure to be
future-proof.
We should be most excited about the upcoming Real-time Retail Payments Platform or RPP.
The RPP will be a game-changer for the Malaysian payment landscape. It will allow Malaysians
to  make  and  receive  payments  conveniently  using  their  IC,  mobile  and  business  registration
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
numbers or by scanning a common Quick Response (or better known as QR) code. We do not
need  to  suffer  the  agony  of  remembering  our  account  numbers  ever  again.  The  RPP  will  be
facilitated  by  a  National Addressing  Database  (NAD)  and  an  interoperable  QR  code  payment
scheme. Seamless and secure payments between bank and non-bank e-money accounts will
also become a reality.
Given  the  overwhelming  benefits  from  this  initiative,  it  is  incumbent  on  all  of  us  to  drive  the
promotion of RPP, such as in facilitating user registration with the NAD and merchant adoption of
the common QR code. Let us make the RPP services a household service and transform all
mobile  phones  into  mobile  wallets.  The  RPP  should  not  be  merely  a  banking  service,  but  a
lifestyle solution.
The  industry  ought  to  build  upon  the  RPP  and  enhance  its  research  and  development
capabilities.  One  such  area  is  through  the  publication  of  Open  Application  Programming
Interfaces (or better known as Open APIs). Based on our interaction with the banking community,
there is interest for this among our banks. The Bank’s survey last year indicated that more than
50% of banks in Malaysia view Open API as a high priority. Thus, the industry should leverage on
Open API to facilitate collaboration with fintech firms to introduce innovations and facilitate new
use cases to enhance the RPP’s value proposition to businesses and consumers.
Notably, the RPP can offer a treasure trove of data. This can be mined to develop more tailored
payment  solutions,  fraud  detection  capabilities,  and  to  support  potential  strategic  partnerships
with  financial  or  non-financial  players.  But  as  I  mentioned  earlier,  confidentiality  and  privacy
should not be compromised.
Part  of  future-proofing  our  payment  systems  is  to  enhance  the  efficiency  of  cross-border
payment  services.  In  this  globalised  world,  there  is  a  growing  demand  for  faster,  reasonably
priced and more transparent cross-border payments. This will become even more important as
international trade and investment linkages deepen, such as through the growth of e-commerce.
Yet, cross-border payment services still pale in comparison to domestic payments, which are
increasingly real time and zero cost. PayNet and the payment system operators in Indonesia,
Singapore, Thailand and Vietnam have entered into a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) to
link their respective real-time payment systems. This will give rise to great opportunities for the
region to forge closer economic and financial integration.
The  industry  should  capitalise  on  such  developments  to  enhance  their  cross-border  payment
offerings to better serve their customers, reduce costs and enhance safety. Harnessing greater
efficiencies of cross-border payments can be a lucrative area and those who can innovate will
certainly benefit most.
Embracing digital disruption that redefine payments
This brings me to my second point. Technology, as you know, is fundamentally changing the way
we live. Many industries have redefined themselves and embraced digital disruption to remain
relevant.  Unlike previous disruptions that came from within the industry, we now see enormous
interest in mobile payments and the proliferation of non-bank payment providers. Data collected
showed an increase in the number of non-bank e-money issuers from 26 in 2016 to 41 as at the
end of last month.
The Bank more than welcomes a more competitive payment landscape. We desire new entrees.
We  are  not  in  the  business  of  protecting  the  incumbents.  We  also  do  not  pick  winners  and
losers. The market will decide those who will prosper. Existing players were given this notice
long time ago. Banks especially, will have to reinvent themselves or risk being disrupted. What
matters most, from the public policy perspective, is that Malaysian businesses and consumers
will  benefit  from  a  more  vibrant,  competitive  and  efficient  ecosystem.  We  should  expect
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
enhanced competition to spur innovation in the products and services that are being offered.
Globally, we have seen collaborative strategies emerging as a response to the changing market
dynamics. From Scandinavia to Asia, banks in some countries are increasingly competing on a
united front. This includes industry partnerships with the payment system operator and fintech
firms. In these markets, collaboration on common mobile applications seeks to enable banks to
develop more innovative use cases by leveraging on pooled R&D resources, and facilitate mass
adoption through common awareness and promotion campaigns.
Collaborative  efforts  enable  greater  economies  of  scale  through  the  pooling  of  resources.
Establishing a common platform among banks defrays the cost of testing out new technologies
and  new  ways  of  doing  business.  This  can  go  a  long  way  in  fostering  a  culture  of
experimentation.
Collaborative  strategies  will  enhance  the  probability  of  success.    This  is  the  essence  of  the
merger between MEPS and MyClear.  Maintaining the status quo is simply not an option.
To set things in motion, we introduced the Interoperable Credit Transfer Framework (ICTF) last
month. Along  with  the  RPP,  the  ICTF  is  also  expected  to  be  a  game  changer  for  Malaysia’s
payment landscape, particularly for mobile payments. For the first time in Malaysia and likely in
the region, banks and non-banks will be connected on a single payment network.
This  is  a  good  example  of  a  strategy  of  collaborative  competition,  or  ‘co-opetition.  Payment
providers  collaborate  at  the  infrastructure  level  via  the  shared  payment  infrastructure  and
compete on the service level. This expands network reach, lowers costs and avoids duplication
of resources by the industry.
It also focuses competition at the product level. Looking ahead, we envisage industry players to
develop more innovative value-added features to provide better service levels to consumers and
merchants.
Another important area where innovation plays a prominent role, is to advance financial inclusion
through digitalisation. Out of the Malaysian adult population of 24 million, we estimate that about
10 million do not use online banking, while 2 million remain unbanked.
We look to the industry, both banks and non-banks, to come up with new and imaginative ways
to accelerate the onboarding of these underbanked and unbanked segments of our society. In
supporting this, the transaction fee for instant transfer transactions up to RM5,000 will be waived
effective 1 July 2018 for individuals and SMEs. Strategies beyond monetary incentives also need
to be employed.  For example, mobile payment applications should be convenient, fast, secure,
simple and intuitive. With so many things competing for our attention these days, the design of
customer experience is critical. Delivering a superior customer experience is a major source of
competitive advantage.
Intensifying public engagement and consumer protection
Our migration to e-payments would not be successful without intense public engagement and
consumer protection efforts. Firstly, much more needs to be done to promote debit card usage.
The  Bank  has  taken  the  lead  by  lowering  the  costs  of  debit  card  acceptance  through  the
Payment  Card  Reform  Framework  (PCRF)  in  2015.  Consequently,  Malaysia’s  debit  card
interchange fee rates are now among the lowest. They are up to 10 times lower than the rates in
other regional economies.
The industry should take advantage of this. We need to educate merchants on the availability of a
lower  cost  debit  card  network.  To  move  this  forward,  PayNet  will  drive  an  industry  wide
awareness campaign. Merchants who cannot afford the cost of accepting the more expensive
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
credit card should opt to accept only debit cards. This would lessen the incentives for merchants
to  impose  surcharges  to  recover  their  payment  card  acceptance  cost  which  would  ultimately
benefit the consumer.
Secondly,  good  customer  engagement  through  effective  disclosures  can  be  a  source  of
competitive  advantage.  Payment  providers  should  consider  differentiating  themselves  by
disclosing key security features and safeguards against fraud and malware threats. This would
demonstrate  how  the  customer’s  hard  earned  money  and  sensitive  personal  data  are  being
protected.
Our  regulatory  focus  going  forward  will  take  into  account  the  potential  for  greater  market
transparency and competition. Market discipline will be strengthened. The regulatory framework
will be improved to ensure that e-payment services remain secure and reliable. Regulators will
not be the cause for bankers’ inertia.
In the coming months, the Bank will introduce minimum standards for the nascent but growing
area  of  mobile  payments.    Mobile  payment  providers  will  be  required  to  disclose  key  security
features  of  their  services,  such  as  in-app  safeguards  against  malware  and  protection  against
unauthorised transactions. This will make it easier for consumers to compare between different
providers,  thereby  promoting  greater  consumer  empowerment  to  make  better  informed
decisions.
Thirdly,  enhancing  customer  awareness  of  basic  safety  tips  is  paramount  as  a  first  line  of
defence against payment fraud. This is particularly relevant for the emerging modus operandi of
social engineering, where fraud victims are duped into disclosing confidential information that are
used to commit fraud.
In  this  regard,  the  industry  can  do  much  more  to  educate  consumers.  Consumer  education
initiatives  have  to  be  more  targeted.  They  should  be  designed  to  address  specific  modus
operandi  that  are  known  to  be  prevalent  or  emerging.  The  messages  should  be  simple  and
tailored  to  the  diverse  profile  of  payment  users.  This  should  also  account  for  demographic,
behavioural and psychological factors that may be at play.
Financial  institutions  must  also  regularly  review  and  measure  the  effectiveness  of  consumer
education initiatives. If the results are not satisfactory, then the strategy must be changed. 
The  Bank  will  continue  to  collaborate  with  the  industry  in  the  area  of  public  education  and
awareness. The Bank will be working with both bank and non-bank players to develop common
promotional  messages  that  provide  “do’s  and  don’ts”  for  e-payment  transactions.  This  will
ensure a more cohesive communication strategy to amplify the impact on the public at large.
Concluding remarks
When I started, I highlighted the lack of public awareness on the payment system despite its
importance as one of the key pillars of the financial services industry.
Times  have  changed.  Widespread  digitisation,  disruptive 
competition have reshaped and magnified the potential of payment services.
technologies  and  heightened
We should be bold in taking advantage of this great potential to deliver e-payments for all and
realise the aspiration of making Malaysia a cashless society.
Before  I  close,  I  would  like  to  congratulate  the  winners  of  today’s  ceremony.  May  our
achievements today inspire even greater ones tomorrow.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
