    Speech at the presentation of  
the Annual Financial Stability Report for 2017    
 Dr Jorgovanka Tabaković, Governor 
 Belgrade, 30 July 2018 
 Ladies and gentlemen, members of the press and dear colleagues,  
Welcome to the presentation of the Annual Financial Stability Report for 2017. Today we have the 
pleasure to present a report about a year marked by exceptionally positive developments, in Serbia 
and the international environment alike, as well as by the results we have achieved. Owing to this, 
financial stability has not only been maintained, but also reinforced, which is reflected in a financial 
system that is to a large degree resilient to any potential future shocks.  
Global economic growth stepped up in 2017, which reflected positively on the growth prospects of 
Central, Eastern and South-Eastern European countries and pushed their risk premiums down. On the 
other  hand,  risks  in  the  international  commodity  and  financial  markets  persisted,  primarily  those 
associated with volatile movements in global oil prices and divergent monetary policies of the ECB 
and Fed.   
Thanks  to  improved  structural  characteristics  and  favourable  growth  prospects,  coupled  with  the 
enactment of well-timed measures and regulations and full coordination between monetary and fiscal 
policies,  Serbia  is  now  more  resilient  to  potentially  adverse  effects  from  the  international 
environment.    This  was  confirmed  in  2017  by  credit  rating  upgrades  by  all  three  rating  agencies, 
successful completion of the three-year stand-by arrangement with the International Monetary Fund 
and a decline in the country risk premium to its historic low.  
The  National  Bank  of  Serbia  remained  cautious  in  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  in  2017  due  to 
uncertainties  in  the  international  financial  and  commodity  markets.  As  inflationary  pressures  were 
running low, the key policy rate was cut by 0.25 pp on two occasions, feeding through into lower cost 
of borrowing for the government, corporate and household sectors. Favourable interest rates are one 
of the key drivers of credit growth, which means that by easing its monetary policy the National Bank 
of Serbia encouraged the increase in investment and private consumption and supported sustainable 
economic growth.  
In 2017 the National Bank of Serbia achieved its key objectives – it ensured monetary and financial 
stability. Throughout the year inflation was low and stable, moving within the new target band, which 
was lowered from 4%±1.5 pp to 3%±1.5 pp as of early 2017. The fact that inflation stood at the 3.0% 
target in December only confirms that the decision to lower the inflation target was correct. At the 
same time, inflation expectations of the financial and corporate sectors have been anchored within the 
target  band  for  quite  some  time  already,  indicating  confidence  in  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia’s 
monetary policy.  
Owing    to  better  export  performance,  high  FDI  inflows  and  greater  interest  of  foreign  investors  in 
long-term  government  securities,  the  dinar  strengthened  vis-à-vis  the  euro  by  4.2%  in  2017.  The 
central  bank’s  interventions  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  aimed  at  preventing  excessive 
appreciation  of  the  dinar  provided  an  additional  boost  to  the  country’s  foreign  exchange  reserves, 
whose level, judging by all relevant indicators, is more than adequate.  
Last year was also very successful in terms of fiscal policy results. For the first time since 2005 a 
fiscal surplus was recorded (around 1.2% of GDP), while the share of public debt in GDP was slashed 
by more than 10 pp in 2017 alone. NBS’s monetary policy easing, better positioning of the country in 
the international financial market, stronger investor confidence, credit rating upgrades and a sharp fall 
in the country risk premium ensure cheaper sources of funding and reinforce Serbia’s fiscal position.   
Against the backdrop of GDP recovery, low and stable inflation, a relatively stable exchange rate and 
vigorous fiscal consolidation, positive tendencies were recorded both in the corporate and household 
sectors.  A  fall  in  the  unemployment  rate  and  rising  wages  were  accompanied  with  growth  in 
household  loans  and  rising  savings.  The  volume  of  new  household  loans  increased  by  21.7% 
compared to 2016, with almost 71% concerning dinar loans, which reflects households’ confidence in 
the  domestic  currency.    Households  were  also  offered  a  new  form  of  safe  investment  after  the 
Republic of Serbia issued a new financial instrument – savings bonds. The issuance of savings bonds 
enables citizens to invest in the safest financing instruments and encourages further development of 
the government securities market. 
The financial position of corporates improved, as reflected in their almost two and a half times higher 
positive  net  financial  result  compared  to  2016.  In  addition,  the  lowering  of  interest  rates  led  to 
acceleration  of  credit  activity  in  the  corporate  sector.  Excluding  the  exchange  rate  effect,  total 
corporate  loans  (domestic  and  foreign)  went  up  by  5.7%,  despite  considerable  clean-ups  of  bank 
balance sheets owing to NPL write-offs, assignment and restructuring.  
The Serbian financial sector remained stable in 2017 as well, as signalled by all key indicators. Given 
the bank-centric nature of the financial sector, banks’ financial soundness and ability to perform their 
main, financial intermediation function is key to maintaining financial stability. Banks operating in 
Serbia  rely  predominantly  on  domestic,  stable  sources  of  funding,  which  reduces  their  exposure  to 
risks from the international environment. The banking sector remained adequately capitalised, highly 
liquid  and  profitable  in  2017.  Our  quarterly  macroprudential  stress  tests  show  that  the  domestic 
banking  sector,  as  a  whole,  would  remain  resilient  to  shocks  even  if  the  worst-case  scenario 
materialised.   
I wish to particularly highlight the exceptional results achieved in reducing NPLs owing to measures 
undertaken  in  the  context  of  the  NPL  Resolution  Strategy  and  other  regulatory  measures  of  the 
National Bank of Serbia. After the National Bank of Serbia passed the Decision on the Accounting 
Write-off of Bank Balance Sheet Assets in August 2017, gross NPLs worth RSD 100 bn were written 
off in 2017, much more than in the earlier years, while RSD 24.5 bn was assigned to non-banking 
sector  entities.  The  NPL  share  in  total  loans  declined  sharply,  by  almost  14  pp  from  the  start  of 
implementation of the Strategy. In May 2018, this share stood at 8.6%, meaning that NPLs fell below 
their  pre-crisis  level.  Such  a  significant  reduction  in  NPLs  is  indicative  of  considerable  efforts 
invested  in  their  resolution  and  the  success  achieved.  It  also  reflects  the  great  commitment  of  the 
National  Bank  of  Serbia,  Government  and  market  participants.  At  the  same  time,  this  will  further 
support future credit and economic activity. 
In 2017, the National Bank of Serbia also adopted a set of regulations transposing the International 
Financial Reporting Standard 9. These regulations reflect the National Bank of Serbia’s commitment 
to  encouraging  adequate  implementation  of  international  standards,  increasing  the  transparency  of 
financial  reports  in  terms  of  the  manner  of  valuation  of  balance  sheet  items,  and  strengthening 
confidence in the banks’ financial position. 
By  regulating  the  banking  area  in  the  way  it  is  done  in  the  European  Union  and  upgrading  the 
regulatory framework, the National Bank of Serbia strengthened further the already high resilience of 
the banking sector. In accordance with the Strategy for Implementation of Basel III Standards in the 
Republic of Serbia, in December 2016 a set of regulations were adopted, in effect as of 30 June 2017. 
Among other things, Basel III standards introduce new capital buffers, which are some of the most 
important  macroprudential  policy  tools.  This  helps  increase  the  quality  of  capital  and  improve  the 
resilience  of  the  domestic  banking  sector  to  systemic  risks,  contributing  to  the  preservation  and 
strengthening of financial stability in the Republic of Serbia. 
Ladies and gentlemen, members of the press and dear colleagues, 
Behind us is a very successful year, as we can see in the results achieved, as well as in attained and 
improved macroeconomic stability. As so far, the National Bank of Serbia will remain committed to 
achieving its objectives, contributing to the resilience and stability of the domestic financial system. 
Thank you for your attention. I now pass the floor to Vice Governor Diana Dragutinović. 
 