Benoît Cœuré: Interview with Bloomberg TV
Interview with Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank,
and Bloomberg TV, conducted by Ms Caroline Connan and broadcast on 9 July 2018.
 Donald Trump has pulled the trigger on tariffs on China; China is retaliating. Could that
complicate the ECB’s task going forward?
What’s really important for us to gauge is the impact on business confidence, which so far has
been limited. We see this escalation process: we start with skirmishes and then skirmishes may
turn into clashes and then, at some point, clashes may turn into a fully-fledged war. That would
be very bad for business confidence. So far, the backdrop is very strong growth in the Eurozone,
resilient growth in the Eurozone, meaning that what we’ve seen so far doesn’t have the potential
to derail the recovery.
Can the ECB just sit back and watch this trade war happening?
We  are  never  sitting  back  and  watching;  we  have  to  understand  what’s  going  on.  So  far  we
believe that growth is strong enough to withstand the shock.
Have  you  already  seen  some  companies  holding  back  investments  because  of  these
protectionist policies risks?
Yes, that may happen. We are not complacent on the possible risks. A fully-fledged trade war
would be extremely bad for the world economy – starting with the United States, by the way. The
first victim would be American jobs, American workers. We very much hope that this doesn’t
happen.
What could be the long-term impact?
The  long-term  impact  is  about  how  the  world  is  run.  It’s  about  having  an  open,  free  market
economy globally, with the rule of law and with instruments for nations to talk together. That’s
how we’ve worked since World War II and we’ve been very well served by the system. We want
it to continue. It has to be improved; it has to become fairer, it has to deliver fairer outcomes for
workers and for households, but it has to remain open. It has to remain built on trust between
nations.
We’ve  got  this  trade  war  going.  We’ve  got  uncertainties  around  Brexit.  We’ve  got
geopolitical  risks,  with  new  sanctions  on  Iran.  What  is  the  biggest  risk  you  see
throughout this summer?
To start with, we see risk as coming mainly from outside the Eurozone. Primarily that’s about
trade  tensions,  as  we’ve  just  discussed.  That’s  about  escalation  of  trade  tensions  denting
business confidence globally, and that’s the main risk.
Could the ECB have to rethink its path between supporting growth and fighting inflation
because of these risks?
These risks were discussed when the Governing Council met in Riga last month. We discussed
risks thoroughly and we designed a path of sustained monetary accommodation, anticipating that
net  asset  purchases  end  in  December  2018,  but  with  a  continued  degree  of  monetary
accommodation  being  delivered  by  rate  guidance  –  enhanced  guidance  on  rates  –  and  by
reinvestment  policy.  That  is  the  balance  we  struck  in  Riga  and  it  already  took  account  of  the
risks.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Despite all these headwinds we’ve been discussing, the ECB still plans to exit QE by the
end of this year. What could derail these plans?
That’s clearly what we anticipate. Now, that said, it will be data dependent – as with everything
we do. But as we speak, in mid-July, I see no reason to change our expectations.
There has been some confusion among investors about the ECB keeping rates on hold
until  “at  least  through  the  summer  of  2019”;  can  you  explain  to  us  again  what  this
means?
“At least through the summer” means “at least through the summer”. It is date-based guidance,
which so far we haven’t done, so it’s a step forward in enhancing our forward guidance. At the
same time, it gives us enough flexibility to adjust depending on the data flow.
Does that mean we could see a decision on rates as soon as September 2019?
That’s not something I can comment on today, by definition; we did not discuss it in Riga.
Could  this  actually  come  before  the  summer  of  2019?  Could  we  see  any  change  of
policies before then, depending on the risk we are currently seeing?
The expectation is that rates will remain low, at the current level, at least through the summer of
2019.
The ECB wants to keep this guidance quite vague at the moment?
It’s not vague; it’s precise enough to anchor, to pin down money market rates. It has been, by the
way, very effective. It has been well understood by the market, so I see no reason to change it
while it works.
Mario Draghi, the ECB President, has flagged that the reinvestment of maturing bonds
could be the next important policy step for the ECB. Will this become a way for the ECB
to provide a little easing?
It  is  an  important  part  of  a  package  of  measures  that  delivers  monetary  accommodation,
sustained  monetary  accommodation  beyond  the  end  of  net  asset  purchases,  that  is,  after
December 2018. There are two aspects: we have the enhanced rate guidance and we have the
reinvestment policy. So it is clearly part of the package. It will ensure that the ECB keeps a very
significant  market  presence  beyond  the  end  of  the  net  asset  purchases  and  for  an  extended
period of time after the end of the asset purchases. That said, we haven’t discussed any details,
so any details related to the maturity of our reinvestment, that’s a technical discussion. That’s not
something the Governing Council or even our committees have discussed.
Is it going to be done before the end of this year?
We’ll  certainly  have  to  discuss  it.  I  see  it  as  a  technical  discussion;  I  don’t  see  it  as  a  major
aspect of our monetary policy when it comes to the maturities. But the commitment to reinvest is
important because it will ensure a continued market presence, which is important to maintain the
degree of monetary accommodation.
Could these reinvestments exceed €160 billion next year, could they be closer to €200
billion, for example?
The reinvestments are quite mechanical. They derive from past investment policy. As you know,
we are committed to being very transparent. We are publishing the reinvestments 12 months in
advance so you will have the numbers when they come.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
There  is  some  flexibility  when  it  comes  to  reinvestments.  Can  the  ECB  and  some
national  central  banks  reinvest  a  government  bond  into  a  corporate  bond,  or  vice-
versa?
That is not something we’ve discussed. That will be a technical discussion. What I don’t expect
is any departure from the principle of capital key investment of government bonds, which has
been a key principle at the heart of our public sector purchase programme.
There are reports about some kind of “operation twist” from the ECB about buying long-
term bonds. Is this happening?
As I said, that’s not something we’ve discussed.
That’s something you’re planning to discuss? That’s something that’s on the table?
We will discuss the reinvestment policy; that will be a technical discussion. I don’t think it’s a
major aspect of our monetary policy.
With  Brexit  it  seems  like  we’ve  had  a  major  step;  on  Friday  night,  after  12  hours  of
discussions, Theresa May managed to get some kind of blueprint. Do you see this as
good news or bad news?
The  ECB  is  not  part  of  the  negotiations.  The  negotiations  between  the  United  Kingdom  and
Europe are led by Michel Barnier on the European side. So we certainly defer to Mr Barnier when
it  comes  to  the  political  direction  of  those  negotiations.  It  is  clearly  very  positive  that  the  UK
authorities are willing to engage in a constructive way, in a practical way, in a detailed way. It will
be for Michel Barnier to react to the paper. That said, and beyond the positive news in terms of
how the discussion is moving on, we also believe at the ECB that private players, industry, have
a responsibility to prepare for the worst outcome. So hope for the best, but prepare for the worst.
In fact it seems like we have an agreement to have similar regulation in the industrial
sector and the agricultural sector, but not the services sector. As we know, the financial
services sector is what worries investors the most. Is this the big concern here?
I will defer to Michel Barnier to pass judgement on that. What we certainly believe very strongly –
as  does  the  European  Commission  and  as  do  all  Member  States  –  is  that  the  key  principles
which uphold the Single Market should not be harmed. Certainly, a good solution should be found
with the United Kingdom, but that cannot be at the expense of the fundamental principles that
have upheld the functioning of the Single Market.
Should the EU actually extend the deadline beyond March 2019 – if that’s a possibility –
to have a better agreement?
That’s part of the political discussion; that’s not for us to decide.
Very finally, the Eurozone budget – which is an idea wanted by the French President,
Emmanuel Macron – seems to face a lot of opposition. Do you think it’s a good idea? Is it
necessary and what could overcome this opposition?
It is not an easy discussion. It’s a fundamentally political discussion that’s about sharing money,
that’s about sharing sovereignty. It’s good the discussion has started. It’s good that ministers and
leaders are discussing ways to make the Eurozone more resilient and to make the Eurozone
stronger. Given the amount of uncertainty that we see around us in the world, all of us in Europe,
in the Eurozone, have a duty to make our system stronger. It’s good that that the discussion has
started, finally.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Even  if  it’s  being  delayed,  even  if  it  might  not  happen  in  this  mandate  of  Emmanuel
Macron?
No one expects that discussion to be easy, so there is lower-hanging fruit such as completing
the banking union. We would certainly hope that the capital markets union would feature more
prominently on the agenda and also that the rules, the fiscal rules and the macroeconomic rules
we’ve been working with, can be improved, can be made more credible. Fiscal union is not low-
hanging fruit; it is difficult, it will take time, but it’s good that that discussion has started.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
