Philip Lowe: An eAUD?
Address by Mr Philip Lowe, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the 2017 Australian
Payment Summit, Sydney, 13 December 2017.
 I would like to thank David Emery, Tony Richards and other staff in the RBA's Payments Policy
Department for assistance in the preparation of these remarks.
Thank you for the invitation to speak at this important summit. It is an honour for me to be able to
join  you.  Over  recent  times,  the  payments  system  has  evolved  tremendously  and AusPayNet
has  been  at  the  centre  of  this  evolution.   In  particular,  it  has  played  an  important  role  in
coordinating  the  industry’s  response  to  the  Strategic  Review  of  Innovation  conducted  by  the
Payments  System  Board.  As  a  result  of  this  work,  same-day  settlement  for  direct  entry
transactions  was  introduced,  the  Australian  Payments  Council  was  formed  and,  most
importantly, the New Payments Platform (NPP) was developed. I would like to thank both past
and current members of the AusPayNet team for your contribution to this effort.
1
If we look back over a slightly longer period, a clear lesson from history is that as people’s needs
change and technology improves, so too does the form that money takes. Once upon a time,
people used clam shells and stones as money. And for a while, right here in the colony of New
South Wales, rum was notoriously used. For many hundreds of years, though, metal coins were
the main form of money. Then, as printing technology developed, paper banknotes became the
norm. The next advance in technology – developed right here in Australia – was the printing of
banknotes on polymer.
No  doubt,  this  evolution  will  continue.  Though  predicting  its  exact  nature  is  difficult.  But  as
Australia’s  central  bank,  the  RBA  has  been  giving  considerable  thought  as  to  what  the  future
might look like. We are the issuer of Australia’s banknotes, the provider of exchange settlement
accounts  for  the  financial  sector,  and  we  have  a  broad  responsibility  for  the  efficiency  of  the
payments system, so this is an important issue for us.
Today I want to share with you some of our thinking about this future and to address a question
that I am being asked increasingly frequently: does the RBA intend to issue a digital form of the
Australian dollar? Let’s call it an eAUD.
The short answer to this question is that we have no immediate plans to issue an electronic form
of Australian dollar banknotes, but we are continuing to look at the pros and cons. At the same
time, we are also looking at how settlement arrangements with central bank money might evolve
as new technologies emerge.
As we have worked through the issues, we have developed a series of working hypotheses. I
would like to use this opportunity to outline these hypotheses and then discuss each of them
briefly. As you will see, we have more confidence in some of these than others.
There will be a further significant shift to electronic payments, but there will still be a place for
banknotes, although they will be used less frequently.
It is likely that this shift to electronic payments will occur largely through products offered by
the banking system. This is not a given, though. It will require financial institutions to offer
customers low-cost solutions that meet their needs.
An electronic form of banknotes could coexist with the electronic payment systems operated
by  the  banks,  although  the  case  for  this  new  form  of  money  is  not  yet  established.  If  an
electronic form of Australian dollar banknotes was to become a commonly used payment
method, it would probably best be issued by the RBA and distributed by financial institutions,
 1 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
just as physical banknotes are today.
Another  possibility  that  is  sometimes  suggested  for  encouraging  the  shift  to  electronic
payments would be for the RBA to offer every Australian an exchange settlement account
with easy, low-cost payments functionality. To be clear, we see no case for doing this.
It is possible that the RBA might, in time, issue a new form of digital money – a variation on
exchange settlement accounts – perhaps using distributed ledger technology. This money
could then be used in specific settlement systems. The case for doing this has not yet been
established, but we are open to the idea.
So these are our five working hypotheses. I would now like to expand on each of these.
1. The shift to electronic payments
An appropriate starting point is to recognise that most money is already digital or electronic. Only
3½ per cent of what is known as ‘broad money’ in Australia is in the form of physical currency.
The rest is in the form of deposits, which, most of the time, can be accessed electronically. So
the vast majority of what we know today as money is a liability of the private sector, and not the
central bank, and is already electronic.
With most money available electronically, there has been a substantial shift to electronic forms of
payments as well. There are various ways of tracking this shift.
One  is  the  survey  of  consumers  that  the  RBA  conducts  every  three  years.  When  we  first
conducted  this  survey  in  2007,  we  estimated  that  cash  accounted  for  around  70  per  cent  of
transactions made by households. In the most recent survey, which was conducted last year,
this share had fallen to 37 per cent (Graph 1).
 2 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
A second way of tracking the change is the decline in cash withdrawals from ATMs. The number
of withdrawals peaked in 2008 and since then has fallen by around 25 per cent (Graph 2). This
trend is likely to continue.
 3 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
The third area where we can see this shift is the rapid growth in the number of debit and credit
card transactions and in transactions using the direct entry system. Since 2005, the number of
transactions using these systems has grown at an average annual rate of 10 per cent (Graph 3).
This stands in contrast to the decline in the use of cash and cheques.
 4 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  overall  picture  is  pretty  clear.  There  has  been  a  significant  shift  away  from  people  using
banknotes to making payments electronically. Most recently, Australia’s enthusiastic adoption of
‘tap-and-go’ payments has added impetus to this shift. In many ways, Australians are ahead of
others in the use of electronic payments, although we are not quite in the vanguard. It is also
worth pointing out, though, that despite this shift to electronic payments, the value of banknotes
on  issue  is  at  a  50-year  high  as  a  share  of  GDP  (Graph  4). Australians  are  clearly  holding
banknotes for purposes other than for making day-to-day payments.
 5 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
This shift towards electronic payments, and away from the use of banknotes for payments, will
surely continue. This will be driven partly by the increased use of mobile payment apps and other
innovations. At the same time, though, it is likely that banknotes will continue to play an important
role in the Australian payments landscape for many years to come. For many people, and for
2
some types of transactions, banknotes are likely to remain the payment instrument of choice.
2. Banks are likely to remain at the centre of the shift to electronic payments
In  Australia,  the  banking  system  has  provided  the  infrastructure  that  has  made  the  shift  to
electronic payments possible. In some other countries, the banking system has not done this.
For example, in China and Kenya non-bank entities have been at the forefront of recent strong
growth  in  electronic  payments. A  lesson  here  is  that  if  financial  institutions  do  not  respond  to
customers’ needs, others will.
At this stage, it seems likely that the banking system will continue to provide the infrastructure
that Australians use to make electronic payments. This is particularly so given the substantial
investment made by Australia’s financial institutions in the NPP. The new system was turned on
for ‘live proving’ in late November and the public launch is scheduled for February. It will allow
Australians to make payments easily on a 24/7 basis, with recipients having immediate access
to  their  money.  The  RBA  has  built  a  critical  part  of  this  infrastructure  to  ensure  interbank
settlement occurs in real time. Payments will be able to be made by just knowing somebody’s
email address or mobile phone number and plenty of information will be able to be sent with the
payment. This system has the potential to be transformational and will allow many transactions
that today are conducted with banknotes to be conducted electronically.
Importantly, the new system offers instant settlement and funds availability. It provides this, while
 6 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
at the same time allowing funds to be held in deposit accounts at financial institutions subject to
strong prudential regulation and that pay interest. This combination of attributes is not easy to
replicate, including by closed-loop systems outside the banking system.
However, the further shift to electronic payments through the banking system is not a given. It
requires  that  the  cost  to  consumers  and  businesses  of  using  the  NPP  is  low  and  that  the
functionality expands over time. If this does not happen, then the experience of other countries
suggests that alternative systems or technologies might emerge.
One  class  of  technology  that  has  emerged  that  can  be  used  for  payments  is  the  so-called
cryptocurrencies, the most prominent of which is Bitcoin. But in reality these currencies are not
being commonly used for everyday payments and, as things currently stand, it is hard to see that
changing.  The  value  of  Bitcoin  is  very  volatile,  the  number  of  payments  that  can  currently  be
handled is very low, there are governance problems, the transaction cost involved in making a
payment  with  Bitcoin  is  very  high  and  the  estimates  of  the  electricity  used  in  the  process  of
mining  the  coins  are  staggering.  When  thought  of  purely  as  a  payment  instrument,  it  seems
more  likely  to  be  attractive  to  those  who  want  to  make  transactions  in  the  black  or  illegal
economy,  rather  than  everyday  transactions.  So  the  current  fascination  with  these  currencies
feels more like a speculative mania than it has to do with their use as an efficient and convenient
3
form of electronic payment.
This is not to say that other efficient and low-cost electronic payments methods will not emerge.
But there is a certain attraction of being able to make payments from funds held in prudentially
regulated accounts that can earn interest.
3. Electronic banknotes could coexist with the electronic payment system operated by
the banks
In principle, a new form of electronic payment method that could emerge would be some form of
electronic banknotes, or electronic cash. The easiest case to think about is a form of electronic
Australian  dollar  banknotes.  Such  banknotes  could  coexist  with  the  electronic  account-to-
account-based payments system operated by the banks, just as polymer banknotes coexist with
4
the electronic systems today.
The technologies for doing this on an economy-wide scale are still developing. It is possible that it
could be achieved through a distributed ledger, although there are other possibilities as well. The
issuing authority could issue electronic currency in the form of files or ‘tokens’. These tokens
could be stored in digital wallets, provided by financial institutions and others. These tokens could
then be used for payments in a similar way that physical banknotes are used today.
In  thinking  about  this  possibility  there  are  a  couple  of  important  questions  that  I  would  like  to
highlight.
The first is that if such a system were to be technologically feasible, who would issue the tokens:
the RBA or somebody else?
The second is whether the RBA developing such a system would pass the public interest test.
In terms of the issuing authority, our working hypothesis is that this would best be done by the
central bank.
In principle, there is nothing preventing tokenised eAUDs being issued by the private sector. It is
conceivable,  for  example,  that  eAUD  tokens  could  be  issued  by  banks  or  even  by  large  non-
banks, although it is hard to see them being issued as cryptocurrency tokens under a bitcoin-
style  protocol,  with  no  central  entity  standing  behind  the  liability.  So,  while  a  privately  issued
eAUD  is  conceivable,  experience  cautions  that  there  are  significant  difficulties  and  dangers
 7 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
associated with privately issued fiat money.
The history of private issuance is one of periodic panic and instability. In times of uncertainty and
stress,  people  don’t  want  to  hold  privately  issued  fiat  money.  This  is  one  reason  why  today
physical banknotes are backed by central banks. It is possible that ways might be found to deal
with this financial stability issue – including full collateralisation – but these tend to be expensive.
This suggests that if there were to be an electronic form of banknotes that was widely used by
the community, it is probably better and more likely for it to be issued by the central bank.
If we were to head in this direction, there would be significant design issues to work through. The
tokens could be issued in a way that transactions could be made with complete anonymity, just
as  is  the  case  with  physical  banknotes. Alternatively,  they  might  be  issued  in  a  way  in  which
transactions were auditable and traceable by relevant authorities. We would also need to deal
with the issue of possible counterfeiting. Depending upon the design of any system, we might be
very  reliant  on  cryptography  and  would  need  to  be  confident  in  the  ability  to  resist  malicious
attacks.
This  brings  me  to  the  second  issue  here:  is  there  a  public  policy  case  for  moving  in  this
direction?
Such a case would need to be built on electronic banknotes offering something that account-to-
account transfers through the banking system do not. We would also need to be confident that
there were not material downsides from moving in this direction.
Our current working hypothesis is that with the NPP there is likely to be little additional benefit
from electronic banknotes. This, of course, presupposes that the NPP provides low-cost efficient
payments. One possible benefit of electronic banknotes for some people might be that they could
have  less  of  an  ‘electronic  fingerprint’  than  account-to-account  transfers,  although  this  would
depend upon how the system was designed. But having less of an electronic fingerprint hardly
seems the basis for building a public policy case to issue an electronic form of the currency. So
there would need to be more than this.
Among the potential downsides, the main one lies in the area of financial stability.
If we were to issue electronic banknotes, it is possible that in times of banking system stress,
people might seek to exchange their deposits in commercial banks for these banknotes, which
are a claim on the central bank. It is likely that the process of switching from commercial bank
deposits  to  digital  banknotes  would  be  easier  than  switching  to  physical  banknotes.  In  other
words, it might be easier to run on the banking system. This could have adverse implications for
financial stability.
Given these various considerations, we do not currently see a public policy case for moving in
this direction. We will, however, keep that judgement under review.
4. Exchange settlement accounts for all Australians?
Another  possible  change  that  some  have  suggested  would  encourage  the  shift  to  electronic
payments  would  be  for  the  central  bank  to  issue  every  person  a  bank  account  –  for  each
Australian to have their own exchange settlement account with the RBA. In addition to serving as
deposit accounts, these accounts could be used for low-cost electronic payments, in a similar
way that third-party payment  providers  currently  use  accounts  at  the  RBA  to  make  payments
between themselves. Some advocates of this model also suggest that the central bank could
5
pay interest on these accounts or even charge interest if the policy rate was negative.
On  this  issue,  we  have  reached  a  conclusion,  rather  than  just  develop  a  hypothesis.  The
conclusion is that we do not see it as in the public interest to go down this route.
 8 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
If  we  did  go  down  this  route,  the  RBA  would  find  itself  in  direct  competition  with  the  private
banking  sector,  both  in  terms  of  deposits  and  payment  services.  In  doing  so,  the  nature  of
commercial banking as we know it today would be reshaped. The RBA could find itself not just
as  the  nation’s  central  bank,  but  as  a  type  of  large  commercial  bank  as  well.  This  is  not  a
direction in which we want to head.
A related consideration is the same financial stability issue that I just spoke about in terms of
electronic banknotes. In times of stress, it is highly likely that people might want to run from what
funds they still hold in commercial bank accounts to their account at the RBA. This would make
the remaining private banking system prone to runs.
The point here is that exchange settlement accounts are for settlement of interbank obligations
between  institutions  that  operate  third-party  payment  businesses  to  address  systemic  risk  –
something that is central to our mandate. A decision to offer exchange settlement accounts for
day-to-day use would be a step into a completely different policy area.
5.  New  settlement  systems  based  on  distributed  ledger  technology  and  central  bank
money?
One final possibility is for the RBA to issue Australian dollars in the form of electronic files or
tokens that could be used within specialised payment and settlement systems. The tokens could
be exchanged among members of a private, permissioned distributed ledger, separate from the
RBA’s Real-time Gross Settlement (RTGS) system, but with mechanisms for the tokens to be
exchanged for central bank deposits when required. Such a system might allow the payment and
settlement  process  to  become  highly  integrated  with  other  business  processes,  generating
efficiencies and risk reductions for private business. As part of this, the tokens might also be able
to  be  programmed  and  sit  alongside  smart  contracts,  enabling  multi-stage  transactions  with
potentially complex dependencies to take place securely and automatically. This seems to be the
general  model  that  some  people  have  in  mind  when  they  talk  about  ‘putting  AUD  on  the
blockchain’, although other technologies might be able to achieve similar outcomes.
Whether  a  strong  case  for  the  development  of  these  types  of  systems  emerges  remains  an
open question. We need to better understand the potential efficiencies for private business and
why  it  would  be  preferable  for  such  a  settlement  system  to  be  provided  by  the  central  bank,
rather than the private sector; why privately issued tokens or files could not do the job. We would
also  need  to  understand  why  any  efficiency  improvement  could  not  be  obtained  by  using  the
existing Exchange Settlement Accounts and the NPP.
We would also need to understand whether and how risk in the financial system would change
as a result of such a system. It remains unclear which way this could go. On the one hand, these
types  of  processes  could  use  a  very  different  technology  from  the  current  system,  which  is
based  on  account-to-account  transfers,  so  they  could  add  to  the  resilience  of  the  overall
payments system. But there would be a whole host of new technology issues to manage as well.
To  help  understand  these  various  issues,  Reserve  Bank  staff  have  been  liaising  closely  with
fintechs and financial institutions. We also regularly talk with other central banks that have tested
distributed  ledger  technologies  in  some  related  contexts.  We  are  also  currently  working  with
some  external  entities  to  observe  or  participate  in  proof-of-concepts  similar  to  those  of  other
central banks. So this area remains a work in progress for us.
Conclusion
This brings me to the end of the elaboration of my set of five working hypotheses. I would like to
conclude by summarising.
There is a lot going on in the world of payments. Much of this is being driven by advances in
 9 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
technology. These advances are opening up possibilities that were difficult even to dream about
a little while ago.
These  changes  are  leading  to  much  greater  use  of  electronic  means  of  payment  and  the
development  of  new  electronic  payment  methods.  This  process  has  much  further  to  run,
although physical banknotes are likely to remain an important part of the payments landscape for
many years to come.
This shift to electronic payments is most likely to occur through products offered by the banking
system. The NPP is a very big step here. If it had not been developed it is likely that non-bank
solutions would have gained wide acceptance. This may still happen. But it seems plausible that
Australian households and businesses will continue to hold the bulk of their money in the form of
commercial bank deposits, which come with flexible, low-cost electronic payment options, earn
interest and are prudentially regulated. But this will require the banks to offer the services that
customers want at a reasonable price.
The  case  for  adding  an  electronic  form  of Australian  banknotes  to  the  payments  mix  has  not
been established, even if it were technologically feasible. My working hypothesis here is that the
NPP will serve this purpose. The RBA is in close contact with our peers in other countries on this
issue and few see electronic banknotes on the horizon.
We do not see a case for the RBA offering every Australian a bank account for the purposes of
making  payments.  Doing  so  would  fundamentally  change  our  banking  system  in  a  way  that
would not promote the public interest.
A  convincing  case  for  issuing Australian  dollars  on  the  blockchain  for  use  with  limited  private
systems has not yet been made. It is certainly possible that this type of system could lead to
more efficient, lower-cost business processes and payments. My working hypothesis here is that
such a case could develop, although we need to work through a range of complex operational
and policy questions.
As  we  work  though  these  various  issues,  we  look  forward  to  an  ongoing  dialogue  with  the
payments industry and other interested parties.
Finally, before I finish I would like to briefly highlight three other issues that I know are of current
interest to the payments industry as well as the Payments System Board.  These are:
6
the importance of allowing merchants to route debit card transactions through the least-cost
network
the need to address rising rates of fraud in card-not-present transactions
the  need  to  develop  a  strong  system  of  digital  identity  that  can  be  used  in  the  financial
sector, and perhaps elsewhere.
In the Payments System Board’s view, it is in the public interest that timely progress be made in
all three areas. The Board’s preference is that this progress be made by industry participants,
without  the  need  for  regulation.  In  the  event  that  this  did  not  occur,  the  Board  would  need  to
consider what steps it might take to promote the public interest.
Thank you for listening and I am happy to answer questions.
1
2
AusPayNet stands for Australian Payments Network. Prior to mid 2017 it was the Australian Payments Clearing
Association (APCA).
In our most recent consumer payments survey, around 12 per cent of respondents used cash for all of their in-
person transactions during the survey week, and cash was used more intensively by older Australians and
those in rural and regional areas. See Doyle M-A, C Fisher, E Tellez and A Yadav (2017), ‘How Australians Pay:
 10 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
Evidence from the 2016 Consumer Payments Survey’, RBA Research Discussion Paper No 2017–04.
3
4
5
6
So-called  Initial  Coin  Offerings  –  crowdfunding-type  ventures,  typically  blockchain-enabled,  that  allow
participants to contribute digital currencies or other funds in return for digital tokens that may provide certain
future rights or benefits – appear to be contributing to some of this speculative mania.
The concept of electronic cash is actually not new. A report from the Bank for International Settlements from over
20 years ago noted that e-money innovations ‘have the potential to challenge the predominant role of cash for
making  small-value  payments  and  could  make  retail  transactions  easier  and  cheaper  for  consumers  and
merchants’ (Bank for International Settlements (1996), ‘Implications for Central Banks of the Development of
Electronic  Money’,  October). A  tokenised  eAUD  could  also  be  seen  as  an  updated  version  of  the  1990s
technologies that yielded prototypes such as Digicash and Mondex. These were ultimately not commercially
successful, but they demonstrated that versions of electronic cash were feasible.
Of course, it might also be possible to pay/charge interest on electronic banknotes as well. This would raise
some of the same issues discussed here.
These were noted in the Bank’s Payments System Board updates following the August 2017  and November
2017 meetings.
 11 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
