Mojmír Hampl: To be or not to be in the eurozone? An answer from
Prague
Speaking points by Mr Mojmír Hampl, Vice Governor of the Czech National Bank, at St. Antony's
College, University of Oxford, Oxford, 21 May 2018.
Ladies and gentlemen,
 Good afternoon. First let me thank Dr Charles Enoch for his kind invitation to speak here today. It
is really an honour for me.
I  was  thinking  for  quite  some  time  about  what  approach  to  take  today.  Should  it  be  a  totally
rigorous,  perfectly  balanced  and  as-full-of-data-as-possible  description  of  the  macro  and
monetary realities of our country? Or should it be more the personal testimony of a policy maker
co-responsible for the monetary zone called the Czech Republic for almost 12 years now? On
the advice of my adviser I decided that the second option might be more appropriate. We should
listen at least sometimes to our good advisers after all.
So, the Czech Republic is a mid-sized European country of 10.5 million inhabitants. It entered
the EU in 2004 and has no opt-out from euro adoption, so legally we are obliged to join and to
make every effort to be there as soon as possible.
Yet  there  is  basically  no  major  political  power  in  our  country  pushing  for  euro  adoption  at  the
moment. It is not part of the real political agenda, and we now have a fourth or so government in
a row declaring that this issue will be left “for the next government after the next elections” – so it
is being postponed to political infinity. The anteroom for euro adoption, the ERM II, is not being
considered either. This approach has the full backing of the central bank.
Ten years ago, supporting the euro was a sign of “good social morals among the better classes”,
whereas today only the brave confess to ardently supporting it. That’s how much the mood of the
elite  and  the  electorate  has  changed  over  the  last  decade.  Why  is  that  so?  Here  my  eight
personal comments come into play.
1.  The euro and political union:
A stateless monetary union is inherently unstable. A currency is usually a consequence, not
a  cause,  of  the  establishment  of  a  state.  In  Europe,  however,  we  began  to  build  the
“currency house” from the roof down, and then in 2008 everyone was very surprised at how
the tiles flew off when the first wind appeared. Is there a prospect of a political union – a
single European state – in the pipeline? Even if there is, do we want to be part of it? If the
question is no, which would seem to be the case, thoughts of introducing the euro in the
Czech Republic should, for that reason alone, be left on the back burner.
2.  Autonomous monetary policy:
Autonomous  monetary  policy  is  a  kind  of  “absorber”  of  economic  shocks.  It  is  meant  to
reduce their impact and smooth the economic cycle. It prevents an economic contraction
being  borne  by  the  unemployed  and  those  on  low  incomes  more  than  is  necessary.
Domestic  monetary  policy  does  that  via  the  Czech  National  Bank.  Certainly,  the  more
flexible is your economy (public finances, the labour market and so on), the easier it is to
cope  with  shocks  and  the  less  monetary  policy  is  needed.  However,  the  case  of  the
Eurozone  shows  how  tricky  it  is  when  the  absorber  in  the  form  of  monetary  policy  is
switched  off  and  nothing  replaces  it.  The  shocks  are  bigger  and  hurt  more.  Listeners
themselves can answer the question of whether the labour market and labour law are likely
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
be made more or less flexible (and dismissals made easier) in the future. In doing so, they
will  answer  the  question  of  whether  there  will  be  a  need  in  the  future  for  more  or  less
domestic monetary policy in the Czech Republic, a country whose conservative population
is so averse to upswings and downswings.
3.  The “convergence trilemma”:
The  standard  “monetary  trilemma”,  which  you  know  very  well  (a  country  cannot
simultaneously  have  a  fixed  exchange  rate,  an  open  capital  account  and  autonomous
monetary policy), is accompanied in a converging economy of our kind with something I call
the “convergence trilemma”. No country can simultaneously have high convergence growth,
a fixed exchange rate and low macroeconomic imbalances, be they internal or external. In
our case, catching up  with  our  wealthier,  low-inflation  Western  peers  means  a  long  term
tendency for our currency to appreciate. This is hardly consistent with a permanently fixed
exchange rate.
4.  The paradox of the Eurozone:
The Eurozone paradox is that the best possible members of the club are the countries that
are so stable themselves in monetary and economic terms that they don’t need “to buy in
stability”. Such countries have fewer and fewer reasons to adopt the euro. Conversely, the
more a country begs to have the euro, the bigger the problem will be. This explains why
almost  no  one  is  conducting  a  euro  debate  in  Sweden,  even  though  it  does  not  have  a
derogation and many would like to see it in the Eurozone. Canonically, the same goes for us:
either we can continue to stabilise ourselves, in which case we don’t need the euro, or we
will destabilise ourselves, but in that case we will potentially harm others in the euro club and
Eurozone membership will be a hindrance in bad times.
5.  There’s no story in our case:
The Baltic states took the euro as a geopolitical and security safeguard and paid a huge
economic price for permanently fixing their currencies to it. Slovenia wanted to cut itself off
from the Western Balkans. Slovakia wanted to seal the reforms of former Prime Minister
Mikuláš  Dzurinda.  Germany  gained  unification  in  exchange  for  the  euro.  The  southern
countries (Italy, France and Spain) gained the stability of the German mark because they
were unable to create such a currency at home. And those who were tied to the German
mark  long  before  the  euro  was  created  (Austria  and  the  Netherlands)  simply  remained
bound to Frankfurt after the Eurozone was established, only the Bundesbank building was
replaced all of a sudden by the ECB building. There’s no basic euro story like this in the
Czech Republic. Why should we try to create one artificially? Our story is one of maintaining
monetary stability across regimes and governments and of keeping the koruna as the name
of our currency continuously since the time of Emperor Franz Joseph (his monetary reform
established  a  new  currency  –  the  crown,  or  koruna  –  throughout  the  Austro-Hungarian
Monarchy in 1892) regardless of totalitarianism and the horrors of the 20th century. Neither
the Nazis, nor the Communists had any tendency to rename the currency and kept this old
monarchist name despite otherwise changing basically everything, and for the worse. Our
country – unlike the rest of the Central Europe – has never experienced hyperinflation in its
modern history, and this monetary stability has always served the entrenched mentality of
small Czech savers well. Domestic scepticism about the euro – that’s our authentic Czech
story.
6.  The Slovak economic miracle:
It is, of course, impossible not to make comparisons with our eastern neighbour Slovakia,
the  only  member  of  the  Visegrád  club  to  have  adopted  the  euro,  which  it  did  in  2009.
Unfortunately,  here  more  than  anywhere  else  it  holds  that  the  data  say  nothing  and
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
interpretation  holds  sway.  So  how  about  this?  For  years  before  and  after  introducing  the
euro,  the  Slovak  economy  has  constantly  been  catching  up  with  the  wealthier  countries,
including  us.  We,  meanwhile,  are  constantly  catching  up  with  the  countries  to  our  west.
Economics  rather  relies  on  the  poorer  catching  up  with  the  wealthier.  And  the  richer  a
country is, the harder it is to catch up. Looking at the numbers, Slovakia is still 10% behind
the Czech Republic in terms of economic output and above it in terms of the price level. It’s
a poorer and more expensive country. Yet tens of thousands of Slovaks still travel from this
euro  paradise  to  the  Czech  Republic  to  work  and  study.  An  equal  but  opposite  flow  is
nowhere to be seen.
7.  The Prague-Copenhagen connection:
I have to add with some bitterness that many in the Czech Republic like having their own
currency but not necessarily their own monetary policy. This magical contradiction can be
seen in the pleiad of ostensibly conservative political opponents of the euro in the revitalised
euro debate. In one breath they say that we should not adopt the euro – so that we can keep
our own currency and hence retain the ability “to weaken the koruna in bad times” – and then
criticise the Czech National Bank for doing exactly that in the bad times of 2013. They then
happily  add  that  Greece  would  have  benefited  from  having  its  own  currency  and  that
Germany is profiting from the euro being weaker than the Deutschmark would have been.
The  same,  however,  doesn’t  go  for  the  Czech  Republic  after  2013.  These  endearing
inconsistencies are present throughout the population. Here again, however, the Eurozone
and its satellites offer parallels. The Danes have a fixed exchange rate against the euro (and
previously had a fixed rate against the mark) and thus in effect “buy in” monetary policy from
Frankfurt. They have their own notes and coins but not their own monetary policy. Note this
fine “Scandinavian paradox”: the Danes have an opt-out from the euro following their 2000
referendum, yet they do not make their own monetary policy, nor did they before the euro
was created, whereas the Swedes do not have an opt-out (although they have been trying
not to fulfil the criteria and not to join ever since rejecting the euro in their 2003 referendum),
yet  they  pursue  autonomous  monetary  policy.  I  sometimes  wonder  whether  the  Czech
sitting-on-the-fence  approach  is  heading  towards  the  Danish  model.  It  wouldn’t  be  my
choice, but it’s good to be prepared.
8.  Macro costs and micro benefits:
The Eurozone has so far failed to make its member states wealthier quicker (the non-euro
EU states are constantly growing faster on average) or to make them converge structurally.
Rather, one could argue that the opposite is true. A truly strong measurable result of the
euro is lower and less volatile inflation. This is hard to see as a bonus for our country, where
we are consistently achieving the same objective with our own currency. The oft-mentioned
bonus  of  lower  interest  rates  due  to  the  euro  does  not  apply  to  us  either.  We  have  long
known what it’s like to live with rates below the Eurozone level. Likewise, it’s hard to believe
that the euro will deepen our trade relations with the euro countries given that we are one of
the few countries enjoying not only growing trade, but also a constantly rising trade surplus
with Germany. The euro has micro benefits at firm level, but unfortunately they come with
the  aforementioned  macro  costs.  The  latter  are  constantly  rising  and  their  final  size  and
structure are impossible to quantify. Besides the known contribution to the stability funds,
they  include  mandatory  participation  in  the  banking  union,  which  is  another  unfinished
structure.
For a country of our type, currency arrangement and monetary history, joining the Eurozone is
generally  an  extremely  tough  question.  It  was  ever  thus,  but  it  is  currently  all  the  more  so.
Adopting the euro today would be like being the last to arrive at a party, one where all the food
and drink has gone and the other guests are looking for someone to help pay the bill. The British
journalist David Marsh, one of the foremost experts on the anatomy of the establishment of the
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
1
single currency, summed it up brilliantly: “the Eurozone doesn’t need new members, it needs
new creditors”.  And when such a consistent defender of mainstream economic thinking as the
American Kenneth Rogoff announces that it is “fairly obvious that the euro was not necessary to
the  success  of  the  EU,  and  instead  has  proved  a  massive  impediment” ,  even  staunch
supporters of the euro in our country probably took notice.
2
The pragmatic Anglo-Saxon approach of “if it ain’t broke, don’t fix it” suits the Czech Republic
generally,  and  especially  on  this  point.  In  the  case  of  the  euro,  it  holds  true  here  more  than
anywhere else that we are not rich enough to afford to repeat the potential mistakes of others.
We make enough of our own.
Thank you for your attention.
1
2
Marsh, D.: “Řecko se zbaví eura, doufejme že kultivovaně,” Lidové noviny, 19 October 2011.
Rogoff, K.: “The eurozone must reform or die,” Project Syndicate, 14 June 2017.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
