Sabine Lautenschläger: Risk reduction in the euro area – how low
can you go?
Contribution  by  Ms  Sabine  Lautenschläger,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European
Central  Bank  and  Vice-Chair  of  the  Supervisory  Board  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  Eurofi
Newsletter, 26 April 2018.
 The financial crisis demonstrated that risks need to be kept in check, both at bank level and at
systemic level. To that end, the euro area has taken many steps over recent years. It has grown
closer together and this has helped to reduce risks.
The European banking union is the centrepiece of these efforts. The first pillar, European banking
supervision, was set up in 2014 to ensure that banks across the euro area are supervised to the
same high standards. To that end, we have harmonised the supervisory approach applied to the
118 largest banking groups. In the process, we made use of the discretion contained in both the
European and the national frameworks. This enabled us, for example, to move in 2014 from 19
different Supervisory Review and Evaluation Processes to a single harmonised one. This and
many other changes in day-to-day supervision help to reduce risks and ensure that banks remain
both safe and sound.
The  second  pillar  of  the  banking  union  was  established  in  2016:  the  Single  Resolution
Mechanism. This ensures that banks can fail in an orderly manner. The failure of a bank must not
pose a threat to financial stability or to public funds. Recent bank failures have shown that the
new  system  works;  supervisory  and  resolution  authorities  have  cooperated  smoothly  and
effectively.
This new institutional set-up is a good basis for reducing risks, but it needs further refinement.
Regulation, for instance, needs to be further harmonised. To reap the full benefits of the banking
union, we need a harmonised regulatory framework.
First, there is the issue of options and national discretions (ONDs). While some of these ONDs
have been harmonised by supervisors, others lie in the hands of national legislators. Waivers for
large exposure limits, for instance, are still fragmented across the euro area. This in turn affects
other cross-border waivers, such as that on liquidity requirements. More generally, it stands in
the  way  of  a  truly  European  banking  market,  as  do  the  other  ONDs  that  fall  within  the
competence of national legislators.
Second, recent bank failures have shown that we need to further harmonise the tools for crisis
management.  We  need  to  remove  the  overlap  between  standard  supervisory  measures  and
early intervention measures, for instance. As we are obliged to apply the least intrusive tool, the
overlap often prevents us from taking early intervention measures. We also need to expand our
toolbox  to  include  a  harmonised  moratorium  tool.  Finally,  national  insolvency  laws  need  to  be
aligned. All this would make the Single Resolution Mechanism even more effective.
These measures will help to better contain risks in the future. However, we also have to reduce
the risks we face today. Non-performing loans (NPLs) currently pose one of the biggest risks to
the  European  banking  sector.  They  need  to  be  dealt  with  first  and  foremost  by  the  banks
themselves. Some progress has been made on this front, although more needs to be done. In
addition, supervisors need to play their part. European supervisors closely monitor how banks
approach NPLs, and in 2017 and 2018 the ECB published guidance on the subject. The aim is
not  only  to  resolve  the  current  NPL  problem,  but  also  to  keep  it  from  recurring  in  the  future.
Finally,  legislators  also  need  to  address  the  issue  of  NPLs. Across  the  euro  area,  legal  and
judicial  systems  differ  substantially  in  terms  of  effectiveness  and  efficiency  when  it  comes  to
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
dealing with NPLs. The time and resources required to resolve NPLs thus differ from country to
country. National legislators should strive to improve legal and judicial frameworks. In the end,
tackling NPLs requires a joint effort by banks, supervisors and legislators.
To sum up, there are still things we can do to reduce risks in the euro area. In doing so, we will
grow  closer  together,  and  that  in  turn  will  help  to  reduce  risks  further;  European  banking
supervision is a prime example of this. We must thus be careful not to reach a point where we
neither reduce risks nor grow closer together. We have to keep moving on both fronts; only then
will we reach our destination of a more stable and prosperous European Union.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
