Jens Weidmann: Fresh momentum for Europe
Speech by Dr Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  and  Chairman  of  the
Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  upon  acceptance  of  the  Grand
Decoration of Honour in Gold with Star for Services to the Republic of Austria, Vienna, 26 March
2018.
1. Welcome and thanks
Ewald
 Members of the General Council and the Governing Board of the Oesterreichische Nationalbank
Ladies and gentlemen
I  would  like  to  give  you  my  heartfelt  thanks  for  presenting  me  with  the  Grand  Decoration  of
Honour in Gold with Star for Services to the Republic of Austria, and to thank you, Ewald, for the
very kind words. I truly feel very honoured to receive this medal.
Monetary  stability  in  the  euro  area,  and  the  prerequisite  for  this  –  a  monetary  union  with  an
enduring  focus  on  stability  –  are  the  guiding  objectives  for  our  work  on  the  ECB’s  Governing
Council. And I’m delighted that my contribution to this has been recognised here, too. This year,
Austria is celebrating not only the 100th anniversary of the Republic’s establishment, but also the
40th  anniversary  of  the  “Miracle  of  Córdoba”,  Austria’s  legendary  3:2  victory  over  the  West
German  team  at  the  FIFA  World  Cup  in Argentina.  The  21  June  1978  went  down  in  German
football history as the “Disgrace of Córdoba”, which just goes to show that one and the same
event can be viewed very differently through the national lens. Of course, it’s perfectly acceptable
to take a national view when it comes to football. What is more problematic, though, is when
decisions affecting Europe or the euro area are judged solely from the national perspective.
When  Ewald  Nowotny  and  I  take  part  in  monetary  policy  discussions  on  the  ECB  Governing
Council, we each bring to bear our national expertise, our body of experience and our monetary
policy stance; not so we can promote national interests, but to create sound monetary policy for
the euro area. The other members of the ECB Governing Council equally take this responsibility
for the euro area as a whole as their touchstone. That certainly doesn’t mean that we always
have to agree on all issues. Quite the contrary, in fact. I consider a diversity of opinions to be an
advantage. At  any  rate,  it  can’t  be  wrong  to  discuss  the  correct  path,  as  long  as  everyone  is
agreed on the objective.
As a national politician, it is no doubt more difficult to avoid viewing the European discussions
from  the  standpoint  of  one’s  home  country.  By  virtue  of  their  office  and  mandate,  their  first
commitment  is  to  their  country’s  prosperity,  and  the  trick  is  to  synthesise  the  sometimes
divergent  national  interests  into  a  European  whole.  These  dialectic  abilities  are  particularly
needed  in  the  negotiations  about  a  new  European  financial  framework.  I  would  consider  it  a
mistake,  however,  to  reduce  the  discussions  surrounding  the  EU’s  financial  framework  to  the
issue of net payments to the EU budget. It would make more sense to first clarify which tasks the
European Union is to take on in future, which tasks it might be possible to return to the member
states, and where savings could be made.
Exactly  six  months  ago,  the  French  President,  Emmanuel  Macron,  gave  a  speech  at  the
Sorbonne calling for the communitisation of a host of policy fields, such as defence, securing
external  borders,  and  climate  protection.  Joint  responsibility  in  those  fields  can  certainly  be
justified economically.
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
A renowned expert in public finances once put it this way: “In keeping with the principle of fiscal
equivalence  for  the  creation  of  public  goods,  the  existence  of  both  positive  and  negative
interregional external effects leads to macroeconomic inefficiency.”  What Ewald Nowotny, from
whose  textbook  this  sentence  is  taken,  is  saying  is  that  when  a  policy’s  impact  goes  beyond
national  borders,  it  can  make  sense  for  responsibility  to  be  shared.  Clarifying  how  these  joint
responsibilities are to be funded should be the second step.
1
The national perspective and the extent of national responsibility also play an important role in the
debate  about  the  institutional  reform  of  monetary  union.  The  special,  asymmetrical  design  of
monetary union – a  single  shared  monetary  policy  paired  with  national  sovereignty  over  fiscal
policy – has proven to be susceptible to unwanted developments and crises. Yet there is still very
little  willingness  to  relinquish  national  sovereignty  to  the  European  level.  This  asymmetry  will
therefore be retained for the time being, and we will have to find ways of making monetary union
even more stable in this configuration, too. Monetary union as a whole and its member states are
thus facing challenges of a short, medium and long-term nature. The good news is that, after the
end of the crisis and given the robust upswing, the starting conditions are better than they have
been for a long time.
One of the challenges that should be overcome relatively quickly is ending the Eurosystem’s net
asset purchases, without this causing distortions in the financial markets. In the medium term,
monetary  policy,  like  the  inflation  outlook,  has  to  be  normalised,  thus  winning  back  scope  for
monetary  policy  manoeuvring.  The  objective  of  making  the  regulatory  framework  of  monetary
union crisis-proof can only be achieved in the medium to long term, even if important groundwork
is  laid  even  earlier.  And  in  the  long  term,  the  member  states  will  be  tasked  with  managing
demographic change and creating the conditions for more economic growth and participation in
that growth.
I’d like to go into a little more detail about the near and distant challenges facing the euro area and
begin with the reform of monetary union.
2. Challenges facing the euro area
The debate began some years ago, and compared with 2010, when the euro area was firmly in
the grip of the crisis, we are already in a much better position. In particular, the euro area has
been  made  more  stable  by  the  creation  of  the  European  Stability  Mechanism  and  the
establishment of a banking union, but also by the new macroprudential supervision regime. In
other words, a similar shock to the Greek crisis would no longer find the euro area in such an
unprepared state, nor would it spread as easily to other countries. But the euro area isn’t yet
permanently crisis-proof. And that’s why it’s good that President Macron’s proposals, and those
of  others,  have  given  the  debate  fresh  momentum.  The  Bundesbank,  too,  has  long  been
contributing constructive proposals to the debate.
Though they may come in different guises, most of the ideas presented recently boil down to
expanded  joint  liability  and  risk-sharing.  In  particular,  fiscal  risk-sharing  is  said  to  be  a  key
instrument to cushion country-specific shocks.  Specifically, one proposal is for the creation of a
common stabilisation facility which would grant funding to the countries hit by such shocks.
2
But do we need an additional buffer like this?
National  fiscal  policy  can  already  absorb  shocks  via  automatic  stabilisers  and,  if  necessary,
discretionary  measures  –  if  public  finances  are  sound,  as  the  mutually  agreed  Maastricht
framework requires and aims to safeguard. In cases of severe distress, the ESM grants financial
assistance  subject  to  conditions. And  private  forms  of  risk-sharing  can  also  cushion  country-
specific  shocks,  quite  without  additional  fiscal  facilities.  If  enterprises  increasingly  find  capital
providers  or  lenders  from  other  euro  area  countries,  the  negative  effects  of  country-specific
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
shocks  will  be  distributed  more  evenly  across  the  currency  area.  Equity  capital,  in  particular,
makes an excellent buffer, as the alternative forms of financing – bonds and loans – have to be
serviced in full even in economically difficult times. Because of this, if nothing else, I consider the
creation of a European capital markets union to be an enormously important project.
If politicians nonetheless opt for increased fiscal risk-sharing, I believe sovereignty rights would
have  to  be  surrendered  in  exchange. After  all,  joint  liability  must  come  with  the  option  of  co-
determination. Otherwise, there would be the risk of misguided incentives. I don’t need to explain
the  practical  relevance  and  occasional  topicality  of  this  connection  to  listeners  from  member
states with a federal structure such as Austria and Germany.
It would be a false signal, which would threaten to discredit the proposed European risk-sharing
mechanism  from  the  outset,  to  now  mutualise  risks  that  arose  under  national  responsibility.
That’s why, ahead of any fiscal backstop for the Single Resolution Fund or a common deposit
protection scheme, it’s important that we first make significant progress in getting rid of legacy
risks.
Legacy risks include the outstanding stocks of non-performing loans on banks’ balance sheets,
especially those not covered by loan loss provisions. On average, it would appear that European
banks have done little to significantly increase their coverage ratio for losses arising from non-
performing loans over the years. It’s also worth taking a closer look at the overall stock of non-
performing loans. While the average non-performing loan ratio has fallen by around one-third in
Europe since 2014, there are two things to bear in mind. First, we are observing a decline from
the very high level recorded in the post-crisis years – compared with pre-crisis levels, we still
have  some  way  to  go.  For  instance,  the  average  non-performing  loan  ratios  of  six  euro  area
countries remain in double-digit territory. To put that into proportion, the share of non-performing
loans in the United States and Japan stood at around 1.5% in 2016.
Second,  individual  member  states  are  the  driving  force  behind  much  of  the  risk  reduction
achieved so far. For example, Ireland and Spain have been able to significantly shrink their high
stocks of non-performing loans. By contrast, other countries’ high ratios have remained all but
unchanged. In other words, we have yet to find a solution to the fundamental problem of non-
performing  loans  being  distributed  unevenly,  with  some  countries  being  much  harder  hit  than
others.
Incidentally, reducing risk isn’t  just  about  addressing  the  legacy  of  non-performing  loans  –  it’s
also about adopting structural measures to prevent similarly excessive risks from accumulating
on  European  banks’  balance  sheets  in  the  course  of  future  crises.  Measures  unveiled  by  the
European Commission and the ECB in mid-March to improve provisioning for non-performing
loans could play a role here in future.
But  the  stocks  of  government  bonds  on  banks’  balance  sheets  –  which,  due  to  a  regulatory
exemption, are backed by little to no capital and are not subject to caps – are also problematic.
This has created a nexus between the solvency of banks and that of their home governments
which  is  much  more  pronounced  now  than  it  was  prior  to  the  crisis.  The  regulatory  reforms
implemented  in  the  wake  of  the  crisis  have  been  limited  to  reducing  banks-to-sovereign
contagion. By contrast, the issue of sovereign-to-banks contagion has not yet been addressed –
and this would be a prerequisite for creating a European deposit insurance scheme so as to
prevent the scheme from indirectly assuming liability for sovereign default risk.
In short, as long it remains possible for actions at the national level – when drafting provisions in
insolvency  law,  for  instance  –  to  have  a  substantial  impact  on  banks  in  both  prosperity  and
adversity, there is virtually no scope for savers or taxpayers from other member states to be held
jointly  liable.  It  is  essential  that  the  unity  of  actions  and  liability  for  their  consequences  be
maintained, for it is only in doing so that a stable regulatory framework can emerge. And a stable
regulatory framework is crucial if monetary policymakers are to be freed up to concentrate on
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
their mandate of preserving price stability. After all, it won’t do them any good in the long run to
have to intervene constantly as a crisis response unit.
3. Challenges for monetary policy
But rather than looking at these risks in detail, I would like to look a little closer at the current
monetary  policy  situation.  What  is  perhaps  most  striking  is  the  extent  to  which  the  economic
situation in the euro area has improved. The upswing now rests on a broad base everywhere,
and  the  growth  rates  recorded  by  the  member  states  now  lie  within  a  considerably  narrower
range. At  8.6%,  the  unemployment  rate  has  fallen  to  its  lowest  level  since  the  end  of  2008.
Sentiment indicators remain at very high levels, which suggests that the favourable economic
developments  we  are  seeing  are  here  to  stay  for  the  time  being.  Looking  at  ECB  staff
projections, GDP growth rates are expected to come in at 2.4% this year, 1.9% in 2019 and 1.7%
in 2020. 
Despite the fact that economic conditions picked up, price pressures in the euro area remained
sluggish. While higher oil prices and the robust upswing did cause inflation to grow much more
briskly in 2017 than it had one year earlier, headline inflation slipped again slightly at the start of
2018. The subdued domestic price pressures reflect the fact that some countries are still trying
to boost their price competitiveness by keeping wages down. But domestic price pressures are
subdued even in countries that weren’t at the epicentre of the crisis. In Germany, for instance,
the immigration of workers from other EU countries over the past few years has resulted in a
marked decrease in wage pressures. There is also some evidence to suggest that additional
factors, such as the increased significance of global value chains, have eased price pressures,
and not just in the euro area.
However, according to ECB staff projections, price pressures will pick up again due to further
rises in aggregate capacity utilisation. The ECB’s economists expect the inflation rate to amount
to 1.4% in both 2018 and 2019, before rising to 1.7% in 2020 – in other words, to a figure that is
broadly in keeping with our definition of price stability over the medium term.
With  that  in  mind,  it  is  no  surprise  that,  for  some  time  now,  the  expectation  on  the  financial
markets has been for net asset purchases to come to an end in 2018 already. But even after net
asset  purchases  have  become  a  thing  of  the  past,  the  monetary  policy  stance  will  remain
accommodative. Ultimately, the degree of monetary policy accommodation is determined not so
much by the monthly volume of net asset purchases as by the overall volume of purchases. And
that  volume  is  huge  –  the  Eurosystem’s  asset  purchases  under  the  current  programme  are
already  worth  more  than  €2.3  trillion  and  consist  largely  of  government  bonds.  That  stock  of
assets  will 
the  net  purchases  are  stopped,  because
the  ECB  Governing  Council  decided  some  time  ago  that  the  proceeds  from  maturing  assets
should continue to be reinvested for an extended period of time.
remain  steady  even  after 
Furthermore, it announced that its policy rates will remain at their current levels well beyond the
end of the net purchases. The markets aren’t expecting the first interest rate rise until around the
middle of 2019, which is probably not wholly unrealistic. Savers, who have been bearing the brunt
of low deposit interest rates for years, are naturally the ones who would most like interest rates to
rise as quickly as possible. But ending the net purchases is just the first step on a multiyear path
towards monetary policy normalisation. And that’s precisely why it’s so important to actually get
the ball rolling soon.
Normalising monetary policy in this way will give policymakers greater leeway to respond to any
economic  slumps  in  the  future  –  because  the  current  upswing  won’t  last  forever.  Either  way,
interest rates aren’t set by the central bank alone. When it comes to interest rates over longer-
term investment horizons, which are especially important for life insurers and pension funds, for
example, monetary policy is just one in a series of determining factors. I will turn my attention to
one of these, namely ageing, in the last part of my speech.
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
4. Facing the challenge of demographic change – improve growth prospects
One  of  the  main  reasons  why  the  term  structure  –  that  is  to  say,  the  relationship  between
maturities  and  interest  rates  –  is  so  flat  in  the  current  environment  is  that  the  Eurosystem’s
unconventional  measures  are  being  targeted  directly  at  the  longer  end  of  the  term  structure.
However, the low long-term interest rates are also a reflection of diminished growth expectations.
After all, if economic growth remains sluggish in the long term, investments will then generate
lower  yields  and,  whether  they  like  it  or  not,  investors  will  have  to  content  themselves  with
correspondingly  lower  interest  rates.  If  we  compare  the  average  growth  rates  of  advanced
economies  before  and  after  the  turn  of  the  millennium,  a  significant  decline  is  apparent.  The
expected real interest rates for German Federal securities with a ten-year residual maturity have
been  caught  in  a  steady  downward  spiral  for  around  three  decades.  In  and  around  1990,  the
German real yield still stood at roughly 5%, but if we fast-forward one or two decades, this figure
falls to around 3% and just over 1% respectively. While it must be said that it is being influenced
by the asset purchase programme, it has now dipped as low as –1%. The situation is similar in
Austria.
Persistently  higher  interest  rates  thus  hinge  on  higher  trend  growth.  But  improving  growth
prospects is a job for national economic policymakers, not central bankers. As they attempt to
accomplish  this  feat,  policymakers  find  themselves  increasingly  confronted  with  the  issue  of
ageing.  Germany  is  especially  affected  in  this  regard,  as  shown  by  medium  and  long-term
economic  growth  projections.  According  to  the  European  Commission’s  latest  Ageing
Report,   Germany’s  labour  force  aged  between  20  and  64  will  shrink  significantly  over  the
coming  decades,  from  around  41  million  persons  at  present  to  38½  million  in  2030  and  just
under 37 million in 2040. That’s a decline of around 10% compared with 6% in the euro area as a
whole.  The  Bundesbank  estimates  that,  not  least  on  account  of  demographic  change,  the
potential growth rate of the German economy will decelerate from an average of almost 1¼%
4
between 2011 and 2017 to just over ¾% in the mid-2020s.
3
The  European  Commission,  which  uses  a  different  method  to  calculate  potential,  puts  the
potential growth rate of the German economy at a slightly more favourable 1.1% in the 2020s and
1.0% in the 2030s in the report I referred to a moment ago. But that’s also markedly down on the
status quo, given that the European Commission estimates current trend growth to be 1.9% – a
figure that we deem fairly high.
The situation in Austria (and several other countries) is a little more positive. Of course, Austria’s
population is also ageing, meaning that old-age dependency ratios, which measure the ratio of
elderly people to those of working age, are on the rise.
The social security systems must be prepared for this demographic change in good time. An
important variable for dealing with the demographic decline in the labour force potential is the
labour  force  participation  rate.  The  aim  is  to  increase  the  labour  force  participation  of  older
workers and women especially. Women’s labour force participation in Germany and Austria is
slightly above the euro area average. However, the difference between women and men is still
more than 9 percentage points in both countries, quite apart from the fact that women (in both
countries) are four times more likely to work part-time than men. In terms of older workers’ labour
force participation rate, by contrast, there are considerable differences between Germany and
Austria:  in  the  age  group  of  55  to  64  year  olds,  the  German  participation  rate  is  almost  20
percentage points higher than in Austria, while the rate for women is as much as 23 percentage
points  higher.  Adjusting  the  retirement  age  to  rising  life  expectancy  is  a  controversial,  but
effective  measure  to  increase  older  workers’  labour  force  participation  and  thus  counteract
demographic change.
Immigration can also help to dampen or delay the demographic decline of the workforce. For
instance,  immigration  to  Germany  contributed  an  average  of  around  0.2  percentage  point  to
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
growth  between  2001  and  2017.  However,  the  contribution  that  immigration  can  make  to
cushioning  the  impact  of  an  ageing  population  on  the  labour  market  hinges  on  whether
immigrants  can  be  integrated  into  the  labour  market  and  what  professional  qualifications  the
immigrants  bring  with  them.  In  any  case,  a  systematic  approach  for  labour-market-oriented
immigration would make sense.
All these measures target the number of hours worked as a means of dampening the harmful
effects of demographic patterns on growth. A complementary approach would be to increase the
productivity of those persons who will generate income in the future and will therefore need to
support an increasing number of elderly dependents. Economic policies that promote innovation
and  competition  and  lower  market  entry  barriers  and  obstacles  to  innovation  as  well  as  an
efficient public administration can make valuable contributions to higher productivity growth.
The education system also has a key role to play. Much of the groundwork for later academic
achievement is laid in the early years of childhood. It therefore makes sense to focus more on
early-years  and  pre-school  education.  In  schools,  academic  success  must  become  less
dependent  on  social  background,  for  instance  by  ensuring  good  all-day  school  facilities  are
available for all. That would make it easier to prepare children and young people whose parents
have  little  interest  in  education  for  their  future  working  life.  And,  most  importantly,  we  must
establish  a  culture  of  lifelong  learning.  That  would  help  ensure  that  people  experience  the
changing requirements of the labour market more as an opportunity and that they could look with
greater  confidence  towards  a  longer  working  life.  Incidentally,  lifelong  learning  reduces  the
mismatch between existing and needed qualifications, in turn contributing to greater productivity.
In  any  case,  the  days  when  employees  over  50  were  considered  as  difficult  to  place  on  the
labour market must be a thing of the past.
Efficient education and training systems are equally indispensable in dealing successfully with a
phenomenon  which  could  cause  quite  significant  changes  to  working  life  and  growth:
digitalisation. Digitalisation can help raise productivity growth. However, it is unclear how large
this contribution might be. Digitalisation will eliminate some jobs, while creating others. On the
one  hand,  digitalisation  automates  many  activities;  on  the  other  hand,  it  also  creates  new  job
profiles and jobs. In the recent past, the digital industry itself has contributed more to productivity
growth than other sectors that merely employ digital technologies.
Whether the application of new digital technologies will boost labour productivity going forward is
not yet clear. It is therefore of the utmost importance to eliminate any obstacles that could stand
in the way of this dynamic. Such obstacles might relate to the physical infrastructure – think of
the expansion of the broadband network. Another bottleneck factor could be a lack of suitably
qualified staff. Already, companies complain of a growing lack of qualified staff, and this is only
likely  to  get  worse  with  demographic  change.  In  Austria,  the  percentage  of  firms  reporting
difficulties  hiring  IT  specialists  is,  at  61%,  considerably  higher  than  the  EU  average  (41%).  In
Germany, 52% of enterprises reported such problems.
A lot therefore depends on making employees fit for the digital world.
The  measures  outlined  above  as  examples  of  ways  to  deal  with  an  ageing  population
demonstrate  how  structural  reform  can  spur  growth.  The  ECB  Governing  Council,  in  the
introductory statements to its press conferences following monetary policy meetings, regularly
warns  that  “the  implementation  of  structural  reforms  in  euro  area  countries  needs  to  be
substantially  stepped  up  to  (...)  boost  euro  area  productivity  and  growth  potential.”  And  this
admonition refers expressly, and quite rightly, not just to the former crisis countries. Countries
with  a  strong  economy  can  and  must  raise  their  growth  potential,  as  just  described.  The
European Union, too, may additionally create momentum for sustainable growth, for instance by
creating a digital single market, through the capital markets union I mentioned earlier and through
its commitment to international free trade.
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
With everyone currently talking of trade, I would like to make one final comment: no one can be
interested in a trade war; at the end of the day everyone is the loser. It is therefore a welcome
development that the EU has initially been exempted from the tariffs on steel and aluminium that
came into force last Friday. That reduces the risk of the current trade conflict with the United
States  escalating. At  the  same  time,  what  counts  is  maintaining  the  rules-based  multilateral
framework as provided by the WTO. It makes commerce easier for all countries, directs trade
conflict into orderly channels and helps bring about solutions that are acceptable for all involved.
It has, for instance, been key in helping boost world trade and economic integration in recent
years and decades, thus raising welfare and growth. The multilateral framework has therefore
served the global economy well, and we should strengthen, improve and expand it.
The agreement that has now been reached between the United States and the EU is therefore
ambivalent: it avoids an open conflict between the world’s two largest economic areas, which
account  for  a  large  percentage  of  global  trade  flows.  Nonetheless,  this  is  no  victory  for
international free trade, as punitive tariffs remain in place for other countries which were unable
to secure preferential treatment for themselves, and even the EU is, to date, only temporarily
exempted. The objective must therefore be not only to prevent new barriers to trade or keep them
as low as possible, but also to eliminate existing barriers. I very much hope that recent signals
from the United States that it is willing to talk about eliminating barriers do not prove to be a false
hope, but that they herald a new outlook.
5. Conclusion
At the beginning of my speech, I mentioned Córdoba. Hans Krankl, who 40 years ago scored the
winning goal for Austria, moved to FC Barcelona following the FIFA World Cup, where he went
on to become Spain’s top scorer. The transfer fee is reputed to have been 10 million schillings,
which works out at around €700,000. Measured in terms of the sums which change hands for
international top players nowadays, that is a bargain, but at the time it was a record fee for an
Austrian player. It is safe to say that prices for football players have risen considerably faster than
consumer prices. In fact, in the face of recent developments, some people even go as far as to
talk of hyperinflation on the transfer market – an aspect of inflation with which we luckily do not
need to concern ourselves. 
1
2
3
4
E Nowotny (1999), Der öffentliche Sektor: Einführung in die Finanzwissenschaft, 4th edition, Berlin et al, p 160.
See, for example, H Berger, G Dell’Ariccia and M Obstfeld (2018), “Revisiting the economic case for fiscal union
in the euro area”, International Monetary Fund.
European  Commission  (2017),  The  2018  Ageing  Report,  Underlying  Assumptions  and  Projection
Methodologies.
See  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  Demographic  change,  immigration  and  the  potential  output  of  the  German
economy, Monthly Report, April 2017, pp 35–47.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
