 Haga clic aquí para escribir texto. 
  01.03.2018 
Developments in the economic situation  
Asociación Española de Directivos, Santa Cruz de Tenerife 
 
Luis M. Linde 
Governor 
 
 
     Introduction 
 
Let  me  begin  by  thanking  the  Tenerife  Asociación  Española  de  Directivos  for  their  kind 
invitation to me to join you today. 
 
The European environment  
 
I shall devote my address to the current situation of the Spanish economy. I will begin by 
highlighting  the  favourable  cyclical  juncture  at  which  the  euro  area  –  the  economic 
environment closest to us – stands. The upturn in which the euro area economy is immersed 
may  be  classified  as  robust  and  dynamic,  and  extensive  to  all  productive  sectors  and 
countries.  
 
The euro area economy began to show signs of strength in the closing months of 2016, and 
these stepped up in the second half of last year. As a result, GDP at the close of 2017 was 
growing at 2.7%, a rate not seen since the start of monetary union and one significantly 
above what was expected a year earlier. These figures comfortably exceed the potential 
GDP growth estimates for the area as a whole and thus contribute to erasing the negative 
output gap generated by the crisis.  
 
One of the characteristics of the current expansionary phase is its intensity in terms of job 
creation, meaning that the euro area as a whole has now exceeded pre-crisis occupation 
levels. Wage restraint and the reforms carried out in some countries have been conducive 
to  the  vigorous  response  by  employment  to  economic  growth.  The  euro  area-wide 
unemployment rate has fallen to 8.7%, compared with levels close to 13% at the height of 
the  crisis,  although  there  are  substantial  cross-country  differences,  ranging  from  an 
unemployment rate below 4% in Germany to 20% in Greece and 16.5% in Spain.  
 
Moreover, a balanced pattern of economic growth can be seen. Adding more recently to 
the  momentum  of  private  consumption,  the  sole  engine  of  growth  of  the  start  of  the 
recovery, has been the dynamism of business investment. Low financing costs, the sound 
performance of final demand and high capacity utilisation are enabling investment to pick 
up to pre-crisis levels. However, factors persist that might restrict medium-term investment 
projects,  including  most  notably  low  potential  growth  expectations,  the  adjustment  of 
balance  sheets  and  the  correction  of  high  corporate  debt  levels  still  under  way,  and  the 
problems that are creating political uncertainty.  
 
Euro  area  exports,  boosted  by  more  buoyant  global  trade,  are  also  contributing  to  the 
momentum  of  activity.  And  this  despite  the  notable  appreciation  of  the  euro  since  last 
spring.  
 
Undoubtedly, a significant factor underpinning the recovery has been the maintenance of 
an  expansionary  monetary  policy,  which  has  allowed  financing  conditions  to  be  relaxed, 
contributing to the upholding of both private consumption and the recovery in investment. 
Specifically, estimates by the Banco de España suggest that the series of monetary policy 
measures  adopted  since  mid-2014  might  account  for  close  to  half  of  the  nominal  GDP 
growth in the euro area from 2015 to 2017.  
 
  
    1  
Nonetheless,  the  buoyancy  of  activity  has  not  yet  been  accompanied  by  a  sustained 
increase in the inflation rate. Once the more volatile components such as energy and fresh 
food prices are stripped out, core inflation remains, as it has done for several years now, at 
low levels of around 1%. Many factors are behind this behaviour of prices, some of which 
are external in nature, such as globalisation, changes in oil and commodities prices, and 
technological progress, which have exerted very durable effects on prices. 
 
But to date, moreover, there has been very contained wage growth in the euro area as a 
whole, which is in contrast to the clear improvement in employment. Low productivity, the 
weight of past inflation on wage-setting processes and the presence – still – of some slack 
in the area’s labour markets, as reflected by high long-term unemployment and the presence 
of  a  notable  volume of  involuntary  part-time  employment,  hamper,  in  my opinion,  higher 
growth in wage income. 
 
The recovery of the Spanish economy  
 
I shall now move on to the essential features of the Spanish economy’s recovery and to the 
outlook for the continuation of the upturn.  
 
The  current  recovery  is  proving  most  intense.  GDP  grew  in  2017  by  3.1%,  the  third 
consecutive year of growth above 3%. The strength of growth, which has throughout the 
expansionary phase outpaced that observed in the euro area as a whole, enabled Spanish 
GDP to resume its pre-crisis level by mid-2017.  
 
One  significant  characteristic  of  the  current  expansionary  period  is  the  fact  that  the 
sustained growth of activity has given rise to a high rate of increase in employment. Here, 
however,  much  remains  to  be  done,  since  the  current  level  of  occupation  is  still  some 
distance off the pre-2008 level. 
 
Another  notable  feature  of  the  current  recovery  is  the  progress  made  in  restoring 
macroeconomic  and  financial  equilibria.  This  is  playing  a  key  role  when  it  comes  to 
explaining  the  intensity  and  duration  of  the  current  upturn.  In  this  respect,  it  is  worth 
mentioning  the  continuing  and  notable  positive  external  balance  and  the  subsequent 
reduction  in  the  economy’s  –  and  in  particular  the  private  sector’s  –  over-indebtedness; 
such  progress  has  proven  vital  for  restoring  the  confidence  of  foreign  investors  and  of 
Spanish households and firms.  
 
The current account balance stood at close to 2% of GDP in 2017, a similar figure to that 
observed the previous year and up on the figures recorded in the early years of the recovery. 
True,  some  factors that  have  contributed to this improvement  in the  economy’s  external 
balance have effects that tail off over time. This is the case of oil prices which, despite their 
recent  rise,  remain  lower  than  those  in  force  until  mid-2014.  Also,  the  improvement  in 
financing conditions in recent years has provided for significantly lower interest payments 
abroad.  
 
Other explanatory factors behind the improvement in the balance vis-à-vis the rest of the 
world are structural in nature. I refer here to the economy’s enhanced competitiveness, the 
 2      
 most striking manifestation of which is, perhaps, the notable correction observed since the 
start of the crisis in unit labour costs compared with the euro area as a whole. 
 
It is thus notable that, unlike previous expansions, the current phase is characterised by the 
fact that the increase in Spanish household and business spending is proving compatible 
with the deleveraging of the economy, meaning that we are not – if you will allow me the 
expression – “buying” growth at the expense of credit from the rest of the world. This confers 
upon the current expansion a more sustainable nature over time and one less vulnerable to 
potential sources of risk. 
 
The outlook  
 
What may we then expect in the coming years?  
 
Here I shall refer to the latest projections by the Banco de España, published last December. 
The  baseline  scenario  expects  the  expansionary  phase  to  continue  over  the  next  three 
years, in a setting in which progress in correcting imbalances will continue to support both 
domestic spending and exports. At the same time, the growth rate of GDP is expected to 
be somewhat less high than that observed in the past three years.  
 
In  terms  of  components,  the  increase  in  output  in  the  coming  years  will  continue  to  be 
underpinned  both  by  the  buoyancy  of  private  national  demand  and  by  the  positive 
contribution of net external demand. As regards national demand, a moderate slowdown in 
private  consumption  may  be  expected,  against  the  backdrop  of  smaller  increases  in 
employment, following several years of strong growth as a result of pent-up demand during 
the crisis.  
 
Investment  in  housing  will  continue  to  grow  notably,  boosted  by  job  creation  and  the 
availability  of  credit  under  favourable  conditions.  Also,  business  investment  will  remain 
robust,  in  line  with  the  expected  course  of  final  demand,  against  a  background  of  most 
notable headway in the ongoing restructuring of corporate balance sheets and of persisting 
easy financial conditions.  
 
Turning to external demand, the cumulative gains in competitiveness that I referred to and 
the sound outlook for the international economy as a whole and, in particular, for the euro 
area, are expected to continue making for a dynamic Spanish export performance.   
 
Risks 
 
This predominantly favourable scenario is subject to various sources of risk.  
 
For example, developments on global financial markets. In February we saw how the high 
valuations attained by certain financial assets can give rise to bouts of price corrections and 
notable rises in volatility. Any future intensification of these episodes, which to date have 
originated in US markets, might have adverse consequences for economic activity and for 
financial stability. 
 
  
    3  
Furthermore, it is complicated to anticipate how Brexit, and its consequences in terms of 
trade in goods and services or in movements of people and capital, will unfold. But, in any 
event,  protracted  uncertainty  over  the  final  agreement  intensifies  the  risks  of  an  adverse 
impact on activity. 
 
On the domestic front, the risks associated with the political situation in Catalonia remain. 
The  baseline  scenario  of  our  December  projections  included  the  negative  effects  of  the 
increase  in  uncertainty  relating  to  political  tensions.  Specifically,  on  that  occasion  it  was 
considered that the scope of the events already observed would be relatively limited and 
temporary, albeit not negligible.  
 
So far, the information available appears to confirm that recent economic developments are 
not  far  removed  from  the  scenario  anticipated,  with  effects  that  appear  to  have  been 
confined to Catalonia. Specifically, since summer 2017, the performance of the Catalonian 
economy appears to have been relatively worse than that of the rest of Spain in terms of the 
figures, for example, on domestic spending and tourism.  
 
Elsewhere,  the  indicators  measuring  the  degree  of  economic  and  financial  uncertainty 
suggest a reduction in this variable. 
 
The  incidence  of  this  source  of  risk  will  depend  on  the  intensity  and  persistence  of  the 
tensions. An easing in these tensions might lead to higher growth than that considered in 
our December projections. Conversely, a hypothetical rebound in tensions might lead to an 
increase  in  uncertainty  resulting  in  a  more  pronounced  impact  on  agents’  spending 
decisions. 
 
Conclusions 
 
I shall now conclude, setting out once more our main challenges.  
 
As I said, the resilience of the Spanish economy to future adverse shocks has increased 
following the crisis. But we cannot be complacent. If we wish to shore up this resilience, we 
must proceed further with the design and application of reforms that tackle the main long-
term  challenges:  productivity,  a  reduction  in  structural  unemployment  and  tackling  the 
consequences of population ageing. These are reforms whose positive effects can only fully 
crystallise following a lengthy period of time. This is precisely why it is desirable that we 
should set about them as soon as possible. 
 
Among the challenges outstanding, I would highlight that of population ageing, owing to its 
far-reaching  consequences,  the  effects  of  which  will  make  themselves  felt  in  numerous 
areas.  These  include  most  notably,  and  primarily,  the  compatibility  between  the 
sustainability and sufficiency of the public pensions system, against the background of the 
progressive rise both in life expectancy and in the number of pensioners relative to current 
employees, but also other potentially adverse effects on productivity and the capacity to 
develop and adopt technological innovations.  
 
As  we  all  know,  reversing  demographic  trends  is  very  difficult  owing  to  various  cultural, 
sociological and economic reasons; and, in any event, any policy along these lines requires 
 4      
 time  to  produce  appreciable  effects.  Accordingly,  without  abandoning  policies  in  the 
medium and long term that seek to alter or alleviate such adverse demographic trends, in 
the  short  term  the  means  of  tackling  the  situation  involves  growth  in  employment  and 
productivity. There is no better or more effective policy in the short term for addressing the 
impact of population ageing and of scant population growth on pensions than to stimulate 
employment and enhance the system’s overall productivity.  
 
Thank you very much. 
  
    5  
