Andreas Dombret: "Basel III - Are we done now?"
Statement  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche
Bundesbank,  Statement  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the
Deutsche Bundesbank, at the Institute for Law and Finance Conference on Basel III, Frankfurt
am Main, 29 January 2018.
 Thanks  Nicolas,  it’s  a  great  pleasure  to  contribute  to  this  panel.  And,  on  behalf  of  the
Bundesbank, I am happy to see that so many outstanding experts accepted our invitation. 
Please let me start with a confession: I strongly support the Basel III finalisation package – in
these times, a global minimum standard is a crucial (and noteworthy) success. It contributes to
stabilising  the  global  financial  system  and  prevents  regulatory  arbitrage.  When  talking  about
Basel III, many banks or lobbyists may think: “Things are never as bad as they seem.” Of course,
they are hoping for of a less strict implementation of the Basel standards. But I have to say that I,
in their stead, would not cherish these hopes. 
Looking ahead, all Basel Committee member jurisdictions must do everything in their power to
ensure  full  implementation.  But  as  important  as  Basel  III  is,  we  should  not  forget  what  it  was
made for — and what not. The Basel III standards are, first, minimum standards for, second,
internationally active banks. Let me say a few words about the first point: Since Basel standards
are  minimum  standards,  a  country  may  decide  to  set  stricter  requirements.  The  second
qualification  of  the  Basel  III  standard  is  that  it  is  for  internationally  active  banks.  As  such,
jurisdictions are free to apply a different set of rules to smaller, only nationally active banks that
pose no threat to international financial stability. 
In sum, then, we should focus on truly global aspects, like regulating globally active banks, while
leaving it to nation states to carry out those tasks that they are better suited to take care of, for
example the regulation of locally active banks. In this sense, let’s not forget the former governor
of the Bank of England, Mervyn King, who said: “Banks are global in life, but national in death." To
make  one  thing  quite  clear:  There  is  no  alternative  to  global  standards,  but  within  their
implementation, we must not forget that a “one size fits all” approach does not always reflect
national different banking systems. So, in sum: Yes, we are done with Basel, but we should lose
no time and start implementing it. 
And one point is of crucial importance in my mind: After having implemented Basel III, we need a
regulatory break — because, yes there is regulatory fatigue; but do not get me wrong — this is
no ticket for regulatory capture and deregulation. As tired as banks are of new regulation, as tired
are we regulators of their (often unsolicited) lobbying efforts. In that sense, I clearly expect from
the industry to adapt their business models to those new rules. The comparable positive reaction
the stocks markets showed in face of the Basel compromise is in my view a sign for the value of
regulatory certainty – so let’s go for it. Therefore, let me recall the objective of Basel III, which is
to reduce RWA variability, and not to raise regulatory capital on average. We still strive for that
objective in the implementation period that will follow. So, the answer to our leading question is:
Yes, we are done now with Basel III. 
Therefore, all discussions about the outcome – or the desired outcome – are a waste of time.
What we need to discuss is how to implement Basel III in a way that is as close to the agreed
standards as possible, but, at the same time, also reflects national particularities. And when this
is done, we can have our regulatory break to see how all the reforms interact with each other and
whether they all work as they should. In the meantime, let’s stop complaining about a one or two
percent  higher  output  floor,  but  let’s  start  talking  about  the  real  stuff  that  may  endanger  our
financial system. Cyber crime is only one catchword amongst many challenges that lie ahead.
 1 / 1
BIS central bankers' speeches
