Jorgovanka  Tabaković:  The  importance  of  women  and  gender
equality
Speech by Dr Jorgovanka Tabaković, Governor of the National Bank of Serbia, at the Conference
organized  by  the  Official  Monetary  and  Financial  Institutions  Forum,  on  the  occasion  of  the
launch of the Global Public Investor Gender Balance Index, London, 7 March 2018.
Ladies and gentlemen, esteemed colleagues,
 1. Know thyself, 2. Nothing in excess, 3. Make a pledge and mischief is nigh. The inscription on
the entrance of Apollo’s temple in Delphi with these three rules is the key to a successful life, if
success is measured by satisfaction with oneself, and others’ satisfaction with us.
However, these three commandments are highly illustrative of the woman and her role in society
today.  What  do  we  want  as  individuals,  what  is  our  accomplishment,  what  are  we  ready  to
sacrifice  in  achieving  the  selected  objective,  and  is  every  sacrifice  for  the  fulfilment  of  that
objective necessary and justified? And do we know how to remain masters of our peace, our
happiness, without promising too much because we are offered the chance to participate in the
game?
As the end of February is near and 8 March draws closer, the titles of high-brow world weeklies
and magazines usually resemble one another. As a rule, the gist of these articles is centred
around the difficulty of striking a balance between motherhood and career. 
Why is the choice always OR, black or white, career or motherhood, as I wish  or  not  at  all?
Balance is the key to success.
A career or motherhood?
Motherhood is not inevitably a family. But family is both an obligation and support. How have we
sacrificed  family  in  favour  of  services?  Instead  of  solidarity  within  our  homes,  family  and
generations, we’ve got paid services – of childcare, care for our parents, care for the elderly. We
now  have  lonely  beings  who,  in  a  race  for  individuality  and  acknowledgment,  have  lost  a
measure  and,  thus,  a  clear  objective  for  achievement.  Not  all  relationships  are  based  on
purchase  and  sale  transactions.  Not  everything  can  be  bought.  It  is  therefore  necessary  to
preserve humanity, self-respect and the respect of others. 
Being  a  woman  is  wonderful.  Being  a  mother  is  even  more  wonderful.  I  testify  this  with  my
experience  with  three  grown-up  children  –  two  daughters  and  a  son.  They  are  good  and
educated people that I am proud of and whom I respect.
Being a successful woman, a satisfied women and a mother who shows that these two things
can go together – this is the best way for motivating others.
As a woman governor who comes from beautiful Serbia, I have chosen for today’s event the
following topics: 1) the issue of vertical advancement, 2) the issue of the first promotion, 3) the
dilemma what the legislator can do, and 4) of course – the implementation of gender equality in
Serbia, with a focus on the financial sector.
Issues of vertical advancement
In terms of the corporate ladder, it is hard to explain why women’s participation at the top of the
ladder narrows. This cannot be explained either by the choice of the profession or the purported
“lack  of  ambition”  among  women.  Women’s  participation  in  the  total  number  of  students
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
graduating from management colleges is increasingly higher each year. However, the number of
women in managerial positions does not follow this rate. The situation in Serbia is similar. More
girls graduate from universities than their male colleagues. More women complete PhD studies
than their male colleagues. Still, this does not influence too much the increase in the number of
women on the vertical corporate ladder.
Issue of the first promotion
What  is  the  reason  for  this?  In  the  past,  there  was  a  belief  that  women  are  simply  not
determined in asking for promotion, but this seems not be the case any longer. For instance, the
research carried out by the McKinsey consulting firm in 2016 shows that women equally request
promotion as their male colleagues. The research also shows that women get promoted at an
equal pace as men from the medium and senior management. However, the advancement at
lower positions is much more commonplace among men. One of the reasons may be the fact
that employers are less motivated to appoint to managerial positions women who are in such a
life phase when it is likely that they will go on maternity leave and have small children.
One of the reasons explaining this pattern also lies in the imbalance in terms of understanding
family responsibilities. Although men today assume more obligations in relation to the upbringing
of  children  than  was  the  case  with  their  fathers,  research  confirms  that  they  usually
overestimate  their  share  in  caring  about  children.  It  also  seems  that  they  underestimate  the
consequences of the care about children for the careers of their female partners. Still today,
fathers  who  participate  in  raising  their  children  by  changing  nappies  and  driving  children  to
school – are rare.
What can the legislator do? Offer a chance, but the chance should be used. A person should
believe that the chance is not only a dead letter, a quota. Evidence is needed that the chance is
real. But these are only successful examples. Examples at all levels. Because society is led by
the best, but society also needs the average ones whom we must promote.
Let us not forget that official state policies also play a role in the division of responsibilities of
both parents. It is not only that state policies aim to equalise the cost of labour for men and
women. They can affect, often indirectly, the companies’ decisions on who to promote more or
more frequently.
In Serbia, the state guarantees a year of paid maternity leave for the first and second child. The
leave can be used either by the mother or the father. For the third and fourth child, this period is
two years. 
Unfortunately, sometimes policies that seem neutral at first sight in fact widen the gap between
men  and  women.  For  instance,  some  universities  introduce  the  possibility  for  men  to  go  on
maternity leave. Some men use such leave to write books and carry out research, and not to
look after the baby. In this way, they ensure advantage over other colleagues. I do not wish to
generalise, I’m just giving examples.
What is the situation in Serbia?
From  a  legal  perspective,  citizens  of  Serbia  enjoy  gender  equality  guaranteed  by  the
Constitution. Through generations, a lot has been done to raise social awareness about the fact
that  there  are  no  special  women’s  rights,  but  the  obligation  of  society  and  each  individual  to
consistently respect the BASIC human rights. 
In Serbia, women make up 56% of students who enrol in universities, and as much as 58% of
those  who  graduate.  Women  take  a  lead  in  PhD  studies  as  well,  whereby  they  have  an
educational advantage over men in Serbia.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Women in government institutions
In  the  Government  of  the  Republic  of  Serbia,  the  situation  today  is  much  more  favourable.
Women  take  five  places  –  including  the  president  of  the  Government  and  four  ministerial
positions. The number of women in government institutions is increasing as well. One third of
the total number of MPs in the Serbian Assembly are women, which is almost five times more
than ten years ago.
In Serbia’s financial sector
As the central bank governor, I can say that I am proud that women in Serbia are dominant in the
financial sector. Women in Serbian banking make up the majority of employees, though they are
somewhat less present on managerial jobs. Women are executive board presidents in ten of 29
banks, and presidents of the boards of directors of five banks. In terms of activity, women in
Serbia are the best paid in financial activities.
At the National Bank of Serbia
When it comes to the National Bank of Serbia, which I head for the sixth year, I can freely say
that gender equality is respected and implemented. The Bank has been operational for almost
134  years  already,  with  women  governing  the  Bank  for  somewhat  more  than  six  years.  The
Bank has had 31 governors, of whom two women. (The first was elected in 2003 and endured
only several months, whereas I am into the sixth year of my term.) However, chronologically,
women’s involvement in managing central banks is dominant in the 21st century. It has often
been  the  case  that  women  make  up  the  majority  of  members  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the
National Bank of Serbia. They thus had the key influence on making strategic decisions.
Today,  women  at  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia  take  the  position  of  the  governor  and  a  vice-
governor.  Ten  of  21  general  managers  at  the  Bank  are  women.  Furthermore,  of  total  189
managers, 115 (58%) are women, while 83 are men (42%).
Let me conclude. Women’s participation in senior management positions still lags behind the
participation of men. The ratio is usually one to five. Women are not less ambitious than men,
but the time when women merit the first managerial position overlaps with the time when they
start a family. The legislator can offer a chance, but the chance should be used. One should
believe that the chance is not only a dead letter, a quota. Evidence is needed that the chance is
real. Because society is led by the best, but society also needs the average ones whom we
must promote. I can personally confirm that at the National Bank of Serbia which I head for the
sixth year there are no quotas for the promotion of women to managing positions. The persons
currently  heading  the  Bank’s  organisational  parts  are  experts  with  considerable  experience.  I
know  that  such  a  balanced  and  modern  approach  has  given  a  significant  contribution  to  the
great success that the National Bank of Serbia has achieved in fulfilling its mandate.
Thank you for you invitation. I wish that next year both statistics and the reality improve in favour
of women.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
