Olli Rehn: Europe, EMU and the banks
Keynote speech by Mr Olli Rehn, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Finland, at the Italian Banking
Association, Rome, 14 May 2018.
Accompanying slides of this speech.
 Ladies and Gentlemen,
 First, let me thank the Italian Banking Association for the invitation to join you today. It is a great
honour to speak here, at the roots of European finance, knowing the role played by Italian banks
in the development of modern banking since the Renaissance. Even more so, as I have always
admired  Italy’s  strong  and  hopefully  continued  European  engagement.  During  my  European
duties I was a regular visitor to Rome for economic and political consultations, and I want to keep
up this practice of European bridge-building and constructive dialogue in my capacity as a central
banker in Finland.
I  would  like  to  first  discuss  Europe’s  current  economic  situation  and  then  how  to  strengthen
Economic and Monetary Union further. I will draw in my analysis from the lessons learnt during
the financial and debt crisis and from my experiences in the eurozone financial fire brigade during
the crisis. My focus will – very intentionally – be on what the economists call first-best solutions,
i.e. finding optimal economic and policy solutions in the medium term, while I will refrain from
assessing second-best constraints, i.e. the positions of Member States or the constraints set by
domestic politics in the short term.
The discussion on EMU reform often becomes quite technical. While details do matter, I believe
it is useful to approach the question from a broader perspective before going into institutional or
financial technicalities.
Namely, the institutional transformation of the EU, or reform of the eurozone, is anything but only
a ‘technical’ matter. It is profoundly related to Europe’s relevance and influence in the world. This
goes  for  both  international  security  matters  and  for  global  economic  governance.  In  the
contemporary  world,  where  the  United  States  is  distancing  herself  from  global  governance,
where the United Kingdom is leaving the EU, where Russia is resorting to power politics, and
where China is getting stronger and stronger, it is ever more important for Europe to act united to
be stronger together and to defend multilateralism in international relations.
While we know that policy priorities in Member States differ, and common security and defence
policy, as well as refugee, immigration and border-control issues, are understandably high on the
EU  agenda  today,  nevertheless  eurozone  reform  is  essential,  indeed  critical,  for  the  broader
endeavour to strengthen liberal democracy and international institutions, which is at the heart of
Europe’s peace project and part of her DNA. In other words, our efforts to reinforce EMU are part
of a broader endeavour to strengthen Europe, so that it will be better in serving its citizens, by
enabling their entrepreneurship, innovation, prosperity and security.
But  to  succeed,  we  must  put  our  own  house  in  order  first.  The  crisis  revealed  serious
weaknesses  in  the  institutional  structure  of  EMU.  It  revealed  especially  how  financial  stability
concerns – in particular the stability of the banking system and of the government bond markets
– had been neglected when EMU was created. Financial stability was the ‘neglected stepchild’ of
Maastricht, it has been said.
The  crisis  finally  galvanized  the  Union  to  action.  There  was  an  important,  even  vital,  wave  of
institutional reforms which came about during the peak of the euro crisis. We should now seize
the  opportunity  provided  by  the  current  favourable  economic  situation  and  complete  the  most
 1 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
significant  remaining  reforms,  in  order  to  make  EMU  more  resilient  before  the  next  recession
arrives. Good times should indeed be used to reform.
So where do we stand today? The eurozone economy has now been growing for over five years.
Growth is broadly based across sectors and countries. The ECB's latest forecast from March
foresees growth to be 2.4% this year and 1.9% in 2019.
Figure 1. Euro area grown for 5 consecutive years (ppt slide)
The recent positive trend can be seen in this graph, showing GDP in the euro area, Italy and
Germany. Euro area GDP reached its pre-crisis level in 2015. However, this includes somewhat
different country-specific paths. German output reached its pre-crisis level already in 2010. While
Italian output is still below its pre-crisis level, it has now returned to a growth path.
Figure 2. Euro area unemployment rates (ppt slide)
Positive  developments  in  output  and  growth  have  also  suggested  encouraging  trends  in  the
labour  markets.  Euro  area  aggregate  unemployment  dropped  to  8.5%  in  March  2018.  The
unemployment rate is trending down in almost all Member States. The German unemployment
rate has dropped to a record low 3.5%, whereas unemployment remains persistently high in the
countries that suffered most from the financial crisis; here in Italy it is 11.0%.
Overall, there was a strong expansion in the euro area economy in 2017. However, short-term
indicators suggest that the pace of growth has cooled somewhat in early 2018.  Some of this
could be explained by temporary factors – such as the cold winter in Europe – but recent data
points to some moderation in the pace of economic growth from the high rates observed at the
end of 2017. Nevertheless, the overall economic outlook for the euro area is strong, supported by
favourable financial conditions, a strong labour market and steady income growth.
1
Yet, forecasts are always uncertain, and this one is no exception. Currently, risks to the medium-
term economic outlook seem to be tilted on the downside. Externally, downside risks stem from
a  possible  increase  in  protectionism,  geopolitical  tensions,  repricing  of  risks  in  the  financial
markets  and  increased  indebtedness  in  some  emerging  economies.  Internal  risks  relate  to
uncertainties  surrounding  the  implementation  of  reforms  in  the  euro  area,  and  to  the  public
finances and banking sectors in some member states.
Monetary policy remains accommodative
Despite the recent recovery, euro area inflation has remained below its historical average for a
prolonged period of time. This has been puzzling and has inspired economists to find several
2
different explanations for the persistently low inflation.
Without going into a detailed list of these explanations, it seems that the financial and debt crisis
that the euro area faced was exceptionally deep and persistent, which has had an impact on
inflation  expectations.  However,  the  latest  estimates  of  excess  capacities  point  to  a  closing
output gap. This, together with the ECB's accommodative monetary policy, is expected to lead to
a gradual pick-up in inflation rates. The ECB's recent forecast expects euro area annual inflation
to reach 1.7% on average in 2020.
The ECB Governing Council reiterated on 26 April that an ample degree of monetary stimulus
remains necessary for underlying inflation pressures to continue to build up and support headline
inflation developments over the medium term. The Governing Council stressed the importance of
patience, persistence and prudence in its monetary policy-making.
But monetary policy alone cannot provide sustained and balanced growth in Europe. Therefore, it
is  important  that  economic  reforms  and  strengthening  the  eurozone  are  kept  on  the  Member
 2 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
States' policy agenda. Next, I will address some of the key issues of reform.
Completing the Banking Union
Completing the Banking Union is crucial for the stability of the European banking system, and
hence a necessary priority of eurozone reform.
Significant progress has been made on the Banking Union since 2012. The Single Supervisory
Mechanism and the Single Resolution Mechanism have been established. At the same time, the
financial stability of the euro area has improved. The capital positions of euro area banks have
strengthened, as can be seen from Figure 3.
Figure 3: Euro area banks’ capital positions are strengthening (ppt slide)
However, the work to strengthen the euro area financial system and to increase stability must
continue.  It  is  important  to  strive  further  to  reduce  the  probability  of  shocks  that  could
jeopardizestability of the euro area banking system.
In  this  respect,  priority  should  be  given  to  strengthening  the  resolution  and  deposit  guarantee
schemes.
Let me say first some words on the setting up of a fiscal backstop to the Single Resolution
Fund, the privately financed capitalization tool of the Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM).
Such a fiscal backstop is important in order to give solid credibility to the commitment of the SRM
to resolve, wind up or reorganize failing banks, quickly and effectively. As ECB President Mario
Draghi  said  in  Firenze  on  Friday,  public  risk-sharing  through  backstops  helps  reduce  risks
across  the  system  by  containing  market  panics  when  crisis  hits.  The  backstop  would  be  a
reserve instrument, activated only if the Single Resolution Fund becomes temporarily short of the
resources required for its tasks, even after the owners and eligible creditors of failing banks have
borne the losses allocated to them.
Financially,  the  backstop  could  operate  as  a  credit  line  in  the  reformed  European  Stability
Mechanism.  It  should  be  fiscally  neutral,  so  that,  over  time,  the  Single  Resolution  Fund  and
ultimately the banking industry itself would replenish any funds drawn from it.
Let  me  turn  to  the  issue  of deposit guarantee scheme, the ultimate objective of which is to
prevent bank runs. A bank run is usually caused by lack of confidence in a single bank or in a
banking system. The stronger and more credible the deposit guarantee scheme is, the less likely
it is that it will have to be used.
The  sustainability  of the suggested new European deposit guarantee scheme  has  been
assessed in a recent study published by the ECB.  It states that even in the event of a major
banking crisis, deposits could be secured by a common deposit guarantee fund. The fund would
be  financed  by  the  banking  sector. An  interesting  result  of  the  study  is  that  very  little  cross-
subsidization would take place between countries when the funds are collected from banks on
the ‘polluter pays’ principle, i.e. according to their risks.
3
A common European deposit insurance scheme would significantly increase the stability of the
euro  area  banking  system  compared  with  the  current  situation  in  which  national  funds  are
responsible for the deposit guarantee. The goal should be that confidence in the secured bank
deposits is equally strong throughout the euro area.
Reducing risks in the euro area banking system
The  implementation  of  a  common  European  deposit  insurance  scheme  can  be  enhanced  by
 3 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
reducing risks in the euro area banking system. Overall in the euro area, significant progress
has  already  been  made,  as  the  level  of non-performing legacy assets  has  decreased.  This
development is clearly visible in Figure 4.
Figure 4: NPLs are decreasing in the euro area  (ppt slide)
4
As we know, the position of countries varies a lot concerning the share of non-performing loans
(NPLs) of the total stock of loans across the euro area, as does the speed of reduction in their
amount (see Figure 5). Spain did utilize well and effectively its ESM-funded financial-sector repair
programme, which started in summer 2012, and has moved further towards solving the problem
by reducing the share of NPLs to around 5% by the end of last year, i.e. close to the euro area
average. Italy took action later and has managed to reduce the amount of NPLs in its banks by
about 30% in two years, and the share of NPLs in Italy in 2016–17 came  down  from  16%  to
around 11%. Hence, while progress has been made, there is still plenty of work to be done to
maintain the positive trend in NPL reduction.
Figure 5: The reduction of non-performing loans by country (ppt slide)
In any case, to mitigate risks in the banking system, it is important to reduce the amount of NPLs
further. The position of the Bank of Finland is that the resolving of legacy problems should be
separated from the management of future non-performing loans. The SSM has already published
a  proposal  on  provisioning  methodologies  for  new  NPLs  that  will  increase  banks’  loan  loss
provisions and resilience.
To  ensure  the  most  effective  reduction  of  NPLs,  legacy  problems  should  be  handled  with  a
combination of bail-in and recapitalization by national funds, in line with the state aid guidelines
(2013) set out by the Commission. Transitional provisions should provide an opportunity for this
by facilitating the write-down of non-performing exposures to a level that enables market-based
solutions, e.g. the selling of NPLs to investors. In due course the transitional provisions should of
course be abolished.
Market-based solutions are obviously the primary alternatives for resolving non-performing loans.
However, a single solution alone is hardly the answer. History has taught us that the most viable
solutions are usually a combination of several alternatives.
Going forward, and thinking particularly about the stability and resilience of the European banking
system, it is also important that banks’ exposures to their home countries’ sovereign bonds be
reduced. One solution is that banks could be required to have more capital if they want to hold
high  amounts  of  a  single  country’s  sovereign  bonds.   This  concentration  charge  would  give
banks an incentive to diversify their sovereign bond holdings. It would also support market-based
risk-sharing in the euro area.
5
Why  would  this  be  important  for  the  future  of  the  eurozone?  Simply  because  breaking  the
undesirable  links  between  national  banking  sectors  and  their  sovereigns  is  one  of  the
fundamental reasons for creating Banking Union. Let’s keep this overall objective firmly in sight
and mind when pursuing reform.
ESM reinforced
Secondly,  Europe’s  financial  firewall,  the  European  Stability  Mechanism,  should  be  further
developed  by  reinforcing  its  capacity  to  take  decisions  and  extending  its  toolbox  with  a  more
workable and effective precautionary credit instrument.
In the event that the euro area faces excessive market turbulence, the ESM should be able to
take rapid, effective decisions to help stabilize the situation. Decisions on conditional loans or
credit lines could in an emergency situation be taken by a reinforced majority of e.g. 85%; recall
 4 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
that  the  IMF  board,  while  striving  for  consensus,  can  take  decisions  by  a  simple  majority.
Decisions  on  the  capital  base  would  continue  to  be  taken  by  unanimity,  underlining  the
Parliament’s budgetary powers.
For a precautionary credit instrument, a pertinent benchmark is provided by the IMF’s Flexible
Credit Line (FCL), which was successfully used during the crisis by three countries: Colombia,
Mexico  and  Poland,  as  a  crisis-prevention  instrument  against  market  turbulence.  None  of  the
three countries had to draw on these lines, as the FCL provided an effective backstop for these
countries and strengthened market confidence during the time of elevated risks.
So,  in  my  view  the  primary  reform  of  the  ESM  now  needed  is  to  enhance  its  concrete
functionality and capacity to act in cases of market turbulence. But I duly recognize there are
other  proposals  on  the  table  as  well.  One  is  to  change  the  name  of  the  ESM  to  European
Monetary Fund, EMF. Would this be justified? To my mind the nameplate is less important than
the substantive improvements in the functioning of the ESM. Besides, the ESM has become a
positive, solid brand, based on the high integrity and professional quality of the institution and its
staff, under the competent leadership of its Managing Director, Klaus Regling.
Another  reform  proposal  relates  to  the  institutional  dimension.  To  increase  accountability,  the
European Commission has proposed to transfer the ESM into the EU Treaty and put it under
parliamentary control of the European Parliament, in a rather similar way as the ECB is – mostly
focusing  on  the  full  right  of  demanding  and  receiving  information.  On  the  other  hand,  the
Commission  proposal  would  maintain  the  key  policy  decisions  and  executive  functions  in  the
hands of the Board of Governors. This includes the decisions to approve of conditional financial
programmes and the appointment of the Managing Director. Hence the Commission proposal is
actually less of a great federalist leap forward than some fear and others wish.
In principle, there are two alternative ways of making progress in European cooperation, either by
the well-tested Community Method or by the intergovernmental method, which some years ago
was  described  as  the  Union  Method.  For  the  EU  to  continue  making  legitimate  progress  in
integration, in my view it is necessary to take good care of the Community method, since it is
able both to provide the effective capacity to act and the legitimacy to take decisions. It is based
on  the  Commission’s  right  of  initiative,  its  independence  and  professionalism,  the  qualified
majority  rule  in  the  Council  and  co-determination  by  the  European  Parliament.  It  enables  the
Union to take decisions and keeps all Member States – including the small states – on board.
Revisions of fiscal rules: the expenditure rule
Let me turn to my third and final subject: the revision of fiscal rules, in particular by introducing
the expenditure rule into the EU fiscal rules.
In the future, the economic and Monetary Union can work smoothly only if the public finances of
all member countries are credibly on a sustainable footing. A combination of fiscal policy rules
and market discipline related to government borrowing is necessary to ensure this. Fiscal rules
should  be  sufficiently  simple  to  ensure  that,  in  normal  circumstances,  we  can  be  certain  in
advance that they will be adhered to when budgets are prepared.
The  expenditure  rule  can  usefully  be  defined  as  a  medium-term  ceiling  for  the  real  growth  of
general  government  expenditure,  set  in  relation  to  the  estimated  future  economic  growth  and
taking into account the stock of public debt. In my view, such a rule, focusing on mid-term debt
sustainability  and  solidified  by  concrete  multi-annual  ceilings  on  budget  lines,  would  probably
serve  better  as  an  operational  fiscal  policy  guide  than  the  current  rule  that  is  based  on  the
structural fiscal balances.
Our present system of fiscal rules and fiscal policy coordination is a result of the reforms agreed
in 2011, the so-called six-pack. This strengthened the euro level governance of fiscal policy in a
 5 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
significant  way.  In  the  past  five  years,  the  overall  budget  deficits  of  euro  area  countries  have
diminished  substantially.  Last  year, the  aggregate  General  Government  Deficit  was  less
than 1% of euro area GDP. Indebtedness (defined as the ratio of government debt to GDP) has
started to decline. Of course, the situation varies across countries, especially regarding the level
of accumulated debt.
Figure 6: Fiscal deficit in the euro area 2000-2018 (ppt slide)
Despite the positive developments of recent years, I think the present system of fiscal rules and
policy coordination in the euro area is far from perfect. My concerns are that 1) the rules have
become very complicated; 2) the system has not been as effective as hoped, especially in the
past; and 3) it is more procyclical than necessary.
These problems with the current system of rules are interrelated:
The complexity of the rules results largely from efforts to make them less procyclical, by applying
such concepts as structural deficits instead of drawing the rules in terms of the actual, nominal
deficits. The measurement of structural deficits is notoriously difficult, however, which adds an
element of discretion in the application of such rules – not making the results politically easier to
accept. At the same time, the inevitable procyclicality of the deficit rules makes them hard to
implement (especially in recessions) and therefore less credible in the first place.
Reliance on rules would be less of a problem if ‘market discipline’ could be trusted to keep the
finances  of  the  Member  States  on  the  narrow  path  of  sustainability.  By  market  discipline  we
mean  the  constraints  that  market  perceptions  of  a  country’s  creditworthiness  puts  on  its
borrowing.
Market  discipline  is  a  necessary  part  of  an  economic  system  where  all  actors  are  ultimately
responsible  for  their  decisions  –  even  when  the  decisions  go  wrong.  However,  this  does  not
mean that market discipline as such would operate in a smooth, always effective manner from
the societal or economic point of view. As evidence, we can recall that market discipline did not
work  well  in  the  years  leading  up  to  the  crisis  (when  the  markets  were  disregarding  the
accumulation of risks), nor did it work well when the crisis was at its most intense (when the
markets reacted in a disruptive way).
This experience is fully in accordance with the Delors report of 1989. This report, which served
as a blueprint for Monetary Union, noted that market forces can exert a disciplinary influence on
the fiscal policies of the member states, but added:
‘…market  perceptions  do  not  necessarily  provide  strong  and  compelling  signals  and  (that)
access to a large capital market may for some time even facilitate the financing of economic
imbalances. Rather than leading to a gradual adaptation of borrowing costs, market views about
the  creditworthiness  of  official  borrowers  tend  to  change  abruptly  and  result  in  the  closure  of
access to market financing. The constraints imposed by market forces might either be too slow
and weak or too sudden and disruptive.’
Because  of  the  often  on/off  nature  of  market  behaviour,  the  euro  area  needs  effective  and
credible  ex  ante  rules  for  fiscal  policy  that  will  prevent  countries  from  hitting  the  financing
constraints on the markets.
Expenditure rules provide governments a less procyclical way to commit to sustainable public
finances  than  deficit  rules  do;  by  being  less  procyclical,  they  are  also  easier  to  stick  to,  and
therefore more credible. A number of countries, such as the Netherlands, Sweden and Finland,
have used expenditure rules as the major building block of their medium term fiscal frameworks
for a long time over the past decades, with relative success. The expenditure rule thus supports
responsible fiscal policy, and increase national ownership of sustainable public finances. It could
 6 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
well be applied across the EU.
The need for further economic reforms
It is not only our common currency area which is in need of reform. The biggest bulk of beneficial
economic reforms are in the responsibility of national policy-makers. These reforms would be
beneficial for the welfare of euro area citizens by promoting long-term income and employment
growth, resilience of the economies to adverse shocks, and social fairness and inclusiveness.
By facilitating adjustments to regional shocks they would ensure the smooth functioning of the
euro  area  and  the  efficient  transmission  of  monetary  policy.  Therefore,  better  economic
structures have importance also from the perspective of monetary policy.
What is then meant by ‘better economic structures’? This phrase covers a wide range of policy
agendas, but these are commonly understood as flexible product and labour markets. In addition,
well-functioning and trustworthy public institutions lead to better economic outcomes.
Figure 7. Ease of doing business and GDP per capita (ppt slide)
Due to their many faces, measuring the quality of economic structures is not straightforward.
One  common  measure  is  the  World  Bank's  ‘Doing  Business’  indicator,  which  compares  the
ease  of  doing  business  across  countries.  From  the  graph  we  see  correlation  between  the
indicator and GDP per capita. There is also some evidence that those euro area countries that
had better functioning institutions recovered faster from the latest financial crisis.  The indicator
also reveals large differences in the ease of doing business across euro area Member States.
Whereas  the  best  performers  are  close  to  the  global  top  performers,   the  weakest  Member
States are hardly in the global top 50. Anyway, every euro area Member State should be active in
enhancing their economies.
6
7
An  example  of  successful  reforms  are  the  pension  reforms  that  many  EU  Member  States
implemented over the last decades.  These reforms have enhanced fiscal sustainability, helped
to  maintain  adequate  pension  income  and  also  contributed  to  increased  labour  participation
rates.
8
During  the  recent  crisis  many  countries  reformed  their  economies,  and  these  reforms  have
contributed to the current upswing, but will also bear fruit in future. For example, Italian labour
market reforms have brought your labour market institutions more closely in line with international
9
benchmarks, and there are already some tentative signs of its positive impacts.
Which reforms should each country then take, for their own sake? The most rewarding reforms
depend on each countries' current structure and need to be tailor-made for local circumstances.
However,  the  OECD  has  found  that  implementing  reforms  in  different  areas  seem  to  provide
significant  synergies.
  For  example,  labour  market  reforms  will  facilitate  the  necessary
reallocation of workers arising from product market reforms.
10
The  European  Commission's  annual  Country-Specific  Recommendations  provide  a  thorough
and tailored guideline for the serious reform agenda. It has, indeed, been disappointing to see
that the momentum for implementing these policy recommendations has weakened in the euro
area. The Commission has concluded that the overwhelming majority – more than 90% – of last
year's  reform  recommendations  have  been  followed  by  only  ‘some’  or  ‘limited’  progress  in
implementation, while just one (of almost 80) of them has been substantially implemented.
11
Why is this worrying? Because the good times of solid growth and expansionary monetary policy
are not going to last forever. Monetary policy cannot be “the only game in town”. The better times
should  be  used  for  reforms  that  may  be  difficult  in  the  short  term  but  carry  benefits  in  the
medium-to-long  term.  And  today’s  reduced  funding  costs  for  sovereigns  should  be  used  to
 7 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
enhance  debt  sustainability,  especially  in  countries  where  solid  debt  sustainability  is  not  self-
evident  due  to  the  high  level  of  public  debt.  This  would  help  creating  the  badly  needed  fiscal
space  in  the  next  recession,  both  for  individual  member  states  and  for  the  eurozone  in
aggregate.
Conclusions
In conclusion, there is a strong case to move on with the ever-changing evolutionary Union. The
dichotomy of ‘federation or death’ has been put forward too often, and frequently for propaganda
reasons. But let me reveal you a secret: it is fake news.
Namely, the euro area will not survive by simply becoming a federation or transfer union – but
neither will it break up just because of not becoming one. Life is seldom black-and-white.
Instead, there is an evolutionary third way – what we need is both a sense of direction and a
sense of realism. The essential guiding principle in reforming euro area economic governance
should  be  that  steps  towards  increased  solidarity  through  co-insurance  and  risk  sharing  are
combined with increased responsibility and economic sustainability. Solidarity can only be built
on solidity, for the sake of both economic sustainability and political legitimacy.
While the institutional reform  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  is  important,  Europe  needs  to
work towards sustainable growth and job creation on all fronts. Putting the real economy and
reforms truly centre-stage means that we should continue to work for a Europe that opens up our
citizens’ opportunities to innovate and build new businesses, and thus create jobs, for a Europe
that seeks to promote sustainable growth through free-trade agreements, despite headwinds; for
a Europe where citizens and businesses can benefit from a genuine single market; and for a
Europe that guarantees civil rights and social justice in the digital age.
These are the concrete, functional goals for sustainable growth and job creation that really matter
to our citizens in Europe, which should always be our yardstick. They should be supported by
rock-solid financial stability by completing the Banking Union. This is a policy agenda that can
help making Europe relevant and moving on.
Thank you very much for your attention!
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
The preliminary flash estimate on the GDP growth rate for the first quarter of 2018 was 0.4%, while in the last
quarter of 2017 the growth rate was 0.7% from the previous quarter.
For  a  thorough  review  of  the  discussion  see  Constâncio,  V.  (2017)  ‘Understanding  and  overcoming  low
inflation’,  Remarks  at  the  Conference  on  ‘Understanding  inflation:  lessons  from  the  past,  lessons  for  the
future?’,  Frankfurt  am  Main,  21  and  22  September  2017;  and  Yellen,  J.  (2017)  ‘Inflation,  Uncertainty,  and
Monetary Policy’, Remarks at the ‘Prospects for Growth: Reassessing the Fundamentals’ 59th Annual Meeting
of the National Association for Business Economics, 26 September 2017; see also Kortela, Oinonen & Vilmi
(2018) ‘Reports of the Phillips curve’s death are greatly exaggerated’, Bank of Finland Bulletin 1/2018.
Completing  the  Banking  Union  with  a  European  Deposit  Insurance  Scheme:  who  is  afraid  of  cross-
subsidisation? 
2018
www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/scpops/ecb.op208.en.pdf?557c7f15bddfac62f842fd08920b1e6e.
Occasional 
Series 
Paper 
ECB 
April 
208 
No 
 The NPL ratio in Italy was 11.1% in Q4 2017.
This  option  is  suggested  by  a  group  of  French-German  economists:  Reconciling  risk  sharing  with  market
discipline: 
2018
cepr.org/sites/default/files/policy_insights/PolicyInsight91.pdf
constructive 
approach 
January 
reform, 
euro 
area 
to 
A 
Draghi (2017), ‘Structural reforms in the euro area’, Introductory remarks at the ECB conference ‘Structural
reforms in the euro area’, Frankfurt am Main, 18 October 2017; and Bank of Finland (2018), ‘Euro countries
recovered from crisis at different paces’, Bank of Finland Bulletin 1/2018.
 8 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
7
8
9
10
11
The top 3 performers are New Zealand, Singapore and Denmark.
For  further  information,  see  Carone,  G.  et  al.  (2016).  Pension  Reforms  in  the  EU  since  the  Early  2000’s:
Achievements and Challenges Ahead. European Commission Discussion Paper 042, December 2016.
For  a  detailed  analysis  see  Pinelli,  D.  (2017).  The  Recent  Reform  of  the  Labour  Market  in  Italy: A  Review.
European Commission, Discussion Paper 072, December 2017.
OECD (2016), Economic Policy Reforms 2016: Going for Growth Interim Report, OECD Publishing, Paris.
For a detailed analysis see ECB (2018). ‘The European Commission’s 2018 assessment of macroeconomic
imbalances and progress on reforms’. ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 2/2018, March 2018, Box 8.
 9 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
