REMARKS  BY  JAVIER  GUZMÁN  CALAFELL,  DEPUTY  GOVERNOR  AT  THE 
BANCO DE MÉXICO, ON “MONETARY POLICY AMIDST NAFTA NEGOTIATIONS 
AND  OTHER  SOURCES  OF  UNCERTAINTY”.  EUROPEAN  ECONOMICS  AND 
FINANCIAL  CENTRE’S  DISTINGUISHED  SPEAKERS  SEMINAR.  London,  July  9, 
2018.1 
I am very honored for the opportunity to participate  in this Seminar and to 
address such a distinguished audience. You will not be surprised if I say that I 
am also very impressed by the venue. The Palace of Westminster is not only 
one  of  the  most  beautiful  sites  in  the  United  Kingdom,  but  also  a  revered 
symbol  of  history  and  democracy.  I  thank  the  European  Economics  and 
Financial Centre, and especially Professor Hannah Scobie, for the invitation to 
take part in this event, and Baroness Gloria Hooper for kindly agreeing to chair 
it. 
I will concentrate my remarks on monetary policy in Mexico, with a special 
emphasis  on  the  environment  of  uncertainty  that  has  been  affecting  us  for 
several years already and on one of its main ingredients, the renegotiation of 
the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA). 
The  Banco  de  México’s  primary  mandate,  enshrined  in  the  country’s 
Constitution, is to seek the stability of the purchasing power of the national 
currency, that is, a low and stable inflation. This is based on a wide body of 
evidence  leading  to  the  conclusion  that  this  is  the  best  contribution  that  a 
central bank can make to a country’s growth and well-being. To this end, the 
conduct of monetary policy in Mexico rests at present on three main pillars 
which,  although  mutually  reinforcing  and  therefore  complementary,  have 
been  sequentially  erected  through  efforts  made  over  the  course  of  several 
decades. 
First among these, is the autonomy that our Central Bank has enjoyed since 
1994.  This  resulted  in  part  from  a  growing  global  trend  that,  in  light  of 
mounting  evidence  highlighting  the  beneficial  effects  of  central  bank 
autonomy  on  inflation  and  growth,  sought  to  equip  national  monetary 
authorities with the institutional features that would allow them to formulate 
policy with a long-term perspective and isolated from political interference. In 
the Banco de México’s case, the importance of moving in this direction was 
                                                           
1 The  views and opinions  expressed in this document  are the sole responsibility of the  author  and do not 
necessarily represent the institutional position of the Banco de México or of its Board of Governors as a whole. 
1 
 more  evident  given  the  need  to  prevent  the  re-emergence  of  damaging 
inflationary episodes of the past, which had resulted from the use of central 
bank money to finance fiscal deficits. Indeed, the independence granted to the 
Central  Bank  is  one  of  the  most  transcendental  institutional  reforms  in 
Mexico’s modern history.  
A second pillar consists of the adoption, since 2001, of an inflation targeting 
regime. By assigning a numerical value to the goal for monetary policy, these 
frameworks  have  allowed  central  banks  of  both  advanced  and  emerging 
economies  to  rely  on  a  more  efficient  nominal  anchor  to  guide  inflation 
expectations. At the same time, they have strengthened the institutional set 
up for the implementation of monetary policy. In the case of Mexico, a target 
of 3 percent has been set for annual CPI growth, with a variability interval of 
plus/minus 1 percent to take into consideration the multiple shocks that can 
affect  relative  prices  in  the  short  term.  Inflation  targeting  has  proved 
instrumental in reducing inflation in Mexico, and is associated with important 
structural  changes  in  the  process  of  price  formation  in  the  economy  –a 
decreased pass-through of the exchange rate to prices, a lower persistence of 
inflation and a much stronger resilience of long-term inflation expectations to 
supply shocks, among them.  
Thirdly, transparency and accountability have been given a prominent role in 
the  implementation  of  monetary  policy.  This  is  inherently  imbedded  in  the 
nature  of  the  above-noted  inflation  targeting  framework.  The  target  itself 
provides the yardstick against which outcomes are measured and evaluated. 
Further to this, continuous and incremental efforts have been made  by the 
Banco  de  México  through  a  comprehensive  and  evolving  communication 
strategy  with  the  public.  This  has  been  fundamental,  since  the  relative 
importance  of  inflation  expectations  as  a  transmission  mechanism  of 
monetary  policy  actions  has  increased  since  the  adoption  of  the  inflation 
targeting regime. As I will explain in more detail below, additional efforts to 
increase transparency and accountability have been set in motion lately.  
The implementation of monetary policy in Mexico has been subject to major 
challenges in recent years as a result of a combination of elements.  
Although the world economy has shown a clear improvement after the Global 
Financial Crisis, this has been accompanied by the emergence of a number of 
risks  that  have  stirred  up  an  atmosphere  of  uncertainty.  The  sources  are 
diverse  and  complex:  a  tightening  of  global  financial  conditions,  persistent 
 2 
vulnerabilities  in  several  advanced  and  emerging  economies,  increased 
protectionist pressures, a growing anti-globalization sentiment, and problems 
of a political or geopolitical nature, among others.  
In this context, Mexico’s economy has been hit by several shocks, of both a 
domestic and external origin, since the second half of 2014: 
  The  combination  of  a  sharp  decline  in  oil  prices2  and  in  Mexico’s  oil-
producing  capacity,3  led  to  a  reduction  of  fiscal  revenues  from  this 
source from 8.8 percent of GDP in 2012 to 3.8 percent in 2017.4  
  Uncertainty associated to the possible trajectory of interest rates in the 
United States, to a significant extent driven by the risks deriving from 
fiscal expansion in an economy operating around full employment, has 
been sharper in Mexico than in other EMEs, given tight links with the US 
economy and a high degree of openness to foreign capital flows. 
  The  2016  presidential  election  in  the  United  States  and  its  aftermath 
have  resulted  in  unease  regarding  the  prospects  for  the  economic 
relationship between the two countries in coming years. 
  The renegotiation of NAFTA has become a focal point of attention for 
both domestic and foreign investors, in view of the importance of this 
Agreement for the region, both from an economic and an institutional 
point of view. 
  The  potential  economic  and  political  implications  of  the  recently 
concluded electoral process in Mexico, where a new President, Congress 
and  several  state  Governors  were  elected,  has  also  been  a  source  of 
uncertainty.  
  Partly  as  a  result  of  several  of  the  above  factors,  the  availability  of 
external financing declined significantly, from an annual average above 
4 percent of GDP in 2013-14, to some 1.5 percent in 2015-17. 
                                                           
2 Although the price of the Mexican crude oil basket has recovered from the lows registered in early-2016, 
this came atop a sharp fall over the previous year and a half, thus resulting in current prices that are still about 
30 percent below the peaks of mid-2014. 
3 Oil production nearly halved in the last 15 years, from 3.45 million barrels per day in December 2003 to 1.87 
million barrels per day at present, a drop of 46 percent. Although the energy sector reform of 2013 is expected 
to foster oil output, results are likely to flourish only gradually over coming years. 
4 As per the most recent projections (March 2018), public oil revenues are expected to amount to 4.0 percent 
of GDP this year. 
3 
 The  Mexican  economy  has  adjusted  to  these  shocks  through  a  number  of 
channels.  Chief  among  them  is  the  significant  depreciation  of  our  currency 
since  September  2014  which,  in  terms  of  its  value  vis-à-vis  de  US  dollar, 
accumulates  to  date  around  46  percent,  a  metric  that  at  some  stages  has 
recorded figures nearing 70 percent. Of course, notwithstanding the above-
noted  reduction  in  the  pass-through  coefficient,  this  has  had  important 
implications  for  inflation.  Although  relatively  contained  during  the  initial 
stages of this process, the inflationary pressures deriving from exchange rate 
depreciation  and  a  series  of  supply  shocks  that  took  place  during  2017,5 
resulted in an upturn in annual inflation to levels that in December of that year 
reached figures (6.77 percent) unseen since May 2001.  
What  has  been  the  response  of  monetary  policy  to  an  environment 
characterized  by 
levels  of 
uncertainty? 
inflationary  pressures  and  high 
increased 
First of all, I wish to note that, as in the entire realm of economic policymaking, 
uncertainty  is  inherently  embedded  in  the  set  of  conditions  under  which 
monetary policy is conducted. The problem in the recent Mexican experience 
is that uncertainty has risen to levels well above those that can reasonably be 
deemed  normal.  This  is  the  case  because,  as  explained  above,  it  includes 
events of paramount importance, complex in nature, that tend to appear only 
sporadically, and where the related risks can materialize simultaneously. 
In my view, under conditions like these, central bank authorities should at least 
consider the following: 
  Enhancing  communication  is  essential  under  a  situation  of  high 
uncertainty,  since  understanding  monetary  policy  actions  becomes 
more difficult in these circumstances. Therefore, additional efforts are 
needed for a proper grasp of the central bank’s reaction function and its 
assessment of the present and future economic situation. 
  The  responsibility  of  a  central  bank  to  adhere  to  its  mandate  is 
unaffected by uncertainty. In other words, uncertainty should not lead 
to  excuses  or  indecision.  The  issue  here  is  how  to  optimize  the 
information used for decision-making, and how to balance the risk of 
having insufficient information vis-à-vis reacting too late. 
                                                           
5 Namely, the surge in the domestic prices of gasoline and other energy products, increases in those of some 
agricultural goods, and two adjustments in the minimum wage, among others. 
4 
   Erring on the side of caution will usually be preferable under a situation 
of high uncertainty. This rests, on the one hand, on the premise that it 
is better to be prepared for events with a small probability of occurrence 
but a potentially high cost and, on the other, on the fact that assessing 
the probability of a disruptive event becomes far more difficult in the 
presence of high uncertainty. In this process, it is fundamental to give 
proper  weight  to  the  large  costs,  both  for  the  institution  and  the 
economy, resulting from a hit to the credibility of the central bank.  
  Models are useful to support monetary policy decisions but they have 
well-known limitations, and the possibility of mistaken prescriptions is 
positively related to uncertainty. Therefore, the role of judgement will 
become even more important with higher levels of uncertainty.  
  The merits of a coordinated use of policy instruments are well known: 
potential  to  exploit  synergies,  less  likelihood  of  overburdening  policy 
instruments  and  reduced  costs  for  the  economy,  among  others.  For 
obvious reasons, the advantages of this approach are clearly enhanced 
as uncertainty levels increase. 
The  strategy  adopted  by  the  Banco  de  México  to  face  the  complex 
circumstances of recent years is consistent with these principles. In general, 
the implementation of monetary policy has emphasized prudence, and timely 
and firm action whenever necessary. Thus, from December 2015 to date, the 
monetary policy interest rate has been increased on 13 occasions, by a total of 
475 basis points.  
In  general  terms,  actions  by  the  Central  Bank  during  this  period  have  been 
aimed at ensuring the convergence of inflation to the 3 percent target, at the 
least  possible  cost  for  economic  activity.  In  this  context,  monetary  policy 
actions have responded to different sorts of circumstances, such as: hikes in 
the reference rate in response to equivalent measures by the Federal Reserve, 
to mitigate the potential for disorderly capital outflows given the high degree 
of  openness  of  the  Mexican  economy  and  the  prevailing  conditions  of 
uncertainty;  adjustments  during  episodes  of  steep  depreciation  of  the 
exchange rate, even with relatively low levels of inflation, to contain the pass-
through  to  domestic  prices  and  to  avoid  second-round  effects  from  these 
shocks; and a decisive response to sizable supply shocks which, combined with 
a substantially depreciated exchange rate, threatened to affect the process of 
 5 
price formation in the economy and, therefore, an unanchoring of long-term 
inflation expectations.  
Furthermore, as mentioned above, in an environment of high uncertainty it 
has  been  considered 
important  to  enhance  the  transparency  and 
accountability of the Central Bank’s actions. Consequently, since February of 
this year, information is provided regarding the time lapse over which inflation 
is  expected  to  converge  to  the  target.  Thus,  quarterly  forecasts  for  the 
trajectory of both headline and core inflation over the period of influence of 
monetary policy are published. This is anticipated to reinforce the role of the 
Central Bank in the determination of inflation expectations. Subsequently, in 
April, the decision was taken to identify voters in the minutes of the Board of 
Governors monetary policy decisions, and to release the full transcript (with a 
3-year delay) of said meetings, among other measures.6 
In addition to the flexible exchange rate mechanism -which has worked as an 
efficient shock absorber- and sporadic interventions in the foreign exchange 
market,  monetary  policy  has  been  supported  by  other  policy  tools.  The 
strengthening of fiscal policy in recent years has been of crucial importance, 
given  the  pernicious  effects  that  weak  fiscal  positions  can  have  on  inflation 
expectations,  interest  rates  and  the  exchange  rate.  Efforts  spanning  over 
several  decades  to  strengthen  the  financial  system  have  also  been 
instrumental, as the latter has allowed an efficient transmission mechanism 
for monetary policy and a sharp increase in interest rates without significant 
adverse side effects on banks or other financial institutions.  
Despite the fact that  some ground  still  needs to be covered  on the road to 
bringing inflation back to target, and the remaining important risks , the results 
obtained thus far are encouraging, especially in light of the magnitude of the 
shocks  that  have  affected  our  economy.  Inflation  has  been  on  a  downward 
trajectory  over  the  course  of  2018,  with  headline  figures  falling  from  6.77 
percent at the end of 2017 to  4.65 in June of this  year, consistent with  the 
Banco de México’s projections. Furthermore, long-term inflation expectations 
have remained stable, although at around 3.5 percent. On the other hand, the 
recent materialization of some upside risks may imply a revision of the period 
over  which  inflation  is  expected  to  converge  to  the  3  percent  target.  It  is 
worthwhile  to  highlight  that  economic  activity  has  not  been  significantly 
                                                           
6  See  Banco  de  México  (2018):  “Banco  de  México  Modifies  its  Monetary  Policy  Communication  Strategy”, 
Press Release, 30 April. 
6 
 affected by the monetary policy stance, as evidenced by the 33 consecutive 
quarters  of  positive  annual  GDP  growth  recorded  as  of  early-2018,  and 
expectations of an output gap around zero during this year and the next. 
To  conclude,  let  me  say  a  few  words  about  NAFTA,  that  may  contribute  to 
understand why this is at present one of the main sources of uncertainty for 
the Mexican economy.  
Even  though  the  economic  integration  of  the  Mexican,  Canadian  and  US 
economies  had  been  underway  well  in  advance  of  the  enacting  of  this 
Agreement in 1994, and while some have argued that said process would have 
continued  even  in  absence  of  NAFTA,7  the  key  role  it  has  played  in  the 
acceleration,  deepening  and  widening  of  the  linkages  among  its  member 
countries over the nearly 25 years it has been active is indisputable. 
Naturally, the main channel through which NAFTA has boosted the region’s 
integration has been trade. In fact, by 2017, the value of merchandise traded 
between the three member countries had nearly quadrupled relative to the 
levels registered in 1993, while bilateral trade between Mexico and the United 
States showed a six-fold increase during the same period. In light of the above, 
it comes as no surprise that, with an 80 percent share of the total, the United 
States is the main destination for Mexico’s exports, while Mexico is the second 
largest  foreign  market  for  US  goods,  surpassed  only  by  Canada.  Taken 
together, US exports to both Mexico and Canada amount to over one third of 
that country’s shipments to the rest of the world.  
Notwithstanding the breadth of the US-Mexico trade relationship that may be 
depicted by the above figures, a more detailed look at the data reveals some 
additional  features  that  are  worth  highlighting.  Mexico  is  among  the  top  2 
export destinations for 27 US states, a figure similar to that of the states (28) 
that  count  Mexico  as  one  of  their  3  main  sources  of  imports.  Texas,  for 
instance, is not only the main destination for Mexican exports within the US, 
but  also  overall,  as  it  accounts  for  nearly  22  percent  of  all  Mexican  sales 
abroad,  a  figure  significantly  above  those  for  countries such  as  Canada  (2.8 
percent), Germany (1.7 percent) and China (1.6 percent). Conversely, Mexico’s 
imports from Texas are greater than those from China, and we buy more from 
California than we do from countries such as Japan, Germany and South Korea.  
                                                           
7  See  Hufbauer,  Gary  et  al.  (2005):  “NAFTA  Revisited:  Achievements  and  Challenges”,  Institute  for 
International Economics, October. 
7 
 The region’s economic integration that has come about as a result of NAFTA 
goes  far  beyond  the  free  international  flow  of  goods  and  services.  It  could 
hardly be argued that this is just a case of three separate economies trading 
finished  goods  among  them.  On  the  contrary:  they  are  producing  many  of 
those  goods  together,  specializing  in  different  stages  of  the  corresponding 
production  processes  through  the  implementation  of  cross-border  supply 
chains  that  enhance  their  competitiveness,  both  individually  and  jointly,  in 
markets  abroad.  Therefore,  as  in  other  regions  of  the  world,  intermediate 
goods  in  North  America  cross  borders  multiple  times  before  reaching  final 
consumers. An input-output analysis of the productive activity in Mexico and 
the United States shows that, in both countries, around 20 percent of the total 
value added generated domestically by these countries’ manufacturing sectors 
is destined to activities abroad immersed in Global Value Chains (GVCs).8 
By including protective rules and procedures for cross border investors, as well 
as  dispute  settlement  mechanisms  for  both  trade  and  investment  flows, 
NAFTA  has  given  rise  to  a  massive  expansion  of  foreign  direct  investment 
among  the  three  members.  For  instance,  annual  US  direct  investments  in 
Mexico  have  multiplied  by  4  since  the  creation  of  NAFTA,  while  the 
corresponding  flows  from  Canada  have  increased  by  a  factor  of  nearly  37, 
albeit from a very low base.  
Naturally, the renegotiation of NAFTA provides the opportunity to update an 
agreement signed more than 20 years ago, and to increase its beneficial effects 
for the three countries. I hope that, in the end, common sense will prevail, and 
that both the realized and still ample scope for mutual gains will  result in a 
strengthened  Agreement  and  an  even  deeper  integration  within  the  North 
American region. 
                                                           
8 Banco de México (2017): “The Importance of Global Value Chains in Mexico and the U.S.”, Box 2 in Quarterly 
Report October-December 2016, March. 
8 
 