Elisa Ferreira: Banking Union at a crossroads
Keynote  speech  by  Ms  Elisa  Ferreira,  Vice-Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Portugal,  at  the  CIRSF
(Research Center on Regulation and Supervision of the Financial Sector) Annual International
Conference 2018 "Banking Union at a crossroads", Lisbon, 6 June 2018.
 
1
Good morning ladies and gentlemen,
 It is a great pleasure to close this morning’s sessions by addressing you on a topic that is so
dear to me: Banking Union. 
We  are  at  a  crossroads,  and  with  the  experience  we  have  already  gathered,  all  the  pro-
Europeans,  among  whom  I  include  myself,  have  the  duty  to  address  the  outstanding  critical
questions of Banking Union. 
And for that, there is nothing better than to go back to the reasons behind putting it in motion and
ponder whether we are moving closer to or drifting away from our original goals.
 The  post-crisis  financial  sector  reforms  were  designed  to  strengthen  financial  stability  by
focusing on improving banks’ resilience, ending too-big-to-fail, breaking the sovereign-bank loop
and reducing financial fragmentation.
Efforts were put into developing a harmonised regulatory framework with stricter requirements on
capital  and  (private)  loss-absorbing  capacity  to  protect  taxpayers,  while  reinforcing  risk
prevention and reduction. 
In  the  European  Union  (EU),  the  Single  Rulebook  and  the  European  System  of  Financial
Supervision  were  introduced.  The  euro  area  went  further,  launching  Banking  Union  and  its
institutions,  namely  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM)  and  the  Single  Resolution
Mechanism (SRM) at an amazing speed – a commendable success.
The  firm,  cohesive  European  commitment  towards  Banking  Union  helped  counter  financial
fragmentation and, as stated in the 2012 Roadmap, aimed to reassure citizens while building the
2
necessary trust between Member States.
However, as the first two pillars of Banking Union were put in place, the political will to build the
third pillar – a European Deposit Insurance Scheme (EDIS) – and complete the Banking Union
waned. New and bigger hurdles emerged as we moved closer to a finish line that was agreed
many years ago. Policymakers got stuck in the risk reduction vs. risk sharing debate, losing sight
of the overall objectives.
This lack of determination in completing Banking Union in accordance with the agreed timelines
has  seriously  jeopardised  its  key  benefits.  Today,  as  we  speak,  Banking  Union  means  that
supervisory  and  resolution  decisions  are  mostly  European,  whilst  the  ultimate  guarantor  of
financial stability remains national, with limited tools to act. 
This asymmetry might have had serious consequences in a series of recent cases, in which
decisions were ultimately redirected to individual nations.
Financial stability is the central objective of Banking Union. Few things can be more destructive
to citizens’ trust in the European Institutions than threats to financial stability, perceived as risking
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
their savings. 
In view of the existing mismatch between European oversight and national liability, the objectives
and interests of the several stakeholders involved are not aligned. So we need to ask: who is
actually looking after financial stability? And which institution is capable and actually equipped to
safeguard it?
With the benefit of six years of hindsight, it is now clear that several links and stabilising elements
are missing in the Banking Union. These need to be urgently tackled. 
At the current juncture, policymakers and co-legislators need, at least, to fine-tune the regulatory
framework, and deliver on what was agreed.
Some concrete examples:
In view of the absence of EDIS, if Banco Popular Español had actually failed, the Portuguese
Deposit  Guarantee  Scheme  would  have  had  to  reimburse  depositors  in  the  Portuguese
3
subsidiary, even though Portugal was neither supervising nor resolving Popular.
As banks are to a large extent still “national in death”, this example shows us that we need to
rethink the Single Point of Entry (SPE)/Multiple Point of Entry (MPE) resolution model in tandem
with the strengthening of the supervisory powers of host national competent authorities (NCAs). 
Additionally,  a  generalised  entry  into  force  of  the  Bank  Recovery  and  Resolution  Directive
(BRRD)  and  the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  Regulation  (SRMR),  irrespective  of  the  banks’
business  models,  has  meant  that,  as  of  today,  many  institutions  would  only  be  deemed
resolvable if bail-in would be extended to the level of senior debt or even deposits.
This, in turn, can have destabilising effects, by amplifying the incentives for a bank run at the
earliest sign of distress.
It is worth recalling that, in this regard, the European Banking Authority (EBA) and the European
Securities  and  Markets  Authority  (ESMA)  recently  published  a  joint  statement  encouraging
institutions, market and resolution authorities to properly consider retail holders of debt financial
instruments  subject  to  the  BRRD  when  carrying  out  their  respective  tasks.   We  still  need  to
evaluate its implementation.
4
Although  one  may  support  and  push  for  credit  institutions  to  increase  their  loss  absorption
capacity, it is simply not reasonable to expect that compliance with Minimum Requirements for
own funds and Eligible Liabilities (MREL) can be achieved by all credit institutions in the short to
medium term without seriously aggravating their financing costs and profitability. 
Resolution  authorities  therefore  need  to  be  able  to  rely  on  alternative  sources  to  support
resolution actions, such as resolution funds, especially in the current period of transition during
which loss-absorbing capacity is not yet available. However, as some had already predicted, the
current internal loss absorption requirements (8% of total liabilities and own funds) and limitations
on the amount of the resolution funds that can be used (5% of total liabilities and own funds)
prevent this, by subjecting senior debt and even unsecured deposits to risks incompatible with
financial stability.
Moreover, the decision to establish a wider scope for MREL than for TLAC (Total Loss Absorbing
Capacity)  cannot  be  ignored.  Whereas  TLAC  applies  only  to  G-SIBs  (Global  Systemically
Important  Banks),  MREL  applies  to  all  credit  institutions  in  the  EU,  regardless  of  their  size.
Proportionality and flexibility are thus crucial, in order to maintain the level playing field and avoid
distortions in banking businesses. 
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Regulatory-driven consolidation has become an imminent risk: if only larger banks are able to
comply  with  increasingly  complex  regulation  and  potentially  disproportionate  requirements,  we
could  be  fostering  the  comeback  of  too-big-to-fail  –  which  we  were  trying  to  avoid  in  the  first
place – while threatening the survival of traditional deposit-taking banks.
A key principle of the EU post-crisis regulatory reform was the preservation of different business
models – this is evident in multiple references in the Single Rulebook. MREL and other regulatory
requirements were not thought of as a way to promote consolidation. 
As we stand, the approach adopted in the EU regarding MREL, combined with a set of other
regulations, may challenge the sustainability of the business model of medium-sized institutions
predominantly  financed  by  capital  and  deposits.   The  financing  of  small  and  medium-sized
enterprises (SMEs), which are the core of the EU economy and job creation, may thus become
harder – with the ensuing social and political consequences.
5
Ultimately,  the  incomplete  set-up  of  the  Banking  Union  and  the  full  implementation  of  the
resolution regime are a dangerous combination. One that calls for a comprehensive rethinking of
the existing framework of safety nets  – especially when monetary and fiscal policy have limited
room for manoeuvre.
6
As  often  in  the  past  in  the  case  of  the  European  project,  now,  in  the  current  context,  bold
decisions are more needed than ever. The completion of Banking Union is in many aspects a
way to restore European citizens’ confidence in the European institutions, build the necessary
trust between Member States and address the rise of Euroscepticism.
This  starts  by  putting  aside  the  risk  reduction  vs.  risk  sharing  debate  that  is  preventing  the
establishment  of  a  fully-fledged  EDIS.  EDIS  is  a  necessary  risk  reduction  instrument  that
reduces moral hazard  – and should be recognized as such. Recent research by the ECB has
shown  that  with  proper  risk-based  banks’  contributions,  an  almost  negligible  cross-border
subsidisation occurs.  The fear that EDIS could imply significant transfers across countries in
case of a new banking crisis is therefore unjustified. 
7
8
But establishing EDIS in isolation is not enough. Recent experiences put the topic of harmonising
EU banks’ liquidation regimes  on  the  agenda  of  policymakers.  But  what  does  bank  liquidation
mean? And do we have the tools to ensure its orderliness in the current context?
Before jumping into the harmonisation of liquidation regimes, it must be acknowledged that this is
not a silver bullet. Indeed, the considerable social and economic impact ensuing from the failure
of a bank with systemic relevance at local level would remain.
Recent  calls  to  form  a  sort  of  European  FDIC  (a  version  of  the  American  Federal  Deposit
Insurance  Corporation),  merging  the  Single  Resolution  Fund  (SRF)  and  EDIS  into  one  single
entity,   are welcome in this regard, provided that the legal framework is fixed and that financial
stability  –  both  at  European  level  as  well  as  at  national  level  –  is  enshrined  as  the  first  and
fundamental objective of any intervention.
9
In fact, the establishment of Banking Union was inspired by the American FDIC. However, it fell
short  of  providing  the  SRF  or  EDIS  with  right  instruments  and  means  to  guarantee  financial
stability. 
For this to happen, a clear definition of what constitutes public interest and critical functions is
required. In view of recent cases, it has been argued that public interest is likely to be a variable
of time and geography, “one at the EU level and another one by national authorities”.
10
 
This discussion cannot be taken only at technical level as its consequences are at the core of
Banking Union’s credibility. European citizens expect this from us. 
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Let me conclude.
One  should  not  underestimate  how  much  has  been  achieved  in  such  a  short  period  of  time.
Nevertheless,  the  foundations  of  the  European  architecture  are  still  not  sufficiently  robust  to
withstand the impact of a future crisis. This should be the focus of policymakers and relevant
institutions.
Decisive  political  will  to  move  forward  with  the  completion  of  the  Banking  Union  is  therefore
required, accompanied by a proper evaluation of the underlying implications for banks’ business
models.  
If  the  necessary  political  will  is  insufficient,  then,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  allow  me  to  say  this
openly:  instead  of  putting  ‘Band-Aids’  in  the  framework  to  compensate  for  the  lack  of  crucial
instruments,  let’s  collectively  recognize  that  it  is  urgent,  and  in  the  best  interest  of  European
citizens, that we revisit the existing rules now. If it turns out that it is not possible to complete the
Banking Union, we must structurally revisit the project. 
Otherwise, we risk both fragmenting the single market and realising we missed this opportunity
when the next crisis hits. In that case, we cannot expect European citizens’ forgiveness.
Thank you for your attention.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
As prepared for delivery.
Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament and the Council – A Roadmap towards a
Banking Union, COM/2012/0510 final.
Nouy, D. (2017), “Banking union, three years on – has it lived up to its promises?”, statement at the Single
Resolution Board Conference, Brussels: “Banks are supervised and resolved at European level, but in the event
of a failure, the negative consequences are felt mainly at national level. (…) If, for instance, the Spanish Banco
Popular had actually failed, Portugal’s deposit insurance scheme would have had to refund depositors in the
Portuguese subsidiary. That is a consequence of having supervision and resolution at European level. The
Portuguese authorities would not have been involved in either process.”
EBA,  ESMA  (2018),  “Statement  of  the  EBA  and  ESMA  on  the  treatment  of  retail  holdings  of  debt  financial
instruments  subject  to  the  Bank  Recovery  and  Resolution  Directive”,  EBA/Op/2018/03,  available  at:
www.eba.europa.eu/documents/10180/2137845/EBA+ESMA+Statement+on+retail+holdings+of+bail-
inable+debt+%28EBA-Op-2018–03%29.pdf 
Restoy, F. (2018), “Bail-in in the new bank resolution framework: is there an issue with the middle class?”,
speech  at  the  IADI-ERC  International  Conference  “Resolution  and  deposit  guarantee  schemes  in  Europe:
incomplete processes and uncertain outcomes”, Naples, 23 March.
Geithner, T. (2016), “Are We Safer? The Case for Strengthening the Bagehot Arsenal”, Per Jacobsson Lecture,
IMF–World Bank Annual Meetings, 8 October.
Smaghi, B. (2018), Financial Times Op-Ed “European banking union needs its final leg”, 21 October 2017.
Carmassi, J., Dobkowitz, S., Evrard, J., Parisi, L., Silva, A., Wedow, M. (2018), “Completing the Banking Union
with a European Deposit Insurance Scheme: who is afraid of cross-subsidisation?”, ECB Occasional Paper
208, April.
Constâncio, V. (2018), “Completing the Odyssean journey of the European monetary union”, remarks at the ECB
Colloquium on “The Future of Central Banking”, Frankfurt am Main 16–17 May.
10
Enria, A. (2017), “Q and A with Andrea Enria of European Banking Authority”, Interview with Politico published on
4 July 2017.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
