Mugur Isărescu: Meeting the challenges of volatility
Opening  speech  by  Mr  Mugur  Isărescu,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Romania,  at  the 
"Meeting  the  Challenges  of  Volatility"  Conference,  organised  by  the  Romanian  Financial 
Analysts' Association (AAFBR) and Chartered Financial Analysts (CFA) Romania , Bucharest, 
27 March 2018.
 Distinguished guests,
Ladies and gentlemen,
Good morning and welcome to the National Bank of Romania. Let me extend a warm welcome
to  our  keynote  speaker,  Ms.  Rachel  Lomax,  a  trusted,  longstanding  friend  of  Romania.  I  am
pleased  to  open  today’s  conference  – Meeting  the  Challenges  of  Volatility,  organized  by  two
prestigious  professional  associations,  the  Romanian  Financial Analysts’ Association  (AAFBR)
and  Chartered  Financial  Analysts  (CFA)  Romania,  with  the  support  of  the  National  Bank  of
Romania.  Here,  at  the  central  bank,  we  always  offer  a  friendly  framework  for  debate  and
interesting topics.
I will not go into detail about today’s topic, as I am sure that the panelists of the three panels will
bring  to  discussion  important  inputs  regarding: Global markets volatility and potential risks for
Romania (Panel I), Lending, regulations and capital flows volatility (Panel II), and How the fiscal
volatility endangers economic growth (Panel III).
Before  introducing  our  keynote  speaker,  allow  me  to  address  a  subject  which  is  not  part  of
today’s agenda, but is dear to our hearts.
th
A  hundred  years  ago,  on  the  27   of  March  1918,  the  union  of  the  old  province  of  Basarabia
(Bessarabia) with Romania was created. As we speak, the Parliament of Romania is holding a
solemn plenary meeting dedicated to the before mentioned event. The National Bank of Romania
had an important contribution during the First World War. Therefore it chose to acknowledge the
historical  moment  by  issuing  a  set  of  numismatic  coins  in  gold,  silver,  coppered  tombac  and
brass dedicated to this Union.
On the obverse, in the foreground, there is an image of the building of the National Council in
Kishinev where, on the 27  of March 1918, the union of Bessarabia with Romania was voted,
while in the background, there is an excerpt from the Union Act; the inscription “ROMANIA” in an
arch, the face value “100Lei, 10LEI, 1LEU, 50 BANI”, the coat of arms of Romania and the year of
issue “2018”.
th
On the reverse there are the portraits and the names of the three cosigners of the Union Act, i.e.
Ion Inculeţ, Chairman of the National Council, Vice-Chairman Pantelimon Halippa and Secretary
Ion Buzdugan; the inscriptions  “100 ANI  DE  LA  UNIREA  BASARABIEI  CU  ROMANIA”  and  “27
Martie 1918”.
Ladies and gentlemen,
Allow me to say a few words about/ introduce Ms. Rachel Lomax. She is back to Romania after a
decade  or  so  and  ready  to  share  her  valuable  40  years’  experience  and  expertise  in  policy
making and financial markets.
After  obtaining  a  Master’s  degree  from  London  School  of  Economics  in  1968,  she  joined  HM
Treasury. She was in succession: Principal Private Secretary to the Chancellor of the Exchequer
Nigel  Lawson  (1985–1986),  then  Deputy  Secretary  at  the  Treasury  and  then  Deputy  Chief
1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
Economic Adviser  (1990–1994).  In  1994  she  was,  for  one  year,  head  of  the  Economic  and
Domestic Secretariat of the Cabinet Office.
From 1995–1996 she was Vice President of the World Bank and Chief of Staff to the President of
the  World  Bank,  James  D.  Wolfenshon.  During  her  tenure  there,  Ms.  Lomax  negotiated
development programs in Romania on behalf of the World Bank. Her Romanian counterpart in
the  negotiations  was  Mr.  Florin  Georgescu,  our  First  Deputy  Governor  who  was  Minister  of
Finance at that moment. I can also see in the audience some of the people who were on the
Romanian negotiation team, me included.
From  1996–2003  Ms.  Lomax  was,  in  turns,  permanent  secretary  at  four  government
departments: the Welsh Office, the Department of Social Security, the Department for Work and
Pensions and the Department for Transport.
Then, in 2003 Ms. Lomax became Deputy Governor at the Bank of England, where she served
for  five  years  on  its  Monetary  Policy  Committee.  In  2005,  she  assisted  us  in  preparing  the
implementation of a new monetary policy.
Ms. Lomax joined the Board of Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation (HSBC) at a time of
great challenges for the global banking sector, in 2008, and served there for nine years.
Ms.  Lomax’s  vast  knowledge  of  the  financial  area,  as  well  as,  of  European  policies  is
successfully shared as she is currently member of the Board of the prestigious Breugel Think-
Tank, President of the Institute of Fiscal Studies (IFS) and trustee of Imperial College London.
Now, let me give the floor to our keynote speaker, Ms. Rachel Lomax. After her speech we will
proceed with the first panel – Global markets volatility and potential risks for Romania.
Thank you!
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
