  31.05.2018 
 “Banks’ traditional funding sources: opportunities for capital markets” 
Keynote address at 50th ICMA Annual Conference 
Javier Alonso 
Deputy Governor 
 
  Good afternoon. 
I would like to thank ICMA for its kind invitation to take part in this special day: ICMA’s 50th 
Annual General Meeting and Conference. It is a pleasure to be here and to speak to such a 
large audience of professionals from such varied backgrounds, representing, among others, 
issuers,  intermediaries,  investors,  capital  market  infrastructure  providers,  regulators  and 
supervisors.  
Capital markets being at the heart of this event, and banks being at the heart of my day to 
day work, what I would like to do in this speech is to highlight some developments related 
to  banks’  funding  sources  that  I  think  may  offer  new  opportunities  for  capital  markets.  I 
would also like to briefly touch upon Brexit, an event that is generating great uncertainty and 
for which careful preparation is required. All of it, from my perspective as Deputy Governor 
of the Banco de España and as member of the Supervisory Board of the Single Supervisory 
Mechanism,  which  explains  why  my  speech  will  be  focused  on  developments  in  the 
European Union.  
New opportunities 
Let me start with what appear to me to be promising developments for reactivation of the 
markets.  
Firstly,  the  renewed  political  commitment  reached  at  the  Euro  Summit  on  15  December 
2017  to  press  ahead  with  improvements  to  euro  area  governance  provides  new 
opportunities  to  accelerate  progress  in  areas  where  developments  so  far  have  been 
somewhat sluggish. Last week, the Banco de España held a high level seminar on the future 
of euro area governance titled “Strengthening euro area economic governance: short-term 
priorities and the long-term view”. A webcast of the seminar is available on the Banco de 
España’s website which I recommend to those interested in the subject. I will not dwell on 
this topic but I would like to say that, on the financial side, completing the Banking Union 
and fostering the Capital Markets Union must be at the top of the political agenda.  
Completing the Banking Union will help to weaken the links between banks and sovereigns 
and to be better prepared to deal with large macroeconomic shocks. Fostering the Capital 
Markets Union will help to promote greater diversification of private sector funding sources 
and greater robustness of private risk-sharing arrangements. These projects pay attention 
to the two main channels through which credit flows to the economy in Europe, and they 
are key blocks in EMU’s future architecture. A window of opportunity seems to be open now 
and it should not be wasted. 
Secondly, focusing on the Capital Markets Union, despite progress having been somewhat 
slow,  there  are  certainly  areas  where  advances  have  been  made.  Later  today,  the 
programme  of  this  conference  offers  an  opportunity  to  hear  directly  from  the  European 
Commission on the Capital Markets Union. Accordingly, my objective now is merely to point 
out a couple of areas where initiatives have been taken to reactivate specific markets. One 
of those areas is the securitisation market. Another one is the covered bond market.  
  3/6 
 Both securitisations and covered bonds have traditionally been important financing sources 
for banks and it is my opinion that they will regain importance in banks’ funding strategies 
as the ECB’s targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO II) progressively mature, 
opening up new opportunities for the markets. 
In the field of securitisations, despite the stigma that has surrounded this product since the 
recent financial crisis, the European authorities have considered that appropriately regulated 
and well-structured securitisations can contribute to diversify funding sources, to promote 
better risk management and, ultimately, to mobilise more funds for the real economy. 
For these reasons, two Regulations were published on 28 December 2017 in the Official 
Journal  of  the  European  Union  amending  the  regulatory  framework  applicable  to 
securitisations, in an attempt to harness their benefits, restricting the risks arising from their 
inappropriate use. 
One  Regulation  establishes  a  general  framework  for  all  securitisations,  and  creates  a 
specific  framework  for  those  that  are  to  be  known  as  STS  (simple,  transparent  and 
standardised).  The  other  Regulation  transposes  the  new  Basel  III  framework,  making 
amendments to the prudential regulation of credit institutions and investment firms, both for 
general and for simple, transparent and standardised securitisations, which will benefit from 
a better treatment. 
These regulatory changes may incentivise changes in banks’ funding and risk management 
strategies, and may trigger a renewed interest in securitisations, providing an opportunity 
to reactivate this market.  
Covered bonds are another instrument where progress is being made. In particular, on 12 
March  the  European  Commission  released  a  proposal  that  seeks  to  harmonise  their 
regulation in Europe.  
The proposal includes a Directive that specifies the core elements of what may be termed 
“European covered bonds”. It also amends banking prudential regulations, strengthening 
the  conditions  under  which  banks  investing  in  these  products  may  benefit  from  lower 
regulatory capital requirements. 
Once  the  Commission’s  proposal  is  approved,  the  Directive  shall  be  transposed  so  that 
banks may begin to issue as soon as possible instruments that benefit from the advantages 
of obtaining the “European covered bond” label. 
So, it is true that there is still a long way to go before these regulatory changes materialise 
but first steps are being taken to pave the way for more harmonised covered bond markets, 
which will foreseeably enlarge the potential investor base for these bonds. 
Lastly, in addition to the specific initiatives already taken under the umbrella of the Capital 
Markets  Union  to  activate  certain  markets,  I  would  also  like  to  mention  that  other 
opportunities  for  the  markets  may  arise  from  new  instruments.  I  have  in  mind  here,  for 
example, the recently created non-preferred senior debt instruments. This new category of 
debt instrument ranks behind ordinary debt in the order of seniority of claims in insolvency 
proceedings and extends the range of liabilities that banks can issue to comply with their 
4/6 
 MREL  requirements.  Some  Spanish  banks  started  last  year  to  issue  this  new  debt 
instrument and others will follow soon. 
Let me now turn to the other side of the coin. Despite the above examples of areas where 
good prospects may arise for market activity, there are also elements of uncertainty on the 
horizon, and one of them is Brexit. 
 Brexit 
On 29 March 2017, the United Kingdom notified the European Council of its intention to 
leave the European Union. This means that 30 March 2019 is, in principle, the “withdrawal 
date”. So far, in the draft Withdrawal Agreement, there is no specific regime with regard to 
financial services and this unquestionably generates a context of uncertainty that affects all 
market participants. Allow me to focus on how it affects banks. 
“Wait and see” is not an option. Banks need to prepare. Within the framework of the Single 
Supervisory Mechanism (SSM), the ECB, together with National Competent Authorities, is 
trying  to  communicate,  to  banks  which  may  be  considering  relocating  their  banking 
activities to the euro area, the SSM’s supervisory expectations on different aspects such 
as:  authorisations  and  licences  to  carry  out  banking  activities  in  the  euro  area;  internal 
governance and staffing arrangements; or authorisations and use of internal models.  
These  expectations  have  a  key  underlying  principle,  which  is  the  need  to  guarantee 
consistency across the existing and the relocating institutions, so that they both operate 
under the same regulatory, prudential and supervisory standards. 
There is another key aspect, which is the need to ensure that relocating banks are not empty 
shells.  The  concern  about  empty  shells  arises  because,  given  the  uncertainty  about  the 
future  relationship  between  the  UK  and  the  EU  and  the  cost  of  making  organisational 
changes, a good number of institutions are studying how to adapt to Brexit minimising the 
changes to be made to their structures, management and business models. They may be 
considering making extensive use of the capabilities of their UK headquarters through the 
use of back-to-back booking models for risk management, maintaining shared governance 
structures, extensive outsourcing within the group or keeping the bulk of their workforce in 
the UK through the artificial use of branches in the UK.  
Empty-shell banks do not have risk management and governance structures that ensure a 
safe continuation of the local business or a smooth wind-down in crisis situations, and may 
present operational risks and financial stability issues for the countries hosting them. 
For this reason, when assessing booking models, the ECB and national supervisors will pay 
attention  to  whether  banks  have  adequate:  (i)  internal  governance  and  organisation;  (ii) 
access to financial market infrastructures; (iii) booking and hedging strategies; iv) intragroup 
arrangements; and v) IT infrastructure and reporting.  
Lastly, another very relevant issue with regard to Brexit that I would like to mention is that 
of the transition period. 
 5/6 
 EU and UK negotiators have reached agreement that a transition period should be a matter 
of  mutual  benefit  and  have  set  the  principles  for  the  negotiation  of  a  transition  period 
between the date the withdrawal agreement enters into force and 31 December 2020. 
But this transition period will be part of the second phase of the negotiations and there will 
be no certainty about it until at least this autumn. Up to now, the EU and the UK are following 
different  strategies  and  even  use  a  different  wording  to  refer  to  this  transition  period, 
“implementation period” being the term used by the UK. 
More specifically, the UK has welcomed the agreement on the transition period and has 
sent out the message that nothing will change up to the end of the “implementation period”. 
Further, to transmit certainty to institutions operating in the UK, it has committed to bring 
forward legislation, if necessary, to create temporary permissions in the “unlikely” event that 
the withdrawal agreement is not ratified. 
The  EU  has  a  more  prudent  stance  and  recalls that  nothing  is  agreed  until  everything is 
agreed.  In  fact,  legal  certainty  will  only  come  with  the  ratification  of  the  Withdrawal 
Agreement by all sides involved in the negotiations. 
 In  this  context  of  uncertainty,  within  the  SSM  framework,  banks  are  considered  to  be 
responsible for taking the necessary steps to obtain all authorisations required for them to 
carry out their activities in a timely manner to make sure that they can continue to serve their 
customers after 30 March 2019. They are expected to present credible Brexit plans and to 
use  the  possible  transition  period  to  implement  their  plans,  not  to  delay  planning.  It  is 
acknowledged  that  adapting  to  a  scenario  where  the  UK  becomes  a  third  country  is 
challenging.  
Conclusion 
To  sum  up,  capital  markets  -  like  banks  -  are  facing  major  challenges  at  a  time  of  far-
reaching transformation. One of those challenges is the uncertainty that a structural change 
such as Brexit generates. But capital markets also find themselves at a juncture where, first, 
efforts made in recent years to reactivate specific markets may start showing results and, 
second, the European political context is such that there appears to be an opportunity to 
foster the Capital Markets Union and to contribute to deeper and more integrated markets 
in the European Union.  
Thank you for your attention. 
 6/6 
 