Mario Draghi: Monetary policy in the euro area
Speech  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  The  ECB  and  Its
Watchers  XIX  Conference,  organised  by  the  Institute  for  Monetary  and  Financial  Stability,
Frankfurt am Main, 14 March 2018.
 Over the past year, the ECB has progressively recalibrated its asset purchase programme. We
have thereby tuned our monetary policy stance to the changing pitch of the recovery – what I
1
have previously termed “accompanying the recovery”.
During  this  time,  the  economy  has  developed  even  more  strongly  than  we  expected  and
confidence in the euro area has increased. But it is not because real growth is strong that we
can declare the job done.
There is a very clear condition for us to bring net asset purchases to an end: we need to see a
sustained adjustment in the path of inflation towards our aim, which is a headline inflation rate of
below, but close to 2% over the medium term.
Thereafter, our monetary policy will have to be calibrated so as to ensure that inflation continues
along this path.
While we are now more confident than in the past that inflation is on the right track, risks and
uncertainties remain. For this reason, even once the outlook becomes less dependent on net
asset purchases, monetary policy still needs to be patient, persistent and prudent to guarantee
the return of inflation to our aim.
Developments in the real economy
The  economy  has  been  growing  consistently  above  current  estimates  of  potential  growth,  by
more  than  a  percentage  point  last  year. All  euro  area  confidence  indicators  are  close  to  their
highest levels since the start of monetary union, even if the latest readings came in slightly below
expectations. And there are signs of pent-up demand for both consumption and investment that
still needs to be satisfied.
For consumption, one useful indicator is the gap between essential purchases, such as food and
rent, and non-essential ones, such as electrical goods and holidays. Non-essential purchases –
which  make  up  around  50%  of  household  spending  in  the  euro  area  –  tend  to  be  postponed
during recessions and then to catch up as the business cycle advances.  Such purchases are
currently only 2% above their pre-crisis level, compared with 9% for essential ones. This implies
that discretionary household spending still has scope to support the expansion.
2
Business  investment  is  also  gathering  steam  as  uncertainty  in  the  euro  area  recedes.  It  now
stands 7% above its pre-crisis level and surveys point to continued strong investment demand:
capacity utilisation in the capital goods-producing sector is close to all-time highs for the euro
area and for the four largest economies. Moreover, housing investment is still 17% below its pre-
crisis  level  and  is  only  now  starting  to  pick  up,  which  will  likely  add  an  extra  impulse  to  the
recovery dynamic.
This  positive  assessment  of  the  growth  outlook  is  reflected  in  the  latest  ECB  staff
macroeconomic projections. Annual real GDP is forecast to increase by 2.4% in 2018, 1.9% in
2019 and 1.7% in 2020. Compared with the December 2017 exercise, growth has been revised
up for 2018 and remains unchanged for 2019 and 2020.
The  strong  performance  of  the  real  side  of  the  economy  is  also  visible  in  the  labour  market,
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
which  continues  on  a  recovery  path.  With  employment  rising  by  almost  7.5  million  since  the
trough in mid-2013 , all of the job losses recorded during the crisis have now been recovered.
The unemployment rate is the lowest since December 2008, despite a 2% increase in the labour
force in that time.
3
There are some questions about the quality of these jobs: we have seen a rise in part-time and
temporary  work.  But  surveys  point  to  continued  employment  momentum.  Employment
expectations  are  near  record  highs  for  both  industry  and  services.  We  project  that
unemployment will fall to 7.2% by 2020.
The contribution of monetary policy to these developments has been crucial.
Our non-standard monetary policy measures have had a decisive influence on credit aggregates,
as well as on bank-based transmission more broadly. We estimate that the growth rate of bank
lending to euro area firms would be roughly half as strong today without our measures. Bank
lending rates to firms would be almost 50% higher.
These positive findings are further buttressed by survey-based evidence. In the Bank Lending
Survey, participating banks reported that our asset purchases contributed to an improvement of
their liquidity position and their market financing conditions, and indicated that they have mainly
used  the  additional  liquidity  related  to  these  purchases  to  grant  loans.  Similarly,  the  ECB’s
negative deposit facility rate is assessed by banks to have had a positive impact on their lending
volumes.
These beneficial effects of our policy measures have been accompanied by improvements in
direct market financing conditions and, taken together, have made a substantial contribution to
the economic recovery. Considering all of the monetary measures taken between mid-2014 and
October 2017, the overall impact on euro area growth and inflation is estimated, in both cases, to
4
be around 1.9 percentage points cumulatively for the period between 2016 and 2020 .
All this has also been facilitated by two further factors. The first is the strengthening of banks’
balance sheets since the crisis, with CET1 ratios for significant banks rising by 580 basis points
above their 2008 levels. The second is the improving the debt sustainability of both firms and
households. Corporate and household indebtedness are now back to their early 2008 levels.
Developments in the inflation outlook
The key question then becomes how quickly stronger demand will translate into rising prices.
Both the ECB staff projections and those of other international institutions suggest that inflation is
moving in the right direction, over the medium-term horizon that is relevant for monetary policy.
The latest ECB projections foresee a pickup in headline inflation from an average rate of 1.4%
this year to 1.7% in 2020.
This  is  the  latest  in  a  sequence  of  projection  vintages  with  relatively  similar  end-points.  This
stands in contrast with the disinflationary period from 2012 to 2015, where we saw continuous
downward revisions to the inflation profile from one projection round to the next.
But there are reasons why we still need to firm our confidence in this forecast.
In particular, the performance of underlying inflation remains subdued compared with previous
recoveries.  Looking  at  a  broad  range  of  measures  of  underlying  inflation,  we  certainly  see  an
upward shift relative to the lows of 2015. But most measures have yet to show convincing signs
of a sustained upward trend.
This is relevant because underlying inflation provides the slow-moving trend that exerts a pull on
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
wage-  and  price-setting  in  the  medium  term.  Measures  of  underlying  inflation  can  therefore
provide  information  about  the  medium-term  “attractor”  to  which  headline  inflation  will  gravitate
5
once short-term shocks have faded out.
There are two factors that might explain why the reaction of underlying inflation to a strengthening
economy is slower than in the past.
First, the responsiveness of inflation to slack has weakened in recent years – a phenomenon we
have  seen  across  advanced  economies  as  they  recover  from  the  crisis.  Comprehensive
analysis by the Eurosystem suggests this disconnect should be temporary, as cyclical forces
linked to the crisis have been the main driver.  But it is still uncertain how persistent the effects of
these forces might be.
6
Second, the degree of slack itself is uncertain. Even if slack is now receding, estimates of the
size of the output gap have to be made with caution. Strong growth may be leading to higher
potential output, as crisis-induced hysteresis may be reversed in conditions of stronger demand.
And the effects of past structural reforms, especially in the labour market, may now be showing
up in potential output.
For  example,  three-quarters  of  employment  growth  over  the  recovery  has  come  from  older
workers and more than half from women. This is in part because past labour market reforms
have  encouraged  both  groups  to  enter  the  workforce  in  response  to  higher  growth.   If
substantially more workers can be drawn into the labour force, it would be possible for the labour
market to strengthen further without generating wage pressures.
7
In  this  environment,  policymakers  have  to  be  more  cautious  than  in  the  past  about  the
assumptions that underpin our forecasts – and simple policy rules based around estimates of
the output gap are no longer a useful guide for our actions. The severity of the crisis means that
we  cannot  rely  exclusively  on  traditional  historical  relationships  to  determine  how  quickly  real
developments will be passed through into nominal ones.
The key issues we need to examine are wage dynamics, their pass-through to prices, and the
possible risks to the inflation outlook.
Wage growth has been trending upwards for the euro area as a whole, rising by 0.5 percentage
points  from  the  trough  in  mid-2016.   But  consistent  with  the  weakening  of  the  relationship
between  slack  and  inflation,  the  adjustment  of  wages  during  the  recovery  has  so  far  been
atypically slow.
8
That said, our analysis suggests that, as the cycle advances, the standard wage Phillips curve
should hold better for the euro area on average. The unexplained residuals in the model – which
in  the  past  were  sizeable  –  are  diminishing,  suggesting  the  link  between  unemployment  and
wages should improve.
Moreover, the anchors for wage formation are gradually becoming more aligned with our inflation
objective.  Backward-looking  factors  appear  to  be  becoming  less  important,  and  the  forward-
looking anchor, inflation expectations, is strengthening.
Phillips  curve  decompositions  find  that  past  low  inflation  dragged  down  wage  growth  from  its
long-term  average  by  around  0.2  percentage  points  each  year  between  2014  and  2017.  But
these  same  analyses  suggest  that,  as  headline  inflation  recovers  to  more  normal  levels,  the
impact of past low inflation on wages could be waning.
In terms of the pass through from wages to prices, the signals remain mixed. As wages have
picked up, labour productivity has also recovered. Labour productivity grew by 0.5 percentage
points  in  2017,  more  than  offsetting  the  increase  in  compensation  per  employee  in  the  same
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
period. This has in turn caused the growth rate of unit labour costs (ULC) to slow, leading to
questions about how quickly we can expect rising wages to feed through into inflation.
There  are  reasons  why  this  phenomenon  might  be  temporary.  For  example,  in  conditions  of
stronger demand, productivity tends to accelerate initially because GDP rises more strongly than
capital and labour inputs, since it takes time to hire more staff or invest in new machinery. But as
these  inputs  catch  up,  productivity  growth  typically  slows,  and  wage  pressures  translate  into
higher ULCs.
At the same time, after a long spell of very weak capital formation, the strong performance of
business  investment  could  prolong  the  productivity  cycle  and  push  back  the  time  when  ULC
growth leads to price pressures.
So this is an issue we will have to monitor closely, especially in an environment where one has to
be cautious about extrapolating past relationships into the future. To build confidence that inflation
dynamics are on track, we will need to see the actual data improving over time, which means
stronger  evidence  of  both  strengthening  wage  growth  and  wage  growth  translating  into  ULC
growth.
Moreover, there are still two risks to the outlook that could – if they intensify – conspire to reduce
our confidence in the inflation path.
The first risk relates to the global environment, and in particular the possible spillovers of the new
trade measures announced by the US administration.
Our own internal estimates suggest that the first-round effect on the euro area of the proposed
measures is likely to be small, even if there is symmetric retaliation from US trading partners. But
there  are  potential  second-round  effects  that  could  have  much  more  serious  consequences.
These include the risk of retaliation across other goods and an escalation of trade tensions; and
the  potential  for  negative  confidence  effects,  which  would  weigh  on  business  investment  in
particular.
The  second  risk  relates  to  developments  in  foreign  exchange  markets  and  wider  financial
markets.
The euro has appreciated since the beginning of last year, and according to our analysis, this
has recently been driven more by exogenous factors – that is, purchases of euros that cannot be
explained solely by the economic expansion. This might weigh on inflation down the line as it
does not fully arise from stronger euro area fundamentals. So this is a development we need to
monitor closely.
In  terms  of  wider  financial  markets,  the  volatility  we  saw  in  February  has  so  far  remained
concentrated in equities, and the spillovers to other asset classes in the euro area that are more
correlated with sentiment indicators has been moderate. But should there be any further sharp
repricing in financial markets, we will need to monitor the consequences carefully.
Implications for monetary policy
So what does this mean for the sustained adjustment in the path of inflation, which is the key
condition for bringing net asset purchases to a gradual end?
A  sustained  adjustment  is  a  forward-looking  concept,  consistent  with  the  medium-term
orientation of our monetary policy framework.
It is not determined by the latest flow of data or the performance of any specific indicator of price
pressures.  Rather,  we  have  to  look  through  short-term  price  fluctuations  and  focus  on  how
inflation will develop at the end of a medium-term horizon. This means a span of time that is not
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
too short – as monetary policy cannot control inflation in the near term – and that is not too long,
because our commitment to our inflation objective has to be verifiable.
Specifically, a sustained adjustment requires three conditions to be in place.
The  first  is  convergence:  headline  inflation  has  to  be  on  course  to  reach  our  aim  over  a
meaningful definition of the medium term. The second is confidence: we need to be sure that this
upward  adjustment  in  inflation  has  a  sufficiently  high  probability  of  being  realised.  The  third
condition is resilience: the adjustment in inflation has to be self-sustained even without additional
net asset purchases.
As I said, successive rounds of projections give us comfort that inflation is on a rising path and is
converging  toward  our  aim  in  the  medium  term. As  for  the  second  criterion,  the  confidence
interval  of  our  baseline  projections  has  both  narrowed  and  become  less  skewed  on  the
downside.  Nevertheless,  the  upward  trend  of  inflation  is  still  subject  to  some  degree  of
uncertainty and downside risks have not disappeared. And this trend is still dependant on quite
some amount of monetary policy support.
This  is  why  the  fundamental  conditionality  built  into  our  reaction  function,  which  makes  the
horizon of the asset purchase programme conditional on a sustained adjustment in the path of
inflation, remains in place.
At  present,  our  policy  stance  is  made  up  of  three  main  elements:  the  flow  of  net  asset
purchases,  the  stock  of  outstanding  bonds  and  principal  reinvestments,  and  our  forward
guidance on the future path of key policy rates. But it is evident that the relative importance of the
different elements will evolve over time, in three key ways.
First,  net  asset  purchases  remain  necessary  for  now  to  validate  the  stimulus  that  is  already
priced into key indices of financial conditions and on which the inflation path depends. Thereafter,
when progress towards a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation is judged to be sufficient,
net  purchases  will  come  to  an  end. At  that  point,  next  to  our  forward  guidance,  appropriate
financial conditions will be maintained by our reinvestment policy.
Re-investments will ensure a continued presence in the market, long after net asset purchases
expire. The cumulative redemptions under the asset purchase programme between March 2018
and February 2019 are expected to be around EUR 167 billion. And reinvestment amounts will
remain sizeable thereafter.
Second, as regards the evolution of our policy rates beyond the end of our net purchases, we will
maintain the sequencing that is currently set out in our forward guidance, namely our pledge to
keep key interest rates at their current levels “well past” the end of net purchases. This time-
based  element  of  our  guidance  is  already  vital  today,  in  particular  to  ensure  that  our  policy
stimulus  is  not  weakened  by  premature  expectations  of  a  first  rate  rise,  and  so  financial
conditions remain consistent with inflation convergence.
Third, as we move forward in time, the anchor for monetary policy, and the main tool for shaping
the stance, will become the path of our key policy rates and forward guidance about their likely
evolution. Our forward guidance has assured in the past, and continues to assure today stability
to the short-end of the curve. As such, our communication, and rate path itself, will be calibrated
to ensure that inflation continues to evolve along a trajectory that is consistent with the sustained
adjustment path.
Adjustments to our policy will remain predictable, and they will proceed at a measured pace that
is  most  appropriate  for  inflation  convergence  to  consolidate,  taking  into  account  continued
uncertainty about the size of the output gap and the responsiveness of wages to slack.
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
We have proven in the past that our forward guidance is credible. This has been the case both
for  our  guidance  on  rates  and  on  our  reaction  function,  notably  when  we  laid  out  the
contingencies that would justify launching an asset purchase programme in response to a too-
9
prolonged period of low inflation.
Conclusion
To conclude, we currently see inflation converging towards our aim over the medium term, and
we are more confident than in the past this convergence will come to pass.
But we still need to see further evidence that inflation dynamics are moving in the right direction.
So monetary policy will remain patient, persistent and prudent.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Draghi, M. (2017), “Accompanying the economic recovery”, speech at the ECB Forum on Central Banking, Sintra,
27 June 2017.
This relationship is based on evidence from France and Finland in the 1980s and 1990s. For similar evidence
from the United States, see McCarthy J. (2017), Discretionary Services Spending Has Finally Made It Back (to
2007), Liberty Street Economics, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Data until 2017Q3.
Updated on 16 March 2018: Mario Draghi mistakenly referred to the period 2016 to 2019, whereas the correct
period is 2016 to 2020.
For further details, see Box 7 entitled “The relationship between HICP inflation and HICP inflation excluding
energy and food”, ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 2 / 2016.
See  “Low  inflation  in  the  euro  area:  Causes  and  consequences”,  ECB  Occasional  Paper  Series,  No  181,
January 2017.
Bodnár, K. (2018), “Labour supply and employment growth”, ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 1/2018.
All data on wages, productivity and GDP deflator components are until 2017Q3.
See  speech  by  Mario  Draghi, Monetary  policy  communication  in  turbulent  times,  at  the  Conference  De
Nederlandsche Bank 200 years: Central banking in the next two decades, Amsterdam, 24 April 2014.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
