Yannis Stournaras: Sources of financing of the Greek economy
Speech by Mr Yannis Stournaras, Governor of the Bank of Greece, at an event organised by the
Foundation  for  Economic  and  Industrial  Research  (IOBE)  and  the  Athens  Stock  Exchange,
Athens, 19 March 2018.
Ladies and gentlemen,
 It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  be  here  with  you  today  for  the  presentation  of  a  very
comprehensive IOBE report, which draws on a wealth of information to discuss, among other
things, the impact of the distorted growth model of the past and the pressing need to adjust it. I
am  also  glad  to  see  that  the  findings  of  IOBE  and  its  proposals  on  how  to  achieve  this
adjustment are in line with the recommendations made by the Bank of Greece in successive
reports. It is also encouraging that, even as a forced response to the crisis and with small steps,
this adjustment has been underway for a few years now.
The  protracted  and  deep  crisis  that  Greece  experienced  over  the  past  ten  years  has  brought
about three major changes that are relevant to its growth model. First, bank lending, which
used  to  be  the  main  source  of  financing  for  households  and  businesses,  collapsed.  Second,
private  investment,  residential  investment  in  particular,  shrank.  Third,  the  production  structure
became more extrovert against a background of recession in the domestic economy.
Starting with the changes in the real economy, the transition to a new, more extrovert
growth model has already begun and can be expected to continue. Businesses, adapting
to the new conditions of declining domestic demand, have strengthened their export orientation
and, as a result, the percentage of output that is exported has increased in all sectors. Exports of
goods and services as a percentage of GDP rose from about 19% in 2009 to 33% in 2017, i.e. by
14  percentage  points.  This  improvement  has  been  driven  by  goods  exports  and,  to  a  lesser
extent, by services exports. A case in point is the refinery industry, which has become one of the
most extrovert among manufacturing sectors.
Developments  in  productive  investment  as  a  driver  of  growth  have  been  less
encouraging. Overall, gross capital formation in the private sector has declined over the last ten
years, from 22% of GDP in 2007 to 8% in 2017 at current prices. Of this total 14 percentage point
decline,  the  largest  part  (11  percentage  points)  is  attributable  to  a  contraction  of  household
investment,  chiefly  in  housing.  Business  investment,  on  the  other  hand,  showed  a  smaller
decrease, but remains alarmingly low (4.8% of GDP in 2017, compared with 8% in 2007).
Excluding depreciation, net capital investment by businesses has remained negative since 2009,
standing at about €4.3 billion or –2.4% of nominal GDP in the third quarter of 2017. However, in
order for the capital stock and potential growth of the Greek economy to increase, positive net
capital  investment  is  crucial.  For  this  to  happen,  private  investment  must  rise  by  50%  in  the
coming  years.  Therefore,  the  Greek  economy  needs  an investment shock,  with  a  focus  on
productive and extrovert business investment, to avoid output hysteresis and foster a rebalancing
of the growth model in favour of tradeable goods and services.
One of the obstacles to the adjustment of the economy is the scarcity of investment finance.
In recent years, the household saving ratio has been negative. Businesses, on the other hand,
have  used  up  part  of  their  own  resources  in  recent  years  in  order  to  service  liabilities,  in  the
absence of profitability and access to market-based financing, also as a result of capital controls.
Turning to external financing, i.e. from banks and capital markets, bank credit remains subdued,
while alternative market financing sources are still underdeveloped. Businesses’ market-based
financing virtually collapsed during the crisis years and turned negative from 2011 to 2015. It has
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
since rebounded, but remains well below pre-crisis levels, while it has deteriorated anew since
the last quarter of 2016.
In an environment, post-crisis, of bank lending scarcity and tighter credit standards, businesses
have sought to cover their financing needs through alternative types of external financing, in
addition to their own resources. These alternative types included non-bank loans, i.e. loans from
domestic financial institutions other than banks, as well as foreign borrowing, mostly intragroup
loans  and  corporate  bonds  issued  on  international  markets.  They  also  raised  unlisted  equity
financing, while particularly muted was the domestic issuance of corporate bonds (€600 million
in 2017) and listed shares. Improved economic conditions helped Greek businesses with positive
growth prospects to regain access to international markets, with bond issuance coming to €1.1
billion in 2017, relatively more moderate compared with €6.3 billion in 2012–2014.
Small and medium-sized enterprises, which make up the vast majority of Greek businesses,
were  disproportionally  hit,  compared  with  large  businesses  with  high  credit  ratings,  by  the
continued  contraction  in  domestic  bank  lending,  given  their  almost  exclusive  reliance  on  bank
lending for their external financing.
The  supply  of  bank  credit,  traditionally  a  key  source  of  financing  for  Greek  businesses,
inevitably  decreased  during  the  crisis,  as  banks  faced  strong  pressures  on  their  liquidity,
profitability  and  capital  adequacy  from  the  combined  impact  of:  (a)  their  inability  to  access
international markets; (b) continuous deposit outflows; (c) the public debt restructuring; (d) the
recession, as well as strategic default practices, on the quality of their loan portfolios; and (e)
capital controls.
The  ECB’s  interventions  were  crucial  in  supporting  and  restoring  smooth  monetary  policy
transmission to the real economy. At the European level, credit growth turned positive long ago,
whereas in Greece it would have been far more negative in the absence of these measures.
The  improvement  in  confidence  in  the  Greek  banking  system  and  the tackling  of  the
problem posed by the high stock of non-performing loans can be expected to further boost
bank  lending.  On  a  positive  note,  the  annual  contraction  in  credit  growth  observed  during  the
crisis  seems  to  have  eased  considerably,  in  particular  with  respect  to  credit  to  non-financial
corporations, which rose in 2017 relative to 2016, as reflected in disbursements of new loans
with a defined maturity.
The  completion  of  the  two  pillars  of  the  Banking  Union,  i.e.  the  Single  Supervisory
Mechanism  and  the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism,  has  already  contributed  significantly  to
restoring  confidence,  as  the  supervisory  authorities  uniformly  and  strictly  assess  banks’
soundness and require banks to maintain high capital adequacy ratios and, at the same time,
improve  the  quality  of  their  balance  sheets.  The  completion  of  the  third  pillar,  the  European
deposit insurance scheme, will bolster confidence even further.
Reducing the high stock of non-performing loans will exert a beneficial effect on economic
activity  and  productivity  via  two  channels:  (a)  increased  supply  of  bank  loans;  and  (b)  the
restructuring of the productive sector. According to Bank of Greece estimates and research, a
reduction  in  non-performing  loans  will  help  reduce  banks’  financial  risk  and  drive  down  their
funding costs, while also boosting their capital adequacy.
This will gradually translate into higher loan supply and lower lending rates to businesses
and households. Meanwhile, business and household financial risk will decline as the economy
recovers, producing valuation gains on their existing assets and higher returns on capital and real
estate  property.  The  creditworthiness  of  households  and  businesses  will  therefore  increase,
enabling further support to investment demand. Finally, the resolution of non-performing loans
will free up resources which, if allocated to more productive businesses and sectors, will lead to
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
higher total productivity. Crucial will be the financial support to business start-ups, which have a
stronger growth potential than well-established businesses and can prove to be big job creators.
Today, the domestic banking system is clearly stronger than at the start of the crisis. Banks’
capital adequacy ratios are satisfactory, higher than the EU average; profitability, ROE and ROA
indicators have improved; and the actions taken to tackle the problem of non-performing loans
seem  to  be  bearing  fruit,  as  the  NPL  stock  is  continuously  falling  in  line  with  the  targets  set.
During 2017, the outstanding balance of banks’ non-performing exposures decreased by some
€11 billion, but still remains high (about €95 billion as at end-2017).
In  addition  to  the  NPL-reducing  impact  of  solid recovery,  further  NPL  reduction  can  also  be
expected to come from the acceleration of real estate e-auctions, which will help improve the
pricing  of  collateral  undergoing  liquidation  that  inevitably  loses  value  so  long  as  its  sale  is
delayed.  These  delays  hamper  the  development  of  a  secondary  loan  market,  as  well  as  the
implementation  of  other  measures  that  would  speed  up  judicial  proceedings  and  facilitate  the
active management of at least part of non-performing loans under legal protection, in particular
those presumably owed by strategic defaulters.
It is worth noting that, even in the cases where banks have agreed on multi-creditor workouts,
several months are needed to complete the relevant legal procedures before these workouts can
be implemented, obviously depriving the economy of resources. Following the publication of the
relevant guidelines by the European Commission, the possibility of transferring NPEs to one or
more central entities to be set up for this purpose could be considered.
However, despite the important role that banks will continue to play in Greece and the EU, in
particular  for  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises,  market  participants  have,  for  years  now,
pointed out the pressing need to expand long-term financing sources.
Apart  from  the  traditional  forms  of  investment  financing,  e.g.  bank  credit  and  guarantee
instruments,  more  active  use  could  be  made  of  the  capital  markets  or  alternative  financing
instruments such as the following:
(1) equity funding, including venture capital, equity crowdfunding and specialised platforms for
public listing of SMEs;
(2) hybrid instruments, such as convertible bonds and mezzanine finance, typically involving
debt instruments that, subject to a trigger, can be converted to equity;
(3) non-bank debt financing, such as corporate bonds, securitised debt and covered bonds.
With the exception of corporate bonds, market-based financing is virtually non-existent
in Greece for small and medium-sized enterprises, as shown by the present IOBE study, and is
also  very  limited  at  European  level.  In  the  EU,  market-based  financing  of  small  and  medium-
sized enterprises accounts for less than 15% of their total financing, and is very costly. A key
problem is that investors lack information on small and medium-sized enterprises. In this regard,
around 25% of all companies and around 75% of owner-managed companies in  Europe do
not have a credit score, according to the European Commission’s Green Paper on Building a
Capital Markets Union.
The extent of the problem across the EU led the European Commission, in 2015, to draw
up and launch an ambitious plan for building a single EU-wide capital market by 2019. The
plan  aims  to  improve  access  to  financing  for  all  businesses  across  Europe,  increase  and
diversify  the  sources  of  funding,  and  make  markets  work  more  effectively  and  efficiently,  by
removing  obstacles  that  make  investor  and  business  access  to  capital  markets  harder  and
costlier.
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Well-developed capital markets deliver considerable benefits to market participants and
economic activity in general. First, they enable businesses to diversify their financing sources,
thereby reducing their reliance on bank credit, and create an environment that is more resilient to
shocks. Second, they help to improve the allocation of capital in the economy and risk sharing,
by  offering  investors  a  broader  array  of  options  and  enabling  them  to  make  their  investment
decisions in line with their risk appetites and therefore finance even businesses that would have
been  seen,  by  banks,  as  too  risky  to  lend  to. Third,  equity  financing  in  particular  boosts
investment without necessarily increasing private debt in the economy.
Progress towards the creation of a Capital Markets Union has been steady, but rather
slow.  Of  the  eight  legislative  proposals  submitted  by  the  European  Commission  before  early
March 2018, three have been approved so far by the European Parliament and the Council and
concern: simple, transparent and standardised securitisation as an additional source of financing
in particular for small and medium-sized enterprises and start-ups; the European Venture Capital
Fund and European Social Entrepreneurship Fund Regulations, aimed to facilitate investment in
innovative companies; and the revision of the Prospectus Directive with a view to facilitating the
access of small and medium-sized enterprises’ to capital markets. The five remaining proposals
are  still  being  negotiated.  Meanwhile,  during  the  past  two  weeks,  the  European  Commission
released five new proposals on: an Action Plan on how to harness the opportunities presented by
technology-enabled innovation in financial services (FinTech) and crowdfunding; an Action Plan
on sustainable finance for a greener and cleaner economy; common rules on covered bonds as
a stable and cost-effective source of funding for credit institutions, especially where markets are
less developed, which would translate into lower borrowing costs for the economy at large; a
proposed  Directive  aimed  to  reduce  barriers  to  cross-border  distribution  of  investment  funds,
making  it  simpler,  faster  and  less  costly;  and  the  clarification  of  the  law  applicable  to  cross-
border transactions in claims and securities, promoting cross-border investment.
Once finalised and implemented, this legislative package can be expected to remove barriers to
the geographical  diversification  of  investor  portfolios,  which  reduce  market  liquidity  and
hamper  business  expansion.  Private  investors  in  the  EU  usually  keep  their  funds  in  bank
deposits  with  short-term  maturities.  Moreover,  institutional  investors,  in  particular  insurance
undertakings and pension funds, with traditionally long investment horizons, have reduced their
equity  investment  to  5-10%  of  their  total  portfolios.  The  Capital  Markets  Union,  by  facilitating
access to attractive investment on competitive and transparent terms, is expected to encourage
such investors to invest in equity instruments within the EU. This will help tackle the challenges
that population ageing and low interest rates pose to the viability of social security funds, while at
the same time opening up financing opportunities for businesses.
Overall,  however,  as  bank  credit  and  the  recourse  to  alternative  financing  sources  are  not
expected – at least in the short term – to increase enough to bring about the quantum leap in
business  investment  needed  for  sustainable  growth,  an aggressive  policy  for  attracting
strategic foreign direct investment is necessary. This need becomes all the more pressing
considering  that  the  saving-to-GDP  ratio  of  the  domestic  private  sector  dropped  dramatically
during the crisis, from 15.3% of GDP in 2007 to 3.8% in the first three quarters of 2017.
If the country is to attract foreign direct investment, priority must be given to eliminating major
counterincentives,  such  as  red  tape,  an  unclear  and  shifting  legislative  and  regulatory
framework, an unpredictable tax system, inadequate protection of property rights, and delays in
contract enforcement. Although foreign direct investment in Greece has been on an upward trend
for the past two years, starting, true, from low levels, its share in GDP is still well below that of
Greece’s South-eastern European trading partners, as well as the EU and euro area averages.
Emphasis should also be placed on promoting co-financed projects and systematically utilising
the resources of European Structural Funds under the new Strategic Reference Framework
2014–2020,  as  well  as  under  other  programmes  such  as  those  of  the  European  Strategic
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Investment  Fund  and  the  European  Investment  Bank.  The active  utilisation  of  these
innovative  financial  instruments and  of  the  advantages  they  present  over  traditional  grants
can  maximise  the  growth  impact  of  EU  resources  available  for  investment  in  the  Greek
economy.
These financial instruments provide opportunities for: mobilising and blending funds from various
EU,  public  or  private  sources;  revolving  funds  for  the  financing  of  other  investment;  and
leveraging additional public and private resources. In this manner, the final amount of financing
can  turn  out  to  be  much  larger  than  the  initially  available  EU  resources,  creating  a multiplier
effect for  the  real  economy.  According  to  a  European  Commission  report  published  in
December 2017, Greece has committed 9% of the total resources under the European Regional
Development Fund and the Cohesion Fund through financial instruments, compared with 19%
for Slovenia, 18% for Portugal and 8% for the EU as a whole. However, several of these financial
instruments, despite having been activated, remain untapped.
Bank  of  Greece  research  also  indicates  the  important  role  of  public  investment in  boosting
business  investment.  Higher  public  investment  is  expected  to  have  a  favourable  effect  on
aggregate  demand  and  total  productivity  in  the  private  sector  and  to  create  incentives  for
investment initiatives.
Most  importantly  however,  what  is  needed  is  a  continuation  of  reforms  and
privatisations, starting with the elimination of obstacles to large investment projects that have
already been agreed upon, but are lagging. Greece must consolidate investor confidence in the
continuation of reforms and convince that fiscal policy will not relapse once again in the wrong
direction, succumbing to clientelism and to a stifling by the State of private initiative. This would
have a positive impact on the terms of Greece’s return to the markets, improve market sentiment
and  help  attract  investment.  It  would  also  encourage  the  return  of  deposits  to  banks,  thereby
enhancing  banks’  lending  capacity.  The  above  would  set  in  motion  a  virtuous  circle  for  the
economy and the banking system and create the necessary conditions for investment financing
and a return to sustainable growth.
If consolidating confidence is a sine qua non for the above, i.e. for the increase of both domestic
and total investment, Greece must also take full advantage of the possibilities arising from
EU and euro area membership to create a financial safety net that would convince of its
ability to cope with any headwinds that could make its financing costs unsustainable, in particular
in an international environment rife with financial and geopolitical challenges.
Ladies and gentlemen,
Today, Greece faces the historic challenge of returning to normality and to a path of convergence
with its European partners. A return to strong and sustainable growth calls for maintaining and
implementing the structural reforms already legislated, as well as further crucial reforms in areas
that are still lagging behind, such as the tax system, public administration, the judicial system,
the link between production, research and education, the legislative and regulatory framework,
especially as regards the use of land, and the goods and services markets. It is obvious that only
on this condition can Greece once again become a friendly place for doing business, effectively
support productive investment and make a successful leap in total factor productivity.
In closing, I would like to underline that, in the long run, increasing investment require an increase
in private sector saving (by households and non-financial corporations), which, as I pointed out
earlier, has declined dramatically, dropping by 11.5 percentage points as a ratio of GDP, in ten
years.  The  fall  in  saving  was  particularly  sharp  in  the  years  2015–2016,  for  households  and
businesses alike. Admittedly, the capital controls combined with higher taxation led households
and businesses to tap their savings, in order to meet their current needs.
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
However, there can be no investment without domestic saving or, alternatively, without continued
foreign financing. This is why it is so important in the long run to restore the saving capacity of
the private sector. In this context, the development of the second and third pillars of the social
security system will not only ensure the system’s viability, but will also encourage households to
increase their saving and open up a new channel for the financing of business investment. This
will enable Greece, in a self-reliant manner, to increase its productive capacity and build the new
growth model on sound foundations.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
