Joachim Wuermeling: Collaboration instead of rivalry – thoughts on
a digital financial centre of Europe
Text of the SAFE Policy Lecture by Prof Joachim Wuermeling, Member of the Executive Board of
the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the House of Finance, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, 15
February 2018.
 1 Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen
I am delighted to have been invited to speak to you here today. I can scarcely think of a better
platform for my lecture than Goethe University’s SAFE Policy Center – and I say that for three
reasons.
First, programme directors Jan Pieter Krahnen and Hans-Helmut Kotz have made it their priority
to provide more opportunities to bring academics, policymakers and market participants closer
together  in  the  field  of  financial  market  development.  I  am  very  much  in  support  of  such  an
approach. I myself have moved, and continue to move, in all three circles, and I am aware of the
concerns  in  some  quarters.  Truth  be  told,  however,  academics,  policymakers  and  market
participants are natural bedfellows, even in the debate on Europe’s future financial centre, which I
would like to talk about today.
Second, universities have always been a key factor to consider when choosing where to locate
major financial centres. In London, for instance, it is commonplace to drop by university research
institutions  and  think  tanks  over  lunch  to  discuss  the  latest  financial  market  developments.
Goethe  University  has  long  since  recognised  the  wealth  of  potential  waiting  to  be  tapped  by
bridging the gap between theory and practice. In this sense, we are also doing our bit today to
add to Frankfurt’s appeal as a location.
Third, I have had the honour of being appointed to the SAFE Policy Council. With that in mind,
this talk is a debut of sorts.
So what is my lecture about? In a nutshell, it’s all about whether the rivalry between financial
centres in continental Europe is a zero-sum game, especially with respect to Brexit. Does one
financial  centre’s  loss  have  to  be  another’s  gain,  or  is  there  another  way?  I  can’t  give  you  a
definitive  answer  to  that  question,  but  I  can  feed  in  some  food  for  thought  for  a  variety  of
stakeholders.
I would like to proceed in three steps with three key messages:
First,  Brexit  marks  a  turning  point  that  will  weaken  the  City  of  London’s  role  as  continental
Europe’s  financial  centre.  On  a  side  note:  Incidentally,  I  will  be  using  the  term  “continental
Europe” throughout this lecture to refer to the EU after Brexit, which includes the Republic of
Ireland.
Second, a global financial centre – or, as Britons would call it, a “City” – can come into being in
the EU even after Brexit. Information technology is opening up the possibility of financial centres
in the rest of the EU becoming a networked digital city of Europe, which would, to a large extent,
overcome the existing fragmentation.
Third, if this became the new horizon of continental financial markets, a lot of stakeholders would
need to pool their resources for the project to establish a digital city of Europe. In this context,
policymakers can serve as a catalyst.
 1 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
But let us now turn our attention to the heart of the action by setting our sights across the English
Channel, on London.
2 Brexit – a turning point for the financial systemof the EU
London has long been not only the most important global financial centre, but also the main hub
for  Europe’s  financial  system.  Enormous  amounts  of  capital  flow  in  from  investors  on  the
continent. And from there capitals flow back out to the EU: to governments, financial institutions,
enterprises and households.
The City benefits from what are known as economies of agglomeration. In fact, the metropolis on
the Thames is often regarded as having its own financial ecosystem. The local concentration of
banks, funds, private equity firms and insurers, but also related service providers such as law
firms, auditors, consultancy firms and IT specialists makes for a wide range of financial products
and high market liquidity. With that in mind, there is virtually always demand to feed supply and
supply to feed demand in the City. Countless options are on offer to cater for the widest range of
tastes with respect to the magic triangle of return, risk and liquidity.
1
It  is  not  for  nothing  that  London  tops  the  widely  recognised  Global  Financial  Centres  Index ,
closely  followed  by  New  York.  Continental  European  financial  centres  trail  behind  in  these
rankings,  with  Frankfurt  in  11th  place,  Luxembourg  in  14th,  Paris  in  26th,  Dublin  in  30th  and
Amsterdam in 33rd.
London’s significance is also corroborated by hard structural data on individual financial market
segments.
The  United  Kingdom  and  London  in  particular  host  around  43  percent  of  euro  trades  on  the
foreign exchange market, which is more than twice as much as the share accounted for in the
rest of the EU as a whole.
The United Kingdom plays a major role as an issuing and trading centre on the bond market, too,
not  least  for  international  bonds  that  were  not  issued  in  the  borrower’s  home  market.  The
outstanding  volume  of  securities  issued  in  the  United  Kingdom  by  non-resident  borrowers,
primarily financial institutions, stands at around US$3 trillion. That’s the highest value worldwide,
and more than a quarter of that figure is euro-denominated.
On the equity market, market capitalisation on the London Stock Exchange is around double that
on  the  Deutsche  Börse,  the  leading  continental  European  exchange.  Comparing  monthly
exchange trading volumes, London outstrips Frankfurt by over 60 percent.
Around  70  percent  of  euro-denominated  OTC  interest  rate  derivatives  trading  takes  place  in
London. And an even greater percentage – some 90 percent – of these instruments are cleared
there.
With total assets amounting to the equivalent of around €9.3 trillion, the British banking system is
the  largest  in  the  EU.  One  indication  of  its  close  ties  with  continental  Europe  is  the  fact  that
around 20 percent of British banks’ balance sheet assets are denominated in euro.
It’s no coincidence that, of the 160 foreign bank branches operating in the United Kingdom, 77
are from the European Economic Area. Banks headquartered in continental Europe contribute 17
percent  to  British  banks’  aggregate  total  assets,  which  is  slightly  more  than  the  16  percent
attributable  to  US  banks.  Only  roughly  half  of  British  banks’  total  assets  come  from  British
institutions.
Other financial market segments in which London plays a prominent role are easy to find and
include funds, insurance, commodities and private equity.
 2 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Essentially, the City brings the demand and supply of capital together from all over the world.
These days, its distinctive role as a connecting and distributing point is of paramount importance
for Europe’s investment and financial flows.
But what will the relationship between the United Kingdom, or London, and continental Europe
look like in future once Brexit has been implemented? Signs are pointing to a watershed moment.
Many observers suggest that it will not be possible for London to remain the EU’s financial centre
once  the  United  Kingdom  has  left  the  single  market.  The  Wall  Street  Journal  wrote  recently:
London’s position as Europe’s financial centre is definitely under threat.
A fairly logical and highly probable legal consequence of Brexit is that the United Kingdom will
probably lose its EU financial services passport, meaning that banks domiciled there would no
longer have access to the European single market. As a result, it would no longer be possible to
sell a financial product  approved  in  the  United  Kingdom  anywhere  in  the  European  Economic
Area without barriers.
Of course, the same would hold true in reverse: Continental European institutions will also no
longer be able to provide their services in the United Kingdom without those same barriers.
In such a scenario, they might even be forced to establish a subsidiary in the United Kingdom so
as to continue to be able to serve their British customers. If no such arrangements were put in
place,  it  would  be  necessary  after  Brexit  to  establish  separate  legal  frameworks  in  individual
jurisdictions, be they in the form of licences for market participants or product approvals, in order
for the United Kingdom and the EU to conduct cross-border business.
The British want to strike an ambitious free trade deal with the EU under which the cross-border
trade in financial services would continue under the most favourable terms possible. However,
EU negotiators resoundingly rejected British calls for such a deal in late January.
In any case, conventional trade agreements have thus far not covered financial services to the
degree desired by the United Kingdom. The freedoms provided by the WTO are rudimentary at
best. Globally, the following rule still applies: all players need to comply with all locally applicable
regulations – regardless of the regulations in place at home.
Up to now, mutual recognition has been selective at best, only one-sided and, above all, only
made possible when it has been in the interest of the recognising country. For instance, the EU
has made 17 and 19 case-by-case decisions on the equivalence of US and Japanese financial
products respectively. However, all this means is that markets open up for individual financial
services.  It  has  nothing  to  do  with  comprehensive  passporting  rights.  Such  rights  would  be
conditional on joint European rules and regulations also applying to, and being enforceable in,
institutions domiciled in such non-euro area countries.
As  yet,  virtually  no  one  across  the  globe  has  ever  taken  the  objective  of  liberalising  financial
services seriously, which is why financial services have thus far largely failed to feature in trade
agreements. I doubt whether it is realistic in the EU-British case.
Look  at  it  from  a  supervisor’s  point  of  view:  The  EU  will,  at  any  rate,  no  longer  be  able  to
adequately  pursue  financial  market  policy  objectives  such  as  financial  market  integration  and
financial stability in the City of London.
As  the  Financial  Time  stated  a  few  weeks  ago:  Why  would  the  EU  give  up  any  measure  or
regulatory control over finance?
What this makes clear is that London will not, as some have suggested, maintain its current role
as the financial centre of the EU after Brexit. Even with the best will in the world, there is no
substitute outside the EU for the freedoms, rights and obligations that come with being part of the
 3 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
single market.
In various scenarios, financial institutions in London and the EU have a wide range of options
open to them. At this stage, most discussions simply centre on how to overcome the negative
effects of Brexit. But the current situation could also provide a good opportunity to look at the
suitability of business models from a more strategic point of view.
As  regards  the  many  options  for  financial  institutions,  just  let  me  say  this  much:  financial
institutions domiciled in the United Kingdom must be prepared to shift any continental business
that can no longer be carried out from there to the EU. Other business may well migrate to other
global financial centres if London’s attractiveness fades as access to the EU’s financial markets
becomes more difficult. Large foreign institutions could also move parts of the value chain back
to  their  home  countries,  or  business  with  continental  European  clients  could  simply  be
discontinued entirely if an EU presence is not worthwhile.
Conversely,  market  participants  who  have,  until  now,  conducted  transactions  with  British
counterparties  while  based  in  Europe  may  have  to  look  for  business  partners  in  the  EU.
Alternatively,  they  might  have  to  be  prepared  to  face  additional  legal  hurdles  if  they  wished  to
remain active in London. But in this case, London would then be competing with other global
centres since it would no longer be able to take advantage of the benefits provided by the single
market. Ultimately, it all depends on institutions’ individual cost-benefit analyses.
As a result, Brexit could, at least in theory, reduce the range of financial intermediation services
available in the EU, weaken institutions’ productivity, and reduce market depth. In a nutshell, it
could entail higher costs. And there is not the slightest guarantee that business will move to the
continent after Brexit. A fair number of people suspect that it may well be the financial centres
outside the EU that will emerge as the real winners after Brexit. New York, in particular, could
well benefit from Brexit, as could other global financial hubs such as Singapore or Hong Kong.
Frankfurt, Paris and Amsterdam are by no means in the second division in this tournament, but
neither are they candidates for the Champions League. As things stand, it is unlikely that any
financial  centre  in  continental  Europe  could  take  over  London’s  role  on  its  own.  Although
Europe’s  national  financial  centres  are  more  than  capable  of  processing  day-to-day  financial
transactions,  all  of  these  locations  lack  the  capacities  on  the  required  scale  to  handle  global
transactions, not to mention the service providers, consultants and infrastructure that surround
these.
So  let’s  not  be  under  any  illusions:  no  other  financial  centre  in  continental  Europe  can  fully
replace the City of London. Brexit could have a detrimental impact on and fragment the EU’s
major funding channels. From the point of view of financial market efficiency, financial market
integration,  financial  stability,  but  also  real  economic  development,  a  scenario  such  as  this  is
clearly harmful.
Initiatives are therefore needed. The most far-reaching objective would be to strive for a globally
significant financial market in continental Europe.
Until  now,  this  has  not  been  one  of  the  EU’s  objectives.  The  single  market  was  intended  to
increase  competitiveness  within  Europe,  the  banking  union  was  created  to  strengthen  the
resilience  of  the  European  banking  system,  and  the  capital  markets  union  was  aimed  at
increasing  the  possibility  of  cross-border  risk  sharing  via  the  equity  markets.  With  Brexit,  we
could  now  face  a  new  strategic  challenge:  setting  up  an  alternative  financial  centre  on  the
continent.
3 Even after Brexit, the EU will still have what it takes to become its own global financial
centre
 4 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
That brings me to my second step: What does a globally competitive financial centre require?
The Global Financial Centres Index, or GFCI, I referred to earlier lists five factors for success:
1.  Business  environment:  Financial  centres  perform  well  in  this  regard  if  their  framework
conditions mean that it is easy for (international) market participants to relocate there. Such
conditions  include  a  stable  political  system  that  includes  a  reliable  legal  system  and  a
consistent  institutional  framework,  efficient  regulation,  low  levels  of  red  tape,  a  lack  of
corruption,  cost  competitiveness  as  well  as  favourable  and  reliable  fiscal  conditions.  The
macroeconomic environment also plays a role.
2.  Human resources: How many people with the required level of education are available at the
respective  financial  centre?  The  more  complex  financial  transactions  become,  the  more
qualified  employees  will  have  to  be  in  order  to  continue  generating  business  potential.
Another element is the flexibility of the labour market.
3.  Infrastructure: In terms of infrastructure, the GFCI assesses the quality of many components
that are often taken as read in financial centres in modern economies. These include the
supply of residential and commercial real estate, the electricity and water supply etc., the
telecommunications  and  IT  infrastructure,  transport  links  and  connectivity,  in  particular  to
other 
increasingly,
environmental factors, too.
financial  centres,  educational  establishments  and, 
international 
4.  Financial  sector  development:  The  depth  and  breadth  of  clusters  of  resident  market
participants with similar or complementary features as well as sufficient availability of capital
and  market  liquidity  are  the  preconditions  for  good  market  access  and  intensive  trading
activity. They include. A high level of or dynamic economic activity at the relevant financial
centre is an advantage, although not decisive.
5.  Reputation:  Reputation  as  a  factor  for  success  depends  on  the  attractiveness  of  the
financial centre as a brand, how its creative potential and cultural diversity are perceived,
and what it has to offer in this regard compared to other financial centres.
Simply listing all these ingredients would not be doing justice to the GFCI. The index is not simply
a set of static building blocks. It is, in fact, a complex and dynamic system.
The importance of a particular success factor can vary depending on the level of development of
a financial centre. For example, while the business environment and infrastructure of a financial
centre tend to form a basis for success initially, human capital is more important at centres in
more advanced stages of development. At the top end of the scale, the smallest differences in
infrastructure can then start to play an essential role again.
The EU and, in particular the euro area, already tick the most essential of the boxes listed above.
For instance, we live in strong, diversified economic areas with high living standards and a broad
cultural landscape. Our political systems are stable and our legal frameworks are reliable. We do
business in a single market with a harmonised regulatory framework within which people, goods,
services and capital can move freely and quickly.
As a single currency, the euro enjoys global confidence. Around a fifth of the world’s currency
reserves  are  held  in  our  shared  currency.  Investors  in  the  euro  can  draw  on  a  huge  array  of
financial products.
The  regulatory  requirements  that  apply  to  financial  products  are  largely  standardised.  With  its
single  supervisory  mechanism  and  extensively  harmonised  regulation,  the  banking  union  has
continued to deepen trust in the European financial system. The emerging capital markets union
may move European financial integration even further forward. And we also have efficient market
infrastructures – for both payment and securities transactions.
 5 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
What’s more, the Eurosystem, and the Bundesbank in particular, is heavily involved in many of
these aspects – the single monetary policy, banking supervision, or market infrastructures such
as  TARGET2  or  TARGET2-Securities,  which,  to  a  certain  extent,  form  the  backbone  of  our
European financial system.
As the second strongest economic area in the world, the European single market easily has the
required global pulling power in any case. It offers financial market services and leads the way
worldwide in certain areas of research and (information) technology.
However, Europe’s overall potential is spread over various locations across the whole continent
and therefore does not have a cumulative effect. During the financial crisis, fragmentation along
national borders became even stronger. Its financial centres are competing with each other for
market shares, tax revenues and jobs. They do not pool their expertise and resources to face
global competition, but instead serve regional needs and niches.
Individually, each of the larger continental European financial centres has at least some of the
factors needed to become a global financial centre – just not enough.
Take market liquidity, for example. Supply and demand are not available in the required quantities
to be able to offer the entire range of products. The numbers I gave you earlier for London as the
main hub for Europe’s financial system are telling.
The  units  at  the  various  sites  are  too  small  to  provide  a  globally  competitive  cost  structure
through economies of scale.
The required services are insufficient to establish a comprehensive, fully functional ecosystem.
Specialist  knowledge,  for  example  relating  to  investment  and  financing,  accounting,  tax,  law,
information technology or consulting, is scattered across various locations that are hundreds of
kilometres apart.
As I already mentioned, a glance at London reveals that economies of agglomeration made an
important  contribution  to  its  growth  as  a  financial  centre.  Ultimately,  all  market  participants
benefited from the concentration of different – but complementary – stakeholders, even if they
were competing with each other. This concentration at a single location provided easy access to
a  wide  range  of  financial  services  which,  in  turn,  attracted  more  market  participants.  London
became more important, thus further boosting the city’s attractiveness – a self-reinforcing cycle.
This  makes  it  clear  that  it  is  spatial  proximity,  above  all,  that  has  made  successful  financial
centres like London possible in the past. In addition, uncomplicated and direct personal contact
was also made easier by the use of English as the “lingua franca” of the global financial system.
The resulting trust among those trading made it possible to make fast, sound decisions, leading
to commercial success.
However,  digitalisation  could  mean  that  geographical  proximity  may  become  less  and  less
important.  By  fully  exploiting  the  possibilities  and  potential  of  current  and  future  information
technology,  it  might  be  possible  in  future  to  overcome  distances  in  space  and  time  almost
without any losses in directness and efficiency in the financial markets, too. This creates a totally
new opportunity for the geographically fragmented continental market. But – my third step – how
to seize those opportunities?
4 Many stakeholders will have to join forces
In  a  competitive  environment,  a  leading  role  as  a  global  financial  centre  is  not  set  in  stone.
Looking  back  over  the  past  three  centuries,  the  balance  of  power  has  clearly  shifted  among
Europe’s  financial  centres.  For  instance,  in  the  18th  century,  it  was Amsterdam  that  held  the
leading position for a long time. As of the 19th century, London began to emerge as a leader
 6 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
driven by Great Britain’s position as a colonial power. Over the past 60 years, the City of London
has continued to cement its dominant position, boosted by stringent US regulatory requirements
and  tax  regulations  in  the  1950s  and  1960s,  Britain  joining  the  European  Community  in  the
1970s, the Big Bang of the 1980s under Margaret Thatcher and the controversial “light touch”
approach adopted by the UK Financial Services Authority around the turn of the millennium. The
Eurodollar and Eurobond markets were born in London, international – especially US – banks
relocated, securities trading business expanded and, later, London went on to become a centre
for – partly contentious – financial innovations. However, in the period of recovery following the
financial crisis, the City of London demonstrated its power of innovation. Yet this does not have to
spell the end of the story. And Brexit is not the only force of change at play. Digitalisation has
unleashed a period of upheaval that is calling into question the way in which established financial
centres usually function. New competitors with innovative technologies and business models are
challenging the traditional financial system. Digital platforms enable the supply of and demand for
financial  services  to  be  matched  much  quicker.  The  use  of  digital  instruments,  such  as
distributed ledger technology, is changing value chains; automated securities trading is gaining
ground.
With old structures becoming less rigid, a new opportunity is opening up for the financial centres
on the European continent; they can pool their potential and work together as a single financial
centre on the global market – not as a replica of the old systems, but in a new, forward-looking
way.
The  new  digital  technologies  provide  a  whole  host  of  ways  to  overcome  the  geographical
distance between individual locations. Various (financial) locations can connect as if they were all
in  the  same  place,  coming  together  to  form  an  agglomeration.  Real-time  communication,
distributed  leger  technology,  platforms  and  co-working  are  just  a  few  ways  of  reducing  the
importance of physical distance. Digital intermediation helps suppliers find customers, and vice
versa.  Just  as  value  chains  of  services  can  today  be  forged  across  continents,  the  inner-
European financial metropolises could work together. Regional markets could be merged on a
European financial platform to create a networked economy. With time, it may even be possible
to develop or at least maintain strong and stable personal relationships online.
The digital, decentralised market is definitely part of the future, and it is calling traditional financial
centres  into  question.  The  European  continent  has  an  incredible  opportunity  to  set  up  a
technologically first-class, networked financial hub from scratch and to become a highly relevant
global player. But what would this require? Let me briefly address five relevant issues.
First,  specialisation  and  cooperation:  The  utmost  challenge  is  for  the  financial  centres  in
continental Europe to limit their own range of services, to find a specialisation and – at the same
time – to cooperate online with other financial centres despite all the other competitors. However,
political  competition  among  financial  centres  is  likely  to  stand  in  the  way  of  this  approach  of
specialisation and cooperation. Market-driven specialisation could help to create economies of
scale and increase the potential for innovation which would, in turn, optimise cost structures and
strengthen competitive positions. Complementary cooperation could ensure the necessary range
and  quality  of  the  financial  services  provided  decentrally.  The  principle  of  cooperation  also
requires a culture of openness towards other international financial centres and players – which
is a prerequisite for successful global competition.
Second, digital infrastructure: Specialisation and cooperation require a digital infrastructure. The
financial centres in continental Europe need to be digitally networked in such a way that enables
the agglomeration effects I mentioned earlier to be generated.
For high frequency trading, a separate cable was installed in the Atlantic to connect London and
New York. Nothing similar exists between Paris and Frankfurt.
But we will not be on an equal footing with other global financial centres until digital intermediation
 7 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
on  the  continent  matches  supply  and  demand  in  a  more  effective  way  than  traditional  trade
practices.  We  need  to  create  digital  hubs  and  platforms  that  are  more  effective  than  in  the
analogue world. This requires not only future-proof digital infrastructures but also a pooling of all
parties’ digital power of innovation, be it financial institutions, infrastructure providers, IT service
providers or FinTech. This takes place already, as we could see in the recent past.
Third, a competitive legal framework: The principle of specialisation and cooperation as well as a
high-performance digital infrastructure are only two components of a whole range of elements
that a “digital finance hub of Europe” requires. In spite of all efforts aimed at harmonisation in the
EU, in many areas continental Europe still does not have a joint, internationally applicable legal
framework that can compete with English common law.
There are debates at the EU level as to whether the 28th regime could be used as an alternative
to the traditional harmonisation of legal provisions. This refers to a private law which does not
replace national legislation but provides an alternative at the European level, such as the legal
form “European company” (Societas Europaea, SE) instead of a public limited company. The
contractual parties can decide independently whether they want to apply such a law. This is of
particular interest in areas in which complete harmonisation does not appear possible or is not
easy to achieve. A 28th regime for business on a continental platform could be an option.
The  aim  of  further  harmonising  the  legal  framework  must  be  to  ensure  that  there  are  no
additional costs for cross-border transactions within the EU – either in a direct form, by means of
taxes or fees, or in an indirect form, for instance by requiring legal advice.
Fourth, compatible IT structures: The merging of existing IT architectures with the least possible
friction  represents  another  challenge.  This  requires  a  high  level  of  standardisation.  Ideally,
technical or administrative issues within the EU should not play any role in investment decisions.
Fifth,  market  forces  have  to  take  effect:  Specialisation  and  cooperation,  digital  networking,  a
competitive  legal  framework,  and  compatible  IT  can  help  a  digital  city  of  Europe  to  grow.
However, a project like this can only succeed if it is market driven. The market has to set the
agenda.
Policymakers could assume the role of a catalyst, sitting the main players down at one table. In
addition  to  market  participants  and  representatives  of  financial  centres,  these  could  also  be
operators of market and IT infrastructures or consultancy firms. One key is to strengthen the
links between the finance and IT industries – in the same way as has been seen in recent years
for FinTech.
There are numerous challenges to overcome in this context. As profit-driven companies, market
participants will naturally have different and, sometimes, clearly opposing individual interests, a
varying  degree  of  motivation  and  a  variety  of  target  coordinates.  However,  it  is  essential  that
inner-European  competition  is  not  seen  as  a  zero-sum  game  where  the  win  of  one  financial
centre is a loss for another, but instead that all financial centres develop their potential together
with everyone reaping the benefits.
5 Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen
Let  me  conclude:  It  is  clear  from  this  initial  outline  that  the  digital  city  of  Europe  is  a  very
ambitious project.
There is – of course – no guarantee for success. But I would like to cite an example from recent
financial history which illustrates the power of technology on the financial markets: the “battle of
the  Bund".  Maybe  some  of  you  can  remember  it.  At  the  end  of  the  1990s,  the  Deutsche
 8 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Terminbörse – the forerunner for today’s Eurex – succeeded in beating the London International
Financial Futures and Options Exchange to win option trading for German Bunds, which is still
important to this day. Years later, an English account of this episode from financial history states
“... Frankfurt leapfrogged us with better technology". And it is just this type of “leapfrogging” that
we need again now, in a team of continental European financial centres, on the digitalisation race
track.
The effort will be worth it, also from the specific viewpoint of a central banker. Our viewpoint is
made up of those targets – in addition to that of price stability – that we, along with the other
Eurosystem central banks, are pursuing, notably safeguarding the stability of the financial system
and  promoting  financial  market  integration.  It  is  a  great  deal  easier  to  do  so  if  the  majority  of
European financial market operations take place within our European jurisdiction. Yet that doesn’t
change  the  fact  that  open,  globe-spanning  capital  flows  and  financial  markets  are  still  highly
desired and necessary.
A self-assured digital city of Europe project requires the input of many stakeholders, all working
together in a new direction. The Eurosystem and the Bundesbank may not by any means be at
the fore but it can make recommendations and suggestions and help where possible to make the
project a success. However, the stimulus has to come from policymakers and the markets.
1
The  GFCI  is  published  twice  per  year  by  Z/Yen  Group  in  London,  and  the  China  Development  Institute  in
Shenzhen since 2015.
 9 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
