Jens  Weidmann:  Exploring  the  agora  -  lessons  for  a  more  stable
economic and monetary union
Speech by Dr Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  and  Chairman  of  the
Board of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, to the Hellenic Bank Association,
Athens, 30 August 2018.
1 Introduction
 Mr Karamouzis,
Deputy Prime Minister,
Governor Stournaras,
Representatives of the Greek political parties, the Greek banks and the Greek economy,
Ladies and gentlemen
Καλησπέρα! – Good evening!
It’s a great pleasure for me to be here today, in this beautiful country, in this vibrant city, in this
prestigious  hotel  on  Syntagma  Square  at  the  heart  of  modern  Greece.  Thank  you  for  your
invitation and your kind hospitality.
Allow me to start by saying that I was shocked by the TV images of deadly wildfires ravaging the
coastal areas of Attica, a few weeks ago. My thoughts were with the victims, my condolences
and sympathies go to their families and the entire Greek people.
Greece is often said to be the cradle of Western civilisation, and rightly so. One could say that
the Greeks invented the way we think. Or, in the words of the English poet Percy Shelley: "We
are all Greeks. Our laws, our literature, our religion, our arts have their root in Greece."   The
lasting  impact  becomes  obvious  when  one  considers  the  many  words  of  Greek  origin  in  our
modern-day  languages:  words  like  "policy",  "democracy",  "economy",  but  also  "idea",  "theory"
and "dialogue".
1
Austrian thinker Karl Popper observed once – and I quote: "The war of ideas is a Greek invention.
It is one of the most important inventions ever made. Indeed, the possibility of fighting with words
and ideas instead of fighting with swords is the very basis of our civilization, and especially of all
2
its legal and parliamentary institutions."
How could this kind of discourse have been invented? A key step may have been that ancient
Greeks  created  a  public  meeting  place  in  the  very  heart  of  the  city-state:  the  "agora".  Here,
citizens  exchanged  views,  discussed  politics  and  celebrated  cultural  events.  The  best-known
example of an ancient agora is situated not far from here.
Just a few years ago, Joachim Gauck, then Federal President of Germany, said in a speech that
Europe would need an agora in order to develop a common European civic spirit.  So this idea of
a forum for public discourse is still with us today. And, indeed, a culture of open debate and a
lively democracy are hallmarks of present-day Greece.
3
Yet the ancient agora not only allowed an exchange of views, but, more tangibly, also defined the
marketplace of a city (as it still does in modern Greece). Here, merchants and craftsmen sold
their products. In this respect, it set an essential foundation for prosperity.
The link between the economic and political spheres also provides the blueprint for my speech
this evening. In particular, I am looking forward to sharing some thoughts on the Greek economy
and my view on European integration with this distinguished audience.
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
2 Greece
2.1 Economic conditions
Ladies and gentlemen
Ten days ago, Greece successfully concluded the third adjustment programme. After more than
eight years, Greece is now ready to stand on its own feet again. This is really good news!
The Greek people have made a great deal of progress on the path towards fiscal and economic
sustainability.  Before  the  crisis,  Greece  had  an  enormous  twin  deficit.  In  2008,  the  current
account deficit stood at 15% of GDP, while the state’s budget deficit also peaked at 15% in 2009.
Last year, by contrast, the government ran a surplus of 0.8% of GDP, and the current account
was virtually balanced.
This impressive progress has resulted from comprehensive budget consolidation measures and
economic reforms that were implemented over the past years. It is true: these changes did inflict
severe social and economic hardships on the Greek people. Acknowledging the sacrifices, I have
great respect for the Greek people and the way in which you all endured this difficult period.
In the course of an arduous adjustment process, the Greek economy slid into a deep recession:
output  dropped  by  more  than  a  quarter  overall.  Now,  a  recovery  has  finally  set  in.  Improved
competitiveness due to labour market reforms and lower unit labour costs combined with rising
external demand is boosting the export of goods. Tourism is also booming. The Greek economy
has become more open. The economic turnaround is also bearing fruit on the labour market. In
the  first  quarter  of  this  year,  employment  surpassed  its  trough  from  late  2013  by  almost  8%.
Similarly,  the  unemployment  rate  decreased  from  roughly  28%  in  July  2013  to  19.5%  in  May
2018. At this level, however, it is still very high.
And this is not the only figure that shows that 20 August (end of the third adjustment programme)
is  not  the  finishing  line,  but  a  milestone  on  a  long  road  to  recovery. According  to  the  latest
Eurobarometer survey (Spring 2018), only a tiny fraction, namely 2%, of Greeks rate the current
situation  of  their  economy  as  good.  Perhaps  even  more  tellingly,  all  of  the  remaining  98%
perceive the economic situation as bad. That contrasts strongly with a more or less even split of
all EU respondents when asked about their respective economies.
All of this means that the economic recovery has not yet reached the population. To announce
"mission  accomplished"  would  be  premature:  the  job  is  not  done  yet.  Many  observers  have
stressed  the  need  for  an  even  more  ambitious  reform  agenda  if  stronger  and  more  inclusive
growth is to be achieved. Additional growth-friendly structural reforms would bring the economy
onto a steeper growth path, and provide greater job opportunities and faster growth in productivity
and real wages.
In this regard, I would like to highlight the particular importance of institutional reforms. Research
has argued convincingly that institutions are key in determining different levels of prosperity in the
long run. Moreover, legal efficiency could contribute to the public’s feeling that the political and
economic system is fair.
2.2 Banking system
A  more  prosperous  economy  would  also  help  the  Greek  banking  system  to  recover  from  the
crisis. However, the severity of the problem of non-performing loans means it will not simply go
away.
While  the  banks  have  demonstrated  their  willingness  and  capability  to  act  by  carrying  out
considerable  write-offs  and  sales,  I  fully  support  what  Yannis  Stournaras  recently  told  the
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Financial  Times  when  he  said:  "We  need  to  be  more  ambitious  in  reducing  non-performing
4
loans. The banks should pursue sales of NPLs more intensively".
In particular, a more efficient and liquid secondary market for non-performing loans (as called for
by the Bank of Greece) would spread the risks among more actors. A swift resolution of the NPL
problem would enable the Greek banking sector to fulfil its traditional role of providing credit to the
real economy and allocating funds to the productive sectors of the economy.
2.3 Fiscal policy
Now, after the conclusion of the ESM programme, fiscal and economic policies in Greece will be
watched closely. To quote Yannis Stournaras again: "The markets will take a tough approach."
And to that I would add: you can’t really argue with them.
Investors’ confidence needs to be regained and maintained. This requires, amongst other things,
an appropriate fiscal policy course. Thanks to agreed debt relief measures, liquidity needs will be
rather limited over the coming years. Further protection is provided by the cash buffer.
The route to future prosperity for Greece could lie in proving in the years ahead that it can stick to
a  sound  fiscal  path  and  bring  its  debt  ratio  onto  a  sustained  downward  trajectory.  In  such  a
scenario, markets would become increasingly confident about Greece, and the growing impact
of market financing would be bearable. This solid path may sound daunting. However, Greece is
currently  running  a  marked  structural  budget  surplus,  which  means  that  no  further  fiscal
contraction would be necessary.
3 The future of the euro area
Ladies and gentlemen
Allow  me  to  come  back  to  the  aforementioned  ancient  agora:  What  was  it  that  made  it  so
economically successful as a marketplace for exchanging goods? Obviously, it confined sellers
and buyers to a distinct space. This spatial concentration made it easy for merchants to find
customers, while the latter could easily compare prices. Thus, the agora reduced transaction
costs.  However,  such  a  market  also  creates  a  fundamental  problem.  Given  the  information
asymmetry between buyer and seller, the latter has an incentive to cheat by providing goods of
lower quality or in smaller quantity than agreed. Of course, the buyers will eventually notice the
deceit and stay away from such a market.
5
The ancient Greeks found a clever solution to this problem: they established public institutions to
improve  and  maintain  market  efficiency.   The  city-state  provided  standardised  weights  and
measures that merchants were obliged to use. For instance, the agora featured a stone table,
the  "sekoma";  it  had  several  cavities  which  were  used  to  measure  different  volumes.  Special
magistrates, the "agoranomoi", examined the quality of products and watched over the proper
conduct  of  transactions.  These  market  controllers  made  sure  sellers  and  buyers  were  held
accountable for their actions. They could impose fines – and carried a whip as a token of their
authority. In addition, the city-states minted coins by putting a stamp on silver discs. In Athens,
these coins bore the owls which have become synonymous with the city. Instead of weighing
and arguing over the precious metal content, market participants could simply count these coins.
The city-states guaranteed the quantity of silver and made the coins legal tender in the agora.
Of  course,  the  provision  of  public  goods  needs  to  rest  on  healthy  financing.  The  city-states
incurred  costs  by  setting  up  the  agora,  maintaining  it  and  paying  salaries  to  the  magistrates.
Thus, it was only fair that they also levied a sales tax ("to epónion").
Overall,  the  agora  is  a  fine  example  of  a  set  of  clever  institutions  reducing  transaction  costs,
aligning incentives, and thereby allowing markets to thrive. Nor is this lesson confined to the inner
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
workings of any economy. It also applies to the European context.
3.1 Lessons learned from the crisis
The crisis has taught us that economic and fiscal imbalances in individual member states are
not  just  a  national  problem.  We  learned  in  practice  what  one  of  my  predecessors,  Hans
Tietmeyer, meant when he predicted more than 20 years ago that a currency union creates a
fateful bond among its member states because interdependencies intensify dramatically. Indeed,
we had to learn the hard way how quickly a local crisis can evolve into a euro area crisis.
Some observers have stressed the magnitude of the financial aid that Greece has received from
other  euro  area  member  states  over  the  past  eight  years.  I  do  not  intend  to  downplay  these
efforts. However, it would also be wrong to look on the assistance as an act of pure generosity.
Underlying the solidarity was the realisation of our interdependence within monetary union and
the imminent threat to the financial stability of the euro area as a whole.
According to the Maastricht Treaty, which set the foundations of economic and monetary union,
economic and fiscal policies remain the responsibility of the member states. But such a set-up
creates vulnerabilities. It intensifies the deficit bias, as it allows costs to be shifted, to an extent,
onto others.
The founding fathers of the euro tried to provide for this well-known risk. They prohibited printing
money to finance government deficits, they ruled out government bail-outs and they established
an  excessive  deficit  procedure.  However,  repeated  breaches  permanently  impaired  the  fiscal
rules.  Germany  was  one  of  the  main  culprits  here,  as  it  –  together  with  other  countries  –
proceeded  to  water  down  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  in  the  early  2000s.  Moreover,  the
institutional set-up turned a blind eye to other macroeconomic and financial imbalances.
Overall,  the  framework  could  neither  prevent  nor  manage  a  crisis.  Given  these  institutional
shortcomings,  the  euro  area  member  states  share  responsibility  for  the  emergence  and
escalation of the crisis in this respect. We were all caught on the wrong foot.
As you know, the Greek Loan Facility in 2010 was created on an ad hoc basis. The institutional
framework has been adjusted and improved since then. One enhancement was to establish a
permanent  rescue  facility.  The  ESM  can  grant  conditional  financial  aid  to  member  states,  if
needed, to prevent a national crisis from jeopardising the stability of the entire euro area financial
system. Another substantial improvement was the launch of the banking union. In this context,
the uniform supervision of banks in the euro area is an important step towards a more stable
European banking system. And if a bank fails nevertheless, a clear liability hierarchy is now in
place.
Together with stricter financial regulation, the banking union and the ESM have undeniably made
the  monetary  union  more  stable.  If  there  were  new  upheavals  in  the  financial  system  or  in
individual member states today, the euro area would be considerably better equipped to deal with
them than eight years ago. At this point, a particular quote which is ascribed to the Greek writer
Plutarch seems appropriate: "To make no mistakes is not in the power of man; but from their
errors and mistakes the wise and good learn wisdom for the future."
3.2 Further reforms needed
As a matter of fact, European policymakers learned from past mistakes and did things better.
However, the achievements seen so far are not enough. There is consensus among experts that
additional reforms are needed to further reduce the euro area’s vulnerability to crises. Yet it is not
clear which path to choose going forward. For some time now, an intensive debate has been
taking place on the future structure of the monetary union. A number of concepts and proposals
are on the table. They differ over the weight they each accord to risk sharing and joint liability on
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
the one hand, and to individual responsibility, a rules-based regime and the avoidance of false
incentives on the other.
Either way, however, it is crucial for the stability of monetary union that the liability principle is
complied with. In a nutshell, it stipulates that whoever decides on an action must also bear the
consequences of that decision – by reaping the benefits or suffering any disadvantage or loss. It
would be neither fair nor sustainable if decisions could be made at the expense of others. Wrong
incentives would be created.
For  example,  insurance  can  encourage  the  policyholder  to  take  on  more  risks.  This  is  the
essence of moral hazard. And again, the ancient Greeks provide us with an illustrative example
since they may have been the first to come up with a commercial insurance scheme.
Back  then,  unpredictable  weather  conditions  and  piracy  rendered  maritime  trade  a  highly
dangerous venture. But the ingenious Greeks invented rather complex contracts for a loan which
could be used for equipping or repairing a ship and which would not have to be repaid if the ship
was lost on its journey. If the ship made a successful return, the creditor received its principal
plus massive interest on top, reflecting the risks involved and the insurance premium. However, if
the loan exceeded the value of the ship, there was an incentive for the ship-owner to simply keep
the loan and make off with it.
6
Thanks  to  a  speech  ascribed  to  the  Athenian  orator  Demosthenes,  we  know  of  a  certain
Hegestratos.   He  is  said  to  have  planned  to  sink  his  own  ship  during  the  journey  –  with  all
passengers  and  cargo  on  board.  Unfortunately  for  him,  he  was  caught  in  the  act,  jumped
overboard and was not seen again. Nevertheless, the incident, which may have been the first
case of insurance scam in history, led to a complicated legal dispute between an alleged co-
conspirator and a creditor.
Fast-forward  more  than  2,300  years,  the  Maastricht  framework  was  based  on  a  clear
understanding of the liability principle. Member states would remain autonomous in terms of their
economic and fiscal policies. The flip-side then was the "no bail-out" clause. Both actions and
liability were located at the national level and, thus, aligned.
Today,  many  Europeans  call  for  greater  risk  sharing.  If  such  a  joint  liability  were  established,
corresponding  sovereignty  rights  would  need  to  be  transferred  to  the  European  level,  too.
Otherwise,  the  set-up  could  contribute  to  a  possible  resurgence  of  unsound  developments.
However, my impression is that the willingness to cede sovereignty rights to Brussels is rather
limited in most of the euro area member states. For the time being, therefore, reforms must fit
within the existing Maastricht framework.
But that does not wholly rule out elements of joint liability. I concede, for example, that a common
deposit insurance could contribute to a more stable financial system, as it would reduce the risk
of bank runs.
However, the balance between actions and liability requires that risks that arose under national
responsibility  cannot  be  mutualised.  They  would  have  to  be  reduced  before  the  scheme  is
established. If not, a common deposit insurance would lead to a redistribution of inherited risks.
I am thinking here of the high stock of non-performing loans, but I am also thinking of sovereign
exposures  in  banks’  balance  sheets.  Since  the  debt  crisis,  we  cannot  go  on  pretending  that
sovereign bonds are risk-free assets. And that is why the Bundesbank advocates putting an end
to the preferential treatment of sovereign debt in banking regulation. The wrong incentives implied
should be reduced – gradually, of course. In any case, we need to avoid a situation in which
banks are highly vulnerable because they have stockpiled huge amounts of sovereign bonds.
In  the  current  reform  debate,  many  concepts  involve  new  fiscal  facilities.  For  example,  it  is
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
argued that a euro area budget would promote competitiveness and convergence of euro area
member economies. However, such a budget could be counterproductive if it raises the fiscal
burden  weighing  on  European  citizens.  Moreover,  it  should  not  create  new  opportunities  for
public borrowing, given already high debt levels. On the other hand, if it is part of a fundamental
reform of EU funds, a euro area budget could be a welcome development.
3.3 A strong euro area as part of a strong EU
Ladies and gentlemen
at  the  World  Cup  football  tournament  in  Russia,  European  teams  were  very  successful.
Admittedly, the Greek national team didn’t qualify and the Germans failed miserably. But the last
four teams were all from EU member states. When Brazil became the last non-European team
to drop out of the competition, our former national goalkeeper, Oliver Kahn, remarked on German
TV: "Well, at least we have a strong Europe at the World Cup." It was just a witty one-liner, but of
course he was not totally wrong.
We need a strong European Union beyond the football pitch. In fact, I would say we need it more
than ever. Europe is facing serious challenges: the reform of the euro area, the refugee crisis,
the  Brexit  negotiations,  international  trade  conflicts,  and  various  geo-political  tensions.  Events
and developments of the recent past underpin the necessity to act in close cooperation. We have
to work together, based on our common values. These values on which the Union is founded
include respect for human dignity and human rights, freedom, democracy, equality and the rule
of law.
However,  a  strong  European  Union  calls  for  workable  institutions  and  a  clear  focus.  The  EU
needs to concentrate on tasks which can be better performed at the European level than the
national – tasks that offer clear European added value. Areas in which this added value may be
found include defence, the protection of external borders, migration policy, climate protection or
the  expansion  of  digital  networks. A  common  asylum  policy  driven  by  a  spirit  of  solidarity,  for
example, would also help individual member states to feel less disadvantaged and abandoned on
account of their geographical location. On the other hand, the tasks that can be better handled
domestically than at the European level should be re-allocated to the national or regional level, in
line with the principle of subsidiarity enshrined in the EU Treaty.
Focusing the EU in this way would help making Europe stronger.
4 Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen
The  ancient  agora  can  teach  us  several  important  lessons.  For  one  thing,  it  provides  early
evidence  that  markets  function  more  efficiently  if  the  state  sets  an  incentive-compatible
framework in terms of smart regulation and law enforcement. The liability principle is essential.
And institutions matter. That was true for the functioning of ancient marketplaces and that is true
for the economic and monetary union.
"The whole is greater than the sum of its parts." This sentence, which is attributed to Aristotle,
concisely sums up the idea of European integration. In this context, Greece is more than the
cradle of Western civilisation: it is very much a part of Europe, and a prosperous Greece will
contribute to making the whole greater.
A more stable economic and monetary union is in our common interest. Much has been done –
in  the  member  states  as  well  as  at  the  European  level.  These  days,  a  shock  similar  to  a
sovereign debt crisis would not find the euro area as ill-prepared as it was in the past. But the
euro area is not yet fully crisis-proof. There is still need for further action. However, making the
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
euro area more stable does not require us to decide between solidarity and solidity. The opposite
is true: we need both solidarity and solidity.
Σας ευχαριστώ πολύ.
Thank you very much for your attention.
1
2
3
4
5
6
P B Shelley (1821), Hellas, preface.
K  R  Popper  (1963),  Conjectures  and  refutations:  the  growth  of  scientific  knowledge,  published  2002  by
Routledge, p. 501.
J Gauck, Europe: renewing confidence – strengthening commitment, speech on the prospects for the European
idea, on 22 February 2013 at Schloss Bellevue.
J Brunsden and K Hope, Athens told to stick to reforms or risk losing vital investment, Financial Times, 31 July
2018.
See A Bresson (2016), The making of the ancient Greek economy – institutions, markets, and growth in the city-
states, Princeton University Press.
See, for example, D M MacDowell (2004), Demosthenes, Speeches 27–38, Against Zenothemis.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
