                 An address by Francois Groepe, 
Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, 
at the 13th BCBS-FSI high-level meeting for Africa on  
‘Strengthening financial sector supervision and current regulatory priorities’  
 Cape Town, South Africa 
25-26 January 2018 
  Page 1 of 13 
 Introduction 
 Good morning, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.  
 It gives me great pleasure to warmly welcome you to Cape Town, South Africa, for 
the 13th  BCBS-FSI1  high-level  meeting for  Africa on  „Strengthening  financial  sector 
supervision and current regulatory priorities‟.  
 I would like to thank you for your attendance and wish to emphasise that the South 
African  Reserve  Bank  (SARB)  truly  values  such  interactions  which,  among  other 
things,  facilitate  the  sharing  of  each  of  our  views  and  experiences  as  well  as  the 
establishment  and  fostering  of  professional  relationships.  This  can  only  contribute 
towards  the  strengthening  of  cross-border  regulation  and  supervision  through 
enhanced relationships with our peers and thus contribute towards a safer and more 
sound global financial system. 
 Regulatory blind-spot quotes about the 2008 global financial crisis  
 The lessons learned from and the stories told about the global financial crisis of 2008 
can  never  be  referred  to  as  a  platitude.  The  crisis  continues  to  be  a  constant 
reminder  of  our  ostensible  blind  spots  as  well  as  the  incessant  need  for  us,  as 
regulators and supervisors, to be ever aware of avoiding regulatory and supervisory 
complacency – notwithstanding the charges of over-regulation and  the more recent 
attempts to roll back some of the reforms. 
 It is important to acknowledge that the financial sector and the risks associated with 
it  are  constantly  evolving.  It  therefore  follows  that  regulatory  frameworks  need  to 
evolve with the sector. Increased regulation should not be construed as a burden of 
over-regulation,  but  should  rather  be  viewed  as  evidence  of  the  evolution  of  the 
financial sector as well as the associated risks and the regulatory response to them.  
                                                            
1 Basel Committee on Banking Supervision – Financial Stability Institute 
 Page 2 of 13 
 I would like to share  a quote with you, which  relates to the  global financial crisis of 
2008. Barack Obama, the former US2 President, once said: 
  The question we ask today is not whether our government is too big or too small, but whether 
it  works  … Nor  is  the  question  before  us  whether  the  market  is  a  force  for  good  or  ill.  Its 
power to generate wealth and expand freedom is unmatched, but this crisis has reminded us 
that without a watchful eye, the market can spin out of control.  
This quote gives impetus to the need for avoiding regulatory complacency. Efforts to 
constantly  strengthen  and  enhance  our  regulatory  platforms  should  therefore  be 
viewed in a positive light.  
 Before  the  global  financial  crisis  of  2008,  while  the  banking  world  focused  on  the 
implementation of Basel 2, the extent of regulatory deficiencies  was not fully known 
and,  in  hindsight,  regulatory  and  oversight  weaknesses  were  clearly  more  than 
significant.    
 The crisis of 2008 has highlighted the extent to which financial groups are embedded 
within  economic  and 
financial  systems  as  well  as 
the  high  degree  of 
interconnectedness  and  which  significantly  increase  spill  over  risks.  Governments 
and  central  banks  in  a  number  of  jurisdictions  had  to  implement  crisis  resolution 
measures  to  stabilise  and mitigate  the potentially  damaging  effects  of  the failure of 
large financial groups on their respective economies.  
 The  way  for  Basel  3  had  thus  been  paved.  These  were,  in  essence,  reactive 
regulatory reforms in response to the lessons learned from the global financial crisis.  
 Failures  in  supervision  have  highlighted  the  shortcomings  in  traditional  supervisory 
frameworks,  where  oversight  was  restricted.  This  is  particularly  important  for 
financial  groups  that  operate  in  multiple  jurisdictions  and  conduct  cross-sector 
activities.  
                                                            
2 United States 
 Page 3 of 13 
 South  Africa  has  recognised  the  integral  importance  of  Financial  Conglomerate 
Supervision, and significant regulatory reforms have been introduced in favour of this 
supervisory  model.  The  intended  outcome  of  these  regulatory  reforms  is  to 
strengthen  domestic  financial  sector  regulation,  which  in  turn  should  play  a  part  in 
strengthening financial sector regulation on the continent.  
 Evidence of regulatory complacency and the existence of regulatory blind spots may 
reveal itself in the form of inertia with regard to the introduction of new and enhanced 
regulations. I am pleased to note, however, that since the global financial crisis that 
inertia has lifted, as is evident in the tightening of regulation and supervision of banks 
on a global scale. It is further chronicled by the regular publications of the BCBS. 
 Proportionality and bank regulation 
 The  Basel  Standards,  as  developed  by  the  BCBS,  are  designed  to  apply  to 
internationally active banks.  
 In  South  Africa,  proportionality  is  limited  to  the  regulatory  options  embedded  in  the 
Basel framework for each of the Pillar  1 risk categories. For example, for credit risk 
purposes,  banks  may  choose  between  the  standardised  approach,  the  simplified 
standardised  approach,  the  foundation  internal-ratings-based  approach,  and  the 
advanced internal-ratings-based approach.  
 In  2012,  the  South  African  Minister  of  Finance  approved  the  amended  Banks 
Regulations  that  incorporated  the  applicable  requirements  set  out  in  the  Basel  3 
framework. 
 The amended Regulations, including specific reporting requirements, took effect on 1 
January 2013. These Regulations continue to apply to all banks, with the exception 
of  mutual  banks and  cooperative  banks.  Additional  capital  requirements  have  been 
imposed on domestic systemically important banks.  
  Page 4 of 13 
 The  Regulations  continue  to  make  provision  for  separate  and  additional  capital 
requirements to be imposed on banks based on idiosyncratic risk factors in the form 
of Pillar 2b capital add-ons. 
 The SARB prefers a risk-based approach to supervision and applies the principle of 
proportionality  as  an  integral  part  of  its  regulatory  and  supervisory  frameworks. 
Additional reporting requirements are imposed on banks as and when necessary. 
 The  requirements  specified  in  the  Basel  Standards  remain  the  minimum  regulatory 
requirements for all South African banks, with the exceptions previously mentioned.  
 Expected loss provisioning 
 International Financial Reporting Standard (IFRS) 9, „Financial instruments‟, became 
effective  for  the  financial  periods  beginning  on  or  after  1  January  2018.  This 
international accounting standard will significantly change the manner in which banks 
determine  impairments  for  non-performing  loans  –  and  will  therefore  affect  banks‟ 
profits  and  capital  levels.  While  the  aim  of  IFRS  9  is  to  ensure  that  impairments 
recognised earlier than under International Accounting Standard 39, i.e. as soon as a 
significant  increase  in  credit  risk  has  been  identified  and  after  considering  forward-
looking  macroeconomic  information,  the  changes  required  to  data,  processes,  and 
systems are onerous and will require a much greater coordination of efforts between 
the various functions in banks, e.g. between the risk and finance functions. 
 Over  the  past  three  years,  the  SARB  has  engaged  through  various  means  with 
banks and the auditing profession to monitor the IFRS 9 implementation process by 
the  banking  industry.  A  significant  amount  of  time  was  spent  on  debating  technical 
accounting, financial modelling, and disclosure issues. There were and there remain, 
to some extent, some challenges to overcome.  
 For  example,  an  industry-wide  shortage  of  the  necessary  skills  and  resources, 
particularly suitable quantitative modelling resources, resulted in some banks finding 
it difficult to meet internal project milestones and targets. Consequently, some banks 
 Page 5 of 13 
 had to reduce the duration of their planned parallel runs prior to the implementation 
date.  Banks  with  operations  across  the  African  continent  were  also  experiencing 
challenges  with  regard  to  data  availability  and  quality  suitability  for  impairment 
modelling  purposes.  Furthermore,  IFRS  9  does  not  define  what  a  „significant 
increase  in  credit  risk‟  is,  and  it  was  left  to  each  bank  to  develop  an  appropriate 
methodology  that  would  meet  the  objective  of  the  standard.  The  industry,  not  just 
locally  but  internationally,  grappled  with  this  and  other  interpretative  issues.  The 
various  methodologies adopted will have to pass the rigorous  analysis and scrutiny 
that  are  expected  from  the  auditing  profession  when  they  audit  these  accounting 
entries.  
 It  should  come  as  no  surprise  that  IFRS  9  will  also  impact  on  bank  regulators.  For 
this reason, the BCBS issued a guidance document titled „Credit risk and accounting 
for  expected  losses‟  in  December  2015.  This  document  contains,  among  other 
things,  the  principles  that  regulators  will  expect  banks  to  follow  with  regard  to 
expected credit loss provisioning. In March 2016, the SARB issued Guidance Note 3 
of 2016, requesting banks to assess their current policies, processes, and practices 
against  the  principles  contained  in  the  BCBS  document,  taking  into  account  the 
nature, size, complexity, and risk profile of their activities. Compliance with the BCBS 
requirements will be a focus area for the SARB going forward. 
 Another important area relating to IFRS 9 that has received particular attention is the 
issue  of  disclosure  and  communication  with  stakeholders  such  as  market  analysts. 
The  SARB  has  engaged  with  the  Johannesburg  Stock  Exchange  on  what  its 
expectations are in terms of reporting to the market.  
 Given the substantial effort and dedication that has been and is still being directed at 
this  change  in  the  accounting  framework,  I  am  confident  that  we  can  expect  a 
smooth transition to IFRS 9 which will serve the overall banking sector well into the 
future.  
    Page 6 of 13 
 Declining correspondent banking relationships  
 Over the past few years, it has been reported that a number of the large international 
financial institutions have reduced their foreign correspondent banking relationships. 
This is a process commonly referred to as „de-risking‟. 
 Notwithstanding  the  underlying  reasons  for  de-risking,  its  culmination  may  be  that 
financial transactions are forced into less-regulated or even non-regulated channels, 
thereby reducing the transparency of financial flows and countering efforts  aimed at 
reducing  financial  exclusion.  This  will  inevitably  result  in  increased  risks  of  money-
laundering  and  terrorism  financing.  Furthermore,  the  decline  in  correspondent 
banking  relationships  renders  it  difficult  to  effect  cross-border  payments  and  may 
potentially  threaten  the  stability  of  financial  systems  in  the  adversely  affected 
countries.  
 The World Bank and the International Monetary Fund conducted studies in 2015 and 
2016 which found that one of the common key drivers responsible for the decline in 
correspondent  banking  relationships  was  the  fact  that  correspondent  banks  did  not 
find some of their correspondent banking relationships to be cost-effective and also 
perceived  the  money-laundering  and  terrorism  financing  risks  as  unmanageable.  A 
further contributing factor was the fear  of administrative sanctions and enforcement 
by regulators in the event of the correspondent bank being found to have inadequate 
systems  and/or  controls  in  place  to  curb  money-laundering  and  the  financing  of 
terrorism.  
 The  Eastern  and  Southern  Africa  Anti-Money  Laundering  Group  (ESAAMLG) 
conducted a survey on de-risking for its 2016-2018 work programme. A fair number 
of  respondent  banks  in  the ESAAMLG  region  indicated  that  correspondent  banking 
relationships  had  been  terminated  or  restricted  between  2011  and  2016.  The 
reasons cited for the terminations and restrictions varied and included, but were not 
limited to, concerns over money-laundering and the financing of terrorism. Countries 
that were particularly affected countries included Angola, Tanzania, and Zimbabwe.  
  Page 7 of 13 
 The ESAAMLG survey also indicated that not all respondent banks reported having 
found  replacement  correspondent  banking  relationships  or  having  made  alternative 
arrangements.  Once  individuals  and  entities  become  unbankable as  a  result  of de-
risking, the risk increases that underground financial systems may develop.  
 The magnitude of illicit capital flows in Africa  
 Illicit capital flows continue to present a serious problem to authorities, particularly on 
the African continent. In order to resolve the problem of illicit capital flows, there is a 
need for coordinated efforts in sourcing data from all countries in order to understand 
the  magnitude  of  the  problem.  One  of  the  reasons  is  that  the  availability  of  data  in 
respect  of  illicit  capital  flows  is  inadequate.  Organisations  such  as  Global  Financial 
Integrity and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development play an 
important  role  in  attempting  to  estimate  of  the  magnitude  of  global  illicit  financial 
flows.  There  are  however  significant  challenges  when  it  comes  to  conducting 
research in this regard.   
 African  governments  have  a  strong  interest  in  stemming  illicit  financial  flows, 
including  through  obtaining  the  cooperation,  compliance,  and  commitment  of  other 
actors. In the context of absent political will in some jurisdictions, there is a need to 
take  urgent  steps  towards  international  coordination  with  the  intention  of  collecting 
reliable data and addressing the problem of illicit capital flow.  
 The need for effective crisis resolution regimes  
 The most recent global financial crisis has demonstrated unequivocally that there is 
a  strong  case  to  be  made  for  robust  resolution  regimes  being  established  for 
financial institutions given their vital role in any country‟s economy.  
 The global financial crisis severely compromised the stability of the financial sectors 
of many countries. Even in countries where the direct impact was limited, significant 
indirect  consequences  were  experienced  due  to  the  subsequent  global  economic 
downturn.  
 Page 8 of 13 
  This  proved  that  more  stringent  supervision  is  not  necessarily  sufficient  to 
appropriately  safeguard  the  resilience  of  the  global  financial  system  and  that 
inadequate powers to deal with financial failures pose a financial stability and a fiscal 
risk. 
 The failure or distress of financial institutions  as well as the possible spillover effect 
that these failures can have on the wider economy is something that all countries are 
exposed to. History has also shown that disorderly bankruptcies lead to uncertainty, 
which in turn leads to a disruption in financial markets and a sharp fall in bank equity 
prices. To best deal with the risk that failed or distressed financial institutions might 
pose,  regulators  have 
to  ensure 
that 
they  have  appropriate  powers  and 
arrangements  in place  to  effectively  contain or  mitigate  the  risk(s)  that the failed or 
distressed institution poses to the wider economy. 
 The  Key  Attributes  of  Effective  Resolution  Regimes  for  Financial  Institutions  (Key 
Attributes)  set  out  the  powers  and  tools  that  national  resolution  authorities  should 
have  at  their  disposal  for  firms  in  all  financial  sectors  that  could  have  a  systemic 
impact if they failed. The Key Attributes also set out recovery and resolution planning 
requirements for such firms, and require that crisis management groups of home and 
key  host  authorities  are  set  up  to  coordinate  group-wide  resolution  strategies  and 
plans for global systemically important banks.  
 The  overarching  objective  of  the  Key  Attributes  is  to  assist  in  an  orderly  resolution 
without  making  use  of  taxpayer  funds  as  it  has  been  proven  that  the  injection  of 
capital  from  national  authorities  into  a  stressed  institution  might  lead  to  recurring 
calls  for  further  capital  injections.  The  Key  Attributes  therefore  aim  to  provide 
resolution  authorities  with  the  necessary  powers,  allowing  them  to  recapitalise  the 
stressed  financial  institution  and  to  avoid  making  use  of  public  funds  as  far  as 
practically possible. 
 It  is  important  for  resolution  authorities  to  have  these  powers  to  assist  with  orderly 
resolutions,  but  it  is  just  as  vital  to  put  these  powers  to  the  test  in  a  simulated 
 Page 9 of 13 
 scenario. To this end, simulation exercises are powerful tools to diagnose what is not 
working in existing crisis management regimes and to provide training in the form of 
„learning by doing‟. Simulation exercises are therefore useful in refining conceptually 
adequate crisis management arrangements. 
 Simulations,  especially  regional  crises  resolution  simulations,  are  important  for  a 
number  of  reasons.  The  resolution  of  a  distressed  financial  institution  in  one 
jurisdiction  can  have  an  economic  impact  on  other  jurisdictions,  especially  the 
neighbouring countries. Quick and adequate information sharing between home and 
host regulators is therefore critical considering that a chosen resolution option might 
be highly beneficial for the financial institution in distress but  that it can also have a 
negative impact in the host jurisdiction if there is a lack of coordination between the 
home and host regulators.  
 As an example: a banking group in the home country might find it beneficial to sell off 
one of its banking subsidiaries in a host country as it will relieve the liquidity stress of 
the  banking  group  within  the  home  country,  but  the  banking  subsidiary  might  be 
significant in the host country‟s financial sector and can therefore have far-reaching 
effects on the host country‟s financial stability.  
 Even  though  cross-jurisdictional  information-sharing  arrangements  are  in  place,  in 
times of crises it is likely that jurisdictions will first act in their own best interest before 
considering wider regional repercussions. 
 A regional crisis resolution simulation  would  therefore assist in testing the available 
resolution tools, the communication plans in place, and the possible knock-on cross-
border effects, thus allowing regulators to be better prepared in a real-life situation by 
ensuring  that  the  most  appropriate  solution  with  the  most  desirable  intended 
consequences is exercised. 
    Page 10 of 13 
 FinTech 
 Given the rapid developments in financial technology (FinTech), it is evident that we 
are  potentially  facing  one  of  the  most  severe  innovation-  and  technology-driven 
disruptions to products and services, particularly in the financial sector space.  
 Regulators  across  the  globe  are  grappling  with  understanding  these  technological 
developments and assessing the regulatory implications. We as the SARB favour a 
„back to basics‟ approach. Regulators should focus on regulatory principles that are 
risk-based  rather  than  creating  excessive  rules-based  regulations  aimed  at  these 
technologies  or  products.  For  example,  financial  regulators  do  not  regulate  the 
Internet, biometric technology, or mobile devices. Regulatory intervention should be 
appropriate and should be applied to the underlying economic function. In the case 
of  most  central  banks,  the  regulated  activities  should  fall  within  the  ambit  of  their 
regulatory  mandate  and  would  typically  include  deposit  taking,  payments,  lending, 
insurance, and investments. 
 The  SARB  has  recently  decided  to  establish  a  FinTech  Unit,  with  three  dedicated 
full-time staff members that report directly to me. This unit is required to strategically 
review  the  emergence  of  FinTech  and  assess  the  related  user  cases.  Its  primary 
responsibilities  are  expected  to  include  the  facilitation  of  the  development  of 
appropriate policy frameworks for the SARB across the FinTech domain. This will be 
done  by  robustly  analysing  both  the  pros  and  the  cons  of  emerging  FinTech 
innovations as well as the appropriate regulatory responses to these developments. 
 Besides  collaborating  locally,  the  SARB  actively  participates  in  international 
regulatory  and  standard-setting  bodies.  Work  undertaken  by  the  various  working 
groups  at  the  Financial  Stability  Board  and  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements 
has  been  proactive  in  trying  to  understand  FinTech  developments  and  robustly 
exploring its benefits, risks, and appropriate regulatory frameworks. 
 The  SARB  is  committed  to  staying  abreast  of  and  contributing  to  global  thought 
leadership on FinTech. 
 Page 11 of 13 
  Cyber-risk 
 In  addition  to  these  FinTech  innovations,  we  are  witnessing  a  rise  in  cybersecurity 
risk,  which  could  undermine  financial  stability.  The  rapid  adoption  of  new  and 
emerging  technologies  increases  the  possibility  of  technology  and  systems  failure. 
Customers  are  demanding  real-time  and  remote  access  to  financial  services  while 
institutions  are  sharing  data  more  freely  and  more  frequently;  this  consequently 
creates additional opportunities for cybercriminals. Increased access along with the 
rise  in  blockchain  technologies  increases  the  number  of  entry  points  for  cyber 
attackers.  As  interconnectivity  increases  the  attack  surface  for  cyber-hackers  into 
financial  systems,  institutions  need  to  develop  a  more  detailed  understanding  of 
mobile,  cloud,  Big  Data,  and  security  technologies.  Authorities  should  persist  in 
increasing  collaboration  with  industry  players  to  ensure  that  integrity,  security,  and 
privacy  are  all  part  of  the  design,  operation,  and  development  process  of 
innovations. 
 Conclusion 
 As has been said on numerous occasions: in these times that we live and operate, 
change is the only constant we are guaranteed. When presented with opportunities 
to learn from each other and to lean on the areas of expertise of our counterparts – 
global,  regional,  and  local  –  none  of  us  should  offer  any  resistance,  whatever  the 
reasons may be. Engaging and interacting with each other is a powerful tool that we 
should never take for granted.   
    Page 12 of 13 
 As the 19th-century French author Alexandre Dumas wrote in his famous book, The 
Three  Musketeers:  “One  for  all  and  all  for  one.”  This  is  very  relevant  to  us  as 
regulators  and  supervisors  who  each  play  a  part  in  maintaining  global  financial 
stability  in  our  respective  jurisdiction  and  in  the  process  are  contributing  towards  a 
more stable global financial system. 
 Please do enjoy the rest of this meeting day. 
 Thank you.  
 Page 13 of 13 
 