Harnessing Big Data & Machine Learning 
Technologies for Central Banks
Opening Remarks by the Deputy Governor of the Bank of Italy
Fabio Panetta
Rome, 26 March 2018
It is my great pleasure to open this workshop on ‘Harnessing Big Data & Machine 
Learning Technologies for Central Banks’, and to welcome the speakers and participants. 
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the organizers for putting together such a 
broad and topical program.
Big  Data  and  machine  learning  are  the  products  of  digital  technology,  whose 
widespread  adoption  has  important  implications  for  how  communication  occurs, 
education is delivered, and knowledge is spread. As we become accustomed to the new 
digital environment, we are seeing significant shifts in society. Around 80 per cent of 
Europe’s citizens own a smartphone, personal computer or tablet. The internet is widely 
used to gather information, communicate and carry out activities that directly or indirectly 
affect people’s behavior.
In Italy 80 per cent of consumers have access to the Internet via a smartphone; half 
of them have direct access to their checking account and buy goods and services online. 
Around  one  third  of  Italian  firms  has  automated  both  administrative  and  back-office 
activities. 
The effects of these changes are particularly evident in the financial sector. Globally, 
the number of users of payment solutions offered by tech giants such as Apple, Google, 
Samsung or Android has risen from 18 to 144 million in the last two years alone. Amazon 
Lending1 issued more than one billion dollars in loans last year (from June 2016 to June 
2017), three times more than the average over the previous five years.
In  broad  terms  Big  Data  is  the  application  of  new  techniques  to  digital 
information  on  a  size  and  scale  that  extends  well  beyond  traditional  approaches.2 
The word ‘big’ encompasses the volume, diversity and speed with which the data are 
generated. This idea is synthesized in the three V’s: volume, velocity and variety, as 
illustrated below.
1  Amazon Lending, the lending arm of Amazon, is a financing service for firms selling through the Amazon 
platform.
2  Lohr, S., ‘How Big Data Became So Big’, The New York Times, 11 August (2012).
Big Data: expanding on three fronts at an increasing rate
Figure
Data
Velocity
Data
Variety
MB
GB 
TB
PB
Data
Volume
Central banks could, and definitely should, play an active role in exploiting digital 
technologies and the enormous amount of data they generate.
The  flow  of  high-volume,  high-velocity  and  high-variety  information  on  agents’ 
preferences and choices can be put to good purpose by policy makers to make better decisions. 
Along with the traditional data stored in well-defined records, today mobile networks and 
social media generate a ‘data rainforest’ with diverse sources of semi-structured (such as 
XML or JSON) and unstructured data (audio/video and free text). The traditional and the new 
data sources can be used to construct better and more timely measures of economic activity.
There are prominent examples of Big Data being used for policy analysis. Big Data 
is used to estimate unemployment rates or the inflation rates, to improve the forecasts of 
policy-relevant variables, to compute measures of sentiment of consumers and firms.3
3  For  example,  D’Amuri  and  Marcucci  (2017)  show  that  models  using  Google  Trends  data  give  better 
predictions of US unemployment than those using standard leading indicators. Using online data from 
the Billion Price Project (BPP), Cavallo (2013) shows that while Argentina’s government announced an 
average annual inflation rate of 8 per cent from 2007 to 2011, the online data suggested it was actually over 
20 per cent, in line with the estimates of some provincial governments, and consistent with the results drawn 
from surveys of household inflation expectations. Goolsbee and Klenow (2018) use online transactions for 
millions of products from 2014 to 2017 to demonstrate that online inflation in the US is lower than in the 
CPI (by around 1.3 percentage points per year) for the same categories. In a similar vein, Daas and Puts 
(2014) compute a measure of sentiment of the Dutch public using social media messages, which are highly 
correlated and cointegrated with the monthly consumer confidence index obtained from the classic surveys.
3
The number of potential applications for central banks is enormous, but there are 
challenges ahead. The technical issues will be discussed in detail in this workshop, but 
I  would  like  to  mention  one  general,  methodological  problem  now:  before  using  the 
relationships  estimated  from  the  Internet  or  social  media  for  policy,  we  have  to  first 
ascertain that they are sufficiently robust, representative, and reliable. To do this we have 
to invest in research.
An  important  field  that  is  deeply  affected  by  the  innovative  technologies  designed 
to extract value from Big Data is financial stability. Fintech firms use Big Data and new 
technologies to create new products and grant continuous access to financial services. This is 
a welcome development, as it increases competition and stimulates productivity. However, 
the development of new lines of business and closer, direct interconnections between banks, 
other intermediaries and investors may well affect the stability of the system. Public authorities 
must carefully examine the changes induced by digital technologies and value innovative 
projects to preserve the stability, the efficiency, and the security of the financial sector. 
The complexity is increased by the fact that central banks are at once both users and 
producers of information and Big Data. Proof of this is the collection of highly granular data 
on individual bank loans by the Single Supervisory Mechanism (the so called AnaCredit), 
on daily money market statistical reporting by the European System of Central Banks, and 
on the trading repositories envisaged by the European market infrastructure regulation.
The sheer amount of these granular data makes it clear that the necessary validation 
processes cannot be performed manually, but will require sophisticated algorithms and 
techniques such as machine learning or artificial intelligence.
Central banks should master these new technologies. The Bank of Italy has created 
an internal multidisciplinary team on Big Data which includes economists, statisticians 
and computer scientists from different departments, working in close cooperation with 
the  Directorate  General  for  Information  Technology.  The  team  has  built  a  hardware 
and  software  infrastructure  in  order  to  deal  with  different  kinds  of  Big  Data  for  both 
macroeconomic and microeconomic issues. Some of the results will be discussed during 
this workshop. The analyses focus on using unstructured textual data from social media, in 
particular Twitter, to compute inflation expectations4 or to gauge retail depositors’ trust.5 
4  See C. Angelico, J. Marcucci, M. Miccoli, and F. Quarta, ‘Can We Measure Inflation Expectations Using 
Twitter?’.
5  M. Accornero and M. Moscatelli in ‘Listening to the buzz: social media sentiment and retail depositors’ 
trust’,  a  measure  of  retail  depositors’  trust  by  checking  Twitter  comments.  Banca  d’Italia,  Temi  di 
Discussione (Working Papers), 1165 (2018).
4
Social media are also used to assess customers’ sentiment towards specific companies and 
its effect on stock returns, volatility and trading volumes.6 Twitter and news are used to 
measure economic policy uncertainty and to focus on payment card scams, to then relate 
them to trends in consumer payments. Another strand of research uses data from single 
online  real  estate  ads  extracted  from  the  web  to  understand  the  microstructure  of  the 
Italian real estate market.7 
Let me conclude by thanking once again all the speakers, discussants, panelists and 
participants for being here. I look forward to hearing more about your findings on Big 
Data and machine learning, and their applications for central banks and policy analysis. 
It  is  important  that  this  workshop  brings  together  researchers  from  central  banks  and 
academia, who can provide a broad variety of perspectives. I am sure we will have two 
productive and interesting days.
6  See G. Bruno, P. Cerchiello, J. Marcucci, and G. Nicola, ‘Twitter Sentiment and Banks’ Equities: Is there 
any causal link?’. 
7  See M. Loberto, A. Luciani, and M. Pangallo, ‘The Potential of Big Housing Data: an application to the 
Italian Real Estate Market’, based on data from www.immobiliare.it. 
5
References
Accornero M. and M. Moscatelli, 2018, “Listening to the buzz: social media sentiment 
and retail depositors’ trust”, Bank of Italy Working Paper, No. 1165.
Angelico C., J. Marcucci, M. Miccoli and F. Quarta, 2018, “Can We Measure Inflation 
Expectations Using Twitter?”, mimeo.
Bruno G., P. Cerchiello, J. Marcucci and G. Nicola, 2018, “Twitter Sentiment and Banks’ 
Equities: Is there any causal link?”, mimeo.
Cavallo A., 2013, “Online and official price indexes: Measuring Argentina’s inflation”, 
Journal of Monetary Economics, 60(2): 152-165.
Daas P. J. H. and M. J. H. Puts, 2014, “Social Media Sentiment and Consumer Confidence”, 
ECB Statistics Paper Series, n. 5.
D’Amuri F. and J. Marcucci, 2017, “The predictive power of Google searches in forecasting 
US unemployment”, International Journal of Forecasting, 33(4): 801-816.
Goolsbee A.  D.  and  P.  J.  Klenow,  2018,  “Internet  Rising,  Prices  Falling:  Measuring 
Inflation in a World of E-Commerce”, Stanford University working paper.
Loberto M., A. Luciani and M. Pangallo, 2018, “The Potential of Big Housing Data: 
an application to the Italian Real Estate Market”, mimeo.
Lohr S., 2012, How Big Data Became So Big, The New York Times, 11 August 2012.
6
the Printing and Publishing Division of the Bank of Italy
Designed by  
