Øystein Olsen: The conduct of monetary policy
Introductory statement by Mr Øystein Olsen, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway),
at the hearing before the Standing Committee on Finance and Economic Affairs of the Storting
(Norwegian parliament), Oslo, 14 May 2018.
Accompanying slides
 Thank you for this opportunity to report on the conduct of monetary policy. My introduction here
today is based on Norges Bank’s Annual Report for 2017 and our monetary policy assessments
up to the monetary policy meeting at the beginning of May.
The  various  components  of  economic  policy  must  interact  to  achieve  sound  and  stable
economic developments over time – with high employment and low unemployment. The primary
objective of monetary policy is to maintain monetary stability.
Since 2001, the operational target of monetary policy has been low and stable inflation. This has
been retained in the new regulation on monetary policy issued by the Government on 2 March
this year. The regulation clarifies the monetary policy mandate and will not result in significant
changes in the conduct of monetary policy.
I will return to this topic later, but first of all I would like to go back to just over a year ago.
At the beginning of 2017, the level of spare capacity in the Norwegian economy was still fairly
high and there were prospects that inflation could remain below the inflation target in the coming
years. International interest rates were very low. Norges Bank had kept the key policy rate at 0.5
percent for a year, and there was a slightly higher probability that the key policy rate would be
reduced  further  than  that  it  would  be  increased  in  the  near  term.  There  were  signs  of  some
brightening, both internationally and in Norway, but considerable uncertainty prevailed.
Chart: Global GDP growth
The economic outlook changed through 2017. Global growth gradually gained a firm footing, and
global  growth  projections  were  revised  up.  For  several  of  Norway’s  main  trading  partners,
unemployment was lower towards the end of 2017 than before the financial crisis.
Despite  rising  growth  abroad  and  falling  unemployment,  wage  growth  remained  moderate.  In
2017, most of Norway’s trading partners were still experiencing below-target core inflation.
Chart: International interest rates
Policy rates in the US, UK and Canada were raised in 2017. In addition, the Federal Reserve
started  to  cautiously  reduce  its  balance  sheet,  while  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)
announced  that  it  would  reduce  its  asset  purchases  from  2018.  Nevertheless,  international
interest rates remain low, and signals from central banks as well as market expectations indicate
a very gradual rise in interest rates.
Chart: Oil prices and the krone exchange rate
Oil  prices  have  risen  over  the  past  two  years,  which  may  reflect  steady  growth  in  global  oil
consumption. Oil prices have recently increased further owing to geopolitical tensions. The krone
has appreciated somewhat in this period.
Chart: Mainland GDP
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
In Norway, growth in the mainland economy picked up through 2017 and the economic outlook
improved.  Low  interest  rates,  improved  competitiveness  and  an  expansionary  fiscal  stance
contributed to the upturn, while oil investment declined at a slower pace after falling sharply for
several years. Although the activity level in the Norwegian economy was still somewhat below a
normal level, the economy was emerging from the downturn that followed in the wake of the fall
in oil prices in 2014. Employment was rising and unemployment was falling.
The improvement in the labour market was reflected in a moderate increase in wage growth,
which  in  the  preceding  years  had  been  restrained  by  the  decline  in  oil  prices,  lower  capacity
utilisation and lower underlying productivity growth.
Chart: Consumer prices
The depreciation of the krone following the sharp fall in oil prices in 2014 and 2015 gradually fed
through to prices and resulted in higher inflation. As this effect faded and the krone appreciated,
inflation fell back. Both low imported inflation and weak cost growth in the Norwegian economy
contributed to low inflation in 2017. Underlying inflation remains below target, but prospects for
higher levels of activity and slightly higher wage growth indicate that inflation will rise in the period
ahead.
Chart: Debt ratio and interest burden
Elevated  house  price  inflation  and  high  debt  growth  have  increased  household  sector
vulnerabilities. After rising faster than household income for several years, house prices began to
fall in April 2017. The correction reflects the pace of housing construction, which has risen to a
high  level,  at  the  same  time  as  population  growth  has  shown  a  marked  fall.  In  addition,  the
requirements  in  the  residential  mortgage  regulation  were  tightened  on  1  January  2017.
Nevertheless, so far the correction seems to be limited, and house prices have edged back up in
recent months.
Chart: Key policy rate
The key policy rate has now been 0.5 percent for a good two years. The very low level of global
interest  rates  has  contributed  to  the  low  interest  rate  level  in  Norway. At  the  same  time,  the
Executive Board’s assessment through 2017 and into 2018 has been that there is a continued
need for an expansionary monetary policy.
The  projections  for  the  key  policy  rate  have  gradually  been  revised  up  as  the  outlook  for  the
Norwegian economy has improved. Economic activity is now approaching a normal level, and
inflation is projected to move up in the period ahead. Our latest analyses, presented in March
2018, suggest that the key policy rate will most likely be raised after summer 2018. At the same
time, the Executive Board has given weight to the consideration that uncertainty as to the effects
of a higher interest rate suggests a cautious approach to interest rate setting.
Chart: Consumer prices
Looking at the wider picture, we can, 17 years after inflation targeting was formally introduced in
Norway, draw the conclusion that the system has functioned well. We can now look back on a
quarter of a century of low and stable inflation.
Chart: Fluctuations in output and employment
A monetary policy oriented towards low and stable inflation has not compromised stability in the
real economy – in  fact, the opposite is true. Employment variability has been lower since 2001
than  in  previous  periods,  despite  the  substantial  shocks  that  have  impacted  the  Norwegian
economy.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
However,  lessons  have  been  learned  along  the  way.  Initially,  most  inflation-targeting  central
banks emphasised the importance of steering inflation towards the target within a clearly defined
time  horizon.  Experience  of  this  regime  provided  useful  insight,  and  ambitions  were  later
adjusted. International events, such as falls in global commodity prices and other major changes
in export and import prices, can have a considerable impact on small open economies. This can
result in wide fluctuations in inflation that cannot be counteracted without having a substantial
impact on the real economy. Norges Bank has addressed this concern by giving greater weight
to output and employment. The inflation target horizon has been extended and monetary policy
has gradually become more flexible.
Chart: Monetary policy mandate
The benefits of flexible inflation targeting were emphasised when the Government in March 2018
presented  a  new  regulation  on  monetary  policy.  The  new  regulation  specifies  that  inflation
targeting shall be forward-looking and flexible, so that it can contribute to high and stable output
and employment and to counteracting the build-up of financial imbalances.
In  the  interest  of  long-term  economic  stability,  fiscal  policy,  monetary  policy  and  the  wage
formation  process  must  complement  each  other.  A  shared  understanding  of  how  these
components interact is very important.
Monetary policy’s most important contribution to economic stability is to maintain monetary value
through low and stable inflation. Both too high and too low inflation can involve costs to society,
with  arbitrary  wealth  redistribution,  underinvestment  and  scarce  resources  that  may  be
misallocated  or  left  idle.  This  is  usually  referred  to  as  providing  the  economy  with  a  nominal
anchor. When households and enterprises can base their economic decisions on low and stable
inflation, this provides an important foundation for higher activity and welfare over time.
As  long  as  there  is  confidence  that  inflation  will  remain  low  and  stable,  monetary  policy  can
contribute to smoothing fluctuations in output and employment. When the economy is exposed to
shocks,  such  as  a  financial  crisis  or  a  fall  in  oil  prices,  monetary  policy  can  respond  rapidly.
Sufficiently  flexible  inflation  targeting  could  help  ensure  that  lower  employment  levels  do  not
persist  over  the  long  term  following  a  downturn.  This  can  reduce  the  risk  of  unemployment
becoming entrenched at a high level.
The  probability  of  a  pronounced  downturn  in  the  economy  has  been  shown  to  increase  after
periods of rapid asset price inflation and debt growth. Monetary policy can also to some extent
contribute to high and stable output and employment by giving weight to counteracting the build-
up of financial imbalances.
However, monetary policy must not be overburdened. If Norges Bank pursues objectives it does
not have the instruments to fulfil, confidence in monetary policy may be eroded. The regulation
and supervision of financial institutions must be the primary means of addressing shocks to the
financial system. Employment levels over time are determined by structural conditions, such as
the functioning of the labour market, the tax and social security system and the wage formation
process. In Norway, a well-functioning wage formation process has enabled unemployment to
remain low while wage growth has remained moderate.
The  new  regulation  underpins  Norges  Bank’s  flexible  approach  to  inflation  targeting.  In  the
conduct of monetary policy, substantial weight will continue to be given to the real economy. In
this  context,  whether  the  inflation  target  is  2.5  percent  or  2  percent  is  less  important.  At  2
percent, the inflation target is now at the same level as that of most of Norway’s trading partners.
The reduction of the target will not in itself significantly affect the short-term interest rate outlook.
Never before have global interest rates been as low for such a long period. Growth abroad has
now  picked  up,  and  there  are  prospects  of  a  gradual  interest  rate  increase  among  Norway’s
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
trading partners. The outlook is also brighter in Norway. In the two years since the cyclical trough
was reached, growth has gained a firm footing and the unemployment rate has declined. The
outlook suggests that it will soon be appropriate to raise the key policy rate – and this is a good
sign.
Thank you for your attention.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
