Vítor Constâncio: Interview in La Repubblica
Interview  with  Mr  Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  in  La
Repubblica, conducted by Ms Tonia Mastrobuoni on 15 January and published on 17 January
2018.
 In December, the ECB revised its growth estimates upwards and its inflation estimates
downwards.  You  seem  to  be  concerned  by  this  discrepancy,  and  especially  by  the
weakness  of  inflation,  as  the  minutes  [of  the  Governing  Council’s  December  2017
monetary policy meeting] make clear. How do you explain this?
This development is in line with a dynamic we are seeing in all the advanced economies. Growth
is  accelerating  but  inflation  is  still  not  meeting  expectations.  In  particular,  the  so-called  “core
inflation” for December – excluding food and energy components – has been disappointing: it fell
to 0.9% because wages still aren’t growing sufficiently.
But  aren’t  you  afraid  that  there  may  be  structural  reasons  for  this  sluggish  price
movement? Such as digitalisation, the internet economy, but also the weak position of an
ever  increasing  number  of  people  on  precarious  contracts  who  do  not  have  the
leverage to obtain wage rises?
Yes, the weakness of wages does play a role, as does technology, but nobody knows precisely
the scale of the impact of technology.
Isn’t  it  ironic  that  the  guardians  of  the  currency  and  wage  moderation  should  be
encouraging trade unions and workers to be bolder?
The situation has changed. Historically, central banks have often faced inflationary pressures.
Now  we  are  in  a  new  environment  that  has  to  do  with  many  structural  factors  but  also  with
secular stagnation.
So we are facing secular stagnation?
Well, there has been modest growth, and all the indicators say that it will continue like that in the
advanced economies for many years.
But some people in the United States think there is a risk of a leap in inflation.
There are always risks but I don’t think this will be a problem for the euro area for some time to
come. Inflation is weak and will remain so for some time in all the developed countries.
Are there hidden risks in the current divergence between the Fed, which is expected to
increase rates three times this year, and the ECB?
There’s  been  a  divergence  several  times  since  the  start  of  the  crisis.  Central  banks  must
respond to the particular fundamental situations of their respective economies. When they do,
this  does  not  in  itself  cause  problems  for  financial  markets.  This  is  what  is  happening.
Admittedly, the US is further on in the cycle and the Fed’s monetary policy is responding to these
developments.
Do you see risks to financial stability from, to say the least, the erratic policies of Donald
Trump?
Risks  to  the  global  economy  come  mainly  from  the  possible  reversal  of  risk  premia  in  bond
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
markets. A fall in prices and an increase in yields, if sudden and disorderly, could be a threat. We
hope that the adjustment to increased growth, and higher inflation in the future, will be gradual.
Are you worried by the recent increase in the exchange rate of the euro?
Looking at fundamentals, inflation declined slightly in December. As it is known, we don’t target
the exchange rate. But I am concerned about sudden movements which don’t reflect changes in
fundamentals.
In  the  minutes  of  the  December  meeting  it  says  that  forward  guidance  “could  be
revisited” early this year. Does that mean that we should expect an increase in rates
ahead of time, even this year? Or what does that mean?
It refers to how our forward guidance operates, to the fact that the assessment of our policy in
relation to our objectives must include all monetary policy instruments. We see the need for a
gradual adjustment of all the elements of our forward guidance if the economy continues to grow
and  inflation  continues  to  move  towards  our  goal.  This  does  not  mean  that  changes  will  be
immediate.
In other words?
We are not changing the path of our monetary policy. With the decision to halve our monthly
bond  purchases  we  have  adapted  our  monetary  policy  to  the  new  economic  context  and
consequently to the higher inflation ahead. But this does not mean that monetary policy will not
remain very accommodative for a long time. We see no inflation risks. We should not choke off
growth too soon.
QE will last until September: do you think it should then finally come to an end, as some
of your colleagues have been saying?
That’s  not  a  very  relevant  question  for  me  because  monetary  policy  works  over  the  medium
term. A few months either way won’t make much of a difference.
But allow me to express a doubt: going from a purchase level of €30 billion to zero could
shock the markets.
I  would  limit  myself  to  saying  that  in  the  subsequent  part  of  the  programme  we  will  have  to
proceed cautiously, i.e. gradually.
What will happen to the bonds – will you continue to reinvest them? The Fed has already
started to shrink its balance sheet.
We are reinvesting them and have so far given no indication of wanting to stop. All will depend on
how the economic climate develops.
In Germany there’s a slight possibility of a “grand” coalition being formed, which could
herald a Franco-German commitment to reforming the euro area. What do you make of
that?
There are many ideas around and it’s the task of governments to decide. Technically, the two
most important things, I think, are the completion of the banking union with the deposit insurance
scheme, and the creation of an ad hoc fund with a stabilising role, if need be, to help manage
growth.  I  have  not  heard  any  convincing  arguments  in  favour  of  transforming  the  European
Stability Mechanism (ESM) into a European Monetary Fund.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Would you keep it as it is?
Yes. It has its tasks; it performs them well. The European Commission has its role as guardian
of  the  treaties  and  it  monitors  the  countries’  adjustment  programmes. And  one  of  the  major
things in recent years has been the huge adjustments in the countries which ended up under
most pressure during the crisis. All these countries are now growing.
You mean the so-called “peripherals” which have asked for assistance in exchange for
adjustments?
Exactly, these countries, except for Spain, which is recovering, have deficits below 3% and have
primary  and  current  account  surpluses.  The  account  and  economic  adjustments  have  been
extremely significant, and have been the result of improvement and reform programmes. The
IMF and the ECB agree that the current account surplus of the countries that have followed an
adjustment programme is structural and not the result of reduced import quotas. So if there have
been improvements, why change the role of the ESM?
So you are against the idea that the ESM might become a budgetary control authority, as
some have suggested?
Many ideas are being discussed; the point I am making is that the European Commission had
responsibility for the adjustments in these countries, and it worked.
So  it  was  right  to  give  those  countries  flexibility  on  their  budgets  to  create  room  to
undertake reforms?
The point is that everyone is now full of praise for the efforts undertaken in those countries that
are or were subject to an adjustment programme. That is what counts. So I don’t see any reason
to  adjust  the  institutional  framework  and  create  a  new  body,  thereby  reducing  the  role  of  the
Commission.
Let’s talk about the most significant election happening this year, the one in Italy. Some
parties are threatening to hold a referendum on the euro, to reverse the Fornero reform
or the Jobs Act, proposing measures which, by our calculations, would cost €200 billion…
It’s not for me to comment on electoral programmes. What I observe is that the markets are very
calm and don’t seem to believe that the risks you mention will materialise. I think the markets
expect  good  sense  to  prevail  in  the  end.  More  generally,  if  I  look  at  countries  like  my  own  –
Portugal – or Greece, with very high levels of debt, I believe that it is important to continue along
the reform path.
Non-performing  loans  are  another  distinctive  Italian  feature.  We  are  expecting  an
announcement from the ECB’s banking supervisors on the stocks of these loans. Do you
anticipate risks for the market?
On the subject of non-performing loans (NPLs), it has been explained many times that the ECB’s
banking supervisors aim to ensure that the banks reduce or evaluate their non-performing loans
appropriately, treating each case  individually.  It  has  never  been  our  intention  to  introduce  rigid
new rules that are applicable for all in exactly the same way. This has been made clear, and in
that sense I do not anticipate risks.
Yes, but if there is a time limit by which NPLs are reduced to zero – the famous seven
years – that is a restriction.
We will see how the banking supervisors decide to approach new NPLs and existing stocks. The
discussion is still ongoing. One way or another, NPLs have to be reduced sooner or later. This is
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
first and foremost in the interests of the banks. It must be said, though, that the Italian banks have
reduced their levels significantly.
Do you see a risk of bubbles forming, for example in the German property market?
There is no risk of bubbles in general, not in any market in the euro area. In the housing market,
average prices are in line with fundamentals, which can be estimated using various methods. In
Europe, the same is true of the stock markets and the corporate bond market. The only market
experiencing pressure is the commercial property market, but this does not imply systemic risks,
as the residential property market would. There are hot spots concentrated in certain cities, of
course,  but  macroprudential  measures  have  been  announced  or  adopted  in  some  countries,
such as the Netherlands, Belgium and France. And Germany may now also do the same.
There is a lot of talk about cryptocurrencies. Do they represent a threat to the financial
system? What can be done to regulate them?
First of all, they are not currencies. They cannot fulfil the classic functions of a currency, the first
of which is to serve as a stable unit of account which can be used to express the value of other
goods. If the value of the currency itself is so volatile, then it cannot perform this function; it is in
fact a speculative instrument. And their use as a means of payment is very limited. They are
used in the shadow economy and in countries where institutions have collapsed and monetary
systems are not working – there they are used as a payment instrument of last resort. They in no
way represent a threat to traditional currencies. Of course, rising prices have led to such high
market capitalisation that a collapse could have consequences. But they wouldn’t be systemic. I
call  these  instruments  “tulips”,  recalling  the  famous  tulip  bubble  and  subsequent  crash  in  the
Netherlands in the 17th century.
But there is a political aspect. Don’t you think that they are a response to the collapse in
confidence in central banks and the traditional financial system?
No, because they are not a threat to traditional currencies, they are not a reliable unit of measure.
Moreover, bank deposits are rising. If there was a crisis of confidence, we would see it there.
In Estonia, Kaspar Korjus wants to introduce a cryptocurrency alongside the euro. Is this
a threat?
Private-sector  operators  offering  competition  to  currencies  have  no  chance  of  success.
Ultimately,  a  currency  needs  to  have  state  backing,  as  history  has  demonstrated.  Over  the
centuries, experience has shown that, even in situations much less complex than today’s, there
needs to be a central bank which is given the exclusive right to print money.
Looking  back  over  those  years  of  turbulence,  on  which  occasions  were  you  anxious
about the euro?
There  were  two.  The  Greek  crisis  in  2010.  And  in  2011–12,  when  market  pressure  shifted
towards Spain and Italy. The European response resulted in, among other things, the creation of
the ESM and the transfer of supervisory functions to the ECB. The actions of the ECB, with its
Securities Markets Programme and Outright Monetary Transactions, were also crucial. Now we
are  seeing  growth  across  the  whole  euro  area,  with  GDP  rates  at  a  ten-year  high  and
unemployment – although still too high – at a ten-year low. The macroeconomic equilibrium has
been restored almost everywhere. There has been a complete turnaround. It is gratifying.
What has been the most important lesson for the ECB from these years of great crisis?
That  non-standard  measures  are  necessary  in  times  of  emergency.  These  measures,  which
have been deemed legal by the European Court of Justice, are now part of the ECB’s toolkit.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
