Gent  Sejko:  Economic  and  financial  developments  in  Albania
during 2017 and objectives for 2018
Address by Mr Gent Sejko, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the end-of-year meeting organised
by the Albanian Association of Banks, Tirana, 21 December 2017.
 Honourable AAB Chairman,
Dear banking system executives,
Dear friends and colleagues,
As always, it a pleasure for me to be together with banking system executives in Albania, in this
annual end-of-year event organized under the auspices of the Albanian Association of Banks. In
my address, I would like to briefly focus on highlights that have characterised the economic and
financial developments in Albania over 2017, as well as on some of our objectives for 2018.
Albanian economy
The Albanian economy seems to be experiencing an overall positive moment of recovery, from
both the global and the regional perspective. Economic activity continued to grow reflecting the
favourable 
impulses  generated  by
employment  gains  and  the  high  levels  of  foreign  direct  investments,  as  well  as  the  positive
momentum in the economies of our trading partners.
improvement  of  confidence, 
financial  environment, 
In terms of aggregate demand, growth was driven by the expansion of private consumption and
investments,  and  the  improvement  of  the  balance  of  trade  with  abroad,  especially  in  the  third
quarter.  In  response  to  the  improvement  by  around  10.5%  of  the  trade  deficit  in  goods  and
services, the current account deficit fell to 4.6% of the GDP in the third quarter, one of the lowest
levels in the last decade. On the other hand, the fiscal stimulus is estimated to have trended
downward  in  the  third  and  fourth  quarters,  albeit  budget  revenues  and  expenditure  have
continued to record high growth rates.
The constant expansion of the aggregate demand has led to an increasingly higher utilisation of
production  capacities.  The  unemployment  rate  fell  to  13.6%  in  the  third  quarter,  down  by  1.1
percentage  points  from  the  same  quarter  in  the  previous  year.  However,  the  gradual
convergence  of  the  economy  toward  its  equilibrium  is  yet  to  be  accompanied  by  upward
inflationary pressures, sufficient enough for the return of inflation to target.
Our accommodative monetary policy stance has reduced the costs of financing for the private
sector, has boosted crediting in the domestic currency and has contributed to the improvement
of  the  borrowers’  financial  situation.  In  the  last  months,  financial  markets  have  performed
relatively calm, amid low interest rates, controlled risk premia and the exchange rate set on a
stabilisation trend.
Banking system
Year 2017 was positive in terms of the expansion and soundness of banking activity in Albania. A
quick glance at the performance in the 10-month period corroborates this conclusion. Banking
sector’s assets expanded further during the period, at 4%, in annual terms. The financial situation
of the sector and activity capitalisation improved. Due to the considerable fall of loan provisioning,
the  financial  result  improved  notably  compared  to  the  previous  year. Also,  the  RoA  and  RoE
indicators doubled at 1.6% and 16.3%, respectively, from 0.74% and 7.8%, in the previous year.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
The liquidity situation appears stable, and its indicators continue to be at good levels. In annual
terms, the deposits base expanded by 2.7%, reflecting a shift in the maturity structure. Against
the backdrop of low interest rates, time deposits fell at 2.1%. By currency, both lek and foreign
currency deposits increased by 1.4% and 3.9%, respectively.
Outstanding credit expanded from a year earlier by 0.8%. Long-term credit dominated, whereas
short  and  medium-term  maturities  shrunk.  Credit  to  households  expanded  by  4.6%,  whereas
credit to enterprises contracted by 1.7%, from a year earlier.
One  of  the  highlights  of  this  year  is  the  reduction  of  the  non-performing  loans  ratio  at  14.4%,
compared  with  18.23%  at  the  end  of  the  previous  year.  Now,  after  a  relatively  successfully
period, the coordinated plan that we undertook together to reduce the stock of non-performing
loans seems to have yielded the expected results. Therefore, in addition to the loss loans write
off from the balance sheet, great results have been also achieved regarding the repayment and
restructuring of non-performing loans.
A number of regulations and other bylaws have been approved by the Supervisory Council of the
Bank  of  Albania,  throughout  2017.  They  aim  at  improving  the  banking  activity  in  terms  of
efficiency, risk management, transparency and depositors’ protection. A special moment was the
establishment  of  the  Resolution  Authority  in  Albania  and  of  the Resolution  Fund,  which  will
receive regular annual contributions by the baking sector.
Dear banking system executives,
As I mentioned above, this is a good moment, while the future still bears some questions. The
economy  is  not  exempt  from  this  overall  consideration.  I  take  the  opportunity  to  bring  to  your
attention  the  fact  that  the  institution  each  of  you  represents  has  a  certain  role  to  play  in  the
everyday economic and financial life of the country. Now that we know the already-announced
objectives  of  the  Government  of Albania  for  2018,  it  is  understandable  that  2018  is  a  rather
challenging  year  to  further  boost  economic  recovery  and  strengthen  the  financial  stability  of
Albania.
From this perspective, I would like to affirm that, like in 2017, in 2018 the Bank of Albania will
continue to focus on:
guaranteeing a stable economic environment, keeping inflation rates in check, and
having  liquid  markets  with  low  volatility. The  monetary  policy  will  aim  at  an  adequate
supply,  in  terms  of  both  quantity  and  price.  The  final  monetary  policy  objective  will  be
unchangeable,  while  the  accommodative  stance  implemented  in  the  past  years  will  be
present during 2018.
boosting credit recovery in Albania. We believe that the further boosting of the economy
provides a friendly environment for lending to the economy. In addition, we will continue to
insist in the implementation of the joint programme for the reduction of non-performing loans.
In this light, we expect the banking system to be proactive in lending to the economy.
strengthening banking supervision and guaranteeing financial system stability, one
of the fundamental objectives of the Bank of Albania activity. As in the past, we will be
constantly  in  search  of  the  best  international  rules  and  practices  that  aim  at  having  a
financially sound banking sector, capable of supporting economic development in Albania.
De-euroization of the Albanian economy. The measures that we have jointly designed will
enter into force in the first half of 2018. Therefore, we should also try together to maximise
the expected results, translating them in practice in greater confidence and higher use of the
national currency in the economy.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
continuous  communication  with  the  sector,  regarding  Bank  of Albania’s  decision
making. The dialogue with the banking industry is considered as a crucial factor in helping to
identify  the  problems,  guaranteeing  the  implementation  of  the  legal  framework,  and
overcoming the challenges.
increasing financial inclusion and deepening financial education. Alongside  with  the
regulatory  and  supervisory  role,  financial  education  is  and  will  continue  to  be  another
important  aspect  of  our  everyday  work.  We  consider  it  as  one  of  the  main  pillars  of  the
economic and social development of Albania.
Concluding, I would like to reassure you that, the Bank of Albania will continue to be a serious
and devoted partner.
I wish you a successful and prosperous year for you and your families.
Thank you!
  3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
