Nadine  Baudot-Trajtenberg: The  future  of  money  -  policy  and
regulation
Remarks  by  Dr  Nadine  Baudot-Trajtenberg,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Israel,  at  the  Eli
Hurvitz Conference on Economy and Society, Jerusalem, 20 June 2018.
 Technological advances are affecting our daily routines, at home, at work, on our commute, and
pretty much everywhere we look around. Yet it is not often that as central bankers, we are faced
with  a  technological  innovation  that  forces  us  to  rethink  the  most  basic  way  we  understand
macroeconomics.  The  appearance  of  cryptocurrencies  such  as  Bitcoin  and  others  has
awakened  a  well-known  and  long  debated  issue  surrounding the role of money: What is it?
How much is needed? Who should provide it, and how?
But the discussion has now broadened considerably: if up to a few years ago we heard mostly
about bitcoins and other digital currencies, today the buzz is more about tokens, ICOs (Initial
Coin Offerings) and the use of DLT (Distributed Ledger Technology) in a very broad range of
sectors  and  industries.  Some  of  the  visionaries  in  the  field  think  that  this  could  bring  about  a
revolution as to how digital information is managed to create business and social models that will
return  power  to  the  private  individuals,  away  from  large  corporations,  organizations  and  even
governments. I must admit that I tend to be skeptical of utopian visions of the future, but this is
not  to  say  that  I  do  not  recognize  that  this  technology  has  the  potential  to  make  dramatic
changes,  just  as  the  Internet  revolution  dramatically  changed  the  way  we  do  things,  and  has
brought about new business models.
It is important to note that even the visionaries do not think that a new world order will appear
overnight. In the meantime it is important to understand what this new technology brings to the
table—that  its  predecessors  did  not—and  as  policy  makers,  how  can  we  seek  to  reap  its
benefits for the general public while balancing out the risks that inevitably accompany change,
particularly during a transition period between old and new.
People have asked, what is DLT’s innovation for digital information systems?
As far as I can understand this new technological infrastructure, there are two elements of DLT,
or at least its early uses as we understand them today, that have the potential to improve upon
our existing systems:
1.  Data and transactions are stored and documented simultaneously in a distributed manner,
not in a central data base and they have strong cryptographic security built into them.
2.  The coins/tokens used in an exchange can embed all of the elements of a smart contract.
These two elements suggest a potential to markedly improve various exchange systems:
More secure data storage and internet based transactions —This is clearly important, we
are increasingly aware of data breaches that can jeopardize information systems, including
payment systems, and as we get to be increasingly more digital, our vulnerability to cyber
breaches  has  increased.  Though  governments  and  the  business  sector  have  invested
considerable resources and continue to add layers upon layers of cyber protection to the
various  systems,  DLT  has  built-  in  security  features.  Blockchain  technology  improves
resilience and secures our data by eliminating central targets altogether making it far more
difficult for theft, fraud and manipulation of data to occur. In addition, encryption that requires
full public verifiability and immutability of the information adds considerably to its security.
This  by  the  way,    comes  at  a  cost,  and  the  validation  system  is  often  slow  and  drains
resources (particularly energy) compared to existing clearing and settlement systems.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Decentralized management of individual data would impede on the rise of “data giants”
that can exploit their monopolistic power and the power that the network effect grants them
over  individuals.  Here  we  refer  obviously,  not  only  to  financial  institutions,  which  at  times
have  been  suspected  of  exploiting  their  information  advantage  making  it  more  difficult  for
smaller  and  newer  entrants  to  compete  with  them,  but  also  to  the  data  giants  that  make
considerable use of the information that they accumulate about individuals, without it being
clear as to the extent to which the users have really consented to that use. I must say that
we do not yet know if this technology can deliver on that promise—one that was similarly
made with the birth of the internet and which over time turned out to have been completely
wrong—particularly  given  that  the  governance  and  control  of  these  new  networks  is  still
heavily centralized. Quoting from R3, “The truth is that all these networks operate according
to a defined set of rules, and that ‘who makes the rules matters at least as much as who
1
enforces them’”. 
Increased efficiency in executing and clearing complex transactions without the need
for intermediaries: Today, complex financial, foreign trade, and other transactions take much
time to complete, and require intermediation by many entities. The possibility of embedding
smart  contracts  into  the  protocol  could  greatly  enhance  the  expediency  with  which  the
transactions are processed. Essentially, this ability to merge functions that until now have
been  mostly  detached  from  one  another,  such  as  payment,  contract  specifications  and
verification mechanisms promises great efficiency gains. To quote the Governor of the Bank
of England, Marc Carney, “Financial transactions that take nano seconds to be executed can
take days to be reconciled, cleared and finally settled.”
This is very exciting stuff indeed, but what does it mean for money as we know it today, and to
what extent and in which direction is this technology expected, and perhaps should, change the
financial system as we know it today?
Money, past, present and future
Our  “textbook”  money  combines  3  essential  roles—it  has  to  be  able  to  serve  as  a  Unit  of
Account, Means of Payment and Store of Value. In order to perform all of these 3 functions, it has
to be easily available, affordable, durable, portable and reliable.
Over the course of history various forms of money have existed, reflecting in part the technology
available at any time, from metallic coins of various sorts, paper banknotes, ledgers recording
promises  to  pay  (as  in  the  ancient  clay  tablets  of  Babylon  in  the  17   century  BCE,  or  the
Renaissance  Bank  of  the  Medici).  But  besides  technology,  these  methods  also  reflected
economic and particularly legal arrangements to ensure the reliability of the payment.
th
In fact the history of the various forms of money is one replete with innovations and failures from
both  public  and  private  institutions.  We  have  seen  Governments  betraying  the  trust  of  their
citizens  by  over-expanding  the  money  supply,  often  to  finance  wars,  or  to  attempt  to  recover
quickly from them, and as a consequence the value of their currency evaporated. Private banks
have been unable to repay the deposits to their clients, having made losses on their loans or
investments. Again  quoting  Marc  Carney “With  the  wisdom  borne  from  such  sad  experience,
most countries have now settled on centralised, public fiat money backed by robust institutions
in order to provide the public with money that is both highly trusted and easy to use”.
Today’s money takes 3 forms: cash and coins (about 10% of money in circulation)–and I can tell
you  that  considerable  resources  go  into  producing  these  in  order  to  ensure  their  reliability,
electronic deposits that commercial banks hold as reserves at the Bank of Israel (a little over
20%) and the rest which are the deposits that commercial banks create when they extend loans
to borrowers which account for 70% of money in the system.
The institutional and legal framework as well as the infrastructure that supports these various
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
forms of money determines the level of trust we have in our money and the efficiency with which
our payments are made.
The  Bank  of  Israel  (as  most  central  banks  around  the  world)  has  been  entrusted  by  the
legislature  to  ensure  that  the  domestic  currency—the  shekel—indeed  fulfills  the  3  important
functions mentioned above.
The Bank is the sole provider of fiat money, and the newly issued series of bank notes uses
the most sophisticated technologies available to ensure that it will be almost impossible to
counterfeit.
It built and operates a wholesale payment system (RTGS) and clearing house for interbank
transactions, and is working to ensure a faster payment system for retail transactions as
well.
As supervisor of the commercial banks, the Bank of Israel ensures that those are properly
governed, with proper risk management in place to make sure that the money we deposit in
the  banks  is  safe.  It  is  important  to  us  that  the  banks  enable  us  to  fulfill  the  “means  of
payment”  role  of  the  money  that  they  hold  for  us,  as  efficiently  as  possible,  and  the
Supervisor  of  Banks  is  in  fact  encouraging  technological  and  structural  improvements  to
enhance efficiency. But we also enforce the public’s demand for “clean” money, and ensure
that  banks  comply  with  the  strictest  level  of  the  laws  prohibiting  money  laundering  and
terrorism financing. This introduces friction in the system, it takes time and resources, but it
is a necessary friction as it certifies that we have a law abiding network: as policy makers
we must design the mechanics of financial transactions to uphold ethical standards from all
individuals, corporations and institutions. This was not in our classic textbook definition of
money, but it should be included in a new definition of “clean money”.
Perhaps most importantly, the Bank’s Monetary Committee is charged with ensuring that our
money keeps its value, by managing monetary policy that will maintain price stability. The 6
Monetary Committee members, including 3 members of the public, meet weekly to discuss
the economic and financial environment and the policy required in order to maintain the price
stability. Essentially, the Committee answers the question raised in my introduction—“how
much money is needed”—and the answer is, enough to facilitate economic activity but not
too much that prices increase by more than the target rate.
This perspective is absolutely essential to the economic system. This is absolutely essential to
the  system,  countries  that  fail  to  do  so  have  seen  their  currency  displaced,  in  all  3  of  its
functions, as a unit of account, as a means of payments and as a store of value. Thus, aspiring
providers of “private currencies”—digital or other—will not survive unless they exhibit that crucial
characteristic.  No  market  economy,  which  is  based  on  the  price  system  signaling  where
resources should be allocated, can thrive with a foggy, volatile and unreliable price mechanism.
This  is  the  most  important  public  good  provided  by  central  banks  to  their  country’s  citizens’
welfare, and should not to be taken for granted.
So what about DC and Crypto assets?
I doubt that any of the crypto assets will soon be able to provide the stable value of the unit of
account so crucially needed in a market economy, and certainly the very recent past shows that
the price volatility they exhibit has been very problematic in this regard. As a means of payment
they  are  still  very  limited  and  suffer  from  the  problem  that  if  their  value  falls,  people  will  be
reluctant to be paid with those assets, and if their value rises, people will hesitate to use it as a
means of payment for fear of missing out on the expected rise in value.
But the technology it brings to the table has great potential to integrate into a few crucial area of
the financial system.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
First,  the  fact  that  it  can  merge  functions  that  were  until  now  split  means  that  they  can
greatly improve the more complex transactions we undertake—and there are many of those,
from  buying  a  house  to  buying  financial  derivatives  in  a  foreign  market,  and  undertaking
import/export  transactions.  In  all  of  those  the  numerous  intermediaries—who  today  bring
value added due to the lack of information available—increases the cost and the need for
credit. Indeed when there is a gap in time between the execution of the transaction and its
final  approval,  credit  must  be  taken  out.  So  its  biggest  immediate  potential  is  in  complex
transactions  that  take  a  long  time  to  settle—not  in  replacing  cash  or  other  immediate
payments.
Second, its built in capacity for more secure data management is coming at a time where
we  face  increasing  cyber  risk,  and  thus  this  technology  may  prove  to  be  a  solution  to  a
growing problem.
Third,  it  will  bring  about  new  business  models,  particularly  matching  consumers  and
investors  directly,  through  legitimate  and  viable  ICOs.  I  emphasize  viable  because  of  the
thousands of ICOs appearing in the past few years, less than half survived beyond 90 days,
and I emphasize legitimate because a large number of the offerings we have seen appear to
be part of fraudulent investment schemes.
In  order  to  fully  reap  those  benefits,  and  the  promise  inherent  in  technology,  all  regulatory
authorities  will  have  to  work  together  to  allow  these  technologies  to  deliver  on  their  inherent
promise, while continuing to protect the citizens from fraud and reckless ventures that are liable
to  erode  the  fabric  of  trust  so  much  needed  for  our  financial  system  to  function  as  it  should.
Therefore, the Bank of Israel is acting on this issue and intends to promote collaboration through
1
a joint team, with the participation of all the relevant entities in the issue.
1
 See R3, “Top Ten Obstacles along Distributed Ledgers’ Path to Adoption”, Sarah Meiklejohn, December 14,
2017.​
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
