François  Villeroy  de  Galhau:  France  and  Europe  -  economic
developments, reforms and attractiveness
Speech  by  Mr  François  Villeroy  de  Galhau,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France,  at  the  Paris
Europlace International Financial Forum, New York City, 18 April 2018.
Accompanying slides of this speech.
Ladies and gentlemen,
 Let me welcome this traditional gathering – Paris Europlace in New York – with a less traditional
timing: one year after the French elections. And indeed much happened in these 12 months. In
my remarks today, I would like to elaborate on what I call “the French momentum” and more
generally  the  “euro  area  momentum”.  We  have  a  unique  opportunity  to  implement  crucial
reforms both in France and in Europe that we must definitely seize.
So I would like to share with you some thoughts on (i) our cyclical favourable environment (ii)
hence, our structural acceleration, and (iii) Paris’ attractiveness, including in the post-Brexit world
we must prepare.
***
1.Our cyclical opportunity and the present expansion phase
[Slide 2] The euro area economy is experiencing a strong and broad-based expansion:
we have now seen 19 consecutive quarters of positive growth. In 2017, real GDP growth peaked
at  2.5%  and  short-term  economic  indicators  all  point  to  a  continued  economic  upswing.
According to the latest ECB projections, real GDP is expected to expand at 2.4% in 2018, above
potential. The breadth of this steady economic growth is noteworthy: dispersion across countries
and sectors is at its lowest level for two decades.
Growth  has  been  supported  by  buoyant  domestic  demand  and  a  pick-up  in  net  exports.
Financing conditions for firms have been very favourable, supporting investment, while private
consumption has benefited from low levels of inflation.
[Slide 3] This steady economic growth has translated to the labour market bringing close to 8
million  workers  [7.8m]  back  to  employment  since  2013,  more  than  offsetting  the  losses
experienced during the crisis. Annual growth in employment has reached its highest level since
2008 and the unemployment rate fell to 8.7% in the fourth quarter of 2017, the lowest rate for nine
years. Looking ahead, unemployment is expected to further decrease to reach 7.2% in 2020, in
spite of an increase in the participation rate.
[Slide 4] In France, GDP growth is robust, averaging 2.0% in 2017. Expansion is expected to
continue  at  a  sustained  pace  in  2018,  supported  by  strong  domestic  demand  and  a  notable
increase in exports. Investment should remain robust thanks to favourable financing conditions
and the positive business outlook. Net exports are expected to pick up in 2018 and be supportive
of  growth.  The  upswing  is  expected  to  continue  in  2019–2020  with  a  GDP  growth  rate  which
should remain above-potential growth, despite a slight slackening in global demand.
[Slide 5] In France too, the ongoing recovery has led to a strong decline in the unemployment
rate which fell to 8.9% in the fourth quarter of 2017. Since 2015, job creation has been boosted
by  measures  to  reduce  labour  costs  (CICE,  PRS,  SME  hiring  scheme)  [I  will  come  back  to
French structural reforms in more detail later]. Although the unemployment rate is still too high,
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
notably among young people, our latest projections forecast a steady decline until 2020. Net job
creations are expected to remain strong as the economy improves.
Following improvement in the  labour  market,  wage  growth  is  expected  to  build  up,  supporting
households’ disposable income and underpinning solid private consumption dynamics.
[Slide 6] Deflationary risks have disappeared in the euro area. Headline inflation printed at 1.3%
in  March  while  core  inflation  is  stable  at  1.0%.  We  are  now  out  of  the  deflationary  risk  zone
although inflationary developments still remain subdued. Yet, the ongoing economic upturn and
the  labour  market  improvements  are  expected  to  pave  the  way  to  increasing  inflationary
pressures, preparing for a return of inflation to a rate below, but close to, 2% over the medium
term. Our forecast is 1.7% for 2020.
[Slide 7] This gradual rise in inflation in the euro area and improvement in the outlook for inflation
is due in large part to the accommodative monetary policy of the ECB. We are now increasingly
confident that inflation will soon be on a sustained path of adjustment back towards our inflation
aim, and so justify our course of gradual normalisation. And we won’t give in to fiscal dominance:
nobody should expect us to delay a warranted monetary normalisation in order to accommodate
the debt problems of any Member state.
2. Our structural acceleration: France is catching up
[Slide 8] Monetary policy plays its full role but cannot be the only game in town, as it may have
only a limited impact on national economic adjustments within the euro area. Since the financial
crisis, several European countries, including Spain, have successfully launched major reforms
and reached higher and sustainable growth while preserving their social model.
[Slide 9]  However,  efforts  should  be  pursued  to  spur  economic  growth  in  the  medium  term.
Structural unemployment remains high and potential growth remains significantly below its 1990s
or  2000s  average.  Structural  reforms  are  needed  to  unleash  the  full  economic  potential  of
European countries.
The  case  of  France,  today,  is  particularly  interesting  in  that  regard.  France  faces  important
structural challenges but as already said, the economic environment for reform has never been
more favourable since the financial crisis. So it is our imperative to “fix the roof”, now. And the
good news is that reforms are on a firm upward path. I stress it as a fully independent Central
Banker: the new government has indeed displayed a strong commitment to reforms and already
implemented major structural reforms to boost employment, productivity and resilience.
[Slide 10] The recent labour market reforms have widened the negotiation space given to social
partners for decision-making and reduced the uncertainties of labour disputes.
This should give more flexibility to firms and contribute to supporting employment.
The ongoing apprenticeship reform aims at making this status more attractive for both workers
and  firms,  in  order  to  tackle  youth  unemployment.  In  a  context  where  the  number  of  job
vacancies remains too high, the ongoing reform of lifelong vocational training, which is currently
too costly and inefficient, should help to better match the skills of workers to the needs of firms.
Add  very  significant  reforms  of  primary  and  secondary  education  and  university,  and  you  can
expect a steady improvement in French labour’s skills in the coming years.
The  unemployment  benefits  reform  will  also  be  an  essential  building  block  in  improving  the
functioning of the labour market. More control over the job-search effort should increase labour
force participation and also contribute to tackling structural unemployment, while improving the
efficiency of the welfare state.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
[Slide  11]  Finally,  consistent  tax  reforms  have  aimed  at  rebalancing  the  tax  burden  from
production factors towards broad-based taxes. Labour costs were lowered, with in particular a
tax credit on payroll, implemented in 2013 and reinforced by social contribution cuts this year.
Regarding capital, important measures have also been taken to alleviate taxation on productive
capital  and  savings:  the  scrapping  of  the  household  wealth  tax  on  everything  except  property
assets, the introduction of a 30% flat tax on household capital gains, dividends or interests and a
decrease  in  corporate  tax  from  33%  to  25%  in  2022  to  ensure  convergence  towards  the  EU
average. These measures should contribute to supporting the positive trend in private domestic
and foreign investment in France.
[Slide 12] All  these  reforms  should  be  enhanced  by  further  progresses  made  by  the  French
government to improve the sustainability of public finances; I would also hope for an acceleration
in  this  respect.  Nevertheless,  the  present  package  is  already  impressive,  and  reinforces  the
attractiveness of France. As you know, France has many assets: it has many fast-growing tech-
firms.  It  offers  high-quality  infrastructures  and  a  high-standard  quality  of  life.  But  more
importantly, its capital, Paris, besides being one of the most attractive cities in Europe, is in a
strong position to become the main euro area centre for market activities, especially in the Brexit
context.
3. Paris’ attractiveness as an integrated financial centre in a post-Brexit world
Brexit was and remains bad news mostly for the United Kingdom but also for Europe.
As for now, there is one principle which in our view is the corner stone of the future agreement
between the European Union and the United Kingdom – preserving the integrity of our common
good, the EU single market. In practice, it means that we cannot separate access and rules and
that UK based entities cannot get a European passport and access the EU single market if they
do  not  fully  comply  with  the  single  market’s  rules  and  do  not  recognise  the  authority  of  the
European  Court  of  Justice.  The  City  of  London  will  of  course  remain  a  major  global  financial
centre but will no longer be in the position to serve as the European financial hub. Against that
backdrop, further integration of capital markets in the EU is all the more needed. Succeeding in
that  endeavour  requires  an  integrated  approach  combining  and  coordinating  the  Juncker
Investment Plan, the Banking Union and the Capital Markets Union to achieve a true “Financing
Union for Investment and Innovation”.
This Financing Union will be built on the EUR 390 billion in annual surplus savings in the euro
area.
Another consequence of Brexit is that a number of financial activities will be relocated within the
EU 27. The competitive landscape between financial centres will therefore change even though
we  do  not  expect  the  emergence  of  a  continental  “City  of  London”  but  a  more  multipolar  and
specialised competitive structure. It is our collective responsibility to foster a competitive and fair
ecosystem for international players; as we have a single rule book, this competition will exclude
any regulatory or supervisory “race to the bottom”.
Against this backdrop, the Paris financial centre has many assets. Paris hosts one of the most
developed capital markets in continental Europe, the first asset management industry, a leading
bond market, the largest commercial paper market with NEU-CP and the largest private equity
investor in continental Europe. Moreover, Paris offers an attractive pool of highly skilled staff in
financial  services.  The  French  government  and  the  French  financial  authorities,  including
the Banque de France, are also working together to facilitating the dissemination of sound and
safe financial innovations and fostering the scaling up of sustainable finance. These investments
are protected by a very resilient banking system, accompanied by consistent regulation. Let me
remind you that Paris is already home to the European Securities and Markets Authority and will
soon host the European Banking Authority. In addition, the Paris Court of Appeal was granted an
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
international chamber last February, with international commercial affairs falling within its remit.
That  will  duly  complete  the  Paris  court  organisation,  which  already  includes  an  international
chamber in its commercial court. Last but not least, let me stress that the French authorities are
making sure that the Paris financial centre and its participants benefit from a streamlined and
business-friendly  regulatory  framework,  for  instance  in  areas  such  as  bond  issuance  and
securitisation.  Meanwhile,  significant  efforts  have  been  made  by  the  French  government  to
alleviate  the  tax  regime  and  social  contributions  of  “impatriates.”  Starting  in  2016  under  the
previous  government,  they  have  been  amplified  by  the  new  one,  including  on  the  eve  of  the
business summit last January.
 France  is  changing,  for  the  better.  But  it  is  still  dependent  on  its  economic  environment,
obviously.  Let  me  conclude  with  two  wishes.  First:  that  Europe  is  courageous  enough  to
strengthen  itself  through  this  cyclical  upswing.  Combining  more  reforms  in  France  and  more
fiscal stimulus in Germany, as will happen, is welcome but not sufficient: we need a stronger
Economic Union in the euro area to avoid overburdening monetary policy by the next recession.
And  second,  that  the  United  States  and  the  G20  are  clear-sighted  enough  to  address  their
economic challenges through multilateral answers, and not unilateral ones: here too, France is a
reliable partner.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
