Claudia Buch: Have the main advanced economies become more
resilient to real and financial shocks?
Statement by Prof Claudia Buch, Deputy President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, prepared for
the  panel  discussion  at  the  Centre  d'Etudes  Prospectives  et  d'Informations  Internationales
(CEPII) 40th Anniversary Conference, Paris, 12 April 2018.
 The global economy is currently in good shape, and valuations on financial markets are high.
Global GDP has been growing for nine consecutive years now, and output has surpassed the
levels prior to the financial crisis (IMF 2017). Growth has not only been sustained for a number of
years, it is also relatively broad based. And, according to recent estimates by the International
Monetary Fund (IMF), growth is expected to continue in the coming years (IMF 2018). Projections
suggest  that  the  world  economy  will  expand  by  3.9%  in  2018,  compared  with  3.7%  in  2017.
These favorable economic outlooks, together with inflation and interest rates that remain below
their historical averages, contribute to high valuations on financial markets.
As regards the regulation of financial markets, much progress has been made since the financial
crisis. G20 reforms that have been agreed upon post crisis aim at enhancing the resilience of the
financial system, ending too-big-to-fail, reforming derivatives markets, and transforming shadow
banking into a resilient source of finance. Many of the reforms are well under way, and a first
assessment of their effects becomes feasible.
Does this mean that all is well and that markets are resilient with regard to future shocks? I will
argue in the following that it is not the time to be complacent:
Favorable economic prospects may lead to an underestimation of risks to financial stability.
Resilience  should  be  assessed  against  the  ability  of  the  financial  system  to  deal  with
unexpected events.
There is the risk of a roll back of reforms.
1. Favorable economic prospects may lead to an underestimation of risks to financial
stability
Market participants are currently quite optimistic. This reflects that the European economy is in
good shape and that the global economy, too, is expanding at a brisk pace. Market participants,
bolstered by the current growth forecasts, are expecting interest rates to slowly start picking up
again.  And  not  only  are  market  participants  optimistic,  the  range  of  expectations  has  also
narrowed  down.  Yet,  this  optimism  and  convergence  of  expectations  may  harbor  risks  for
1
financial stability.
Assuming that the current outlook will be sustained, risks to financial stability will be limited. A
gradual upturn in interest rates would strengthen the stability of the financial system. Banks may
see their interest margins recover – in particular if interest rates stay out of negative territory. Life
insurers and pension institutions would find it easier to generate returns and to honour promised
payments to customers.
But how would markets respond to an unforeseen economic slowdown? What if interest rates
stay  low  for  much  longer?  What  if  political  risks  materialize  and  risk  premiums  increase
abruptly? Such unexpected events may affect many market participants at the same time – thus
potentially threatening the functioning of the entire financial system.
A  resilient  financial  system  needs  to  be  in  a  position  to  weather  also  unexpected,  but  by  no
means  unrealistic,  scenarios.  During  the  extended  spell  of  low  interest  rates,  risk  has  been
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
growing in the global financial system. Low interest rates and strong growth might cause risks to
be underestimated. These risks can be mutually reinforcing in the financial system. Therefore,
the resilience of the financial system might be overstated.
The good economic conditions might lead markets participants to ignore the risks of scenarios
involving  heavy  losses.  Gazing  into  the  rear  view  mirror  for  too  long  increases  the  risk  of
overlooking hazards on the road ahead. The longer booms persist, the greater the inclination to
extrapolate current trends, and the weaker are incentives to take precautions against unforeseen
events. If the real economy takes a worse path than expected, that would also drive up credit
risk.
In  Germany,  for  example,  the  number  of  insolvencies  has  almost  halved  in  the  past  years,
dropping from just over 39,300 in the year 2003 to a little more than 20,000  in  the  year  2017
(Federal Statistical Office of Germany 2018).  To put that number into perspective: There are
just over 11,000 municipalities in Germany. Hence, there has been an average of less than two
insolvencies  per  municipality.  Reflecting  these  numbers,  credit  risk  provisioning  for  German
banks is currently at record lows. Moreover, we know from empirical studies that entry and exit of
firms is an important mechanism behind innovation and, ultimately, economic growth (Foster,
Grim, Haltiwanger, and Wolf 2018).
2
Yet, low default rates on loans are a backward-looking indicator and do not provide a good proxy
for  future  risks.  Larger  banks  use  their  own  risk  models  to  assess  risks  as  a  basis  for  their
capital requirements. These banks might underestimate the risks which might arise if economic
activity unexpectedly worsens. This might, in turn, also lead to an underestimation of how much
capital is needed to provide sufficient buffers against losses.
There are, in fact, scenarios which could hit the financial system hard.One risk scenario is a
faster-than-expected  upturn  in  interest  rates.  For  instance,  risk  premiums  in  international
financial markets might increase unexpectedly. A rapid increase in interest rates would drive up
short-term funding costs and hit particularly those financial institutions that have invested into low
rate, fixed term assets. In Germany, for instance, 44% of housing loans are fixed-rate mortgages
with  a  maturity  of  more  than  ten  years,  this  number  being  up  from  26%  at  the  beginning  of
2010.  An abrupt increase in interest rates would put pressure on banks – their funding costs
would go up, and their interest income would, initially, rise at a slower pace. An abrupt rise in
interest  rates  would  also  send  valuations  down  from  their  current  high  levels  and  thus  cause
losses.
3
A second risk scenario is that of persistently low interest rates which would incentivize a search
for yield. Empirical results for the US show that risk-taking by banks intensifies if interest rates
are low for long (Buch, Eickmeier, and Prieto 2014; Dell’Ariccia, Laeven, and Suarez 2017). Also,
life  insurers  and  pension  institutions  would  find  it  increasingly  difficult  to  generate  sufficient
income to cover the returns that some of them have promised to pay.
2. Resilience should be assessed against the ability of the financial system to deal with
unexpected events
The resilience of a financial system has two key components – buffers against risks and the
risks  themselves.  Notwithstanding  difficulties  with  the  definition  of  capital  and  liquidity  buffers,
these can be measured with a reasonable degree of certainty. On average, banks’ capital ratios
have increased since the crisis. Within the euro area, the Tier 1 capital ratio, which is measured
in relation to banks’ risk-weighted assets, increased from 8.8% in the year 2008 to 14.7% in 2016
(CGFS 2018).  This raise has been achieved by a decline in total assets, a decrease in average
risk-weights, and by a strengthening of banks’ capital positions. Measured relative to banks’ total
assets, bank capital has increased to a lesser extent, from 3.7% in the year 2008 to 5.8% in
2016.
4
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Banks  have  also  built  up  buffers  against  liquidity  shocks.  By  the  end  of  2016,  the  Liquidity
Coverage Ratio (LCR) was 130% on average in an international sample of around 90 large banks
(CGFS  2018).  More  than  90%  of  those  banks  had  already  met  the  regulatory  requirement  of
the LCR set at 100%. Banks’ long-term resilience against liquidity shocks has also substantially
improved.  In  particular,  the  Net  Stable  Funding  Ratio  (NSFR)  has  increased  significantly  from
5
43% in 2012 to 115% in 2016 (CGFS2018).
Notwithstanding higher levels of capital in the banking sector, global debt levels remain elevated.
At 144% of GDP, private non-financial sector debt has been higher in late 2017 than its pre-crisis
level of 125% in 2007 (BIS 2018). This trend is explained, not least, by increased leverage in the
corporate sector, particularly in emerging market economies. Complacency with regard to the
resilience of the financial system is thus a risk, and assessment of debt sustainability might be
overly positive.
Moreover, measuring risks and the associated losses when these risks materialize is  difficult.
Risks to global financial stability are genuine uncertainties, rather than well-defined risk scenarios
with estimates of probabilities and losses-given-default attached to them. Writing contracts that
describe all relevant contingencies and that condition the responses of the contractual parties on
these outcomes is typically not feasible.
In addition, risks are highly endogenous and depend on the ability of the financial system to adjust
to  shocks.  Seemingly  small  shocks  can  propagate  in  the  financial  system  and  become
contagious (Allen and Gale 2000). Contagion effects can arise in the financial system whenever
market participants are contractually highly interconnected or if investment strategies are very
similar. In that situation, a relatively minor shock can affect the functioning of the entire financial
system – with negative implications for the real economy.
The  financial  system  needs  to  have  sufficient  buffers  to  be  able  to  absorb  even  unexpected
events, which can become mutually reinforcing in the system. Two examples can illustrate such
systemic events:
First,  risks  stemming  from  an  interest  rate  hike,  revaluations  in  markets  and  increased  credit
losses could materialize simultaneously. Asset values might plunge; write-downs would erode
equity. And, in particular, credit risk could increase if economic activity unexpectedly declines.
Second,  common  exposures  to  the  same  risk  factor  can  trigger  systemic  risks.  Take  one
example based on the German financial system. One of the German banking system’s strengths
is its large number of smaller credit institutions operating directly within the regions in which they
are  based.  Yet,  the  bulk  of  Germany’s  smaller  credit  institutions  –  its  credit  cooperatives  and
savings banks – are highly exposed to interest rate risk. This might undermine stability precisely
when interest rates climb more briskly and more strongly than anticipated. Small though these
institutions may be individually, together they account for a significant share – roughly 50% – of
lending  to  domestic  enterprises  and  households  (Deutsche  Bundesbank  2018).   If  those
institutions were to run into difficulties, the repercussions for the economy as a whole could be
severe.
6
Generally, resilience with regard to such systemic events should be measured with regard to the
mechanisms that are in place to deal with losses. Equity capital, for example, provides an ex
ante insurance mechanism. Whenever risks materialize, the value of equity adjusts, and dividend
payments  can  be  suspended.  Thereby,  equity  investors  bear  upside  and  downside  risks.
Standard debt contracts, in contrast, are insensitive to the borrower’s situation. Risks are not
shared unless the debtor enters insolvency proceedings and unless risk sharing occurs through
haircuts.  Insolvency  proceedings,  however,  are  often  inefficient,  may  create  distortions  if
investments are postponed, and may lead to the liquidation of viable parts of businesses.
Market  participant  needs  to  hedge  against  negative  scenarios  –  by  making  sure  that  they  put
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
enough  capital  into  any  investment  and  basing  expectations  on  the  most  realistic  scenarios
possible. But what happens when risk materializes that the individual cannot readily grasp, when
risks become mutually reinforcing in the system?
At  the  system  level,  the  credibility  of  regimes  for  the  recovery  and  resolution  of  financial
institutions is a crucial element of resilience. In 2011, the Financial Stability Board published an
international  standard  for  sound  resolution  regimes:  the  “key  attributes  of  effective  resolution
schemes for financial institutions” (FSB 2011). Their overall aim is to establish a framework that
allows  for  systemically  important  financial  institutions  to  exit  the  market  without  endangering
financial  stability.  In  particular,  the  burden  of  losses  should  be  shifted  from  taxpayers  to
shareholders and creditors. This reduces moral hazard and funding advantages due to public
bail-outs.
While the “key attributes” are applicable to all kind of financial institutions, their implementation
has  so  far  advanced  mostly  for  banks.  In  the  European  Union,  the  attributes  have  been
transposed via the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD) for all EU members as of
2015. For euro area countries, the Single Resolution Mechanism was established in 2016 with
the Single Resolution Board as a common resolution authority. The new rules were applied for
the first time in 2017. These first applications highlight shortcomings that need to be addressed
(Deutsche Bundesbank 2017). For example, the decision that failing banks have reached their
point of non-viability should be based on more specific criteria in order to avoid (costly) delays of
the  “failing  or  likely  to  fail”  decision.  Moreover,  the  first  applications  of  the  BRRDrevealed
discrepancies in bail in rules according to the European resolution framework, state aid rules,
and  national  insolvency  laws.  Finally,  contagion  risks  that  might  emerge  from  banks’  cross-
holdings of each other’s liabilities can be mitigated by implementing holding restrictions.
3. There is the risk of a roll back of reforms
Fading memory of the crisis and a favorable economic environment intensify pressure to relax
financial  regulations.  The  risk  of  a  roll  back  of  reforms  is  particularly  acute  when  business
models  of  incumbent  financial  institutions  are  under  pressure  as  a  combination  of  excess
7
capacity in some markets, changing patterns of globalization, and technological change.
Since  the  financial  crisis,  reforms  have  been  initiated  –  the  impact  of  which  is  now  gradually
making itself felt in the markets. Higher capital and resilience of the financial system are a stated
objective of these reforms. We can now begin evaluating the effects of the reforms. Have they
achieved their objectives? Do the reforms bring with them unintended side-effects?
Under the German presidency in 2017, the G20 have agreed on a framework for a structured
evaluation of the reforms (FSB 2017). A structured evaluation is needed to gauge the costs and
benefits  of  reforms.  Such  an  analysis  needs  to  take  the  perspective  of  society  as  a  whole
because not all the costs being discussed in the public arena are in fact costs to society. The
costs  of  failures  in  the  financial  system  should  be  borne  by  those  who  cause  them  –  the
shareholders  and  potentially  also  the  creditors  of  financial  institutions  –  rather  than  by  the
taxpayer.  Technically  speaking,  the  reforms  aim  at  cutting  implicit  subsidies  for  systemic
institutions. For the private sector, funding costs are thus going up. Yet, society benefits because
costs of financial distress are shifted from society to the originators. Also, if financial crises occur
less often and are less severe, reforms carry a lower economic and social price tag. Finally,
benefits of the reforms can only be reaped over the longer term, whereas higher funding costs
tend to be recognized immediately.
Evaluation, therefore, means making the costs and rewards of the reforms for society as a whole
more transparent and disclosing any unintended side-effects. So far, there are no indications that
the reforms have impaired the ability of the financial system to provide services and to lend to the
real economy. The evaluation of the reforms should not be used as a pretext to water them down
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
or weaken the resilience of the financial system. Ultimately, a stronger, better capitalized, and
more resilient financial system promises a “double dividend” in terms of growth and stability.
4. References
Allen, Franklin, and Douglas Gale (2000). Financial Contagion. Journal of Political Economy,
108(1): 1–33.
Bank for International Settlements – BIS (2018). BIS Statistical Bulletin, March 2018. Basel.
Buch, Claudia M., Sandra Eickmeier, and Esteban Prieto (2014). In Search for Yield? New
Survey-Based Evidence on Bank Risk Taking. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control,
43: 12–30.
Committee on the Global Financial System – CGFS (2018). Structural Changes in Banking
After the Crisis. CGFS Report No 60, January 2018. Basel.
Dell’Ariccia,  Giovanni,  Luc  Laeven,  and  Gustavo  A.  Suarez  (2017).  Bank  Leverage  and
Monetary  Policy’s  Risk Taking  Channel:  Evidence  from  the  United  States.  The  Journal  of
Finance, 72(2): 613–654.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2017). Financial Stability Review, November 2017. Frankfurt.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2018), Monthly Balance Sheet Statistics, January 2018. Frankfurt.
Eickmeier,  Sandra,  Norbert  Metiu,  and  Esteban  Prieto  (2016).  Time-varying  Volatility,
Financial  Intermediation  and  Monetary  Policy,  Discussion  Paper  46/2016,  Deutsche
Bundesbank, December 2016. Frankfurt.
Federal Statistical Office of Germany (2018). Number of business insolvencies down 6.6%
in 2017 year on year, Press release 91, March 2018. Wiesbaden.
Financial Stability Board – FSB (2011). Key Attributes of Effective Resolution Regimes for
Financial Institutions, October 2011. Basel.
Financial  Stability  Board  (2017).  Framework  for  Post-Implementation  Evaluation  of  the
Effects of the G20 Financial Regulatory Reforms. Basel.
Foster, L., Cheryl Grim, John C. Haltiwanger, and Zoltan Wolf (2018). Innovation, Productivity
Dispersion,  and  Productivity  Growth,  NBER  Working  Paper  24420,  National  Bureau  of
Economic Research (NBER). Cambridge, MA.
International  Monetary  Fund  –  IMF  (2017),  World  Economic  Outlook  Database,  October
2017. Washington DC.
International Monetary Fund – IMF (2018), World Economic Outlook Update, January 2018.
Washington DC.
Pellegrino, Giovanni (2017). Uncertainty and the Real Effects of Monetary Policy Shocks in
the Euro Area, Melbourne Institute Working Paper No 15/17, June 2017. Melbourne.
Rajan,  Raghuram  G.,  and  Luigi  Zingales  (2003).  The  Great  Reversals:  the  Politics  of
Financial Development in the Twentieth Century. Journal of Financial Economics 69(1): 5–
50.
Rajan, Raghuram G., and Rodney Ramcharan (2016). Constituencies and Legislation: The
Fight Over the McFadden Act of 1927. Management Science 62(7): 1843–1859.
1
2
3
For example, empirical results for the US show that monetary policy shocks affect output and investment more
strongly in times of low financial market volatility than during spells of heightened volatility (Eickmeier, Metiu, and
Prieto 2016). Similar results were found for the euro area (Pellegrino 2017).
These  numbers  are  based  on  data  from  the  Federal  Statistical  Office  of  Germany  available  at
www.destatis.de/EN/FactsFigures/Indicators/LongTermSeries/Insolvencies/lrins01.html.
These numbers are based on data from the Bundesbank’s MFI interest rate statistics and calculated as a share
of domestic banks' credit volume with a respective fixed interest rate of the total volume (measured by the
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
4
5
6
7
volume of new business). The time series is part of the system of indicators for the German residential property
market that is available at www.bundesbank.de/residential_property.
The liquidity coverage ratio (LCR) is a supervisory minimum ratio of short-term liquidity that banks have to hold.
In order to achieve the required LCR of at least 100%, a bank’s available liquid assets have to surpass its
expected cumulative net cash outflows over a period of at least 30 days. This is designed to ensure that banks
are able to withstand a severe stress scenario, such as the coincidence of a partial run on customer deposits
and the drying-up of unsecured funding. The LCR entered into force in January 2018.
The net stable funding ratio (NSFR) is a prudential ratio that measures the extent to which a bank has medium
to long-term funding for its exposures. The NSFR standard is designed to ensure sustainable and stress-
resistant funding of a bank's asset-side business as well as its off-balance sheet activities. It is defined as the
ratio of sustainable funding (including equity capital and long-term liabilities) over the required stable funding.
The minimum ratio is 100%. The NSFR rule is scheduled to enter into force in 2020.
This number is based on data from the Bundesbank’s monthly bank balance sheet statistics as of January
2018 (latest data: November 2017). It was calculated as the amount of loans by savings and cooperative banks
to domestic non-financial firms and households relative to the total amount of loans by all monetary financial
institutions 
at
www.bundesbank.de/Navigation/EN/Statistics/Banks_and_other_financial_institutions/Banks/Monthly_balance_sheet_statistics/monthly_balance_sheet_statistics.html
information 
available 
Further 
sector. 
(MFIs) 
same 
are 
the 
to 
Historically, changes in financial regulations have indeed often been driven by interests of incumbent firms and
the political impact of "insiders" (Rajan and Ramcharan 2016, Rajan and Zingales 2003).
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
