   
Governor 
 
Title 
 
Date 
Event 
 
Venue   
 
  
: Mr. Tariq Bajwa 
: Opening of BOC Pakistan Operations 
: November 7, 2017 
: Official Opening Ceremony of Bank of China Limited Pakistan Operations 
: President House, Islamabad 
   H.E. President Mamnoon Hussain, Honorable President of Pakistan,  
Mr. Chen Siqing, Chairman Bank of China, 
Distinguished Dignitaries and Guests,  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Assalam-o-Alaikum and Good Morning, 
It is a great pleasure to be here at the inauguration ceremony of Bank of China’s operations in Pakistan. I 
welcome Bank of China in Pakistan. This is indeed a very auspicious occasion as the two brotherly 
countries, Pakistan and China, further cement their ties in the fields of Banking and Finance. Banks are 
to an economy what lubricants are for a machine. 
 Page 1 of 4 
Going forward, I hope that Bank of China will play its due role not only in the economic development of 
Pakistan but also be a catalyst in further strengthening our bilateral trade and banking relationships. 
Ladies and Gentlemen! 
In contrast to the protectionist sentiments that are gaining momentum in some parts of the world, 
Pakistan and China present a distinct example of regional cooperation and harmony. The financial 
linkages between Pakistan and China are growing manifold. We are already host to Industrial and 
Commercial Bank of China Limited (ICBC). Recently, consortium of Chinese investors acquired forty 
percent shares in Pakistan Stock Exchange. Chinese investors have evinced interest in acquiring KE. I am 
also aware that other Chinese institutions are exploring the possibility of making investments in the 
financial and other sectors of our economy. Our banks have also been venturing into China and some of 
them have established branches and representative offices in China, such as Habib Bank Limited, 
National Bank of Pakistan, United Bank limited and Bank Al-Habib. 
With start of Bank of China operations, ties between Pakistan and China will strengthen further. Bank of 
China  is  not  an  ordinary  bank.  It  is  one  of  the  big-four  banks  in  China  and  is  a  Global  Systematically 
Important  Bank.  It  is  ranked  amongst  the  top  global  banks  in  terms  of  assets  and  has  a  significant 
footprint in over 50 countries. It brings with it a rich heritage of over 100 years of banking experience, 
practices, and knowledge. As Bank of China is a key partner in China’s “One-Belt One-Road” initiative, 
we expect that it will be able to effectively cater to the financing needs of CPEC projects by leveraging its 
specialized services and expertise.  
Presence of Bank of China in Pakistan is also expected to benefit the banking sector through technology 
transfers  and  associated  innovation  in  products  and  processes,  human  capital  development  and 
improved  competition  and  efficiency  in  the  financial  services.  Further,  increased  diversity  of  foreign 
banks and access to external financial resources will facilitate in enhancing the resilience of our financial 
 Page 2 of 4 
sector.  The  financial  sector  assets  in  Pakistan  as  a  percentage  GDP  are  still  low  at  74.3  percent.  The 
presence of world top banks like BoC will facilitate in exploiting this potential through enhancing the size 
of bank assets and the much needed access to credit. 
These growing banking relationships between Pakistan and China are critical considering that the trade 
linkages have increased manifold. In FY17 alone, China-Pakistan merchandise trade volume has 
increased to USD 12.2 billion from a level of USD 7.4 billion in FY13. With the China Pakistan Economic 
Corridor (CPEC) now taking shape in the form of completion of various projects, the trade and financial 
linkages between the two countries are set to increase exponentially in the near future. In this 
perspective, as the CPEC continues to mature and more infrastructure projects are initiated, Specialized 
Economic Zones are established, and trade starts to flow faster; more and more economic and business 
opportunities will be created for the banking sector that can be capitalized with careful business 
strategies. The demand for fixed investment and infrastructure loans particularly relating to the CPEC 
projects is expected to rise. Banks with relevant expertise in long-term project financing and resources 
such as the Bank of China would be the key player to meet this additional demand. I am confident that 
with growing cooperation the two countries would continue to grow with a sense of solidarity and 
mutual benefit.   
I understand that Bank of China also provides services and products designed to meet the banking needs 
of Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs), across the various jurisdictions in which it operates. We, at 
State Bank of Pakistan, believe that the growth of SMEs is vital for country’s economic growth and 
provision of quality banking services and products in this area remains paramount. I hope that, we can 
learn from Bank of China’s diverse experience in serving this particular segment. State Bank of Pakistan 
is already facilitating banks in this regard and is willing to support them further.  
  Page 3 of 4 
Ladies and Gentlemen! 
The future prospects of China and Pakistan’s economic cooperation are very bright; more so in the wake 
of  sustained  improvement  in  Pakistan’s  GDP  growth  resulting  in  growing  investor  confidence.  This  is 
reflected by rise in private sector credit especially the increasing share of fixed investment loans across 
wide  segments  of  the  economy.  Monetary  easing,  stable  prices,  better  availability  of  energy,  and 
improved  law &  order  conditions  have  created  an  enabling  macroeconomic  environment.  As  a  result, 
the  GDP  growth  in  Pakistan  increased  to  5.3  percent  in  FY17  highest  since  FY07.  Moreover,  stable 
economic  outlook  of  Pakistan  coupled  with  high  dividends  expected  from  CPEC  suggest  a  promising 
future. However, of course we will have to manage the challenge of the Current Account Deficit. 
In the end, I am confident that the emergence of Bank of China on the financial horizon of Pakistan will 
be beneficial for our banking industry and the growing linkages between our two brotherly nations 
would create a better future for all of us.    
Thank you very much. 
 Page 4 of 4 
