Peter Praet: Monetary policy in a low interest rate environment
Speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at the
Congress of Actuaries, Berlin, 6 June 2018.
Accompanying slides of this speech.
 salient feature of the economic environment in advanced economies has been the steady decline
of  short  and  long-term  interest  rates  over  several  decades  to  the  extremely  low  levels  which
currently prevail.  Since 1980, long-term interest rates have declined by about 860 basis points in
the United States, 790 basis points in Germany and more than 1,200 basis points in France.
1
I am acutely aware that an environment of low interest rates poses considerable challenges for
many  of  the  business  models  operated  by  actuaries  and  other  professionals.  However,  the
similar behaviour of yields across different economic areas attests to the global nature of the
economic and financial developments at work, as well as to the broad similarity of the methods
adopted  by  monetary  policymakers  in  advanced  economies  to  respond  to  the  adverse
developments of the last ten years.
In my remarks today, I would like to outline the ECB’s monetary policy response to the different
phases  of  the  crisis.  Our  monetary  policy  response  has  taken  place  in  a  low  interest  rate
environment, which can be attributed to specific global and euro area factors, some of which are
secular and some of which are a legacy of the financial crisis. In any case, the secular trends
and structural forces – which, prior to the crisis, had pushed down long-term yields over a span
of at least 30 years – made central banks’ efforts to stabilise their economies when the crisis
finally  hit  even  more  strenuous  than  they  would  have  been  otherwise,  and  required  more
innovative and bolder measures.
Nonetheless,  the  present  environment  of  low  interest  rates  need  not  become  permanent  as
public policy can address some of the causes of the very low interest rates. While several of the
secular factors are challenging for policy to reverse, others can be alleviated by effective and
targeted policies that boost potential growth and, in the case of Europe, complete the euro area’s
institutional framework.
Monetary  policy  plays  an  important  role  by  creating  an  environment  which  facilitates  the
necessary  structural  adjustments,  even  if  in  itself  it  cannot  address  structural  aspects  of  the
economy. Indeed, by laying the groundwork for a return of inflation to our objective, our monetary
policy  measures  have  been  supporting  economic  activity  and  have  alleviated  damage  to  the
economy’s growth potential.
Our  asset  purchase  programme  (APP)  has  been  the  pivotal  component  of  our  strategy  for
countering and reversing the crisis. As you know, since the programme’s inception in 2015, the
Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  has  made  net  asset  purchases  under  the APP  conditional  on
progress towards a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation to levels below, but close to, 2%
over  the  medium  term.  We  have  set  forth  criteria  to  measure  the  headway  we  have  made
towards  meeting  this  stated  objective  since  the  programme  was  launched.  Next  week,  the
Governing Council will have to assess whether progress so far has been sufficient to warrant a
gradual unwinding of our net purchases. In making its assessment, it will consider the underlying
strength of the euro area economy and the pass-through to wage and price formations.
Monetary policy response to the crisis
In  the  years  preceding  the  onset  of  the  global  financial  crisis  in  2008,  over-optimistic  growth
expectations had taken hold in a number of advanced economies. Although productivity growth
1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
had  been  slowing  since  the  mid-1990s,  agents  overestimated  future  income  growth  and
borrowed  against  it,  accumulating  excessive  levels  of  debt.  At  the  same  time,  poor  risk
management, low capital and liquidity, inadequate corporate governance, and weak supervision
and regulation encouraged financial leverage, which led to the build-up of vulnerabilities. This was
particularly acute in the United States, where there was a rapid expansion in the development of
complex financial securities, which later proved to entail substantial risks.
This oversight can to some extent be explained by the fact that, in the decade leading up to the
crisis, the overall macroeconomic environment had been very stable, with some observers even
concluding that monetary policy had tamed the business cycle once and for all. This was also
the period when the perceived benefits of globalisation reached their high-water mark and, for
euro area countries, when Monetary Union came into being, potentially paving the way for the
macroeconomic  and  microeconomic  benefits  of  the  European  Single  Market  to  be  fully
unleashed.
When the cycle finally turned in 2008, it set in train a turbulent decade of deleveraging and de-
risking, consisting of a number of different phases.
The first phase was similar across advanced economies. It was characterised by the financial
panic and abrupt liquidity crisis triggered by the collapse of Lehman Brothers in September 2008.
Banks became uncertain about the underlying health of other banks, bringing market funding to a
sudden stop. Globally, central banks intervened forcefully and in a coordinated manner so as to
provide  essential  liquidity  to  the  banking  sector.  During  this  first  phase  of  the  crisis,  the  ECB
lowered  its  main  refinancing  rate  to  the  then  record  low  of  1%  in  May  2009,  while  letting  the
pivotal overnight money market interest rate drift down to the floor of the interest rate corridor – a
level  much  lower  than  1%.  To  facilitate  banks’  borrowing  of  central  bank  funds,  the  ECB
expanded  the  range  of  eligible  collateral  for  refinancing  operations  and  provided  liquidity
elastically  to  the  banking  sector.  The  easing  impact  of  our  liberal  liquidity  injections  was
enhanced  by  increasing  the  maturity  of  liquidity  provisions.  This  phase  of  the  crisis  deeply
affected euro area banks because, unlike in other jurisdictions, no institutional frameworks were
available to swiftly address problems.
Banks’ needs for fresh resources put a growing strain on the public finances of those countries
whose  banking  sectors  had  been  allowed  to  grow  to  outsized  proportions  relative  to  the
underlying  economy.  The  contagion  from  banks  to  their  sovereigns  –  coupled  with  growing
concerns about the sustainability of high-debt countries – paved the way for the second phase of
the  crisis:  the  sovereign  debt  crisis.  The  debt  crisis  was  fuelled  by  the  vicious  loop  between
banks  and  sovereigns.  While  the  contingent  liabilities  associated  with  the  weak  state  of  the
national banks had undermined the credit standing of governments, the attendant loss of value of
the bonds issued by these governments contributed to undermining the health of the banks even
further.
Financial markets then began to fragment along national fault lines, eventually preventing entire
banking systems from accessing market funding. Lack of liquidity, coupled with the erosion of
capital due to losses on sovereign exposures, precipitated a renewed credit crunch.
A  new  round  of  the  vicious  cycle  with  negative  feedback  loops  then  began.  The  tightening  in
domestic credit conditions aggravated the ongoing recession, eroded the quality of banks’ loan
portfolios and further weakened banks’ capital positions, which in turn made the bailing-out of the
banking system by the government even more likely and thus pushed up sovereign borrowing
costs even higher.
Confronted  with  these  events,  many  investors  started  to  think  that  this  negative  spiral  might
ultimately  lead  the  affected  countries  to  exit  the  euro  area.  As  a  result,  redenomination  risk
soared and sovereign spreads widened.
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
This led to a serious disruption of the monetary policy transmission mechanism and prevented
our accommodative policy stance from reaching businesses and households. As the affected
economies represented a third of euro area GDP, the contagion became an acute threat to price
stability in the euro area.
The ECB monetary policy  response  to  these  developments  was  twofold.  First,  to  ensure  that
banks had access to longer-term funding, two three-year refinancing operations were undertaken
at  the  end  of  2011  and  the  beginning  of  2012.  Second,  in  summer  2012,  the  ECB’s
announcement  of  Outright  Monetary  Transactions  served  as  a  powerful  circuit  breaker  of  the
ongoing downward spiral. Nonetheless, the sovereign debt crisis left a damaging legacy, which
led the way for the third phase of the crisis.
As the euro area entered a prolonged slump, banks in many parts of the euro area – particularly
in  vulnerable  countries  –  embarked  on  a  drawn-out  process  of  deleveraging,  which  mainly
involved reducing lending to the real economy. Towards end-2013, loans to the private sector
were falling by more than 2% per year and a credit crunch loomed. Moreover, by mid-2014, the
economic recovery was losing momentum and the weakness in aggregate demand was starting
to depress inflation expectations. The sharp fall-off in oil prices that began in the late summer of
that year exerted further disinflationary pressure.
The Governing Council had to provide additional policy accommodation to restore price stability.
But it faced the challenge that interest rates were already at low levels, limiting the room available
for further cuts of its policy rates – the ECB deposit facility had already been brought down to
zero in July 2012.
But why were interest rates across the whole spectrum of maturities so low in the first place?
Why was the buffer for further monetary policy easing so limited? One way to answer this is by
taking  a  longer-term  perspective  and  disentangling  nominal  long-term  interest  rates  into  three
constituent parts: (i) expected average inflation , (ii) expected average real rate over the lifespan
of a bond, (iii) real term premia, representing the compensation investors require for holding onto
a long-term asset. Although data limitations make it hard to derive empirical estimates of each
element of this decomposition going far back in the past, what transpires from this analysis is
3
that all components had had a decades-long history of consistent decline.
2
Taking a historical perspective, long-term inflation expectations had declined steadily since the
beginning of the 1980s to stabilise at levels around 2% in the late 1990s. The trend decline and
subsequent  stabilisation  reflected  the  success  of  central  banks’  monetary  policy  in  regaining
control  of  inflation  and  in  establishing  strong  credibility.  However,  in  mid-2014  these  benign
developments were overshadowed by a decline in long-term inflation expectations, which, from a
central bank’s perspective, was highly concerning .  Turning  to  the  real  term  premia,  available
since  2005  when  inflation  swaps  were  introduced  in  the  euro  area,  we  observe  a  significant
decline, mainly on account of the imbalance between the reduced supply of, and the increased
demand for, safe assets at the global level, which has been exacerbated by the global financial
crisis.
4
The final component is the expected average real rate. Focusing on its value over the longer run,
it  is  found  to  have  steadily  declined  due  to  structural  forces  on  the  one  hand  and  to  cyclical
factors  on  the  other.  Structural  factors  include  the  slowdown  in  productivity,  unfavourable
demographic developments and the increase in savings. The intuition is that these factors drive
investment, which in turn determines the demand for loanable funds. In the euro area and other
major  advanced  economies,  productivity  and  population  growth,  which  are  also  the  drivers  of
potential  GDP  growth,  have  been  declining  for  decades.  The  intersection  point  of  the  desired
demand for “loanable funds” with the level of savings constitutes the interest rate.
In addition to these secular forces, more cyclical factors linked to the financial crisis have been a
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
drag on real interest rates. In particular, the euro area has faced a massive debt overhang in the
public  and  private  sector,  resulting  in  a  severe  “balance  sheet  recession”  and  a  tightening  of
credit conditions. This has required a substantial amount of deleveraging, which in turn reduced
investment, prolonged the downturn and weighed on the real interest rate.
Overall,  the  pre-crisis  slowdown  in  potential  growth,  coupled  with  the  negative  effects  of  the
crisis on investment and private sector balance sheets, has resulted in an imbalance between
saving and investment, and largely accounts for the decline in the real interest rate to very low
levels.
From a monetary policy perspective, this means that the equilibrium real interest rate – defined
as  the  value  of  the  short-term  real  interest  rate  consistent  with  the  economy  operating  at  its
5
potential (or sustainable) level and inflation at its objective – has declined.
Faced  with  disinflationary  shocks,  a  central  bank  wishing  to  preserve  price  stability  when  the
equilibrium real rate has declined has to steer interest rates to levels below the equilibrium real
rate prevailing in the long run. Yet, while the equilibrium real rate can be very negative, there is a
lower bound to the nominal interest rate.
In the context of the disinflationary pressures we faced in 2014 and 2015, this implied that the
room  for  the  additional  reduction  of  short-term  interest  rates  was  insufficient  to  generate  the
necessary stimulus, given the low level of the equilibrium rate.
To address this challenge, the ECB sought to affect the whole range of interest rates that are
relevant for private sector financing conditions. This strategy constitutes of three elements.
The  first  was  the  launch  of  a  negative  interest  rate  policy,  which  entailed  a  decrease  in  the
deposit facility rate to –0.1% in June 2014 and to –0.2% in September 2014. This first wave of
cuts into negative territory provided additional stimulus as it extended the scope of conventional
monetary policy. The deposit facility rate was subsequently brought to –0.4% in two further rate
reductions in December 2015 and March 2016.
The second was the introduction of a credit easing package, which included a third covered bond
purchase  programme  and  an  asset-backed  securities  purchase  programme.  This  aimed  to
improve the pass-through for each euro of liquidity injected into the financial system to private
sector  borrowing  costs  and  to  reinforce  the  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance.  The
package  also  contained  targeted  longer-term  refinancing  operations,  which  were  specifically
designed to support bank lending to the private sector.
The third element of the strategy was the addition of a public sector purchase programme to the
ECB’s asset purchase programme (APP). These measures helped to compress the risk premia
all along the yield curve. Shortly after the public sector purchase programme was launched, the
Governing  Council  embarked  on  a  second  wave  of  cuts  to  the  deposit  facility  rate,  which
empowered the portfolio rebalancing channel of the APP as it incentivised banks to invest central
bank reserves in higher yielding assets.
These  instruments  were  complemented  by  the  use  of  forward  guidance,  through  which  we
started to communicate our expectations of future policy, along with the conditions that would
warrant a change in the policy stance.
The economic impact of monetary policy measures
Our monetary policy strategy has borne fruit, with 2017 marking the euro area’s fifth consecutive
year of positive growth. Recently, the pace of economic growth has moderated somewhat, which
in part relates to temporary factors and possibly some pull-back from last year’s strong growth.
In addition, concerns about trade protectionism may have dampened business sentiment and
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
expectations.  The  recent  slowdown  could  also  be  a  sign  that  supply-side  constraints  are
becoming increasingly binding. Nonetheless, the underlying strength of the euro area economy
persists, with growth above potential and sentiment indicators still well above long-term averages
for most sectors and countries.
The underlying momentum is evidenced in the labour market, with around 8 million more people
employed in the euro area since the trough in mid-2013. This implies that all of the job losses
recorded  during  the  crisis  have  been  recovered. Also,  the  unemployment  rate  is  at  its  lowest
level for nearly nine years, despite an increase in the labour force of more than 2%.
In terms of demand components, private consumption – one of the main drivers of the euro area
recovery  since  2013  –  is  being  supported  by  the  steady  growth  in  households’  disposable
income, higher asset valuations and by an accommodative monetary policy that contributed to a
lower debt burden for borrowers. There also appears to be scope for further private consumption
growth  as  anticipated  improvements  in  the  labour  market  should  keep  consumer  confidence
high.
At the same time, the investment outlook continues to strengthen and is supported by an ongoing
need  to  modernise  the  capital  stock  after  years  of  subdued  investment,  as  well  as  by  very
favourable financing conditions, an improvement in profitability and solid demand. The European
Commission’s biannual investment survey, released on 27 April, shows expectations of a strong
increase in real industrial investment of 7% in 2018.
An  important  factor  supporting  the  good  domestic  demand  performance  is  the  favourable
financing conditions for firms and households, which are still influenced by the policy measures
that  have  been  announced  since  June  2014.  Bank  lending  rates  to  euro  area  non-financial
corporations (NFCs) have fallen by around 120 basis points since June 2014 and to households
by  around  110  basis  points.  At  the  same  time,  the  heterogeneity  of  lending  rates  across
countries has also fallen sharply, with the pass-through of our measures becoming more even.
Loans to NFCs have continued to grow and reached an annual growth rate of 3.3% in April 2017.
The  key  question  for  monetary  policy  is:  will  growth  remain  sufficiently  strong  for  the  ongoing
pressure  on  resource  utilisation  to  continue  to  nudge  inflation  along  a  pathway  that  rises  fast
enough towards our objective?
The main intersection between growth and inflation formation is the labour market. A look at the
sectoral make-up of the most recent developments in the job market is encouraging. PMI survey
indicators signal continued employment creation ahead across sectors as well as across major
countries  in  the  euro  area.  Measures  of  labour  market  tightness,  such  as  the  vacancies-to-
unemployment ratio or survey indicators of labour shortages, show an upward trend for the euro
area  that  has  steepened  over  the  past  year.  Measures  of  slack,  such  as  the  U6  measure  of
6
unemployment, also show improvement.
At  the  same  time,  there  is  growing  evidence  that  labour  market  tightness  is  translating  into  a
stronger pick-up in wage growth. Annual growth in negotiated wages in the euro area increased
to 1.9% in the first quarter of 2018, from 1.6% in the fourth quarter of 2017. The upsurge was
primarily due to Germany, where negotiated wages increased by 2.3% in first quarter of 2018 up
from 1.9% in the fourth quarter of 2017, driven by major wage agreements in the German metal
and engineering industry, the public sector and the construction sector.
Rising  wage  pressures  are  gradually  starting  to  be  reflected  in  aggregate  measures  of
compensation per employee. These, in turn, feed into producer prices for domestic sales of non-
food consumer goods.
The Governing Council has three criteria for assessing whether there is a sustained adjustment
in the path of inflation towards levels below, but close to, 2% over the medium term: first, the
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
convergence of the projected headline inflation to our medium-term aim; second, confidence in
the realisation of this convergence path; and third, the resilience of inflation convergence even
after the end of our net asset purchases.
Signals showing the convergence of inflation towards our aim have been improving, and both the
underlying  strength  in  the  euro  area  economy  and  the  fact  that  such  strength  is  increasingly
affecting wage formation supports our confidence that inflation will reach a level of below, but
close  to,  2%  over  the  medium  term.  As  for  our  third  criterion,  resilience,  waning  market
expectations  of  sizeable  further  expansions  of  our  programme  have  been  accompanied  by
inflation expectations that are increasingly consistent with our aim.
At the end, any decision concerning the termination or further extension of our net purchases will
hinge on the ultimate judgement of the Governing Council. Once the Governing Council judges
that the three criteria have been met, net asset purchases will expire, in line with our guidance.
From  that  point  in  time,  inflation  developments  will  remain  conditional  on  reinvestments
continuing for an extended period of time and on policy rates remaining at their present levels
well past the end of our net asset purchases. Our forward guidance on policy rates will then have
to  be  further  specified  and  calibrated  as  appropriate  for  inflation  to  remain  on  the  sustained
adjustment  path  to  levels  below,  but  close  to,  2%  over  the  medium  term.  The  stock  of  long-
duration  assets  held  in  our  portfolio  will  continue  to  put  downward  pressure  on  longer-term
interest rates well beyond the end of our net purchases.
Conclusion
Low  interest  rates  fundamentally  reflect  the  consequences  of  unfavourable  secular  trends,
combined with the fall-out from the global financial crisis and euro area sovereign debt crisis. As
a result, the equilibrium real interest rate has declined to very low levels, although the precise
level is very uncertain.
Confronted with a declining equilibrium interest rate and the effective lower bound on policy rates,
we had to resort to unconventional monetary policy measures in order to provide the necessary
accommodation to support domestic demand, thwart the deflationary risks which were emerging
in 2014 and prepare the way for inflation to return to our objective.
However, monetary policy cannot increase the long-term real interest rate. This requires policies
that  address  the  factors  depressing  the  real  interest  rate:  increasing  potential  growth  and
completing the euro area’s institutional set-up. Such measures would support investment and
rebalance saving and investment, which in turn would increase the equilibrium real interest rate
and support the normalisation of interest rates.
1
2
3
4
I would like to thank John Hutchinson for his support in preparing this speech.
Expected inflation can be further decomposed into “risk neutral” inflation expectations and inflation risk premia.
For the United States such analysis can be undertaken from the late 1990s when Treasury Inflation-Protected
Securities became available, while inflation swaps started being traded quite a bit later. See, for example,
Abrahams, M., Adrian, T., Crump, R. K., Moench, E. and Yu, R., (2016), “Decomposing real and nominal yield
curves”,  Journal  of  Monetary  Economics,  Volume  84,  December,  pp.  182–200.  In  the  euro  area,  these
decompositions can also be undertaken using model-based analysis, albeit only over a shorter time period due
to the later availability of suitable inflation-linked instruments.
Whereas the inflation risk premia and the real term premia, taken together, display a trend decline over recent
decades, the analysis of their individual dynamics is subject to data limitations as estimates are based on
inflation-linked bonds or swaps which have only recently become more widespread. But it is likely that the
inflation  risk  premia  declined  significantly  in  the  1980s  and  1990s  alongside  the  decline  in  inflation
expectations, with investors accepting lower compensation for bearing inflation risk. The decline in inflation risk
premia from mid-2014, by contrast, pointed to the increased prominence that market participants assigned to
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
lower than expected inflation outcomes around that time.
5
6
More than a century ago Knut Wicksell (1898) described the natural rate as: “There is a certain rate of interest on
loans which is neutral in respect to commodity prices, and tends neither to raise or to lower them. This is
necessarily the same as the rate of interest which would be determined by supply and demand if no use were
made of money and all lending were effected in the form of capital goods”.
The “U6 measure” captures unemployment, underemployment (i.e. workers who would like to work more hours)
and marginal attachment, which refers to those members of the workforce who are not seeking employment
very  actively,  because,  for  example,  they  are  not  available  to  start  a  new  job  at  short  notice  or  have  been
discouraged by a fruitless search for work.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
