  M a y   3 0 ,   2 0 1 8 
B a n k   o f   J a p a n 
 
 Opening Remarks at the 2018 BOJ-IMES Conference 
Hosted by the Institute for Monetary and 
Economic Studies, Bank of Japan 
Haruhiko Kuroda 
Governor of the Bank of Japan 
 I. Introduction 
Good  morning.  I  am  honored  to  welcome  distinguished  guests  from  academia  and 
central banks to the 24th International Conference hosted by the  Institute for Monetary 
and Economic Studies.  On behalf of conference organizers, I thank all of you here who 
have  kindly 
taken 
time  out  of  your  busy  schedules 
to  participate  in  this 
one-and-a-half-day conference in Tokyo.   
The topic of  this year's conference is "Central Banking in a Changing World." Over the 
past few years, our  conferences focused  on  monetary  policy  issues, yielding important 
insights and suggestions for the conduct of monetary policy  after  the  Global  Financial 
Crisis.  This  year's  conference  expands  its  scope  from  monetary  policy  to  "central 
banking," that is to say, central bank policies and operations on the whole. Behind this is 
the  fact  that  global  structural  changes  in  recent  years  influence  not  only  central  bank 
policies such as monetary and prudential policies, but also central bank operations such as 
the  issuance  of  currency  and  the  operation  of  payment  and  settlement  systems,  which 
provide basis for the conduct of central bank policies. 
As these changes span a wide range of areas, I think it is helpful to briefly outline recent 
changes in the global economic and financial environment, especially which are deemed 
important for central banks.     
 II. A Changing World and Central Banks 
In recent years, the global economic and financial environment surrounding central banks 
has  changed  significantly.  Global  trade  activity  has  gathered  strength  again  following 
years  of  lackluster  growth  in  the  wake  of  the  Global  Financial  Crisis.  Against  the 
backdrop of the favorable global economic environment, investment activity by financial 
institutions and other  investors around the world has become increasingly  active. Along 
with these developments, economic  and  financial linkages between countries have been 
strengthening. This increased interconnectedness is,  of  course,  desirable for the global 
economy,  as  it  reflects  ongoing  globalization. But  at  the  same  time, partly due to the 
recent dynamics of political economy and geopolitics, the size of global shocks has been 
increasing,  and  the  spread  of  global  economic  shocks  has  been  presenting  a  great 
challenge for central banks. 
 1 
Regarding  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  changes  in  price  and  wage  dynamics  have 
attracted keen attention in both academia and central banks, especially those in advanced 
economies.  As  the  adverse  effects  from  the  Global  Financial  Crisis  subside,  the 
unemployment rate has dropped in many countries and the real economy has improved 
substantially,  partly  due  to  the  effects  of  large-scale  macroeconomic  policies.  Despite 
these improvements in the real economy, prices and wages have remained sluggish. This 
phenomenon  has  recently  been  labeled  the  "missing  inflation"  or  "missing  wage 
inflation" puzzle. Looking back on the discussions at our conference last year, adaptive 
elements in inflation expectations formation were highlighted as a possible factor behind 
the missing inflation. It is urgent that we explore the mechanism behind the changes in 
price and wage dynamics especially in advanced economies. 
Turning to the financial system, after ten years since the outbreak of the Global Financial 
Crisis, the robustness of the global financial system has been enhanced through the efforts 
of financial authorities, which include the finalization of Basel III, and those of financial 
institutions to strengthen their risk management practice. However, it is necessary to pay 
attention  to  developments  in  the  so-called  shadow  banking  sector,  which  is  not 
sufficiently  covered  by  conventional  supervision  and  regulations.  Moreover,  in  recent 
years,  the  low  profitability  of  financial  institutions,  especially  in  advanced  economies, 
has come to pose a new challenge for global financial stability. As such, central banks are 
faced with new challenges in terms of financial stability as well. 
From a longer perspective, central banks are faced with an important challenge posed by 
innovations in information and communication technology. We see remarkable progress 
in  a  wide  range  of  technologies,  such  as  artificial  intelligence,  big  data  analysis,  and 
distributed ledger technology. We also see the rapid development of smartphones, social 
network services, and e-commerce. The application of these technologies in the field of 
financial  business,  typically  dubbed  "FinTech,"  has  already  brought  about  drastic 
changes  in  the  way  payments  are  made  in  many  countries.  These  developments  are 
expected  to  continue  in  the  future,  promoting  further  changes  in  business  models  at 
financial institutions.   
Of  course,  over  the  past  several  decades,  central  banks  --  in  their  role  as  the  "bank  of 
banks" -- have made various efforts to improve the safety and efficiency of payment and 
settlement systems, for example by introducing real-time gross settlement, simultaneous 
settlement  of  funds  and  securities,  and  simultaneous  foreign  exchange  settlement. 
Furthermore, with regard to currency issuance, a fundamental role of central banks, some 
central banks are now exploring the possibility of issuing central bank digital currency. 
 2 
Thus,  in  the  long-run,  an  era  of  major  transformation  may  lie  ahead  even  in  the  core 
operations of central banking, such as the "issuer of banknotes" and the "bank of banks." 
 III. Conclusion   
In sum, central banks are facing new challenges both in terms of policies and operations 
as  a  result  of  wide-ranging  structural  changes  in  the  global  economic  and  financial 
environment.  I  hope  we  will  have  lively  discussions  on  these  challenges  and  their 
implications at this conference. 
Following  my  remarks,  this  year's  Mayekawa  lecture  will  be  given  by  Professor 
Raghuram Rajan of the University of Chicago. I am looking forward to learning from his 
extensive knowledge of banking theory as well as his experiences as Chief Economist of 
the  International  Monetary  Fund  and  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India.  For  the 
keynote  speech,  Professor  Athanasios  Orphanides  of  the  Massachusetts  Institute  of 
Technology, our new Honorary Adviser to IMES, will share his views on policy issues, 
based on his experience both as a former central bank governor and an academic. 
The  paper  presentations  will  focus  on  the  four  topics:  (1)  the  sustainability  of  the  low 
interest  rate  environment under  globalization, (2) the impact  of the issuance of  central 
bank  digital  currency  on  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy,  (3)  the  impact  of 
productivity changes on optimal trend inflation, and (4) the mechanism behind missing 
wage  inflation.  The  final  and  concluding  session  will  be  the  policy  panel  discussion, 
moderated by the IMES Chief Councillor Kazuo Ueda. As panelists, we welcome James 
Bullard,  President  and  CEO  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  St.  Louis,  and  David 
Ramsden,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England.  I  hope  that  this  panel  will  help 
deepen  our  understanding  on  "Central  Banking  in  a  Changing  World"  from  both  a 
theoretical and a practical perspective.   
Of course, compared with the wide range of issues to be discussed, our available time at 
this conference -- one-and-a-half days -- might be too short. Based on this limitation, the 
items in the program, especially the paper presentation sessions, are necessarily selective. 
Nevertheless, by combining paper presentations, lectures, and panel discussions, I hope 
that the conference as a whole will activate discussion from a variety of perspectives and 
will deepen our understanding of the issues facing central banks.   
Thank you for your attention. 
 3 
