Yannis  Stournaras:  Greece  and  the  global  economy  -  prospects
and main challenges ahead
Speech by Mr Yannis Stournaras, Governor of the Bank of Greece, at an event on the occasion
of Accenture’s  25th  anniversary  in  Greece  "Greece  and  the  global  economy  -  prospects  and
main challenges ahead", Athens, 28 March 2018.
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 It is a great pleasure for me to be here tonight and share my thoughts on the prospects of the
Greek economy against a backdrop of brighter prospects for the global and euro area economy
but also against the headwind of higher uncertainty due to a rise in protectionism worldwide. 
1. The international environment 
T h e global  economy  continues  to  strengthen,  underpinned  by  the  investment  and
international  trade  recovery,  on  account  of  favorable  financial  conditions,  supporting  monetary
policy, improving confidence and low international commodity prices. This favorable momentum
1
is expected to continue in 2018. 
World trade  in  goods  and  services  has recovered and its volume is now estimated to have
increased by 4.7% in 2017, compared with 2.5% in the previous year. The upward revision of
growth rate of international trade is not only due to a faster recovery in world GDP but also to an
increase  in  income  elasticity  that  has  fallen  in  recent  years  due  to  the  sluggishness  in  fixed
capital investments which are to a large extent “trade-intensive”. 
Regarding the euro area, economic expansion is strong and broad-based.  The recovery is
accompanied  by  solid  employment  gains,  reflecting  also  past  labour  market  reforms.  The
unemployment rate continues to decline despite an increase in labour force participation. Private
consumption is supported by rising employment and growing household wealth. The investment
outlook  is  positive,  on  account  of  rising  corporate  profitability,  easing  financing  conditions  and
solid  demand,  as  well  as  the  need  for  capital  stock  replacement  after  several  years  of
underinvestment. The broad-based global expansion is providing impetus to euro area exports.
Overall, in the euro area, GDP in 2017 grew by 2.3% – the highest post-crisis growth rate – and
is expected to increase by 2.4% in 2018 and 1.9% in 2019. Positive consumption and investment
developments have been fostered and reinforced by the pass-through of the ECB’s monetary
policy measures, that eased funding conditions for households and firms . The contribution of
the ECB easing measures to annual euro area GDP growth was estimated at half a percentage
4
point in 2017 and still is expected to be around one-third of a percentage point in 2018.
Inflation in the euro area reached 1.5% in 2017 and is expected to decline slightly to 1.4% in
2018, largely a reflection of developments in international oil prices. Inflation is expected to move
gradually  up  thereafter  to  1.7%  in  2020,  reinforced  by  the  ECB’s  accommodative  monetary
policy,  robust  economic  activity  and  projected  labor  cost  increases,  as  the  level  of
5
underemployment of the workforce will decrease.
2
3
The Governing Council of the ECB is more confident that inflation will reach a level of below, but
close to, 2% over the medium term. At the meeting of March 8, the Governing Council of the ECB
introduced a further gradual adjustment to the monetary policy stance, removing from the official
communication the so-called APP easing bias . However, the Governing Council still needs to
see further evidence that inflation dynamics are moving in the right direction. So monetary policy,
as  President  Draghi  and  other  members  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  ECB  have  put  it,  will
6
 1 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
remain patient, persistent and prudent. 
T h e risks  surrounding  the  forecasts  for  the  global  and  European  economies  appear  to
be balanced in the short term, under the positive effect of accommodative monetary policy in
advanced  economies  and  the  recovery  of  international  trade.  However,  they are tilted to the
downside  in  the  medium  term as  interest  rate  hikes  as  a  result  of  the  normalization  of
monetary policy in advanced economies (which is under way) are expected to burden the service
of high total public and private debt and to dampen growth dynamics.
Downside risks relate to:
-  Rising  protectionism  and  in  particular  the  possible  spillovers  of  the new  trade  measures
announced  by  the  US  administration.  An  escalation  of  trade  tensions,  the  intensity  of
retaliation  and  their  potential  negative  confidence  effects,  would  weigh  on  world  trade.  These
measures already affect stock markets.
- The possibility of tighter global financial conditions as well as potential sharp correction in
financial markets, triggered by a faster than expected tightening of US monetary policy and/or a
reassessment of investors’ risk appetite. In this context, talking down currencies exacerbates
exchange rate volatility which is harmful for global and euro area growth.
- The outcome of Brexit negotiations.
- Geopolitical tensions in the Middle East, the Korean peninsula and Iran, as well as a possible
resurgence of the refugee crisis.
- The possibility of anti-euro attitude by populist governments in Eurozone Member States. 
Moreover, there are several medium-term challenges for the global economy.
Productivity  growth  has  slowed  across  advanced,  emerging  market  and  low-income
countries at a time of significant innovation and technological change. This is expected to
negatively affect the long-term potential output.
The  generally low  level  of  global  inflation  and  wage  growth,  especially  in  advanced
economies despite the fact that the output gap is closing, is a puzzle for monetary policy
makers. 
– This development could be linked to globalization and the increasing role of China in the
global  economy,  labour  market  slack  and  labour’s  weakened  bargaining  position  on
account  of  labour  market  reforms,  increases  in  labour  supply  and  more  work  of  a
temporary  and  part-time  nature,  the  opening  up  to  competition  of  product  and  services
markets coupled with the growing importance of services, as well as e-commerce which
dampens price inflation.
These changes – some of which are here to stay for long – have affected the position
and the slope of the Phillips curve  (the  relationship  between  labour  market  slack  and
inflation) in these economies, and pose a number of dilemmas for central banks regarding
the continuation of the accommodative monetary policy stance. 
2. The future of the Economic and Monetary Union (EMU)
A Euro Area specific challenge relates to the fact that, despite the robust recovery and the policy
changes taken in recent years, the EMU architecture remains incomplete, making the region
vulnerable to future financial crises. Euro area policy makers cannot rely solely on the ECB and
expect  that  it  will  keep  monetary  policy  loose  indefinitely.  A  well-functioning  monetary  union
 2 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
requires: flexible markets for goods, services, labour and capital to facilitate adjustment and
reduce both the likelihood and the impact of any future shock . At the same time, national fiscal
positions should be  soundto cater the stabilization needs over the business cycle and create
fiscal  space  that  could  be  used  in  a  recession.  Notwithstanding  the  above  actions  which  are
based  on national  responsibility,  euro  area  wide  policy  instruments  are  necessary
to provide risk-sharing and enhance solidarity in order to cope with large shocks. 
7
Building  on  the  Five  Presidents’  Report  and  the  European  Commission   proposal,  the  key
institutional reforms for the new EMU architecture should be the following: 
o  The completion  of  the  Banking  Union through  the  establishment  of  a  European  Deposit
Insurance Scheme and a common fiscal backstop for the Single Resolution Mechanism to stop
the still strong bank-sovereign links.
o  The  creation  of  a  true Capital  Markets Union  to  increase  harmonization  towards  best
practices in securitisation, accounting, insolvency law, company law, as well as property rights
and to enhance private risk-sharing.
8
The creation of a centralised fiscal stabilisation tool in order to enhance public sector
risk-sharing. This tool will provide effective protection against asymmetric shocks triggered
by  regional  disturbances.  Various  proposals  have  been  put  forward,  i.e.,  a common
investment fund of EU resources  to  finance  investment  projects  conditional  on  reform
implementation, the establishment of a European unemployment insurance scheme, the
issuance of European “safe” bonds (ESBies) and, later on, Eurobonds by the European
Stability Mechanism.
The  transformation  of  the  European  Stability  Mechanism  into  a  fully-fledged European
Monetary Fund that would act as lender of last resort for Member States.
T h e appointment  of  a  Euro  Area  Finance  Minister,  accountable  to  the  European
Parliament.
Increasing accountability of all European institutions to the European Parliament, and
Reinforcing  the  macroeconomic  rebalancing  mechanisms (i.e.  the  Macroeconomic
Imbalance  Procedure),  which  must  operate symmetrically.  Up  to  now,  the  burden  of
adjustment falls on Member States with current account and budget deficits, while Member
States  with  current  account  surpluses  continue  to  augment  even  higher  surpluses.  This
creates a “recessionary” bias in the Eurozone. 
long-term  prosperity  of 
Moving forward in this direction would safeguard the monetary union’s resilience, its viability and
its  citizens. These  changes  will  also  reinvigorate  real
the 
convergence in the euro area.  Recent  IMF  work  has  shown  that  since  2010  there  is  real
divergence among the original euro area countries , while in-house work by the Bank of Greece
has shown that the real divergence persists even if Greece is excluded from the sample.
3. Greek economy: Progress over the past eight years 
10
9
The Greek crisis was the result of major macroeconomic imbalances which have accumulated
over a long period of time, leading to the outbreak of the sovereign debt crisis in 2010. To a large
extent, these imbalances have now been addressed, although major challenges remain, as I will
explain later. 
Over  the  past  eight  years, Greece  has  implemented  a  bold  economic  reform  and
adjustment programme that has fully eliminated fiscal and external deficits and improved
competitiveness. As a consequence, openness has improved substantially and the economy
 3 / 9
11
BIS central bankers' speeches
11
12
has started to rebalance towards tradable, export-oriented sectors.
The banking  system  has  been  restructured,  consolidated  and  recapitalized,  following
stringent stress tests along with in-depth asset quality reviews. Greek banks are now among the
best capitalized in Europe.
The ratio of Non-Performing Exposures to total Exposures remains quite elevated (44.6%
of total exposures or €100.4 billion in September 2017). But banks have set operational targets to
reduce  the  stock  of  non-performing  exposures  (NPEs)  by  37%  by  end-2019. And  they  have
accumulated provisions covering about half of their total NPEs, while the other half is covered by
the underlying collateral. According to December 2017 provisional data, there was a substantial
improvement  in  the  pace  of  NPE  reduction  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  2017  (with  the  NPE  stock
amounting to roughly €95 billion). 
Significant institutional reforms have been implemented, aiming at providing banks with a
variety of means for reducing non-performing loans. These reforms include, among others, the
authorization  of  credit  servicing  firms,  operation  of  an  electronic  platform  for  out-of-court
settlement,  and  electronic  auctions  of  real  estate.  The  progress  achieved  in  removing  the
obstacles  to  the  management  of  NPEs  and,  in  particular,  the  impact  on  strategic  defaulters’
behaviour from the launch of e-auctions was a main factor behind the favourable picture in the
fourth quarter. 
4. Short and medium-term outlook 
Progress in the implementation of the adjustment programme is having a beneficial impact on
confidence, liquidity and the real economy. Real GDP in 2017 increased by 1.4% on account of
the positive contribution of exports of goods and services and gross fixed capital formation. By
contrast, private consumption remained flat, while public consumption contributed negatively to
growth. Positive developments are not only reflected in economic activity indicators, but also in
soft  data  such  as  the  manufacturing  PMI  and  the  economic  sentiment  indicator  which  have
reached and at times surpassed previous peaks pointing to continuing economic expansion. 
Improvements  are  also  visible  in  the  financial  sector:  bank  deposits  of  the  non-financial
private sector have increased by about 10 billion euro since mid-2016 and bank credit to non-
financial corporations has stabilized. Capital controls have been relaxed and banks’ dependence
on  central  bank  financing  has  declined  significantly.  Nevertheless,  financial  conditions  remain
tight and bank lending rates are high compared to other euro area countries. 
Yields  of  Greek  government  bonds  have  declined  to  pre-crisis  levels,  despite  recent
turbulence  in  financial  markets,  and  the  yield  curve  has  largely  normalised. The  Greek
government returned to international bond markets, for the first time since 2014.
A five-year bond was issued in July,
an exchange operation of PSI bonds was conducted towards the end of 2017, in order to
enhance the liquidity of the market for Greek debt,
in  early  February  2018  (and  despite  market  turbulence)  the  Greek  government  raised  €3
billion from a new seven-year bond, at a yield of 3.5 percent.
Fitch and Moody’s recently upgraded the Greek sovereign. However, GGBs are still
five notches below investment grade. 
Looking forward, the Bank of Greece expects economic activity to pick up in the medium
term, with GDP growing above 2.0% in 2018 and 2019. Growth will be driven by robust export
performance,  benefiting  from  the  global  expansion  and  competitiveness  gains,  solid  private
consumption  growth,  supported  by  rising  employment,  and  robust  investment  spending,
 4 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
reflecting the realization of new investment projects, benefiting from the gradual improvement in
both confidence and funding conditions. These forecasts are based on the assumption that the
reform and privatization programme will be implemented smoothly and according to the agreed
time schedule.
Domestic downside risks are related to reform implementation, as well as the impact of
excessive taxation on economic activity.
There  are  also external  risks  to  the  forecast,  which  are  linked,  among  others,  to  a
slowdown  in  global  economic  activity,  an  increase  in  investors’  risk  aversion  due  to
disturbances in international financial markets, tensions in foreign exchange markets, and
the rise in protectionism worldwide, as well as a possible resurgence of the refugee crisis.
Finally, there are upside risks too. The most significant one is related to the announcement
of further debt relief measures. 
5. The return to financial markets on sustainable terms 
The key issue in the coming months is the improvement of the country’s creditworthiness,
which  will  allow  the  return  of  the  Greek  sovereign  to  financial  markets on  sustainable
terms after  the  end  of  the  programme  in  August  2018.  This  requires  strengthening  the
confidence of international investors in the prospects of the Greek economy. This, in turn, can be
achieved by implementing the following actions:
First,  economic  policy  should  focus  on  the  preparation  for  the timely conclusion of the
fourth and final review, which will mark the end of the programme;
Second, our European partners should specify in more detail the medium-term debt re-
profiling  measures.  This  will  enable  Greece’s  access  to  bond  markets  on  sustainable
terms and will facilitate the inclusion of Greek government bonds in the ECB’s quantitative
easing programme.
Third, capital controls should be lifted after the end of the current ESM programme.
Fourth, build  up  a  cash  buffer using  new  bond  issuances  coupled  with  ESM
disbursements. Such a cash buffer would be particularly useful in the event that Greece’s
credit  rating  has  not  improved  to  investment  grade  by  the  end  of  the  programme,  and  if
volatility in financial markets remains elevated. 
Nevertheless,  in  order  to  fully  resolve  uncertainty over  the  medium  term  prospects  of  the
economy  the  Greek  authorities  alongside  with  our  European  partners should  clarify both
t h e type  of  post-programme  surveillance  and whether  any  post-programme  support
arrangement would be available after the completion of this programme in August 2018. Under
the EU legal framework, Greece will be under surveillance at least until it repays 75% of the
official loans received from euro area countries, the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF)
and the European Stability Mechanism (ESM). 
According  to  the  Bank  of  Greece, the  decision  to  establish  a  post-programme  support
arrangement should reflect the need to ensure smooth financing of Greek banks (including
the continuation of the waiver) and the Greek economy in the event that Greece’s credit rating
remains lower than investment grade and especially if international financial market conditions
deteriorate.
6. The transition to a new outward–oriented growth model 
As the result of the painful economic adjustment over the past eight years, macroeconomic flow
disequilibria  have  now  been  eliminated  and  reforms  have  contributed  to  a  substantial
improvement of competitiveness. Hence, this is a good starting point for the Greek economy to
 5 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
embark on a sustainable outward-oriented growth model. However, stock disequilibria — such
as the high public debt, the high burden of NPLs and high unemployment — persist or
have even increased during the years of the crisis, acting as a drag on long-term growth. In order
to address the abovementioned challenges and to ensure that the economy will move towards a
sustainable export led growth model, the focus of economic policy should be on the following:
Implementing the remaining reforms, improving the quality of and safeguarding the
independence of institutions, because institutional quality is a key determinant of long-
term growth.
Addressing  the  public  debt  overhang.  Decisive  and  concrete  actions  are  needed  to
ensure the sustainability of Greek public debt, on the basis of the Eurogroup’s decision of
June 2017. The Bank of Greece has put forward a mild debt re-profiling proposal, which
entails only a negligible cost for our partners and provides for, among other things, extending
the weighted average maturity of interest payments on EFSF loans by at least 8.5 years.
Adopting a growth-friendly fiscal policy mix. High tax rates and the over-reliance on taxes
are  a  disincentive  on  the  willingness  to  invest  and  to  work.  Moreover,  high  tax  rates
encourage the shift of activities towards the shadow economy and provide incentives for tax
evasion.
Tackling  the  problem  of  non-performing  exposures  (NPEs)  which  constrains  the
banking system’s ability to finance economic growth. Banks need to step up their efforts to
attain their operational targets for reducing their NPEs. In this context, banks should facilitate
the  restructuring  of  viable  businesses,  the  identification  of  strategic  defaulters  and  the
liquidation of non-viable businesses. Due attention should be paid on the implementation of
IFRS 9, stricter treatment of loan-loss provisions, as well as the EU-wide stress test to be
conducted by the ECB.
Promoting innovation, education and knowledge-based capital in  order  to  raise  TFP
and long-term growth.
Attracting  FDI  to  close  the  investment  gap  and  to  increase  the  openness  of  the
Greek economy, because FDI promotes greater trade ties with countries and companies
with cutting edge-technologies.
Supporting the unemployed by using employment and training programmes and targeted
social transfers. 
7. Final remarks 
Over the past eight years, Greece has gone a long way in adjusting its major macroeconomic
imbalances,  reforming  its  economy  and  restoring  competitiveness.  The  economy  is  now
recovering. 
Overall, I believe that 2018 is a landmark year for Greece’s return to normality. I am convinced
that the actions I have just described will lead to a sustainable return to the financial markets.
This will mark the final exit from the crisis and the transition to a sustainable export led growth
model  after  many  years  of  painful  adjustment,  social  tensions,  recession  and  economic
stagnation.
Sources: 
Bank 
2
Item_ID=505&List_ID=b2e9402e-db05–4166–9f09-e1b26a1c6f1b 
February
. www.bankofgreece.gr/Pages/en/Bank/News/Speeches/DispItem.aspx?
Governor’ 
Greece 
Report, 
(2018). 
Annual 
of 
6
Berger, H, Dell’Ariccia, G and Obstfeld, M. (2018). The Euro Area Needs a Fiscal Union, IMF blog
21/2/2018. blogs.imf.org/2018/02/21/the-euro-area-needs-a-fiscal-union/
 6 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Coeure, B. (2018). Making our monetary union stronger and more resilient. Speech at the at the
Finanzmarktklausur 
2018
Berlin, 
www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2018/html/ecb.sp180314_4.en.html
CDU  Wirtschaftsrat. 
14  March 
the 
of 
Draghi, 
2018. www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pressconf/2018/html/ecb.is180308.en.html 
Introductory 
Statement. 
(2018). 
M. 
8 
March
Draghi, M. (2018). Monetary Policy in the Euro Area. Speech at the ECB and Its Watchers XIX
Conference,  organized  by  the  Institute  for  Monetary  and  Financial  Stability.  14  March
2018, www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2018/html/ecb.sp180314_1.en.html 
ECB (2018). Economic Bulletin No 2. 22 March 2018. 
www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-bulletin/html/eb201802.en.html
27 
European Council (2018). Remarks by President Donald Tusk following the informal meeting of
the 
February
2 0 1 8 , www.consilium.europa.eu/en/press/press-releases/2018/02/23/remarks-by-president-
donald-tusk-following-the-informal-meeting-of-the-27-heads-of-state-or-government-on-23-
february-2018/
government 
heads 
state 
on 
23 
or 
of 
European Commission (2018). Winter 2018 (Interim), INSTITUTIONAL PAPER 073 | FEBRUARY
2018. 
ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/economy-finance/ip073_en_upd2.pdf 
European  Commission  (2017).  Commission  sets  out  Roadmap  for  deepening  Europe’s
Economic  and  Monetary  Union,  6  December  2017 europa.eu/rapid/press-release_MEMO-17–
5006_en.htm
European Commission (2015), Completing Europe’s Economic and Monetary Union. Report by
Jean-Claude Junker in close cooperation with Donald Tusk, Jeroen Dijsselbloem, Mario Draghi
and Martin Schulz. 22 June. 
Franks, JR, Barkbu BB, Blavy R, Oman W, Schoelermann, H. (2018). Economic Convergence in
the Euro Area: Coming Together or Drifting Apart? IMF working paper 2018/10.
IMF (2018). World Economic Outlook Update, January 2018.
Malliaropulos, D. (2018). Real convergence in the euro area or the lack thereof. Presentation at
the 7th BBVA Seminar for Public Sector Investors and Issuers, Bilbao, 26 February – 2 March
2018.
www.bankofgreece.gr/BogDocumentEn/Real_Convergence_in_the_Euro_Area_Malliaropulos_28_02_2018.pdf
Praet,  P.  (2018).  Assessment  of  quantitative  easing  and  challenges  of  policy  normalization.
Speech  at  The  ECB  and  Its  Watchers  XIX  Conference,  Frankfurt  am  Main.  14  March  2018
www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2018/html/ecb.sp180314_2.en.html 
Stournaras Y. (2018). The future of the Greek economy, Speech at an event organized by the
Hellenic Spanish Chamber of Commerce, Athens. 12 February 2018. 
www.bankofgreece.gr/Pages/en/Bank/News/Speeches/DispItem.aspx?
Item_ID=499&List_ID=b2e9402e-db05–4166–9f09-e1b26a1c6f1b 
Stournaras, Y. (2017a). Greece and the global economy: Prospects and main challenges ahead.
Speech 
11
, www.bankofgreece.gr/Pages/en/Bank/News/Speeches/DispItem.aspx?
O c
an 
t o b e r
organised 
Suisse, 
Athens, 
Credit 
event 
by 
at 
 7 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Item_ID=476&List_ID=b2e9402e-db05–4166–9f09-e1b26a1c6f1b. 
Stournaras, Y. (2017b). The Greek economy: Prospects and main challenges. Speech at the 2nd
EU-Arab World Summit, Athens, 10 November, 
www.bankofgreece.gr/Pages/en/Bank/News/Speeches/DispItem.aspx?
Item_ID=482&List_ID=b2e9402e-db05–4166–9f09-e1b26a1c6f1b. 
Stournaras, Y. (2017c). The future of the euro area and Greece. – Article by the Governor of the
Bank of Greece Yannis Stournaras published in the newspaper “Ta Nea”. 11 September. 
www.bankofgreece.gr/Pages/en/Bank/News/Speeches/DispItem.aspx?
Item_ID=469&List_ID=b2e9402e-db05–4166–9f09-e1b26a1c6f1b
 1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
Global GDP growth is estimated by the IMF (2018) to have accelerated to 3.7% in 2017 from 3.2% in 2016 and is
expected to reach 3.9% in 2018.
See 
www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pressconf/2018/html/ecb.is180308.en.html
Introductory 
Draghi, 
(2018) 
Mario 
Statement, 
8 
March 
2018.
See  Draghi,  Mario  (2018)  Monetary  Policy  in  the  Euro  Area  ,  Speech  at  the  ECB  and  Its  Watchers  XIX
Conference,  organised  by 
for  Monetary  and  Financial  Stability  14  March  2018,
www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2018/html/ecb.sp180314_1.en.html
Institute 
the 
  Coeure,  Benoit  (2018)  Making  our  monetary  union  stronger  and  more  resilient.  Speech  at  the  at  the
Finanzmarktklausur 
2018
www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2018/html/ecb.sp180314_4.en.html
Wirtschaftsrat, 
Berlin, 
March 
CDU 
the 
14 
of 
See Draghi, Mario (2018) Monetary Policy in the Euro Area, Speech at the ECB and Its Watchers XIX Conference,
organised 
2018,
www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2018/html/ecb.sp180314_1.en.html
Financial  Stability 
for  Monetary 
14  March 
Institute 
and 
the 
by 
That is a sentence in which – since December 2016 – we had expressed our readiness to increase the monthly
pace and/or extend the horizon of our net asset purchases if certain unfavourable macroeconomic or financial
conditions  materialized.  Draghi,  Mario 
2018.
www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pressconf/2018/html/ecb.is180308.en.html.  Praet,  Peter  (2018),  Assessment  of
quantitative  easing  and  challenges  of  policy  normalization,  Speech  at  The  ECB  and  Its  Watchers  XIX
Conference, 
2018
www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2018/html/ecb.sp180314_2.en.html
Introductory  Statement, 
8  March 
Frankfurt 
(2018) 
March 
Main, 
am 
14 
Coeure,  Benoit  (2018)  Making  our  monetary  union  stronger  and  more  resilient.  Speech  at  the
Finanzmarktklausur 
2018
www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2018/html/ecb.sp180314_4.en.html.
Wirtschaftsrat, 
Berlin, 
March 
CDU 
the 
14 
of 
European Commission 2017, Commission sets out Roadmap for deepening Europe’s Economic and Monetary
Union, 6 December 2017 europa.eu/rapid/press-release_MEMO-17–5006_en.htm
Franks, Barkbu, Blavy, Oman, and Schoelermann (2018) Economic Convergence in the Euro Area: Coming
Together or Drifting Apart? IMF working paper 2018/10.
Malliaropulos, Dimitris (2018), Real convergence in the euro area or the lack thereof, Presentation at the 7th
BBVA  Seminar 
Issuers,  Bilbao,  26  February  –  2  March  2018.
www.bankofgreece.gr/BogDocumentEn/Real_Convergence_in_the_Euro_Area_Malliaropulos_28_02_2018.pdf
for  Public  Sector 
Investors  and 
The share of total exports in GDP increased from 19.0% in 2009 to nearly 32% in 2017. Exports of goods and
services, excluding the shipping sector, have increased by 50% in real terms since their trough in 2009, similar
to euro area exports. The share of tradables goods and services in the economy has increased by 10% relative
to non-tradables in terms of real gross value added since 2010. Also, relative prices and net profit margins of
tradables’ sectors have increased, facilitating the rebalancing process of the Greek economy towards tradable
 8 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
goods and services.
12
Based on September 2017 data the CET1 ratio came to 17.1% (December 2016: 16.9%) and the CAR to 17.2%
(December 2016: 17%). 
 9 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
