Nestor A Espenilla, Jr: Moving the discussion forward
Speech by Mr Nestor A Espenilla, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank of the Philippines), at a special brownbag session for the Bank of International Settlements
(BIS) Working Paper (WP) No. 724 "Do small bank deposits run more than large ones? Three
event studies of contagion and financial inclusion", Manila, 13 August 2018.
 Financial  inclusion  partners,  colleagues  in  government  and  in  the  banking  community,
distinguished guests, friends from media, fellow BSPers, ladies and gentlemen, good morning.
The topic of this brownbag session has far-reaching implications on two goals that the BSP is
passionate about — financial inclusion and financial stability.
One  of  our  mandates  is  to  ensure  that  our  covered  institutions  operate  in  a  safe  and  sound
manner. Intuitively, we believe that discipline and prudence not only permit the industry to thrive
but that practice of these values also safeguard financial consumer interests. 
The paper we will hear today (titled, “Do Small Bank Deposits Run More than Large Ones? Three
Event  Studies  on  Contagion  and  Financial  Inclusion”)  revisits  the  insightful  and  provocative
question of whether or not there is a trade-off between financial inclusion and financial stability.
Specifically, it utilizes empirical tests to assess whether bank deposits of different sizes react
differently  to  the  closure  of  a  bank  and  whether  deposits  in  nearby  banks  are  affected  by  a
closure of a bank.
From Experience
The BSP’s pursuit of greater financial inclusion involves a three-pronged approach. 
First,  we  seek  to  provide  broader  access  to  financial  services  –  to  reach  the  unbanked  and
underbanked and include them in the formal financial system. 
Second, we vigorously promote financial literacy to empower consumers to make wise financial
choices. 
Third,  we  actively  champion  consumer  protection  so  that  our  citizens  would  enjoy  improved
financial  well-being  and  best  participate  in,  and  meaningfully  contribute  to,  economic
development.
As  banking  supervisor  and  regulator,  we  insist  that  banks  conduct  safe  and  sound  banking
operations.  This is to protect the public interest. 
But  in  cases  when  —  and  it  does  happen  —  that  some  banks  fail  to  operate  accordingly,
sometimes we are left with no other option but to prohibit them from continuing to do business. 
When  unsafe  and  unsound  practices  have  been  egregious,  and  remedial  options  have  been
exhausted, closure may in fact, be the only alternative. 
Any decision to close a bank is not made lightly.  Notice and opportunity to be heard, and all
avenues are extended to allow recovery.  Again, this is to protect the public interest.
When  a  bank  is  closed,  the  effect  is  not  only  on  the  particular  bank,  its  directors,  officers,
employees, stakeholders and depositors. 
The increasing interconnection of markets, not to mention the widespread and almost-real-time
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
information  and  opinions  disseminated  by  traditional  and  modern  social  media,  brings  about
quick public reaction and repercussions on the community. Even individual bankers have come
to us, to share how their operations are affected when a nearby bank has closed.  We take all
these into consideration.
From  experience,  the  commitment  to  ensure  that  safe  and  sound  banking  practices  are
conducted (manifested in decisive bank closures) may, at least in the interim, have unintended
consequences on immediate industry confidence, and on financial stability.
Statistically Validated Results
What is exciting for us today is that we will have the opportunity to move the discussion from
experience and conjecture to statistically validated data. 
The paper based on specific empirical tests is penned by three distinguished scholars:
Dr. Dante Canlas was the former Director General of the National Economic and Development
Authority (NEDA) and Professor Emeritus at the UP School of Economics.
Dr. Eli Remolona is currently Chief Representative, BIS Representative Office for Asia and the
Pacific and also served at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
And  last  but  not  least,  Dr.  Johnny  Noe  Ravalo  is Assistant  Governor  here  at  the  BSP.    Noet
heads our newly created Office of Systemic Risk Management.
When the paper was published by the Bank of International Settlements last May, social media
feedback was very positive. For our benefit, the paper is freely available online.
I have also been apprised that the authors are working on new tests to expand on the results they
will present today.  When finalized, the updated paper will be submitted to a leading academic
journal.
I have no doubt that the updated paper will find its proper place in an academic journal and will
help inform other scholars in this field.
I truly appreciate the efforts of the distinguished authors. This early, allow me to congratulate the
three of you for a job well done. 
I would also like to recognize our colleagues from the Supervisory Data Center and the Office of
Systemic Risk Management for their contributions towards the completion of this research output
that is at par with the most authoritative studies in the world.
I have had opportunity to peruse the paper and I am confident we are on the right track, in terms
of guiding us craft possible policy interventions. The initiative also enhances our BSP research
program.
Through the years, BSP papers have been disseminated through our own journal at the BSP (the
BS Review) or through conferences. We continue to raise the bar in our research efforts. I have
encouraged  more  of  our  personnel  to  conduct  technical  studies  and  to  submit  these  to
prestigious international journals.
I  am  heartened  that  this  paper  is  a  step  towards  greater  efforts  to  leverage  on  our  unique
perspective as the country’s central monetary authority. Also, since the research will likely be on
issues requiring policy intervention, I am confident we will all benefit from this thought leadership.
I look forward to an active discussion from all of us this morning.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
