Juyeol Lee: New Year Speech   
 
New Year’s address by Mr Juyeol Lee, Governor of the Bank of Korea, at the Bank of Korea, Seoul, 
2 January, 2018 
 
 Dear fellow members of the Bank of Korea! 
 Today we start our first tasks of 2018, filled with new hope and resolve. I would like to begin by 
expressing my heartfelt gratitude to all of you, for so faithfully carrying out your duties throughout 
the last year even in the midst of difficult conditions. 
 Last year the trend of growth in our economy picked up gradually, even despite the worsening of 
our trade conditions vis-à-vis major countries and the increase in North Korea risks, as our exports 
and  facilities  investment  showed  buoyancy  in  line  with  the  global  economic  recovery.  This 
improvement can also be said to have owed in large part to the Bank of Korea’s accommodative 
monetary policy to this time. With regard to consumer price inflation, the upward pressures on the 
demand side were not large last year, but under the influence of supply-side factors including the 
rising international oil prices, the annual rate of inflation was around our target level of 2%. Given 
the forecast that the economy would continue to grow at its potential rate going forward as well, 
and that inflation would approach the target level, conditions were also built up under which the 
degree of monetary policy accommodation could be adjusted. Judging that holding the Base Rate 
at the current level under these circumstances could lead to a further expansion in the real degree 
of accommodation which could entail an increased risk of financial imbalances accumulating, the 
Monetary Policy Board raised the Base Rate by 25 basis points last November.   
 The Bank of Korea, while devoting efforts to maintaining market stability whenever factors causing 
financial or foreign exchange market unrest arose, at the same time also endeavored last year to 
expand its bilateral currency swap agreements with foreign central banks so as to strengthen the 
multi-layered global financial safety nets. The extensions of its currency swap agreements with the 
Reserve  Bank  of  Australia  and  the  Peoples’  Bank  of  China,  and  the  establishment  of  a  new 
standing currency swap agreement with Canada, a vehicle currency country, can be considered 
particularly valuable achievements reaped directly by the Bank itself last year. 
 Dear members of the Bank of Korea! 
  This  year  the  Korean  economy  appears  likely  to  maintain  its  trend  of  solid  growth,  thanks  for 
1 / 5 
 example to a continuation of the global economic recovery and to the government’s expansion of 
its  fiscal expenditures. However,  a  look  at  domestic  and external  conditions finds  there  to  be a 
variety of potential risks in many places.   
If  major  country  central  banks,  following  the  US  Federal  Reserve,  reduce  the  degrees  of  their 
monetary policy accommodation due to the strengthening of their economic recoveries, then there 
is  a  possibility  that  a  shrink  in  the  volume  of  global  liquidity  could  destabilize  the  international 
financial market and thereby constrain the global economy’s recovery. There is also a chance of 
the  growth  in  world  trade  slowing,  due  to  worsening  trade  conditions  in  consequence  of 
strengthened protectionism in major countries. The possibility also remains that, as North Korea 
risks  surface  occasionally,  they  can  cause  expanded  financial  market  volatility  and  negatively 
affect economic sentiments. 
 On the top of this, the structural problems that are limiting our economy’s vitality also continue to 
exist, among them our low birthrate and population aging, the deepening of our segmented labor 
market  and  of  the  income  imbalances,  the  buildup  of  household  debt,  and  the  delay  in  our 
development of next generation high-tech industries. 
 Under these circumstances, if we want our economy to take one more leap forward, while also 
sustaining the momentum of our current economic recovery, we have to continue our reform efforts 
to  improve  the  make-up  of  our  economy  and  expand  its  growth  potential.  And  I  think  that  the 
present time, when the trend of growth is recovering and fiscal policy is being operated expansively, 
is a suitable one for pushing ahead with reform. The government and private economic actors will 
have to cooperate on this, so as to avoid missing a golden opportunity. 
 Dear members of the Bank of Korea! 
 Let me talk now about the main tasks that the Bank of Korea will have focus on carrying out this 
year. 
  We will need to conduct our monetary policy so as to ensure that sustainable growth continues 
and  consumer  price  inflation  can  be  stabilized  at  the  target  level  over  a  medium-term  horizon. 
Given the forecast that the demand side inflationary pressures will not be high, even though the 
economy’s solid trend of growth will continue this year as well, it will be desirable to maintain our 
accommodative monetary policy stance for the time being. At the same time, we should pay more 
attention to the possibility that the prolongation of this stance will cause a deepening of our financial 
imbalances,  and  the  cumulative  effects  of  these  imbalances  on  growth  and  inflation  over  the 
medium-  to  long-term  horizon.  Keeping  this  in  mind,  we  should  judge  carefully  whether  it  is 
2 / 5 
 necessary  to  adjust  its  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance  further,  based  upon  close 
examination  of  future  growth  and  price  trends  and  conditions  related  to  financial  stability.  In 
addition, inasmuch as the monetary policy operating conditions and transmission effects are now 
differing  greatly  from  those  in  the  past,  we  will  have  to  deliberate  more  carefully  and  carry  out 
research on measures that can enhance our monetary policy’s effectiveness. 
 During this year we will have to again examine the operating conditions of our inflation targeting 
system, which will be newly set with effect from 2019. We will have to systematically analyze any 
changes  in  the  inflation  dynamics,  such  as  the  trends  of  inflation  and  the  relationship  between 
growth and prices, and carefully examine whether there might not be points needing improvement 
in relation to the inflation target level, the method of setting the target, our responsibility for policy 
explanation, etc. 
 As  I  have  stressed  on  many  occasions  until  now,  in  order  to  effectively  operate  a  well-timed 
monetary policy, the enhancement of our precision in economic forecasting is more important than 
anything. Amid the rapid changes in the conditions surrounding our economy, the cause and effect 
relationships between economic variables are changing. And with the development of industrial 
technology  and  the  progress  of  globalization  the interrelationships  among  individual  economies 
are evolving in complex ways. In line with this, while we on the one hand expand our database 
necessary for economic analysis, we will also need to endeavor to constantly improve our methods 
of analysis and our forecasting models, and ensure thereby that we can more accurately predict 
macroeconomic  variables  such  as  growth  and  prices.  And  on  this  foundation,  we  will  have  to 
deliver consistent policy signals to economic agents as we carry out our policies. 
 Our efforts to secure a solid level of financial stability must also be strengthened further. We must 
closely examine factors causing financial unrest at home and abroad, trends of capital flows, and 
so  on,  and  through  timely  implementation  of  market  stabilizing  measures  where  necessary, 
maintain the stability of our financial and foreign exchange markets. With regard to household debt, 
the pace of its growth is expected to gradually slow thanks to the government’s efforts for housing 
market and household debt stabilization. However, we should not neglect the fact that the total 
household debt volume is high, and that it is still increasing faster than household income, which 
may hinder the sustainable growth of our economy and financial stability. It may be difficult within 
a short period of time to resolve the problem of household debt, but over the medium- to long-term 
it is necessary to maintain the rate of growth in debt at no more than that in income. 
 The payment and settlement environment is changing greatly now, as technologies such as big 
data, artificial intelligence and biometric authentication come to be adopted in the financial industry. 
3 / 5 
 In these circumstances the Bank of Korea must devote special efforts to advancing the payment 
and settlement systems and heightening their safety. The work of constructing the next generation 
BOK-Wire, in order among other things to enhance financial institutions’ convenience in making 
funds  transfers,  will  have  to  be  carried  out  with  insights  peering  ahead  20  or  30  years  into  the 
future.  We  will  in  addition  have  to  work  harder  to  strengthen  the  resilience  of  the  BOK-Wire 
businesses against cyber risks and natural disasters as well. 
 Fathoming the depth and the breadth of the changes taking place in the financial sphere due to 
the  recent  digital  innovations  is  not  easy.  Research  on  ways  of  applying  distributed  ledger 
technology to payment and settlement has been increasing rapidly, led by central banks in major 
countries and commercial banks. There is a possibility that cryptocurrency transactions, which are 
showing signs of overheating around the world, will work as risks to financial stability, and we will 
therefore also have to continue considering measures for dealing with those risks. We should also 
keep participating actively in the related discussions in international society and with the domestic 
ministries  and  institutions  concerned,  while  steadily  carrying  out  studies  of  the  effects  of  digital 
innovation  on  financial  stability  and  monetary  policy,  and  of  the  possibility  of  digital  currency 
issuance by the central bank. 
 Dear fellow members of the Bank of Korea! 
 Efforts are currently proliferating to eradicate corruption throughout our society as a whole, and to 
make it an upright one. We are confident that we have always put an emphasis on principles and 
fairness, and managed ourselves strictly, but a look at it from the lofty standpoint of the public, 
which is demanding high levels of morality and transparency of the central bank, may find there to 
be some areas in which we have fallen short. And therefore, in carrying out our duties, we will have 
to check again one more time to see whether there might not be practices that we engage in that 
can be judged as unreasonable, and if so make bold efforts to correct them. 
 Our policy conditions and our business environment are changing incessantly. In this situation, if 
our ways of thinking and patterns of behavior remain stuck in the past we will face difficulties in 
fulfilling all of the duties entrusted to us. We have to constantly ask ourselves what the roles being 
demanded  of  the  central  bank  are,  right  now  in  particular,  what  policy  alternatives  related  to 
pending economic issues we can propose, and how we should communicate with economic agents 
about our monetary policy directions. Meanwhile, if we carry out our duties passively, for the reason 
that predicting the directions and the timings of future changes is difficult, then it will be difficult to 
propose policy alternatives that will help our economy to develop. We will have to exert courage 
individually, and work with enterprising spirits like ’First Penguins’, taking single steps at a time 
4 / 5 
 forward and challenging the environment. 
 But even if an organization’s members all devote their best efforts in their own individual spheres, 
unless they can overcome the ‘Silo Effects’ of focusing solely on their own or their own departments’ 
performances it will be difficult for the organization as a whole to develop. We therefore have to 
work to increase staff communication − between superiors and subordinates, between co-workers, 
and between departments − and through a broadening of understandings fix into place a healthy 
organizational  culture  characterized  by  mutual  respect  and  care  for  one  other.  I  cannot  stress 
enough that we will have to design an elaborate assessment and compensation framework, and 
operate  it  to  ensure  that  our  organizational  and  personnel  system  can  well  support  the 
development of such a culture.   
 My fellow Bank of Korea family members!   
 At this time last January, we started our new year with a special determination compared to any 
other time, to overcome the many difficulties that we faced. Our economy has fortunately been 
showing a steady trend of growth, so that we have been able escape certain worries that we initially 
had, but we cannot be complacent and let down our guards at any time. I ask that during this year 
as well all of us, as central bankers, go forward with self-esteem and a sense of mission and do 
our very best in fulfilling the duties entrusted to us. As we welcome this new year of the Golden 
Dog, I want to wish all of you here at the Bank of Korea, and your families, a year filled with health 
and happiness. 
 Thank you. 
    January 2, 2018 
Governor   
Juyeol Lee 
5 / 5 
 