Michele Bullock: Financial technology and payments regulation
Keynote speech by Ms Michele Bullock, Assistant Governor (Financial System) of the Reserve
Bank of Australia, at the 5th Bund Summit on Fintech, Shanghai, 8 July 2018.
 My thanks to Chay Fisher, Jiamin Lim, Sean Langcake and Stephanie Bolt who carried out the
work on which this speech is based.
Thank you to the Shanghai Finance Institute for the invitation to speak at this summit. The theme
of the summit – New Finance, New Technology, New Trends – really captures the excitement of
the payments industry at the moment. But it is also a challenging time for regulators who want to
encourage innovation but at the same time ensure that payment systems remain safe for users
and that there is a level regulatory playing field. Today I am going to talk about some of those
challenges and how we are thinking about them at the Reserve Bank of Australia. I will start by
briefly setting out the Australian regulatory framework for payments before talking about the key
forces  shaping  payments.  I  will  then  talk  about  some  of  the  potential  implications  for  retail
payments and for regulators.
Payments Regulation in Australia
Like in China, the primary regulator of the payments system in Australia is the central bank – the
Reserve Bank of Australia. The Reserve Bank’s payments system policy is determined by the
Payments  System  Board  (PSB),  which  is  chaired  by  the  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  and
includes a number of external members. The key duties of the PSB with respect to the payments
system are to ensure that the powers of the Bank are exercised in a way that best contribute to
controlling  risk  in  the  financial  system,  promoting  efficiency  of  the  payments  system  and
promoting competition in the market for payment services consistent with overall stability of the
financial system.
The Reserve Bank has strong powers to regulate payments systems and in some cases it does.
For  example,  certain  competition  and  efficiency  issues  associated  with  credit  card  systems
could not be addressed by participants so the Bank introduced regulation that required changes
to certain practices in these schemes. But the Bank’s preferred approach is to identify areas
where  competition,  efficiency  or  safety  could  be  enhanced  and  then  encourage  industry  to
address  those  issues.  A  good  example  of  this  was  the  development  of  the  New  Payments
Platform (NPP).
The NPP is an open access infrastructure for fast payments in Australia. It went live earlier this
year  and  is  gradually  ramping  up.  It  allows  users  of  the  payments  system  to  send  real-time
payments with simple addressing 24/7. It also allows more complete information to be sent with
payments. But this wasn’t a spontaneous creation of the industry. It was developed in response
to a number of strategic objectives for the Australian payments system set by the Reserve Bank.
While the industry determined how it would achieve the objectives, the Reserve Bank played a
significant role in encouraging and facilitating the cooperation required to develop and build the
system.
The Forces Shaping Retail Payments
There  are  three  key  forces  that  are  introducing  innovation  and  competition  to  retail  payment
systems around the world: new payment channels, new technologies and new participants.
Increasingly, consumers are reducing their use of cash and using electronic payment methods.
But they are also making electronic payments through new channels. One example is payment
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
using  mobile  devices.  These  devices  have  become  ubiquitous  and  are  now  being  used  for
payment at the point of sale, online payments and ‘in-app’ payments. Wearables and the ‘internet
of things’ more broadly are also expanding the devices through which payments can be made. In
Australia,  most  of  these  new  payment  channels  use  the  existing  payment  rails  –  in  particular
those of the card schemes.
New  technologies  are  also  shaping  retail  payments.  Distributed  ledger  technology  has  been
receiving  a  lot  of  attention  lately,  with  suggestions  that  new  payment  mechanisms  using  this
technology might be more efficient (e.g. cross-border payments) and even result in a reduced
role for traditional financial institutions. But other technologies that are likely to facilitate innovation
in the payments system include cloud computing, artificial intelligence and cryptography. These
technologies  have  the  potential  to  improve  payment  experiences  for  customers  as  well  as
support  new  payment  instruments.  They  are  also  potentially  allowing  non-traditional  players
without a large physical footprint to compete with the established financial institutions.
Which brings me to the third force shaping the retail payments system – new participants. There
are broadly three types of potential competitors. Most similar to the incumbents are digital banks,
sometimes called neobanks. These banks offer banking services typically by mobile app. They
are  unencumbered  by  legacy  systems  and  physical  branch  networks  and  can  use  newer
technologies, potentially making them more flexible and responsive to consumer needs. Then
there are fintech firms, many of which are using technology to address particular frictions and
gaps  in  the  payments  market.  Online  payments,  point-of-sale  technology  and  cross-border
payments are all areas in which fintechs are innovating. And, finally, there are the large global
technology  companies  that  can  leverage  their  already  extensive  networks  to  offer  proprietary
closed loop payment services. In China there are two at the forefront of this – AliPay and WeChat
Pay. But Google, Apple, Facebook and Amazon all have some payment functionalities within their
networks that they could potentially expand.
Moves  to  require  banks  to  share  the  data  of  their  customers  with  other  participants  (open
banking) have the potential to further promote competition and innovation. In Australia, we are in
the process of implementing an open banking regime that will put consumers in control of their
banking  data.  It  is  expected  that  consumers  will  be  able  to  use  these  data  to  access  better
products and services. For example, consumers could ask their bank to share their credit card
transaction history, interest rate, fees and other relevant data with a product comparison website.
Using  this  information,  the  website  could  provide  a  tailored  assessment  of  the  best  possible
credit  card  for  that  particular  individual,  including  an  accurate  estimate  of  potential  savings
compared with their current card. While there are a number of challenges in implementing this
ambitious  reform,  such  as  ensuring  data  security  and  customer  privacy,  these  can  be
addressed. The Reserve Bank is confident about the potential of open banking to deliver benefits
for consumers.
Implications for the Retail Payments System
With  all  this  innovation  and  competition  in  the  financial  system,  and  the  payments  system  in
particular, a logical question is: what are the implications for policy and regulation? I will address
four here:
Challenges in balancing innovation and regulation
Implications for efficiency of the payments system
Security
Resilience
Financial regulation
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
An important challenge for regulators is how to limit barriers to innovation while maintaining safe
and efficient payments systems. This requires regulators to be alert to any detrimental impact
that regulations might have on innovative new technologies and participants. But new entrants
might  also  find  that  it  is  difficult  to  get  access  to  the  underlying  payments  infrastructure. And
some innovations might require participants that are otherwise competitors to cooperate, making
it difficult to get an innovative product or system off the ground. The Reserve Bank therefore sees
a need to play a proactive role in facilitating cooperative projects and monitoring potential access
issues.
Most regulators around the world seem to be encouraging innovation while taking a proportionate
approach to regulation. This often involves a graduated approach to regulation, depending on the
activities of the new participants. For example, many jurisdictions have some type of regulatory
‘sandbox’  in  which  new  participants  can  develop  their  services  without  the  full  weight  of
regulation.  Some  jurisdictions  authorise  payment  service  providers  under  less  onerous
conditions than apply to full financial institutions.
In Australia, the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority (APRA) and the Australian Securities
and  Investments  Commission  (ASIC)  are  also  taking  a  graduated  approach  to  new  entrants.
ASIC has a regulatory sandbox framework that is specifically designed to provide eligible fintech
businesses  the  flexibility  to  test  new  products  and  services  without  the  need  for  a  licence.
Similarly  APRA  has  established  a  framework  for  licencing  ‘Restricted  ADIs’,  which  allows
potential entrants to the banking sector to conduct limited banking business for a period of time
under  a  simpler  prudential  framework  while  they  develop  their  capabilities  and  resources.
Importantly though, under both these frameworks, new entrants are expected to eventually meet
the same requirements as other financial service providers, ensuring a level playing field.
There  are  two  issues  in  the  Australian  payments  system  that  are  potentially  going  to  be  of
interest  to  financial  regulators.  The  first  is  access.  New  payment  service  providers  will  need
access  to  the  underlying  payments  infrastructure  to  compete  with  the  incumbent  financial
institutions.  Non-bank  providers  of  payment  services  already  have  access  to  accounts  at  the
Reserve Bank for the purposes of settlement. But they will also need access, either direct or
indirect, to payment clearing systems. While they might be able to commercially negotiate an
agency arrangement, this could add to their costs and they might therefore prefer direct access.
If incumbent financial institutions control access, they might seek to put up unreasonable barriers
to entry. Regulators will need to be alert to potential anti-competitive conduct.
The second area is stored value products. Traditionally, payment services have been provided by
regulated financial institutions through transaction accounts. These institutions are prudentially
supervised  to  ensure  that  the  public  can  have  confidence  that  they  will  be  able  to  meet  their
financial  commitments  under  all  reasonable  circumstances.  In  addition,  in  most  countries,
including Australia, retail deposits would be protected if a bank were to fail. But some of the new
entrants are holding client funds on their books as ‘stored value’. This raises a number of policy
questions. Should the funds being held be treated like deposits? If not, do the firms holding the
funds need to be regulated in some other way to protect consumers? If the new entrants are very
large, like the big technology companies, they could potentially hold substantial amounts of value
in their closed systems. What are the implications for systemic risk of such a market structure?
Regulators are still working through these questions.
Efficiency
The potential for new products to improve payment services will depend on the extent to which
there  are  gaps  or  frictions  in  the  payment  process.  Three  areas  that  are  often  identified  are
micropayments, ‘programmable money’ and cross border payments.
The concept of micropayments – of, say, one-hundredth of a Yuan or an Australian dollar – is not
new  (indeed,  the  concept  has  been  around  for  decades).  In  recent  years,  demand  for  a
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
micropayment service has typically been from internet content providers looking for alternatives
to  the  advertising  or  monthly  subscription-fee  business  models.  But,  looking  ahead,  the
development of an ‘internet of things’ potentially greatly broadens the demand for the ability to
make and receive very small payments at low cost. A challenge in addressing this gap has been
how to recover costs – or even be profitable – when the value of each transaction is so small.
‘Programmable money’, that is, payments that occur automatically if certain terms or conditions
are met, could improve efficiency by minimising the need for human intervention. For example,
online  payments  for  goods  could  be  held  as  a  deposit  with  an  independent  third  party  and
automatically  released  once  goods  are  confirmed  as  delivered.  Other  possible  applications
include payments that occur within business supply chains.
Cross-border payments are widely regarded as an area in which significant potential efficiency
gains exist. Current processes are slow and costly, involving significant compliance burden and
a  number  of  different  financial  institutions  in  different  jurisdictions.  New  technologies  and  new
business models could be used to address some of these frictions.
While there are clearly potential efficiency gains from addressing some of these gaps, there are
reasons for regulators to keep an eye on developments that might result in inefficient outcomes.
Some of these arise from the existence of network effects. A very large network that incorporates
payments as one part of its services might be able to lock in the payments business, even if it is
more costly than alternatives, because customers are unwilling to leave the ecosystem.
The trend towards embedding payments in apps or other devices could also lead to inefficient
outcomes. While automated payments are likely to be convenient for consumers and merchants,
they might also make it more difficult for alternative payment methods to compete and reduce the
sensitivity of users to changes in the relative prices of payment instruments.
Security
With increasing commercialisation of consumer data, interest in people’s personal banking data
(including payments) is likely to grow. For example, it has been suggested that if individuals could
easily  and  securely  share  their  personal  banking  information  (while  retaining  ownership  of  the
data),  new  services  could  be  developed  to  facilitate  personalised  financial  services.  More
generally,  the  advent  of  ‘big  data’  analytics  to  generate  insights  into  behaviours  of  individual
consumers has increased interest in access to data on consumer payments behaviour.
But with more data being stored and shared, data security (and cybersecurity more generally)
will  be  important  ongoing  issues  for  the  industry  and  for  regulators.  Incumbent  financial
institutions  invest  a  lot  in  securing  their  customers’  data  and  in  managing  fraud  in  payment
systems. Mostly they do this without the need for regulators to be involved because it is in their
interests to ensure that they maintain the trust of their customers. But with new participants and
new technologies, there is a risk that security vulnerabilities and opportunities for fraud will arise.
The  strength  of  the  system  is  only  as  good  as  its  weakest  link  so  it  is  essential  that  all
participants in payment systems and the financial system more broadly manage and mitigate
these  risks.  Regulators  may  have  a  role  to  play  in  encouraging  the  adoption  of  minimum
standards.
Resilience
The final area I want to focus on is resilience of payment systems. Traditionally, central banks
and  regulators  have  paid  a  lot  of  attention  to  the  resilience  of  high-value  payment  systems
because of the systemic disruption that would likely occur if such systems were to suffer from an
outage.  High-value  payment  systems  are  therefore  subject  to  high  standards  of  operational
resilience.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Retail payment systems have not usually been required to meet similarly high standards. But,
with electronic payments becoming increasingly important, the resilience of the electronic retail
payment systems is becoming quite critical to the smooth functioning of economies. With people
carrying  less  cash,  an  outage  in  a  retail  payment  system  can  mean  that  customers  can’t
undertake transactions. In Australia, for example, an outage at a major bank recently meant that
its merchant customers had to turn customers away if they didn’t have cash (and many didn’t).
These sorts of outages disrupt commerce and erode trust of consumers in payment systems.
Regulators are therefore starting to focus on the operational risks associated with retail payment
systems  and  whether  the  operators  and  the  participants  are  meeting  appropriately  high
standards of resilience.
Conclusion
There  is  a  lot  of  change  happening  in  retail  payments  and  it  is  happening  quickly.  Financial
technology  is  facilitating  the  development  of  new  payment  products  and  the  entry  of  new
participants,  and  potentially  transforming  the  customer  experience.  It  has  the  potential  to
enhance  competition  and  increase  efficiency  in  the  payments  system.  Recognising  this,
regulators in Australia and other countries are encouraging innovation. Nevertheless, regulators
need to keep up with this fast changing world and the implications for efficiency, and safety of the
payments system.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
