Yves Mersch: Interview with Bloomberg
Interview with Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank,
and Bloomberg, conducted by Mr Piotr Skolimowski and Ms Carolynn Look on 6 February 2018.
 BIS General Manager Augustine Carstens said in his speech in Frankfurt the other day
that there is a “strong case” for authorities to rein in digital currencies because of their
links to the established financial system. How would you respond?
The General Manager of the BIS is usually also reflecting the views that are expressed around
the table when central bankers come together. You won’t be surprised to know that we at the
ECB are fully in line with his views and we have similar worries, or similar endeavours we are
working on.
The question is not so much that these virtual currencies (VCs) are already at a level that would
cause  huge  disruption  in  the  real  economy,  but  we  are  currently  more  concerned  about  the
social  and  psychological  effect  they  seem  to  have.  In  this  respect  money  has  to  do  with
confidence  and  that’s  why  we,  central  bankers,  feel  that  we  have  a  certain  role  to  play  to
preserve confidence of the public in our legal tender. There is so much money flowing in that it’s
like a gold rush – but there is no gold.
What  specific  role  can  the  ECB  as  a  banking  supervisor  play  in  reining  in  digital
currencies?
It’s  important  to  stress  that  we  are  a  supervisor  and  not  regulator.  But  supervisors  can  also
impose certain requirements in terms of risk mitigation and prudent behaviour. But by and large,
many banks out of their own initiative have already taken clear positions that they will not venture
into this gold rush. But that being said, it’s not only the question of the bank supervisor. Also from
the monetary policy perspective, the central bank has a mandate to promote sound and efficient
payment systems. From that point of view, it remains appropriate that we keep a clear distinction
between virtual private initiatives, not backed by anyone, and trusted public currencies that are
legal tender and backed by whole economies.
Are you coordinating your efforts with other authorities?
We are obviously in a constant dialogue with other authorities, whose mandate is to maintain the
integrity of the markets, protection of investors and of consumers. Therefore we should have a
deeper reflection on where the action is needed. There is an area of investor protection, then
there is oversight of the financial market infrastructure. If you increasingly have bridges between
the virtual world and the real world and then there is a collapse in this virtual world, it could drain
liquidity from the real world. This then becomes a concern for the central bank.
Take the example of CCPs: if one were to offer future contracts on such VCs these would then
have to be cleared. But CCPs have a single fund of default and if that fund were not sufficient
then that would engage the responsibility of other clearers. That would mutualize risks that are
emanating from those virtual currencies. The question then arises whether we shouldn’t have a
clearer segregation between the real and the virtual world. The same goes for the imported credit
risk that could come along and the question of collateral. These are the areas where we have
direct responsibility as a central bank.
What is relevant to us is that we protect the functioning of our open market economy. At the
same  time,  if  someone  wants  to  play  Casino,  let  him  do  it,  but  then  we  shouldn’t  mutualize
losses with the rest of the society.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
What  tools  do  you  have  to  keep  this  virtual  world  at  bay  and  do  they  need
reinforcement?
Our existing frameworks for monetary policy clearly don’t accept these assets as collateral and
we  will  also  not  accept  them  to  enter  our  existing  platforms  like  Target-2  –  these  rules  are
already in place. The question is: should we go beyond?
If  banks  were  to  start  leveraging,  i.e.  giving  loans  to  finance  such  activities,  then  it  would
obviously  be  of  concern  for  us,  not  only  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  risk  management  as  a
supervisor,  but  also  in  the  view  of  our  role  to  support  financial  stability  and  in  view  of  our
functioning, because we conduct monetary policy through banking system so we need a sound
banking system.
Would  it  help  if  also  in  the  market  infrastructure  we  would  have  the  obligation  to  segregate
accounts or to have higher capital retention? Those ideas are typical tools that are at disposal of
either the central bank or the supervisor or macroprudential authorities and we might have to take
a  look  whether  they  are  also  applicable  to  those  virtual  currencies  and  whether  the  time  has
come  to  go  that  way.  But  since  some  of  those  VCs  have  no  national  base,  but  rather  define
themselves as being globalized it would be best to have a globalized response and that’s why the
G20 is looking into the matter.
In what areas do you foresee the need for more forceful global response?
Since  I  have  heard  from  different  locations  of  similar  concerns,  we  are  all  working  at  home,
looking  at  what  could  be  done.  But  it’s  at  a  very  premature  stage  because  we  don’t  want  to
overdo it. We are in an open society, where people are free to lose money as they like.
It’s a phenomenon that affects central banking, payment systems, banks and financial market
infrastructure. By definition those activities become cross-border so a cross-border response is
always preferable to a fragmented national one. In many jurisdictions there is a very high concern
about money-laundering and terrorism financing. What needs to be decided here as a super-
priority  has  to  do  with  the  level  of  political  responsibility  rather  than  the  level  of  individual
agencies. Therefore the G20 where you also have the government side coming is a welcome
forum.
The second in the list of priorities is to have more information because it’s very difficult to have
access to what is happening and where it’s happening. We need more information and that’s
why  for  me  one  obligation  would  already  be  to  force  the  unregulated  platforms  to  report
transactions in a harmonized way to repositories so that we would have access to information
also in order to create a better response. I hear often that there are concerns of criminal activity
and the amount of hoaxes in this virtual world is rather high. So the main concern is the absence
of proper information and the absence of traces so you could track the transactions. So this is
certainly something that specialized staff in different member states will also look into.
Your colleague Benoit Coeuré said recently that the ECB expects G-20 meeting in March
to focus on coordinated response to the growth of digital currencies and urged leaders
to come up with a regulatory answer. What are you expectations about this meeting in
Buenos Aires?
You should not think of a meeting as being a switch. It will launch a certain amount of studies, it
will probably task a certain number of existing institutions to dig deeper and then we will start the
work.  But  in  the  meantime  we  already  prepare  in-house.  Whatever  happens,  we  want  to  be
prepared.
What can you do until this coordinated response is ready?
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
We have on the one hand our existing toolbox. It always is useful if you look at the toolbox again
in terms of what is possible from the point of view of a new application. Then you can see that a
lot  can  be  done  already.  Some  measures  might  also  be  taken  without  huge  or  difficult  legal
changes.
Could you give us an example?
Our  collateral  framework,  our  platform  where  we  are  an  operator,  we  have  our  payment
systems, we are in the midst of discussing European framework for CCPs — these are all areas
where there is still time and where a certain amount of legislation is still under review, so we
could add it.
Would you be ready to abandon your TIPS initiative in favor of a blockchain/DLT based
solution?  The  conclusion  to  your  Stella  project  with  BOJ  says  “DLT-based  solution
could meet the performance needs of current large value payment systems”?
TIPS is 10 seconds, 0.2 cents. DLT transactions are at best 30 euros and take at least one hour.
Why would we abandon TIPS? We have a mandate for efficient payment systems, and we go for
efficiency. We are not bound to a technology, we are bound to results, and I think it’s the result
that counts.
As to the technology of DLT, we are testing it but there are so many unsolved questions in terms
of  governance  and  legal  certainty  in  DLT.  We  are  looking  to  what  extent  we  could  overcome
these legal barriers, but we are at a very early stage.
There seems to be a certain change of tone in how you and your colleagues now speak
about digital currencies. In the past some of your colleagues largely dismissed it as, for
example,  Tulip  mania  with  no  immediate  consequences  for  the  central  bank.  What
prompted this bigger sense of urgency that something needs to be done right now?
As long as it was negligible it was not considered a priority, but since this hype accelerated at the
end  of  last  year  it  has  moved  higher  up  on  the  agenda.  If  you  see  how  fast  something  can
develop, it can very quickly reach dimensions of past bubbles that also had negative effects on
the economy. That we cannot ignore. The valuations are not at a level where you would now
jump from your chair and say “you need to forbid this thing”. We are not there. But what I do not
like  is  the  public  hype  driving  this  thing. Also  the  amount  in  ICOs  is  rather  small.  But  this  is
market integrity, this is protecting the consumer. Here you can’t say it’s also affecting monetary
policy. One thing to remember is also that we target asset bubbles if they are a risk for financial
stability, and are debt-financed.
If we could fast-forward a bit —- can you imagine a situation where there is going to be
one day a digital euro? Do you completely rule out such development — a digital fiat
currency?
I’m not a science fiction writer so in my official imagination I would restrain myself at best to look
at certain circumstances if citizens were to desert cash, which is not the case right now. I could
imagine  a  digital  representation  of  cash,  meaning  a  digital  issuance  that  would  replicate  the
features of cash, not a new digital currency disrupting bank intermediation, in order not to rock
the boat of our whole economy and put into question the functioning of a two-tier banking system.
So why would we do it? For the sake of disruption? We have made so much effort to make our
banking system safer and sounder again, and we are still not fully finished. Why would we then
discontinue with that? I think there would be a price – and maybe not a small price – in doing
away with the banking system from one day to the next.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
