François Villeroy de Galhau: Green Finance – a new frontier for the
21st century
Opening  keynote  by  Mr  François  Villeroy  de  Galhau,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France,  at  the
International climate risk conference for supervisors, Amsterdam, 6 April 2018.
Accompanying slides of this speech.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
 What location could be more appropriate for a conference on climate change than Amsterdam?
Two thirds of Dutch territory is at risk of flooding as sea levels rise.  It is no coincidence that this
country’s mathematicians, including Prof. Laurens de Haan, have made decisive contributions in
determining  a  safe  height  for  sea  dikes  based  on  extreme  value  theory.   Yet  the  interest  of
central  bankers  and  supervisors  in  climate  change  may  seem  more  surprising.  Though
unexpected,  it  is  not  fashion,  it  is  conviction:  climate  stability  is,  in  the  long  run,  one  of  the
determinants  of  financial  stability.  This  is  even  more  important  to  us  in  Europe  because  the
Treaties entrust the Eurosystem with the task of “supporting the general economic policies in the
Union”;   this  includes  “the  sustainable  development  of  Europe  based  on  […]  a  high  level  of
protection and improvement of the quality of the environment”  (Art. 3).
1
2
3
4
And one thing is certain: time is running out. At the One Planet Summit in Paris last December,
President Macron issued a stark warning that “we are losing the battle” on climate change. Mark
Carney will tell us later on whether we have escaped the “tragedy of the horizon”  he famously
described. Clearly, if carbon emissions remain on their current trend, and if we want to keep the
increase in temperature below 2°C, our global carbon budget  will be consumed within 15 to 30
7
years.
5
6
As  central  bankers  and  supervisors,  our  mission  is  both  humble  and  considerable.  Humble
because the success of the Paris Agreement is the responsibility of the signatory states: the EU
is committed to reducing carbon emissions by at least 40% by 2030,   and financial regulation
cannot  be  a  substitute  for  an  ambitious  climate  agenda.  Considerable  because,  we  must  do
everything  we  can  to  support  and  complement  the  action  undertaken  by  states.  It  is  a  great
challenge  for  us,  as  supervisors  in  the  21th  century.  I  would  even  say  that  it  is  our  “new
frontier”, comparable to the financing of growth and major infrastructures in the 19  century or
the management of great financial crises in the last 100 years.
th
8
For this reason, I am very pleased to see that the Network for Greening the Financial System
(NGFS),  that  the  Banque  de  France  launched  last  December,  is  gaining  momentum.  This
pioneering initiative brings together, for the time being, 9 central banks and supervisors from all
over the world, and is chaired by Frank Elderson (De Nederlandsche Bank). We plan to publish
our first report by April 2019. In the meantime, let us take a closer look at the risks presented by
climate  change,  but  let  us  not  overlook  the  opportunities.  In  my  remarks  today,  I  will  address
these two questions: (i) how can we better measure the long-term risks associated with climate
change? (ii) and how can we develop the opportunities related to the financing of the transition?
[slide 2]
**
1. From physical risks to transition risks, and from a snapshot to a video
Dr Shuckburg has just given an excellent presentation of the available research, which confirms
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
that  the  forces  of  climate  change  are  powerful  and  inevitable. Physical risks  –  the  increased
frequency  and  severity  of  extreme  weather  events  –  are  obviously  the  most  visible  and
immediate source of risk for the financial sector. [slide 3] With 710 natural disasters in 2017,  we
have  just  lived  through  another  year  of  record  climate  turbulence.  The  600  mark  has  been
exceeded  only  five  times,  all  of  them  in  the  last  six  years.  Needless  to  say, the  insurance
sector is at the forefront in dealing with physical risks. Yet, contrary to widespread belief, if
not covered by insurance, physical risks could loom large for banks as well. The lack of
insurance  protection  when  natural  disasters  occur,  or  what  we  call  “protection  gaps”,  may
increase  credit  risks  for  banks  if  it  leads  to  suppressed  economic  activity  and  higher
unemployment.  Globally,  protection  gaps  are  already  sizeable.
  They  could  increase  further,
including in developed countries, if insurers increase their premiums or simply retreat from risky
market segments. Physical risks should therefore be, at the very least, carefully monitored.
10
9
But what might scare people the most is not necessarily what we should focus on the most.
Transition risks, the ones related to the adjustment towards a low-carbon economy, are less
visible long-term risks that have not yet materialised. Nevertheless, we need to be prepared for
these  as  well.  Transition  costs  and  uncertainties  about  the  winners  and  losers  will  certainly
create  strong  market  volatility  and  lead  to  adverse  aggregate  macroeconomic  outcomes.
According to our first estimates made by the ACPR – the French supervisor –,
 13% of French
banks’ total net credit exposure is to sectors vulnerable to transition risks. The DNB conducted a
similar exercise and found roughly the same exposure for Dutch lenders.
 Financial institutions
may object that the timeframe for the materialisation of these risks is far beyond their investment
horizon and the average maturity of their balance sheets. They may argue that their exposures
can  be  adjusted  progressively  if  needed.  In  my  view,  it  is  delusional  to  think  that  when  risks
become  perceptible,  everyone  will  be  able  to  cut  their  exposures  at  the  same  time  and  in  an
orderly fashion.
11
12
My  hope  is  that  the  current  momentum  among  supervisors  around  the  world  will  help  us  to
better  measure  and  mitigate  the  long-term  risks  associated  with  climate  change,  and
hence  smooth  the  transition.  In  this  regard,  we,  as  supervisors,  should  collectively move
forward in two priority areas. [slide 4]
Our first priority should be the identification and disclosure of existing exposures in the
financial sector, or “the snapshot of risks”. A huge amount of work has already been done:
the recommendations of the FSB’s Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures (TCFD)
provide a comprehensive and consistent basis for the voluntary disclosure of information about
risks. In addition, I propose that we identify European best practices, and move gradually towards
a compulsory transparency requirement in Europe, provided that two conditions are met in order
to avoid overburdening financial institutions: this requirement should be based on (i) a “comply or
explain” principle and on (ii) a common taxonomy with a sufficiently broad level of aggregation.
France already requires by law  that asset managers, banks and insurance companies publish
information about the way they take climate change into account.
On top of that, we should develop forward-looking carbon stress tests for both insurance
companies and banks – what I call “the video of risks”. It is obviously a complex and difficult
task, but it is essential. Today we are able to perform sensitivity analyses to ascertain the size of
probable losses for financial institutions’ portfolios under a range of economic scenarios. But one
of  our  duties  in  the  NGFS  will  be  to  carry  out  additional  work  on  two  key  issues:  (i)  how  to
translate  climate  change  scenarios  into  economic  scenarios  that  can  be  used  in  our  stress
testing frameworks, and (ii) assessing the impact of shocks on the probability of default over a
much longer horizon than the usual one of one year.
2.  Converting  our  quantitative  and  qualitative  challenges 
opportunities
into  unprecedented
13
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
15
14
xvii
Our objective is to enhance the role of the financial system, not only to manage climate change–
related  risks,  but  also  to  “mobilise  capital  for  green  and  low-carbon  investments.”
  But
financing the transition to a low-carbon economy is both a quantitative and qualitative
challenge.
[slide  5]  The quantitative challenge  is  linked  to  the massive  investment  required in  three
areas: first, infrastructure and technical solutions, especially in transport, energy production and
consumption  and  agriculture;  second,  intangible  goods,  including  continuous  training  and
research; and third, the adaptation and improvement of existing structures, notably the thermal
rehabilitation of buildings. The needs are so considerable that public financing alone will never be
sufficient: as an illustration, the estimated global needs could reach USD 90 trillion over the next
15 years for new green infrastructure alone.
Fortunately, the private sector is already showing a growing interest in green finance. I could
16
cite many examples, including the sharp rise in the global green bond market, +78% in 2017,
or the success of the issuance of France’s first green sovereign bond in January 2017 with EUR
7 billion allocated and total demand of more than EUR 23 billion, and supplemented yesterday. All
this looks very promising… but it is still insufficient. The systematic oversubscription of green
bonds  at  issuance  is  actually  a  sign  that  there  is  a  lack  of  green  financial  products.  Green
markets  remain  niche  markets:  green  bonds  still  account  for  less  than  2%  of  global  debt
issuance.
 The success of the transition will also depend on our ability to broaden the sources
of financing: we should not rely solely on green bonds. We also need more green loans, and
more green financing in general, accessible to individuals, SMEs and start-ups.
Green  financing  requires  an  innovation-friendly  framework:  green  securitisation,  green
covered bonds, green derivatives, green crowdfunding platforms and green private equity should
all be promoted. In addition, we have to carefully assess the impact of existing regulations. In
the face of strong pressure from the financial industry, we must not however lose sight of our
main goal as supervisors, which is financial stability. So far, there is no empirical or theoretical
evidence that “green” assets are less risky and could warrant lower risk weights in the form of a
“green  supporting  factor”.  We  should  instead  target  brown  assets  with  a  “brown  penalising
factor”, because the transition risks will at some point materialise. This could be designed either
as a dedicated Systemic Risk Buffer or be integrated into Pillar 2 requirements. The latter would
have the advantage of spurring banks to improve their risk management capabilities for climate-
related risk.
This leads me to the qualitative challenge. [slide 6] The risk of green washing may undermine
the  reputation  of  green  markets  and  impede  progress.  To  me,  the  prerequisite  for  an  orderly
development of the markets is a clear and harmonised taxonomy of green assets and sectors.
In this regard, I welcome the European Commission Action Plan which provides one of the most
ambitious policy blueprints ever published on sustainable finance. But we should go further, at
least  at  the  European  level,  including  with  the  United  Kingdom:  we  should work  towards
common standards  for  the  green  bonds  market. At  present,  two  are  widespread:  the  Green
Bond Principles (GBP) and the Climate Bond Initiative (CBI). It would certainly make sense to
promote  a  convergence  towards  a  harmonised  European  standard,  leveraging  the  GBP
approach in terms of processes and transparency, and building on the CBI approach with regard
to taxonomy. There should also systematically be an independent measurement of the impacts.
Last  but  not  least,  we  need  to infuse  sustainability  into  our  own  activities,  because  our
credibility also depends on our exemplarity. At the Banque de France, we took a pioneering step
last month with the adoption of a Responsible Investment Charter. We are among the first
central banks to commit ourselves to improving the contribution of our own funds and pensions
portfolios to the environmental transition, and we intend to report annually on our progress.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
 Let  me  conclude  by  quoting  one  of  the  greatest  European  writers  of  the  19   century,  Victor
Hugo, who once wrote: “How sad to think that nature speaks and mankind doesn’t listen.” We
now have sufficient evidence that climate change speaks for itself. It is high time that we listened
and  acted  in  consequence.  This  is  why  we  have  decided  to  take  our  responsibilities  firmly  to
heart. Not all countries have yet done so, unfortunately. But we, today, already stand together as
a powerful coalition of the willing. Thank you for your attention.
th
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
OECD (2013): Water and Climate Change Adaptation: Policies to Navigate Uncharted Waters.
L. de Haan (1990): Fighting the arch-enemy with mathematics. Statistica Neerlandica 44, 45–68.
Article 127 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union.
Article 3 of the Treaty on the European Union.
“Breaking the Tragedy of the Horizon – climate change and financial stability”, Speech given by Mark Carney,
Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England  and  Chairman  of  the  Financial  Stability  Board,  Lloyd’s  of  London,  29
September 2015.
The  maximum  cumulated  amount  of  carbon  emissions  consistent  with  holding  the  increase  in  the  global
average temperature to below 2°C.
OECD  (2017): Investing in Climate, Investing in Growth. www.oecd.org/environment/cc/g20-climate/synthesis-
investing-in-climate-investing-in-growth.pdf
EU 2030 climate and energy framework, ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/strategies/progress_en
Munich Re (2018): “Hurricanes cause record losses in 2017 – The year in figures”. www.munichre.com/topics-
online/en/2018/01/2017-year-in-figures#furtherinformation
Geneva Association (2014): The Global Insurance Protection Gap: Assessment and Recommendations.
French Treasury, Banque de France and ACPR (2017): L’évaluation des risques liés au changement climatique
dans le secteur bancaire, February. Top-down assessment based on the nine sectors which display the highest
level of CO2 emissions.
De  Nederlandsche  Bank  (2017): Waterproof?  An  exploration  of  climate-related  risks  for  the  Dutch  financial
sector.
Article 173 of the French Energy transition Act of 17 August 2015.
Joint statement by the Founding Members of the Central Banks and Supervisors Network for Greening the
Financial System, 12 December 2017.
New  Climate  Economy  (2016): The  sustainable  infrastructure  imperative  Financing  for  Better  Growth  and
Development. newclimateeconomy.report/2016/wp-content/uploads/sites/4/2014/08/NCE_2016Report.pdf
www.climatebonds.net/files/reports/cbi-green-bonds-highlights-2017.pdf
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
