Ed Sibley: Brexit - where to next?
Speech by Mr Ed Sibley, Deputy Governor (Prudential Regulation) of the Central Bank of Ireland,
to the DCU Brexit Institute, Dublin, 12 April 2018.
 With  thanks  to  Cormac  Staunton,  Ellen  Ryan,  Gina  Fitzgerald,  Martin  Moloney  and  Cian
Murphy. Dedicated to Colm Curley and his abiding interest in this topic.
Introduction
I would like to start by thanking the DCU Brexit Institute for inviting me to speak here today, and to
Arthur Cox for hosting the event.
The impact of Brexit is such that we need venues and fora where academics, policy-makers,
industry, advisors and the media can interact and find solutions to the challenges we face. Since
its  foundation,  it  is  clear  that  the  Institute  is  doing  just  that.  I  commend  DCU  for  having  the
foresight to set up the Institute, and all those who contribute to its on-going success. Indeed, the
very existence of a “Brexit Institute” at one of our leading universities shows the importance of
this topic, not just for the UK, but for the rest of Europe and particularly for Ireland.
When  it  comes  to  the  financial  sector,  Brexit  will  have  broad,  fundamental  impacts,  and  will
substantively  alter  the  functioning  of  the  UK,  Irish,  and  European  financial  systems.  However,
there is still considerable uncertainty around Brexit. We, at the Central Bank, while hoping for the
best, are continuing to prepare for plausible worst-case scenarios, including a ‘hard Brexit’. This
involves ensuring that existing Irish firms understand and are planning for the impact that Brexit
will have on their businesses; and engaging with those firms that are executing plans to move to
Ireland, or firms changing their business models in Ireland.
In my remarks today, I will:
Start with a brief overview of the topic.
Cover some of the potential impacts of Brexit on the Irish economy with a particular focus on
the financial services system.
Address the impact of Brexit on financial services firms, both those currently supervised by
the Central Bank of Ireland and those seeking to relocate business here.
Give an overview of the impact of Brexit on the future regulatory framework in Europe. 
Overview
Brexit could be one of the most significant events to affect the Irish economy and Irish financial
services firms in a generation. The full significance is almost impossible to predict at this stage,
not least given the high degree of uncertainty surrounding both the short-term arrangements and
the longer-term relationship between the UK and the EU.
It is noteworthy that there are many asymmetries associated with Brexit. For example, there are
asymmetries in the relative importance of Brexit to the current members of the EU, with the UK,
obviously, and Ireland the most affected. There are, consequently, asymmetries in the incentives
that those affected by Brexit have, and consequently the decisions that they are making.
The recent announcement on transitional arrangements is welcome, but is undoubtedly affected
by these asymmetries. The arrangements are still, ultimately, dependent on a political agreement
on the terms of the UK’s withdrawal from the EU; and as the saying goes: ‘nothing is agreed until
everything is agreed’. The different incentives and backstops in place in the UK compared to the
 1 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
EU27, should the transitional arrangements not be ratified, result in the UK and EU27 regulatory
authorities having to take somewhat different approaches. Therefore, while we will continue to
take a pragmatic approach, which I will outline in a moment, our approach has to recognise that it
is still plausible that there will be a “hard Brexit” less than year from now. 
This  approach  is  shared  by  our  colleagues  across  Europe.  As  Dr  Andreas  Dombret  of  the
Bundesbank  recently  remarked  in  a  speech  here  in  Dublin,  there  is  “no  alternative  to  timely
1
preparation, and to preparing for the worst-case scenario of a hard Brexit” .
It may be helpful if I begin by laying out some of the fundamentals that we as the Central Bank
use when approaching an issue as large and complex as Brexit.
The Central Bank’s vision for the Irish financial system is that it is well-managed, well-regulated,
and sustainably serves the needs of the economy and consumers over the long term. Given the
international  nature  of  financial  markets  and  the  increasingly  international  aspects  of  the  Irish
financial services sector, we also have a responsibility to consider the broader impacts of the
financial system in co-operation with our European peers . Being part of this complex European
financial services ecosystem, the Central Bank plays an active role in the European framework
of regulation and supervision. Within that framework, we operate a robust and effective approach
to supervision. All of which is relevant to the approach we are taking to Brexit.
2
Whilst  many  conversations  about  Brexit  and  the  Irish  financial  services  system  to  date  have
focused on which firms may (or may not) be coming here, what is more important is what Brexit
means  for  the  Irish  financial  system  as  a  whole  –  and  what  such  a  shock  can  mean  for  the
functioning of the wider European financial ecosystem. We also should be mindful that not all
sectors of the financial system will be affected in the same way.
Brexit presents both short-term risks – where a hard or chaotic Brexit may have detrimental “cliff
effects” for the Irish economy and the financial services system that serves it – and longer-term
risks for the post-Brexit Irish, European and global system.
Financial  services  firms,  both  those  that  are  operating  in  Ireland  already  and  those  that  are
thinking of operating in Ireland in the future, need to understand these risks, need to understand
what the Central Bank expects from them, and need to be mitigating these risks.
Finally,  Brexit  will  have  a  significant  effect  on  financial  services  regulation  in  Europe,  both  in
terms of how policy is developed, but also on how we oversee the financial services sector in a
new reality where the UK is likely to be outside of the European system but still a very important
player in global financial markets.
Indeed, this is a key point. London is a truly global financial services centre operating within, and
serving a very material amount of the financial services needs of, the EU. While undoubtedly the
role  of  London  and  its  interconnections  with  the  EU  will  change  post  Brexit,  it  is  critically
important for the EU economy and all its citizens that it continues to have a financial services
system that delivers within the EU, but also has deep global connectivity beyond it, including with
London. 
Brexit and the Irish economy
Since joining the European Community in 1973, the Irish economy has become more open and
has traded more extensively with a wider range of countries than ever before. However, the UK
remains one of our most important trading partners, with 13 per cent of goods and 16 per cent of
3
services exported from Ireland going to the UK .
The  importance  of  the  UK  market  for  the  Irish  economy  is  increased  further  by  the  nature  of
these goods and services, which predominantly come from sectors which are of vital importance
 2 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
from  a  regional  employment  perspective  and  comprise  a  large  share  of  Ireland’s  small  and
medium enterprises, such as tourism and agriculture.
The ultimate impact of Brexit on the Irish economy remains uncertain and highly dependent on
the  terms  of  the  UK’s  future  relationship  with  the  EU.  Nonetheless,  it  is  clear  that  the  close
relationship between the Irish and UK economies makes Ireland the most exposed to Brexit of all
of the EU’s remaining Member States, for a number of reasons, including:
First and foremost, the UK’s departure from the EU will most likely reduce Irish exporters’ access
to UK markets and Irish consumers’ access to products sourced from the UK. This may take the
form of the imposition of tariffs on goods sold into the UK. In what could be considered a worst-
case scenario, the UK may revert to trading with Ireland on the basis of world trade organisation
rules.  Work  by  the  ESRI  shows  that  under  these  rules  some  of  the  highest  tariffs  would  be
applied  to  products  from  Ireland’s  most  exposed  and  most  employment  intensive  exporting
4
sectors, with numerous agri-food products possibly facing rates in excess of 30 per cent .
In a less extreme scenario, whereby an extensive free trade agreement is reached between the
UK and EU, the reduction in market access should be less severe. If we look at existing free
trade agreements between the EU and non-EU countries for example, many of these eliminate
tariffs on virtually all goods. However, exceptions are applied and again are particularly prevalent
in sectors of most importance to Irish exports such as agri-food.
Furthermore, it must be remembered that tariffs are not the only barriers to trade outside of the
Single Market. Non-tariff barriers such as increased administrative and customs’ requirements or
costs  associated  with  setting  up  new  logistics  and  trade-processing  systems  also  pose
substantial  costs  to  importers  and  exporters .  Many  of  these  existing,  extensive  free  trade
agreements between the EU and its trading partners, often referred to as “New Generation” free
trade agreements, have also targeted these additional barriers to trade.
5
Ultimately,  when  compared  with  current  trading  arrangements  and  the  achievements  of  the
Single  Market,  any  Free  Trade  Agreement  could  still  represent  a  substantial  loss  of  market
access. This would suggest that following Brexit, Irish exporters seeking to continue to trade with
their UK clients will face considerable challenges and increased import costs, which could both
6
reduce the range and increase the price of imported goods available to Irish consumers .
One very tangible risk posed to the Irish economy is the potential disruption of the land-bridge to
continental Europe that the UK physically provides to Irish trade with the rest of the EU. Currently,
exports consigned in Ireland and bound for the continent can travel overland through the UK with
minimal administrative burden. Post-Brexit, new documentation or customs procedures threaten
to add time and financial cost associated with the use of this route. ESRI research suggests a
very  significant  share  of  Ireland’s  non-UK  international  trade  as  measured  by  weight  currently
uses the land-bridge: 4,253 tonnes outbound and 2,505 tonnes inbound. This represents 53 per
cent of exports to and 11 per cent of imports from the rest of the world excluding the UK, and
7
indicates the magnitude of the economic activity exposed to land-bridge disruption .
The  implications  of  reduced  access  to  the  UK  market  would  be  further  aggravated  by  any
negative economic shock to the UK economy associated with Brexit. A reduction in the incomes
of UK households or the profits of UK firms will lead to a reduction in their demand for the goods
sold by Irish exporters. Further depreciation in sterling may also make Irish goods less affordable
8
for UK consumers and, relative to goods produced within the UK, less competitive .
Taking these factors into account, our estimates suggest that in the event of no post-Brexit trade
agreement being reached, GDP in Ireland might be around three per cent lower after ten years
than under a no-Brexit scenario. This figure could be expected to translate into roughly 40,000
9
fewer jobs, which may occur largely in particular regions and sectors .
 3 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
These considerations, while central to understanding risks facing Irish exporters and households,
are  also  important  for  our  financial  system  and  the  stability  of  our  financial  institutions.  The
customers of Irish financial services firms, including banks, insurance firms and asset managers
will  be  impacted  by  Brexit.  For  example,  Irish  exporting  firms,  particularly  small  and  medium
10
enterprises (SMEs), are predominantly funded by banks .
This creates a direct link between Irish financial services firms and any disruptions to trade with
the UK and an indirect link to the performance of the UK economy.
Risks to the Irish financial services system
The Irish financial services system is closely intertwined with the UK system. This means that a
‘hard Brexit’ will lead to significant disruptions, in particular for the Irish financial system.
At the Central Bank we have been engaged, both internally and through the European authorities,
to analyse the “cliff effects” that will occur in the event of a hard Brexit, in order to understand the
impact a hard Brexit will have on firms and the economy, and how we can mitigate these risks.
Before discussing these cliff effects in the banking, insurance and funds areas, I first want to lay
out how the European passport currently works in the financial services area. 
The single market ‘passport’ enables a financial services firm authorised in its ‘Home’ Member
State to exercise its right under the relevant single market Directive to provide services in another
(‘Host’) Member State either by establishing a branch (known as freedom of establishment) or
providing such services on a cross-border basis (known as freedom of services), without the
need for separate authorisation in the host Member State. In a Brexit context, UK firms may no
longer be able to avail of the financial services passport to offer their services into Ireland (and
the EEA) and similarly, Irish firms may no longer be able to passport their business into the UK
on a freedom of services or establishment basis.
The  concept  of  ‘passporting’  financial  services  within  the  EU  has  different  meanings  and
significance depending on the sector and legislation concerned. In some sectors, it is a source of
substantial cross-border business, whereas in others, whether due to limits on passporting in the
governing legislation or to industry specificities, passporting is much less prevalent. An inability to
passport between the UK and the rest of the EU post Brexit will be particularly impactful in the
Insurance  and  Funds  spheres  given  the  level  of  business  conducted  on  this  basis  between
Ireland and UK currently.
The likely loss of passporting rights between the UK and the EU27 therefore presents a material
risk for Irish firms that depend on a European passport for the cross border provision of financial
services into the UK, and may affect competition and product availability for sectors in Ireland,
with inevitable knock-on implications for consumers.
Banks
For the Irish banking sector, the potential implications include, amongst others, negative impacts
on profitability and asset quality from the expected slowdown in UK and Irish economic growth. In
addition,  direct  credit  exposures  from  lending  to  the  UK  retail  market  are  vulnerable  to  a  UK
slowdown. The impact of sterling weakness and declining economic growth may also impact the
repayment ability of Irish Corporates and SME exporters.
From a structural perspective, the loss of the passport is relatively less concerning from an Irish
retail banking perspective vis-à-vis other sectors, as the largest Irish retail banks tend to access
the UK market via subsidiaries, which they can continue to do post Brexit and the provision of
banking services through passporting to the Irish economy and citizens is relatively small.
 4 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
However,  new  businesses  entering  Ireland  as  a  response  to  Brexit  will  mean  a  significant
transformation of the Irish banking landscape, with a material growth in its size and complexity.
Insurance
The Irish insurance sector has significant international linkages. At the end-2015 , over €3 billion
of  non-life  business  and  over  €2.6  billion  of  life  business  was  written  through  international
channels, either through branches or on a freedom of service basis.
11
Most of this is written by UK and Gibraltar-based insurance firms. This is perhaps unsurprising
given the similarities in legal frameworks and the absence of a language barrier between both
jurisdictions. Firms from the UK and Gibraltar accounted for €1.8bn of non-life and €2.5bn of life
insurance business.
These  interactions  between  the  insurance  industry  in  Ireland  and  the  UK  include  the  sale  of
insurance products, financial arrangements such as cross border reinsurance, and the use of
outsourced service providers.
This  cross-border  business  has  been  an  important  channel  in  improving  the  provision  of
insurance to Irish businesses and consumers, some of it quite specialist in nature. The cross-
border model works well, in both directions, when provided by firms that are financially resilient,
well managed, with a solid business strategy and are knowledgeable about the Irish insurance
market. 
The potential loss of EU authorisation will affect the ability of UK and Gibraltar-based insurance
undertakings to continue performing certain obligations for EU policyholders (and vice versa) and
will impact the service continuity of contracts concluded before the UK leaves the EU. Without
action, there are risks that UK and Gibraltar-based insurers passporting into Ireland will lose their
ability to continue to provide insurance cover, including collecting premiums, making mid-term
alterations and negotiating and settling claims on any outstanding insurance contracts – ranging
from long-term life insurance policies to annual motor insurance contracts – taken out prior to the
UK’s departure from the EU.
The €1.8 billion value of business written inwards by UK and Gibraltar-based firms for non-life
lines  of  business  is  significant.  Approximately,  €17  billion  of  non-life  business  is  written
domestically  and  internationally  by  firms  regulated  by  the  Central  Bank .  The  larger  firms
typically have activated plans to obtain licences in the EU27. However, there are some providers,
often offering relatively niche products or serving niche markets, where the cost of setting up and
running a new EU subsidiary may be prohibitive. In addition to the contract continuity risk, there
are clear risks of reduced competition and a reduction in customer choice.
Markets
12
In fund management, UK fund managers could lose the right to manage Irish authorised funds
under  the  passporting  regime.  Such  funds  could  also  lose  the  power  to  delegate  investment
management and risk management functions to UK authorised entities.
Brexit  is  also  going  to  impact  on  how  financial  institutions  interact  with  each  other.  New
regulations brought in since the crisis have sought to increase transparency and reduce risks in
the securities and derivatives markets. The effect of this is that more firms are required to clear
and  settle  their  securities  and  derivatives  with  Central  Counterparties  (CCPs)  and  Central
Securities Depositories (CSDs).
However, much of this essential financial market infrastructure, including as it relates to Ireland,
is  currently  located  in  the  UK.  For  example,  the  London  Clearing  House  (LCH)  is  one  of  the
world’s largest CCPs. LCH dominates the clearing of over-the-counter interest rate swaps, with
13
 5 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
over 95 per cent of the market
, and regularly clears in excess of $1 trillion notional per day.
13
If UK CCPs are not recognised under EU regulations after Brexit, firms engaging in, for example,
interest-rate  swap  transactions  would  be  unable  to  clear  them  in  the  UK.  This  issue  is
compounded by the lack of sufficient substitute capacity elsewhere. This will affect any EU firm
that is using interest-rate swaps to mitigate the risk of interest-rate changes, elevating financial
stability risks and, again, potentially reducing consumer choices.
A similar risk of loss of market access arises in relation to the settlement of equity securities
traded on the Irish Stock Exchange. These are currently settled in the UK’s Central Securities
Depository. After Brexit, the UK CSD may lose its right to passport its services into Ireland, with a
direct impact on the settlement of Irish equity securities.
Brexit impact on financial services firms
These are the system-wide impacts. I now want to talk about the impact at the firm level. I will
differentiate here between firms already operating in Ireland and how they might be impacted by
Brexit, and new firms that are looking to move into Ireland – including where a new business line
is being transferred into an existing firm.
Existing firms
For existing firms, we consider Brexit as part of our ongoing supervisory approach. As I have
described already, my vision for the Irish financial services sector is that it is well managed, well
regulated and sustainably serves the needs of the economy and its consumers over the long
term. In this context, when the Central Bank assesses the firms we regulate, we are essentially
looking at four objectives from a prudential supervision perspective. Regulated firms should:
1.  Have sufficient financial resources, including under a plausible but severe stress.
2.  Have sustainable business models.
3.  Be  well  governed,  with  appropriate  cultures,  effective  risk  management  and  control
arrangements in place.
4.  Be able to recover if they get into difficulty, and if they cannot, they should be resolvable in an
orderly manner without significant externalities or taxpayer costs.
Brexit  has  the  potential  to  affect  each  of  these,  and  all  financial  services  firms  should  be
evaluating  the  impact  of  Brexit  on  these  aspects  of  their  business.  From  a  regulatory  and
supervisory perspective, a primary concern is to ensure that regulated firms that have business
models with direct or indirect exposures to the UK economy address and plan appropriately for
the potential negative impacts of Brexit.
Therefore,  we  expect  regulated  firms  across  all  sectors  to  consider,  plan  and  adapt  to  the
potential implications for their business models and revenue streams. It is the responsibility of
firms’ boards to assess the potential impact of Brexit on their firm and to plan accordingly. This
should  include  early  engagement  with  the  Central  Bank  and  relevant  UK  authorities  as
appropriate.
New or materially changing entities
In terms of new entities or business lines, we have been working for some time with a range of
firms who have recognised that they need to relocate some of their activities in order to continue
to access the EU market after Brexit.
Once  again  there  are  asymmetries  here.  Brexit  is  an  imposed  and  undesired  cost  for
businesses.  There  is  the  potential  cost  of  setting  up  a  new  business  in  a  different  location,
 6 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
seeking authorisation, finding premises, relocating staff and so on. Perhaps more importantly for
some firms there are ongoing costs and frictions associated with reorganising business lines,
funding flows, booking models, and so on. It is understandable that firms want to minimise these
costs and frictions.
But our gatekeeping role is hugely important in mitigating financial stability risks and protecting
market integrity and customers in Ireland and across Europe. So, it is imperative that any new
business authorised here as a result of Brexit meets the high standards that are expected of any
such firm authorised in the EU – consistent with them effectively being, in many cases, an EU
head office responsible for business undertaken in multiple jurisdictions. They need to organise
themselves so that when they are up and running their business will truly be run from here, be
clearly  governed  by  EU  norms  and  standards,  and  be  set  up  to  meet  our  robust,  analytical,
intensive and outcomes-focused supervisory expectations.
Good practices have involved firms who have looked very carefully at the legislative and business
constraints, identified a credible new working model and put in place a strong team to deliver
that. The process is typically more effective and efficient when we are dealing with the CEO and
the Board of the entity that will be running the new business, rather than a project team from a
global group.
Our approach
The Central Bank of Ireland has been working on Brexit-related issues since before the 2016
referendum. We have been conducting our own analysis of the impacts, and engaging with firms
on  a  continual  basis  to  ensure  that  they  are  preparing  appropriately.  In  short,  it  is  one  of  our
highest priorities and involves teams working across every area of the Central Bank.
In  terms  of  new  authorisations,  there  is  considerable  challenge  for  us  in  terms  of  the  large
volume of applications being processed over a relatively short period of time. Consistent with the
challenges outlined by the UK authorities as recently as this week , the unprecedented level of
authorisation activity is necessitating the Central Bank to make hard choices. We have increased
headcount,  recruited  heavily  and  re-allocated  senior  and  experienced  resources  from  other
important  tasks  to  ensure  that  we  deliver  effectively,  efficiently,  predictably  and  in  a  timely
fashion.  We  are  also  having  to  now  de-prioritise  and  defer  other  less  critical  work  to
accommodate our work on Brexit.
14
We are also active internationally to ensure that the risk of divergence between EU jurisdictions
in  how  they  handle  relocations  from  the  UK  is  mitigated.  In  order  to  address  the  concern  of
regulatory divergences and the risk of regulator arbitrage between EU member States, we have
long  been  engaging  closely  with  the  European  Central  Bank,  across  the  Single  Supervisory
Mechanism  (SSM)  and  the  European  Supervisory  Authorities  to  agree  European-wide
approaches to the key policy and supervisory issues, stances and decisions that have arisen
from Brexit. For example, we worked very closely and very actively as part of the SSM to develop
a set of guidelines  on this matter.
15
The ECB’s stance is reflected in comments by Sabine Lautenschläger of the ECB’s Executive
Board when she stated that “the euro entity should not be an empty shell where the credit risk
stays in the euro area, and all of the market risks are booked and governed and managed outside
16
of the euro area ”
The result is that much of the heat is now gone out of the regulatory arbitrage issue, although we
will continue to work hard to maintain consistent approaches as new issues arise and the work
17
on key issues develops and deepens .
 7 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
Brexit transition
As  I  mentioned  at  the  start,  all  of  this  work  takes  place  in  a  period  of  uncertainty,  and  it  can
appear that the sands are continually shifting beneath us. This is reflected by the announcement
in March of an agreed transition period. On the one hand, the knowledge of a ‘transition period’
does provide a measure of comfort to both regulators and market participants.
On  the  other  hand,  as  the  transition  phase  only  comes  into  effect  if  there  is  a  withdrawal
agreement, and the EU27 does not have the same legislative backstop as the UK . Therefore,
we still must know what we are going to do in the event of a hard Brexit in March 2019. We still
expect firms to continue to prepare for all plausible contingencies, including the eventuality that
the transition period is not finally agreed on account of the overall uncertainty of the negotiations.
Taking a conservative, prudential approach, we cannot exclude such a scenario – even as we
welcome the progress on a political level.
18
Existing  firms  who  are  doing  their  contingency  planning  well  for  Brexit  have  already  clearly
defined a realistic worst-case scenario. They have worked out what they will do in such a worst-
case scenario and they have figured out what the trigger events are for their worst-case scenario
contingency plan to be put into operation. They already know who within their firm will have the
lead in implementing that plan. Their boards have already seen and approved those plans.
Not every firm is in that situation. We are saying to boards and chief executives – you need to
mandate  your  staff  to  think  through  the  plausible  scenario  of  a  hard  Brexit.  You  need  to  be
costing  it  and  you  need  to  be  putting  timelines  on  it  now.  You  need  to  encourage  your  risk
managers to be realistic about that worst-case scenario and not make optimistic assumptions
about what Governments and legislators might do to solve your problems for you.
That said, we recognise the realities and complexities of the situation. It is also important (as I
outlined earlier) that Ireland and the EU continues to have an outward facing financial system,
which facilitates global financial flows and retains connectivity with the UK. So, when I talk about
pragmatism in this context what do I mean?
A fundamental principle of authorisation and supervision is that a regulated entity must have the
governance  and  control  arrangements  in  place  that  are  commensurate  with  the  nature,  scale
and complexity of its business from the point of authorisation. It must also have the necessary
resources (human, operational and financial) to support the business on, what could be referred
to, as Day 1 of authorisation. This is not negotiable.
However,  many  Brexit-related  changes  and  applications  involve  transfers  of  existing  business
lines, new licences and growth plans. So Day 1 may not be the destination, it may be a staging
post  on  the  path  towards  the  time  –  let’s  refer  to  this  as  Day  2  –  when  the  full  post-Brexit
business arrangements of the firm are operational.
In the event that the proposed transitional arrangements are ratified, this transfer and growth may
take place over an extended period. So, we are open to understanding, on a case-by-case basis,
both existing and applicant firms’ plans for navigating the paths between their Day 1 and Day 2
arrangements.  Importantly,  these  plans  need  to  be  clearly  articulated,  credible  and  reflect  the
uncertainty associated with Brexit. In other words, we may hope that we have time post-March
2019, but firms need to be able to credibly demonstrate they can accelerate their journey from
Day 1 to Day 2 should the transitional arrangements not be ratified.
And again, there are asymmetries here. What may be appropriate for a firm passporting into the
UK may not work for a firm passporting from the UK into the EU, simply because of the different
backstops that are in place.
 8 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
The impact of Brexit on the regulatory framework
Finally, it is important to emphasise that Brexit will change the European regulatory landscape,
and that divergence in financial regulation remains a key risk in the wider process.
Much media and political commentary in the UK in recent weeks and months has focussed on
using Brexit as an opportunity to diverge from EU rules and regulations, particularly in the area of
financial services, although I note the CBI report published this week which suggests that this is
19
not a UK business ambition .
In the short-term, the UK Government is working to integrate the current body of EU financial
services law into domestic UK law. In the medium-to-longer-term, however, the position is less
certain. As  I  said  at  the  outset,  we  do  not  yet  have  a  final  withdrawal  agreement,  despite  the
latest progress announced on 19 March; nor is the future trading relationship known.
As such, a risk of material divergence between the EU and UK regulatory frameworks is one
which  must  occupy  some  time  as  part  of  wider  Brexit  preparations.  Divergence  in  the  future
might be problematic for the following reasons.
Firstly, access to EU markets for financial services is based on the concept of equivalence, or
the idea that the firms seeking access to the Single Market from outside the EU have broadly
comparable regulatory requirements as those present in the EU. This seeks to ensure a level
playing field for EU and non-EU firms; maintain high prudential standards and investor protection
outcomes;  and  ensure  financial  stability  aims  are  met  by  applying  stringent  standards  to  the
riskiest firms operating in the EU, regardless of where their home country is.
A materially divergent future UK regime would place any relationship based on equivalence in
doubt,  especially  as  equivalence  assessments  require  an  update  periodically  and  there  is  no
guarantee  of  the  outcome  of  future  assessments.  This  is  clearly  less  than  ideal  in  terms  of
building  a  long-term,  mutually-beneficial  framework  of  access  between  UK  and  EU  financial
markets. It also heightens political risk as a focus for the regulatory community given the potential
disruption that a sudden withdrawal of equivalence could generate.
From  regulatory  perspective  it  is  desirable,  given  the  size  and  role  of  London  as  a  financial
centre,  that  some  form  of  sustainable  link  between  the  EU  and  the  UK  is  found.  Indeed,  it  is
important  that  the  EU  continues  to  play  an  active  and  engaged  role  in  international  financial
markets and does not seek to introduce barriers to well-functioning markets where key risks can
be managed appropriately.
Secondly, on a more practical level, following the UK’s departure from the EU there will be a loss
of  experience  and  expertise  when  UK  regulators  are  no  longer  sitting  at  the  table.  Whilst  this
might  sound  like  a  relatively  minor  issue  given  the  other  challenges  Brexit  presents,  as  a
regulator I believe it is something that we need to be mindful of, particularly in Ireland. Whether it
is because or despite of the long history between Ireland and the UK, our regulatory philosophies,
approaches and thinking are usually aligned.
London’s role as the pre-eminent financial centre in Europe results in more than a hub for trading
and finance, but also a hub for the regulation of those activities. The loss of this voice is to be
mourned. It is important that the EU27 tries to fill any gaps in regulatory expertise where possible.
At the Central Bank we understand that the UK’s departure will require increased engagement on
our  part  in  the  relevant  EU  and  international  fora,  to  convey  our  viewpoint  and  add  our  own
expertise to the mix. We have consistently and successfully been making a substantial effort in
this regard since the crisis, including trying to bring the very painful lessons learned from the
crisis here to a wider audience and in an attempt to prevent such an event from happening again.
We will continue to prioritise our largely invisible work in this regard.
 9 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
Conclusions
I will conclude by emphasising some of my key messages: 
Firstly, the decision by the UK to leave the European Union is one that will have knock-on effects
for years, even decades, to come. For Ireland these effects are largely going to be negative and
deeply  profound,  notwithstanding  that  there  will  be  significant  growth  in  the  size,  scale  and
complexity of the Irish financial system. 
Secondly, regardless of the outcome of the political discussions, there will be significant changes
to the financial services system, and the regulatory and supervisory frameworks, in both Europe
and in Ireland. It is important that the EU financial system continues to embrace integration with
the broader global financial system, even as the UK departs it. 
Thirdly, as regulators, we see enormous challenges ahead, both for ourselves and for the firms
that we supervise. What is concerning to me is that this view does not appear to be shared by
everyone. We recently wrote to all the insurance companies that we supervise to ask them about
their Brexit preparations. Of the 197 responses we received, 38 companies deemed that Brexit
would have a high impact on their business model and 12 a medium impact. The remaining 147
– almost three quarters – think Brexit will have little or no impact on them.  Given  the  level  of
uncertainty  and  the  range  of  challenges  we  have  heard  about  today,  this  is  an  astounding
number.
Even in a best case scenario, there is likely to be some major disruption ahead. And it appears
that we are still very far away from being able to anticipate a best case scenario.
Finally, the Central Bank is doing its part – continuing to resource our teams, engaging with new
businesses, working with our existing firms and actively participating in Europe. We will adapt
and change as necessary and respond to the developments as they arise. We will continue to
monitor the risks from Brexit as we see them, continue to communicate them publicly and with
our firms, and actively engage in constructive fora such as this.
With that in mind, I will finish by saying that I anticipate that the work of the DCU Brexit Institute
will not end when the UK leaves the EU. In fact, that is probably when your work will really begin.
Thank you for your attention
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Keynote speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the
AIMA Global Policy and Regulatory Forum, Dublin, 20 March 2018. www.bis.org/review/r180322b.htm
See www.centralbank.ie/news/article/DGsibley17October2017  for  perspectives  on  the  European  Regulatory
Framework.
Office  of  the  Revenue  Commissioners  and  IGEES,  July  2017:  “Ireland  and  the  UK  –  Tax  and  Customs
Links”, igees.gov.ie/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/ireland-uk-tax-and-customs-links.pdf
Lawless, M. and Morgenroth, E., “The Product and Sector Level Impact of a Hard Brexit across the EU”, ESRI
Working Paper No 550, November 2016 www.esri.ie/pubs/WP550.pdf
In October, the Central Bank hosted a roundtable on potential supply chain disruptions arising from Brexit as
part  of  ongoing  work  to  quantify  non-tariff  barriers.  For  details  see: www.centralbank.ie/docs/default-
source/tns/events/brexit-and-supply-chain-disruption-in-the-import-channel.pdf?sfvrsn=2
Lawless,  M.  and  Morgenroth,  E.,  “Brexit  and  Irish  Consumers”,  ESRI  QEC  Special Article,  March  2018  for
discussion of costs to Irish consumerswww.esri.ie/publications/brexit-and-irish-consumers/
Lawless, M. and Morgenroth, E. “Ireland’s international trade and transport connections", ESRI Working Paper
No. 573, October 2016.www.esri.ie/pubs/WP573.pdf
 10 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
Research by the Central Bank published in today’s Quarterly Bulletin focuses on the channels through which a
sterling deprecation impacts on the domestic economy. This finds that a 10 per cent fall in sterling translates
into  a  loss  in  Irish  GDP  of  just  under  0.2  per  cent.  This  work  builds  on  previous  published  Central  Bank
research that highlighted the pass through from sterling exchange rate movements to Irish consumer prices
(seeReddan  and  Rice  (2017),  “Exchange  Rate  Pass-Through  to  Domestic  Prices”.  Economic  Letter  no.  8.
Central Bank of Ireland.
Opening  Statement 
2017 www.centralbank.ie/news/article/opening-statement-by-gabriel-fagan-at-the-seanad-committee-on-brexit
at  Seanad  Committee 
by  Gabriel 
on  Brexit, 
Fagan 
4  May
Central  Bank  of 
source/publications/systemic-risk-pack-systemic-risk-pack-february-2018.pdf
Ireland  Systemic  Risk  Pack:  February  2018. www.centralbank.ie/docs/default-
Consolidated figures based on regulatory returns submitted to the Central Bank of Ireland.
Consolidated figures based on regulatory returns submitted to the Central Bank of Ireland for the period ended
31 December 2015.
www.lch.com/services/swapclear/volumes
See www.fca.org.uk/news/press-releases/fca-publishes-its-business-plan-2018–19
See www.bankingsupervision.europa.eu/banking/relocating/html/index.en.html
Ms Sabine Lautenschläger, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank and Vice-Chair of the
Supervisory  Board  of 
the  Financial  Times,  July
2017 www.bis.org/review/r170728h.pdf
the  European  Central  Bank, 
interview  with 
www.centralbank.ie/news/article/integration-interconnection-innovation-in-financial-regulation-gerry-cross
The  UK  “Government  has  committed  to  bring  forward  legislation,  if  necessary,  to  create  a  temporary
permissions  regime  to  allow  relevant  firms  to  continue  their  activities  in  the  UK  for  a  limited  period  after
withdrawal. In the unlikely event that the Withdrawal Agreement is not ratified, this provides confidence that a
back-stop 
see www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/prudential-
regulation/letter/2018/firms-preparations-for-the-uk-withdrawal-from-the-eu-update-march-2018.pdf?
la=en&hash=FD310274EDB28E2A0440228F3DD928E4BB725457
available” 
will 
be 
www.ft.com/content/35133a4e-3ca4-11e8-b9f9-de94fa33a81e
 11 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
