Gent Sejko: Effectively using remittances sent by Albanians abroad
Address  by  Mr  Gent  Sejko,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of Albania,  at  the  high-level  meeting  on  the
remittances from the Albanian diaspora, Tirana, 11 December 2017.
 Dear Minister Majko,
Dear guests,
Welcome to the premises of the Bank of Albania! I would like first to thank the Minister of State
for  the  Diaspora,  Mr  Pandeli  Majko,  for  his  initiative  for  higher  attention  to  drawing  in  and
effectively using the remittances sent by Albanians abroad.
Today’s meeting is the first in a series of common steps to be taken by Albanian institutions, in
an effort to give its due place to the financial contribution by Albanian emigrants to the welfare of
their  families  at  home.  This  contribution  is  also  vital  for  the  sustainable  and  long-term
development of the Albanian economy.
The  Bank  of Albania  has  always  considered  the  remittances  as  a  very  important  contributing
factor for the economy of Albania and beyond. In this light, the Bank of Albania measures and
analyses  the  available  statistics,  and  conducts  non-quantitative  assessments  related  to  the
geographical distribution of the sources of remittances, at the national and international level. The
assessment of factors contributing to the level of remittances and the cyclical volatility of their
flows over the years remains at the focus of our work.
For Albania, remittances represent a steady and considerable source of inflows, which surpass
foreign  direct  investments,  being  thus  a  substantial  source  of  financing  economic  growth  in
Albania.  In  this  regard,  the  Bank  of Albania  considers  remittances  as  an  important  source  of
income in the economy and a contributor to the Balance of Payments.
From a narrower perspective, remittances are estimated to have a significant impact on Albanian
households, for reducing the poverty and improving the quality of life.
Even in the case of Albania, the studies performed by the Bank of Albania and the World Bank
show that the income from remittances are allocated mainly for consumption, medication, and
education, as well as for savings and investments, the latter mainly for residential properties.
In addition to the above, the Bank of Albania treats remittances also from the perspective of their
inflow channels in the Albanian economy. Recent studies show that the formal transfer channels
dominate,  mainly  through  money  transfer  financial  institutions,  and  less  through  banks.  In  the
meantime, remittances in cash remain at high levels, which is worth for an in-depth analysis.
The World Bank survey conducted in 2016 concluded that the reasons for the limited use of the
banking channels are the high costs on money transfers and the perceived cumbersome and
complex procedures. To illustrate my point, according to this survey, the costs of remittances
toward Albania are estimated at 9.4 per cent of the amount sent, compared to the 7.2 per cent
average in the region.
We are all aware that the more financial channels are used, the more finances penetrate in the
economy.  Moreover,  the  increase  in  the  use  of  financial  channels  contributes  to  enhancing
financial inclusion, increasing the opportunities for savings and productive investments.
Taking into account the benefits from the formal penetration of remittances in the economy and
the insofar contribution to the banking and financial sector, the Bank of Albania suggests added
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
attention with regard to reducing transfer costs and improving or designing afresh products and
services  /targeted  to  this  segment  of  the  population.  From  its  side,  the  Bank  of  Albania  is
engaged to further modernise the payment system infrastructure and align the legislation to the
EU directives for an open, barrier-less, and competitive market.
In the last two years, the Bank of Albania has been engaging in concrete projects with the World
Bank, related to remittances and financial inclusion.
The first project consists in an assessment of the compliance with the “General Principles for
international  remittance  services”  designed  by  the  World  Bank  and  the  Bank  for  International
Settlement and a concrete action plan, with many stakeholders involved, to comply with those
fields that need further improvement.
Another  noteworthy  project  is  the  Greenback  of  the  World  Bank  dedicated  to  remittances,
implemented  in  several  countries  across  the  world.  This  project  comes  now  to Albania  as  a
receiver of remittance and aims at enhancing the efficiencies in the market for remittances and
raising the awareness and financial education, and has Bank of Albania’s endorsement until its
completion.
The other project consists in assessing the compliance with the criteria set out in the framework
of the “Payment aspects of financial inclusion”. By complying with the criteria from the involved
stakeholders, it aims to increase the number of households and enterprises (mainly the small
ones) that have a bank account or a payments account to conduct various transactions.
In addition to the above, for a broader review of the remittances across all its dimensions, the
Bank  of  Albania  commits  today  in  the  framework  of  this  meeting  to  produce  a  dedicated
publication, which will be presented every June, a period which coincides with the International
Day of Family Remittances, 16 June.
Last but not least, considering the coordination among state authorities as very important, as well
as the constant communication with the private sector, we are signing today the Memorandum of
Understanding. It is aimed at raising the awareness, facilitating dialogue and fostering effective
cooperation between the parties on issues related to remittances from the Albanian diaspora,
contributing to economic development.
The joint engagement we are initiating today is the first necessary step of a development platform
for the empowerment and effective use of remittances.
In  conclusion,  I  would  like  to  underline  once  again  that  it  is  time  that  we  show  more  care,
appreciation  and  gratitude  to  tens  of  thousands  of Albanians  abroad,  who,  through  sacrifice,
continue to contribute to the welfare of our nation, sending a part of their savings to their families
back home.
We  invite  the  banking  industry  and  other  actors  in  the  financial  system  to  contribute  to  this
initiative, with concrete vision and products, taking into account that you can play a special role in
effectively mobilising remittances.
Reasserting our institutional support and commitment for this initiative, I am confident that this
will be an on-going dialogue to facilitate every undertaking in the aspect of remittances.
Thank you for your attention!
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
